About Hobbits

This book deals primarily with Hobbits, and its
pages where a reader can discover much of their character and a
Little information is found there about their history. Further information will also be available in the selection from the Westmarch R has already been published, under the title The Hobbit.
The story is taken from the early chapters of the Red Book, composed by Bilbo himself, the first Hobbit to become world-famous, and cal Back again, since they recounted his trip to the Orient and
His return: an adventure that later involved all the Hobbits in the major events of that era, which are recounted here.

However, many will want to know more about this topic.
Some remarkable people from the outset, while others may not have owned the previous book. For these readers, a few remarks on the most The important points taken from the Hobbit universe are gathered here, and the first adventure is briefly mentioned.

Hobbits are a discreet but very ancient people, more
They were more numerous in the past than they are today; for they love peace
and a well-plowed, calm, and fertile land: a well-ordered and well-maintained land. The agricultural countryside was their preferred pl and did not understand or appreciate machines more complicated than a blacksmith's bellows, a watermill, or a handloom, although they w were, as a rule, shy around the "Big People," as they call us, and now they avoid us with dismay and are becoming difficult to...
They have keen hearing and sharp eyesight, and although
They tend to be large and do not hurry unnecessarily, yet they remain agile and skillful in their movements.


2





possessed from the beginning the art of disappearing quickly and
in silence, when important people they did not wish to meet happened to be passing by; and they developed this art until men It may seem magical. But in reality, Hobbits have never studied any form of magic, and their elusive nature is solely due to
A professional skill acquired through heredity and practice, and a close, inimitable relationship with the land, made unique by its gre and more clumsy races.

Because they are small people, smaller than Dwarves: less robust and stocky, that is to say, even when they are not really very tall smaller. Their size varies, ranging from two to
four feet by our measure. They rarely reach three feet now; but they have decreased, they say, and in ancient times, they were taller. According to the Red Book, the Bandobras took (Bullroarer), son of Isumbras III, who measured 1.35 meters. and capable of riding a horse. He was surpassed in all the Hobbits
Only two famous figures from the past bear witness to this; but this curious subject is treated in this book.

As for the Hobbits of the Shire, with whom these stories are concerned, in these times of peace and prosperity, they They were a joyful people. They dressed in bright colors, being
They were particularly fond of yellow and green; but they rarely wore shoes in these colors, as their feet had sturdy leather soles and with thick, curly hair, similar to that of their heads, which was usually brown. Thus, the only craft practiced little was the one they Among these trades was shoemaking; but they had a long and skillful tradition with their fingers, and could make many other useful and Their faces were generally kind rather than beautiful.
Pretty, broad-shouldered, with bright eyes, rosy cheeks, and mouths that seemed to swell with laughter, and with eating and drinking. A eating and drinking often and heartily, appreciating simple jokes

at any time, and six meals a day (when they could get hold of them). They were hospitable and loved to party, and in gifts, which they offered generously and which they accepted eagerly.

It is clear indeed that, despite a later falling out, Hobbits are our kin: much closer to us than Elves, or even... Dwarves. Long ago,





3


She had her own style and liked and disliked pretty much the same things as
Men did it. But the exact nature of our relationship can no longer be defined, can no longer be discovered. The beginning of Hobbits go The ancient times, now lost and forgotten. Only the Elves remain, preserving traces of that bygone era, and their
Traditions are almost entirely centered on their own history. a story in which men rarely appear and Hobbits are not men
We hadn't imagined them at all. Yet, it's clear that the Hobbits had, in reality, lived peacefully in Middle-earth for many years befor They even became aware of it. And the world being, after all...
These little beings teem with strange and countless creatures. This seemed to matter very little. But in Bilbo's time,
and of Frodo his heir, they suddenly became, without their own having wanted it, both important and renowned, and troubled by the couns

Those days, the Third Age of Middle-earth, are now past. The past, and the shape of all the lands has been changed; but the
The regions where the Hobbits lived at that time were probably the same as those where they still persist: the northwest of the Old Wor In Bilbo's time, no knowledge had been preserved. The love of learning (apart from genealogical knowledge) was far from widespread amon They studied their own books and even collected reports from ancient works, from the distant times and lands of the Elves, Dwarves, and The proper records only began after the founding of the Shire, and their oldest legends barely went back further than their days of wan legends, and according to the testimony of their particular words and
customs, which the Hobbits, like many other peoples, had in the distant past
The past has shifted westward. Their oldest accounts seem to glimpse a time when they inhabited the upper valleys of the Anduin, betwee the eaves of Greenwood the Great and the Misty Mountains. Why did they then undertake the difficult and perilous crossing of the Eriado The stories speak of the multiplication of men in the country, and of


4




a shadow that fell upon the forest, plunging it into darkness and its new name was Mirkwood. Before crossing the mountains, the Hobbits had
They had already split into three somewhat different races: Harfoots, Stoors, and Fallohides. The Harfoots were browner. of skin, smaller and shorter, and they were beardless and
barefoot; their hands and feet were well-groomed and nimble; and they
They preferred the high plateaus and hillsides. The Stoors were broader, more stout; their feet and hands were larger; and they
They preferred the plains and riverbanks. The Fallohides were more beautiful, both in skin and hair, and they were taller and slimmer. than the others; they adored trees and forests.

The Harfoots had many links with the Dwarves in ancient times. They lived for a long time in the foothills of the mountains. They moved west early and traveled through Eriador as far as

At Weathertop, while the others were still in Wilderland, were the most normal and representative variety of Hobbit, and by far the mos settled in one place and retained their ancestral habit of living in tunnels and holes for the longest time.

The Stoors lingered for a long time on the banks of the Great River
They originated from the Anduin and were less fearful of men. They came west past the Harfoots and followed the Loudwater south. quarters; and many of them remained there for a long time between Tharbad
and the borders of Dunland before they moved north again.

The Fallohides, the smallest in number, were a northern branch people. They were more friendly towards the Elves than the others.
The Hobbits were, and possessed greater skill in language and song than in crafts; and formerly, they preferred hunting to tilling the They crossed the mountains north of Rivendell and arrived
going down the River Hoarwell. In Eriador, they soon mingled with the other kinds that had preceded them, but being somewhat More daring and adventurous, they were often found as chiefs or notables among the Harfoot or Stoor clans. Even
In Bilbo's time, the strong Fallohid lineage could still be seen, noted among the great families, such as the Tooks and the Masters of Buckland.





5


In the western lands of Eriador, between the Misty Mountains
And in the Mountains of the Moon, the Hobbits found both Men and Elves. Indeed, a remnant of the Dúnedain still lived there. kings of Men who came from across the Sea from the West; but
Their ranks were dwindling rapidly, as were the lands of their northern king. Houses were collapsing everywhere in the debris. There was space
And to spare the newcomers, the Hobbits soon began to settle in organized communities. Most of their early settlements-the rites of whi although small in size; it was in Bree and in the Chetwood which was about forty kilometers east of the County.

It was probably around this time that the Hobbits
They learned their letters and began to write in the manner of the Dúnedain, who in turn had learned long before the The art of the Elves. And at that time, too, they forgot what...
all the languages they had used before and still spoke afterwards. The common language, Westron as it was called, was current flowing through all the lands of the kings, from Arnor to
Gondor, and pretty much all the coasts of the Sea from Belfalas to
Moon. They nevertheless kept a few words in their name, as well as theirs
proper names for the months and days, and a large store of personal memories of names from the past.

Around this time, the legend began to take shape among the Hobbits, the story with a reckoning of the years. For it was in the thousand The Fallohide brothers, Marcho and Blanco, departed from Bree; and having obtained permission from the High King to
Fornost*, they crossed the brown river Baranduin with a large number of Hobbits. They crossed the bridge of
The stone arches, which had been built in the days of the power of the Northern Kingdom, and they took all the lands beyond, settling b

* According to the annals of Gondor, this was Argeleb II, the twentieth king of the northern line, which ended with Arvedui three hundr years later.


6

They were asked to guard the Great
Bridge under repair, and all other bridges and roads, hasten the king's messengers, and acknowledge his lordship.

Thus began the calculation of the county, for the year of the crossing of the Brandywine (name given by the Hobbits) became
The first year of the Shire, and all subsequent dates were calculated from that time, saw the Hobbits of the West immediately fall in l They arrived on dry land, and they stayed there, then soon returned to the same spot, outside the history of Men and Elves. While there They were kings in name only, subjects of his people, but they were kings in reality. Governed by their own leaders, they did not inter The sorcerer-lord of Angmar sent archers to his aid.
of the king, or so they claimed, though no account of Men Record it. But this war brought an end to the Northern Kingdom; and
The Hobbits then seized these lands and chose... of their own accord a Thain to hold the authority of the king who had disappeared. The Largely undisturbed by the wars, they prospered and multiplied, from after the Dark Plague (SR 37) until the disaster of the Long Winter and the ensuing famine. Several thousand people perished, but the Famine Days (1158-1160) occurred during this time. That story accustomed to abundance. The land was rich and bountiful, and
Although it had been deserted for a long time when they entered, it had
before it was well cultivated, and there the king had once had many farm properties, cornfields, vineyards and woods.

It stretched for forty leagues, from the Far Downs to the Brandywine Bridge, and fifty from the northern moors to The southern marshes. The Hobbits called it the Shire.
as the region of their Thain's authority, and a district of well-ordered affairs; and there, in that pleasant corner of the world, they


Thus, the years of the Third Age, according to the calculation of the Elves, can be found by adding 1600 to the dates of the county.





7


They paid less and less attention to the outside world, where displaced darkness reigned, until they came to believe that peace and abu the rule in Middle-earth and the right of all sensible people.
They have forgotten or ignored the little they ever knew of
The Guardians, and the work of those who made the Shire's long peace possible. They were, in reality, safe, but they had ceased to reme

Hobbits, whoever they were, had never been warlike, and they had never fought among themselves. In the past, they had. Of course, they were often forced to fight to stay alive in a harsh world; but in Bilbo's time, that was very ancient.
The story. The last battle, before this narrative begins, and indeed the only one that ever took place within the borders
of the Shire, was beyond collective memory: the Battle of Greenfields, SR 1147, in which Bandobras Took charted a route for the invasio the wolves that used to come and devour the North
The harsh, white winters were now nothing more than a grandfather's tale. So, although some stockpiles of weapons still remained in the These objects were mainly used as trophies, hung above fireplaces or on walls, or collected at the Michel Delving Museum.
It was called the House of the Mathoms; for all that the Hobbits
They had no immediate use for them, but were unwilling to throw them away. They called them mathams. Their homes were likely to become They were passed from hand to hand.
Nevertheless, ease and peace had left this people still curious.
They were terribly tough. They were, if necessary, difficult to intimidate or kill; and perhaps they were so tirelessly devoted to good and especially because, when forced to do so, they could do without certain things and could survive the ill-treatment inflicted by gri a time that astonished those who didn't know
They examined them closely and looked no further than their bellies and their well-fed faces. Though not inclined to quarrel, and killi Nothing alive, they were valiant in battle and in need
They could still handle weapons. They shot well with bows, because they were attentive and precise in their aim. Not only with bows and




Arrows. If a Hobbit bent down to pick up a stone, he'd better get hit. Quickly take cover, as all the intruding beasts knew very well. All Hobbits originally lived in holes dug in the ground, or
That's what they believed, and it was in such dwellings that they still felt most at ease at home; but with time, they had been forced adopt other forms of housing. In fact, in the Shire, in Bilbo's adventures. As a rule, only the richest and poorest Hobbits participate in the most primitive burrows, simple holes in reality, with only one window, or even none at all; while the more affluent...
They built more luxurious versions of these simple excavations.
ancient sites. But suitable sites for these large, branching tunnels (or smials, as they were called) were not supposed to be everywher found; and in the plains and lowland districts, the Hobbits,
As their numbers increased, they began to build above ground. Indeed, even in hilly regions and older villages, like Hobbiton, this pra or Tuckborough, or in the main township of the county, Michel
Exploring the White Downs, one now found many houses

of wood, brick, or stone. These materials were particularly valued by millers, blacksmiths, ropemakers, wheelwrights, and others of tha sort; for even when they had holes to live in, Hobbits had I have long been in the habit of building sheds and workshops.

It was said that the custom of building farms and barns began among the inhabitants of the lower marshes The Brandywine. The Hobbits of this district, the East...
The Farthings were rather tall and had sturdy legs, and they wore dwarf boots in muddy weather. But they were well known for
They have Stoors in much of their blood, as was indeed demonstrated by the downy hair growing on the chins of many. No Harfoot nor Fallohide bore no trace of a beard. Indeed, the inhabitants of Marish, and of Buckland, east of the river, whom they after
The occupied districts, mostly of people who arrived later in the County from the south; and they still had many distinctive names. and strange words that are not found anywhere else in the Shire.

It is likely that the building trade, like many other trades, was derived from the Dúnedain. But Hobbits can I learned it directly from the Elves, the masters of Men in





9


their youth. For the Elves of the High Family had not yet
Middle-earth was abandoned, and they still lived at that time at Grey Havens in the west, and in other places within within reach of the Shire. Three elven towers of time immemorial were still visible on the Tower Hills, beyond the west steps. They shone in the distance under the moon. The highest was the most distant, standing alone on a green mound.
The hobbits of the West Quarter said that one could see the sea from the top of that tower; but no hobbit had ever been there. known for climbing it. Indeed, few Hobbits had ever seen it or sailed the sea, and even fewer returned to

Report it. Most Hobbits regarded even rivers and small boats as insignificant things, with deep apprehension, and few of them knew how And as the days in the Shire grew longer, they spoke less and
I had less contact with the Elves; I feared and distrusted them, and those who had business dealings with them; and the sea became a A word of fear among them, and a sign of death, and they turned their faces away from the western hills.

The art of building could have originated with the Elves or Men, but the Hobbits used it in their own way. They didn't.
They favored tower blocks. Their houses were generally long, low, and comfortable. The oldest types were, in fact, nothing more than built imitations of smials, covered with dry grass thatch or straw, or covered with peat and whose walls were slightly domed.
This stage, however, belonged to the early days of the Shire, and
The construction of hobbit buildings had long since been modified, improved by devices learned from the Dwarves, or discovered by thems Round windows, and even round doors, were preferred; the main remaining characteristic of hobbit architecture.

The hobbit houses and holes in the Shire were often large, and inhabited by large families. (Bilbo and Frodo Baggins)
were, as bachelors, very exceptional, as they were also in many other areas (in other ways, such as their friendship with the Elves). S at certain times, as in the case of the Tooks of Great Smials, or the Brandybucks of Brandy Hall, several generations of parents
They lived together in (relative) peace within an ancestral territory and a manor house with many tunnels. All Hobbits were, anyway.


I/O





They were clannish and assessed their relationships very carefully.
They drew long and complex family trees with countless branches. When dealing with Hobbits, it's important to remember who is related t It is impossible in this book to present a family tree that includes even the most important members of the most important
The families of that era mentioned in these stories. The genealogy
The trees at the end of the Red Book of Westmarch are small, a book in themselves, and all but Hobbits would find them Extremely boring. Hobbits delighted in such things, if that was true: they liked to have books filled with things they We already knew that, it was presented clearly and without contradictions.


2

Regarding pipeweed

There is another amazing thing about hobbits of old:
It is worth mentioning an astonishing habit: they drank or inhaled, through clay or wooden pipes, the smoke of They burned the leaves of a herb they called pipeweed or leaf, probably a variety of Nicotiana. A great mystery. surrounds the origin of this particular custom, or art such as the
The hobbits preferred to call it that. All that could be discovered about it was that in ancient times, it was assembled by Meriadoc Br (later master of Buckland), and since he and the tobacco of Le Southfarthing play a part in the story that follows, his
The remarks in the introduction to his work Herblore of the Shire can be quoted.

According to him, it's the only art we can truly claim as our own invention. When Hobbits started smoking.
No one knows for sure; all the legends and family histories take it for granted. Certainly; for centuries, the inhabitants of the Shire The real pipe-weed in his gardens in Isengrim's time. Secondly, around the year 1070 of the Shire calendar. The best

II

Local produce still comes from this area, especially the varieties now known as Longbottom Leaf, Old Toby and South Star. We don't know how old Toby got to the factory, because at
He refused to reveal his date of death. He knew a great deal about medicinal plants.
But he was not a traveler. It is said that in his youth he often went to Bree, though he never ventured further than Bree. It is theref of this plant in Bree, where, at least now, it grows well on the southern slopes of the hill. The hobbits of Bree claim to have
They claim to have been the first to smoke pipe-weed. Of course, to have done everything before the people of the County, whom they call "settlers"; but in this case, their
I think that statement is plausible. And it certainly came from Bree that the art of smoking real weed spread in recent centuries among the Dwarves and other similar peoples,
Wanderers, sorcerers, or vagrants, as they were still passed down from generation to generation, by this ancient crossroads. The hearth This art can therefore be found in the old inn in Bree, The Cabriolet.
Pony, which has been kept by Butterbur's family for a record time.

Nevertheless, the observations that I myself have made
Numerous trips south have convinced me that the weed itself is not native to our parts of the world, but came north. from the lower Anduin, where it was originally located, I suppose
Brought by sea by the men of the West. It grows abundantly in Gondor, and it is richer and more extensive than within the
In the north, where it is never found in the wild, and where it only thrives in warm, sheltered places like Longbottom. The Men of Gond Call it sweet galena, and appreciate it only for the fragrance of its flowers. From this land, they must have been transported to the s Elendil and our time. But even the Dúnedain of Gondor
We must give credit where credit is due: it was the Hobbits who first put it in the works. Not even. The Wizards thought of it before u A magician I knew took up this art a long time ago and became as good as he was. He excelled at it as he did in everything he undertook


12





3

From the county organization

The Shire was divided into four districts, the Farthings, already mentioned: North, South, East, and West; and these
each again in a number of folkloric lands, which still bore the names of some of the old ruling families, although by the At that time, these names were no longer found.
in their ancestral lands. Almost all the Tooks still lived in the Tooklands, but this was not the case for many other families, such as the Eastern and Western Marches: the Buckland (p. 129); and the Westmarch was added to the county in SR 1452.

At that time, the Shire had virtually no government. Families generally managed their own affairs.
Preparing and eating food occupied most of their time. For the rest, they were, as a rule, generous and not greedy.
but satisfied and moderate, so that the estates, the farms, the works, the shops and the small businesses generally remained unchanged. There remained, of course, the old tradition concerning...
ant the High King at Fornost, or Norbury as they called it,
north of the Shire. But there had been no king for nearly a thousand years, and even the ruins of Kings Norbury were
covered in grass. Yet the Hobbits still spoke of wild peoples and evil things (like trolls) they had never heard of, king. For they att laws; and generally they respected the laws of free will, because they were the Rules (as they were called), both ancient and just.

It is true that the Took family had long been preeminent; for the office of Thain had been passed down to them (from the Elder of the S assembly, and captain of the Shire and Hobbiton gathering
weapons; but as gatherings and assemblies only took place in times of emergency, which no longer occurred, the Thainship had It ceased to be more than a nominal dignity. The Took family





13


was still, in fact, the object of particular respect, because it remained both numerous and extremely rich, and was likely to to produce in each generation strong and distinctive characters, habits, and even an adventurous temperament. This last quality
However, the relationships were now more tolerated (among the wealthy) than generally approved. The custom nevertheless persisted. designating the head of the family as Le Took, and
by adding a number to his name, if necessary: for example Isengrim The second, for example.

The only true county official at that time was the mayor, Michel Delving (or the County Mayor), who was elected every seven years at the free fair on the White Downs in Lithe,
that is, at the summer solstice. As mayor, his sole duty was almost exclusively to be responsible for it. To preside over the banquets This happened at frequent intervals. But the postmaster's and first sheriff's offices were attached to the town hall, so that he

They managed both the messenger service and the watch. These were the only services in the County, and the Messengers were the larger a This means that all Hobbits were literate, but those who were constantly wrote to all their friends (and a selection of their
parents) who lived at a distance greater than the distance of an afternoon walk.

The Shiriffs is the name the Hobbits gave to their
the police, or the closest equivalent they had available.
They did not, of course, have uniforms (such things being quite unusual), only a feather in their hat; and they were in practice more like Haywards than police officers, more concerned with the
There were more stray beasts than men. There were only twelve of them in the whole Shire, three in each farthing, for the domestic work A larger force, whose size varied according to need, was employed to patrol the borders and ensure that foreigners from any land, large They were small and did not cause any problems.

At the time this story begins, the Bounders, as they
They were summoned, their numbers having increased considerably. There were many reports and complaints concerning strange people and c prowling at the borders, or crossing them: the first sign that
Everything wasn't quite as it should have been, and that had always been the case, except


14





in the tales and legends of yesteryear. Few paid attention to the sign, and
Even Bilbo had no idea what this foreshadowed. Sixty years had passed since he had embarked on his memorable journey, and he was old ev

as often as otherwise; but there was clearly still a lot left of it. He had brought back a considerable fortune. How much?
He revealed to no one, not even Frodo, how little he had confided in him, his nephew. And he always kept secret the ring he had find.


4

From the discovery of the ring

As The Hobbit tells us, one day there came a knock at Bilbo's door... the great wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with He: indeed, no other than Thorin Oakenshield descended with the King of Kings and his twelve companions into exile.
He set off, to his own lasting surprise, one April morning, in the year 1341 of the County calendar, in search of great treasures, the dwarven treasures of the kings under the Mountain, under Erebor in the valley, far to the east.
The quest was successful, and the dragon guarding the treasure was defeated. It was destroyed. Yet, before all was won, the battle of Five armies were surrendered, Thorin was killed, and many
If acts of renown had been performed, the matter would scarcely have been closed. It concerned later history, or deserved more than a m the long annals of the Third Age, without an accident occurring through the
The group was attacked by Ore people in a high mountain pass.
The Misty Mountains as they were heading towards the Wild Lands; and so it happened that Bilbo got lost for a time in the black ore. Mines buried deep beneath the mountains, and there, as he groped in the darkness, in vain, he placed his hand on a ring lying on the gr

Looking for a way out, Bilbo went down to the
the roots of the mountains, until he could go no further.





15


At the end of the tunnel was a cold lake, far from any light, and Gollum lived on a rocky islet in the middle of the water. He was a repugnant little creature: it paddled in a small boat with its large flat feet, looking with pale and luminous eyes and catching. It fi Any living thing, even ore, if he could catch and strangle it without difficulty. He possessed a secret treasure that had
They came to him a very long time ago, when he still lived in the light: A gold ring that made the wearer invisible. It was the only th He didn't have it with him. He kept it safely hidden in a hole on his island, except when he was hunting or spying for minerals. mines.

Perhaps he would have attacked Bilbo on the spot, if the ring
had been on him when they met; but that was not the case, and the hobbit held in his hand an elven knife, which served as his a sword. So, to save time, Gollum challenged Bilbo to a sword duel.
A game of riddles, saying that if he posed a riddle to which Bilbo could answer, it would be this one. If Bilbo couldn't guess, then he Bilbo defeated him, then he would do what Bilbo wished: it would allow him to find a way out of the tunnels.

Since he was lost in darkness, without hope, and could in no way go back or return, Bilbo accepted the challenge; and they posed many r the game, more by chance (it seemed) than by intelligence; for he, finally running out of riddles to pose, cried out, while his
His hand landed on the ring he had picked up and forgotten: "What do I have in my pocket?" This Gollum could not answer, even though he

It is true that the authorities differ on the answer to this last question.
It was a simple question and not a riddle according to the strict interpretation.

rules of the game; but all agree that after accepting it, Gollum, trying to guess the answer, was tied up by his
promise. And Bilbo encouraged him to keep his word; for the promise... The idea occurred to him that this slimy creature might prove false, even though such promises were considered sacred, and everyone except the vilest feared to break them.








After centuries spent alone in darkness, Gollum's heart was black, and
There was betrayal in that. He slipped away and returned to him. An island, about which Bilbo knew nothing, not far from there, in the water. There, he thought, was his ring. He was hungry now, and angry, and once his Precious was with him, he
fear no weapon.

But the ring wasn't on the island; he had lost it. Gone. His piercing cry made Bilbo shudder, although he
He didn't yet understand what had happened. But Gollum did. I finally tried to guess, but it was too late. What does it contain? "Pockets?" he cried. The light in his eyes was like a flame-green as he raced back to kill the hobbit and retrieve his
"Precious." Just in time, Bilbo saw the danger and fled blindly. He went back up the passage, away from the water; and once again, he w Saved by luck. For, as he ran, he put his hand in his pocket, and the ring slipped gently onto his finger. And so it was.
Gollum passed by him without seeing him and went to take up his guard.
the exit, for fear that the thief might escape. Cautiously, Bilbo followed. He let go of him as he advanced, swearing and talking to hi about his Precious; about which Bilbo eventually fell silent.
He divined the truth, and hope was born within him in the darkness: he
He himself had found the marvelous ring and a chance to escape from the ores and Gollum.

They finally stopped before an unseen opening that led to the lower mine entrances on the eastern side of the mountains. There, Gollum, sword. But pity held him back, and although he kept the ring, he would not use it to kill, for that was his only hope.
The wretched creature in a position of weakness. In the end, the gathering
Showing great courage, he leaped over Gollum in the darkness and fled. He ran down the corridor, pursued by his enemy's hateful shouts. And despair: Thief! Thief! Baggins! We will hate him forever!

However, it's curious to note that this isn't the story as told by Bilbo. He first told it to his companions. Here's how he explained i Gollum had promised him a gift if he won.





17


game; but when Gollum went to look for him on his island, he
It was discovered that the treasure had disappeared: a magic ring, which had been
a gift that had been given to him long ago for his birthday. Bilbo guessed that it was this one; it was precisely the ring he had found The game was rightfully his. But finding himself in a difficult situation,
He said nothing and forced Gollum to show him the
an outcome, like a reward rather than a gift. This story of Bilbo's is recorded in his memoirs, and he seems never to have altered them It still appeared in the original Red Book, as in several other works, copies, and summaries. But many copies contain the truth. account (as an alternative), probably taken from notes of Frodo or Sam, who both learned the truth, however they seem to have refused t Written by the old hobbit himself.

Gandalf, however, did not believe Bilbo's first story, for very quickly upon hearing it, he remained very curious about it.
ring. Finally, after much effort, he managed to extract the true story from Bilbo. Questions which, for a time, severely tested their f The magician seemed to value the truth. Although he
He didn't tell Bilbo, but he too thought it was important, and it's troubling to realize that the good hobbit hadn't told him...
The truth from the outset: completely contrary to his habits. The idea of a gift was not, however, a mere invention worthy of a hobbit. The idea was suggested to him by Gollum's words, as he confessed, which he had overheard by chance; for Gollum did indeed call the ring "A birthday present," repeatedly. That's what Gandalf thought too. Strange and suspicious; but he didn't discover the truth.
and this will continue for many years to come, as we will see in this book.

There is no need to say more here about Bilbo's later adventures. Thanks to the ring, he escaped from the mine guards at He went through the door and joined his companions. He used the ring several times.
On several occasions during his quest, mainly to obtain help from his friends; but he hid it from them for as long as possible. After h Back home, he never spoke of it to anyone again, except Gandalf.





and Frodo; and no one else in the Shire knew of its existence,
At least, that's what he thought. It was only to Frodo that he showed the account of his journey that he was writing.

His sword, Sting, Bilbo hung above his fireplace, and his marvelous chainmail, a gift from the Dwarves of the
He loaned the dragon's treasure to a museum, to the Michel Delving Mathom-house, actually. But he kept it in a drawer in Cul-de-Sac.

the old coat and hood he had worn on his travels; and the ring, held by a thin chain, remained in his poached.

He returned home to Cul-de-Sac on June 22nd.
his fifty-second year (SR 1342), and nothing very noteworthy
This continued throughout the Shire until Mr. Baggins began preparations for the celebrations for his one hundred and eleventh birthday anniversary (SR 1401). This is where this story begins.




At the end of the Third Age, the role played by the Hobbits
The major events that led to the County's inclusion in the Reunited Kingdom awakened a greater...
aroused interest in their own history; and many of their works, previously mainly oral, were collected and
wrote. Larger families were also concerned about events in the Kingdom in general, and several of their members studied its history and They were already found in the first century of the Fourth Age.
In the county, several libraries contained numerous historical documents, books, and archives.

The most important of these collections were probably located at Undertours, Great Smials, and Brandy Hall. This account of The end of the Third Age is primarily drawn from the Red Book of Westmarch. This is the most important source for the story. The War of the Ring was so named because it was long preserved at Undertowers, the home of the Fairbairns,





19


Guardians of the Westmarch.* Originally, this was Bilbo's private domain. The journal he took with him to Rivendell. Frodo brought it. back in the Shire, with many loose sheets of notes,

and during SR 1420-1, he almost filled its pages with his account of the war. But annexed to it and kept with it,
The three large volumes were probably in a single red case, bound in red leather, which Bilbo gave him as a parting gift.
To these four volumes was added, in Westmarch, a
fifth containing comments, genealogies and various other questions concerning the hobbits who are members of the Fellowship.

The original Red Book has not been preserved, but many copies have been preserved.
Copies were made, including of the first volume, for the use of the descendants of Master Samwise's children.
The most important copy, however, has a different history. It was kept at Grand Smials, but it was written in Gondor, probably
at the request of Peregrin's great-grandson, and completed in SR 1592 (FA 172). His southern scribe added Note: Findegil, the king's sc
172. This is a copy in every respect of the Book of Thain. Minas Tirith. This book was a copy, made at the request of King Elessar, of brought by the Thain Peregrin when he retired to Gondor in IV 64.

The Book of Thain was therefore the first copy made of the Red Book.
The book contained many passages that were later omitted or lost. Minas Tirith received numerous annotations and corrections, particula languages; and an abridged version has been added.
of those parts of the Tale of Aragorn and Arwen which are found
apart from the account of the war. The complete story is believed to have been written by Barahir, grandson of the steward Faramir, some time after the king's death. But the main important thing
The unique feature of the Findegil copy is that it is the only one to contain the complete translations of Bilbo from Elvish. These thr


20





have been discovered to be a work of great skill and knowledge in which,
Between 1403 and 1418, he had used all the sources available to him in Rivendell, both living and written. But as they were little used by Frodo, being almost entirely preoccupied. As for the Elder Days, we will not discuss them here.

Since Meriadoc and Peregrine became the leaders of their
great families, and at the same time they maintained their relations with Rohan and Gondor, the libraries of Bucklebury and Tuckborough contained many items not found in the Red Book. At Brandy Hall, there were numerous books dealing with
Eriador and the history of Rohan. Among these:
composed or begun by Meriadoc himself, although in the Shire he is best known for his work Herblore of the Shire, and
for his work "Reckoning of Years" in which he discusses the relationship between the calendars of the Shire and Bree and those of Riven Gondor and Rohan. He also wrote a short treatise on the Old Testament.
Words and names from the county, demonstrating a particular interest in discovering the relationship with the Rohirrim language such county words as mathom and old elements in place names.

In Great Smials, Shire was less interested in books.
folkloric, though more important for history in general. None of them were written by Peregrin, but he and his successors collected the numerous manuscripts written by scribes from Gondor: mainly copies or summaries of stories or legends relating to Elendil

and his heirs. It was only here in the Shire that they could be found in such vast quantities, providing valuable material for the hist Sauron. It was probably in Great Smials that the Tale of the Book Years* was created with the help of materials.
Collected by Meriadoc. Although the dates given are often conjectural, especially for the Second Age, they deserve attention. It is lik information came from Rivendell, which he visited several times. There, although Elrond had left, his sons remained for a long time.

* Represented in a much smaller form in Appendix B, with regard to the End of the Third Age.





21


as well as some High Elves. It is said that
Celeborn went to settle there after Galadriel's departure; but there is no record of the day when, finally, he sought to Grey Havens, and with it disappeared the last living memory of the Old Days in Middle-earth.


THE FRATERNITY OF THE RING


BEING THE FIRST PART OF

The Lord of the Rings


BOOK ONE


I





When Mr. Bilbo Baggins of Bag End announced that he would soon be celebrating his one hundred and eleventh birthday with a celebration of particular magnificence, there has been much talk and the excitement is palpable in Hobbiton.

Bilbo was very rich and very special, and had been the marvel of the Shire for sixty years, ever since his incredible disappearance and Upon returning from his travels, he had become a local legend.
and it was commonly accepted that, whatever the ancients might say
It was said that Cul-de-Sac Hill was full of tunnels filled with treasure. And if that wasn't enough for the glory, there was also His sustained vigor was admirable. Time passed, but
This seemed to have little effect on Mr. Baggins. At ninety years old, he was
Pretty much the same as at fifty. At ninety-nine, they started calling him well-preserved, but unchanged would have been closer to Mark. Some shook their heads and thought
It was too good to be true; it seemed unfair.
Everyone should (apparently) possess eternal youth, like a (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth. "We'll have to pay," they said. "It's not natural, and it's going to cause trouble!"
But so far, no problems had arisen; and since Mr. Baggins was generous with his money, most people were willing to bet, "Leave him with in visiting relations with his relatives (except, of course, the Sackville-Bagginses), and he had many devoted admirers among the hobbi He didn't have any close friends, until some of his younger cousins started to... grow up.


28

The eldest of them, and Bilbo's favorite, was young Frodo Baggins. When Bilbo was ninety-nine, he adopted Frodo as his heir and brought The Bagginses were finally defeated. Bilbo and Frodo
It just so happens that we share the same birthday, on September 22nd.
"You'd better come and live here, Frodo my boy," said Bilbo. "One day we'll be able to celebrate our birthdays!" comfortably together. At that moment, Frodo was still in his
Pre-adolescents, as the hobbits called irresponsible young adults, between childhood and the transition to adulthood at thirty-three.

Twelve years passed. Each year, the Bagginses had
Lively communal birthday parties were held in Cul-de-Sac; but it was now understood that this was something quite exceptional.
Everything was planned for that autumn. Bilbo was going to be eleven and eleven, sick, a rather curious number, and a very re
a respectable age for a hobbit (Old Took himself was only a few years old) reached 130 years); and Frodo was about to turn thirty-three Important number: the date of his or her majority.

Tongues began to stir in Hobbiton and Bywater; and
Rumors of the coming event spread throughout the Shire. The story and character of Mr. Bilbo Baggins once again became the main topic o No one had a more attentive audience than old Flam

Gamgee, more commonly known as the Gaffer. Fie gave a speech at the Ivy Bush Inn, a small inn on the road to Bywater; and he spoke with He had been there for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same job he had previously done. Now that he was getting old himsel With stiff joints, the work was mainly done by his young... his son, Sam Gambee. Father and son were both very
They were on good terms with Bilbo and Frodo. They lived on the hill itself, at number 3 Bagshot Row, just below Bag End.

Mr. Bilbo is a very kind and eloquent hobbit, as I have observed.
"I've always said so," declared the Gaffer. "It's perfectly true: for Bilbo." He was very polite to him, calling him "Master Hamfast,"





29


the consultant constantly focused on vegetable cultivation -
When it came to roots, and especially potatoes, the Gaffer was recognized as the authority by everyone in the hooded neighborhood (incl

"But what about this Frodo who lives with him?" asked old Noakes of Bywater. "His name is Baggins, but he is much more than that." Half a Brandybuck, apparently. I don't understand why we'd have Bagginses. The people of Hobbiton should go find a wife there, in Buckland, where the people are so weird.

And it's no wonder they're queer, as Daddy Twofoot (the boss's neighbor) said, if they live on the wrong side of the tracks. on the side of the Brandywine River, and again to the right.
It's a dark and sinister place, if half the stories are true.

"You're right, Dad!" said the boss. "Not that the brandy... The deer of Buckland live in; but they're strange."
Race, apparently. They're having fun with boats on this big
river-and it's not natural. No wonder problems arose. I'm telling you. But anyway, Mr. Frodo is as kind as a A young hobbit just as one might hope. Exactly like
Mr. Bilbo, and not just physically. After all, his father was a Baggins. A respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo. Baggins; there wasn't much to say about him until he was drowned.

"Drowned?" several voices said. They had heard that and
Of course, there have been other, darker rumors before; but the hobbits have a They were passionate about family history and willing to hear it again.
"Well, that's what they say," said the chief. "You see, Mr. Drogo married poor Miss Primula Brandybuck. She was our Mr.
Bilbo's maternal cousin (his mother being the youngest of Old Took's daughters); and Mr. Drogo
was his first cousin. So, Mr. Frodo is both his first cousin and his second cousin. Cousin, second degree in both cases, as they say, i Follow me. And Mr. Drogo was staying at Brandy Hall with
his stepfather, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often did after his marriage (being fond of food and old Gorbadoc (who was holding a very generous table); and he went out


30




to go boating on the River Brandywine; and he and his wife were drowned, and poor Mr. Frodo, who was only a child. I heard they went out on the water after dinner.
"By the light of the moon," said old Noakes; and it was Drogo's weight that sank the ship.

And I heard that she pushed him inside, and he pulled her inside after "Him," said Sandyman, the miller of Hobbiton.

"You shouldn't listen to everything you hear, Sandyman," said the Gaffer, who didn't much care for the miller. There was no appeal. When it comes to pushing and pulling, boats are quite tricky. Quite tricky for those who remain motionless without looking any further. cause of problems. In short: there was this Mr. Frodo who had left behind orphans and isolated, as one might say, among these queer
The Bucklanders, who were raised at Brandy Hall anyway.
A regular terrier, according to all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc never had fewer than two hundred relatives. Mr. Bilbo never performed a more generous act than when he brought the boy back to live among good people.

But I suppose it was a tough blow for those Sackville-Bagginses. They thought they were going to get Bag End that time he left and ever Then he comes back and orders them to leave; and he continues
He lives on forever, and never seems to have aged a day, God bless him! And suddenly, he produces an heir, and he has all the papers. They did well. The Sacquet-Bessac family will never see the inside of Cul-de-Sac now, or at least, let's hope not.

Apparently there's a nice little fortune hidden up there.
"Tell me," said a stranger, a business visitor from Michel. Explore the Westfarthing. The entire top of your hill is riddled with tunne

"So you've heard more than I can say," replied Le Gaffer. "I know nothing about the Jools. Mr. Bilbo is free with his money, and he doesn't seem to lack it; but I know of no tunnel digging. I saw Mr. Bilbo on his return, a matter

Sixty years ago, when I was a child, I hadn't been an apprentice for long with old Holman (who was my father's cousin), but he





31


I was in Cul-de-Sac to help him stop people from plotting.
She was walking around and doing trapeze all over the garden while the sale was taking place. And in the middle of all this, Mr. Bilbo with a pony, very large bags and a few chests.
I have no doubt that they were mostly filled with treasures that he had chosen.

up there, in distant lands, where there are mountains of gold, they
I said; but there wasn't enough to fill the tunnels. But my boy Sam, we'll find out more about that. He's going back and forth to Cul-d He is passionate about stories of yesteryear and he listens
All of Mr. Bilbo's Tales. Mr. Bilbo learned to read and write.
I don't want to hurt anyone, and I hope nothing bad happens to you because of this.

"Elves and dragons!" I told him. "Cabbages and potatoes are better for me and for you. Don't get involved in this."
"From your superiors, otherwise you'll get yourself into trouble that's way too much for you," I told him. "And I could tell that to ot The stranger and the miller.

But the Gaffer did not convince his audience. The legend
Bilbo's wealth was now too firmly entrenched in the minds of the younger generation of hobbits.

Ah, but he has probably already contributed enough to what he "Brought first," argued the miller, expressing a common opinion. He's often away from home. And look at these eccentric people.
who visit him: dwarves who come at night, and that old wandering wizard, Gandalf and all the others. You can say what you like, Gaffer,

And you can say what you want about what you don't know.
"More so than you when it comes to pleasure boating, Mr. Sandyman," he retorted. The boss, who hated the miller even more than usual. I Given that we are queer, we might well need a bit more queerness in these areas. There are a few not far from here that wouldn't offer a pint of beer to a friend, if he lived in a hole with gold walls. But in Cul-de-Sac, they do things properly. Our Sam says everyone wi There will be gifts, please note, gifts for everyone - on that same day, in that same month, exactly as it was.


32





That month was September, and the weather was as beautiful as could be. We ask. A day or two later, a rumor (probably started by the
Sam, who knew about these things, had spread the rumor that there were people who were going
to be fireworks-fireworks, no less, as if they weren't. It hasn't been seen in the Shire for nearly a century, and indeed not since Old Took died.

The days passed and D-Day approached. A strange apparition: a cart loaded with oddly shaped packages rolling into Hobbi- One evening, I arrived and climbed the hill to Cul-de-Sac.
Surprised hobbits peered through the lamplit doors, gazing in awe at him. He was being led by strange people, singing bizarre songs: dw with long beards and deep hoods. A few of them stayed in Cul-de-Sac. At the end of the second week of September,
The cart arrived via Bywater from Brandy. Wine bridge in broad daylight. An old man was driving it. alone. He wore a large pointed blue hat, a long grey cape, and
a silver scarf. He had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows that peeked out from under the brim of his hat. Little hobbit-
The children ran after the wagon all over Hobbiton and as far as
the hill. It was carrying a cargo of fireworks, as they had guessed. In front of Bilbo's door, the old man began to unload: there was
They were large bundles of fireworks of all kinds and shapes, each marked with a large red G ^ and the elven rune, JJ>!

That was Gandalf's mark, of course, and the old man
This was Gandalf the Wizard, whose fame in the Shire was due primarily to his skill with fire, smoke, and light. His true business was The inhabitants of the Shire knew nothing about it. For them, he was just one of many attractions at the festival. Hence the excitement the hobbit children. "G for Great!" they cried, and the
The old man smiled. They recognized him by sight, although he was only... occasionally appeared in Hobbiton and never stayed there long but neither they nor any of them, except for the oldest, had I seen one of his fireworks - they now belonged to a legendary past.
When the old man, aided by Bilbo and some dwarves,
Once the unloading was finished, Bilbo gave some money; but


33

Not a single firecracker or spark was fired, to the disappointment of the spectators.

"Run away now!" said Gandalf. "You'll have had enough when..." The time came. Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and
The door was closed. The young hobbits stared at the door, vain for a moment, then ran away, sensing that the day of the feast would ne

At Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open table. Window of a small room overlooking the garden to the west. The late afternoon was bright and peaceful. The flowers glowed with golden hues: snapdragons and sunflowers, and nasturtiums creeping on the grassy walls and glancing inside the round windows.

"How splendid your garden is!" said Gandalf.

"Yes," said Bilbo. "I love him very much, and everything about him."
Dear old Shire; but I think I need a holiday. So you intend to continue with your plan? Yes. I made my decision months ago, and I didn't do it. I changed it.

Very well. No need to say more. Stick to your
Plan everything-don't forget your whole plan-and I hope it all goes well. For the best, for you and for all of us. I hope so. In any case, I fully intend to have fun on Thursday. And here's my little joke.
"Who will laugh, I wonder?" said Gandalf, shaking his head. "We'll see," said Bilbo.
The next day, more carts climbed the hill, and still more wagons. There may have been some grumbling about the management. "locally", but starting that week, orders began to pour in from Bag.
End for all forms of provisions, goods or luxuries which
They could be found in Hobbiton, Bywater, or anywhere else in the neighborhood. People became enthusiastic; and they
They began to count the days on the calendar; and they looked, they waited impatiently for the postman, hoping to receive invitations. Very quickly, invitations began to pour in, and the

34





The Hobbiton post office was blocked, and the Bywater one...
The post office was overwhelmed by the snow, and volunteer mail carriers were on hand. They were in high demand. There was a constant s At the top of the hill, bearing hundreds of polite variations of "Thank you," I will surely come.

A sign appeared on the gate of Cul-de-Sac: No Entry. The attitude was the same, except for party business. Even those who had, or claim Inside, Bilbo was busy: writing invitations, ticking RSVP boxes, wrapping gifts, and having a few private meetings
preparations of his own initiative. From the moment Gandalf arrived He remained hidden from view.
One morning, the hobbits woke up and discovered the great field to the south.
from Bilbo's entrance gate, covered with ropes and poles for tents and pavilions. A special entrance was dug into the bank. Leading to the road, wide steps and a large white gate were built there for the three hobbit families of Bagshot Row,
The people living near the field were very interested and generally envied. Old Gaffer Gamgee even stopped pretending to work. in his garden.

The tents began to be pitched. There was one particularly large pavilion, so large that the tree growing in the field was right inside, and stood proudly near one end, at the head of
the main table. Lanterns hung from all its branches. Even more promising (from the hobbits' point of view): a huge An outdoor kitchen has been set up in the north corner of the property.
A team of cooks from all the inns and restaurants for miles around arrived to reinforce the dwarves and others Strange follicles that were dismembered at Cul-de-Sac. Excitement rose to his level.

Then the sky clouded over. It was Wednesday.
The day before the party. The anxiety was intense. Then on Thursday, September 22nd, dawn finally broke. The sun rose, The clouds dissipated, the flags were unfurled, and the festivities began.

Bilbo Baggins called it a party, but it was really a variety of entertainments rolled into one. Virtually all the inhabitants We were invited to a nearby location. A few people were inadvertently overlooked.





35


But since they all arrived anyway, it didn't matter. Many people from other parts of the county were also interviewed; and

There were even a few who had come from outside the borders. Bilbo met the guests (and the new arrivals) in person at the new white doo He was handing out gifts to everyone, especially to those who were... those who had left by a roundabout way and come back in again near the door. The hobbits offer gifts to other people on their
their own birthdays. As a rule, not very expensive birthdays, and not as lavishly as on this occasion; but it wasn't a bad system. In reality, in Hobbiton and Bywater, every day of the year was someone's birthday, so every hobbit in those lands had
They had a good chance of receiving at least one gift at least once a week. But they never tired of it.

On this occasion, the gifts were exceptionally good.
The hobbit children were so excited that for a moment they almost forgot to eat. There were toys similar to the ones they
I had never seen anything like it; everything was magnificent, and some were clearly magical. Indeed, many of them had been ordered a y and had come from the Mountain and the Valley, and were true dwarves.

When each guest had been welcomed and it was finally
Inside the gate, there were songs, dances, music, games, and, of course, food and drink. There were three formal meals:
Lunch, tea, and dinner (or supper). But lunch and tea were distinguished primarily by the fact that at those times, all the guests sat It was simply a lot of people eating and drinking - continuously from 11 a.m. until 6:30 p.m., when the fireworks started.

The fireworks were Gandalf's doing: they had not only been brought by him, but conceived and executed by him; and the special
He was responsible for the special effects, sets, and rocket launches. But there was also a generous distribution of firecrackers. firecrackers, fireworks, sparklers, torches, dwarf candles, leprechaun-
Fountains, goblin cries, and thunderclaps. They were all there. Magnificent. Gandalf's art has only improved with age. There were rockets like a flock of shimmering birds singing with sweet voices. There were green trees with dark trunks.

36





smoke: their leaves opened like a whole spring unfolding in an instant, and their shining branches dropped brilliant flowers. They swoo The smell just before they touched their upturned faces.
fountains of butterflies flew sparkling into the trees;
There were pillars of colored fire that rose up and transformed into eagles, or sailing ships, or a phalanx of swans in flight; there There was a red thunderstorm and a shower of yellow rain;
It was a forest of silver spears that suddenly leaped into the air, with a cry like that of an army in battle, and descended again into The water hissed like a hundred burning snakes. And then
There was also one last surprise, in honor of Bilbo, and it surprised
The hobbits did extremely well, just as Gandalf had predicted. The lights went out. Thick smoke rose. It took the shape of a mountain. Seen in the distance, it began to shine at its summit.
Green and scarlet flames erupted. A red-gold flame escaped from them. The dragon-not life-size, but terrifyingly realistic: fire sprang three times above the heads of the crowd. They all ducked, and many fell flat on their stomachs. The dragon passed like a
The express train made a perilous leap and hurtled into Bywater with a deafening explosion.

"It's suppertime!" said Bilbo. The pain and alarm vanished at once, and the prostrate hobbits leaped to their feet. There was a splendi everyone, that is, with the exception of the special family guests, was invited to a dinner. This took place in the large pavilion with tree. Invitations were limited to twelve dozen (a number also called by hobbits a Gross, although the word was
(not deemed appropriate for the use of people); and the guests were chosen from all the families to which Bilbo and Frodo belonged and present with parental permission; for hobbits were easygoing with their children regarding staying up late, especially
when there was an opportunity to offer them a free meal. The young hobbits took a lot of food.





37


There were many Bagginses and Boffins, and many others as well.
Tooks and Brandybucks; there were various Grubbs (re¬
(birth certificates of Bilbo Baggins' grandmother), and various Chubbs (links to his grandfather Took); and a selection of Burrowses, B Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of them were only very distantly related to Bilbo, and some had practically never
I had already been to Hobbiton, as they lived in remote parts of the Shire. The Bagginses had not been forgotten. Otho
and his wife Lobelia were present. They didn't like Bilbo and Frodo hated him, but the invitation card was so magnificent, written in g refuse. Moreover, their cousin, Bilbo, had specialized in
He was a chef for many years and his restaurant enjoyed an excellent reputation.

The one hundred and forty-four guests all expected a pleasant stay, a feast of ants; although they were rather dreading the after-dinne from their host (an unavoidable element). He was likely to bring back bits and pieces of what he called poetry; and sometimes, after a Two, would allude to the absurd adventures of his mysterious journey. The guests were not disappointed: they had a very

A pleasant feast, even a captivating entertainment: rich, abundant, varied, and prolonged. The purchase of provisions virtually disappeared throughout the district during the period that followed
weeks; but as Bilbo's catering services had exhausted the stocks of most shops, cellars, and warehouses for miles around, this It didn't matter much.

After the feast (more or less), came the speech. Most of the company was now in a tolerant mood, however, at this point. A charming ste They sipped their favorite drinks and nibbled on their
Their favorite treats and their fears were forgotten. They were ready to listen to everything and applaud at every stop.

"My dear friends," Bilbo began, rising to his feet. "Listen!"
"Listen! Listen!" they shouted, and repeated it in chorus, seeming reluctant to follow their own advice. Bilbo left his chair and settl The tree. The light from the lanterns fell upon her radiant face;


38




Gold buttons glittered on his embroidered silk vest. Everyone could see him standing there, waving one hand in the air, the other in hi "My dear Baggins and Boffins," he continued; "and my dear Books and Brandybucks, and Grubbs, and Chubbs, and
Burrowses, and Hornblowers, and Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Good-
Bodies, Brockhouses, and Proudfoots. "Proudfoot!" shouted an old hobbit from the back of the pavilion. His name, of
Of course, there was Pied-de-Fou, and he deserved it; his feet were large, exceptionally hairy, and both were on the table.

"Mad with pride," repeated Bilbo. "And my good Bagginses!"
I'm so happy to be back in Cul-de-Sac. Today I'm celebrating my 100th birthday, and my eleventh birthday too: I'm eleven years old toda Ray! Happy birthday! they shouted, and they ham
They lounged happily on the tables. Bilbo was doing wonderfully. It was the kind of thing they liked: short and simple.

I hope you're all having as much fun as I am. (Muffled applause.) (Shouts of "Yes" (and "No").) (Sounds of trumpets and horns, pipes an As mentioned, many young hobbits were present.
Dozens of musical firecrackers had been set off. Most of them bore the Dale brand, which didn't add much to
Most of the hobbits, but they all agreed that they were wonderful biscuits. They contained instruments, small, but of absolute perfecti enchanting sounds. Indeed, in one corner, some of the young Tooks and Brandybuck, assuming that Uncle Bilbo
Having finished (since he had clearly said everything that was necessary) (sary), he then improvised an orchestra and began to play a joyful dance tune. Master Everard Took and Miss Melilot Brandybuck climbed onto a table and, holding bells,
began to dance the Springle-ring: a pretty dance, but rather vigorous.

But Bilbo wasn't finished. Grabbing a horn from a young boy nearby, he let out three loud cries. The noise stopped. I'm going
"I won't keep you long!" he exclaimed. Applause from the entire assembly. I have gathered you all for a specific purpose. Something in The way he said it made a strong impression. There was almost





39


Silence fell, and one or two of the Tooks pricked up their ears.

Indeed, for three reasons! First, to tell you that I love you all immensely, and these eleven years are too long. It would be too short a time to live among such excellent and admirable hobbits. Explosion of massive approval.

I don't know half of you as well as I'd like; and I
Like less than half of you, half as good as you deserve. It was unexpected and rather difficult. There were a few scattered elements. There was applause, but most were trying to understand and see if it led to a compliment.

Secondly, to celebrate my birthday. Cheers! I should
Let's say: OUR birthday. Because it is also, of course, the birthday of my darling Frodo, heir and nephew, who reaches adulthood and co Today. A few perfunctory claps from the elders; and a few resounding cries: Frodo! Frodo! Good old Frodo, since the
The youngsters. The Bagginses frowned and wondered... "What did they mean by entering into his inheritance?"

Together, we scored one hundred and forty-four points. Your numbers
were chosen to correspond to this remarkable total: a large, if I may say so, expression. No applause. It was ridiculous. A lot of The guests, and in particular the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted.
They were convinced that they had only been asked to fill in the required fields. A number, like goods in a package. Just one, really! Vulgar expression.

It is also, if I may refer to ancient history, the anniversary of my arrival in a barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake; I had forgotten it was my birthday
on that occasion. I was only fifty-one then, and birthdays didn't matter. They seem so important. The banquet, however, was splendid. Although I had a bad cold at the time, I remember it, and all I could say was, "You're very good." I'll say it more correctly now: Than Thank you so much for coming to my little party. Stubborn silence.
They all feared that a song or a poem was now imminent; and they were beginning to get bored. Why couldn't he stop talking and let them or recite. He paused.

Thirdly and finally, he said, I wish to make a

40





ANNOUNCEMENT. He pronounced that last word so loudly and
Suddenly, all those who still could stood up. I regret to announce this-although, as I said, eleven years is far too long. The time spe I'm leaving NOW. GOODBYE!

He went down and disappeared. There was a blinding flash of lightning.
of light, and all the guests blinked. When they opened their eyes, Bilbo's eyes were nowhere to be found. One hundred and forty-
Four stunned hobbits remained seated, speechless with astonishment. Old Odo Proudfoot removed his feet from the table and stamped his f Then a deathly silence fell, until suddenly, after several deep breaths, each Baggins, Boffin, Took, Brandybuck,
Grubb, Chubb, Burrows, Bolger, Bracegirdle, Brockhouse, Goodbody, Hornblower and Proudfoot began to speak immediately.

It was generally agreed that the joke was in very poor taste.
And more food and drink were needed to care for the guests. Shock and annoyance. He's furious. I've always said so.
This is probably the most popular comment. Even the Tooks (with
(With a few exceptions) thought Bilbo's behavior was absurd, at a time when most of them took it for granted that his This disappearance was nothing more than a ridiculous farce.

But old Rory Brandybuck wasn't so sure. Neither age nor
A gargantuan dinner had clouded his judgment, and he said to his daughter-in-law, Esmeralda: There's something fishy going on here.

My dear! I think that madman Baggins has gone off again. Poor old fool. Idiot. But why worry? He didn't take any provisions. He called out to Frodo in a loud voice to send back the wine.

Frodo was the only one present who hadn't said anything.
He had sat silently for some time beside Bilbo's empty chair, and he ignored all the remarks and questions. He had enjoyed the joke.
Of course, even if he knew. He had
difficulty suppressing a laugh in the face of this indignant surprise
guests. But at the same time, he felt deeply troubled: He suddenly realized that he deeply loved the old hobbit. The guests continued to eat, drink, and chat.
The eccentricities of Bilbo Baggins, past and present; but the Sackville-





41


Baggins had already left, furious. Frodo didn't want him to.
to have no further connection with the party. He gave orders to
More wine was about to be served; then he stood up and emptied his own glass. He silently raised a glass to Bilbo's health and slipped

As for Bilbo Baggins, even while he was giving his speech,
He caressed the gold ring in his pocket with his fingertips: his magic
a ring he had kept secret for so many years. As he approached, he slipped his finger onto it and was never seen again. Is there still a hobbit in Hobbiton?

He returned briskly to his hole and remained motionless for a moment, listening with a smile to the hubbub of the pavilion, and the Sounds of rejoicing were heard in other parts of the field. Then he entered. He took off his evening clothes, folded them, and wrapped He wrapped his embroidered silk vest in tissue paper and put it on. He walked away. Then he quickly put on some old, messy clothes and He had hung a short sword in a damaged black leather sheath.
From a locked drawer, thick with the smell of mothballs, he took something out. They pulled out an old coat and a hood. They had been l stained by the weather, their original color was barely visible.
I guessed it: it was probably dark green. They were rather too big for him. He then went into his office, and with a big The safe produced a package wrapped in old rags, and a leather-bound manuscript; and also a large, bulky envelope.
The book and the package he had stuffed into the top of a large bag that was already almost full. Inside the envelope He slipped on his gold ring and delicate chain, then
He sealed it and addressed it to Frodo. At first, he placed it on the mantelpiece, but suddenly he took it off and put it in his pocket "Hello!" said Bilbo. "I was wondering if you were coming."
"I am happy to see you visible," replied the magician, who was seated.
Sitting in an armchair, I would have liked to catch up with you and have a few drinks.


42

Final words. I imagine you feel that everything has changed. Splendidly and according to plan?

"Yes, I believe it," said Bilbo. "Although that flash was surprising." It surprised me a great deal, let alone the others. A small addi Yours, I imagine?

That was the case. You wisely kept the secret of that ring all these years.
And it seemed necessary to offer something to your guests. Otherwise, it would explain your sudden disappearance. And that would spoil my joke. You're an old busybody and a busybody.
"The body," laughed Bilbo, "but I suppose you know better than anyone, as usual."

Yes, when I know something. But I'm not entirely sure. About this whole affair. We've reached the end of it now.
You've made your joke, and you've alarmed or offended most people. Your relationships, and enough to give the whole Shire something to Anything else?

Yes, I am. I need a vacation, a very long vacation, because
I already told you. Probably a permanent vacation: I don't know. I expect to come back. Actually, I don't intend to, and I have I organized everything.

I am old, Gandalf. I don't look it, but I'm beginning to feel it deep in my heart. Really well preserved!
She sniffed. "Hey, I feel so thin, like I've been stretched, if you know what I mean. What I mean is: like butter that's been scraped t Bread. It can't be that. I need a change, or something like that.

Gandalf looked at him with curiosity and attention. No, that's the case.
"That doesn't seem right to me," he said thoughtfully. "No, after all, I think..." Your plan is probably the best.

Well, I've made my decision, anyway. I want to see the mountain.
"Mountains again, Gandalf," and then find somewhere I can rest. Quiet, away from a lot of family. Nosy, and a series of bewildered visi on the bell. Perhaps I could find a place where I could finish my book. I imagined a lovely ending: and he lived
They lived happily until the end of their days.

Gandalf laughed. I hope he does. But no one will read the rest of the book, whatever its ending.





43


Oh, perhaps, in the years to come. Frodo has read some
Assuming that's even happened, you'll keep an eye on Frodo. Won't you?
Yes, I will-with both eyes, as often as possible. Fie would come with me, of course, if I asked her. In fact, He suggested it once, just before the party. But he didn't do it.
I really want to, but not yet. I want to see the wilderness again before I die, and the mountains; but he's still in love with the The county, with its woods, fields, and little rivers. It should be... I feel good here. I let him do whatever he wants, of course. With a few minor exceptions. I hope he will be happy when he
He's getting used to being alone. It's time he took control of his destiny. Now.
"Everything?" asked Gandalf. "The ring too?" "You agreed." You remember that. "Well, uh, yes, I suppose," stammered Bilbo. Where is he?
"In an envelope, if you must know," said Bilbo impatiently. There, on the mantelpiece. Well, no! Here it is in my... "In my pocket!" He hesitated. "That's weird, isn't it?" he said softly.
to himself. But after all, why not? Why shouldn't it stay that way? There?

Gandalf looked at Bilbo very carefully again, and there was a
A glimmer shone in his eyes. "I think, Bilbo," he said softly, "that I should..." Forget it. You don't want to?
Well, yes and no. Ultimately, I don't like separations. I don't really see why I should care about them.
"Why do you want me to do it?" he asked, and a curious change occurred. His voice was tinged with suspicion and annoyance. You're always nagging me about my ring; but you
They never bothered me about the other things I experienced on my trip.

"No, but I couldn't help pestering you," said Gandalf. "I wanted the truth. It was important. Magic rings are... well, magic; and they ar Your ring, you can say; and I still am. I'd like to know
where it is, if you go for another walk. I also think you have


44

I've had it long enough. You won't need it anymore, Bilbo. Unless I'm completely mistaken.

Bilbo blushed, and a glint of anger shone in his eyes.
His kind face hardened. "Why not?" he exclaimed. "And what? What business is it of yours what I do with my..." My own things? They are mine. I found them. They came to me.

"Yes, yes," said Gandalf. "But there's no reason to get angry."

"If it's me, it's your fault," said Bilbo. "It's mine, I tell you." Mine. My precious. Yes, my precious.

The magician's face remained grave and attentive, and only a glimmer in his deep eyes showed that he was surprised and indeed alarmed. But I'll say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said it the same time. She's no longer his, but mine. And I'll keep her.
Gandalf stood up. He spoke sternly. You will be a fool if "Yes, Bilbo," he said. "You confirm it every time."
You're taking this way far too seriously. Let him go! Then you can go on your own and be free. "I will do what I want and go wherever I please," Bilbo declared obstinately.
"Come, come, my dear hobbit!" said Gandalf. "All your long
We've been friends all our lives, and you owe me something. Come on! Do as you promised: give up!

"Well, if you want my ring yourself, just say so!" cried Bilbo.
But you won't have it. I won't give up my Precious, I tell you. You. His hand accidentally went to the hilt of his small sword.

Gandalf's eyes gleamed. "It will be my turn to get angry. Soon," he said. "If you repeat it, I will. Then you will."
Gandalf the Grey revealed himself. He took a step towards the
hobbit, and he seemed to grow larger and become menacing; his shadow filled the small room.

Bilbo backed away against the wall, panting, his hand
He clutched his pocket. They remained face to face for a moment. Another, and the air in the room vibrated. Gandalf's eyes He remained stubbornly focused on the hobbit. Slowly, his hands relaxed, and he began to tremble.





45

"I don't know what's gotten into you, Gandalf," he said. You've never been like this before. What is it?
It's mine, isn't it? I found it, and Gollum would have killed me. If I hadn't kept it. I'm not a thief, whatever he said.

"I have never treated you in this way," replied Gandalf. "And I..." "Neither have I. I am not trying to steal from you, but to help you You. I'd like you to trust me, like before. He turned away. He walked away, and the shadow disappeared. It seemed to shrink again.
to an old, greying, bent and tormented man.

Bilbo ran his hand over his eyes. "I'm sorry," he said.
But I felt so strange. And yet, it would be a relief in a way. I don't want to worry about it anymore. It's only gotten worse. My mind has been racing lately. Sometimes I've felt like it's like an eye is watching me. And I always want to put it on and disappear, you know; or to wonder if it's safe, and
I took it out to check. I tried to lock it, but I found
I couldn't rest without having it in my pocket. I don't know why. And I can't make up my mind.

"Then trust mine," said Gandalf. "It's entirely made up. Go. Leave it behind. Cease possessing it. Give it to Frodo." and I will watch over him.

Bilbo remained tense and undecided for a moment.
He sighed. "Very well," he said with some effort. "I will." Then he shrugged and smiled with a touch of bitterness. After all, that's w Getting rid of a lot of birthday presents, and making things easier somehow by giving them all at once, didn't make things easier.
Ultimately, yes, but it would be a shame to ruin all my preparations. It would completely spoil the joke.

Indeed, that would remove the only interest I've ever seen in the "A case," said Gandalf.

Very well, said Bilbo, he will go to Frodo with all the others.
He took a deep breath. And now I really have to start, or someone else will catch up to me. I said goodbye, and I He couldn't bear to start over. He grabbed his bag and headed for the door.

"You still have the ring in your pocket," said the magician.


46

"Well, me too!" cried Bilbo. "And my will and all the others
The documents too. You'd better take them and bring them to me. That will be the safest way.
"No, don't give me the ring," said Gandalf. "Put it on the finger of..." On the mantelpiece. It will be safe enough there until Frodo a Bilbo took out the envelope, but just as he was about to put it in
He looked at her near the clock, his hand jerked back abruptly, and the package fell to the floor. Before he could pick it up, the magi He grabbed it and put it back in its place. A fit of anger flashed quickly across the hobbit's face again. Suddenly, it gave way to a l

"That's it," he said. "Now I'm leaving!"

They went out into the hall. Bilbo chose his favorite staff. He stepped off the platform and whistled. Three dwarves came out from diff "Is everything ready?" asked Bilbo. "Everything is packed and... labeled?"
"Everything," they replied.
Well, let's begin then! He went out the front door. It was a beautiful night, and the dark sky was dotted with stars.
He looked up, sniffing the air. What a pleasure! What a pleasure to be gone! Here I am back on the road with dwarves! Here's what I hav I've been dreaming of this for years! Goodbye! he said, looking
In front of his old house, he bowed before the door. Farewell, Gandalf!

Goodbye for now, Bilbo. Take care! You're old enough, and perhaps even wise enough.

Take care of yourself! I don't care. Don't worry about me! I am happier than I've ever been, and that's saying a lot. Deal done. But the moment has arrived. I am completely charmed.
Finally, he added, then in a low voice, as if to himself, he sang softly in the dark:

The road continues indefinitely.
Down below, from the door where it all began. The road now stretches far ahead. And I must follow, if I can,





47

Pursuing him with impatient feet, until she reached a wider path Where many paths and many races intersect. And then? I couldn't say.
He paused, silent for a moment. Then, without another word, he turned away from the lights and voices in the field and He went around to the tents, followed by his three companions.
He entered his garden and trotted down the long sloping path. He jumped over a gap in the hedge below, and took towards the meadows, passing through the night like a rustle of wind in the grass.

Gandalf stood for a moment watching him walk away into the Darkness. Goodbye, my dear Bilbo - until we meet again. "Ging!" he said softly before going back inside.

Frodo entered shortly afterwards and found him sitting in In the darkness, lost in thought. "Has he left?" he asked.

"Yes," replied Gandalf, "he has finally left."

I would have liked-well, I hoped until tonight-that it was only that.
"It's a joke," said Frodo. "But deep down I knew he meant it. I had to go. He always joked about serious things." I wish I could have come back earlier, just to say goodbye to him.

I think that in reality, he preferred to slip away discreetly at the end.
"Don't worry too much," said Gandalf. "He'll be all right... now." He left you a package. Here it is! Frodo took the envelope from the mantelpiece and glanced inside. She looked at it, but did not open it.
You will find his will and all the other documents there, I think, said the magician. You are now the master of Cul-de-Sac. And I imagi "The ring!" exclaimed Frodo. "Did he leave it for me? I wonder." "Why? It might still prove useful."
"Perhaps, perhaps not," said Gandalf. "I shouldn't..."
I'd take advantage of it if I were you. But keep it a secret and safe! Now, I'm going to bed.

* * *


48

As master of Bag End, Frodo felt it his painful duty to bid farewell to the guests. Rumors of strange events had been circulating. Now they were spread all over the field, but Frodo kept saying no. I doubt everything will be clear tomorrow morning. Around noon... Night coaches came to collect important people. One by one. They moved away, filled with well-fed but very dissatisfied hobbits.
The gardeners came by appointment and removed the wheels and barriers for those who had inadvertently remained behind.

The night passed slowly. The sun rose. The hobbits got up early.
Later. The morning continued. People arrived and began (on orders) to remove the pavilions, tables, and chairs, and
the spoons, the knives, the bottles, the plates and the lanterns, and the flowering shrubs in planters, and the crumbs and Biscuit wrappers, bags, gloves and forgotten tissues
the chefs and the leftover food (a very small amount). Then several other people came (in no particular order): the Bagginses, and Boffins, Bolgers, Tooks, and other guests who lived or stayed nearby. Around noon, even the best...
The federation members were out again; there was a large crowd in Bag. The end was unsolicited but not unexpected.

Frodo was waiting on the step, smiling, but looking rather
Tired and worried. He welcomed all the visitors, but he had... I don't have much to add. His answer to all the questions. It was simply this: the air. Bilbo Baggins is gone; as far as I know, for good. Some of the visitors he invited to come inside, as Bilbo had left them messages.

Inside, in the hall, was piled a large assortment of parcels, packages, and small pieces of furniture. On each The item had a label. There were multiple labels on this item. Sort:

For Adelard, for his own, from Bilbo, on
An umbrella. Adelard had taken many of them without labels.

To Dora Baggins, in memory of a long-time correspondent dence, with love from Bilbo; on a large wastepaper basket.
Dora was Drogo's sister and the oldest surviving female relative of Bilbo and Frodo; she was ninety-nine years old and had been writing


49

For Milo Burrows, hoping this will be helpful, from BB; on a gold pen and inkwell. Milo never answered letters.

For Angelica's use, from Uncle Bilbo; on a round, convex mirror. She was a young Baggins, and all too obviously con She thought his face was well-defined.

For the HUGO BRACEGIRDLE collection, from a con
tributary; on an (empty) library. Hugo was a great borrower. And even later to return the books.

For LOBELIA SACKVTI J E-BAGGTNS, as a GIFT,
about a matter of silver spoons. Bilbo believed she had
Lobelia retrieved a good number of his spoons while he was away. His old trip. Lobelia knew this very well. When she Arriving later in the day, she immediately grasped the point, but they also took the spoons.

This is just a small selection of the gifts collected. Bilbo's house had become rather cluttered with objects.
the course of his long life. It was a tendency for hobbit houses to accumulate possessions: hence the custom of giving away so many thi Birthday presents were largely to blame. No, of course not. Birthday presents were always new; there was one
or two old, forgotten mathoms that had circulated all over the area; but Bilbo usually offered new gifts, And he kept those he had received. The old hole was now being... It's become a little clearer.

Each of the different going-away gifts had a written label.
Bilbo did it personally, and several were right, or at least a little bit. Joke. But, of course, most things were given where They would be wanted and welcome. The poorest hobbits, and
Those from Bagshot Row, in particular, did very well. Old Gaffer Gamgee received two sacks of potatoes, a new spade, a wool sweater, a In gratitude for his great hospitality, Rory Brandybuck received a dozen bottles of Old Winyards: a full-bodied red wine from the South Farthing, and now fully ripe, as it had been laid down by Bilbo's father. Rory has completely forgiven Bilbo and elected him.
A great guy after the first bottle.


50





There was still plenty of everything left for Frodo. And, from
Of course, all the main treasures, as well as books, paintings, and more than enough furniture, were in his possession. However, there was no sign or mention of money or jewelry. Lery: not a penny or a glass bead was distributed.

Frodo had a very trying afternoon. A false rumor that the whole family was receiving a free distribution like wildfire; and soon the place was crowded with
People who had no business being there, but who couldn't be stopped from entering. Labels were torn off and mixed up, and arguments bro

People tried to make exchanges and transactions in the lobby; and others attempted to take small items of little value that were not me Access to the gate was blocked by wheelbarrows and handcarts.

Amid the confusion, the Sacquet-Bessac
Frodo had arrived. He withdrew for a while and left his friend Merry Brandybuck to keep an eye on things. When Otho Merry, loudly demanding to see Frodo, bowed politely. "He's unwell," he said. "He's resting."
"You mean hide?" asked Lobelia. "In any case, we want to see..." We want to see him. Go ahead and tell him!

Merry left them in the hall for a long time, and they had plenty of time.
They discovered that they had been given spoons as parting gifts. This changed nothing; their anger intensified. Finally, they were all Frodo was sitting at a table with a lot of papers in front of him. He seemed unwell-at the thought of seeing the Bagginses in any case;

The Bagginses were rather offensive. They started by offering him ridiculously low prices (as if they were friends) for various precious and unlabeled things. When Frodo replied that only things specially ordered by Bilbo were
They revealed the case, saying it was very suspicious.

"One thing is clear to me," said Othon, "and that is that you are doing extremely well. I insist on seeing the will." 51

Otho would have been Bilbo's heir, were it not for the adoption.
Frodo's. He read the will carefully and sniffed. It was, unfortunately, very clear and correct (according to the law) hobbit customs, w (signatures of witnesses in red ink).

"Missed again!" he said to his wife. And after waiting sixty minutes... years. Spoons? Nonsense! He snapped his fingers under
Frodo bit his nose and limped away. But Lobelia wasn't so easily intimidated. She got rid of him. A little later, Frodo came out of the how things were going, and I always found her around, he explored every nook and cranny and patted the ground.
He firmly escorted her out of the premises after relieving her of her duties. She had several small (but rather valuable) articles that She had magically slipped inside his umbrella. Her face held an expression of astonishment. She was deep in thought about a truly heart note; but all she could think to say, turning back on the step, was:

You'll regret it, young man! Why didn't you go?
You too? You have no business here; you're not Baggins - you - you're a Brandybuck!

Did you hear that, Merry? It was an insult, if you like. said Frodo, slamming the door in his face. "It was a compliment," said Merry Brandybuck, "and therefore, of course, it's not true."
They then went around the hole and expelled three young people.
Hobbits (two Boffins and a Bolger) who were digging holes
within the walls of one of the cellars. Frodo also had an altercation with young Sancho Proudfoot (grandson of old Odo Proudfoot). who had begun excavations in the largest pantry, where I thought I heard an echo. The legend of Bilbo's gold was exalted.
both curiosity and hope; for legendary gold (mysteriously) (obtained, even ill-gotten), is, as everyone knows, Everyone is in favor of this discovery, unless the research is interrupted.

After defeating Sancho and driving him off the field,
Frodo collapsed into a chair in the hall. It's time to close the "Shop, Merry," he said. "Lock the door and don't open it."


52




Today, nobody, not even if they bring a ram. He went to refresh himself with a late cup of tea. He had barely sat down when there was a soft knock at the door.
The front door. Lobelia again, most likely, he thought. They must have imagined something truly horrible and come. I'll be back to tell

He continued drinking his tea. There was another knock, many
louder, but he paid no attention. Suddenly, the magician's head appeared at the window.

If you don't let me in, Frodo, I'll blow your door open.
"Go down into your hole and come out through the hill," he said.

My dear Gandalf! Half a minute! cried Frodo, running off.
He left the room and headed towards the door. "Come in! Come in!" I thought it was Lobelie.

So I forgive you. But I saw her a while ago, driving a pony trap near Bywater, with a face that would have new curdled milk.

She had almost scared me away. Honestly, I nearly did... I tried on Bilbo's ring. I dreamed of disappearing. "Don't do that!" said Gandalf, sitting down. "Be careful."

of this ring, Frodo! In fact, it's partly about this that I came to say one last word. So what?
What do you already know?

Only what Bilbo told me. I heard his story: how he
He found it, and how he used it: during his journey, I mean. "What a story, I wonder?" asked Gandalf.
Oh, not what he told the dwarves and wrote in his book,
said Frodo. He told me the true story shortly after my arrival.
to live here. He said you harassed him until he told you. So I'd better know too. "No secrets between us, "Frodo," he said, "but they mustn't go any further. It's mine anyway."
"That's interesting," said Gandalf. "Well, what do you think of all that?" If you mean making all this up about a "gift," well, I
I thought the real story was much more likely, and I couldn't see


53

What was the point of changing it? It wasn't at all like Bilbo. Anyway; and I found it rather strange.

Me too. But strange things can happen to people who possess such treasures... if they use them. Let this be a warning. You have to be very careful with that. It could have other powers besides...making you disappear whenever you want.

"I don't understand," said Frodo.

"Me neither," replied the magician. "I've only just begun."
It's pointless to ask questions about the ring, especially since last night.
Don't worry. But if you follow my advice, you'll use it very often. Rarely, or even not at all. At least, please, don't use it under an So as not to stir up gossip or arouse suspicion. I repeat: keep this to yourself. It's safe, and keep it a secret!

You're very mysterious! What are you afraid of?

I'm not sure, so I won't say any more. I might be able to tell you something when I get back. I'm leaving right now. So, that's goodbye for now. He stood up.

"Right away!" cried Frodo. "But I thought you were staying!" It's been at least a week. I've been eagerly awaiting your help.

I fully intended to do it, but I had to change my mind. I might do it. I'll be away for quite a while; but I'll come back to see you, a As soon as possible. Expect to see me! I'll slip in discreetly. Discreetly. I won't often return to the Shire openly.
I've noticed I've become rather unpopular. People say I'm a nuisance and a disturbance of the peace. Some are actually... allies accusi I want to know, it seems there's a plot between you and me to get my hands on his fortune.

"Some people!" exclaimed Frodo. "You mean Otho and..." Lobelia. How awful! I'd give them Bag End and
As for the rest, if only I could get Bilbo back and go hiking... in the countryside with him. I love the Shire. But I'm starting to wis In a way, I had been there too. I wonder if I'll ever see him again.

"Me too," said Gandalf. "And I have many other questions."

Goodbye! Take care! Watch over me! Especially at unexpected times! Goodbye!


54





Frodo walked him back to the door. He gave him a final wave, and walked away at a surprising pace; but Frodo thought The old wizard seemed unusually stooped, almost as if he were carrying a heavy burden. Night was falling, and his The draped figure vanished quickly into the twilight. Frodo did it. I won't see him again for a long time.


2





The discussions did not calm down in nine days, nor even in ninety-nine. The second disappearance of Mr. Bilbo Baggins has been
Oaths were uttered in Hobbiton, and indeed throughout the Shire, for a year and a day, and were remembered for much longer.

It became a story told around the fireside to young hobbits; and eventually Mad Baggins, who used to vanish with a bang and a flash and have been forgotten.

But in the meantime, the general opinion in the neighboring country...
The hood belonged to Bilbo, who had always been a bit mad, had finally gone completely mad, and had run away into the Blue. There, he h They ended tragically, but certainly not prematurely. The family was at fault. The responsibility lay primarily with Gandalf.

If only that cursed wizard would leave young Frodo alone,
Perhaps he'll eventually calm down and develop some hobbit common sense, he said. And, outwardly, the wizard left Frodo alone.
And he finally settled in, but the development of his hobbit sense wasn't very noticeable. In fact, he immediately began to continue Bilbo's reputation for eccentricity. He refused to wear mourning; and the following year, he gave a party in Bilbo's honor.
one hundred and twelfth anniversary, which he called a Centenary Weight Feast. But that was insufficient, because twenty Guests were invited and several meals were organized.
Food that has fallen from the snow and drinks soaked by the rain, as the hobbits say.

Some people were quite shocked; but Frodo continued to fight.
The custom of organizing Bilbo's birthday party year after year until they got used to it. He said he didn't think Bilbo was


56





dead. When they asked, "Where is he?", he shrugged.

He lived alone, as Bilbo had done; but he had many friends, especially among the young hobbits (mainly
the descendants of the old Tooks) who, as children, had been very fond of Bilbo and often visited Bag End. Folco Boffin and
Frederick Bolger was one of them; but his closest friends were Peregrin Took (usually called Pippin), and Merry Brandybuck (whose real (rarely mentioned). Frodo crossed the Shire.
with them; but most often he wandered alone, and at
To the astonishment of sensible people, it could sometimes be seen from very far away.

From my home, I would wander through the hills and woods under the stars. Merry and Pippin suspected that he sometimes visited the Elve as Bilbo had done.

Over time, people began to notice that Frodo, too, showed signs of good preservation: outwardly, he retained the appearance of a robust his pre-teens. Some people are really lucky, they said; but that was the case. It wasn't until Frodo reached the generally more sober a They started finding it strange fifty years ago.

Frodo himself, after the initial shock, discovered that being his own, Master Baggins of Bag End was rather pleasant. For a few years, he was perfectly happy and hardly worried about the future. But he was half-unaware of the regret that He hadn't gone with Bilbo, who was constantly growing. He found himself wondering sometimes, especially in autumn, about the wild lands and the strange visions of mountains he had
Things he had never seen before appeared in his dreams. He began to think: Perhaps one day I will cross the river myself. To what end? The other half of his mind always replied: Not yet.

And so on, until the forties drew to a close, and his fiftieth birthday approached: fifty was a number that
He had a feeling that it had some significance (or was a bad omen); it was at any moment. At that age, adventure had suddenly come to B Frodo began to grow restless, and the old paths seemed too...





57


well frequented. He looked at maps and wondered what was there.
Beyond their borders: the maps made in the Shire mainly showed blank spaces beyond its borders. He began to wander. further away and more often alone; and Merry and
His other friends watched him anxiously. He was often seen walking and talking with the strange travelers who had begun to appear in th

Rumors were circulating about strange events taking place in the outside world; and as Gandalf had not yet appeared at that time or Having sent no messages for several years, Frodo gathered all the news. He could. The elves, who rarely wandered the Shire, could now. They passed away and did not return; but they left Middle-earth and no longer concerned themselves with its problems. There was, However, one encounters an unusual number of dwarves on the road. The old east-west road crossed the county to its terminus at
The Grey Havens, and the dwarves had always used it on their way to their mines in the Blue Mountains. They were the hobbits
their main source of information from distant lands-if they so desired: A rule the dwarves rarely spoke of, and the hobbits asked for n They sought refuge in the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in whispers of the Enemy and the Land of Mordor.

The hobbits knew this name only from the legends of the dark world, from the past, like a shadow in the background of their memories; b It was unsettling and sinister. It seemed that the power of evil in Mirkwood had been driven out by the White Council.
to reappear in greater strength in the old strongholds of Mordor. The Dark Tower had been rebuilt, it was said. There, power spread far and wide, very far away.
To the east and south, there were wars and growing fear. Minerals were once again plentiful in the mountains. The trolls were out, no

Longer stupid, but cunning and armed with formidable weapons.
weapons. And whispers could be heard of creatures more... more terrible than all these, but they had no name.


5§

Of course, little of this information reached the ears of ordinary mortals. Hobbits. But even the most deaf and homebodies began
to hear strange stories; and those whose affairs brought them to the borders witnessed strange things. The conversation in The Green Th the fiftieth year, showed that even in the comfortable heart of the
Rumors circulated about the Shire, although most of the hobbits... they laughed at them.

Sam Gambee was sitting in a corner by the fire, and
Opposite him was Ted Sandyman, the miller's son; and there were several other rustic hobbits listening to their conversation. "It's true that we hear some strange things these days," said Sam.
Ah, said Ted, you can hear it if you listen. But I can hear the fireplace... stories and tales for children at home, if I feel like it.

"Without a doubt," Sam retorted, "and I dare say there are some."
Some of these statements contain more truth than you think. Who invented this? Stories, anyway? Let's take dragons, now.

"No thanks," said Ted, "I won't do it. I heard about them when I was young, but there's no reason to believe them." "Now there's only one dragon in Bywater, and it's green," he said, provoking general laughter.

"Very well," said Sam, laughing with the others. "But what?"
Speaking of these tree-men, these giants, as you might call them? They say that a specimen bigger than a tree was spotted in the distan Beyond the North Moors, not so long ago. Who are they?
My cousin Hal, for example. He works for Mr. Boffin at
He goes over the hill and up to the northern district to hunt. He saw one.

He claims to have done it, perhaps. Ton Hal always says he saw things; and perhaps he sees things that don't exist. But this one was as tall as an elm, and to walk - to walk seven yards in a stride, if that was an inch.
So I bet it wasn't even an inch. What he saw was an elm tree. As likely as not. But this one walked, I tell you; and there is no elm tree on the northern moors.




59


"So Hal didn't get to see one," said Ted. "There were a few." Laughter and applause: the audience seemed to think that Ted had scored a point.

Nevertheless, said Sam, you can't deny that others, besides
Our Halfasts have seen queer people crossing the county-crossing. That said, there are others who are turned away at the border. The Bo

And I've heard that the elves are migrating west. It's true. They say they're going to the ports, far away, beyond... White Towers. Sam made a vague gesture with his arm: neither him nor
None of them knew how far the sea lay beyond the ancient towers, beyond the western borders of the Shire. But it was
an old tradition according to which, there were the Grey Havens, from which elven ships sometimes departed, never to return.

They sail, sail, sail on the sea, they are
"They're heading west and leaving us," Sam said, half-whispering. As he said the words, he shook his head sadly and solemnly. But Ted l

Well, that's nothing new, if you believe the old stories. And I don't see how it concerns me, or you. Let them leave! But I guarantee you that you didn't see them do it; nor did anyone else anywhere else in the Shire.

"Well, I don't know," Sam said thoughtfully. He believed
He had already glimpsed an elf in the woods and hoped to see another one someday. Of all the legends he had heard in his In the early years, such fragments of stories and half-forgotten memories
The stories about the Elves, as the hobbits knew them, had always been distorted. He was more deeply affected. There are some, even in "To know the Little People and keep up with their news," he said. Mr. Baggins, for whom I work, told me they were
He knows how to sail and he knows a little about the Elves. And old Mr. Bilbo knew that. And then, there are so many conversations I ha

"Oh, they're both cracked," said Ted. "At least old Bilbo's was cracked, and Frodo's was cracked. If that's where your conclusion comes With a cup in hand, they left noisily.


60

Sam remained silent and added nothing. He had a lot to do. Think about it. First, there was a lot to do up there.
the Cul-de-Sac garden, and he would have a busy day tomorrow, if the weather improved. The grass was growing fast. But Sam He had other things on his mind besides gardening. After a while, he sighed, got up and left.

It was early April and the sky was beginning to clear after heavy rains.
It was raining. The sun had set, and a cool, pale evening had settled in quietly. Night was falling. He walked home under the first sta crossing Hobbiton and going up the hill, whistling softly and thoughtfully.

It was precisely at that moment that Gandalf reappeared after his long absence. He had been gone for three years after the Party. He then paid Frodo a brief visit, and after observing him closely
He flew into another rage against him. Over the next two years, he had
They appeared quite often, surging unexpectedly after dusk, and leaving without warning before sunrise. He wouldn't do it. He talked about his own affairs and travels, and seemed mainly
I am interested in the small news concerning Frodo's health and activities.

Then, suddenly, his visits stopped. This went on for more than nine years.
ever since Frodo had seen him or heard about him, and had begun to... She thought the wizard would never return and had given up. all interest in hobbits. But that evening, while Sam was out walking
The house was going dark, twilight was fading, and there it was again, what was once familiar to me. Press on the study window. Frodo greeted his old friend with surprise and joy. They exchanged an intense look.
"Everything's fine, isn't it?" said Gandalf. "You haven't changed a bit, Frodo!"

"You too," replied Frodo; but secretly he thought Gandalf looked older and more worried. He pressed him with his finger. to get news of him and of the wider world, and soon they
They were deep in conversation and stayed up late into the night.

The next morning, after a late breakfast, the wizard sat with Frodo by the open window of the study. A blazing fire

6 l


was on the hearth, but the sun was warm and the wind was from the south. Everything seemed fresh, and the new green of Spring sparkled in the fields and at the treetops, the fingers of the trees.

Gandalf thought of a spring, almost eighty years ago, when Bilbo had fled Bag End unaided.
a handkerchief. His hair was perhaps whiter than it had been then, and his beard and eyebrows were perhaps longer, and his His face was more marked by worry and wisdom; but his eyes were as bright as ever, he smoked and blew smoke rings with the same vigor and same pleasure.

He was now smoking in silence, for Frodo remained seated motionless.
Lost in thought, even in the morning light, he felt the darkness, the shadow of the news Gandalf had brought. Finally, he broke the silence.

Last night, you started telling me strange things about my "Ring, Gandalf," he said. "And then you stopped, because you..."
He said it was best to leave those questions unanswered until later. Right? You'd better finish now? You say the ring is dangerous... Ous, much more dangerous than I thought. In what way?

"In many ways," replied the magician. "It's much more powerful..."
richer than I could ever have imagined at the start, so powerful that it would eventually completely annihilate any mortal being that He possessed her. She would possess him.

Long ago in Eregion, many elven rings were made, magical rings, as you call them, and they were, of course, of various kinds.
of sorts: some more powerful and others less so. The less powerful rings were simply trials before the craft was fully developed, and a They were only elven smiths, certainly, but in my opinion, they remain insignificant objects, dangerous to mortals. But the Great Rings Power was perilous.

A mortal, Frodo, who possesses one of the Great Rings, does
It doesn't die, but it doesn't grow or acquire more life; it simply continues on, until every minute becomes a source of boredom. And i He often uses the Ring to make himself invisible; he fades away, eventually becoming permanently invisible, and walks in the
Twilight under the watchful eye of the Dark Power that reigns over the Rings.


62




Yes, sooner or later-later, if he is strong or well-intentioned. We start, but neither strength nor good intentions will last. Sooner o "How awful!" exclaimed Frodo. There was still a long silence. Then Sam Gambee could be heard mowing the lawn.
from the garden.

"How long have you known?" Frodo finally asked. "And what did Bilbo know?"

Bilbo knew no more than what he told you, I'm sure of it, said Gandalf. It certainly would never have reached you. everything he considered a danger, even if I
He promised to take care of you. He thought the ring was very beautiful, beautiful and very useful in case of need; and if something we or queer, it was himself. He said that it "pleased him more and more".
"mind," and he worried about it constantly; but he did not... He suspected the ring itself was the problem. Although he had

I discovered that the object required care; it did not always seem to be the same size or weight; it shrank or expanded. in a strange way, and could suddenly slip from a finger where it had been gripped.
"Yes, he warned me about it in his last letter," said Frodo. "So I've always kept it on his chain." "Very wise," said Gandalf. "But as for his long life..." Bilbo
He never made the connection with the ring. He took all the credit. He kept it to himself and was very proud of it. Although he He was becoming agitated and uncomfortable. Thin and tense, he said. A sign that the ring was taking control.

"How long have you known all this?" Frodo asked again.

"Known?" asked Gandalf. "I have known many things that only..." The wise know this, Frodo. But if you mean "known for this ring,"
Well, I still don't know, you could say. There's one last test to pass. But I no longer doubt my intuition.

When did I start guessing? he wondered, searching his memories. From memory. Let's see... it was the year the White
The Council banished the Power of Darkness from Mirkwood, just before the Battle of the Five Armies, the one where Bilbo found his ring





63


So, that touched my heart, even though I didn't yet know what I
dreaded. I have often wondered how Gollum led me to a Great Ring. It was obvious, or at least it was clear from the beginning.
I heard Bilbo's strange story about how he had "won" her, and I couldn't believe it. When I finally managed to get the truth out of him I immediately understood that he was trying to assert his rights on
A ringtone, without a doubt. A bit like Gollum with his "birthday ringtone". "Present." The lies were all too similar for my liking.
Clearly, the ring possessed an unhealthy power that began to work.
on his guardian immediately. That was the first real warning I received that all was not well. I often told Bilbo that such rings were It was better not to use it; but he was upset about it and soon became angry.
There wasn't much else I could do. I couldn't remove it from
without causing him any more harm; and I had no right to do so. In short, I could only watch and wait. Perhaps I could have He consulted Saruman the White, but something still remained unresolved. Send me back.
"Who is he?" asked Frodo. "I've never heard of him before." "Perhaps not," replied Gandalf. "Hobbits are not, or were not,
He is preoccupied with himself. Yet, he is great among the wise. He is the head of my order and president of the Council. His knowledge is profound, but his pride has grown with him, and he takes everything badly. The tradition of the elven rings, great and small, belong their making; but when the Rings were debated in the Council
He told us everything he wanted to reveal about his ring knowledge, recounting it to counter my fears. Then my doubt subsided, but it w

And everything seemed to be going well for Bilbo. And the years passed. Yes, they passed, and they didn't seem to affect him.
I showed no signs of aging. The shadow fell upon me again. But I told myself, "After all, he comes from a long-lived family." On his mo

And I waited. Until that night when he left that house.
I said and did things back then that filled me with a fear that no one... Saruman's words could soothe. I finally knew that something


64

A dark and deadly force was at work. And I have spent most of the years that have passed since then searching for the truth.
"There was no permanent damage, was there?" Frodo asked anxiously. "He'd make it out in time, wouldn't he? Him? To be able to rest in p He felt better at once, said Gandalf. But there is only one.
The power in this world that knows everything about the Rings and their
effects; and as far as I know, there is no Power in the world that knows everything about hobbits. Among the Wise, I am the The only one interested in hobbit legends: an obscure branch of knowledge, but full of surprises. Smooth as butter,
and yet sometimes as robust as the roots of an old tree. I think it's likely that some would withstand the Rings much longer than most. The wise would believe it. I don't think you have anything to worry about. Bilbo.

Of course, he owned the ring for many years and used it, so it could take a long time for its influence to dissipate.

- before it is no longer safe for him to see him again, for example.
Otherwise, he could live for years more, perfectly happy: all he has to do is stop. He would have to remain exactly as he was when he p ending it on his own initiative: an important point. No, I wasn't.
He no longer worried about dear Bilbo, once he had let the thing be. Go ahead. It is for you that I feel responsible.

Since Bilbo left, I have been deeply concerned about you, and all those charming, absurd, and helpless hobbits.
It would be a terrible blow to the world if the Power of Darkness
have conquered the Shire; if all your kind, merry, and foolish Bolgers,
Horn players, scholars, support belts and all the others, not forgetting Let us mention the ridiculous Bagginses, who were enslaved. Frodo shuddered. "But why should we?" he asked. "And why would he want such slaves?"
"To tell you the truth," replied Gandalf, "I believe that
Until now-until now, mind you-he has completely ignored the existence of hobbits. You should be grateful. But your
The danger has passed. He doesn't need you; he already has plenty. More useful servants, certainly, but he will never forget you. Hobbi


65

The hobbits are happy and free. Malice certainly exists. Revenge.

"Revenge?" asked Frodo. "Revenge for what? I still don't know." He wanted to understand what all this had to do with Bilbo and me, and our ring.

"It's intimately connected with that," said Gandalf. "You don't..."
You will not yet know the true peril; but you will know it. I was not sure of it. I said so myself during my last visit; but the time h Give me the ring for a moment.

Frodo took it out of his breeches pocket, where it hung from a chain dangling from his belt. Fie unfastened it and slowly handed it to heavy, as if he or Frodo himself were somehow reluctant, as long as Gandalf could touch him.

Gandalf held it up. It seemed to be made of pure, solid material. Gold. "Do you see any markings on it?" he asked. "No," said Frodo. "There isn't. It's very clear, and it..." shows no scratches or signs of wear.
Well, look! To Frodo's great surprise and dismay

the magician suddenly threw it into the middle of a glow
by the fireside. Frodo cried out and groped for the pincers; but Gandalf held him back. "Wait!" he said imperiously, giving Frodo a quick glance under his bushy eyebrows.
No apparent change occurred in the ring. After a while, Gandalf stood up, closed the shutters on the outside of the window, and The curtains were drawn. The room became dark and silent, however the clicking of Sam's scissors, now closer to the windows, could The faint noise from the garden could still be heard. For a moment,
The magician stood there watching the fire; then he bent down and pulled the ring back towards the hearth with the tongs, and at once i "Up!" Frodo gasped.

"This is really great," said Gandalf. "Take it!" Frodo received it. On his shrinking palm: it seemed to have thickened and Heavier than ever.

"Hold it up in the air!" said Gandalf. "And watch closely!"


66





As he did so, Frodo then saw fine lines, finer than the finest feather strokes, running along the ring, outside and inside: lines of fl They shone with a piercing, yet distant light, as if they were emerging from a great depth.


"I cannot read the flaming letters," said Frodo in a trembling voice.

"No," said Gandalf, "but I can. The letters are Elvish, in an ancient style, but the language is that of Mordor, which I..." I won't say it here. But here's what we say in common parlance: We say that's roughly it:

One Ring to rule them all. One Ring to find them.

One Ring to gather them all and in the darkness bind them.

These are just two lines from a poem long known in elven tradition: Three rings for the elven kings under the sky, Seven for the dwarf lords in their stone halls, Nine for mortal men condemned to die,
One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne in the land of Mordor, where the Shadows reign.

One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them,

One Ring to gather them all and bind them in the darkness, in the land of Mordor, where the Shadows lay.

He paused, then said slowly in a deep voice: This is the Master Ring, the One Ring to rule them all. This is the A Ring he lost a long time ago, due to the great weakening





67


of his power. He ardently desires it, but he must not obtain it.
Frodo remained silent and motionless. Fear seemed to spread. An immense hand, like a dark cloud rising from the East, threatened to eng "Ah!" said Gandalf. "It's a very long story. The beginning..."
The memories go back to the Dark Years, known only to the luminaries. Remember. If I were to tell you this story, we should I would still be sitting here when spring had given way to winter.

But last night, I told you about Sauron the Great, the Dark Lord; the rumors you heard are true: he has Indeed, he got up and relinquished his hold on Mirkwood and
He returned to his old refuge in the Dark Tower of Mordor.
This name, even you hobbits have heard of it, like a shadow on the borders of old stories. Always after a defeat and a respite, the Sha "I wish that this had not happened in my lifetime," said Frodo.
"Me too," said Gandalf, "and all those who live long enough to see this too. But it's not for them to decide. All we have to do is Deciding means what to do with the time allotted to us. Already, Frodo, times are beginning to darken.
The enemy is rapidly becoming very powerful. His plans are far from over.
They are ripe, I believe, but they are still ripening. We will have a very hard time... That would be very difficult for us to accept, this terrible opportunity.

The enemy still lacks one thing to give him strength and
The knowledge to overcome all resistance, break down the last defenses, and shroud all the lands in a second darkness. He lacks the One

The Three, the most beautiful of all, the elven lords hid from Him, and His hand never touched or defiled them. Seven Possessed dwarf kings, but he recovered three of them, and the
Others, the dragons devoured. Nine, he gave to mortals. Proud and powerful men thus ensnared them. Long ago, they fell under the domini Nazgûl, shadows beneath his great Shadow, his most


68





Terrible servants. Long ago. It has been many years since the Nine traveled abroad. But who knows? As the Shadow grows once Furthermore, they too will be able to walk again. But come! We will not speak of such things, not even in the morning in the Shire.

So now it is: the Nine, he has gathered them to himself;
Seven too, otherwise they are destroyed. The Three are always hidden. But that no longer troubles him. He only needs the One;
For he himself forged this Ring, it is his, and he has allowed a great part of his former power to be passed on to him, so that he may the others. If he gets it back, he'll order them all.
Once again, wherever they are, even the Three, and everything that has happened, the works they created will be revealed, and it will b Stronger than ever.

And that is the terrible risk, Frodo. He believed that the One had perished; that the Elves had destroyed it, as
It should have been done. But he knows now that it wasn't. He perished, that he was found. That's why he searches for him, he searches our greatest fear.

"Why, why wasn't it destroyed?" cried Frodo. "And how could the enemy ever have lost, if he was so strong?" Was it so precious to him? He clutched the ring in his hand.
as if he could already see dark fingers reaching out to seize it. It has been taken from him, said Gandalf. The strength of

The Elves' resistance to him was greater long ago; and not all men were strangers to them. The men of the West
They came to their aid. That belongs to ancient history, which it would be good to recall; for there was sorrow then, and growing darke which were not entirely in vain. One day, perhaps, I will tell you.
You'll hear the whole story told in detail by someone who knows it. That's the best way.

But for now, since what you need to know most of all
How this thing came into your hands, and that will suffice as a story, this is all I will say. It was Gil-galad, Elven king, and Elendi The Westerners who overthrew Sauron, though they themselves perished in this act; and Isildur's son Elendil cut down the Ring.

69


He took it from Sauron's hands and claimed it for himself. Then Sauron
He was defeated, his spirit fled and remained hidden for a long time, for years, until his shadow took shape again in Mirkwood.

But the Ring was lost. It fell into the Great River, the Anduin, and was gone. For Isildur was walking north along the eastern banks of He was ambushed by the Mountain Ores, and almost all his people were killed. He jumped into the water, but the Ring slipped away.
with his finger while he was swimming, and then the Minerais saw him and He killed him with arrows.

Gandalf paused. And there, in the dark pools in the middle of the Gladden Fields, he said, the Ring lost consciousness
and the legend; and even a large part of its history is known today. Only to a few, and the Council of Sages could not discover any No more. But I think I can finally continue the story.

Much later, but still a very long time ago, near the banks of the Great River on the outskirts of Wilderland lived a skilled and small, silent beings. I suppose they were hobbits. Kind; like the Stoors' fathers, for they
He adored the river and often swam in it, or made small boats out of reeds. Among them was a family of great renown, for
It was larger and richer than most, and it was ruled by a grandmother of the people, stern and wise according to the ancient traditions His family name was Sméagol. He was interested in roots and beginnings; he plunged into deep pools; he buried himself beneath
trees and growing plants; he dug tunnels in green mounds; and he ceased to look up at the hilltops, or at the leaves on trees, or flowers opening in the air: his head and eyes were downwards.

He had a friend named Déagol, of the same sort, but more lively...
They had their eyes fixed on the water, but were neither very quick nor very strong. One day, they took a boat and went down to the Gla Beds of irises and flowering reeds. That's where Sméagol went out and snooped along the banks, but Déagol stayed in the boat and
He was fishing. Suddenly, a big fish took the bait, and before he


70





He knew where he was; he was dragged out and lowered into the water, to the bottom. Then he dropped his line, because he thought He saw something shining in the riverbed; and holding his breath, he caught his breath, clinging to it.
Then he arrived, spitting, with wild grasses in his hair, and he took a handful of mud and swam to the shore. And there he was! When he washed off the mud, he found in his hand a magnificent
A ring of pure gold; and it shone and glittered in the sun, so that His heart was glad. But Sméagol had been watching Him from... behind a tree, and while Déagol rejoiced in front of the ring, Sméagol approached gently from behind.

"Give it to us, Déagol, my love," said Sméagol over his voice. His friend's shoulder.

"Why?" asked Déagol.

"Because it's my birthday, my love, and I want it," she said. Sméagol.

"I don't care," said Déagol. "I gave you a present."
Already, more than I could afford. I found it, and I'm going to keep it.

  "Oh, you truly are, my love," said Sméagol; and he seized Déagol by the throat and strangled him, for the The gold looked so bright and beautiful. Then he put the ring on his finger.

No one ever knew what became of Déagol;
He was murdered far from home, and his body was cunningly hidden. But Sméagol returned alone; and he found that no one-his family-could He was very pleased with his discovery and he concealed it;
and he used it to uncover secrets, and he put his knowledge at the service of science for dishonest and malicious purposes. He became v He was very sensitive to anything hurtful. The ring had given him power proportional to his stature. It is no wonder that he became ver (ble) by all his relatives. They struck him and he bit them.
feet. He began to fly, and went from place to place muttering to himself, and gurgling in his throat. That is why he was called Golhim,


71
His mother, desiring peace, drove him out of the family and He drove him out of his hole. He wandered alone, weeping a little over the hardship...
He explored the world and went up the river until he reached a stream flowing down from the mountains, and he
He went that way. He fished in deep pools wearing invisible goggles. He ate his raw fingers. One day, it was very hot, and while he

As he leaned over a swimming pool, he felt a burning sensation in his back.
his head, and a dazzling light from the water hurt his wet eyes. He was surprised by this, for he had almost forgotten about the Sun. Then, for the last time, he looked up and clenched his fist. to her.

But looking down, he saw in the distance the peaks of the Misty Mountains, from which the stream sprang. And he
I suddenly thought: "It would be cool and shady under those mountains. The sun couldn't see me up there. The roots of These mountains must be true roots; there must be great things there.
Secrets buried there that have not been discovered since the beginning.

He therefore undertook a night journey to the highlands, and he
He found a small cave from which the dark stream sprang; and he slithered like a maggot into the heart of the hills, and disappeared from collective memory. The Ring entered the
shadows with him, and even the creator, when his power had I started growing again, but I learned nothing from all of it.

"Gollum!" cried Frodo. "Gollum? Do you mean that it's..."
The Gollum-like creature that Bilbo encountered? How horrible!

"I think it's a sad story," said the wizard, "and it might well have..." It's happened to others, even to some hobbits I knew. I can't believe that Gollum is linked to hobbits.
"Even from a distance," said Frodo with a touch of enthusiasm. "What... " What an abominable idea!

"That's still true," replied Gandalf. Regarding their
As for the origins, I know more than the hobbits themselves.
Even Bilbo's story suggests this connection. There were many things buried deep in their minds and memories.


72





It was very similar. They understood each other.
Very good, much better than a hobbit could understand.
For example, a dwarf, an ore, or even an elf. Think of the riddles. They both knew that, for starters.

"Yes," said Frodo. "Although other people besides hobbits ask riddles and such things. And hobbits don't cheat. Gollum intended to chea with an easy victim, but if he lost, he wouldn't hurt him.

"That's quite true, I'm afraid," said Gandalf. "But there was something..." There's something else in it, I think, that you don't yet s The wise men would have guessed it - just as a hobbit would have.
It was a small corner of her mind that still belonged to her, and the light passed through it, as through a crack in the darkness: ligh The voice again, bringing back memories of wind, trees and the sun on the grass, and all those forgotten things.

But that, of course, would only reinforce his share of evil.
angrier in the end-unless it could be defeated. Unless... could be cured. Gandalf sighed. Alas! There was little hope of that for him. Ye He hadn't worn it much in a long time: in total darkness, it was rarely necessary. It had certainly never "disappeared." It is
Slim and still as strong as ever. But the thing was eating away at his mind. Of course, and the torment had become almost unbearable.

All the "great secrets" buried beneath the mountains had become secrets. It turned out to be just another empty night: there was nothin Nothing interesting to do, only eat furtively and resentfully, remembering. He was utterly miserable. He hated the
darkness, and he hated the light even more: he hated everything, and the Ringer especially.

"What do you mean?" asked Frodo. "The Ring was his, wasn't it?" Precious and the only thing that mattered to him? But if he hated it, Why didn't he get rid of it, or why didn't he leave things as they were?





73


You should start to understand, Frodo, after all, you
"I've heard of it," said Gandalf. He hated it and loved it, for he hated himself and loved himself. He couldn't get rid of it. He had There is no will left in this matter.

A Ring of Power protects itself, Frodo. It could slip right through your fingers, treacherously, but its guardian never abandons it. At plays with the idea of handing over responsibility to someone else - and only at the beginning, when it starts to take effect.
But as far as I know, Bilbo is the only one in the story to have gone beyond the game; he really did. He needed all my help. And even so, he would never have abandoned him, nor thrown him away

Let's leave that aside. It wasn't Gollum, nor Frodo, but the Ring itself that made the decisions. The Ring left him. "What, just in time to meet Bilbo?" said Frodo. "Wouldn't it?" Ore would have been more suitable.

"This is no laughing matter," said Gandalf. "Not for you." This was the strangest event in the entire history of the Ring. far away: Bilbo's arrival at that very moment, and the fact that he puts his hand on it, blindly, in the dark.

There was more than one force at work, Frodo.
Ring was trying to return to his master. He had slipped on him. Isildur's hand betrayed him; then, when an opportunity presented itself She caught up with poor Déagol, and he was murdered; and after that Gollum, and he had devoured him. He could no longer use it: it was He stayed with him and would never leave his deep pool again. So, when his master awoke again and sent
His dark thought, which came from Mirkwood, abandoned Gollum. To be taken in by the most unlikely person imaginable:
Bilbo of the Shire!
Behind all that, something else was at work, beyond anything else. The ringmaker's design. I couldn't put it better than to say that Bi "No," said Frodo. "Although I'm not sure I understand..."
I'm keeping an eye on you. But how did you learn all this about the Ring?


74




And Gollum? Do you really know, or are you just pretending? Are you still guessing? Gandalf looked at Frodo, and his eyes shone. I knew it.
"I have learned a great deal," he replied. "But I am not." I will give you an account of everything I have done. The story of Elendil a Wise man. Your ring is revealed to be the One Ring by fire. The writing alone, without any other proof.

"And when did you discover that?" asked Frodo, intrigued. (Break.)

"In a little while, right here in this room, of course," the magician replied abruptly. But I expected to find him. I came back from Dark journeys and a long quest to succeed in the final test. This is the Last Proof, and everything is now crystal clear. Unmasking Gol I may have started with assumptions about Gollum, but... I'm not making assumptions anymore. I know. I've seen him.

"Have you seen Gollum?" exclaimed Frodo, astonished.

Yes. The obvious thing to do, of course, if one could. I had tried a long time ago, but I finally succeeded. What happened next after Bilbo escaped from him? Do you know?
Not so clearly. What I told you was what Gollum was ready to say-but not, of course, in the way I did.
He pointed it out. Gollum is a liar, and his words must be analyzed carefully. For example, he called the ring his "birthday present," He stuck to it. He said it came from his grandmother, who... I had lots of lovely things like that. A ridiculous story. I have no doubt A great person in his own way, but to speak of his many qualities could not be more appropriate. The elven rings were absurd, and as fo

A lie. But a lie that contains a grain of truth.

The murder of Déagol haunted Gollum, and he had made building a defense, repeating it endlessly to her "Precious"
Again, he gnawed on bones in the darkness, until he was almost dead. I believed it. It was his birthday. Déagol should have given
The ring was for him. It had clearly appeared as if by magic.





75


A gift. It was his birthday present, and so on.

I endured it as long as I could, but the truth was hopeless. It was very important, and finally I had to be tough. I put the The fear of fire gripped him, and he extracted the truth from her, little by little.
A little, accompanied by a lot of whining and grumbling. He thought he was misunderstood and mistreated. But when he had finally told me, his story, right up to the end of the puzzle game and
He wouldn't say any more about Bilbo's escape, except in the dark.
Allusions. Another fear, greater than mine, dwelled within him. He muttered that he would take revenge. People would to see if he could withstand being hit and thrown into a hole
And then he stole. Gollum now had good friends, very good and very strong friends. They would help him. Baggins would pay. That was his main concern. He hated Bilbo and cursed him. His name. Moreover, he knew where he came from.

"But how did he discover that?" asked Frodo.

As for the name, Bilbo had the great folly of telling it to Gollum.

himself; and after that, it wouldn't be difficult to discover his country, once Gollum appeared. Oh yes, he appeared.
His desire for the Ring proved stronger than his fear of
the ores, or even the light. After a year or two, he left the mountains. You see, although still bound by the desire for it, the ring n He felt old, terribly old, and yet less timid, and he was mortally wounded. Starved.

Light, light of the Sun and the Moon, he feared and hated it still, and I think he always will; but he was cunning. He discovered that could hide from the daylight and moonlight, and make its way swiftly and quietly through the heart of the night, with its pale, cold ey and catch small, frightened, or unwary creatures. He grows
Stronger and bolder thanks to a new diet and fresh air. He found it. He made his way into the Black Forest, as expected. "Is that where you found it?" asked Frodo.
"I saw him there," replied Gandalf, "but before that, he
had wandered far, following Bilbo's trail. It was difficult to
You couldn't learn anything from him for sure, because his speech was constantly interrupted by curses and threats. "What was that?"


76





"In his pockets?" he asked. "She didn't answer, no, precious. Little cheat. Unfair question. He cheated first, that's for sure. He brok Rules. We should have taken advantage of them, yes, precious. And our will, precious!

Here is an excerpt from his speech. I suppose you don't want it.
I've had some difficult days. But according to a few allusions scattered among
The grunts I understood from his wading paws had carried all the way to Esgaroth, and even to the streets of Dale, listening
In secret and by observing. Well, the news of the great events spread, and throughout the wilderness, and many had heard of Bilbo.

We knew he had a name and where he came from. We hadn't hidden anything about our journey back to his home in the West. Attentive ears would soon understand what he wanted.
"Then why didn't he follow Bilbo's trail?" asked Frodo. "Why didn't he come to the Shire?" "Ah," said Gandalf, "here we are. I think Gollum..."
He tried. He set off and returned westward, as far as the border of the Great River. But he turned back. He was not intimidated. Distance, I'm sure of it. No, something else attracted him.
Far away. At least, that's what my friends think, those who tracked him down for me.

The Wood Elves hunted him down first, an easy task for them.
because his trail was still fresh at that time. Through the Black Forest and back he led them again, but they never caught him. The woo was full of rumors about him, even terrible stories among
Animals and birds. The lumberjacks said there were a few.
A new terror abroad, a bloodthirsty ghost. He climbed trees.
to find nests; he slipped into holes to find the little ones; he crept through windows to find cradles.

But at the western edge of the Black Forest, the path forked. He wandered off. He meandered south and left the
The woodland elves knew it, and he was lost. And then I made a great mistake. Yes, Frodo, and not the first; though I fear it was. I le I had many other things on my mind at that moment, and I still trusted the legends of Saruman.

Well, that was years ago. I've paid a heavy price since. Dark and dangerous days. The trail was long and cold when I





77


I took it up again after Bilbo left. And my search... would have been in vain, without the help I received from a friend:
Aragorn, the greatest traveler and hunter of this age
the world. Together, we searched for Gollum throughout the world, throughout all of Wilderland, without hope and without success. But Finally, when I had given up the pursuit and turned my attention to other things, Gollum was found on the roads. My friend returned fro perils bringing this wretched creature with him.

He didn't say what he had done. He just cried.
and called us cruel, with many ghouls in his throat; and when we insisted, he groaned, curled up and rubbed himself. His long hands, licking his fingers as if they hurt him, as if he remembered old tortures. But I fear there are none.
One possible doubt: he had progressed slowly and stealthily, step by step. Step by step, kilometer after kilometer, southward, to the l

A heavy silence fell over the room. Frodo could hear his heart beating. Even outside, everything seemed still. Not a sound of Now we could hear Sam's scissors.

"Yes, to Mordor," said Gandalf. "Alas! Mordor draws all evil things, and the Power of Darkness bent all his will to gather them there. Mark, too, left him exposed to the summons. And all the people were then whispering the news of the Shadow of the South, and his

Hatred of the West. He had new friends who would help him in his revenge!

Poor fool! In that country, he would learn a great deal too, a great deal for his comfort. And sooner or later, while he was prowling a He realized he'd been there for a long time and was on his way. Back again. On some malicious mission. But that didn't matter. Much les

Yes, alas! Through him, the Enemy learned that one has been found. He knows where Isildur fell. He knows where Gollum found his ring. He knows it's a
Great Ring, because it gave long life. He knows he is not one.


78





of the Three, for they have never been lost, and they remain
No harm done. He knows it's neither one of the Seven nor one of the Nine. Because they're all counted. He knows it's Him. And I think he finally heard about hobbits and the Shire.

The Shire-perhaps he's searching for it now, if he hasn't already. I've already discovered where he is. Indeed, Frodo, I fear he One might even think that the name Baggins, which had long gone unnoticed, has become important.

"But this is terrible!" cried Frodo. "Far worse than the worst."
which I imagined based on your hints and warnings. Oh Gandalf, my best friends, what should I do? I am truly afraid. What to do? What a shame Bilbo didn't stab him! Vile creature, when he had the chance!

Pity? It was pity that restrained him. Pity and mercy. Not striking unnecessarily. And he was richly rewarded. Frodo. Rest assured that he was very little harmed by the evil, and
He finally escaped, because he began to take possession of the Ring it like that. With pity. "I'm sorry," said Frodo. "But I'm afraid; and I don't..." Do you feel any pity for Gollum? "You didn't see it," Gandalf interjected.
No, and I don't want to, said Frodo. I don't understand.
You. Do you mean to say that you, and the Elves, let it happen? How could he have survived all those horrible acts? In any case, he He is as bad as ore, a true enemy. He deserves to die.

He deserves it! I dare say. Many who are alive deserve it. Death. And some who die deserve to live. Can you give it to...
And them? So don't be too quick to dispense death as judges. For even the wisest cannot foresee everything. I have not
It is greatly hoped that Gollum can be cured before his death, but there is a possibility. And his fate is linked to that of The Ring. My heart tells me it still has a role to play.
For better or for worse, before the end; and when that comes, pity. Bilbo's fate may well decide the destiny of many, and yours in part The Wood Elves hold him in prison, but they treat him with all the kindness they can find in their wise hearts.





79


"Nevertheless," said Frodo, "even if Bilbo could not kill..."
Gollum, I wish he hadn't kept the Ring. I wish he'd never done it. I found it, and I didn't have it! Why did you let me keep it? Why didn't you make me throw it away, or destroy it?

"Let you do this? Force yourself?" asked the magician. "Weren't you listening to everything I said? You're not thinking about what... T False. These rings always end up in the wrong hands. He could have done terrible things. Worse still, he could have fallen.
into the hands of the enemy. Indeed, this would certainly happen; for it is he, and he is using all his power to find him or draw him t

Of course, my dear Frodo, it was dangerous for you; and
This deeply troubled me. But the stakes were high; I had to take risks, even when I was far away. There has never been a day when the Shire has not been...
under surveillance. As long as you weren't using it, I was. Don't think the Ring would have a lasting effect on
You, not to do evil, at least not for a very long time. And you must remember that nine years ago, the last time I saw you, I still kne

But why didn't you destroy it, as you say should have been done?
"A long time ago?" Frodo exclaimed again. "If you had warned me, or even..." If he had sent me a message, I would have deleted it.

Would you do it? How would you go about it? Have you ever tried? No. But I suppose we could hammer it or melt it. "Try it!" said Gandalf. "Try it now!"

Frodo took the Ring out of his pocket again and looked at it. It now appeared smooth and without any mark or device that he could see. absolutely precious. When he took it out, he intended to
He threw it far from him, into the hottest part of the fire. But he then realized that he could not do so, not without a great

He weighed the ring in his hand, hesitating, and


8o





forcing himself to remember everything Gandalf had told him;
And then, with an effort of will, he made a movement, as if to throw it away-but he realized that he had put it back in his poached.

Gandalf let out a sinister laugh. You see? You too, Frodo.
I can't easily detach myself from it, nor do I want to damage it. And I couldn't. "to make you" - except by force, which would break your spirit.
But as for breaking the Ring, force is useless. Even if you were to take it and strike it with a heavy mace, it Leave no mark on it. It cannot be undone by your hands, or by mine.

Your little fire, of course, wouldn't even melt ordinary coal. Gold. This ring has already passed through it unharmed, and even unheated. But there is no forge in this Shire that
could not change anything. Not even the anvils and furnaces of the dwarves were capable of it. It is said that the dragons' fire could. which could have harmed the One Ring, the King's Ring, for which it was made by Sauron himself.

There is only one way: find the Cracks of Destiny in the
in the depths of Orodruin, the Fire Mountain, and throw the Ring in there, if you truly wish to destroy it, put it beyond the The enemy's grip forever.

"I really want to destroy it!" cried Frodo. Or rather, destroy it.
Destroy it. I'm not made for perilous quests. I wish... I had never seen the Ring! Why did it come to me? Why? Have I been chosen?

"Such questions cannot be answered," said Gandalf. "You..."
We can be certain that it's not through merit that others don't do it. To possess: not for power or wisdom, in any case. But you have have been chosen, and you must therefore demonstrate that strength and with as much heart and spirit as you have.

But I have so little of all that! You are wise. and powerful. Will you refuse to take the Ring?

"No!" cried Gandalf, leaping to his feet. "With that power!"





I would have too great and terrible a power. And above me, the Ring would acquire an even greater and more deadly power.
Her eyes sparkled and her face lit up as if by an inner fire. Don't do it. Tempt me! For I do not wish to become like the Dark Lord. himself. Yet the Ring's path to my heart leads through pity, pity for weakness and the desire for strength to do good. Do not
You tempt me! I don't dare take it, not even to keep it safe and unused. The desire to handle it would be too strong for me. I will need it so much. Great dangers await me.

He approached the window and drew back the curtains and
The shutters closed. Sunlight flooded the room again. Sam whistled past along the outside path. "And now," he said
The wizard, turning to Frodo, said, "The decision is yours. But I will always help you." He placed his hand on Frodo's. shoulder. I will help you carry this burden, for as long as it takes.
It's up to you to bear the brunt of it. But we must act, and quickly. The enemy is on the move.

A long silence followed. Gandalf sat back down and
He puffed on his pipe, as if lost in thought. His eyes seemed closed, and he watched Frodo intently beneath his eyelids. Frodo stared a They filled his entire field of vision, and he seemed to be looking down into deep pits of fire. He thought of the legendary
The cracks in fate and the terror of Fire Mountain.

"Well!" said Gandalf at last. "What are you thinking? Have you decided what you're going to do?"

"No!" replied Frodo, regaining his senses after being plunged into darkness, and noting with surprise that it was not dark, and that Through the window, he could see the sunny garden. Or perhaps, yes. If I understood you correctly, I suppose that...
He must keep the Ring and protect it, at least for now, whatever that may mean to me.

Whatever he does, it will be slow, slow to harm, if you "Keep it for that purpose," said Gandalf.

"I hope so," said Frodo. "But I hope you find..." Another, better guardian soon. But in the meantime, it seems that


82

I am a danger, a danger to everyone who lives near me. I cannot continue the Ring and stay here. I should leave Bag End, leave the County, leave everything and go. He sighed.

I would like to save the Shire, if I could - although...
There were times when I thought the inhabitants were too stupid and speechless, and I felt that an earthquake or a dragon invasion migh Like this now. I feel safe as long as the Shire remains behind us, and comfortable; I will find wandering more bearable: I
I know there is a solid point of support somewhere, even if my feet... I can no longer stay here.

Of course, I sometimes thought about leaving, but
I imagined it as a kind of vacation, a series of adventures.
like Bilbo's, or better yet, ending in peace. But that would mean exile, a flight from danger to danger, which pursues me.

And I suppose I have to go alone if I want to succeed and save the Shire. But I feel so small, and so uprooted, and well
- Desperate. The enemy is so strong and so terrible.

He didn't tell Gandalf, but as he spoke, he made a great commotion. The desire to follow Bilbo blazed in his heart-to follow Bilbo, and He overcame his fear: he could almost have run and
Then he went down the road without his hat, just as Bilbo had done on a similar morning a long time ago.

"My dear Frodo!" exclaimed Gandalf. "Hobbits are truly..."
Extraordinary creatures, as I've already said. You can learn everything there is to know about their customs in a month, and yet After a hundred years, they can still surprise you if needed.
I hardly expected such a response, not even from you. But Bilbo was not mistaken in his choice of heir, although...
I hadn't imagined how important this would turn out to be. I'm afraid you're right. The Ring cannot remain hidden in the County much longer; and for your own good, as well as for
For the rest of you, you will have to leave and leave the Baggins name behind. That name will not be safe to bear, outside of Whether in the Shire or out in nature, I'm going to give you a travel name. When you leave, leave like Mr. Underhill.





83


But I don't think you need to go alone. Not if you know someone you trust, and who would be willing to go through with you. your camp - and that you would be willing to take into account
Unknown dangers. But if you are looking for a companion, be careful.
In your choices! And be careful what you say, even to your loved ones! Closest friends! The enemy has many spies and many tricks. (The

Suddenly, he stopped as if to listen. Frodo became aware of the situation. Everything was very quiet, both inside and out. Gandalf crep There was a windowsill, and he stretched a long arm downwards.
A shrill cry rang out, and Sam Gamgee's curly head shot up, pulled by one ear.

"Well, well, God bless me!" said Gandalf. Sam Gamgee: Oh really? What are you doing right now?

"God bless you, Mr. Gandalf!" said Sam. "Nothing! Anyway, I was just trimming the lawn under the window, if you follow me." He took his They presented them as evidence.

"No," replied Gandalf darkly. "It has been a long time since I..." I heard the sound of your scissors. How long have you been here? Clandestine wiretapping?
Are you listening at doors, sir? I can't follow you, please. Pardon me. There are no overhanging roofs in Cul-de-Sac, that's a fact. Don't be silly! What did you hear, and why did you...
Listen? Gandalf's eyes sparkled and his eyebrows rose like bristles.
"Sir Frodo, sir!" Sam cried, trembling. "Don't let him hurt himself. Me, sir! Don't let him turn me into something unnatural! My old fa "He won't hurt you," said Frodo, struggling to restrain his laughter, although he himself was surprised and somewhat perplexed.
He knows, just like I do, that you don't want to hurt anyone. But just... stand up and answer his questions immediately! "Well, sir," said Sam, hesitating a little. "I heard about an agreement that
I hadn't quite understood, regarding an enemy, rings, and


84





Mr. Bilbo, and dragons, and a mountain of fire, and-and

Elves, sir. I listened because I couldn't help myself, if you know what I mean? Lord, I love stories about That sort of thing. And I believe it too, whatever Ted says.
Elves, sir! I would love to see them. Could you take some with you? Allow me to see the elves, sir, when you leave?

Suddenly, Gandalf burst out laughing. "Come in!" he shouted. Stretching out his arms, he lifted up a stunned Sam, scissors, With the cut blades of grass and everything else, directly through the window, he stayed there.
"I'll take you to see the elves, won't I?" he said, watching him. Sam approached, but a fleeting smile lit up his face. "So, you... I h

Yes, sir. And that's why I stammered: you heard it.
Apparently. I tried not to, sir, but the words escaped me: I was so... upset.

"There's nothing we can do, Sam," said Frodo sadly. He had suddenly... Denly realized that leaving the Shire would mean more
There are separations more painful than simply saying goodbye to the familiar comfort of Cul-de-Sac. I'm going to have to leave. But... Keep this secret safe. You see? Otherwise, if you don't even breathe...
If you hear a word of what you've heard here, then I hope Gandalf will turn you into a speckled toad and fill the garden with grass. snakes.

Sam fell to his knees, trembling. "Get up, Sam!" he said. "Gandalf. I've thought of something better than that." That'll shut you up and punish you properly for listening. You'll be leaving with Mr. Frodo!

"Me, sir!" cried Sam, leaping like a dog invited to eat. "Walk. Me, go see the elves and all that!" "Hurrah!" he shouted, and then she


3





You should leave quietly, and you should leave soon, he said.
Gandalf. Two or three weeks had passed, and Frodo was still there, showing no sign of wanting to leave.
I know. But it's difficult to do both, he objected. If I just did Vanish like Bilbo, the story will spread throughout the Shire in no t "Of course, you mustn't disappear!" said Gandalf.
That would be absolutely unacceptable! I said soon, not instantly. If you can think of any way to leave the Shire without it being Generally speaking, it's worth waiting a little while. But you mustn't delay too long.

And autumn, on our birthday or after? he asked
Frodo. I think I could probably arrange things by then... then.

To be honest, he was very reluctant to start, now that
We had reached the point where Cul-de-Sac seemed more desirable.
a residence he hadn't had for years, and he wanted to savor the pleasure of it as much as he could of his last summer in the Shire. Autumn arrived, and he knew that at least part of his heart would make him think more favorably of the trip, as it always did at this t

for his fiftieth birthday: the one hundred and twenty years of Bilbo the Eighth. It seemed like the perfect day to begin
Go out and follow him. Following Bilbo was his absolute priority. It was the only thing that made the idea of leaving bearable. He thou where it might ultimately lead. But he didn't tell him everything. Thoughts for Gandalf. What the wizard sensed was always true. Hard t

He looked at Frodo and smiled. "Very well," he said. "I think..." That'll do, but not later. I'm getting very


86





anxious. In the meantime, take care of yourself and don't let anything slip out
The slightest clue about your destination! And don't forget Sam Gamgee! He doesn't talk. If he does, I'll really turn him into a toad.

As for where I'm going, said Frodo, that will be difficult to reveal this, because I myself don't yet have a clear idea.

"Don't be foolish!" said Gandalf. "I'm not warning you against leaving your address at the post office! But you are leaving the Shire-a We will almost certainly never know.

I was so obsessed with the idea of leaving Bag. The end, and the goodbyes, I had never thought about it. "The way?" asked Frodo. "Where am I supposed to go?" And by
What should I do? What will my quest be? Bilbo went in search of... treasure, there and back; but I go there to lose one, and not back, from what I can see.

"But you can't see very far," said Gandalf. "Neither can we."
I. It may fall to you to find the flaws in fate; but that
This quest may be meant for others: I don't know. In any case, you are... I am not yet ready for this long road.

"No, indeed!" said Frodo. "But in the meantime, which course should I take?"

Faced with danger; but not too recklessly, nor too directly, replied the magician. If you want my opinion, go ahead. Rivendell. This journey should not prove too perilous.
Although the road is less easy than before, and will continue to develop, it will become more difficult. The situation worsens as the y

Rivendell! said Frodo. Very well: I'll go east, and I
We'll go to Rivendell. I'll take Sam to visit the Elves; he'll be delighted. He spoke lightly, but his heart was touched. Suddenly seized by a desire to see the house of Elrond Halfelf,
and breathe the air of this deep valley where many of the Little People lived, still living in peace.

One summer evening, some astonishing news
They reached the ivy bush and the green dragon. Giants and others





87


The omens at the borders of the Shire had been forgotten for a long time. Important questions: Mr. Frodo was selling Bag End, indeed. He had already sold it - to the Sacquet-Bessac family!

"And what's more, it's a good price," some said. "At a bargain price," others added. And it's more likely when Mistress Lobelia is ther buyer. (Othon had died a few years earlier, at a ripe old age but (a disappointing 102 years old.)
The reason why Mr. Frodo was selling his magnificent hole remained a mystery, more debatable than the price. Some supported the theory- Driven by winks and allusions to Air. Baggins himself - that Frodo's money was running out: he was going to leave.
Hobbiton and live peacefully thanks to the proceeds of the sale there, in Buckland, among his relatives Brandybuck.
According to some, Sacquet-Bessac, as is possible. But thus it was firmly rooted in the idea of the immeasurable wealth of the The Bagginses of Cul-de-Sac became what most found hard to believe, more than any other reason or unreason, that their
The idea of fantasy might suggest: for most, it evoked a dark world and yet an unrevealed plot of Gandalf's. Although he remained very Calm and not moving around during the day, it was well known that he
was hiding up there, in Cul-de-Sac. But however a move might have worked, it perfectly suited the purposes of his magic, there was no d regarding Frodo Baggins returning to Goat.

Yes, I'll be moving this fall, he said. Happy Brandybuck is looking for a quiet little place for me, or maybe a small house.

In fact, with Merry's help, he had already chosen
and bought a small house in Crickhollow, in the countryside
Beyond Bucklebury. To everyone except Sam, he pretended to be, "I'm going to settle here permanently." The decision to settle there... was located on the eastern borders of the Shire, and since he had lived there in his childhood, his return would seem at least credible.

Gandalf remained in the Shire for over two months. Then one evening, at the end of June, shortly after Frodo's plan had been


88





Finally, everything was arranged, and he suddenly announced that he was leaving.
He sets off again the next morning. "Only for a short while, I hope," he says. "But I'm going down beyond the southern borders to..." If I can, I'll get some news. I've been inactive longer than I should have.
He spoke in a light tone, but Frodo had the impression that he seemed rather worried. "Has something happened?" he asked. No, but I heard something that...
Concerned and requires investigation. If I deem it necessary afterward, you must all get off immediately; I'll be right back. or at least let people know. In the meantime, stick to your plan;
But be more careful than ever, especially with regard to the Ring. Let me repeat it once more: do not use it!

He left at dawn. "I could be back any day," he said. "I'll be back at the latest for the farewell party. I think." After all, you might need my company on the road.

At first, Frodo was very disturbed and wondered
often what Gandalf could have heard; but his discomfort
The fatigue faded, and in the fine weather, he forgot his worries for a moment. Meanwhile, the Shire had rarely experienced such a beau Autumn was bountiful: the trees were laden with apples, the honey was plentiful, the corn dripped in the husks, and it was tall and ful

Autumn was already well advanced when Frodo began to worry. There was talk of Gandalf again. September passed and there was...
Still no word from him. His birthday and his departure had attracted attention. He was getting closer, and yet he didn't come, nor did Folco Boffin, and of course his special friends Pippin Took and Merry Brandybuck. Together, they transformed everything

place upside down.

On September 20th, two covered wagons left Buckland loaded with furniture and belongings that Frodo had not sold to his new home, via t Bridge. The next day, Frodo became very anxious and kept... constantly watching Gandalf. Thursday, his birthday
In the morning, the sky rose as clear and bright as it had been for a long time. Bilbo's big party. Gandalf was still not there. In the





89


That evening, Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was quite small, just a dinner for himself and his four attendants; but it was troubled and had no desire to. The idea that he would
The prospect of soon having to part with his young friends weighed heavily on his heart. He wondered how he was going to break the news

The four young hobbits, for their part, were in good spirits, and the group soon became very cheerful despite Gandalf. absence. The dining room was empty, except for a table and
The chairs were uncomfortable, but the food was good and so was the wine: Frodo's wine had not been included in the sale to Sacquet-Bessac.

Whatever happens to the rest of my affairs, when the S.-Bs
They managed to seize it, but in any case, I found a good home.
"For that!" said Frodo, emptying his glass. That was the last straw for the old Winyards.

After singing many songs and talking about many subjects,
They reminisced about the things they had done together and made a toast to Bilbo's birthday. They drank together to his health and Fro Frodo's custom. Then they went outside for some fresh air, and
They saw the stars, then went to bed. Frodo's group was finished, and Gandalf hadn't come.

The next morning, they were busy filling another cart with the rest of the luggage. Merry took charge of it.
and left with Fatty (that is, Fredegar Bolger). "Someone needs to arrive and heat the house before you get here," said Joyeux. "Well, s Don't fall asleep on the way!

Folco went home after lunch, but Pippin stayed behind.
Frodo was restless and anxious, straining his ears in vain to hear a sound from Gandalf. He decided to wait until nightfall. After that Gandalf wanted it urgently; he would go to Crickhollow.
and might even arrive first. Because Frodo was going there on foot.
His plan - as much for pleasure and a last look at the Shire as for any other reason - was to walk from Hobbiton to Bucklebury. Ferry, taking his time.

"I'm going to train a little too," he said, looking


90





He had looked at himself in a dusty mirror in the half-empty hall. I hadn't done any strenuous walking in a long time, and Her reflection seemed rather flabby to him.

After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her
Lotho, the blond-haired son, made his appearance, much to Frodo's dismay. "Finally, it's our turn!" exclaimed Lobélie as she entered. It was...
not polite; nor entirely accurate, since the sale of Cul-de-Sac did not make it effective until midnight. But Lobelia may perhaps be fo Given that she had been forced to wait approximately seventy-seven years

She stayed in Cul-de-Sac longer than she had hoped, and she was now a hundred years old. In any case, she had come to see that nothing She had paid for it to be taken away; and she wanted it
It took a long time to satisfy her, as she had brought keys. She went through a complete inventory with her and reviewed it.
She finally left with Lotho, the spare key, and promised him that the other key would be left at Gambee Bagshot Row. She sniffed, and m It was thought that the Gamgees were capable of plundering the hole during the night; Frodo did not offer him tea.

He had his own tea with Pippin and Samwise Gamgee in the kitchen. It had been officially announced that Sam was
to come to Buckland to look after Mr. Frodo and take care of him in a corner of the garden; an arrangement that was approved by the Gaf

"Our last meal at Bag End!" said Frodo, pushing back his chair. They left the dishes at Lobelia's. Pippin and Sam
They strapped their three bags and stacked them on the porch. Pippin went out for one last stroll in the garden. Sam... appeared.

The sun set. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy. Disheveled, Frodo wandered through the familiar rooms, and I saw the light of the sunset fade on the walls, and the shadows
They slipped out of the corners. Darkness slowly settled inside. I went outside and walked to the door downstairs. path, then a short while descending the hill road. Halfway

91

We expected to see Gandalf appear with great strides in the twilight. The sky was clear and the stars were shining brighter and brighte "It's going to be a beautiful evening," he said aloud. "It's a good start. I want to walk. I can't stand being suspended anymore."
I will begin, and Gandalf must follow me.
He turned around, then stopped, because he heard voices, just
At the corner of the street, at the end of Bagshot Row, a voice was heard. Certainly old Gaffer's; the other was strange, and some... What a nuisance! He couldn't decipher what was written, but I heard the Gaffer's replies, which were rather shrill. The old man seemed

No, Mr. Baggins has left. He left this morning, and
My Sam went with him: at least, all his things are gone. Yes, sold. It's over, I'm telling you. Why? That's none of my business. Or yours. Where? It's no secret. He moved to Bucklebury or somewhere like that, way out there in the back. Yes, that's it.
- in a clean way. I've never gone that far myself; these are queer people. To Buckland. No, I can't pass on a message. Good night to you!

Footsteps faded away down the hill. Frodo wondered...
It's unclear why they didn't go up the hill. What a relief! I'm fed up with the questions and the curiosity. About my actions, I suppos They're all fantastic! He almost felt like going to ask the boss who the person he was talking to was; but he thought better (or worse) Then he turned around and quickly returned to Cul-de-Sac.

Pippin was sitting on his backpack on the porch. Sam wasn't there. There. Frodo stepped through the dark doorway. "Sam!" he called. Sam! It's time!

"I'm coming, sir!" replied a voice from deep within me. Shortly after, Sam himself wiped his mouth. He had said Goodbye to the beer barrel in the cellar.

"All aboard, Sam?" said Frodo.

Yes, sir. I'll hold on a little longer, sir.

Frodo closed and locked the round door, then put the key back in.
"Sam, get this home quickly!" he said. Then, follow the line and join us as soon as possible at


92





the gateway to the path beyond the meadows. We will not go
Throughout the village tonight. Too many prickly ears and intrusive eyes. Sam ran away at top speed.

"Well, we're off at last!" said Frodo. They charged.
They loaded their bags, took their walking sticks, and circled around the western corner of Bag End. "Goodbye!" said Frodo.
He looked at the dark, blank windows. He waved his hand, and then he turned and (following Bilbo, if he had known) hurried off They followed Peregrin along the garden path. They jumped over a low spot in the hedge below and went into the fields. blending into the darkness like a rustling in the grass.

At the foot of the hill, on its western slope, they arrived at
The gate opened onto a narrow alley. There, they stopped and adjusted the straps of their backpacks. Suddenly, Sam appeared, trotting b hoisted high on his shoulders, and he had placed on his head a
a large, shapeless felt bag, which he called a hat. In the dim light, he looked very much like a dwarf.

"I'm sure you've given me the hardest things," he said. "Frodo. I pity the snails and all those who carry their homes on their backs." "I could take a lot more, sir. My package is rather light," said Sam confidently and deceitfully.
"No, Sam!" said Pippin. "He's fine. He's..."
We received nothing other than what he had ordered us to take. He was
He has relaxed lately, and he will feel the weight less once he has walked. of some of his family.

"O land for a poor old hobbit!" laughed Frodo. "I shall be..."
As thin as a willow twig, I'm sure, before we even got to Buckland. But I was talking nonsense. I suspect you took more.
that your share, Sam, and I'll think about it at our next meeting. He packed his bags. He picked up his walking stick. Well, we all lik "Walking in the dark," he said, "so let's move forward a few kilometers." We did this before going to bed.

They followed the path westward for a short distance.
After leaving it, they turned left and calmly resumed their journey towards the fields.

93


They walked in single file along the hedges and edges of the thickets, and night fell upon them. In their dark cloaks
They were as invisible as if they all possessed magic rings. They were all hobbits, and they tried to remain silent; they made no sound

After some time, they crossed the Water, west of Hobbiton, by a narrow wooden bridge. The stream was no longer there but a winding black ribbon, bordered by leaning alders.
A kilometer or two further south, they hurriedly crossed the main road from the Brandevin bridge; they were now in the Tookland

and heading southeast, they made their way to Green Hill
The country. As they began to climb its first slopes, they looked
I turned back and saw in the distance the lights of Hobbiton twinkling in the sky. Gentle valley of water. Soon, it disappeared into th from the darkened earth, and was followed by Bywater beside his
grey swimming pool. When the light from the last farmhouse had faded away, Frodo, glancing between the trees, turned around and waved goodbye.
"I wonder if I will ever look down that valley again," he said softly. After walking for about three hours, they rested.
The night was clear, cool, and starry, but wisps like mist smoke rose up the hillsides from the streams and
Deep meadows. Birches with light foliage, swaying in a light breeze. Above their heads, a black line was drawn against the pale sky. They had a very frugal supper (for hobbits), then they left.
They resumed their journey. Soon, they arrived on a narrow, winding road.
From top to bottom, the grey merging into the coming darkness: the road to Woodhall, Stock, and the Bucklebury ferry. He climbed far from the main road in the water valley, and wound its way
Beyond the foothills of the Green Hills, towards Woody End, a wild nature corner of the East End.

After a while, they plunged into a deeply cracked track. between tall trees whose dry leaves rustled in the night.
It was very dark. At first, they talked or hummed softly together, now far from prying ears. Then they


94





They continued walking in silence, and Pippin began to lag behind. Finally, as they started to climb a steep slope, he stopped and yawn

"I'm so sleepy," he said, "that I'm going to collapse on the road soon. You're going to sleep on your feet? That's almost it." midnight.
"I thought you liked walking in the dark," said Frodo. There's no rush. Merry is expecting us sometime during the day. The day after to "The wind is coming from the west," said Sam. "If we make it to the other end..."
On the side of this hill, we will find a sheltered and comfortable spot.
That's enough, sir. There's a dry pine forest right in front, if I remember correctly. Quite rightly. Sam knew the area well within a t Hobbiton, but that was the limit of its geography.

Just at the top of the hill, they arrived at the plot of
fir wood. Leaving the road, they plunged into the deep resin, the fragrant darkness of the trees, and gathered dead branches and
They used cones to light a fire. Soon, a cheerful flame crackled at the foot of a large fir tree, and they sat around it for a while. until they begin to nod. Then, each in a corner of the large space at the foot of the trees, they huddle in their coats and blankets, a They soon fell into a deep sleep. They didn't post a watch; even Frodo was afraid. There was no danger for the moment, as they were sti Few creatures came to watch them when the fire was extinguished. A fox, crossing the woods on business
His own stopped for a few minutes and sniffed.

Hobbits! he thought. Right, so what? I've heard about
Strange things happen in this country, but I've rarely heard of them. Three hobbits are sleeping outside, under a tree! There's something pretty damn strange about that. He was quite... That's right, but he never knew any more.

Morning arrived, pale and damp. Frodo was the first to wake up. and discovered that a tree root had made a hole in his back, and

that he had a stiff neck. Walking for pleasure! Why didn't I... "Drive?" he thought, as he usually did at the beginning of the day.





95

The expedition. And all my magnificent feather beds are sold to the expedition. The Sackville-Bagginses! These tree roots would do them He stretched. "Wake up, hobbits!" he cried. "It's magnificent." morning.

"What's so nice about that?" asked Pippin, peering over the... the edge of his blanket, one eye on the edge. "Sam! Make breakfast. At h Sam jumped up, looking a little dazed. "No, sir, I haven't... Sir!" he said.
Frodo took off Pippin's blankets and rolled him up. He went past, then walked away to the edge of the woods.
In the east, the sun rose, glowing red through the thick mists. The autumn trees, tinged with gold and red, shone across the world. seemed to be sailing without an anchor on a dark sea. A little further down to his left, the road descended sharply into a hollow and d

Upon his return, Sam and Pippin had lit a good fire. "I'm going. Water!" shouted Pippin. "Where's the water?"

"I don't keep water in my pockets," said Frodo.

"We thought you'd gone to get some," said Pippin, busy.
We're getting the food and drinks ready. You'd better leave now.

"You too can come," said Frodo, "and bring all the water."
bottles. There was a stream at the foot of the hill. They filled their bottles and the small camping kettle near a small waterfall wher an icy cold; and they were spitting and blowing while bathing their faces and hands.

When their breakfast was finished and their bags were securely packed
I got up; it was after ten o'clock and the day was beginning. It was getting thin and hot. They went down the slope and crossed the stream into which he plunged under the road, and then
slope, and going up and down another shoulder of the hills; and by
At that point, their coats, blankets, water, food and other equipment already seemed like a heavy burden.

The day's walk promised to be hot and tiring.
After a few kilometers, however, the road stopped climbing and below: he wearily climbed to the top of a steep bank


96





zigzagging, then ready to descend for
The last time. Before them stretched the lowlands dotted with... with small groves of trees that blended into the distance towards a brown mist of undergrowth. They gazed into the distance.
Woody End towards the River Brandywine. The road wound its way away from them like a piece of string.

"The road is endless," said Pippin; "but I can't go with..."
He allowed himself a break. It was high time for lunch. He sat down on the riverbank, by the roadside, and looked eastward into the mis Beyond lay the river, and the county line where
He had spent his whole life there. Sam was by his side. His round eyes were wide open-for he was looking across the lands he had never seen before, heading towards a new horizon.
"Do elves live in these woods?" he asked.

"Not that I've ever heard of it," said Pippin. Frodo remained silent.
He too was looking east, along the road, as if he'd never done it before. I'd seen him before. Suddenly, he spoke, aloud but as if to h saying slowly:

The road continues indefinitely.
Down below, from the door where it all began. The road now stretches far ahead. And I must follow, if I can, continuing on with tired feet.
Until it joins a wider lane,

Where many paths and many races intersect. And then? I couldn't say. "That sounds like a rhyme from old Bilbo," said Pippin.
Or is this one of your imitations? That doesn't sound entirely encouraging.

"I don't know," said Frodo. "It came to me then, as if I were..." I'm making it up; but it's possible I heard it a long time ago. Certa This reminds me a lot of Bilbo in his later years, before he left. He often said that there was only one road; that it was like a great





97

"Frodo, as you leave your house," he said. "You walk."
On the road, if you lose your balance, there's no way out. Knowing where you could be swept away. Do you realize that? that this is precisely the path that crosses the Black Forest, and
that if you let her, she might take you to the Lonely Mountain
"Or even further, in worse places?" He used to say that. The path in front of the Cul-de-Sac entrance, especially after He had gone for a long walk.

Well, the road won't take me anywhere for an hour.
"At least," said Pippin, unfastening his bag. The others followed his example, placing their packets against the bank and their They stretched their legs out onto the road. After a break, they had a good lunch, and then some more rest.

The sun was beginning to set and the afternoon light was fading.
was on the ground as they descended the hill. So far, they hadn't encountered anyone on the road. This path was not well-traveled. being barely passable for carts, and with little traffic heading towards Woody End. They had resumed their jog an hour earlier.
or even more so when Sam paused for a moment, as if he were listening.
We were now on flat ground, and the road, after many bends, stretched straight across a meadow dotted with tall trees. peripheral areas of the approaching woods.

I hear a pony or a horse coming down the road "Behind," said Sam.

They turned around, but the bend in the road prevented them from doing so. We can see him from afar. I wonder if it's Gandalf chasing us.
said Frodo; but at the very moment he said it, he had the feeling that it was No, and a sudden urge to hide from the rider's gaze. invades it.
"It may not be of great importance," he said apologetically, "but..." I would prefer not to be seen on the road, by anyone. I am
I'm tired of my actions being noticed and commented on. And if that's the case, Gandalf, he added as an afterthought, we can give him a Unsurprisingly, he has to be paid for his lateness. Let's go. A view!

The other two ran quickly to the left and went down into a small


98





hollow not far from the road. There they lay flat. Frodo
He hesitated for a moment: was it curiosity or some other feeling that was present?
He fought against his urge to hide. The sound of hooves drew his attention. Closer. Just in time, he dropped into a corner of long gras grass behind a tree that overhanged the road. Then he
He raised his head and cast a cautious glance over one of the large roots.

A black horse appeared around the corner, not a hobbit pony but
a horse of normal size; and upon it sat a tall man, who appeared to be crouching in the saddle, wrapped in a large black cloak and hood, revealing only her boots in the high stirrups below; her face was in shadow and invisible.

When he reached the tree and was level with Frodo,
The horse stopped. The rider's figure remained motionless, head bowed. He bowed, as if listening. A noise came from inside the hood. as if someone were sniffing to catch an elusive scent; the head turned from one side of the road to the other.

A sudden and irrational fear of being discovered seized Frodo, and he thought of his Ring. He hardly dared to breathe, and However, the desire to take it out of his pocket became so strong that
He slowly began to move his hand. He felt that he only had
All he had to do was put it on, and he would be safe. Gandalf's advice: It seemed absurd. Bilbo had used the Ring. And I'm still in The Shire, he thought, when his hand brushed against the chain.
She was suspended. At that moment, the rider straightened up and trembled. The reins. The horse moved forward, walking slowly at first, then start trotting quickly.

Frodo crawled to the edge of the road and observed
rider, until he disappeared over the horizon. He couldn't be. He was quite sure of it, but it suddenly seemed to him that, before The horse disappeared from his sight, turned away and entered the trees on the right.

"Well, I find that very strange, and even worrying," said Frodo, thinking as he walked towards his companions.
Pippin and Sam had remained lying in the grass, and having seen nothing, Frodo described the rider and his strange behavior thus.





99

I couldn't say why, but I was certain he was looking at or smelling for me; and I was equally certain I didn't want him to discover me. County before.

But what is the connection between one of the Great Men and us? "Said Pippin. And what's he doing in this part of the world?"

"There are men around here," said Frodo. "Down there, in the..." Southfarthing, they've had trouble with important people, I believe. B I wonder where he comes from.

Please excuse me, bring Sam in suddenly, I know where he's from. This dark-haired man is from Hobbiton. The rider is coming, unless there are several. And I know where. He's going to do it.

"What do you mean?" Frodo asked sharply, looking at him with astonishment. "Why didn't you speak sooner?"

I just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I went back to our hole last night with the key, my father said to me, "Hi Sam! I though I was with Mr. Frodon this morning. There was a strange customer.
She asks about Mr. Baggins from Cul-de-Sac, and he's only just left. Eve. He sent him to Bucklebury. Not that I liked the name he gave He seemed very upset when I told him that Mr. Baggins had left his old house for good. He whistled at me. It gave me a strange feeling. I shudder. What kind of guy was he? I said to the chief.
"I don't know," he said; but he was no hobbit. He was tall and
He was as black as night and leaned over me. I suppose he was one of the tall ones. People from elsewhere. He spoke strangely.

I couldn't stay to hear more, sir, since you were waiting; and I didn't pay much attention myself. The boss is being taken for a ride. It was dark when this man arrived at the top of the hill and found him getting some fresh air at the end of our row. I hope he didn't h Sir, me neither.

"We can't blame the leader anyway," said Frodo. "As a..." In fact, I overheard him talking to a stranger who seemed
He was asking around for me, and I almost went to ask him who


IOO





Yes. I wish I had known that before, or that you had told me. I probably should have been more careful on the road.

However, there may be no connection between this rider and
"The Great Boss's stranger," said Pippin. "We left Hobbiton in secret." That's enough, and I don't see how he could have followed us. "And the smell, sir?" asked Sam. "And the gaffer? He said it was a Black man."
"I would have liked to wait for Gandalf," murmured Frodo. "But that might only have made things worse." "So, do you know or guess anything about this rider?" said Pippin, who had heard the whispered words. "I don't know, and I prefer not to guess," said Frodo.
Very well, cousin Frodo! You can keep your secret for now, if you wish to remain mysterious. In the meantime, what to do?
What should I do? I'd like to eat and have a drink, but I don't know why... I think it's best to move on. Your comments about sniffing

"Yes, I think we'll move on now," said Frodo; "but not on the road-in case that biker comes back, or another one follows." Him. We should make a big step forward today. Buckland is still miles away.

The shadows of the trees were long and thin on the grass,
as they resumed their journey. They now stayed a few steps to the left of the road, and kept out of his sight as much as possible.
They could have. But this prevented them; for the grass was thick and bushy, and the ground uneven, and the trees began to to regroup in thickets.
The sun had set, glowing red behind the hills that surrounded them. and evening was approaching when they returned to
road at the end of the long level she had traveled in a straight line
for a few kilometers. At that point, she turned left and descended into the Yale lowlands heading towards Stock; but a path turning right, winding through a forest of centuries-old oak trees
"Onward to Woodhall. That's the way we must go," said Frodo.

Not far from the road meeting point, they arrived at the enormous wreck. of a tree: it was still alive and its small branches had leaves.

IOI


which she had spread around the broken stumps of her long-fallen tree limbs; but it was hollow and could be penetrated by a large A crack on the side opposite the road. The hobbits have slipped through.
inside, and sat there on a floor of old leaves and plant debris from the woods. They rested and ate a light meal, talking in hushed voi

Twilight enveloped them as they stealthily made their way back to the path. The west wind sighed in the branches. The leaves were Murmurs. Soon, the road began to descend gently but surely.
At dusk, a star appeared above the trees in the growing darkness. East lay before them. They walked side by side in step, keeping pace. their minds. After a while, as the stars became more numerous and brighter, the feeling of unease left them, and they no longer
I listened to the sound of hooves. They began to hum softly, as hobbits often do when walking, especially as they approach home at nigh Hobbits, it's a supper song or a bed song; but these hobbits were humming a marching song (but not, of course, without any
(mention of supper and bed). Bilbo Baggins had done the words, to a tune as old as the world, and they learned it to
Frodo, as they walked through the paths of the valley of water, and they talked of adventure.

On the hearth, the fire is red, Under the roof is a bed; But our feet aren't tired yet.

We could meet very close by. A sudden tree or an upright stone that no one but us has seen. Tree, flower, leaf and grass,
Let them pass! Let them pass! Hill and water under the sky, Let them through! Let them through!

There might still be room around the corner. A new road or a secret door, And yet, we are passing by them today.

102





We could pass by here tomorrow.
And take the hidden paths that run towards the Moon or towards the Sun. Apple, thorn, walnut and sloe,
Let them go! Let them go! Sand, stones, pond and valley, Goodbye! Goodbye!
Home is behind us, the world is ahead. And there are many paths to travel. Through the shadows to the edge of night, until all the stars shine.
The world behind us, the house in front of us.

We'll go home quietly and to bed. Mist and twilight, clouds and shadows, Time will fade away! Time will fade away! Fire and lamp, meat and bread, And then off to bed! And then off to bed!

The song ended. And now, off to bed! And now, off to bed! sang Pippin in a high-pitched voice. "Hush!" said Frodo. "I think I hear hooves again."
They stopped abruptly and remained motionless, silent as trees. Listening shadows. The sound of hooves could be heard on the path. a little behind, but coming slowly and clearly with the wind at their backs.
Quickly and silently, they left the path and found themselves facing me, in the deeper shadows beneath the oak trees. "Don't let us go too far!" said Frodo. "I don't want to be..." I saw him, but I want to check if he's another Black Rider. "Very good!" said Pippin. "But don't forget to sniff!"
The hooves drew closer. They didn't have time to find anything, a better hiding place than the general darkness under the trees; Sam and Pippin crouched behind a large tree trunk, while Frodo stepped back a few meters towards the path. This showed
Pale gray, a fading line of light through the wood. Above
The stars were numerous in the dark sky, but there was no moon. The sound of hooves ceased. Frodo, who was watching, saw




103


something dark crosses the lighter space between two

Trees, then a stop. It resembled the dark shadow of a horse, guided by a small black shadow. The black shadow stood nearby.
until they reached the point where they had left the path, and it swayed from side to side. Frodo thought he heard a sniffling sound. The shadow bent down towards the ground, then began to crawl towards him.

Once again, Frodo was seized by the desire to put on the Ring; but this time it was stronger than before. So strong that, almost before He was groping in his pocket. But at that moment, a noise was heard.
like a mixture of singing and laughter. Clear voices rose and fell in the starry air. The dark shadow straightened and
He withdrew. He climbed onto the dark horse and seemed to disappear on the other side of the alley, into the darkness. Frodo breathed a "Elves!" exclaimed Sam hoarsely. "Elves, sir!" they would have sprung from the trees and rushed towards the
votes, if they hadn't stopped him.

"Yes, they are Elves," said Frodo. "Some of them can be found in the Wood. They do not live in the Shire, but they enter it in spring and autumn, outside of their own
lands beyond the Tower hills. I'm grateful they... You didn't see it, but the Black Rider stopped right here. And she was even crawling towards us when the song started. As soon as he heard the voices, he slipped away.

"And the elves?" asked Sam, too excited to care. "About the rider. Couldn't we go see him?" Listen! They're coming this way, said Frodo. We have... There's nothing left to do but wait.
The singing drew closer. A clear voice now rose above the others. She sang in the beautiful Elvish tongue, of which Frodo knew little, and the others knew nothing. Yet the sound, mingling with the melody, seemed to shape itself.
In their thoughts, translated into words they only partially understood, he stood there. Here is the song as Frodo heard it:


104

Snow White! Snow White! O White Lady! O Queen from beyond the western seas! O Light for us who wander here In the heart of a world of woven trees!

Gilthoniel! O Elbereth!

Your eyes are clear and your breath is pure!
Snow White! Snow White! We sing to you In a faraway land, beyond the sea. O stars, which, in the sunless year, were sown with His shining hand,
In the windy fields, now bright and clear, we see your silver flower blooming! O Elbereth! Gilthoniel!
We still remember, we who live in that distant land, beneath the trees, Your starlight upon the western seas.

The song ended. They are High Elves! They spoke...
"The name Elbereth!" exclaimed Frodo, astonished. "Few people like that..." The most beautiful folics ever seen in the Shire. There are Strange coincidence!

The hobbits were sitting in the shade by the roadside. Soon, Elves descended the path towards the valley. They passed
Slowly, the hobbits could see the starlight twinkling in their hair and eyes. They carried no lights, yet as they... A twinkling appear The hills that had risen before seemed to crumble at their feet.
They were now silent, and when the last elf passed by, he turned around and looked at the hobbits and laughed.

"Hello, Frodo!" he cried. "You're abroad late. Or else..."
Perhaps lost? Then he called out to the others, and the whole company stopped and gathered around. "That's truly wonderful!" they said. "Three hobbits in one!"
105
Wood at night! We hadn't seen anything like it since Bilbo. He's gone. What does this mean? "That means, fair people," said Frodo, "simply that..."
It seems we're heading in the same direction as you. I enjoy walking under the stars. But your company would be welcome.

But we need no other company, and the hobbits are
Then they laughed, looking so boring. And how do you know we're going to the same place as you, since you don't know where we're going? "And how do you know my name?" Frodo asked in return.
"We know a lot," they said. "We've seen you often before with Bilbo, even if you haven't seen us." "Who are you, and who is your lord?" asked Frodo.

"I am Gildor," replied their leader, the elf who had been the first to... He bowed to him. Gildor Inglorion of the House of Finrod. We The exiles, and most of our loved ones, left a long time ago and
We too are only passing through here for a while before returning overboard to the Great Sea. But some of our loved ones still live in To Rivendell. Come, Frodo, tell us what you are doing? For we see that a shadow of fear hangs over you.

"O Wise Men!" interrupted Pippin eagerly. "Tell us about The Black Riders!"

"The Black Riders?" they asked in low voices. "Why do you ask?" "About the Black Riders?"

Because two Black Riders have overtaken us today, or one
"He did it twice," said Pippin; "just a short time ago, he..." She disappeared as you approached.

The Elves did not answer immediately, but spoke together in hushed voices, in their own tongue. Finally, Gildor turned to the hobbits. We won't discuss it here, he said. We think you had
It's best to come with us. It's not our usual practice, but for this time... We'll take you along our route and you'll stay with us. Tonight, if you like.

Oh, Belle Folic! This is an incredible stroke of luck, beyond all expectation, she said. Pippin. Sam was speechless. Thank you so much, Inglorion, said Frodo, bowing. Elen sila lumenn omentielvo,
"A star shines at the hour of our meeting," he added. (Language of the High Elven.)


io6





"Beware, my friends!" cried Gildor, laughing. "Say nothing!" Secrets! Here is a scholar of ancient languages. Bilbo was A good master. Greetings, elf friend! he said, bowing to Frodo. Now come with your friends and join our company!
It was best to walk in the middle so as not to get lost. We might be tired before we stop. Why? Where are you going? asked Frodo.
Tonight, we're going into the woods in the hills above Woodhall. It's a few kilometers, but you'll find rest at the end, and it will sh

They resumed their march in silence and passed by as
shadows and faint glimmers: for the Elves (even more so than for the Hobbits) They could walk around as they pleased, without noise or Pippin soon began to feel sleepy and staggered once or twice;
But each time, a tall elf at his side reached out and saved him.
Sam stopped him from falling. He walked beside Frodo, as if he were in a

dream, with an expression on his face that was half fear, half dark, astonished joy.

The woods on both sides were becoming denser; the trees were
now younger and more robust; and as the road descended, running down a fold of the hills, there were many deep ravines
Hazel trees on the rising slopes on either side. Finally, the Elves. The path veered away. A verdant alleyway was almost hidden behind through the thickets on the right; and they followed it as if the path wound its way up the wooded slopes to the top of a shoulder of t trees, and before them stretched a vast expanse of grass, grey under the night. On three sides, the woods pressed in.
on it; but to the east the ground dropped steeply and the tops of the dark trees, which grew at the bottom of the slope, were Beneath their feet, the lowlands stretched out, dark and flat.
Under the stars. Closer by, a few lights twinkled in the sky. Woodhall village.

The Elves were sitting on the grass and talking quietly together; they seemed to have forgotten the hobbits. Frodo





107


and his companions wrapped themselves in cloaks and
The blankets and drowsiness enveloped them. The night dragged on. And the lights of the valley went out. Pippin fell asleep. situated on a green hill.

Up there in the east, hovered Remmirath, the Stars in a Net,
And slowly above the mists, a red Borgil rose appeared, shining like a jewel of fire. Then, with a change of air, all the mist was diss Edge of the World, the Sky Swordsman, Menelvagor
with her shining belt. All the elves began to sing. Suddenly, beneath the trees, a fire burst forth, accompanied by a red glow. "Come!" the Elves called to the hobbits. "Come! Now is the time! Let the speeches and rejoicing begin!"
Pippin sat up and rubbed his eyes. He shivered. There is
"A fire in the hall and food for the hungry guests," said an elf, standing before him. At the southern end of the lawn, there was an opening.

There, the green ground extended into the woods and formed a
a vast, room-like space, covered by tree branches. Large trunks stretched out on either side like pillars. In the middle, a wood fire b Torches with golden and silver lights burned continuously. The elves sat around the fire on the grass or on the saw.
rings of old tree trunks. Some came and went, rolling bowls and drinks; others brought food on overflowing plates and flat dishes.

"This is a very poor meal," they told the hobbits; "for we are..." lodged in the forest, far from our buildings. If you ever are We will treat you better here.

"That seems perfectly appropriate for a birthday party," said Frodo.

Pippin then remembered little about food or drink, for his mind was filled with the light on the elves' faces, and the
The sound of voices was so varied and beautiful that he felt as if he were in a waking dream. But he remembered that there was bread, s ing; and sweet fruits like wild berries, richer than cultivated ones


io8

fruits from the garden; he emptied a bowl that was filled with
a fragrant breeze, fresh as a clear fountain, golden as a summer afternoon.

Sam could never describe in words, nor clearly picture to himself, what he had felt or thought that night, even though it remained in h The closest he ever came to saying it was: Well, sir, if I could grow up, if I saw apples like that, I'd consider myself a gardener. Bu

Frodo was sitting happily, eating, drinking, and conversing; but
His mind was mainly focused on the spoken words. He knew a little of it. He heard the Elvish language and listened eagerly. From time t He addressed those who had served him and thanked them in their own language. They smiled at him and said, laughing: "Here is a jewel a

After a while, Pippin fell into a deep sleep, and was lifted up and carried to a shelter under the trees; there he was laid
He lay down on a soft bed and slept until the end of the night. Sam refused to leave his master. When Pippin had left, he came
and sat huddled at Frodo's feet, where he finally nodded his head and closed his eyes. Frodo remained awake for a long time, talking wi Gildor.

They talked of many things, old and new, and Frodo asked Gildor how much he had learned about the events of the wide world. Outside the Shire. The news was mostly sad and worrying: growing darkness, wars between Men, and the flight of the
Elves. Finally, Frodo asked the question that was closest to his heart:
"Tell me, Gildor, have you seen Bilbo since he left us?" Gildor smiled. "Yes," he replied. "Twice." He said goodbye. to us, in that very spot. But I saw him once more, far from where he said nothing more about Bilbo, and Frodo fell. silent.

You don't ask me many questions and don't tell me much about yourself. "Frodo," said Gildor. "But I already know a little, and I can..."
Read more into your face and the thought behind your question.





109


tions. You leave the Shire, and yet you doubt that you
You will find what you are looking for, or you will accomplish what you have in mind, or you will return one day. Isn't that right?

"That's true," said Frodo; "but I thought my departure was secret, known only to Gandalf and my faithful Sam. He looked They looked at Sam, who was snoring softly.

"This secret will not reach the Enemy," declared Gildor.
"The enemy?" asked Frodo. "Then you know why I'm here." "Are you leaving the Shire?" I don't know why the enemy is pursuing us.
"You," replied Gildor; "but I can see that he is... strange." Indeed, that is what it seems to me. And I warn you of this danger. is now both in front of you and behind you, and on either side.
You mean the Riders? I was afraid they were in the service of... the enemy. What are the Black Riders? Gandalf told you nothing? Nothing about such creatures.
So I think it's not for me to say more, for fear of sowing terror. This shouldn't prevent you from continuing your journey. Because it You left just in time, assuming you were on time.
You must now hasten, and neither stop nor turn back; for the Shire offers you no more protection.

I cannot imagine what information could be more terrifying.
"That's much better than your hints and warnings!" exclaimed Frodo. "I knew it..."
This danger was lurking, of course; but I didn't expect to encounter it in our own Shire. Can't a hobbit walk from the Water to the Riv

"But this is not your own Shire," said Gildor. "Others have lived here. Hobbits once lived here; and others will live here again. When You can lock yourself in, but you can't lock yourself in forever. Get him out.

I know - and yet, it has always seemed so safe and so familiar to me.
What can I do now? My plan was to leave the Shire secretly and go to Rivendell; but now my steps are stubbornly, even before arriving in Buckland.


No





"I think you should still follow this plan," said Gildor. "I will. Don't think the road will be too difficult for your courage."
If you would like clearer advice, ask Gandalf. I do. I don't know the reason for your theft, and therefore I don't know how your pursue Things Gandalf needs to know. I suppose you'll see them before you leave the Shire?

I hope so. But it's also a source of concern.
I've been waiting for Gandalf for several days. He was supposed to arrived in Hobbiton no later than two nights ago; but he
It never appeared. Now I wonder what could have happened. It happened. Should I wait for it?

Gildor remained silent for a moment. I don't like this news. "He said finally. Gandalf being late is not a good omen."
Well. But it is said: Do not meddle in the affairs of sorcerers, for they are cunning and quick to anger. The choice is yours: leave, o And it is also said, replied Frodo: Do not go to the Elves for advice, for they will say both no and yes.
"Really?" laughed Gildor. "Elves rarely give out information." cautious advice, because advice is a dangerous gift, even coming from
Wise people consult wise people, and all paths can go wrong. But what if...? And you? You haven't told me everything about yourself; an So, should I make a better choice than you? But if you ask for advice, I'll give it to you out of friendship. I think you should do it Leave immediately, without delay; and if Gandalf does not come
Before you leave, I also advise you to do this: don't go alone. Choose loyal and supportive friends. Now, you should
Be grateful, for I do not give you this advice lightly. The Elves have their own sorrows and their own griefs, and they are with little regard for the customs of hobbits, or any other creature on earth. Our paths rarely cross theirs, by
Chance or intention. In this meeting, there might be more chance involved; but the purpose is not clear to me, and I am afraid to say t "I am deeply grateful," said Frodo; "but I wish you... Tell me clearly what the Black Riders are. If I follow your advice
III


I may not see Gandalf again for a long time, and I should know it. What danger is pursuing me?

Isn't it enough to know that they are servants of the
"Enemy?" replied Gildor. "Flee from them! Don't speak a word to them." They! They're mortal. Don't ask me for more! But my heart
It foretells that before all is over, you, Frodo, son of Drogo, will be... I know these terrible things better than Gildor Inglorion. Elbereth protects you!

"But where shall I find the courage?" asked Frodo. "That is what I need most of all."

"Courage is found where it is least expected," said Gildor. Be brave. Good luck! Now sleep! Tomorrow morning we will be gone; but We will send our messages across the lands. The Wanderers
Companies will be informed of your trip, and those that have... May the force of good watch over you. I name you Friend of the Elves; And may the stars shine at the end of your path! Rarely
Have we ever experienced such joy in the company of strangers? And it is right to hear words of the Old Tongue spoken by other traveler in the world.

Frodo felt sleep overcoming him, even after Gildor had finished.
"I am going to sleep now," he said; and the Elf led him to a bower. He settled down in a bower near Pippin, and threw himself onto a be


4





In the morning, Frodo awoke rested. He was lying in a
an arbor made from a living tree with intertwined branches that drooped to the ground; its bed was made of ferns and grass, deep and so The leaves were quivering, still green on the tree. He jumped up and went out.

Sam was sitting on the grass, near the edge of the woods. Pippin was standing, observing the sky and the weather. There was no trace of the Elves.

"They left us some fruit, drinks, and bread," said Pippin. "Come and have your breakfast. The bread tastes almost the same as it did la

Sam insisted.

Frodo sat down next to Sam and began to eat. What is the "A plan for today?" asked Pippin.

"To get to Bucklebury on foot as quickly as possible," replied Frodo, and turned his attention to the food.

"Do you think we'll ever see anything of those Riders again?" Pippin asked cheerfully. In the morning sunshine, the prospect of Seeing a whole group of them didn't seem very alarming to him.

"Yes, probably," replied Frodo, annoyed by the reminder. "I hope to cross the river without them seeing us." Did you learn anything about them from Gildor?
"Not much, just hints and riddles," replied Frodo evasively. Did you ask about sniffing?
"We haven't discussed it," said Frodo, his mouth full. "You should have. I'm sure it's very important." In that case, I'm sure Gildor would have refused to explain himself.
"That!" said Frodo sharply. "Now leave me alone for a moment!"


113

I don't want to answer a series of questions while I eat. I want to think!

"My God!" exclaimed Pippin. "For breakfast?" He walked towards the edge of the green.

From Frodo's mind sprang the radiant morning-treacherously bright, he thought, had not dispelled the fear of being pursued; and he pond He came to him. He was running on the green grass, singing.

No! I couldn't! he told himself. Taking is one thing. Taking is another. It's another thing... my young friends who traveled through th They are hungry and tired, and food and a bed are comforting. Take them into exile, where hunger and fatigue may have no effect.
The treatment is a completely different matter-even if they are willing to come. The inheritance belongs to me exclusively. I don't thi Sam. He looked at Sam Gamgee and discovered that Sam was watching him.

"Well, Sam!" he said. "What do you think? I'm leaving the Shire. As soon as possible-in fact, my decision is already made." There's no point in waiting a day in Crickhollow if it can be avoided. Very well, sir!
Are you still planning to come with me? I am.
This is going to be very dangerous, Sam. It's already dangerous. Us. It's highly likely that neither of us will return.

If you don't come back, sir, then I certainly won't come back. "Don't leave him!" they told me. "Leave him!" said Sam.
I said. I never intended to. I will accompany him, if he manages to reach the summit. Moon; and if one of those Black Riders tries to s "We'll have to deal with Sam Gambee," I said. They laughed. Who are they, and what are you talking about?
The Elves, sir. We had a little chat last night; and they... I seemed to know you were leaving, so I didn't see the point. To deny it. Wonderful people, the Elves, sir! Wonderful!

"Yes," said Frodo. "Do you still love them, now that you..." have you had a closer look?

They seem a bit beyond my tastes, so to speak. Sam replied slowly. It seems my opinion doesn't matter.


114

about them. They are quite different from what I expected. So old and so young, so cheerful and so sad, in a way.

Frodo looked at Sam, quite surprised, almost expecting to see
some outward sign of the strange change that seemed to have occurred "Come on him." It wasn't old Sam's voice.
Gamgee, whom he thought he knew. But it looked like the old one.
Sam Gamgee was sitting there, except his face was unusually thoughtful. Do you feel the need to leave the Shire now?
"Has your wish to see them already been fulfilled?" he asked.

Yes, sir. I don't know how to say it, but after last night
I feel different. I feel like I can see the future, in a way. I know we're going to take a very long road, towards darkness; but I know I can't turn back. It's not to see the Elves now, nor dragons, nor mountains, that I desire-I don't really know.
What I want: but I have something to do before the end, and
It's further on, not in the Shire. I must go all the way, sir, if you understand.

I don't entirely agree. But I understand why Gandalf chose me. I am a good companion. I am glad. We will go together.

Frodo finished his breakfast in silence. Then he stood up.
He scanned the lands that stretched before him and called for Pippin.

"Is everything ready to begin?" he asked as Pippin came running up. "We need to be ready." We got off immediately. We slept late; and there are many kilometers to cover.

  "You slept late, you mean?" said Pippin. "I stayed up a long time before; and we're just waiting for you to finish eating and thought.

I've finished both now. And I'm going to do it for
The Bucklebury ferry is arriving as soon as possible. I'm not getting out.
of the way, to return to the road we left last night: I will cross the country in a straight line from here. "Then you will fly," said Pippin. "You will not cut." On foot, all over this country.
"We can cut a straighter line than the road anyway," replied Frodo. "The ferry is east of Woodhall; but the route is difficult." It curves to the left - you can see a bend to the north


115

There. He skirts the northern end of the Marsh so that
to hit the road from the bridge over Stock. But that's very far from the path. We could save a quarter of the distance if we were to queue for the ferry from where we are.

"Shortcuts lead to long delays," Pippin stated. The country
The terrain is rugged around here, and there are peat bogs and all sorts of difficult lands in the Marshes - I know the country well. pieces. And if you're worried about the Black Riders, I can't see that it's any worse to encounter them on a road than in a wood or a f

"It's harder to find people in the woods and fields," Frodo replied. "And if you're supposed to be on the road," It's possible you're wanted on the road. And not off-topic.

"Very well!" said Pippin. "I'll follow you into every marsh."
and get rid of the ditch. But it's difficult! I had planned to pass the Golden Perch in Stock before sunset. The best beer in the East. farthing, or rather, that was the case: it's been a long time since I've tasted it.

"It's decided!" said Frodo. "Shortcuts cause delays, but..."
The hostels make them longer. We must keep you away from the Golden Perch at all costs. We want to get to Bucklebury before Dark. What do you say, Sam?
"I'll come with you, Mr. Frodo," said Sam (despite his personal doubts and deep regret for the best beer in the East End). So, if we have to struggle through swamps and brambles, let's go!
"Go now!" said Pippin.

It was already almost as hot as the day before; but clouds were beginning to arrive from the west. It seemed likely that it would rain. The hobbits hurried down one

A steep, green embankment plunged into the thick forest below.
Their route had been chosen so as to leave Woodhall on their left, and to cut diagonally through the woods that clustered along the eastern slope of the hills, until they reach the plain beyond. They could then head directly towards the ferry.
An open country, except for a few ditches and fences.


Il6

Frodo estimated that they still had eighteen miles to go as the crow flies.

He quickly realized that the thicket was closer and more impenetrable than it had appeared. There were no paths underground.
their growth, and they didn't get along very quickly. When they had, they laboriously reached the bottom of the bank and found a stream Steep, slippery slopes, overgrown with brambles. Most of the unsuspecting... By a stroke of luck, this intersected the line they had ch Wet, scratched, and covered in mud, they stopped, wondering what to do. "Just do it. First check!" said Pippin with a sinister smile.

Sam Gambee turned around. Through an opening in the
Through the trees, he glimpsed the top of the green bank they had descended.

"Look!" he said, grabbing Frodo by the arm. "They're all..."
They looked, and right at the edge, high above them, they saw against
A horse stood upright in the sky. Beside it, a black figure was leaning over.

They immediately abandoned any thought of turning back. Frodo led the way, and quickly plunged into the thick bushes near the "Phew!" he said to Pippin. "We were both right!" The shortcut has already slipped; but we've made it through to safety.
Perfect timing! You have good hearing, Sam: can you hear that? Something coming?

They remained motionless, almost holding their breath, while
I listened, but there was no sound of a chase. I don't want to... He would try to get his horse off that bank, Sam said. But I imagine he knows we managed to get down. We'd better be. (in progress)

Continuing their journey wasn't entirely easy. They had bags to carry, and the bushes and brambles resisted their efforts. They were sheltered from the wind by the ridge.
behind them, and the air was still and stifling. When they finally reached more open ground, they were hot and tired and badly scratche of the direction in which they were going. The banks of the
The stream lowered, when it reached the levels and widened and became less deep, moving away towards the marsh and the river.


117

"But that's Stock Creek!" said Pippin. "If we go..."
To try and resume our journey, we must cross immediately and turn right.

They forded the stream and hurried across a wide clearing. On the other side, an area overgrown with rushes and devoid of trees. Beyond The terrain was relatively flat and the vegetation was sparse; but the
The trees were too close for them to see far ahead. Leaves were lifted by sudden gusts of wind and scattered showers of rain. Raindrops began to fall from the overcast sky. Then the wind died down, and the rain poured down. They advanced with difficulty.
As fast as they could, over the clumps of grass and through the thickets of piles of old leaves; and all around them the rain pattered The water was flowing. They didn't speak, but kept turning around, from one side to the other.
After half an hour, Pippin said: I hope we haven't turned too far south, and aren't traveling lengthwise. through this wood! It's not a very wide belt - I should have
He said it was no more than a mile wide at its widest point - and we should, I've already experienced it.

"There's no point in starting to zigzag," said Frodo. "It won't change anything. Let's keep going!" I'm not sure I want to reveal myself publicly at the moment.

They continued for a few more kilometers.
The sun pierced the ragged clouds and the rain once more
The heat subsided. It was now past noon, and they could feel it rising. Lunchtime. They stopped under an elm tree: its leaves Although yellowing rapidly, the leaves remained thick, and the soil at its feet was relatively dry and sheltered. When they came to do During their meal, they noticed that the Elves had filled their bottles with a clear, pale gold-colored drink: it had the scent of
It was a honey made from many flowers, and it was wonderfully refreshing. Very quickly, they started laughing and snapping their finger In the rain, and at Black Riders. The last few kilometers, they could feel it, it would soon be nothing but a bad memory.


Il8

Frodo leaned against the tree trunk and closed the door.
his eyes. Sam and Pippin were sitting near them and they began to hum. And then to sing softly: Ho! Ho! Ho! I'm going to the bottle to heal my heart and drown my sorrows.
It may rain and it may blow,

And there are still many kilometers to travel, but I will lie down under a large tree. And let the clouds drift by on the water.

Ho! Ho! Ho! they started again, louder than before. They stopped abruptly. Suddenly, Frodo jumped to his feet. A long groan rose up. At the mercy of the wind, like the cry of an evil and solitary creature.
It rose and fell, ending on a high, piercing note. Even if they remained seated or standing, as if suddenly frozen, they were answered:
Another cry, weaker and more distant, but no less chilling for the blood. Then silence, broken only by the noise wind in the leaves.

"And what do you think it was?" Pippin finally asked.
He tried to speak in a light voice, but trembled slightly. If it was a bird, it was a song I had never heard before in the Shire.

"It was neither bird nor beast," said Frodo. "It was a call, or a
signal - there were words in that cry, even though I couldn't hear them. Catch them. But no hobbit has such a voice.

We didn't talk about it anymore. They were all thinking about...
There were riders, but nobody talked about it. They were now reluctant. It was either stay or leave; but sooner or later, they would ha earlier and in broad daylight. In a few moments, they should have... They put their bags back on and left.

Soon, the woods abruptly ended. Broad grasses...
Lands stretched out before them. They saw now that they had, in fact, turned too far south. In the distance, beyond the plains, they The low hill of Bucklebury could be seen on the other side of the river, but it was now to their left. Slipping cautiously out of the


119
At the edge of the trees, they dashed across the plain as fast as they could. At first, they were afraid, far from the shelter of the woods.
Far behind them, rose the high place where they had

Frodo ate his breakfast. He almost expected to see the small dot in the distance, the silhouette of a rider on the dark ridge against t There was no trace of it. The sun was escaping from the waves.
The clouds, as they descended towards the hills they had left behind, were now shining brightly once more. Their fear had left them, ev I felt uneasy. But the land gradually became more tame and orderly. Soon, they arrived at well-tended fields and meadows: there were he At the edge of the Shire. Their morale rose with every step.
the river line drew nearer; and the Black Riders began to look like ghosts of the woods now far behind.

They walked along the edge of a vast field of turnips, and
We reached a sturdy barrier. Beyond it, a rutted path wound between low trees. Neatly trimmed hedges extend to a grove of trees in the distance. Pippin stopped.

"I know these fields and this gate!" he said. "It's Bam-"
Furlong, the land of old farmer Maggot. That's his farm next door. There, in the trees.

"One problem after another!" exclaimed Frodo, looking almost as alarmed, as if Pippin had declared that the way was the A crack led to a dragon's lair. The others watched, surprised.

"What's wrong with old Maggot?" asked Pippin. "He's a..." Good friend to all the Brandybucks. Of course, he's a real bully. to intruders, and guards ferocious dogs - but after all, people here, near the border, they have to be more vigilant. guard.

"I know," said Frodo. "But all the same," he added with a
A shameful laugh escapes my throat. I'm terrified of him and his dogs. I've avoided his farm for years. He's caught me there several ti I used to make illegal forays into Brandy Hall to look for mushrooms when I was young. The last time, he beat me up, and then


120





He took me in and showed me his dogs. "Look, guys," he said.
"The next time that young scoundrel sets foot on my land, you can..." Eat him. Now, escort him back! They chased me all the way to The ferry. I never got over that fear - although I dare say The beasts knew their stuff and wouldn't really have touched me.

Pippin laughed. Well, it's time you made up for it. Especially if you're moving back to Buckland. Old Maggot is
Quite a fellow, if we leave him alone with his mushrooms. Let's go! If we take the path, we won't be breaking the law. If we I'll meet him and talk to him. He's a friend of Merry's, and I used to come here with him quite often at one time.

They followed the path until they saw the thatched roofs of a large house and farm buildings that could be discerned among the trees in This farmhouse was solidly built of brick and had a high wall all around. There was a wide wooden door that opened onto...
the wall in the alley.

Suddenly, as they approached, terrible barking and howling erupted. A fight broke out and a loud voice was heard: Grip! Fang! Wolf! Come on, guys!

Frodo and Sam stopped abruptly, but Pippin continued on his way.
a few steps away. The gate opened and three enormous dogs rushed out. One came out into the driveway and rushed towards the travelers, fiercely. They paid no attention to Pippin; but Sam cowered against the wall, while two wolf-like dogs sniffed

He looked at him suspiciously and growled if he moved. The tallest and fiercest of the three stopped in front of Frodo, bristling. and while grunting.

Through the door appeared a large, thick band of Hobbits with round, red faces. "Hello! Hello!" "And who can..." "And what do you want?" he asked. "Good morning, Mr. Maggot!" said Pippin.
The farmer looked at him intently. Well, if that isn't Master
Pippin - Mr. Peregrin Took, I should say! he cried, changing the subject.





121


From a frown to a smile. It's been a long time since I've seen you. There you go. You're lucky I know you. I was just going out. Unleashing my dogs on strangers. There are some pretty funny things that happen.
This is happening today. Of course, we have queer people walking around, sometimes in those areas. Too close to the river, he said, tre His head. But that guy was the most outlandish I've ever seen. I saw him. He won't cross my property without giving me a second thought

"Which individual are you talking about?" asked Pippin.

"So you didn't see him?" asked the farmer. "He left." A short time ago, on his way back up the path towards the road. was an amusing customer and asked amusing questions. But per
Perhaps you'll come in with us, and we'll give you more details. Comfortable. I have a good draft beer, if you and your Friends are willing to do it, Mr. Took.

It seemed obvious that the farmer would tell them more, if allowed to do so at his own pace and in his own way, so they all accepted th

The farmer laughed. They won't hurt you, unless I...
Tell them to do it. Here, Grip! Fang! Talon! he shouted. Talon, Wolf! To Frodo and Sam's relief, the dogs moved away and Let them go free.

Pippin introduced the other two to the farmer. Mr. Frodo
Baggins, he said. You may not remember him, but he used to live at Brandy Hall. On behalf of Baggins, the farmer
He began to speak and gave Frodo a piercing look. For a moment, Frodo thought the memory of the stolen mushrooms had been He was excited, and they told the dogs to escort him back. But Farmer Maggot took him by the arm.

"Well, if this isn't stranger than ever!" he exclaimed. "Mr. Baggins, is that right? Come in! We need to talk."

They went into the farmer's kitchen and sat down near the large table and fireplace. Mrs. Maggot brought out some beer in a huge jug, a He filled four large cups. It was good tea, and Pippin found it more than made up for his absence at the Golden Roost.
Sam sipped his beer suspiciously. He had a natural distrust.


122





inhabitants from other parts of the Shire; and he was also
reluctant to quickly become friends with anyone who had beaten his master so long ago.

After a few remarks on the weather and agriculture

perspectives (which were no worse than usual), Farmer Maggot He put down his cup and looked at them all in turn.

"Mr. Peregrin," he said, "where have you been?" Where have you been and where do you intend to go? Were you coming? To visit me? Because, if that's the case, you crossed my gate without seeing you.

"Well, no," replied Pippin. "Actually, ever since..."
As you might have guessed, we entered the track from the other end: We had flown over your fields. But it was entirely by chance. We got lost in the woods near Woodhall while trying to take a shortcut to the ferry.

If you had been in a hurry, the road would have been useful. "Better," said the farmer. "But that didn't worry me."
You have permission to cross my land, if you wish, Mr. Peregrin. And you, Mr. Baggins-though I dare say you still like mushrooms. He la name. I remember the time when young Frodo Baggins was
One of the worst young rascals in Buckland. But that wasn't the case. I was thinking about mushrooms. I had just heard the name. Baggins before you arrived. What do you think? It's funny, isn't it? The customer asked me?

They were eagerly waiting for him to continue. Well, the farmer
He continued on, approaching his goal with a savory slowness, and arrived riding a large black horse at the gate, which happened to be Be open, and right up to my door. He was dressed all in black.
He too, wrapped in a cloak and hood, as if he didn't want to be. I knew it. "But what could he possibly want, exactly?" I wondered. Myself. You don't see many large law firms on the other side of the border; and besides, I'd never heard of a guy like that Black man.

"Hello!" I said, walking towards him. "This road leads nowhere, and wherever you go, your
The quickest thing would be to get back on the road. I didn't like the look of him; and when Grip came out, he took a drag and left


123
He let out a small cry as if he had been stung; he lowered his tail and ran away howling. The black man remained perfectly still. "I come from there," he said in a slow, stiff voice.
pointing west, above my fields, please. Have you
"Have you seen Baggins?" he asked in a strange voice, and he leaned towards me. I couldn't see any face, for his hood had fallen so low I don't see why he would come riding on my land with such audacity.

"Get out!" I said. "There's no Baggins here. You're inside."
You're in the wrong part of the Shire. You'd be better off heading back west. Hobbiton-but you can take the road there this time. "Baggins has left," he replied in a low voice. "He's coming. He's not far. I want to find him. If he passes by, will you tell me? I'l
"No, you won't do it," I said. "You'll go back where you came from. Belong, quickly. I'll give you one minute before I call everyone my

He let out a sort of hissing sound. It might have been laughter, or it might not. Then he spurred his big horse straight at me. and I jumped aside just in time. I called the
dogs, but he swung forward, went through the gate, and came up the track toward the road like a thunderclap. What What do you think?

Frodo sat for a moment gazing at the fire, but his only
I wondered how they were going to be able to reach the ferry. "I don't know what to think anymore," he finally said.

"So I'll tell you what you should think," said Maggot. "You should"
You have never had the opportunity to mingle with the inhabitants of Hobbiton, sir.

Frodo. People are strange up there. Sam shifted in his chair and glared at the farmer. But you were
Always a reckless boy. When I heard you'd left the Brandy-dollars and gone to old Mr. Bilbo's, I said you were You're going to get yourself into trouble. Believe me, it all stems from there.
Mr. Bilbo's strange behavior. His money has been misappropriated in certain ways. It's said to be a strange fashion abroad. Perhaps it Some want to know what happened to the gold and
Jewels that he supposedly buried in the hill of Hobbiton, if I understood correctly?


124





Frodo said nothing: the farmer's wise assumptions were rather disconcerting.

"Well, Mr. Frodo," continued Maggot, "I'm glad you've had the wisdom to return to Buckland. My advice: stay there."
There you go! And don't let these eccentric people bother you. You'll make friends around here. If one of these Black people If they come back for you, I'll take care of it. I'll say you're dead.
or have left the Shire, or any other place of your choosing. And that could
that this is indeed true; for it is very likely that it is old Mr. Bilbo from whom they want news. "Perhaps you're right," said Frodo, avoiding the farmer's gaze and staring at the fire.
Maggot looked at him thoughtfully. Well, I see you have
"Those are your own ideas," he said. "It's crystal clear that no..." The accident brought you and that motorcyclist here on the same ro noon; and perhaps my news wasn't such great news for you after all. I'm not asking you to tell me anything that's going through your he You might think it won't be so easy to achieve. Crossing by ferry without getting caught?

"I thought so too," said Frodo. "But we must try and..."
We will achieve this; and it won't happen by sitting around thinking. So I'm afraid we have to leave. Thank you very much.
Thank you so much for your kindness! I was terrified of you and your dogs. For over thirty years, Farmer Maggot, even if you laugh
I'm sad to hear that. It's a shame, because I've missed a good friend. And now... I'm sorry to leave so soon. But perhaps I'll come bac day - if I have the opportunity.

"You'll be welcome when you arrive," said Maggot. But I have an idea. The sun is almost set, and we are
We are going to supper; for we usually go to bed soon afterwards.
The sun. If you, Mr. Peregrin, and everyone else could stay and have a bite to eat with us, we would be delighted!

"Us too!" said Frodo. "But we have to go to..."
I'm afraid it will be dark before we can reach the ferry.

Ah! But wait a minute! I was going to say: after a little while of





125


For supper, I'll bring out a small cart and take you all to the ferry. This will save you a long walk, and it might also to save you from another kind of trouble.

Frodo then gratefully accepted the invitation, much to everyone's relief. Pippin and Sam were also present. The sun had already set ove The hills came into view and the light was fading. Two of Maggot's sons and his three daughters arrived, and a generous supper was prep

the large table. The kitchen was lit by candles and the fire was repaired. Mrs. Maggot was constantly pacing back and forth. One or two Shortly after, fourteen of them sat down to eat. There was plenty of beer, and a hearty dish of mushrooms and bacon, in addition
Many other hearty farm dishes. The dogs were lying near the fire, along with gnawed bark and broken bones.

When they had finished, the farmer and his sons went out
With a lantern, he prepared the wagon. It was pitch black. He climbed aboard and got in. The farmer sat at the wheel, and He revved his two sturdy ponies. His wife stood in the light of the open door.

"Watch yourself, you vermin!" she cried. "Don't go. Argue with the strangers and come back immediately!"

"I'm going!" he said, and he drove out through the gate. There wasn't a breath of wind to be felt; the night was calm and silent, and t Slowly. After a kilometer or two, the path stopped, crossing a deep dike, and the ascent of a short slope to the summit - Elevated caus

Maggot went down and looked carefully both ways, north and south, but nothing could be seen in the darkness, and Silence reigned in the still air. Thin filaments of river mist hung above the dikes and crept across the fields.

"It's going to be thick," said Maggot; "but I won't light my..."
Lanterns until I get home. We'll hear everything that happens on the road long before we meet him tonight.


126





There were five miles or more between Maggot's Lane and the ferry.
The hobbits wrapped themselves in their clothes, but their ears were
strained his ears to hear the slightest noise above the squeaking of the wheels and the slow clicking of the ponies' hooves. The cart s more than a snail for Frodo. Beside him, Pippin nodded his head.
towards sleep; but Sam stared straight ahead, towards the rising sun. Fog.

They finally reached the entrance to the ferry lane. It was
marked by two large white posts that suddenly appeared on the ground to their right. Farmer Maggot brought back his ponies and the wago She stopped with a screech. They were just starting to run away when suddenly they heard what they all feared:
Horseshoes on the road ahead. The noise was getting closer. Them.

Maggot jumped to the ground and stood there, holding the ponies' heads and peering into the darkness. Clip-clop, clip-clop The rider was approaching. The sound of hooves echoed loudly. The air was still and misty.

"You'd better be hiding, Mr. Frodo," Sam said anxiously. You get out into the carriage and cover yourself with blankets,
And we'll put that cyclist back on the right path! He got off and went to the farmer. The Black Riders should to step over him to get closer to the cart.
Clop-clop, clop-clop. The rider was almost on top. Hello! My name is Farmer Maggot. The hooves that advance
They stopped abruptly. They thought they could vaguely make out an indistinct shape in the mist, a meter or two ahead.
"Well!" said the farmer, throwing the reins to Sam and striding forward. "Don't come any closer! What? What do you want, and where are I want to see Mr. Baggins. Have you seen him? said a muffled voice - but it was the voice of Merry Brandybuck.
A dark lantern was unveiled, and its light illuminated the astonished people's faces. The farmer's face. "Mr. Merry!" he exclaimed.
"Yes, of course! Who did you think it was?" asked Merry, stepping forward. As he emerged from the fog and their fears...





127


Once he had calmed down, he suddenly seemed to become an ordinary hobbit again.
size. He was riding a pony, and a scarf was wrapped around him. His neck and chin to protect him from the fog.

Frodo jumped out of the chariot to greet him.
"You're finally here!" said Merry. I was beginning to wonder if... you'd introduce yourself today, and I was just on my way back to supper. When the fog lifted, I arrived and got back on my horse.
I went to see Stock to check if you'd fallen into a ditch. But I... I couldn't tell you which way you came from. Where did you go? Did you find them, Mr. Maggot? In your duck pond?

No, I caught them trespassing on my property, said the farmer, and he almost... I set my dogs on them; but they'll tell you the whole s Without a doubt. Now, if you'll excuse me, Mr. Merry and Mr. Frodo and all that, I'd better go home. Mrs. Maggot will be here.
The night grew darker and more ominous.

He backed the cart into the aisle and turned it around. Well, "Good night everyone," he said. "It was a strange day, and not..." mistake. But all's well that ends well; although perhaps we should
I won't say anything until we reach our own door. I won't deny it. I'll be happy when I do. He lit his lanterns and stood up. Suddenly, he pulled a large basket out from under the seat.
"I was about to forget," he said. "Mrs. Maggot put it up for sale for..." Mr. Baggins, with his compliments. He passed it on and
They walked away, followed by a chorus of thanks and goodnights.

They watched the pale rings of light around his lanterns as they disappeared into the misty night. Suddenly, Frodo laughed: From the covered basket he was holding, the smell of mushrooms was rising.


5

"Now we'd better go home ourselves," said Merry. "There's..."
I can see that there's something strange about all this; but we'll have to wait until we... Get in.

They took the ferry route, which was straight and
well-maintained and bordered with large whitewashed stones. In about a hundred meters, this led them to the riverbank, where
There was a wide wooden jetty. A large, flat-bottomed ferry was moored alongside. The white bollards near the shore glittered in the li posts. Behind them, the mists in the flat fields were now above the hedges; but the water in front of them was dark, with only a
A few curling wisps, like steam, among the reeds near the skein. There seemed to be less fog on the other side.

Merry led the pony across a gangplank onto the ferry, and the others followed. Then Merry walked slowly away with a long pole. The Brandevin flowed slowly and widely in front of them.
On the other side, the bank was steep and a winding path led up it.

The path climbed from the farthest ledge. Lamps flickered. There. Behind it rose Buck Hill; and out of there, through
Scattered wisps of mist shone through many round windows, gleaming yellow and red. These were the windows of Brandy Hall, the old The home of the Brandeboucs.

Long ago, Gorhendad Oldbuck, head of the Oldbuck family, one of the oldest in the Marshes, if not the County,
had crossed the river, which formed the original eastern boundary of the land. He built (and excavated) Brandy Hall,
He changed his name to Brandybuck and settled in
to become master of what was practically a small, independent country. His family was constantly growing, and after his days off





129


continued to expand, until Brandy Hall occupied the entirety of
Situated on a low hill, it had three large entrance gates and numerous side doors, and about a hundred windows. The Brandybucks and the Many dependents then began digging burrows, and later a structure all around them. This is how Buckland, a
densely populated strip between the river and, a
a sort of Shire settlement. Its main village was Bucklebury, clustered on the riverbanks and slopes behind Brandy Hall.

The inhabitants of the Marsh were friendly towards the Buck-
the inhabitants, and the authority of the Master of the Hall (like the
The head of the Brandybuck family (as he was known) was still recognized as bordered by farmers between Stock and Rushey. But most the inhabitants of the old county regarded the Bucklanders as
Strange people, half-foreign in a way. However, as far as they were concerned, they weren't very different from other hobbits. of the Four Farthings. Except on one point: they were fond of boats, and some knew how to swim.

Their land was originally unprotected from the east; but on that side, they had built a hedge: the High Hay. Planted several generation The Brandywine Bridge, in a large loop away from the
the river, as far as Haysend (where the Withywindle emerged from the (Forest in the Brandywine): more than twenty miles from the end In conclusion. But, of course, it wasn't complete protection. The forest approached the hedge in many places.
The inhabitants of Bucklander kept their doors locked after nightfall, and that too was not common in the Shire.

The ferry was slowly crossing the water. The Buck-
The coast was getting closer. Sam was the only member of the a group that had never crossed the river before. He had a
A strange feeling as the slow murmur of the stream flowed by: its old life had faded behind, a dark adventure awaited us.
He scratched his head and, for a moment, had the passing wish that Mr. Frodo could have continued to live peacefully in Bag End. The four hobbits stepped off the ferry. Merry was tying the knot.

130

Pippin was already leading the pony along the path when Sam (who had turned around, as if to say goodbye) from the Shire) said in a hoa Look behind you, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?
On the back stage, under the distant spotlights, they could just make out a shape: it looked like a dark black package left behind. But as they watched, it seemed to move and sway, as if it were searching the ground. Then it crawled, or
He bent down and returned to the darkness beyond the lamps. "But what is this?" exclaimed Merry.
"Something is following us," said Frodo. "But don't ask me." Never again! Let's leave immediately! They hurried to...
the path leading to the top of the bank, but when they turned around the opposite bank was shrouded in mist and nothing could be seen.

Thank God you don't keep boats in the west.
"The riverbank!" said Frodo. "Can the horses cross the river?"

They can go ten miles north to the Brandywine Bridge - or
"They could swim," Merry replied. "Although I've never heard of a horse crossing the Brandywine. But what about what happened? Horses, I'll tell you later. Let's go inside and we can talk about it.
Very well! You and Pippin know the way; so I'll just take the path. Light it and tell Fatty Bolger you're coming. We'll see what happen Dinner and all that.

We had an early dinner with Farmer Maggot, said Frodo; but we could certainly use another one. You'll have it! Give me that basket! said Merry, and rode onward into the darkness.
There was some distance between Brandywine and Frodo's new home in Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and Brandy.
Hall on their left, and on the outskirts of Bucklebury, they struck the main road to Buckland which led south from the bridge.
About eight hundred meters further north, they reached an intersection. On their right, they followed this road for a few kilometers. I They finally arrived at a narrow gate in a thick hedge. Nothing.

131

The house could be glimpsed in the darkness: it was set back. The driveway was in the middle of a wide circle of lawn surrounded by a belt of low trees inside the outer hedge. Frodo had chosen it because it was in a secluded corner of the
It was the countryside, and there were no other dwellings nearby. He could come and go unnoticed. It had been built long ago by the Bra or family members who wished to escape from
Brandy Hall's hectic life for a while. He was an old...
a rustic-looking country house, resembling as much a hobbit house as a possible hobbit house: it was long and low, without an upper flo It had a turf roof, round windows and a large round door.

As they walked back up the green path from the gate, there were no lights.
The window was visible; the windows were dark and closed. Frodo. There was a knock at the door, and Fat Bolger opened it. A friend Light burst forth. They quickly slipped inside and closed them. They found themselves and the inner light. They were in a vast hall wit There were doors on each side; in front of them, a passage led to the back, to the middle of the house.

"So, what do you think?" asked Merry as she arrived.
the passage. We did our best in a short amount of time to make it
It looks like home. After all, Fatty and I only arrived here with the Last Wagon loaded yesterday.

Frodo looked around. It looked very much like home. Many of his favorite things-or Bilbo's things (they reminded him of him) (clearly o a comfortable and welcoming place; and he found himself wishing
that he had really come here to settle down and enjoy a peaceful retirement. It seemed unfair to have put his friends through all that. trouble; and he wondered again how he was going to get out of it. He had to tell them the news that he had to leave them so soon, indee They all went to bed.

"It's delicious!" he said with effort. "I hardly feel like we've moved at all."


132





The travelers hung up their coats and piled their bags on the floor. Merry led them into the corridor and opened a
The door at the far end. The glow of the fire burst forth, followed by a cloud of steam. A bath! cried Pepin. Oh, blessed Meriadoc! "In what order should we go?" asked Frodo. "The eldest first, or the fastest first? Either way, you'll be last, Master Peregrin."

"Count on me to make things better than this!" said Merry.
You can't start life in Crickhollow with a quarrel about baths.
In this room, there are three bathtubs and a copper pot filled with boiling water. Water. There are also towels, mats, and soap. Come i Hurry up !

Merry and Fatty entered the kitchen on the other side of the passageway and busied themselves with the final preparations. for a late supper. Snippets of competing songs drifted from the bathroom, mingled with the sounds of splashing and diving. Pippin's voice suddenly rose above the noise, along with others singing one of Bilbo's favorite bath songs.

Sing "hey!" for the bath at the end of the day that washes away the stubborn mud! He who does not sing is a fool.
Oh! Hot water is a noble thing!

Oh! What a sweet sound is that of falling rain! and the stream that leaps from hill to plain; but better than rain or rippling streams,

Oh! Cold water that we can pour when needed, swallow your thirst and truly rejoice; But beer is preferable if one is short of drink, and hot water flowed down my back.

Oh! The gushing water is beautiful. in a white fountain under the sky;
But never has the fountain rung so softly, like splashing warm water with my feet!





133


There was a huge splash and a shout of "Whoa!"
Frodo. It seemed that much of Pippin's bath had mimicked a fountain and leaped high into the air.

Merry went to knock on the door: How about we have supper and a beer? "The throat?" he asked. Frodo went out, drying his hair.

There's so much humidity in the air that I'm... "We need to finish the cooking," he said.

"Oh dear!" said Merry, looking inside. "The stone floor was..." Ming. "You should clean everything before taking anything." "Dinner's ready, Peregrin," he said. "Hurry up, or we won't wait for you." They dined in the kitchen, at a table near the fire.

"I suppose the three of you won't want any more mushrooms?" said Frédégar without much hope. "Yes, we will!" cried Pippin.
"They're mine!" said Frodo. "Given by Mrs. Maggot." A queen among farmers' wives. Take your greedy hands. Go, and I'll serve them.

Hobbits have a true passion for mushrooms, even surpassing...
The most voracious tastes of the powerful. A fact that, in part, explains why. It explains the long expeditions of young Frodo towards The fields of the Marshes, and the anger of the wounded Worm.
On this occasion, there was enough for everyone, even according to
The hobbit standards. There were also many other things to follow. And when they had finished, even Fat Bolger sighed. They sighed contentedly. They pushed back the table and pulled up chairs around the fire.

"We'll clear that up later," said Merry. "Now, tell me everything!" I imagine you've had some adventures, which you haven't. That's perfectly fine without me. I want a full report; and above all, I want to know what went wrong with old Maggot, and Why was he talking to me like that? He almost seemed... scared, if that's possible.

"We were all scared," Pippin said after a pause.
Frodo stared at the fire without saying a word. You would.
You would have been the same, if you had been pursued for two days by Black Cavaliers.


134





And what are they?

"Black figures riding black horses," replied Pippin.
Frodo doesn't want to talk, so I'll tell you the whole story from the beginning. He then gave a full account of their journey from the As they left Hobbiton, Sam offered various forms of support: nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent.

"I think you've mixed everything up," said Merry, "if
I hadn't seen that black shape on the landing platform - and
I detected a strange tone in Maggot's voice. What do you think of all this, Frodo?

"Cousin Frodo was very close," said Pippin. But...
The time has come for him to reveal himself. Until now, we've had no other clue than Farmer Maggot's guess, or something like that, tha "That was just a guess," said Frodo hurriedly. "Wasp, on the other hand, does it." I know nothing.
"Old Maggot is a clever one," said Merry. "A lot of things are going on..." behind his round face, this did not show in his words. I heard that he used to go there at one time.
and he has a reputation for knowing quite a few strange people
But you can at least tell us, Frodo, if you think that... But you can at least tell us, Frodo, if you think that... His assumption is g

"I think," Frodo replied slowly, "that was a good guess, as far as it goes. There's a connection with Bilbo's old adventures. Things, a Say he's looking, for himself or for me. I'm scared too, if you want

Know that this is not a joke at all; and that I am not safe here or anywhere else. He looked around him, at the windows and the walls. as if he feared they might suddenly give in. The others
They looked at him in silence and exchanged meaningful glances. "It'll be out in a minute," Pippin whispered to Merry.
Merry nodded.

"Well!" said Frodo at last, straightening himself up and straightening up.
He stepped back, as if he had made up his mind. I can't keep this a secret any longer. I have something to tell you. But I don't know. I'm not really sure where to start.


135

"I think I could help you," Merry said softly, "by telling you. I have some of it myself."
"What do you mean?" asked Frodo, looking at him anxiously. "Well, my dear old Frodo: you are unhappy because..." You don't know how to say goodbye. You wanted to leave.
County, of course. But danger caught up with you sooner than you expected. As planned, you now decide to leave immediately. And you don't want that. We are truly sorry for you.

Frodo opened his mouth and closed it again. His gaze...
The surprise was so comical that they laughed. Dear old Frodo!
said Pippin. You really thought you'd scattered dust everywhere? Our eyes? You weren't careful or clever enough. For that! You had obviously planned to go there and say
Goodbye to all your favorite places since April. We have I kept hearing you mutter, "Should I ever lower my eyes?"
"Back in this valley again, I wonder," and things like that. Pretending you had no more money, and
Selling your beloved Bag End to those Sackville-Bagginses! And all those intimate conversations with Gandalf!

"My God!" exclaimed Frodo. "I thought I'd been both." Prudent and intelligent. I don't know what Gandalf would say. So the whole county is discussing my departure?

Oh no! said Merry. Don't worry! The secret
It won't last long, of course; but for now, I think so. Only the conspirators know that. After all, it's worth remembering. We know you well and are often with you. I can usually guess what you're thinking. I knew Bilbo too.
To be honest, I've been watching you closely.
Since he left, I thought you would have pursued him sooner.
or later; in fact, I expected you to leave earlier, and lately we have been very anxious. We were very afraid that you
You could slip away from us and disappear suddenly, all alone, just like he did. Since this spring, we have remained vigilant. and we did a good part of the planning on our own initiative. They're not going to get away with it that easily!

"But I must go," said Frodo. "There is no other way, dear friends. It is terrible for us all, but there is no use trying."


136




to keep me safe. Since you've guessed so much, please help me, and don't stop me! "You don't understand!" said Pippin. "You must leave-and"
We must come too. Merry and I will go with you. Sam is a great guy, and he'd jump off a dragon.
his throat to save you, if he did not stumble on his own feet; but you will need more than one companion in your dangerous adventure.

"My dear and much-loved hobbits!" said Frodo in a deep voice.
I moved. But I couldn't afford it. I decided that a long time ago. You talk about danger, but you don't understand. That's not the case Treasure hunt, no return trip. I'm flying from mortal peril to mortal peril.

"Of course we understand," Merry said firmly. "It's
This is why we decided to come. We know that the Ring is not
It's a question that might seem silly; but we will do our best to help you against the enemy. "The Ring!" exclaimed Frodo, now completely amazed.
"Yes, the Ring," said Merry. "My dear old hobbit, you don't..." Give way to your friends' curiosity. I've known of the Ring's existence In fact; but since he evidently considered it a secret, I kept silent. I had all this knowledge in my head until we formed our plot. I He was young, and he was also more cautious - but he wasn't worried.
That's enough. If you want to know how I discovered it, I'll tell you. "Go on!" said Frodo in a weak voice.
It was the Sackville-Bagginses who caused his downfall, as you know. As one might expect. One day, a year before the Party, I happened In the distance, the S.-B.s appeared, coming towards us. Bilbo slowed down, and poof! he disappeared. I was so...
I was surprised to find that I barely had the strength to hide in a more ordinary place; but I climbed over the hedge and walked on.

along the edge of the field inside. I was looking out at the road. After the S.-B. had passed, he looked Bilbo straight in the eyes.


137

when he suddenly reappeared. I caught a glimpse of a golden glint as he put something back in his trouser pocket.

After that, I kept my eyes open. In fact, I confess I spied. But you have to admit it was very intriguing, and I was just a teenager. I "You've read his book!" exclaimed Frodo. "My God!" Above! Nothing is certain?
"Not very prudent, I'd say," said Merry. "But I only..."
He only glanced at it quickly, and it was hard to make out. He never
I left the book somewhere. I wonder what became of it. I'd like to... Another look. You understand, Frodo? No. It wasn't in Cul-de-Sac. He must have taken it.
"Well, as I was saying," Merry continued, "I kept my knowledge."
I kept to myself until this spring, when things got serious. We formed our conspiracy; and since we were serious, and We were serious, we weren't very scrupulous. You are
This is no small matter, and Gandalf is even worse. But if you wish to be introduced to our chief investigator, I can produce him. "Where is he?" asked Frodo, looking around as if he had been expecting it. A masked, sinister figure emerged from a cupboard.
"Go on, Sam!" said Merry; and Sam stood up.
A face scarlet up to his ears. Here's our information gatherer. And he gathered a lot of it, I can tell you, even before he was finally himself as being on parole, and it dried up.

"Sam!" cried Frodo, feeling that astonishment could reach its peak. Furthermore, and unable to decide whether he was angry, Amused, relieved, or simply stupid.

"Yes, sir!" said Sam. "Excuse me, sir! But I meant..."
This is no harm to you, Mr. Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf. It doesn't matter. He has good sense, mind you; and when you said, "Go alone," h "But it doesn't seem like I can trust anyone," said Frodo. Sam looked at him unhappily. "It all depends on what you..."
138





You want to? Put Merry on. You can count on us to be there for you every step of the way. Through thick and thin, all the way. And you But you can't trust us to leave you to face your problems alone and go away. He left without a word. We are your friends, Frodo. In sho There you have it. We know most of what Gandalf told you. We know a great deal about the Circle. We are terrified, but we come with you

And after all, sir, Sam added, you should have taken the
Advice from the elves. Gildor said you should take them as they should be taken, and you can't deny it.

"I don't deny it," said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now smiling. "I don't deny it, but I'll never believe you're asleep." I'm going to give you a good kick to get you snoring again, whether you snore or not. Make sure of it.

"You are a bunch of treacherous scoundrels!" he said, turning towards
the others. But God bless you! he said, laughing, rising and waving. I give in to his embrace. I will follow Gildor's advice. If the da If the darkness weren't so profound, I would dance for joy. Even so, I can't. This has helped me feel happy; happier than I've been in I was dreading this evening.

Perfect! It's settled. Hooray for Captain Frodo and
"Company!" they cried; and they danced around him. Happy and Pippin began a song, which they had apparently learned ready for the occas

It was created based on the song of the dwarves which began when Bilbo, during his adventure of long ago, sang to the same tune: Farewell, we call to the hearth and the hall! Even if the wind blows and the rain falls, we must leave before dawn.
Far beyond the woods and high mountains.

In Rivendell, where Elves still live
In the clearings at the foot of the misty hill,

Across moors and deserts, we ride at full speed, And then, we cannot say.




139


With enemies before us, terror behind us, our bed will be under the sky.

Until our labor is finally finished, our journey is over, our race is over. We must leave! We must leave! We're leaving before dawn!

"Very well!" said Frodo. "But in that case, there are many..."
Things to do before going to bed - safely tucked away, for tonight anyway. "Oh! That was poetry!" said Pippin. "You really mean that? Start before dawn?"
"I don't know," replied Frodo. "I'm afraid of those Black Riders."
And I'm sure it's dangerous to stay in one place for long, especially somewhere I was known to be going. And Gildor too. I was advised not to wait. But I would very much like to see Gandalf. I could see that even Gildor was troubled when he I heard that Gandalf never appeared. It really depends on
Two questions. How soon could the Cavaliers arrive in Buldebury? And when could we leave? It will take a long time. preparation.

The answer to the second question, said Merry, is that
We could leave in an hour. I've practically got everything ready.
thing. There are five ponies in a stable on the other side of the fields; shops All fishing gear is packed, except for some spare clothing and perishable food.
"It would seem to be a very effective conspiracy," Frodo said. "But what about the Black Riders? Would they be safe? Wait a day for Gan It all depends on what you think the Cavaliers would do.
"If they found you here," Merry replied, "they might..."
They would have arrived here long ago, of course, if they hadn't been stopped at the north gate, where the hedge slopes down to the riv The riverbank, just on this side of the bridge. The guards at the gate wouldn't let them through at night, even though they might try t


140

at least until they manage to get a message to the Master of the hall - because they wouldn't want to see the Knights, and would certainly be frightened by it. But, of course,
Buckland cannot long withstand a determined attack. And it is possible that that very morning a Black Rider who was riding
He stood up and asked if Mr. Baggins would be allowed to pass. He was. It is generally assumed that you will return to live in Crickhollow.

Frodo sat for a moment, thinking. I have made my decision.
"Listen," he finally said. "I'll start tomorrow, as soon as possible."
It's daylight. But I'm not taking to the road: it would be safer to wait. Here rather than there. If I go through the North Gate, my de The information coming from Buckland will be immediately public, instead of being kept secret for at least several days, as might other The bridge and the eastern road, near the borders, will certainly
It will be necessary to closely monitor whether or not a rider manages to enter Buckland.
We don't know how many there are; but there are at least two, and perhaps more. The only thing to do is to head off in a completely une

But that can only mean going in! he said
Fredegar was horrified. You can't even consider doing that. It's just as dangerous as the Black Riders.

"Not quite," said Merry. "It looks very hopeless, but..."
I think Frodo is right. It's the only way out without
followed immediately. With luck, we could get a considerable number to start.

"But you won't stand a chance," he objected.
Fredegar. Nobody ever gets lucky there. You'll get lost. People don't go there.

"Oh yes, they do!" said Merry. "The Brandybucks come in-occasionally, when the crisis hits them. We have a private..."
Entrance. Frodo went in there once, a long time ago. I've visited it several times. Times: usually in broad daylight, of course, when t "Well, do as you please!" said Frédéraire. "I'm more afraid of that than anything I know."




141

The stories about it are a nightmare; but my vote hardly counts, since I'm not making the journey. Nevertheless, I'm very glad someone when he appears, as I am sure he will not be long in coming.

Despite all the affection he felt for Frodo, Fat Bolger had no desire to leave the Shire, nor to see what lay beyond. His family Originally from the East End, from Budgeford to Bridgefields, he had in fact never crossed the Brandywine Bridge. His task, according t The plan was to stay put and deal with the curious, and to maintain for as long as possible the pretense that Mr. Baggins was still
He lived in Crickhollow. He had even brought some old
Frodo's clothes were to help him play his role. They were small. I thought about how dangerous this part could turn out to be.

"Excellent!" said Frodo, understanding the plan. He wouldn't have been able to leave a message for Gandalf.
Wise. I don't know if these Knights can read or not, of course, but I shouldn't have dared risk a written message.
in case they come in and search the house. But if Fatty is ready to hold the fortress, and I can be sure Gandalf knows it.

The way we've evolved, that's what makes my decision. I'm going into the Old Forest tomorrow morning.

"Well, there you have it," said Pippin. "All in all, I would prefer
We have more work than Fatty's - we're waiting here until the Black Riders come.

"Wait until you are well inside the forest," said Frédégar.
You'll regret not coming back here with me before this time tomorrow.

"There's no point in discussing it anymore," said Merry. I still need to tidy up and add the final touches to the
I'm going to pack my bags before going to bed. I'll call you all before sunrise.

Once finally in bed, Frodo could not sleep for
For a while. His legs ached. He was glad to be on horseback in the morning. Finally, he drifted into a vague dream, in which He seemed to be looking out of a high window, above a dark area.


142





a sea of tangled trees. Below, among the roots, there was
He could hear the sounds of creatures crawling and sniffing. He was certain of it. They would eventually unmask him.

Then he heard a noise in the distance. At first, he thought a strong wind was blowing through the leaves of the forest.
He knew it wasn't leaves, but the sound of the distant sea; a sound he had never heard in his life, though it had often disturbed his d outdoors. There were finally no trees. He was on a
The moor was dark, and a strange smell of salt hung in the air. Looking up, he saw a tall white tower before him, standing alone on a h The tower and the sea. He began to climb laboriously up the ridge towards the tower: but suddenly a light appeared in the sky, and a so

6





Frodo woke with a start. The room was still dark. "Happy birthday!" he was standing there, a candle in his hand, and tapping on the door with the other one. Very well! What is it? asked Frodo, still shaken and bewildered.

"What?!" exclaimed Merry. "It's time to get up. It's 5:30 PM."
Four o'clock and thick fog. Come on! Sam's already making breakfast. Ready. Even Pippin's up. I'm just going to saddle the ponies. and go get the one who is supposed to carry the luggage. Wake him up
That lazy bum! At least he has to get up and say goodbye to us.

Shortly after six o'clock, the five hobbits were ready to begin. Fat Bolger was still yawning. They slipped quietly away. Merry went ah He followed a path that crossed a grove behind the
house, then crossed several fields. The leaves of the trees were shiny, and every twig dripped; the grass was
Gray with cold dew. Everything was still, and distant sounds could be heard. Something seemed close and clear: poultry chirping in a ya to close the door of a distant house.

In their shelter, they found the ponies: sturdy little creatures of the kind hobbits liked, not fast, but good for a long time After a day's work, they mounted their horses and soon galloped off into the mist that seemed to part reluctantly before them. and following them closely, menacingly. After driving for about an hour, slowly and without a word, they saw the hedge.
A figure suddenly appeared before us. It was tall and covered in a net of silvery spiderwebs. How are you going to get out of this? Fredegar asked.
"Follow me!" said Merry, "and you'll see." He turned towards
They turned left along the hedge and soon came to a point where it curved inwards, running along the edge of a hollow. A cutout


144





It had been built, at some distance from the hedge, and sloped gently down towards the ground. Its walls were made of brick. the sides, which rose steadily, until suddenly they curved upwards and formed a tunnel that plunged deep under the hedge and It came out through the hollow on the other side.

That's where Fat Bolger stopped. Goodbye, Frodo! he said.
I wish you hadn't gone into the forest. I just hope you do. No need to be rescued before the end of the day. Good luck to you.
- today and every day!

If nothing worse is coming, I
"We shall be in luck," said Frodo. "Tell Gandalf to hurry. Eastbound: we shall soon be back there and will travel as fast as "Yes, we can. Goodbye!" they shouted, and they ran down the slope and disappeared from Fredegar's sight in the tunnel.

It was dark and damp. At the opposite end, it was closed off by a
The gate was made of thick iron bars. Merry climbed down and opened it. He pushed the gate open, and when they had all gone through, he Again. The door slammed shut, and the lock clicked. The sound was a bad omen.

There! said Merry. You have left the Shire and you are now... outside, and on the outskirts of. "Are these stories true?" asked Pippin.
"I don't know what stories you're talking about," replied Merry.
You mean those old bogeyman stories Fatty's nurses used to tell? Him, about goblins, wolves, and things like that, I I should say no. In any case, I don't believe them. But the forest is strange. Everything there is much more alive.
They are more aware of what is happening, so to speak, than things are in the Shire. And the trees don't like strangers. They watch. They generally just observe you, for as long as necessary, for the duration of the day, and don't do much. Sometimes, the most
The hostile plants might drop a branch, or send out a root, or grab you with a long trail. But at night, things can be different. It's I had the impression that all the trees were whispering in each other's ears as they passed by, sharing news and intrigues in an incomp





145


The branches swayed and groped without a breath of wind. They say that... trees really do move and can surround strangers and To surround them. In fact, a long time ago, they attacked the Hedge: they came and settled right next to it and leaned over it. But the hobbits arrived and cut down hundreds of trees, and they made a great bonfire in the forest and burned all the ground. along a long strip east of the hedge. After that, the trees gave up the attack, but they became very hostile. There is still a a vast, bare space not far from where the bonfire had been lit.

"Are only trees dangerous?" asked Pippin.

There are various strange creatures living deep in the forest, and on the other side, said Merry, or at least that's what I've heard; b paths. As soon as you enter, you find open paths; but
They seem to move and change from time to time in a strange fashion. Not far from this tunnel is, or was for a long time, the beginning Bonfire Clearing, then more or less in our direction, eastward and a little further north. That's the path I'm going to try to find.

The hobbits then left the tunnel door and crossed the wide hollow. On the other side, a faint path led up to the forest floor, a hundre the trees. Turning around, they could see the dark line of the hedge through the already thick tree trunks.
around them. Looking ahead, they saw nothing but tree trunks of countless sizes and shapes: straight or curved, twisted, leaning, squat or slender, smooth or gnarled and branched;
and all the stems were green or grey, covered with moss and slimy, hairy outgrowths.

Merry seemed quite cheerful. You'd better take the lead.
"Go on and find that path," Frodo told him. "Don't let us get lost. We'll either forget which way the hedge is!"

They chose a path through the trees, and their ponies
He advanced with difficulty, carefully avoiding the numerous snakes and tangled roots. There was no undergrowth. The ground


146

The situation was steadily worsening, and as they advanced, it seemed that the trees grew taller, darker, and thicker. There was no There was no noise, except for a few drops of moisture that occasionally fell through the still leaves. For the moment, there were no w movement among the branches; but they all received an uncomfortably pleasant feeling of being casually observed
Approval, which turns into aversion, even hostility. The feeling
They grew steadily, until they found themselves quickly raising their heads. or by glancing over their shoulder, as if they were expecting a sudden blow.
There was still no sign of a path, and the trees
seemed to constantly block their path. Pippin suddenly felt he couldn't take it anymore and, without warning, he blurted out A shout. Hey! Hey! he shouted. I'm not going to do anything. Please let me through!

The others stopped, surprised; but the cry fell as if muffled by a heavy curtain. There was neither echo nor reply, yet... The wood seemed to become denser and more alert than before.

"If I were you, I wouldn't shout," said Merry. "That's right." More harm than good.

Frodo began to wonder if it was possible to find a way and if he had been right to bring the others. in that abominable wood. Merry looked all around.
to the side, and already seemed hesitant about which direction to take. Pippin I noticed. You didn't take long to lose us, he said. But at
At that moment, Merry let out a hiss of relief and pointed ahead.

"Well, well!" he said. "These trees are moving. There's the
The bonfire grove is in front of us (at least I hope so), but the path to get there... It seems to have moved!

The light became sharper as they advanced. Suddenly, they emerged from the trees and found themselves in a wide circle of space. Above to be able to see the morning rise and the mist dissipate.
However, the sun was not yet high enough to illuminate the interior.





147


the clearing, although its light shone on the treetops. The leaves were all denser and greener at the edges of the clearing, surroundin only short grass and many tall plants: faded and rough edging, tendrils and wood parsley, fireweed seeds turning into fluffy ash, and n After the nearby forest, the garden seemed charming and cheerful.

The hobbits felt encouraged and looked up hopefully at the daylight expanding in the sky. At the far end of the clearing there was a ga and open above, although from time to time trees appeared and shaded it with their dark branches. At the top of this path
They rode on. They continued to climb gently, but now they went much faster, and with more heart; for it seemed to them that the forest had given way and would let them pass, finally without hindrance.

But after a while, the air began to become hot and stifling. The trees drew closer again on either side, and they could no longer
They could see far ahead. Stronger than ever, they felt again... the ill will of the wood pressing against them. A silence so heavy was The sound of their ponies' hooves clattering on dead leaves and sometimes falling on hidden roots seemed to echo in the void.
their ears. Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage them, but his voice turned into a whisper.

O you who wander in the dark lands
Do not despair! For even if they stand in the darkness, every forest must eventually come to an end. and watch the sun set:
the setting sun, the rising sun,
the end of the day, or the beginning of the day.

In the east as in the west, all forests must perish...

Failure... The moment he uttered the word, his voice trailed off into silence. The air seemed heavy, and the words labored. Just behind them, a large branch fell from an old overhang.


148

A tree fell across the path. The trees seemed to be closing in on them.

They don't like any of it, whether it's the end or the failure, he said. Happy. I shouldn't sing anymore for the moment. Wait until we do it.
We'll reach the edge, then we'll turn around and show them our strength. Chorus!

He spoke in a cheerful tone, and if he felt great anxiety, he expressed it. They didn't show it. The others didn't respond. They were d A heavy weight was inexorably pressing down on Frodo's heart, and with every step forward, he now regretted never having...
He considered defying the threat posed by the trees. He was.
Indeed, I was about to stop and suggest going back (if that
(was still possible), when things took a new turn. The path stopped climbing and remained almost horizontal for a moment.
The dark trees parted, and before them they could see the path stretching out almost straight ahead. Ahead of them, but at some distanc There stood a green, treeless hill, rising like a bald head out of the surrounding woods. The path seemed to be taking shape.
directly for that.

They then set off again, delighted with the
I thought about climbing to the top of the forest for a while. The path went down, then up again. upwards, finally leading them to the foot of the steep hillside.
There, she left the trees and blended into the grass. The woods rose up
all around the hill, like thick hair ending abruptly in a circle, around a shaved cap.

The hobbits led their ponies uphill, turning and turning.
until they reached the summit. There, they stood and gazed at the surroundings. The air was bright and sunny, but hazy; and they Visibility was limited. The fog was very close.
It had almost completely disappeared; however, some vestiges remained in the hollows of the woods, and to the south of them, in a deep Crossing the forest from one side to the other, the fog still rose like steam or wisps of white smoke.

"There," said Merry, pointing to the line, "there's the line." It runs down the Withywindle and





149

It flows southwest through the heart of the forest to join the Brandywine below Haysend. We don't want to go that way!
The Withywindle Valley is reputed to be the strangest part of the region. The entire wood - the center from which all the strangeness o so to speak.

The others looked in the direction Merry had indicated.
But they could scarcely make out anything but mists above the dampness and deep clefts in the valley; and beyond, the southern half of view.

The sun at the hilltop was beginning to warm things up. It must have been about eleven o'clock; but the autumn mist still lingered, pre To the west, they could distinguish neither the hedgerow nor the Brandevin valley beyond. To the north, where
They looked with the most hope, they saw nothing that could be the line of the great Eastern Route, for which they were. They were on a The horizon was veiled .
On the southeast side, the terrain descended very steeply, as if the slopes of the hill extended far below
trees, like island shores that are actually the slopes of a mountain rising from the deep waters. They were sitting on the verdant edge They gazed at the woods below while eating their midday meal. At sunrise and in the afternoon, they
In the distance, to the east, the grey-green lines of the Downs could be seen, on the other side. This was delightful. This greatly amazed them; for it was good to see something beyond.
the limits of the wood, although they did not want to go in that direction, if they could avoid it: the Barrow-downs had a side as sini

Finally, they decided to leave. The path that had led them to the hill reappeared to the north. service side; but they hadn't followed him very far before becoming
aware that she was regularly curving to the right. Soon, she began to... he must have descended quickly, and they assumed that this mus heading towards the Withywindle Valley: not at all


150





the direction they wished to take. After some discussion, they decided to abandon this misleading path and head north; for, although th The road must go this way, and it can't be many kilometers away. Also to the north, and to the left of the road, the land
The terrain seemed drier and clearer as we went up the slopes.
where the trees were less dense, and where pines and firs had replaced oaks, ash trees and other strange and nameless trees of the denser wood.

At first, their choice seemed wise: they got along well at
They were traveling at a decent speed, but as soon as they caught sight of the sun, they slowed down. In an open clearing, they seemed eastward. But after a while, the trees began to close up again, right where they had looked thinner from a distance.
and less tangled. Then the deep folds of the soil were untangled.
unexpectedly covered, like the ruts of giant wheels or wide moats and hollow roads, long abandoned and cluttered with
brambles. These were usually found across their path and could only be crossed by descending and then climbing back up in a hurry. which was problematic and difficult with their ponies.
When they went down, they found the hollow filled with thick
impenetrable bushes and undergrowth, which, one way or another, would not yield the right of way on the left, but only yield when they right; and they had to travel some distance along the bottom
before they could find a way up the opposite bank. Each time they climbed out, the trees seemed deeper and darker; and always to the le and they were forced to go to the right and down.

After an hour or two, they had lost all clear sense of direction, even though they knew perfectly well that they had stopped long ago. They were not allowed to go north. They were pushed back and were... simply following a route chosen for them - eastward and southwards, into the heart of the forest and not outside of it.

The afternoon was drawing to a close when they rushed off and stumbled into a fold wider and deeper than any they had ever seen. had not yet met. It was so steep and so overhanging that it proved





151
It was impossible to get out again, either forwards or backwards. Pupils, without abandoning their ponies and their luggage. They could do nothing but follow the trend - downwards.
The ground became soft and, in places, marshy; springs appeared in the banks, and soon they found themselves following a stream
which trickled and murmured through a flowerbed overgrown with weeds. Then the ground began to sink rapidly and the stream became very And noisy, it flowed and rushed down the slope at full speed. They were in
a deep, dimly lit ravine, overlooked by very tall trees. After stumbling along the stream for some time, they

He suddenly emerged from the darkness. As if he had walked through a door.
They saw the sunlight before them. Coming from the opening, they realized they had managed to descend through a
a crevice in a steep, high embankment, almost a cliff. At its foot lay a vast expanse of grass and reeds; and in the distance, one coul I glimpsed another bank, almost as steep. A golden afternoon.
The last rays of the sun settled, warm and drowsy, on the hidden earth. Between them, a dark river meandered lazily.
The brown water, bordered by ancient willows, formed an arch above with willows, blocked by fallen willows, and scattered with Thousands of withered willow leaves. The air was heavy with them, floating yellow on the branches; for there was a
A warm, gentle breeze blew softly through the valley, and the reeds rustled and the willow branches crackled.

"Well, now I at least have some idea of where we are!" said Merry. "We came from almost the opposite direction." Just what we expected. It's the Withywindle River! I'll keep exploring.

He fainted in the sunlight and disappeared into the
tall grass. After a while, he reappeared and reported that
There was relatively firm ground between the foot of the cliff and the river; in places, the firm grass sloped down to the water's edge A path winds along this side of the river. If we turn
going left and following it, we will inevitably end up exiting to the east towards the forest. "I dare say it!" said Pippin. "Well, if things continue this way."

152





far away, and doesn't simply lead us into a swamp to abandon us there. Who do you think composed this piece, and why? I'm sure of it. It wasn't in our interest. I'm starting to have serious doubts about that.
The forest and everything in it, and I'm beginning to believe everything
Stories about that. And do you have any idea how far we are from the east? Should he leave?

"No," said Merry, "I haven't done it. I have absolutely no idea. We're so far out in the Withywindle, or who would? I come here often e I neither see nor imagine any other way out.

Having nothing else to do, they went outside, and Merry led them along the path he had discovered. Everywhere,
The reeds and grasses were lush and tall, in places well above their heads; but once found, the path was easy to follow, for it turned and twisted, picking out the background sound among
the peat bogs and the ponds. Here and there, it crossed other streams, rushing down the ravines to the Withywindle, from the heights forest lands, and in these places there were tree trunks or bundles of branches carefully arranged across them.

The hobbits began to get very hot. There were armies of
Flies of all kinds buzzed around their ears, and in the afternoon the sun burned their backs. Finally, they arrived suddenly. in the dim shade; large grey branches stretched across the path. Each step forward was more difficult than the last.
Drowsiness seemed to spring from the ground and rise to the surface, their legs, and gently fall from the sky onto their heads. and the eyes.

Frodo felt his chin drop and his head nod. Right in front of him, at the sight of him, Pippin fell to his knees. Frodo stopped. It's... "This isn't going to work," he heard Merry say. "I can't go any further with..."
I need rest. I need a nap. It's cool under the willows. Fewer flies!

Frodo didn't like that. Come on! he cried.
We can't take a nap yet. We have to get out of the forest first. But the others were too far away to care. Next to them, Sam stayed the Suddenly, Frodo himself felt sleep overcoming him.




153


My head was spinning. There seemed to be no sound in the air.
The flies had stopped buzzing. Only a faint noise could be heard on the ground. At the edge of hearing, a slight rustling like a half-w It seemed that something was moving in the branches above him. He raised his heavy eyes and saw, leaning over him, an immense willow tr It appeared immense, its tentacular branches rising as if stretching out arms with numerous long-fingered hands, its knot and twisted t While the branches moved. The leaves trembled against the bright light. The sky dazzled him, and he collapsed, remaining lying where he on the grass.

Merry and Pippin shuffled forward and lay down.
They crouched down, their backs against the trunk of the willow tree. Behind them,
Wide cracks opened to receive them as the tree swayed and creaked. They looked up at the gray and yellow leaves,
moving gently against the light and singing. They closed their eyes, and then it seemed to them they could almost hear words, beautiful They were captivated and fell into a deep sleep at its feet, by the great grey willow.

Frodo lay there for a moment, fighting the sleep that had overtaken him; then, with effort, he painfully got up.

Again. He felt an irresistible need for fresh water. Wait.
"Me, Sam," he stammered. "I need to wash my feet for a minute."

Half asleep, he wandered towards the riverbank.
of the tree, where large, winding roots plunged into the stream, like gnarled dragonets bending down to drink.
He straddled one of them and dipped his burning feet in the cool, brownish water; and there, he too suddenly fell asleep with his back to the tree.

Sam sat down, scratched his head, and yawned like a
cave. He was worried. The afternoon was drawing to a close, and he found this sudden drowsiness strange. There is more
Behind all of this, there was only the sun and the warm air, he murmured to himself. I don't like this big tree. I don't trust it. List Singing songs about sleep is unacceptable! That's completely wrong!


154





He struggled to his feet and staggered away to see what was happening. He had become one of the ponies. He noticed that two had strayed He had made good progress along the path; and he had just caught up with them and was leading them back to the others, when he heard Two sounds; one loud, the other faint but very clear. It was the sound of a heavy object falling into water;
The other was a noise similar to the creaking of a lock when a door opens slowly and closes quickly.

He rushed to the shore. Frodo was in the water, very close to the edge, and a large tree root seemed to cover him and hold him down, bu He grabbed him by the jacket and pulled him out from under the root; and then, with difficulty, he hauled him onto the bank. Almost awa
"You know, Sam," he said finally, "the monstrous tree. I felt it! The big root twisted around and gave me a tip!" "You were dreaming, I imagine, Mr. Frodo," said Sam.
You shouldn't sit in such a place if you're sleepy.
"And the others?" asked Frodo. "I wonder what kind of dreams they have." They walked around the tree, then
Sam understood the click he had heard. Pippin had
disappeared. The crack in which he had lain had closed. together, so that no crack was visible. Merry was trapped: another crack had closed around his waist; his legs
He was lying outside, but the rest of his body was inside a dark opening, the edges of which gripped like a pair of pincers.

Frodo and Sam first struck the trunk of the tree where Pippin
They were lying down. They then struggled frantically to pry open the jaws of the crack that was holding poor Merry. It was completely

"What a horrible thing has happened!" cried Frodo, mad with rage. "Why..."
Will we ever reach that terrible forest? I wish we were all back. To Crickhollow! He kicked the tree with all his might, watch out! less than his own feet. A barely perceptible shiver ran through him. The stem and up to the branches; the leaves rustled and whispered, but with a faint, distant sound of laughter.


155

"I suppose we don't have an axe in our luggage, sir. Frodo?" asked Sam.

"I brought a small axe to chop firewood," said Frodo. "It wouldn't be of much use."

"Wait a minute!" exclaimed Sam, struck by an idea suggested by Firewood. We could do something with fire! "It's possible," said Frodo doubtfully. "We might succeed in..." Pippin was roasting alive inside.
We could start by trying to hurt or scare this tree,
"said Sam vehemently. If that doesn't let them go, I'll knock him down, if I have to gnaw him. He ran towards the ponies and shortly af Back with two boxes of tinder and a hatchet.

They quickly gathered dry grass, leaves and pieces of bark; and made a pile of broken twigs and cut sticks. They piled them against the trunk on the other side of the prisoners' tree. As soon as Sam lit a spark
Thrown into the tinder, it ignited the dry grass and caused a burst of flames. And the smoke rose. The twigs crackled. Small flames lea He burned it. A tremor ran through the entire willow.
The leaves seemed to whistle above their heads in a hiss of pain and anger. A piercing scream rose from Merry, and from afar Inside the tree, they heard Pippin let out a muffled cry.

"Turn it off! Turn it off!" Merry shouted. "He'll force me in. Two, otherwise. He said it!" "Who? What?" cried Frodo, rushing to the other side of the tree.
"Turn it off! Turn it off!" begged Merry. The branches of the
The willow began to sway violently. A sound like the wind rising and spreading to all the branches was heard.

other trees nearby, as if they had dropped a stone into the peaceful sleep of the river valley, creating ripples of anger that spread t The small fire was extinguished, and the sparks were crushed. But Frodo, without
Any clear idea of his reasons for acting this way, or what he hoped to achieve, was lost. Along the way, they were shouting for help! H He could barely hear his own shrill voice: it was


156





carried away from him by the willow wind and drowned in a
The rustling of the leaves, as soon as the words left his mouth. I felt desperate: lost and bewildered.

He stopped abruptly. There was an answer, or so he thought. He considered it; but it seemed to be coming from behind him, far below, do He listened, and soon there was no longer any doubt: someone was... singing a song; a deep and joyful voice sang carefree and joyfully,

Hey dol! Happy dol, ring a bell at dong dillo! Ring a dong! Jump along! Fal lal the willow! Tom Bom, happy Tom, Tom Bombadillo! Half hopeful and half frightened by a new danger, Frodo, Sam, and Sam stood motionless. Suddenly, a long rope shot out.
From nonsensical words (or at least, that's what they seemed to be), the voice rose, loud and clear, and he began this song:

Hey! Come joyful dol! derry dol! My darling! The wind and the feathered starling fly away.
Down below, at the foot of the hill, shining in the sun, Waiting on the threshold for the cold starlight, There is my lovely lady, the Thin as a willow twig, clearer than water. The water lilies of Old Tom Bombadil
He skips home. Can you hear him singing? Hey! Come joyful dol! derry dol! and joyous-o,
Golden berry, golden berry, joyous yellow berry! Poor old Willow-man, you hide your roots! Tom is in a hurry. Evening will follow day. Tom returns home, bringing back water lilies. Hey! Come to Derry Dol! Can you hear me singing?
Frodo and Sam remained motionless, as if spellbound. The wind blew. The leaves fell silently back onto the stiff branches. There was another explosion of singing, then suddenly, skipping and





157


Dancing along the path, above the reeds appeared a

an old, battered hat with a high crown and a long blue feather, stuck in the group. With another leap and a bound, he arrived
A man appeared on the horizon, or so it seemed. In any case, he was too tall and heavy for a hobbit, though not quite tall enough for o The big men, although he made enough noise that only one could object, with big yellow boots on his thick legs, and charging
He slid through the grass and rushes like a cow coming down to drink. He wore a blue coat and had a long brown beard; his eyes were blu and bright, and his face was red like a ripe apple, but wrinkled with a hundred laugh lines. In his hands, he carried
On a large sheet of paper, as if on a tray, a small pile of white water lilies.
"Help!" cried Frodo and Sam, who ran towards him with their hands outstretched. Oh! Oh! Gently! cried the old man, holding him back.
with one hand, and they stopped dead, as if they had been struck dead. Now, my lads, where are you going, to smoke? Like a bellows? What's the problem then? Do you know?
Who am I? I'm Tom Bombadil. Tell me what your problem is! Tom is in a hurry. Don't trample my lilies! "My friends are caught in the willow!" cried Frodo, breathless.
"Master Merry is stuck in a crack!" cried Sam.

"What?" shouted Tom Bombadil, jumping into the air.
Willow Man? There's nothing worse, eh? It could happen soon. Fixed. I know the drill for him. Old Gray Willow! I'll I'll give him a bloodbath if he doesn't behave. I'll sing.
Its roots torn out. I will sing a melody and blow on the leaves and branches. Far away. Old Willow!

Carefully placing his lilies on the grass, he ran towards the
tree. There, he saw Merry's feet still sticking out-the rest had already been pulled deeper inside. Tom put his mouth to it. They appro A dangling branch struck the side of the willow with it.
"Let them out again, old Willow!" he said. "What do you want?"


i58





What are you thinking about? You shouldn't be awake. Eat dirt! Dig!

Deep! Drink water! Sleep! Bombadil speaks! He
Then he grabbed Merry's feet and pulled him out of the water, suddenly a crack widening.

There was a piercing crack and the other fissure opened. And Pippin sprang out, as if he'd been lucky.
With a sharp crack, the two fissures snapped shut. A shiver ran through the body. Through the tree, from root to crown, and complete si "Thank you!" said the hobbits, one after the other.
Tom Bombadil burst out laughing. Well, my little lads!
he said, leaning forward to scrutinize their faces. "You'll have to come to my house!" The table was covered with yellow cream, honeyco We'll have plenty of time to ask questions around the table. Follow me as quickly as you can! With these words, he chose... He raised h would jump and dance along the path to the east, always singing loudly and incoherently.

Too surprised and too relieved to speak, the hobbits followed
They gave chase as fast as they could. But it wasn't fast enough. Tom soon disappeared before them, and the sound of his voice faded aw The singing faded and drifted away. Suddenly, her voice returned. They came back floating with a loud "halloo!"

Onward, my little friends, let's go up the Withywindle! Tom goes ahead with candles to light. In the west, the sun sets: soon you will be groping.

When the shadows of night fall, the door will open. The light filtering through the glass will shimmer yellow.
Do not fear the black alder! Do not consider the white willow! Do not be afraid of the roots or the branches! Tom goes before you. Well then! Happy birthday! We're waiting for you!

After that, the hobbits heard nothing more. Almost immediately, the sun seemed to disappear behind the trees. They thought of the slant The river and the windows of Bucklebury are beginning to shine.





159


with hundreds of lights. Large shadows were cast upon them;
The trunks and branches of the trees hung dark and menacing above us. The path. White mists began to rise and swirl across the surface. from the river and wander among the roots of the trees on its bordering banks. From the very earth at their feet sprang a dark vapor. I

It became difficult to follow the path, and they were very
They were tired. Their legs felt like lead. Strange, furtive noises could be heard among the bushes and reeds on either side of them; a They looked up at the pale sky, they saw strange things, gnarled and bumpy faces that stood out darkly against the
at dusk, and stared at them with a lewd grin from the high bank and the edge of the woods. They began to feel that all this country It was unreal, and they were groping in a disturbing context. A dream that did not lead to waking up.

Just as they felt their feet slow to a complete stop, they noticed the ground rising slightly. The water began to rise. A murmur. In th of moss, where the river flowed in a small cascade. Then south. Then the trees disappeared and the mist dissipated.
They emerged from the forest and discovered a vast panorama.
grass grew before them. The river, now small and swift, leaped joyfully to meet them, sparkling here And there, in the light of the stars that were already shining in the sky.

The grass beneath their feet was smooth and short, as if it had been mowed or shaved. The overhanging trees of the forest behind
The grass was cut and trimmed into a hedge. The path was now clear. In front of them, well-maintained and bordered with stones, it woun at the top of a grassy knoll, now gray beneath the pale starry night; and there, still high above them on another
On the slope, they saw the twinkling lights of a house. They went back down. The path continued, then climbed again, along a long, smoo grass, towards the light. Suddenly, a wide yellow beam. A bright light burst forth from an open door.
Tom Bombadil's house was in front of them, up, down, at the foot of the hill.
Behind her, a steep embankment stretched out, grey and bare, and


i6o

Beyond, the dark silhouettes of the Barrows' Mounds prowled in the distance in the eastern night.

They all hastened forward, hobbits and ponies alike. Already halfway there, their fatigue and all their fears had left them. Hey!
Come, merry dol! the song began to welcome them. Hey! Come to Derry Dol! Jump on, my friends! Hobbits! Only ponies! We love to party. L Then another clear voice, as young and as ancient as Spring, like the song of joyful water flowing in the night, after a bright morning

Let the song begin! Let's sing together!

Sun, stars, moon and mist, rain and cloudy weather, light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather,
The wind on the open hill, the bells in the heather, the reeds by the shaded pond, the water lilies on the water: Old Tom Bombadil and the River Girl!

And with that song, the hobbits stood on the threshold, and a golden light enveloped them.


7

The four hobbits crossed the wide stone threshold, and
They remained motionless, blinking. They were in a long, low room, filled with the light from lamps hanging from the roof beams; and On the dark, polished wooden table were numerous tall, yellow candles, burning with a bright light.

Sitting on a chair at the other end of the room, facing outside
A woman was sitting in the doorway. Her long blond hair cascaded down her face and shoulders; her dress was green, green like young ree with silver pearls like dew; and her belt was of gold, of a peculiar shape, like a garland of lilies, adorned with the pale blue eyes o Forget-me-nots. Around her feet, in wide green and brown vases, white water lilies floated on earthenware, so that she
It appeared to be enthroned in the middle of a swimming pool.

"Come in, dear guests!" she said, and at these words, they knew
They had come, and it was his clear voice they had heard singing. He took a few tentative steps further into the room and began to bow A young and beautiful elf queen dressed in living clothes answered him.
flowers. But before they could say anything, she leaped lightly, jumped over the water lilies and ran laughing towards them; and as she ran, her dress rustled softly like the wind in the flowery banks of a river.

"Come, dear friends!" she said, taking Frodo by the hand. "Laugh and rejoice! I am Goldberry, daughter of the River."
She passed them slightly and, closing the door, she turned her head. Let's go back, our white arms stretched out over it. Let's close o "Out of the night!" she said. "For perhaps you are still afraid of the fog." And the shadows of the trees and the deep waters, and the Nothing! Because tonight, you are under Tom Bombadil's roof.


i62

The hobbits gazed at her in wonder; and she gazed at them, and each of them smiled. "Fair lady Goldberry!" said Frodo
Finally, feeling his heart fill with a joy he had never known, he understood. He stood there, as he sometimes had stood there, captivat It was different: the pleasure was less intense and less haughty, but deeper, and closer to the hearts of mortals; wonderful and yet no "Beautiful Lady Goldberry!" he repeated. "Now, the joy that was
What was hidden in the songs we heard now appears clearly to me. Oh, as fine as a willow wand! Oh, clearer than clear water! O reed by the living spring! Fair daughter of the river! O spring and summer, and spring again after!
Oh wind on the waterfall, and laughter of the leaves!

Suddenly, he stopped and stammered, overwhelmed by surprise.
He was proud to hear such things said to him. But Goldberry laughed.

"Welcome!" she said. "I hadn't heard that the people of the Shire were so gentle and polite. But I see that you are a friend of the elv The light in your eyes and the resonance of your voice tell the story.
What a joyous gathering! Now sit down and await the Master of the House! He won't be long. He'll take care of your Ured beasts.

The hobbits happily sat down on low rush-seated chairs, while Goldberry busied herself around the table; and their eyes followed her, for the graceful elegance of her movements filled
watching them with silent pleasure. From somewhere behind the house, singing could be heard. From time to time, they would catch them i among many others a derry dol and a merry dol and a ring a ding dillo the repeated words:

Old Tom Bombadil is a cheerful companion; his jacket is bright blue and his boots are yellow.
"Beautiful lady!" said Frodo again after a moment. "Tell me, if my question doesn't seem absurd: who is Tom Bombadil?"


163
"It's him," said Goldberry, interrupting his rapid movements and smiling. Frodo looked at her questioningly. He is, as you have seen.
"He is the Master of," she said in response to his gaze. woods, water and hill. So all this strange land belongs to him?
"No, indeed!" she replied, and her smile faded.
"It would indeed be a burden," she added in a low voice, as if to herself. The trees, the grass, and everything that grows or The inhabitants of this country belong to themselves. Tom Bombadil
He is the Master. No one has ever caught old Tom going into the forest, wading through water, leaping across hilltops in light and shad

A door opened and Tom Bombadil entered. He now had
No hat, and his thick brown hair was crowned by autumn. He left. He laughed, and, approaching Bay of Gold, he took her hand.

"Here is my pretty lady!" he said, bowing to the hobbits.
Here is my Goldberry, all dressed in silvery green and flowers
in its sheath! Is the table laden? I see yellow cream and honeycomb, white bread and butter; milk, cheese, and freshly picked green her Is dinner ready?

"That's the case," said Baie d'Or; "but perhaps the guests aren't?"

Tom applauded and shouted: Tom, Tom! Your guests
You're tired, and you'd almost forgotten! Come on, my merry friends, and Tom will refresh you! You'll clean up the dirt. Wash your hands and tired faces; get rid of your mud. Wrap yourself up and detangle your hair!

He opened the door, and they followed him for a short distance.
They arrived in a low room, after a passage and a sharp turn, with a sloping roof (a penthouse, it seemed, built on the roof) (north en They were mostly covered with green and yellow hanging mats and curtains. The floor was paved and strewn with fresh green leaves. rushes. There were four thick mattresses, each covered with
White blankets were laid out on the floor along one side. Against the opposite wall was a long bench laden with large earthenware dishe


164
Basins, and beside them were brown ewers filled with water, some cold, some scalding. There were soft, green slippers prepared beside e Shortly afterwards, washed and refreshed, the hobbits took their seats.
At the table, two sat on each side, while at each end were Goldberry and the Master. It was a long and joyous meal. Although
The hobbits ate, as only hungry hobbits can eat; there was plenty. They lacked nothing. The drink in their cups seemed crystal clear. Cold water, yet it penetrated their hearts like wine and set them free. Their voices. The guests suddenly realized that they
They sang joyfully, as if it were easier and more natural than speaking.

Finally, Tom and Goldberry got up and cleared the table quickly. The guests were ordered to remain seated in silence, and were He sat on chairs, each with a footrest for his tired feet. A fire burned in the wide fireplace in front of them.
with a sweet fragrance, as if it were made of apple wood. When all was in order, all the lights in the room were on, except for one lam She presented them, holding a candle; and she wished each of them a good year, a good night, and a deep sleep.

"Rest in peace now," she said, "until morning!" Don't listen to Night Noises! For nothing passes through here, neither door nor window. Spare the moonlight, the starlight, and the wind from the hilltop. Good night! She left the room with a glow and
A rustling. The sound of his footsteps was like the murmur of a stream. Gently, descending the slope on cool stones in the stillness of the night.

Tom sat silently beside them for a moment, while each of them tried to muster the courage to ask one of the many questions he had plann Did you hear me call you, Master, or was it simply a coincidence? Were you brought here at that moment?
Tom stirred like a man shaken after a pleasant dream.
Huh? What? he said. Did I hear you call me? No, I didn't hear you.


165

Listen: I was busy singing. It was chance that brought me to that moment, if you can call it that. It wasn't my intention, even though We're waiting for you. We heard from you and learned you were wandering. We assumed you'd soon come down. Water: all roads lead to it, The gray willow-man is a powerful singer; and it's difficult for the little Folics to escape his ingenious labyrinths. But Tom had a mi

taking it up again; but he continued in a soft, singing voice:

I had an errand to run there: to pick water lilies.
Green leaves and white lilies to please my lovely lady, the last ones before the end of the year to protect them from the winter. that it may bloom at her pretty feet until the snow has melted.

Every year, at the end of the summer, I go and get them for her.
in a vast expanse of water, deep and clear, at the very bottom of Withywindle; That's where they open first in the spring and that's where they linger the longest.

By the edge of this pond, I found long ago the River Girl, the young and pretty Goldberry sitting in the reeds. Her voice was sweet then, and her heart was beating wildly!
He opened his eyes and looked at them with a sudden blue gleam.

And it worked out well for you - because from now on I won't make it go back down deep along the forest stream. Not before the end of the year. I won't be passing by either. The old willow's house on this side of spring, not before the joyous spring, when the river girl
She dances down the willow-lined path to bathe in the water.

He fell silent again; but Frodo could not help asking a question. A final question: the one he most wanted answered. "Tell us, Master," Him? I've never heard of him before.

"No, don't do it!" said Merry and Pippin together, sitting upright. "Not now! Not before tomorrow morning!"


i66

"That's right!" said the old man. "The time has come to..."
Rest. Some things are unpleasant to hear when the world is at peace. In the shadows, sleep until daybreak, rest on your pillow! Listen. No night noise! Fear not the grey willow! And with these words, he took up the lamp. He lowered it and blew out the flame, then, seizin He led them out of the room, one by the hand.

Their mattresses and pillows were as soft as down, and the
The blankets were white wool. They had barely lain down on the deep beds and pulled the light blankets over themselves before they fell

In the dark night, Frodo was lost in a lightless dream. He saw the young moon rise; in its faint glow, he before him stood a wall of black rock, pierced by a dark hole
An archway resembling a great gate. Frodo felt as if he were being lifted up.
Going back up, and passing over it, he saw that the rock face was a circle of hills, and that inside was a plain, and in the middle of In the distance rose a stone pinnacle, like a huge tower, but not built by hands. At its summit stood the silhouette of a man. The moon It seemed to float for a moment above her head and
Highlights shone in her white hair, which was stirred by the wind.
Below, in the dark plain, echoed the cries of sinister voices and howls. The sound of many wolves. Suddenly, a shadow, like the shape o Large wings passed in front of the moon. The figure raised its eyes. Arms and light burst forth from the staff it brandished.
A powerful eagle swooped down on him and carried him off. The voices
They moaned and the wolves yelped. There was a noise like a violent wind blowing, and it carried the sound of hooves. Gallop, gallop, gallop from the East! Black Riders!
" thought Frodo as he awoke to the sound of hooves"
The words still echoed in his mind. He wondered if he would ever do it again, have the courage to leave the safety of those stone walls He remained motionless, still listening; but all was now silent, and finally, he turned over and fell asleep again or wandered off some Another forgotten dream.

Beside him, Pippin was dreaming peacefully; but a change... He was overcome by his dreams, turned around, and groaned.


167

He woke up, or at least thought he had woken up, and yet he could still hear in the darkness the sound that had disturbed his dream: ti "Screeching," the noise sounded like branches creaking in the wind.
Twig-like fingers scraping against the wall and the window: crackling, crackling, crackling. He wondered if there were any willows near and suddenly, he had the horrible feeling that he was not
in an ordinary house, but inside the willow tree and listening to that horrible dry, grating voice that was still mocking him.
He sat up, felt the soft pillows give way beneath his hands, and lay back down. Relieved, he let himself fall back down. He seemed to h In his ears: Don't be afraid of anything! Be at peace until morning! Don't listen to the noises of the night! Then he fell back asleep.

It was the sound of water that Merry heard falling into his
A peaceful sleep: water flowing gently and then spreading out,
spreading irresistibly all around the house in a dark, shoreless expanse like a swimming pool. The water gurgled beneath the walls and Surely. I'm going to drown! he thought. It'll happen eventually. I'm going to drown. He felt as if he were lying in fresh, slimy swamp a cold, hard slab. Then he remembered where he was.
and lay back down. He seemed to hear, or remember hearing:
Nothing passes through the doors or windows except moonlight and stars.
Light and wind drifted down from the hilltop. A gentle breeze. He drew back the curtain. He took a deep breath and fell back asleep. As far as he could remember, Sam had slept all night. (The text then abruptly shifts to a seemingly unrelated topic: "in the in-depth c
They all four woke up at the same time, in the morning light. Tom was moving around the room whistling like a starling. He heard them move, he clapped his hands and shouted: Hey! Come, happy dol! derry dol! My comrades! He removed the
Yellow curtains, and the hobbits saw that these had covered the windows, at each end of the room, one facing east and the other facing

They sprang to their feet, invigorated. Frodo ran to the east window and found himself gazing at a grey vegetable garden with dew. He almost expected to see the lawn up to the walls.


i68





The grass was riddled with hoofprints. In fact, its view was hidden by a tall row of beans on stakes; but above and far beyond them, th The sun was rising. It was a pale morning: to the east, behind long clouds like lines of soiled wool, stained red at the edges, shimmer The light spread quickly, and the red flowers on the
The beans began to glisten against the background of damp, green leaves.

Pippin looked out the west window, down into a pool of mist. The forest was hidden beneath a fog. It was like a bird's-eye view of a sl was a fold or channel where the fog fractured into many plumes and waves: the valley of the Withywindle.
The stream flowed down the hill to the left and disappeared into the white shadows. Nearby were a flower garden and a trimmed hedge, silver net, and beyond, shaved grey
The grass was pale under the dew. There was no willow tree in sight.

"Hello, happy friends!" exclaimed Tom, opening the
The window was open to the east. A fresh breeze was coming in; it was raining.

It smells bad. The sun won't show much today, I think. They walked across, leaping over hilltops, from the
The grey dawn rose, laden with wind and bad weather, the grass wet beneath my feet. Foot, wet sky above me. I awoke singing Goldberry u In the morning. At night, the little beings awaken in the darkness, and
Sleep after sunrise! Ring a ding dillo! Wake up now, my happy friend! Forget the noises of the night! Ring a ding dillo Del! Derry Del, my comrades! If you come soon, you will find
Breakfast is on the table. If you arrive late, you'll have grass and rainwater!

Needless to say-even though Tom's threat didn't seem very threatening-seriously, the hobbits arrived quickly and left the table late, o Neither Tom nor Goldberry were there. Tom could be heard talking in the house, noises in the kitchen, and up and down.
Stairs and singing here and there outside. The room seemed


169

westward, above the mist-shrouded valley, the window was open. Water trickled from the thatched eaves above.
Before they had even finished their breakfast, the clouds had joined together to form an unbroken canopy, and a straight, gray rain was descended regularly. Behind its thick curtain, the forest was there, completely veiled.

As they looked out the window, drops fell gently, as if rain were falling from the sky, the water clear. Goldberry's voice sang above them. They could hear few words, but it seemed clear to them that the song was a
Rain song, as gentle as the showers on the arid hills, which told the story of a river from its source in the highlands to the distant below. The hobbits listened with delight; and Frodo was happy in his heart, and blessed the fine weather, for he
This prevented them from leaving. The idea of leaving had been a weight on him from the moment he woke up; but he now guessed that they

The high-altitude wind settled in from the west, becoming deeper and more humid. Clouds gathered, ready to unleash their heavy rain upo The water was falling. Frodo stood by the open door and watched.
The white, chalky path turned into a small river of milk and flowed bubbling down the valley. Tom Bombadil arrived
trotting around the corner of the house, waving his arms as if he were protecting himself from the rain - and indeed, when he bounded Once he crossed the threshold, he seemed perfectly dry, except for his boots. He took them off and placed them in the corner by the fir He sat down in the largest armchair and called the hobbits to gather around him.

It's Goldberry's laundry day, he said, and his own
Autumn cleaning. Too wet for the hobbits - let them rest.
While they still can! It's a good day for long stories, for questions, and for answers, so Tom will start talking.

He then told them many remarkable stories, sometimes as if he were talking to himself, sometimes looking at them. Suddenly, a bright blue eye appeared beneath her thick eyebrows. Often


170

his voice transformed into song, and he emerged from his
He would sit and dance around them. He would tell them stories of bees and flowers, the ways of the trees, and the strange creatures of about bad things and good things, friendly things and
hostile things, cruel things and benevolent things, and secrets hidden under the brambles.

By listening, they began to understand the life of the Forest, outside of themselves, indeed to feel like Strangers in a place where everyone else felt at home. Moving out
Old Willow constantly appeared and disappeared in his speech, and

Frodo now knew enough to satisfy him, and even more than necessary. Enough, because it wasn't comfortable knowledge. Tom's words had be Dark and strange, and filled with a deep hatred for all that is free on earth, gnawing, biting, breaking, chopping, burning: Destroyers and usurpers. That's not what they were called.
for no reason, because it was indeed very old, a survivor from a vast era.
forgotten woods; and in them still lived people, who aged no faster than the hills, the fathers of the fathers of the trees, rememberin eras when they were lords. The countless years had filled them with pride and deep-rooted wisdom, and with malice. But
None was more dangerous than the Great Willow: its heart
He was rotten, but his strength was green; and he was cunning, and a master of the winds, and his song and his thought traversed The woods on both sides of the river. His gray and thirsty spirit
It drew its strength from the earth and spread out like fine roots.
in the ground, and invisible twig fingers in the air, until he had almost all the trees in the forest under his control, from the Hedge towards the Downs.

Suddenly, Tom's words left the woods and leaped up.
the young stream, over bubbling waterfalls, over worn pebbles and rocks, and among the small flowers in the dense, damp grass crevices, wandering at last as far as the Downs. They heard of Great Tumuli, and green mounds, and stone-
Circles on the hills and in the hollows between the hills. Sheep bleated in flocks. Green walls and white walls rose up. There were fortresses on the hills. Kings of small kingdoms.


171

They fought together, and the young Sun shone like fire upon the red metal of their new and eager swords. There was victory and
defeat; and the towers fell, the fortresses were set ablaze, and the flames rose to the sky. Gold was heaped upon the biers of the dead

kings and queens; and mounds covered them, and the stone
The gates were closed; and grass covered everything. Sheep wandered about. They grazed the grass for a while, but soon the hills were d Again. A shadow emerges from the distant darkness, and the
Bones were stirred in the burial mounds. Specters of the mounds appeared. The hollow spaces with a clinic of rings on cold fingers, and Gold chains fluttered in the wind. Stone rings seemed to smile from the earth, like broken teeth in the moonlight.

The hobbits shuddered. Even in the Shire, the rumor of the Barrow Wraiths beyond the forest spread.
had been heard. But it wasn't a story a hobbit appreciated. Listen to them, even by a cozy fireside, far from home. Those four... I sud Driven from their minds: Tom Bombadil's house nestled at the very foot of those dreaded hills. They lost the
He interrupted his story, shifting uncomfortably and glancing at one of them. Another.

When they overheard him speaking again, they found that he had
They now wandered in strange regions, beyond their memories, and beyond their waking thoughts, in times when the world was wider, and the seas flowed directly towards the western shore; and
Tom continued to sing, then he returned singing in the light of the ancient stars, while only the elf fathers were awake. Then suddenly He stopped, and they saw that he nodded his head as if he were falling asleep. The hobbits sat motionless before him, enchanted; and it The day had disappeared, the clouds had dissipated, and it was over. They withdrew, and darkness had come from the East and the West, a

Whether it's morning and evening of one day or several
Days had passed, Frodo couldn't say. He felt nothing either. Hungry or tired, only filled with wonder. The stars shone. Through the window, the silence of the sky seemed


172

to be near him. He finally spoke, overcome by astonishment and a sudden fear of this silence:

"Who are you, Master?" he asked.

"Huh?" said Tom, sitting up straight, his eyes shining.
Sadness. You don't know my name yet? That's the only one. Answer me. Tell me, who are you, alone, yourself, and nameless? But you are young and I am old. The elder, that's what I am. Believe me, my friends: Tom was here before the river.
and the trees; Tom remembers the first drop of rain and the first He traced paths before the Great Ones and saw the acorn.
People arriving. They were here before the kings and the
tombs and the spirits of the mounds. When the Elves passed west... Tom was already there, even before the seas curved. knew the darkness beneath the stars when she was fearless - before the Dark Lord came from outside.

A shadow seemed to pass before the window, and the hobbits
They glanced quickly through the windows. When they turned around, Goldberry was standing in the doorway, bathed in light. She was hold and the light passed through it, like sunlight through a white shell.

The rain has stopped, she said; and new waters are flowing
As we descend the slope, under the stars. Let us laugh and rejoice!

"And let's eat and drink!" cried Tom. Long stories
They are thirsty. And long listening sessions are work that make you hungry, morning, noon, and night! With these words, he jumped up f One leap took a candle from the mantelpiece shelf and lit it in the flame held by Goldberry; then he danced around
table. Suddenly, he jumped out the door and... appeared.

He returned quickly, carrying a large, heavily loaded tray.
Tom and Goldberry set the table; and the hobbits sat down half in wonder and half laughing: such was Gold's grace! berries and so joyful and strange are Tom's capers. Yet, in
In a way, they seemed to be weaving a single dance, neither hindering the other, inside and outside the room, and all around. the table; and with great speed, food, utensils and lights


173

They were arranged in order. The boards glowed with white and yellow candles. Tom bowed to his guests. "Supper is served," he said. Goldberry; and now the hobbits saw that she was fully clothed
She was dressed in silver with a white belt, and her shoes looked like fish. The mail. But Tom was all light blue, blue as if washed by Forget-me-nots, and he was wearing green stockings.

The supper was even better than the last time. The hobbits, under the spell of Tom's words, may have missed a meal, or even several. But when the food was before them, it seemed to them at least a week had passed since they had eaten; they no longer sang and hardly sp Their hearts and minds were lifted up again, and their voices resounded with laughter and bursts of joy.

After the meal, Baie d'Or sang them many songs,
songs that began joyfully in the hills and descended gently into silence; and in the silences, they saw in their minds pools and waters vaster than any they had ever known, and gazing at them, they saw the sky below and the stars like jewels in the heavens. Then, and left them by the fire. But Tom now seemed very large. They woke up and bombarded them with questions.

He already seemed to know a lot about them and everything
their families, and indeed know a large part of the entire history and actions of the Shire since times barely remembered

among the hobbits themselves. This no longer surprised them;
But he did not hide the fact that he owed his recent knowledge largely to this source, Farmer Maggot, whom he seemed to consider a

a more important person than they had imagined. There is
the earth beneath his old feet, and the clay on his fingers; wisdom in
"His bones are intact, and both his eyes are open," Tom said. "It was also..."
It was clear that Tom had dealings with the Elves, and it seemed that he had somehow received news from Gildor concerning Frodo's escap

Tom knew so much, and his mind was so cunning in its questioning, that Frodo found himself telling him more about it. Bilbo and his own hopes and fears that he had not told before


174





even to Gandalf. Tom nodded his head up and down, and
A gleam shone in his eyes when he heard talk of the Riders.

"Show me the precious ring!" he said suddenly in the middle of the story; and Frodo, to his own surprise, pulled I took the chain from his pocket, and detached the ring he was holding out. I immediately gave it to Tom.

He seemed to grow larger as he rested for a moment on his large, brown-skinned hand. Then suddenly, he raised it to his eye and
They laughed. For a second, the hobbits had a vision, both comical and... and alarming, of his bright blue eye shining through a circle of gold. Then Tom slipped the ring around the end of his little
I held my finger up to the candlelight. For a moment. The hobbits noticed nothing strange about it. Then they She gasped. There was no sign of Tom's disappearance!

Tom laughed again, then he twirled the ring in the air.
- and he disappeared in a flash. Frodo gave a cry - and Tom. She leaned forward and smiled back.

Frodo examined it carefully, and with a rather suspicious air (like someone who has lent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, Frodo always had the feeling that Frodo's hand was strangely heavy.
But something prompted him to make sure. Perhaps he was a little annoyed with Tom, who seemed to be taking it lightly. something that even Gandalf considered so perilous and important. I waited for an opportunity, when the conversation resumed, and Tom told an absurd story about badgers and their strange ways - then he put on the ring.

Merry turned to him to say something and threw him an exclamation. He began and checked. Frodo was delighted (in (in a way): it was indeed her own ring, for Merry was staring at it.
He remained rooted to the spot, staring blankly, seated in his chair, clearly unable to see him. He got up and silently walked away fro door.

"Hey!" cried Tom, giving him a very... I saw in his bright eyes. "Hey! Come on, Frodo!" Where are you going? Old Tom Bombadil isn't as blind as...
It's not holding yet. Take off your gold ring! Your hand looks better.


175

Without that. Come back! Put down your game and sit down next to it.
Me! We need to talk a little longer and think about what happened this morning. Tom must teach the right path, and keep your feet out of reach of wandering.

Frodo laughed (trying to appear satisfied), and removing the bell, he rang and returned to his seat. Tom then told them that He thought the sun would shine tomorrow and it would be a radiant morning, and leaving would be full of hope. But they

It would be wise to leave early; for the weather in that country was
something even Tom couldn't be sure of for long, and that's what it seemed. Sometimes things changed faster than he could change his ow jacket. I'm not a meteorologist, he said; and nothing is either. moves on two legs.

On his advice, they decided to head almost due north from his house, on the western and lower slopes of the Downs:
They could thus hope to reach the eastern route in a day. Travel and avoid the burial mounds. He told them not to be afraid.
- but to mind their own business.

Stay on the green grass. Don't meddle in what doesn't concern you.
old stones or cold specters or search their houses, unless you are strong, folic, with hearts that never waver! He said this more often on the west side, if they happened to venture near one. Then he taught
Give them a nursery rhyme to sing, in case they unfortunately get into trouble, danger, or difficulty the next day. Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!
By the water's edge, in the woods and the hills, near the reeds and the willows, by fire, sun and moon, listen to us! Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near!

When they had all sung this after him, he applauded.
They patted each other on the shoulder, laughing, and took candles. He led them back to their room.

8





That night, they heard no sound. But whether in his dreams, or among them-he couldn't say which-Frodo heard a soft
A song came to mind: a song that seemed to emerge like a faint glimmer behind a curtain of gray rain, and which grew stronger transforming the veil into glass and silver, until at last it was rolled up. He stepped back, and a distant green land opened before hi Quick sunrise.

The vision merged with waking; and there, Tom whistled
They flew like a tree full of birds; and the sun was already dipping down the hill and through the open window. Outside, everything The thing was green and pale gold.

After breakfast, which they again ate alone, they were ready to say goodbye, their hearts almost as heavy as possible.
On a morning like this: fresh, bright and clean under a washed cloth. Autumn sky a pale blue. The air came fresh from the North. to the west. Their calm ponies were almost fidgeting, sniffing and restless. Tom came out of the house and waved his hand.
hat and danced on the threshold, inviting the hobbits to "Get up and go at full speed."

They rode off on horseback along a path that wound behind them, past the house, and climbed gently towards the northern end of the
a promontory under which he took shelter. They had just dismounted. They were about to lead their ponies up the last steep slope, when

"Golden bay!" he cried. "My beautiful lady, dressed in silvery green!" We never said goodbye to her, nor have we seen her since. In the evening! He was so distressed that he turned back; but at that precise moment, a clear signal sounded. There, on the
She stood on the hill, waving to them: her hair flowed in the wind. Loose, and when it caught the sun, it shone and sparkled.


177
A light like the reflection of water on dew-covered grass sprang from beneath her feet as she danced. They hurried up the last slope and were left breathless.
next to her. They bowed, but with a wave of her hand, she ordered them to leave.
They looked around them; and they looked from the top of the hill beyond the lands beneath the morning. It was now as clear and as visi in the forest, whose pale green hues could now be seen rising from the dark trees to the west. In that direction, the land
pink on the wooded ridges, green, yellow, russet under the sun, beyond which lay hidden the valley of Brandevin. To the south, beyond the Withywindle line, there was a
A distant glimmer, like pale glass, where the River Brandywine formed a great loop in the plains and flowed out of the The hobbits' knowledge. Northward, beyond the decline
The hills stretched as far as the eye could see, dotted with plains and grey swellings and
Pale green and earthy hues, until everything faded into a uniform appearance, and a shaded distance. To the east rose the hills of the Ridge after ridge until morning, and disappeared from
It was merely a supposition, an intuition, to guess whether blue was present: a distant white glow merging into the edge of the sky. but it spoke to them, through memories and old tales, of the high and distant mountains.

They took a deep breath and felt a leap, and a few sturdy strides would take them wherever they wanted.
seemed too shy to go for a jog alongside the crumpled terrain along the hillsides towards the road, when they should have been leaping, as vigorously as Tom, over the stones that crisscross the hills straight towards the mountains.

Goldberry spoke to them and remembered their eyes and thoughts. "Quickly, dear guests!" she said. "And hold fast! Your objective! North May blessings be upon your steps! Hurry while the sun shines!
And to Frodon she said: Farewell, elf friend, it was a joyous reunion!

But Frodo could find no words to reply. He bowed deeply, and he mounted his pony and, followed by his friends, he trotted slowly.


178





below the gentle slope behind the hill. Tom Bombadil's house. The valley and the forest disappeared from my sight. The air grew warmer, The smell of grass was strong and sweet when they breathed it in.
Turning around, when they reached the bottom of the green hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small and thin as a
A flower bathed in sunlight, standing out against the sky: she remained motionless, looking at them, and her hands were outstretched to They looked at her, she made a clear call, and raising her hand, she turned and disappeared behind the hill.

Their path wound along the floor of the hollow, and around
The verdant foothills of a steep hill merge into another, deeper and wider valley, then over the flanks of other hills, and down their long limbs, and again their smooth flanks, up to
New peaks and new valleys. There were no trees, nor any visible water: it was a land of grass and short, soft turf, silent except for t the far reaches of the territory and the lonely, high-pitched cries of strange birds. They traveled, the sun rose, and the heat became When they sighted the land to the west,
The forest in the distance seemed to be smoking, as if the fallen rain was

Steam escaped again from the leaves, roots, and mold. A shadow now stretched to the limit of visibility, a dark mist above which the sk Around noon, they arrived at a hill whose summit was wide
and flattened, like a shallow saucer with a green mound at the rim. Inside, the air was still and the sky seemed close. They rode acros Their hearts raced; for it seemed evident that they had come even further than they had anticipated. Certainly, the des
Relationships had now all become blurred and deceptive, but there was no doubt that the Downs were coming to an end. A long valley stretched below, winding northward, until it opened onto a clearing between two steep ridges. Beyond, There seemed to be no more hills. Due north, they were faintly visible.





179


I glimpsed a long, dark line. "It's a row of trees," said Merry. "And it must mark the Road. All along it, for many leagues." To the east of the bridge, trees are growing. Some say they were planted long ago.

"Splendid!" said Frodo. "If we succeed as well, it will be wonderful. This afternoon, as we did this morning, we will have left the Downs before sunset and go jogging in search of a campsite. But, while talking, he turned his head
He glanced eastward and saw that the hills were on that side. He looked higher and overlooked them; and all those hills were crowned with green mounds, and on some stood people
Stones, pointing towards the sky like sharp teeth emerging from green gums.

This sight was somewhat disturbing; so they turned away from the view and descended into the hollow circle. In the middle There stood a solitary stone, erected proudly beneath the sun, above it, and at that hour cast no shadow. It was formless.
And yet significant: like a landmark, or a guardian finger, or rather a warning. But now they were hungry, and the sun was still at noo on the east side of the stone. It was cool, as if the sun had...
There was no electricity to heat it; but at the time, it seemed pleasant. There, they ate and drank, and had a very good lunch. a meal under the stars, just as one might wish; for the food
"He came from down below, Hill." Tom had provided them
Enough to fully enjoy the comfort of the day. Their ponies unloaded, lost on the grass.

As they rode over the hills, and ate their fill, under the hot sun and the smell of grass, which had lingered a little too long. their legs and looking up at the sky above their noses: these
Perhaps these events alone explain what happened. How? In any case, they awoke abruptly and uncomfortably.
of a sleep they had never planned to take. The standing position. The stone was cold and cast a long, pale shadow that stretched eastwa hollow in which they lay; to the north, south, and east, beyond the


ideo





The fog was thick, cold, and white. The air was still, heavy, and cold. Their ponies huddled together, heads bowed.

The hobbits jumped up in alarm and ran towards the western edge. They discovered they were on an island in the fog. Even when they looked in dismay at the scenery
The sun went out before their eyes, melting into a white and cold grey sea. A shadow appeared to the east, behind. The fog lifted until...
the walls and rose above them, and as it rose, it curved over them
their heads until it became a roof: they were enclosed in a hall of mist whose central pillar was the standing stone.

They felt as if a trap was closing in on them; but they
They hadn't completely lost hope. They still remembered the hopeful prospect; they had glimpsed the route ahead, and they still remembe knew which direction he was in. Anyway, they now had... a great aversion to that hollow place around the stone that no
The idea of staying there crossed their minds. They packed their bags and stood up as fast as their frozen fingers would allow.

Soon, they were leading their ponies in single file on the edge and down the long northern slope of the hill, until a misty sea. As they descended, the mist grew colder.
and more humid, and their hair hung stiff and dripping down their foreheads. When they got to the bottom, it was so cold that They stopped and took off their coats and hoods, which soon became dripping with gray droplets. Then, mounting their ponies, they They slowly resumed their journey, feeling their way with the changing tide. They were heading, as best they could,
for the door-shaped opening at the northern end of the long valley they had glimpsed that morning. Once they were
Through space, they simply had to continue as if nothing had happened. A straight line, and they were eventually forced to strike the Road. Their thoughts didn't go beyond that, except for one
The vague hope that perhaps, beyond the Downs, there was something like that. No fog.

Their progress was very slow. To prevent them from separating...
Soaked and wandering in different directions, they walked in single file.

l8l

Frodo was in the lead. Sam followed him, and behind him came the procession. Pippin, then Merry. The valley seemed to stretch to infini without end. Suddenly, Frodo saw a sign of hope. On either side
Before us, a darkness began to emerge through the mist; and they supposed that they were finally approaching space in the The hills, the northern gateway to the Giant's Mounds. If they could pass through, they would be free.

Come on! Follow me! he called over his shoulder.
and he advanced hastily. But his hope soon turned to dismay, desolation, and alarm. The dark patches deepened, but they
It narrowed; and suddenly he saw, rising menacingly before him and leaning slightly towards each other like the pillars of A headless door, two enormous menhirs. He couldn't
I don't remember seeing the slightest sign of that in the valley when He looked down from the hill in the morning. He had passed between them almost before he realized it: and even then, darkness seemed to envelop him. His pony reared up.
He sniffed and fell. Turning around, he realized... that he was alone: the others had not followed him. Sam! he called. Pippin! Merry! Come on! Why not? Are you keeping up?
There was no answer. Fear seized him and he fled in the opposite direction, the stones screaming wildly: Sam! Sam! Merry! Pippin! The pony darted into the mist and disappeared. From afar,
Or at least, that's what it seemed to him; he thought he heard a shout: Hey! Frodo! Hey! It was to the east, on his left as he stood be Large stones, staring and peering into the darkness. He dove in.
He set off in the direction of the call and found himself climbing a steep slope.

Despite his efforts, he called again, and continued to call.
more and more frantically; but he received no answer for some time. Time passed, then he seemed faint, distant, and high above. "Him. Frodo! Hey!" cried the faint voices that came out of the mist: and
Then a cry that sounded like "Help! Help!", repeated often, ending with a final, desperate struggle, which faded into a long, suddenly towards the cries; but the light had now disappeared, and clung


i82

Night had enveloped him, so that it was impossible for him to be
He seemed uncertain of which direction to take. He appeared to be constantly climbing. Higher and higher.

Only the change in ground level at his feet indicated the way forward. He was exhausted, sweating, and yet shivering with cold when he "Where are you?" he cried miserably.
There was no answer. He stood there listening. Suddenly, he was... aware that it was very cold and that down below, there was a wind. A Faint stars appeared above our heads, amidst the swirling wisps of cloud and fog. The wind began to whistle above the clouds. Grass.

He suddenly thought he heard a muffled cry, and
He walked towards her; and even as he advanced, the mist was... The fabric rolled up and was pushed back, revealing the starry sky. A quick glance showed him that he was now facing south and
He was at the top of a rounded hill, which he had had to climb from the north. A glacial wind was blowing from the east. Its right hand rose against the western stars, a deep black shape. A great mound stood there.

"Where are you?" he shouted again, both angry and frightened.

"Here!" said a deep, cold voice that seemed to come from the ground. "I'm waiting for you!"

"No!" said Frodo; but he did not flee. His knees buckled, and he fell to the ground. Nothing happened, and there was
No sound. Trembling, he looked up, just in time to glimpse a tall, dark figure. A figure like a shadow against a backdrop of stars. It I thought there were two eyes, very cold although lit by a pale light, a light that seemed to come from very far away. Then
A grip stronger and colder than iron seized him. The ice. The contact chilled him to the bone, and he remembered nothing.


183

When he regained his senses, he was able, for a moment,
I remember nothing but a feeling of dread. Then suddenly, he knew he was imprisoned, trapped without hope; he was in a wraith of the mo already under the spell of the terrible Barrow-wights regarding
whose whispers told stories. He didn't dare move, but remained lying as he found himself: lying on his back on a cold stone with his her hands on her chest.

But although his fear was so great that it seemed to be part of him, in the midst of the darkness that surrounded him, he found himself as he lay there, thinking of Bilbo Baggins and his stories, of running together through the Shire alleyways and talking
about roads and adventures. There is a seed of courage, hidden (often deeply, it's true) at the heart of the biggest
and the most timid hobbit, awaiting a final, desperate danger to make him grow. Frodo was neither very fat nor very timid; indeed, thou Gandalf considered him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought he had reached the end of his adventure, and a
A terrible end, but the thought hardened him. He found himself
stiffening, as if for a last resort; he no longer felt as soft as a defenseless prey.

Lying there, reflecting and regaining his composure, he
I immediately noticed that the darkness was slowly dissipating: A pale greenish light was spreading around him. It wasn't at

Start by showing him what kind of place he was in, so the light seemed to come out of him, and from the ground next to it.
He, and had not yet reached the roof or the wall. He turned around, and there, in the cold glare, he saw Sam and Pippin lying beside hi and Merry. They were on their backs, and their faces seemed
of a deathly pallor; and they were dressed in white. Around them were many treasures, perhaps of gold, although from this angle they They looked cold and unattractive. On their heads, they wore gold diadems. Chains encircled their waists, and numerous rings adorned th Rings. Swords lay beside them and shields were at their feet. But a long, naked sword was placed across their necks, three of them.


184

Suddenly, a song began: a cold whisper, rising and falling. The voice seemed distant and infinitely sad, something like... Sometimes hi from the ground. From the formless flow of sad but
Horrible sounds, strings of words sometimes took shape themselves: dark, hard and cold words, heartless and miserable.
The night rebelled against the morning for which it was grieving, and the cold cursed the heat for which it Frodo was hungry. He was freezing cold. After a while,
The song became clearer, and with a deep anguish in his heart, he perceived that it had transformed into an incantation:

Cold as the hand, the heart, and the bones, and cold to sleep under the stone:
Never again to wake up on a bed of stone,
Never, until the Sun sets and the Moon dies. In the black wind, the stars will die. And let them stay here, on the gold.
until the lord of darkness raises his hand over the dead sea and the parched land.

He heard a cracking and a grinding noise behind his head. Pushing himself up on one arm, he looked and now saw in the
A dim light indicated that they were in some kind of passageway, behind which they turned a corner. Around the corner, a long arm was.. groping, walking on his fingers towards Sam, who was lying very close, and towards the hilt of the sword that rested on him.

At first, Frodo felt as if he had truly been turned to stone by the incantation. Then a mad thought of escape arose.
to him. He wondered if, by putting on the Ring, he would need it. Barrow-wight would regret it, and perhaps he would find a way. He imagined himself running freely on the grass, in mourning.
ant for Merry, and Sam, and Pippin, but free and alive himself, Gandalf would admit that there was nothing else. He could do it.

But the courage that had awakened within him was now... Too strong: he couldn't abandon his friends so easily.





185


He hesitated, groped in his pocket, then struggled with himself.
Again; and as he did this, the arm drew closer. Suddenly, resolve. He hardened and seized a short sword that lay nearby.
He, kneeling, bent over the bodies of his companions. With all his might, he slashed at the waist
the arm crawled near the wrist, and the hand detached itself; but at the same instant, the sword broke to the hilt. A piercing scream rang out and the light disappeared. In the darkness, there was a growl.

Frodo leaned forward over Merry, and Merry's face turned cold.

Suddenly, he returned to his mind, from which he had disappeared.
With the first mists, the memory of
house at the bottom of the hill, and Tom singing. He re-
He remembered the nursery rhyme Tom had taught them. In a small, desperate voice, he began: "Ho! Tom Bombadil!" and then his voice seem a sharp sound, and the dark room resonated like a drum and trumpet.

Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!

By the water's edge, in the woods and the hills, near the reeds and the willows, by fire, sun and moon, listen to us! Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near!

A sudden and profound silence fell, in which Frodo could
He heard her heartbeat. After a long moment of waiting, he heard a plain, but distant sound, as if it were descending through the On the ground or through thick walls, a voice answers by singing:

Old Tom Bombadil is a cheerful companion, his jacket is bright blue and his boots are yellow. No one has caught him yet, because Tom is the master:
His songs are more powerful, and his feet are faster. There was a dull rumble, like that of rolling stones and The light was falling, and suddenly it burst forth, the true light, the plain
in the daylight. A low opening, resembling a door, appeared at the end of


i86

the chamber beyond Frodo's feet; and there lay Tom's head
(the hat, the feather, and everything else) stood out against the sunlight. A red glow rose behind him. The light fell on the ground an They were not moving, but their sickly complexion had left them. They now looked as if they were fast asleep.

Tom bent down, took off his hat, and stepped into the darkness. (room, song) Get out, you old ghost! Vanish in the sunlight!
To shrivel like the cold mist, like the moaning winds, Far away, in the desolate lands, far beyond the mountains! Never come back here again! Leave your wheelbarrow empty! Lost and forgotten, darker than darkness,
Where the doors remain forever closed, until the world is repaired.

At these words, there was a scream and a part of the inner ending. The room collapsed with a crash. Then there was a long a shrill cry gradually fading away at an indeterminate distance; and then this silence.

"Come, friend Frodo!" said Tom. "Let's go." Clean grass! You must help me put up with them.

Together they carried Merry, Pippin and Sam.
Frodo left the burial mound for the last time, he thought.
a severed hand still writhing, like a wounded spider, in a pile of collapsed earth. Tom went back there, and there was a
There was a lot of noise from blows and trampling. When he came out, he was carrying a large load of treasures in his arms: things from Gold, silver, copper, and bronze; many pearls and chains and precious ornaments. He climbed the green mound and placed them all up ther
He stood there, his hat in his hand and the wind in the air, his hair blowing, and looked down at the three hobbits, who had been lying the mound. Raising his right hand, he said in a clear and commanding voice:





I87


Wake up, my joyous companions! Wake up and heed my call! Warm yourselves now, heart and body! The cold stone has fallen; The dark door is wide open; the dead hand is broken. Night has flown away beneath night, and the door is open!
To Frodo's great joy, the hobbits became agitated and stretched their
They rubbed their eyes, arms outstretched, then jumped to their feet. He looked around in astonishment, first at Frodo, then at Tom. rising up, immense as life, on the tumulus above them; and then looking at themselves in their thin white rags, crowned and belted with

"What is it?" began Merry, feeling the
a gold diadem that had slipped over one eye. Then he
He stopped, a shadow passed over his face, and he closed his eyes. "Of course I remember!" he said. "Carn's men Dum attacked us at night, and we were defeated. Ah! A spear in my heart! He clutched his chest. No! No!
he said, opening his eyes. What am I saying? I was dreaming... Where have you gone, Frodo?

"I thought I was lost," said Frodo; "but I don't want to..."
To discuss this, let's think about what we need to do now! Continue!

"Dressed like that, sir?" said Sam. "Where are my..."
Clothes? He threw his diadem, his belt, and his rings onto the grass, and
He looked around helplessly, as if he expected to find his coat, jacket, breeches, and other hobbit clothes lying around somewhere. where the hand is located.

"You'll never find your clothes again," said Tom, leaping up. He climbed down the mound and, laughing, danced around it. Exposing them to the sun. One might have thought that nothing
Dangerous or terrible things had happened; and indeed, horror filled their hearts when they looked at him and saw the a joyful glimmer in her eyes.
"What do you mean?" asked Pippin, looking at him half-heartedly. Perplexed and half-amused. Why not? But Tom shook his head, saying, "You've found your..."
Here we are again, out of the deep waters. The clothes are just a small loss.


i88





If you escape drowning. Rejoice, my joyful friends,
And may the gentle warmth of the sun now warm heart and body! Cast off the moorings, those cold rags! Run naked on the grass, while Tom

Let's go hunting!
He raced down the hill whistling and shouting. Frodo followed him and saw him fleeing south.
along the green hollow between their hill and the next, always whistling and crying:

Hey! Now! Come now! Where are you going?

Up, down, near or far, here, there or far away? Pointed ears, Wise nose, Whipped tail and Bastard, White socks, my little boy, and old Fat Lumpkin!

Then he sang, running at full speed, throwing his hat in the air and catching it, until it was hidden by a fold in the earth; but for a Time, its "hey now! hey now!" returned floating on the wind, which had moved south.

The air was becoming very hot again. The hobbits ran
They stayed on the grass for a while, as he had told them. Then they lay down, basking in the sun with the joy of those who have been suddenly went from a harsh winter to a mild climate, or from
people who, after being sick and bedridden for a long time, wake up one day to find they are in perfect health and the day is starting full of promise.

By the time Tom returned, they felt strong.
(and hungry). He reappeared, hat first, above the crest of the hill, and behind him followed six ponies in single file: Their five of their own and one more. The last one was simply old Fat Man.
Lumpkin: he was bigger, stronger, fatter (and older) than their own ponies. Merry, who owned the others, hadn't actually given them suc their lives. Tom called them one by one and they climbed up
They crossed the front and stood in line. Then Tom bowed before the hobbit.


189

"Here are your ponies!" he said. "They are more intelligent." (in some respects) than you other wandering hobbits - more
They have an exceptional sense of smell. For they sniff out imminent danger and throw themselves into it without hesitation; and if the Hearts are faithful; facing the fear of the mound specters is not what they were created for. See, here they are back, bringing everyth their burdens!

Merry, Sam, and Pippin then put on a change of clothes.
They took clothes out of their bags; and soon they became too hot, for they were obliged to wear thicker and warmer clothes. things they had brought to protect themselves against the arrival of winter.

Where has that other old animal gone, that fat slob? "Where do you come from?" asked Frodo.

"He's mine," said Tom. "My four-legged friend; although I..."
I rarely ride him, and he often wanders far away, free on men's backs, down hillsides. When your ponies were at my place, they got to k I ran to meet him. I thought he would look for them and that with his
Words of wisdom dispel all their fears. But now, my merry Lumpkin, old Tom is going off on horseback. Hey! He's coming with To get you on the road, he needs a pony.
It is difficult to talk to hobbits on horseback when you are on your own legs trying to trot alongside them.

The hobbits were delighted to hear this and thanked Tom several times; but he laughed and said they were so good At the thought of getting lost, he would only feel happy when he had
I saw them safe and sound on the other side of his territory's borders. "I have things to do," he said: "my creation and my song, my wo my walks and my observation of the countryside. Tom cannot be
always near open doors and willow cracks. Tom has his. I have the house in mind, and Goldberry awaits me.

It was still quite early, between nine and nine and ten, and the hobbits turned to the food. Their The last meal had been lunch near the standing stone that day.
Before. They now ate their breakfast with the leftovers from Tom's meal.


190

provisions, intended for their supper, with additions that Tom had brought with him. It wasn't a large meal (considering
(the hobbits and the circumstances), but they felt much better. While they were eating, Tom climbed onto the mound and...
He examined the treasures. He transformed most of them into a
a pile that glittered and shimmered on the grass. He ordered them to leave.
They lie there, free and at the disposal of all who find them, birds, beasts, elves or men, and
"All benevolent creatures," for such should be the charm of the mound. Broken and scattered, and no Spectre has ever returned.
From the pile, he chose a brooch set with blue stones, multicolored like flax flowers or the wings of blue butterflies. He gazed at it
Here's a lovely toy for Tom and his lady! It was just the one who used to carry this over her shoulder. Goldberry, wear it now, and we For each of the hobbits, he chose a long, leaf-shaped dagger, crafted with precision, of remarkable workmanship, damask.
with red and gold serpent shapes. They shone as I pulled them from their black sheaths, made of a strange material.

Made of metal, light and strong, and set with many dazzling stones.
Whether by some inherent virtue of these sheaths or because of the spell that rested on the mound, the blades seemed intact over time,

The old knives are long enough to serve as swords for hobbits,
"He said. Sharp blades are useful if the people of the County are going to walk east, south, or far away, in darkness and danger. He told them that these blades had been forged over many, many years.
Long ago, by the Men of the West: they were the enemies of the Dark Lord, but they were defeated by the wicked king of Carn Dûm in the Angmar country.

Few remember them today, murmured Tom, and yet... Some wander, sons of forgotten kings, walking alone. lines, protecting unsuspecting people from harm.

The hobbits did not understand his words, but as he spoke
They had, as it were, a vision of a vast period of years behind them, like a vast shaded plain across which they paced.


191

Silhouettes of tall, sinister men, brandishing gleaming swords, and finally a man appeared, a star on his forehead. Then the image fade They were back in the sunny world. It was time to start again. They prepared themselves, packing their bags and loading their ponies.
They attached their new weapons to their leather belts under their jackets, finding them very cumbersome, and wondering if
They would be of no use. There had never been any fighting before. One of them was like one of the adventures during which their flight would allow them to achieve this.

Finally, they set off. They led their ponies down the hill; then, mounting their mounts, they trotted swiftly along the valley. He turn And from there the sunlight on the gold rose like a yellow flame. Then they rounded a shoulder of the Downs and it was hidden from view

Although Frodo looked around him on all sides, he saw no sign of the great stones standing like a gate, and soon
They reached the north pass and crossed it quickly, and the landscape stretched out before them. It was a joyful journey with Tom Bomba on Fatty Lumpkin, who could move much faster than his

The circumference was promised. Tom sang most of the time, but it was mostly nonsense, or perhaps some strange language unknown to hobbits, an ancient language whose words were primarily those of wonder and delight.

They advanced steadily, but they soon saw that the
The road was farther than they had imagined. Even without the fog, their midday nap would have prevented them from It could only be reached after nightfall the previous evening. The darkness
The line they had seen was not a row of trees, but a row of bushes growing along the edge of a deep dike with a steep wall on the further on. Tom said that this had once been the limit of
A kingdom, but a very long time ago. He seemed to remember it. There was something sad about it, and I won't say any more.

They climbed down from the dike and exited through a breach in the wall, then Tom turned due north, for they had


192

The ground was now clear, oriented slightly to the west, and quite flat, and they quickened their pace, but the sun
The boat was already sinking fast when they finally saw a line of tall trees in front of them, and they knew they had returned to the The road after many unexpected adventures. They galloped their ponies along the last furlongs, and stopped beneath the long
in the shade of the trees. They were at the top of an embankment.
And the road, now dark as evening advanced, wound its way down below. At this point, it stretched almost from the southwest to To the northeast, and on their right, the slope descended rapidly towards a wide
Hollow. It was rutted and bore many traces of recent intensive work. It was raining; there were puddles and holes filled with water.

They rode down the riverbank and looked up and down. There was nothing to see. "Well, here we are again at last!" they said. Frodo. I suppose we haven't lost more than two days, in my opinion.
A shortcut through the forest! But perhaps this delay will prove worthwhile. Useful-it may have diverted them from our trail.

The others looked at him. The shadow of fear hung over him.
The Black Riders suddenly invaded them again. Since entering the forest, their main concern had been obtaining
back to the road; it was only now, as it lay beneath their feet, that they remembered the danger that had been pursuing them, and was It is highly likely that they are lying in wait for them on the road.
themselves. They cast an anxious glance back towards the setting sun, but the road was brown and deserted. "Do you think," Pippin asked hesitantly, "do you think that we..." could consider a chase tonight?
"No, I hope not tonight," replied Tom Bombadil; "nor
Perhaps the next day. But don't rely on my guess; for I cannot say for certain. To the east, my knowledge is limited. Tom is not there. country.

Nevertheless, the hobbits would have liked him to come with them.
They thought he would know how to deal with the Black Riders, if anyone did. They would soon move on to the next step.
lands that were completely foreign to them, and beyond all but the vaguest and most distant legends of the Shire, and in the gathering

193


As dusk fell, they longed to return home. A profound sense of loneliness and nostalgia gripped them. The weight of loss was heavy. They After the final goodbyes, it was only slowly that I realized Tom was wishing them farewell and telling them to have a good heart.
and to continue riding until nightfall without stopping.

Tom will give you good advice, until the end of the day (after which your own luck must accompany and guide you): four kilometers furth Bree-hill, with its west-facing gates, is home to an old inn called The Prancing Pony. Barliman Butterbur is the trustworthy warden. Yo Bold, but cautious! Keep your spirits up and go find... your fortune!

They begged him to at least come to the inn and drink one last time with them; but he laughed and refused.

Tom's world ends here: he will not cross the borders. Tom has his home to watch over, and Goldberry is waiting for him! Then he turned around, threw his hat in the air and jumped onto Lumpkin's horse.
He stepped back, then crossed the bank and walked away singing into the twilight. The hobbits climbed up and watched him until he was out of sight.
"I'm sorry to have to take leave of Master Bombadil," said Sam.
He is cautious, and that's undeniable. I think we could manage just fine.
Let's continue down this path and find nothing better, nor stranger. But I won't. I'll deny that I'd be delighted to see that rearing p It'll be like the Green Dragon far from home! What kind of... Is folic acid available in Bree?

There are hobbits in Bree, said Merry, as well as Great Ones.
Friends. I imagine it will be quite cozy. The Pony is a good place. An inn, apparently. My people go there from time to time. "Perhaps that's all we could wish for," said Frodo; "but it's out there." The Shire, all the same. Don't get too worked up about it.

194





home! Don't forget - all of you - that the name of
Baggins must not be mentioned under any circumstances. I am Mr. Underhill, if necessary. The name must be stated.

They then mounted their ponies and silently rode off towards evening. Night fell quickly as they trudged on. Slowly downhill then uphill, until finally they saw the lights twinkling a little further away.

Before them rose Bree-hill, blocking the passage, a dark mass against the misty stars; and beneath its western flank nestled a great village. They then hurried towards it, desiring only one thing: to find a fire there, and a door between them and the night.


9





Bree was the main village of Bree-country, a small inhabited village region, like an island in the middle of the surrounding desolate l Combe in a deep valley a little further east, and Archet on the outskirts of Chetwood. Extending around Bree-hill and the
The village was a small country of fields and tamed woods only a few kilometers wide.
The men of Bree were dark-haired, broad-shouldered and rather short, cheerful and independent: they belonged to no one. but themselves; but they were more friendly and familiar with Hobbits, Dwarves, Elves, and other inhabitants of the world
about them, more than was (or is) usual with important people. According to their own accounts, they were the original inhabitants and the descendants of the first Men who ever wandered the
To the west of the Middle World. Few had survived the upheavals of the Old Days; but when the Kings returned to the
In the Great Sea, they had found the men of Bree still there, and they were still there now, when the memory of the ancient kings had f

At that time, no other man had established dwellings so far west, or within a hundred leagues of the Shire. But in the
Beyond Bree, in the wild lands, lived mysterious wanderers. The inhabitants of Bree called them Rangers and knew nothing about them. Their origin. They were taller and darker than the Bree Men and were believed to possess strange powers of sight.
and hearing, and understanding animal language
and the birds. They wandered as they pleased southward and eastward, even as far as the Misty Mountains; but they were now Few in number and rarely seen. When they appeared, they brought news from afar, and strange, forgotten stories that were


196

They were listened to eagerly; but the inhabitants of Bree made no friends among them.

There were also many hobbit families in Bree-land; and they claimed to be the oldest hobbit settlement in the world, a world that was f Wine was crossed and the Shire was colonized. They lived mainly in Staddle, although there were some in Bree itself, especially
on the highest slopes of the hill, above the houses of the Men. The Big Men and the Little Men (as they called themselves) were on good terms, going about their own business in their
Each in their own way, but both rightly considered certain parts of the people of Bree necessary. Nowhere else in the world was this fo

The Bree-folk, Great and Little, did not travel much themselves; and the affairs of the four villages were their chief concern. Sometim The bridge was now rarely visited by the Hobbits of the Shire.
Occasionally, an adventurous Bucklander or Took would show up at the inn for a night or two, but even that became
less and less common. The hobbits of the Shire referred to those of Bree, and to all those who lived beyond the borders, as Foreigners, and he had very little interest in them, considering
They were boring and rude. There were probably many more of them.
Foreigners scattered throughout the Western world in these
days that the inhabitants of the Shire could never have imagined. Some, no doubt,
They were no better than tramps, ready to dig a hole in any riverbank and stay there only as long as it suited them. But in Bree-land,
In any case, the hobbits were honest and prosperous people, and not
more rustic than most of their distant relatives inland. It was not yet forgotten that there had been a time when there were There is a lot of back and forth between the Shire and Bree. Bree was, in everyone's opinion, a daughter of Brandybuck.

The village of Bree had about a hundred stone houses.
Big Folic, mostly above the road, nestled on a hillside with


197

West-facing windows. On this side, more
Halfway between the hill and the starting point, there was a deep dike, with a thick hedge on the inner side. On the other side was the blocked by a large gate. There was another gate to the south, at the corner where the road led out of the village. The gates were closed at nightfall; but just inside were small pavilions for the guards.

Further down the road, where it turned right to make a detour.
At the foot of the hill stood a large inn. It had been built long ago, when road traffic was much heavier. For Bree stood at an old crossroads; another old
The road crossed the eastern road just outside the dike, to the west of the village, and formerly the men and other madmen People of all kinds had traveled there extensively. Strange how the news
"De Bree" was still a common expression in the East End, a descendant of that time when news from the North, South, and East arrived. You could hear them in the inn, and when the hobbits of the Shire... I used to go there more often to listen to them. But the northern It had long been desolate, and the North Road was now rarely traveled. It grew in the grass, and the inhabitants of Bree called it the Greenway.

The inn in Bree was still there, and so was the innkeeper.
was an important person. His house was a meeting place for idle, talkative, and curious locals, large
and small, of the four villages; and a resort for Rangers and other vagrants, and for such travelers (mostly dwarves) as They continued to use the eastern route, going to and from the mountains.

It was night and white stars were shining when Frodo and his companions finally arrived at the crossroads of the green road and They approached the village. They arrived at the west gate and found it closed; but at the gate of the pavilion beyond, there was a A man was sitting. He jumped up, fetched a lantern, and looked out. They rushed over the gate in surprise.

"What do you want, and where are you from?" he asked gruffly.


198

"We are heading towards the inn," replied Frodo.
We are heading east and cannot go any further tonight.

Hobbits! Four hobbits! And what's more, from the Shire!
"By their words," the guard said in a low voice, as if speaking to himself. He stared at them for a moment with a dark look, then He slowly opened the gate and let them pass on horseback.

You don't often see people from the county riding on the road at night.
He continued, as they paused for a moment in front of his door. "Excuse me for asking, what is the purpose of your trip east of..." Bree! What are your names, if I may ask?

Our names and our company belong to us, and that's not a problem.
"This is not the ideal place to discuss this," said Frodo, not liking the man's appearance or the tone of his voice. "Your affairs are yours, no doubt," said the man; but it is up to me to ask questions after nightfall.
We are hobbits from Buckland, and we have a soft spot for
To travel and stay at this inn, please say Merry. I am Mr. Brandebouc. Is that sufficient? The Bree-folk used to... We had to be fair to the travellers, at least that's what I had heard.

"Okay, okay!" said the man. "I didn't mean to offend anyone."
You might find there are more people than just old Harry at the door. You'll be asked questions. There are queer people around. If you

If you go to the Pony, you will find that you are not the only customers.

He wished them good night, and they added nothing; but
Frodo could see by the lantern's light that the man was still there, watching them curiously. He was pleased to hear the gate slam shut The man was so suspicious, and wondered if someone had asked the question. News from a group of hobbits. Was it Gandalf?
He could have arrived while they were delayed in the forest and the Downs. But there was something in his gaze and the The guard's voice made him uncomfortable.

The man stared at the hobbits for a moment, then

He went back home. As soon as his back was turned, a
A dark figure quickly crossed the gate and blended into the background, the shadows of the village street.


199

The hobbits continued along a gentle slope, passing a few isolated houses, and stopped in front of the inn. The houses The place seemed large and strange to them. Sam looked up at the inn.
Its three floors and numerous windows gave him the effect of a bout of the blues.
He had imagined encountering giants taller than trees, and other creatures even more terrifying, at some point during his journey; but The first sight of the men and their tall houses was quite enough, indeed. It was too much for the somber end of an exhausting day. He and the Black Riders who spied through the dark windows of the upper floors.

We're not going to stay here all night, are we?
"Sir?" he exclaimed. "If there are hobbits in these parts..." Why not look for someone who would be willing to take us in? Inside? That would be warmer.
"What's wrong with the inn?" asked Frodo. Tom Bombadil: I recommend it. I imagine the interior is quite cozy. Even from the outside, the inn looked like a pleasant house.
Familiar eyes. It had a facade facing the road and two wings.
running across land partially cut into the lower slopes of the hill, so that at the rear the second-floor windows were at ground level. There was a wide archway leading to a courtyard between the two wings, and to the left under the
There was an archway and a large doorway accessible by a few wide steps. The doorway was open and light streamed in. Above the Under the arch was a lamp, and below it swung a large sign. On the sign: a large white pony rearing up on its hind legs.
The door was painted in white letters: the rearing pony by Barliman Butterbur. Several low windows revealed lights behind thick curtain

While they hesitated outside in the dim light, someone began
They were singing a joyful song inside, and many joyful voices joined them, singing aloud in the choir. They listened to this encouragi They paused for a moment, then dismounted from their ponies. The song ended. And there was an explosion of laughter and applause.

They led their ponies under the arch and left them standing in the courtyard. They went up the steps. Frodo left.


200





I moved forward and almost collided with a short, fat, bald man.
His head and face were red. He was wearing a white apron and was hurrying out of one door and coming in through another, carrying a tra "Can we?" Frodo began.
"Half a minute, please!" the man shouted over his shoulder, and disappeared in a hubbub of voices and a cloud of smoke. A moment later, he was unconscious again, wiping his hands on his apron.
"Good evening, little master!" he said, leaning forward. "What? Perhaps you're lacking some?" Sleeping quarters for four and stalls for five ponies, if possible. Done. Are you Mr. Butterbur? That's right! My name is Barliman. Barliman Butterbur at
At your service! You're from the Shire, aren't you? he said, then...

Suddenly, he raised his hand to his forehead, as if he were trying to
Remember something. Hobbits! he cried. Now what? It reminds me of... May I ask your names, gentlemen? "Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck," said Frodo; "and here is..." Sam Gambee. My name is Underhill.
There! said Mr. Butterbur, snapping his fingers. It's...
He's gone again! But he'll be back, when I have time to think about it. I'm swamped; but I'll see what I can do for you. Festivals are not often found in the Shire these days, and I
I should be sorry for not giving you a warm welcome. But there are so many
There are already a lot of people in the house tonight, unlike what has been happening for several weeks. Quite a long time. "Misfortun Hey! Nob! he shouted. Where are you, you little rascal? Slowpoke? No!

I'm coming, sir! I'm coming! A cheerful-looking hobbit nodded his head. He went out through a door and, seeing the travelers, stopped s he looked at them with great interest.

"Where's Bob?" asked the owner. "You don't know? Well, find him! Quickly! I don't have six legs or six eyes."
Neither! Tell Bob there are five ponies to put in the stable. He'll find some space. Nob trotted off with a smile and a wink.





201


"Well, what was I going to say?" said Mr. Butterbur, tapping his forehead. One thing chases another, and so on.
Speak. I'm so busy tonight that my head is spinning. There is
a group of people who arrived via the greenway from the south last week at night - and that was already quite strange to begin with. There's a traveling troupe of dwarves heading west; come in tonight. And now, there's you. If you weren't hobbits, I
We don't know if we could accommodate you. But we do have one or two rooms in the north wing, which has been specially fitted out for h This place has been built. On the ground floor, as usual.
They prefer round windows, etc., as they wish. I hope you will be comfortable. You will want to eat dinner, I'm sure. Quickly! This way!

He led them a short distance into a passageway and opened a door. "This is a lovely little sitting room!" he said. "I hope it will do, He needs to be trotting. It's hard work for two legs, but I don't understand. Thinner. I'll come back later. If you need anything, call shout!

He finally left, leaving them a little out of breath.
He seemed capable of an endless stream of words, however
He might have been busy. They found themselves in a small, comfortable place. In the room, a bright fire burned in the hearth. And in front of it, there were low, comfortable chairs.
There was a round table, already covered with a white tablecloth,
And on top of it was a large little bell. But Nob, the hobbit servant, arrived in a rush long before they had thought to ring it. He brought candles and a tray full of plates.

"Masters, would you like something to drink?" he asked.
And may I show you the rooms while your supper is being prepared? Are you ready?

They were washed and surrounded by good, deep cups of beer when Mr. Butterbur and Nob returned. In a
The table was set, sparkling with a thousand lights. There was hot soup, cold cuts, a blackberry tart, loaves of fresh bread, pats of b Cheese: a good, simple food, as good as what Comté cheese could offer.

202




and warm enough to dispel Sam's last doubts. (already much relieved by the excellence of the beer). The owner lingered for a while, then prepared himself.
leave them. I don't know if you would like to join us.
"The company, once you've had dinner," he said, getting up. At the door. Perhaps you'd prefer to go to bed. The company would be very happy to welcome you, if
You were witty. We don't often welcome strangers-travelers from the Shire, I should say, if you'll excuse me; and we... I'd like to hea Keep that in mind. But do as you see fit! Ring the bell if you need anything. Nothing!

They felt so refreshed and encouraged at the end of their supper (about three-quarters of an hour's walk, unhindered by idle chatter) t It's too stuffy. I'm going to sit quietly here by the fire for a little while, and maybe go out later for some fresh air. Take care of Don't forget that you're supposed to escape.
secret, and they remain on the right track and are not very far from the Shire!

"Very well!" said Pippin. "Be careful! Don't get lost, and..." Remember, it's safer inside!

The company was gathered in the inn's large common room. The assembly was large and diverse, as Frodo discovered.
when his eyes adjusted to the light. This came mainly from a crackling wood fire, for the three lamps hanging from the beams. were dark and half-veiled with smoke. Barliman Butterbur was standing by the fire, talking to two dwarves and another.
or two strange-looking men. On the benches were various folic: the men of Bree, a collection of local hobbits (sitting) (chatting toget Silhouettes difficult to distinguish, hidden in the shadows and corners.

As soon as the hobbits from the Shire entered, a chorus arose.
of the warm welcome from the inhabitants of Bree. The strangers, especially those who had arrived via the greenway, stared at them.


203

Oddly enough, the owner introduced the new arrivals to
The Bree-folk, so quickly that, although they received many names,
They were rarely sure to whom these names belonged. The men of Bree seemed to have a rather botanical appearance (and for the Shire- rather strange folk names, such as Rushlight, Goatleaf, Heather-toes, Appledore, Thistlewool and Ferny (not forgetting
Butterbur). Some hobbits had similar names.
Wormwoods, for example, seemed plentiful. But most of them had natural names, such as Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes, Sandheaver and Tunnelly, many of which were used in the County. There were several Staddle Underhills, and as
They could not imagine bearing the same name without being related. They welcomed Frodo with open arms, like a long-lost cousin.

The hobbits of Bree were, in reality, friendly and curious.
And Frodo soon discovered that an explanation of what he was would have to be given. He revealed that he was
passionate about history and geography (fields in which he had a great deal of interest) nods, although neither of these words was (very common in the Bree dialect). He said he was thinking of writing a book (which caused silent astonishment), and that he and his fr

At these words, a chorus of voices rose. If Frodo had truly
He wanted to write a book and had found many listeners; he would do it. I learned enough for several chapters in just a few minutes.
And as if that weren't enough, he was given a whole list of names, starting with Old Barliman here, to whom he could go and seek further information. But after a while, as Frodo showed no sign of writing a book on the spot, The hobbits resumed their questions about what was happening in the
Shire. Frodo wasn't very communicative, and he soon left. He found himself sitting alone in a corner, listening and watching. around.

The Men and the Dwarves mostly talked about distant things. events and news that were becoming increasingly unbearable
It seemed familiar. There was unrest in the distance, in the South, and it seemed


204

that the men who had arrived via the greenway were on the
They set off, in search of lands where they could find some peace.
The inhabitants of Bree were compassionate, but clearly not very ready to welcome a large number of strangers onto their land.
Among the travelers, a shady and malevolent man was the first... to say that more and more people would come from the north
in the near future. If we can't find them a place, they'll find one for themselves. They have the right to live, like everyone else. " he said aloud. The locals didn't seem thrilled. " the prospect.

The hobbits didn't pay much attention to all of this, because
This did not seem, for the moment, to concern the hobbits. The Big Folk could hardly beg for lodging in hobbit houses. They were more i They felt completely at ease and chatted happily about the events unfolding in the County. Pippin provoked a great burst of laughter wi from the collapse of the Town Hole roof to Michel
Exploration: Will Whitfoot, the mayor, and the biggest hobbit in Westfarthing had been buried under the chalk and resurfaced like a bal Some locals, who seemed to have stayed in the Shire several times, wanted to know where the Underhills lived and who they were.
were linked to.

Suddenly, Frodo noticed strange weather.
The beaten man, sitting in the shadows near the wall, was also
He listened attentively to the hobbit conversations. He held a large tankard in his hand, and curiously smoked a long-stemmed pipe. sculpted. His legs were stretched out before him, showing a tall stature. Soft leather boots that suited him well, but which he had see They were very worn and now covered in mud. Travel stains. A thick, dark green coat was pulled tightly around him, and despite the heat Shadows covered his face; but the brightness of his eyes could be seen as he was looking at the hobbits.

"Who is it?" asked Frodo, when he had a chance to whistle. "According to Mr. Butterbur. I don't believe you've introduced him?"


205

"Him?" the owner whispered in reply, cocking his weapon. He glanced around without turning his head. "I don't really know. He is One of these nomads-the Rangers, as they are called. He rarely
He speaks: no, not really, but he can tell a rare story when he has the time. He disappears for a month, or even a year, then he reappe He's reappeared. He was coming and going quite often last spring; but I haven't seen him lately. What's his real name?
I've never heard of it, but here, they call it Strider.
He moved at a brisk pace on his long legs, though he didn't say so. No one knew why he had to hurry. But there was no accounting. For E And the people of the Shire, please excuse me. It's funny you should know. Ask him for news. But at that moment, Mr. Butterbur was call It was replaced by a request for more beer, and his last remark remained

unexplained.

Frodo noticed that Strider was now looking at him, as if he had heard or guessed everything that had been said. Currently, with With a wave of his hand and a nod of his head, he invited Frodo to come.
and sit down beside him. As Frodo approached, he threw back his hood, revealing dark, shaggy hair flecked with grey, and in a pale and severe face, a pair of piercing grey eyes.

"My name is Strider," he said in a low voice. "I am very..."
Pleased to make your acquaintance, Master - Underhill, if old Butterbur is correct.

"Yes," replied Frodo stiffly. He was far from comfortable under the piercing gaze of those scrutinizing eyes.

"Well, Master Underhill," said Strider, "if I were you, I'd have to stop your young friends from talking too much. Drink, Fire and chance encounters are certainly pleasant, but... well... this
This isn't the Shire. There are some strange people around here. Well, that's what I say.
"As you shouldn't think," he added with a wry smile, seeing Frodo's expression. And there were even stranger ones. "Lately, travelers have been passing through Bree," he continued, "watching Frodo confront him."

Frodo met his gaze but said nothing; and Aragorn made no further sign. His attention suddenly seemed to fall on Pippin. To his great su


206





Young Took, encouraged by his success with the portly mayor of Michel Delving, was now actually giving a comic account of Bilbo's Farew of the speech, and approached the astonishing Disappearance.

Frodo was annoyed. It was a fairly harmless story for most people. Local hobbits, no doubt: just a funny anecdote about them. Strange people, far beyond the river; but some (old) Butterbur, for example, knew a thing or two about it and probably had
I had heard rumors a long time ago about Bilbo's disappearance. It would make them think of the name Baggins, especially if Inquiries had been made to Bree following this name.

Frodo was restless, wondering what to do. Pippin was naughty. He greatly enjoyed the attention he received and had
They almost completely forgot the danger. Frodo suddenly had a sudden realization. The fear that, in his current mood, he might even me Ring the bell; and it could well be disastrous.

"You'd better do something quickly !" Strider whispered into his ear.

Frodo jumped onto a table and began to speak. Pippin's audience's attention was disrupted. Some
The hobbits looked at Frodo, laughed and applauded, they thought, and that Mr. Underhill had drunk as much beer as was possible for him

Frodo suddenly felt very stupid and found himself (like
(It was his habit, when he spoke) to touch the objects in his pocket. He felt the ring on his chain, and it was quite uncomfortable. The urge to put it on and disappear overwhelmed him irresistibly.
to get out of this absurd situation. It seemed to him, in a way, that the suggestion had come from the outside, from someone or He sensed something in the room. He firmly resisted the temptation and gripped the Ring in his hand, as if to hold it back.
and prevent it from escaping or causing damage.
This gave him no inspiration. He uttered a few suitable words.
"Words", as they would have said in the Shire: We are all very touched by your warm welcome, I dare to say. I hope that my brief visit will help to re-establish old ties

207
the friendship between the Shire and Bree; and then he hesitated and coughed. All eyes were now on him. A song!
"A song! A song!" cried one of the hobbits. "A song!" cried all the other hobbits. Come on, master, sing us something we I'd never heard of that!

Frodo stood speechless for a moment. Then, in despair...
He began a ridiculous song that Bilbo greatly enjoyed (and was actually quite proud of, because he had invented the words). himself). It was an inn; and that's probably why
The idea crossed Frodo's mind at that precise moment. Here it is in its entirety. Generally speaking, only a few words of it have been There is an inn, a cheerful old inn at the foot of an old grey hill,
And there, they brew such a dark beer
That the Man in the Moon himself came down one night to drink his fill.

The stable boy has a drunk cat

who plays the five-stringed violin; And np and he lowers his bow,
Sometimes a high-pitched squeak, sometimes a low purr, sawing in progress in the middle. The owner has a small dog who loves to joke around;
When good humor reigns among the guests,

He listens intently to all the jokes and laughs until he chokes. They also own a horned cow as proud as any queen;

But music makes his head spin like beer.

And she wags her bushy tail and dances on the lawn.


208





And oh! the rows of silver dishes and the shop of silver spoons!
For Sunday*, there is a special pair, and they polish them carefully. Saturday afternoon.

The Man in the Moon drank in large gulps, and the cat began to meow;
A plate and a spoon danced on the table, the cow from the garden skipped wildly. and the little dog chased its tail.

The Man in the Moon took another cup, then he rolled under his chair; And then he dozed off and dreamed of beer.
Until the stars in the sky were pale, and dawn could be felt. Then the stable boy said to his drunken cat:
The White Horses of the Moon,
They neigh and bite their silver bits; But their master has perished and lost his mind. And the sun will rise soon!

Then the cat on his violin played hey-diddle-diddle, a jig to wake the dead:

He squeaked, sawed, and picked up the pace. While the owner was shaking the Man in the Moon:

"It's past three o'clock!" he said.

They slowly rolled the man up the hill and carried him to the Moon. While his horses galloped behind,
And the cow came bounding along like a doe, and a plate was formed with the spoon.





209

Now the fiddle played faster, deedle-dum-diddle; The dog began to roar,
The cow and the horses were standing on their heads; all the guests jumped out of bed. and danced on the dance floor.

With a game of ping and pong, the violin strings broke! The cow jumped over the moon! And the little dog laughed to see so much joy.
And Saturday's dish was served in no time, with Sunday's silver spoon.

The round moon rolled behind the hill as the sun raised its head.
She* could hardly believe what her fiery eyes revealed to her; For, although it was day, to her great surprise They all went back to bed!

The applause was long and enthusiastic. Frodo had had a good party. They liked his voice and his song. Where is old Barley? They cried. He should hear that. Bob should get to know his cat. The violin, and then we danced. They wanted more.
and began to shout: Let's do it again, master! Here we go again! One more time!

They gave Frodo another drink, then began his
The song was set to music again, and many of them joined in; for the tune was... They were very well known and learned the words quickl Now it was Frodo's turn to be pleased with himself. He pranced about on the table; and when he returned a second time to the
The cow jumped over the moon, she bounded through the air. Much too vigorously; for she landed, bang, on a tray full of cups. and slipped, and rolled off the table with a crash, a clanging, and boom! The audience was left speechless.

Laughter, then a gaping silence; for the singer

Elves (and hobbits) always refer to the Sun with the pronoun "She".


210





It disappeared. It simply evaporated, as if it had vanished in an instant, right through the floorboards without leaving a hole!

The local hobbits stared at them in astonishment, then jumped up. They stood and called for Barliman. The whole company rose, leaving P in a corner, and observed from afar with a somber and doubtful expression.
It was clear that many people now regarded them as the companions of a wandering magician with unknown powers and
But there was a swarthy Bree-lander standing there, looking at them with an expression that was both knowing and half-mocking, which ma out of the door, followed by the southerner with squinty eyes: they had whispered together a lot during the
evening.

Frodo felt foolish. Not knowing what else to do, he crawled
far under the tables, in the dark corner near Strider, who was sitting
Imperturbable, without betraying his thoughts, Frodo leaned back. He leaned against the wall and removed the ring. How he had ended up He couldn't say which finger he had touched. He could only guess that... he had been holding it in his pocket while he sang, and that It had somehow slipped off him when he reached out. A fool to break his fall. For a moment, he wondered if the Ring
She herself had not played a trick on him; perhaps she had tried to reveal herself in response to a wish or a command felt within the room. He didn't like the look of the men who had gone outside.

"Well?" Strider asked as he reappeared. "Why did you...?" That? Worse than anything your friends could have said! You made a blunder! Or should I say a finger blunder?

"I don't understand what you mean," said Frodo, annoyed and alarmed.

"Oh yes, you need it," Strider replied; "but we'd better wait until the commotion has died down. Then, please, sir..." Baggins, I would like to speak with you discreetly.

"So what?" asked Frodo, unaware of the sudden use of his... proper name. A question of some importance - for both of us, he replied




21 1

Aragorn, looking Frodo in the eyes. You might hear something. To your advantage. "Very well," said Frodo, trying to sound indifferent. "I'll... we'll talk later." Meanwhile, an argument broke out near the fireplace. Mr.
Butterbur had arrived at a trot and was now trying to
listening simultaneously to several contradictory accounts of the event time.

"I saw it, Mr. Butterbur," said a hobbit; "or at least I
I didn't see him, if you know what I mean. He simply disappeared. In a way, like air.
"Oh really, Mr. Mugwort!" said the owner, looking perplexed.

"Yes, I think so!" replied Mugwort. "And I really do. What's more."

"There's been a mistake somewhere," said Butterbur, shaking his head. "There were too many, Mr. Underhill, to disappear as if by magic; or as if by magic, which is more likely in this play.

"Well, where is he now?" several voices exclaimed.

How could I know? He's free to go wherever he wants. As long as he pays tomorrow morning. Here's Mr. Took now: It hasn't disappeared.

Well, I saw what I saw, and I saw what I didn't see, he said, stubbornly.

And I say there's been a mistake, Butterbur repeated, pick up the tray and pick up the broken dishes.

"Of course there's a mistake!" said Frodo. "I haven't vanished. Here I am! I've just had a little chat with Strider over there." He advanced into the light of the fire; but most of the comrades in the company retreated, even more disturbed than before.

were not at all satisfied with his explanation that he had quickly slipped under the tables after his fall. Most of the Hobbits and Men of Bree left then and there, sulky, having no desire to be entertained any further.


212





That evening. One or two glared at Frodo and left, murmuring amongst themselves. The Dwarves and the two or
The three strange men who remained got up and said goodnight to the owner, but not to Frodo and his friends. Before For a long time, there was no one left except Strider, who remained seated, unnoticed, by the wall.

Mr. Butterbur did not seem particularly upset. He felt,
Most likely, his house would be full again on many nights in the following days, until the current mystery was completely solved. We discussed it. And you, what have you been doing lately, Mr. Underhill? he asked. Scaring my clients and breaking my
Crocks with your acrobatics!

"I am truly sorry for causing any inconvenience," said Frodo.
It was completely unintentional, I assure you. A very regrettable incident. An accident.

Very well, Mr. Underhill! But if you intend to do anything at all...
No more stunts, or magic, or anything else, you'd better warn people in advance - and warn me too. We're a little suspicious. Here, nothing is off the beaten track - it's strange, if you understand me; and we don't embrace it overnight.

I will never do anything like that again, Mr. Butterbur.
I promise you. And now, I think I'll go to bed. We'll leave early. Will you be able to look after our ponies? Are they ready at eight o'clock?

Very well! But before I go, I'd like to say a word to
You in private, Mr. Underhill. Something has just come back to me.
I think I should tell you. I hope you won't. I won't take it badly. Once I've sorted out a few details, I'll come with you to your room

"Certainly!" said Frodo; but his heart sank. He wondered... how many private conversations he had before going to bed, and what they were going to reveal. Were these people all in cahoots?
against him? He was even beginning to suspect Butterbur's fat old face was hiding dark designs.


io





Frodo, Pippin and Sam returned to the living room.
There was no light. Merry wasn't there, and the fire had gone out.
They burned gently. It was only when they rekindled the embers in a brazier and threw in some bundles of wood that they They discovered that Strider had come with them. He was there, calm, sitting on a chair near the door!

"Hello!" said Pippin. "Who are you and what do you want?"

"My name is Grand-Pas," he replied; and although you may have forgotten, your friend promised to have a private conversation with me.

You said I might hear something to my advantage, I "Believe it," said Frodo. "What do you have to say?"

"Several things," Strider replied. "But, of course, I have My Price." "What do you mean?" Frodo asked sharply.
Don't be afraid! I simply want to say this: I will tell you what I know, and I can give you good advice - but I will need a reward.

"And what will it be, pray tell?" asked Frodo. He suspected... now that he had befriended a scoundrel, and he thought uneasy that he ha All this would hardly be enough to satisfy a scoundrel, and he could not spare anything.

"No more than you can afford," Strider replied with a
A slow smile, as if he had guessed Frodo's thoughts. Just this: you. You must take me with you, until I wish to leave you.

"Oh, indeed!" replied Frodo, surprised, but not entirely. Relieved. Even if I desired another companion, I shouldn't I would have accepted such a thing until I knew much more about you and your company.


214

"Excellent!" exclaimed Strider, crossing his legs and sitting down. "Make yourself comfortable. You seem to be coming to your senses." Once again, and that's a good thing. You've been far too
So far, so good. Very good! I'll tell you what I know, and
I leave it to you to reward yourself. Perhaps you will be happy to grant it, once you have heard me. "Go then!" said Frodo. "What do you know?"
"Too many dark things," Strider said gloomily. "As for your affairs..." He stood up and went to
He quickly opened the door and looked outside. Then he closed it again. He sat down quietly. "I have good hearing," he continued, lower

I have hunted many wild and wary beasts, and I usually manage to avoid being seen, if I wish. But I was behind the hedge. One evening, on the road west of Bree, four hobbits arrived.
outside the Downlands. I don't need to repeat everything they said to old Bombadil or to each other; but one thing interested me. "Don't forget," said one of them, "that the name Baggins must..."
I must not be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, if indeed a name must be cited. It's given. It interested me so much that I followed them I slipped over the gate right behind them. Perhaps Mr. Baggins has a valid reason for leaving his name behind; but if so,
I should advise him, and his friends, to be more careful.

"I don't see what interest my name could have for anyone in Bree," said Frodo angrily, "and I still need to learn why you care. Mr. Str Clandestine listening; but if that's the case, I would advise him to explain himself.

"Well answered!" said Strider, laughing. "But the explanation is simple: I was looking for a Hobbit named Frodo Baggins."
I wanted to find him quickly. I had learned that he was carrying a secret outside the Shire, a secret that worried me and my friend.

"Don't misunderstand me!" he cried, as Frodo jumped out of bed. Sam jumped up, frowning. "I'll have more."
The secret must be protected more than you are. And it must be protected! He leaned forward and looked at them. "Beware of every shadow In hushed voices. Black riders crossed Bree.





215


On Monday, one of them went down the greenway, they say; and Another one appeared later, coming up the greenway from the south.

A silence fell. Finally, Frodo addressed Pippin and Sam: I should have suspected something from the way the guardian was acting.
"He welcomed us," he said. And the owner seemed to have heard. Something. Why did he entice us to join the company? And why on earth di We remained silent here.

"It would have been better," Strider said. "I would have..."
I would have prevented you from entering the common room, if I could have; but the innkeeper would not let me in to see you, nor take a "Do you think he..." Frodo began.
No, I don't think old Butterbur does any harm. He alone does. Not quite like those mysterious wanderers of my kind. Frodo
She gave him a puzzled look. Well, I do look rather mischievous, don't I? said Aragorn with a smirk and a strange expression.
a glimmer in her eyes. But I hope we'll get to know each other better. When we do, I hope you'll explain what happened at the end of yo "It was a pure accident!" Frodo interrupted.
"I wonder," said Strider. "An accident, then. This accident has... made your position dangerous."

"Hardly more than before," said Frodo. I knew it.
These riders were chasing me; but now at least they seem to have missed me and left.

"Don't even think about it!" Strider snapped.
They will return. And others are coming. There are still more. I know their number. I know these Riders. He paused, and his eyes were c "They can't be trusted," he continued. "Bill Ferny, for example. He has a sinister reputation in Bree-land, and the weird people call h

his house. You probably noticed him among the guests:
a swarthy, mocking type. He was very close to one of the
They were foreigners from the South, and they slipped away together right after


216





your "accident". Not all those people from the South have good intentions; and as for Ferny, he sold anything to anyone; or did silly things for fun.

What will Ferny sell, and what does that have to do with my accident?
"With him?" asked Frodo, still determined not to understand. Strider's clues.

"I'd love to hear from you, of course," Strider replied. "Your performance would be very interesting to some."
People. After that, they would almost no longer need to be told who you really are. It seems highly likely to me that they will hear ab before this night is over. Is that enough? You can do what you want. As for my reward, whether you take me as your guide or not, I can. I say that I know all the lands between the Shire and the Misty. The mountains, because I have roamed them for many years.
I'm older than I look. I might be of use to you. You'll have to leave the road after tonight; for the riders will
Watch him day and night. You might be able to slip away from Bree and be allowed to move forward as long as the sun is up; but you won' They're terrible!

The hobbits looked at him and saw with surprise that his
Her face was contorted as if by pain, and her hands clenched.
the armrests of his chair. The room was very calm and quiet, and the light seemed to have dimmed. For a moment, he remained seated with blind eyes as if they were walking in a distant memory or listening to noises in the night, far away.

"There!" he exclaimed after a moment, tracing a line with his hand. Perhaps I know more about these pursuers than... Yes, you fear them, but not enough.
Not yet. Tomorrow, you'll have to escape, if you can. Strider can lead you down rarely traveled paths. Will you him?

A heavy silence fell. Frodo did not reply; his
His mind was troubled by doubt and fear. Sam frowned, and he looked at his master; and finally he escaped: With your permission, Mr. Frodo, I would say no. This Great Strider here,




217


He warns me and tells me to be careful; and I agree, and let's go. Let's start with him. He comes from the wilderness, and I've never h Such folic acid is useless. He knows something, that's obvious, and
more than I would like; but that's no reason to let him do it. Leading us into a dark place, far from any help, as he he said.

Pippin was fidgeting and seemed uncomfortable. Strider, on the other hand, didn't seem bothered. He answered Sam, but turned his pierci He met her gaze and looked away. No, he said slowly.
I don't agree. I think you're not really the way you want to be. Look. You started talking to me like Bree-folk, but your
His voice has changed. Yet Sam seems to be right about this: I don't see why you're warning us and asking us to take precautions at the Do you really know my company? And how do you know? Do you know?
The lesson of caution has been well learned, Strider said.
with a sinister smile. But caution is one thing, and hesitation is another. Another. You'll never get to Rivendell on your own now. Trusting me is your only chance. You have to make your decision. I'll answer some of your questions if that helps.
You'll do it. But why should you believe my story if you don't believe me yet? Here it is anyway.

At that moment, there was a knock at the door. Sir
Butterbur had arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob with jugs of hot water. Strider retreated to a dark corner.

"I've come to wish you a good night," said the innkeeper, placing the candles on the table. "Nob! Bring the water to the rooms!" He went in and closed the door.

"This is how it goes," he began, hesitant and looking worried. "I've caused harm, and I'm truly sorry. But one thing motivates me..." Another one, as you will recognize; and I am a busy man. But first one thing, then another this week, refreshed my memory, as
As the saying goes; and I hope it's not too late. You see, I've been asked to look out for the hobbits of the Shire, and a certain name Baggins in particular.


2l8





"And what does that have to do with me?" asked Frodo.

"Ah! You know better than anyone," said the owner knowingly. "I won't betray you; but I've been told that this Baggins would be calling himself Underhill, and I was given a description. This suits you quite well, if I may say so.

Indeed! Let's take it then! said Frodo, intervening imprudently. Break.

"A small, stocky fellow with red cheeks," said Mr. Butterbur solemnly. Pippin chuckled, but Sam looked indignant.

That won't help you much; that's true for most hobbits, Barley, he said to
"Me," continued Mr. Butterbur, glancing at Pippin. "But..." This one is taller than some and blonder than most, and he has a dimple in Excuse me, but he's the one who said it, not me.
"He said it? And who was it?" Frodo asked eagerly. Ah! It was Gandalf, if you know who I'm talking about. A wizard. They say he is, but he's a good friend of mine, whether he is or not.
But now, I don't know what he'll have to say to me, if I see him him again: turn all my sour beer or me into a block of wood, I
He shouldn't be surprised. He's a bit hasty. But what's done is done. Undone.

"Well, what have you been doing?" asked Frodo, growing impatient with the slow unveiling of Butterbur's thoughts.

"Where was I?" asked the owner, stopping and snapping his fingers. "Ah yes! Old Gandalf. Three months ago, he was walking..."
He comes into my room without knocking. "Barely," he says, "I'm leaving tomorrow morning. Could you do something for me? You just need "Tell me," I said. "I'm in a hurry," he said, "and neither am I. But I want a message to get to the Shire. Do you have anyone who..." I can send someone, and I can trust them to go? I can find someone, I said, tomorrow. Maybe, or the day after. Do it tomorrow, he said, He gave me a letter.

"That's quite clear," said Mr. Butterbur, pro-
He took a letter out of his pocket and read it aloud. He spoke slowly and proudly (he valued his reputation as

(literate man):





219


MR FRODO BAGGINS, BAG-END, HOBBITON
in the COUNTY.

"A letter from Gandalf for me!" cried Frodo.

"Ah!" said Mr. Butterbur. "So your real name is Baggins?"

"That's the case," said Frodo, "and you'd better give me that letter immediately, and explain why you never sent it. That's what you... To get to the point.

Poor Mr. Butterbur looked worried. 'You're right, sir,' he said, 'and I beg your pardon. I have a mortal fear of What Gandalf will say if things go wrong. But I didn't keep it.
I put it back. I put it in the safe. Then I couldn't find it. Nobody wanted to go to the Shire the next day, or the day after. and none of my own could spare me from it; and then one thing
After the other one, I ended up forgetting. I'm a busy man. I'm going to
I will do everything I can to make things right, and if I need help, I can give it to you, just name it.

Leaving the letter aside, I promised Gandalf nothing less. "Barley," he told me, "that friend from the Shire, he might well..." He and another one will be coming out this way soon. He will be
He calls himself Underhill. Watch out! But you don't need to ask any questions. And if I'm not with him, he might get into trouble, and He might need help. Do everything you can for him, and I'll be grateful, he said. And here you are, and trouble is just around the corn apparently.

"What do you mean?" asked Frodo.

"These black men," said the owner, lowering his voice.
They're looking for Baggins, and if they mean well, then I'm... a hobbit. It was Monday, and all the dogs were barking.
And the cries of the geese. Strange, I told you so. Nob, he came
and told me that two black men were at the door asking for a hobbit named Baggins. Nob's hair was all bristling. He ordered the black m Archet, it seems. And this Ranger, Strider, he keeps asking


220





Questions too. I tried to come see you before you... He had a bite or some soup.

"He did it!" Strider suddenly exclaimed, stepping into the room. And a lot of trouble would have been avoided if you'd had him. Let him The owner jumped in surprise. "You!" he exclaimed. "You keep showing up. What more do you want?"
"He is here with my permission," said Frodo. "He has come to offer... his help." Well, you know your own business, perhaps, said Mr.

Butterbur, looking at Strider suspiciously. But if I were in his shoes, in your situation, I wouldn't mess with a Ranger.

"So who would you date?" Strider asked. "A big
an innkeeper who only remembers his own name because people Yell at them all day? They can't stay at the Pony for
They cannot go home. The road is still long before they disappear. Them. Will you go with them and stop the Blacks from entering?

Me? Leave Bree alone! I wouldn't do that for anything in the world, she said. Mr. Butterbur looks really scared. But why can't you stay What's going on? What are these black men looking for, and where are they going? Where are they coming from? I'd really like to know.

"I'm sorry, I can't explain everything," Frodo replied. "I'm tired and very worried, and it's a long story. But if you want to help
I must warn you that you will be in danger as long as I am in your home. These Black Riders: I'm not sure, but I think, I fear they com

"They come from Mordor," said Aragorn in a low voice. From Mordor, Barliman, if that means anything to you.

"Save us!" cried Mr. Butterbur, turning pale; the name was obvious. He knew Dently. This is the worst news imaginable. Come to Bree in my time.

"Yes," said Frodo. "Are you still willing to help me?" "Yes," said Mr. Butterbur. "More than ever. Although I..."
I don't know what someone like me can do against it, against it - He hesitated. "Against the Shadow in the East," Strider said in a calm voice.





221

A lot, Barliman, but every little helps. You can let Mr. Underhill stay here tonight, as Mr. Underhill; and you can forget Baggins' nam "I will do it," said Butterbur. "But they will discover he is there."
Without my help, I'm afraid it's impossible. That's a shame, Mr. Baggins. He certainly made a name for himself tonight; needless to say The story of Mr. Bilbo's departure has already been told. Tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has started guessing.
in his slow skull; and there are others in Bree faster in the more than he is. Well, we can only hope the Riders don't return anytime soon, said Frodo.
"I certainly hope not," said Butterbur. "But ghosts or not..."
The ghosts won't get into the Pony so easily. Don't worry. Until morning, no one will say a word. No Black person will pass.
My doors, as long as I can stand. Me and my people, we will carry on. Watch tonight; but you'd better get some sleep, if you can.

"In any case, you'll have to call us at dawn," said Frodo.
I must leave as soon as possible. Breakfast at 6:30, please.

Perfect! I'll take care of the orders, said the owner. Good night. Mr. Baggins-Underhill, I should say! Good night-now, my God! Where i

"I don't know," said Frodo, suddenly anxious. They had... I had completely forgotten about Merry, and it was getting late. I'm scared. He went outside. He said something like he was going to get some fresh air.

Well, you want us to take care of you, and there's no mistake: your party might be on vacation! said Butterbur. I have to go to the bar The doors open quickly, but I'll make sure your friend gets in when he...

He's coming. I'd better send Nob to look for him. Good night, everyone! Finally, Mr. Butterbur left, with another doubt... He looked at Strider gravely and shook his head. His steps turned back into the passageway.

"Well?" asked Strider. "When do you intend to open this letter?" Frodo examined the seal carefully before breaking it. It seemed
This is undoubtedly Gandalf's. Inside, written in the wizard's quill, the script, both strong and elegant, contained the following mess


222





THE ABANDONING PONY, BREE. Midyear Day, Shire year, 1418. Dear Frodo,
I have received bad news. I must leave immediately. You had... It's best to leave Bag End soon and get out of the Shire before the end. no later than July. I will return as soon as possible and follow the instructions. If I notice your absence, please leave me a message You're driving through Bree. You can trust the owner (Butterbur). You might run into one of my friends on the road: a slim, dark-haired

Tall, some call him Strider. He knows our area and will be a great help to us. You. Go to Rivendell. I hope we'll meet there again. If Don't go there, Elrond will advise against it.

Yours truly, in the strictest measure, Gandalf. F

P.S. Don't use it anymore, for any reason! Don't travel at night! F

P.S. Make sure this is the real Strider. There are many of them. Strange men on the roads. His real name is Aragorn.

All that glitters is not gold.

Not all who wander are lost; what is old and strong does not fade.
The deep roots are untouched by frost. From the ashes, fire will be reborn.
A light will burst forth from the darkness; the broken blade will be reforged. He who has no crown will be king again.


P.S. I hope Butterbur sends this quickly. Man, but his memory is like a lumberjack's. room: something always buried.

If he forgets, I'll roast him.

Farewell!


A worthy





223

Frodo read the letter to himself, then passed it on to Pippin and Sam. The very old Butterbur made a terrible mess.
"That's ridiculous!" he exclaimed. "He deserves to be roasted. If I'd had that in my..." In the old days, we might all be safe in Riven What happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he were exposing himself to great danger.
"He's been doing this for many years," Strider said. Frodo turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering Regarding Gandalf's second postscript. Why didn't you tell me?
"So you were immediately friends with Gandalf?" he asked. That saved time.

Really? Would you have believed in me until now?
said Sttider. I knew nothing about that letter. As far as I know, I would have had to persuade you to trust me without proof if I were from you. The enemy has already set traps for me. Like
As soon as I made my decision, I was ready to tell you.
Everything you asked for. But I must admit, he added with a strange laugh, that I was hoping you would take it for me.
For himself. A hunted man sometimes tires of mistrust and longs for friendship. But here, I think my appearance is an obstacle. Me.

"They are - at least at first glance," Pippin laughed.
A sudden relief after reading Gandalf's letter. But beautiful is as beautiful as made, as they say in the Shire; and I dare say We will all look very much alike after spending days lying in hedges and ditches.

It would take more than a few days, weeks, or years to
wandering in the wilderness to make you look like Aragorn, he replied. And you would die first, unless you were made of Tougher than you look.

Pippin calmed down; but Sam was not discouraged and he continued Strider looked at him dubiously. How do we know you're Strider? "What is Gandalf talking about?" he asked. "You have never..."
Gandalf said that, until this letter came out. You might be a spy playing a part, I see, trying to get us to leave with


224





You. You could have done the same thing with the real Strider and taken his... clothes. What do you think?

"You're a strapping fellow," replied Aragorn; "but I am..." I fear my only answer to you, Sam Gambee, is this: If I had killed the real I've already killed you without so many words. If I were after the Ringing, I could have it - now!

He stood up and suddenly seemed to grow taller.
His eyes shone with a bright, commanding light. Throwing his cloak back, he placed his hand on the hilt of a sword that hung concealed

She was sitting with her mouth wide open, staring at him with a bewildered expression.

But I'm the real Strider, thankfully, he said, looking
He looked down at them, his face softened by a sudden smile. "I am Aragorn, son of Arathorn; and if by life or death I can save you, I

A long silence followed. Finally, Frodo spoke hesitantly. "I thought you were a friend even before I received this letter." He said it, or at least I wish I had said it. You frightened me. Several times tonight, but never in the way the servants of The enemy would do it, at least I imagine so. I think one of their spies...
That would seem... well, fairer and more unpleasant, if you see what I mean.
"I see," Strider laughed. "I look horrible and I feel good. Is that it?" All that glitters is not gold, not all who wander are lost. "Did these verses apply to you then?" asked Frodo. "I could..." I didn't understand what they were about. But how did you know that the "I didn't know," he replied. "But I am Aragorn, and..."
These verses correspond to that name. He drew his sword, and
They found that the blade was indeed broken a foot below the handle. Not very useful, is it, Sam? said Strider. But time is of the esse close to the time when it will be reforged. Sam said nothing.
"Well," said Strider, "with Sam's permission, we'll call it that."
It's settled. Strider will be your guide. And now, I think the time has come. You went to bed and got the rest you could. We will have





225


The road ahead will be difficult tomorrow. Even if we are allowed to leave Bree without hindrance, it's hard to hope it will go unnotic But I'm going to try to get lost as quickly as possible. I know one or
There are two other ways out of Bree-land besides the main road. Once we get rid of the pursuit, I'll head towards Amon Sûl. "Weathertop?" asked Sam. "What is that?"
It's a hill, just north of the road, roughly halfway from here to Rivendell. It offers a breathtaking panoramic view; And there we'll have the chance to look around. Gandalf will go to that point, if he follows us. After Weathertop Our journey will become more difficult, and we will have to choose between different dangers.

"When did you last see Gandalf?" asked Frodo. "Have you seen Gandalf?" Do you know where he is, or what he's doing?

Strider looked grave. "I don't know," he said. "I came west with him in the spring. I often patrolled the borders." of the Shire in recent years, when he was occupied elsewhere.
He rarely left her unattended. Our last meeting was on May 1st, at Sarn Ford, downstream from the Brandywine. He told me that his Things had gone well with you, and you would be... I'm leaving for Rivendell the last week of September. Knowing he was by your side, I clean. And this proved detrimental; for it is clear that some news reached him, and I was not there to help him.

I'm troubled, for the first time since I've known him. We should have exchanged messages, even if he couldn't come. himself. Upon my return several days ago, I heard the news of the illness. The news had spread like wildfire: Gandalf was missing and the riders had been sighted. It was the
El vcn - the people of Gildor who told me this; and later they told me
that you had left your home; but we had no news of you. I am leaving Buckland. I have been watching the road east. anxiously.

Do you think the Black Riders have any connection with "Is this in Gandalf's absence, I mean?" asked Frodo.

I can't see anything else that could have hindered
"Him, except the Enemy himself," said Aragorn. "But don't..."


226

Don't get your hopes up! Gandalf is bigger than you, people of the Shire, don't you think? As a rule, we only ever see his jokes and hi

Pippin yawned. "I'm sorry," he said, "but I'm exhausted. Despite all the dangers and worries, I must go to bed, or I sleep where I sit. That would be the last straw, if we had to go out in the dark to look for him.

At that moment, they heard a door slam; then footsteps could be heard. They were running along the passageway. Merry came running up. lowered by Nob. He closed the door hurriedly and leaned against
He was out of breath. They stared at him anxiously for a long moment. A moment before exclaiming: I saw them, Frodo! I saw them! I saw them! The Black Riders!

"The Black Riders!" cried Frodo. "Where?"

Here. In the village. I stayed inside for an hour. Then, since you didn't come back, I went out for a walk. I had come back and standing just outside the light of the
a lamp gazing at the stars. Suddenly, I shuddered and felt something horrible approaching: there was a kind of

a deeper shadow among the shadows on the other side of the road, just beyond the edge of the lamplight. She slipped into the darkness a Without a sound. There was no horse.
"Which way did he go?" Strider asked suddenly and sharply. Merry began, noticing the stranger for the first time. "Go." "Let's go!" said Frodo. "He's a friend of Gandalf's. I'll explain later."

He seemed to be walking away down the road, heading east, Joyeux continued. I tried to follow him. Of course, he disappeared almost imm once; but I turned the corner and continued to the last house on the road.

Strider looked at Merry in astonishment. "You've got quite a temper." "Heart," he said; "but that was insane."

"I don't know," said Merry. "Neither brave nor stupid, I think."
I could hardly help myself. I was irresistibly drawn there. Anyway, I went, and suddenly I heard voices near the hedge.





227


One was muttering; the other was whispering or whistling.
I didn't hear a word that was being said. I didn't crawl at all.
I got closer, because I started trembling all over. Then I felt a sense of terror... I heard a gunshot, I turned around and was about t

I found it, sir, it was put in Nob. Mr. Butterbur sent me.
with a lantern. I went down to the West gate, then I went back up.
Heading towards Southgate. Right next to Bill Ferny's house, I thought to myself...
I thought I saw something on the road. I couldn't say for sure, but... It seemed to me that two men were leaning over something. I lifted him up. I shouted, but when I got to the place where he... There was no trace of them, and only Mr. Brandybuck lay by the At the side of the road. He seemed to be asleep. "I thought I had fallen into
"Deep water," he told me when I shook him. Very strange. He was, and as soon as I woke him up, he got up and ran. I'm back here like a hare.

"I'm afraid that's true," said Merry, "though I don't know for sure."
That's what I said. I had a horrible nightmare, which I don't remember. I broke down. I don't know what came over me. "Yes," said Strider. "The Black Breath. The Riders must..."
left their horses outside and went back through the
Southgate in secret. They will know all the news now, because they visited Bill Ferny; and probably that Southerner. He was also a spy. Something could happen during the night, before we leave Bree.
"What's going to happen?" asked Merry. "Are they going to attack the inn?" "No, I don't think so," said Strider. "They're not all here yet."
And anyway, that's not how they operate. In darkness and solitude they are strongest; they won't openly attack a house where
There are lights and many people-not until they are extinguished, not while all the long leagues of Eriador still stretch before us. Bu They will hold them in their grip. They will push these wretches to commit some evil. Work: Ferny, and some foreigners, and perhaps the The security guard too. They had an altercation with Harry at Westgate. On Monday. I was watching them. He was white and trembling. when they left him.


228





"It seems we have enemies all around us," said Frodo. "What should we do?"

Stay here and don't go back to your rooms! They've surely discovered which ones. The hobbit rooms have North-facing windows close to the ground. We're all going to
Stay together and barricade that window and door. But first... Nob and I will go get your luggage.

During Strider's absence, Frodo gave a brief account to Merry
of everything that had happened since supper. Merry was still reading. Aragorn and Nob returned.

"Well, Masters," said Nob, "I have ruffled the clothes and I placed a bolster in the middle of each bed. And I made a
A fine imitation of your head with a brown wool rug, sir. Bag - Underhill, sir, he added with a smile.

Pippin laughed. "Very realistic!" he said. "But what will happen?" What happens when they've pierced the disguise? "We'll see," said Strider. "Let's hope we can hold out until morning."

"Good night," said Nob, and he went to get his bed. Part of the door surveillance.

They piled their bags and equipment onto the living room floor. He pushed a low chair against the door and closed the window. Looking o The sickle* swung, gleaming, above Bree-hill's shoulders. He then closed and locked the heavy inner shutters, and pulled them shut. The

The hobbits lay down on their blankets, feet on the ground, near the hearth; but Strider settled himself in the armchair against the door. They talked for a little while, because Merry still had several questions to ask.

"I jumped over the moon!" chuckled Merry as he rolled it.
himself in his blanket. That's very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish


* The name that Hobbits give to the Plough or the Great Bear.


229

I was there to see. The worthy of Bree will be dishonored. I will still curse it a hundred years from now. "I hope so," said Strider. Then all fell silent, and at a certain hour, the hobbits fell asleep.

n





As they were preparing to sleep at the Bree inn, night was falling.
Buckland; a mist drifted through the valleys and along the riverbanks. Crickhollow's house remained silent. Fatty Bolger opened the doo I cautiously opened the door and glanced outside. A feeling of dread washed over me. He had enjoyed himself so much all day that he was As he stared into the darkness, a black shadow slipped beneath
The trees; the gate seemed to open and close of its own accord, again without a sound. Terror gripped him. He stepped back. And for a moment, he stood there, trembling, in the hall. Then he locked the door.

The night grew thicker. The soft neighing of horses could be heard.
They crept stealthily along the path. They stopped in front of the gate, and three dark figures entered, like creeping shadows of the n across the courtyard. One went toward the door, the other toward the corner. of the house on either side; and they stood there, motionl The shadows of the stones, as night slowly settled in. The house and the silent trees seemed to hold their breath.

A soft rustling sound was felt in the leaves, and a rooster crowed in the distance. The cold hour before dawn was passing. The silhouet The door moved. In the darkness, without moon or stars,
The drawn blade gleamed, as if an icy light had just been pulled from its sheath. There was a soft but heavy knock, and the door trembl Open up, in the name of Mordor! said a thin, menacing voice.
On the second blow, the door gave way and fell back down, with
The beams gave way and the lock was broken. Dark figures passed by, quickly entering.

At that moment, a horn sounded among the nearby trees. It tore through the night like a fire on a hilltop.





231


Wake up! Fear! Fire! Enemies! Wake up!

Big Bolger hadn't been idle. As soon as he saw the darkness and shapes emerging from the garden, he knew he had to run for
He had to do it, or perish. And he fled, through the back door, across the garden and the fields. When he reached the nearest The house was over a kilometer away; he collapsed on the threshold. No, no, no! he cried. No, not me! I don't have it!
It took some time before anyone could understand what it was; they stammered. Finally, they understood that the enemies were In Buckland, a strange invasion from... And they wasted no more time.

Fear! Fire! Enemies!

The Brandybucks sounded Buckland's horn,
which hadn't been rung for a hundred years, not since the
The white wolves arrived during the Fatal Winter, when the Brandywine was frozen. Wake up! Wake up!
In the distance, response sirens could be heard. The alarm had sounded. Broadcast. The dark figures fled from the house. One of them dropped

a hobbit cloak on the step, as he ran. In the alley, the sound of hooves began to run and, gathering at a gallop, they pounded the grou Honking horns, shouts and the sound of running footsteps.
But the Black Riders rode like a storm toward the North Gate. Those little men are useless! Sauron would deal with them later. Meanwhile, they had another mission: they now knew that the house was empty and the Ring had disappeared. They rode down. The guards po


232

Early in the night, Frodo awoke suddenly from a deep sleep, as if disturbed by a noise or a presence. He saw that Strider sat alert in his chair: his eyes shone in the light of the fire, which had been tended and was burning
He had a bright look in his eyes, but he made no sign or movement.

Frodo soon fell asleep again; but his dreams were once more... Disturbed by the sound of the wind and galloping hooves. The wind seemed to wrap around the house and shake it; and in the distance, he heard a horn sounding wildly. He opened his
He opened his eyes and heard a rooster crowing vigorously in the inn's courtyard. Strider had drawn the curtains and pushed back the sh A metallic clang. The first grey glimmer of daylight entered the room, and a chill emanated from it. Air entered through the open windo

As soon as Strider had woken everyone up, he led the way to their rooms. When they saw them, they were happy that They had followed his advice: the windows had been forced open, and they swayed, and the curtains flapped; the beds They were tossed about, and the bolsters were slashed and thrown on the floor; the brown carpet was torn to pieces.

Strider immediately went to fetch the owner. Poor Mr. Butterbur looked drowsy and frightened. He had barely closed up He kept his eyes open all night (or so he said), but he never heard a sound.

"Never has anything like this happened in my lifetime!" he exclaimed, throwing up his hands in horror. "Guests unable to sleep in their has?

"Dark times," Strider said. "But for now, you can be..." We will leave in peace, once you have eliminated us.
Just once. It doesn't matter what breakfast is: a drink and a bite to eat standing up. That'll do. We'll be done cleaning up in a few m

Mr. Butterbur hurried to make sure their ponies were safe, ready, and to bring them food. But he returned very quickly.
in consternation. The ponies had disappeared! The stable doors had been opened during the night, and they had vanished: not only Merry's ponies, but also all the other horses and animals of the place.

Frodo was devastated by the news. How could they possibly hope... to reach Rivendell on foot, pursued by enemies on horseback?





233


Might as well go to the moon. Strider remained silent for a moment.
while observing the hobbits, as if weighing the pros and cons of their strength and courage.

"The ponies wouldn't help us escape the riders," he said. Finally, thoughtfully, as if he guessed what Frodo had in mind.

We shouldn't slow down much more on foot, nor on the roads I was planning to take. I was going to walk anyway. That's the Food and shops worry me. We can't rely on supplies. There's nothing to eat between here and Rivendell, except what we
We must take with us; and we should take plenty in reserve; for we may be delayed, or forced to make a detour, very far from the Direct route. How much are you willing to carry on your back?

"As much as we must," said Pippin, his heart heavy.
but trying to show that it was harder than it looked (or felt). "I can carry enough for two," Sam declared defiantly.
"Is there nothing to be done, Mr. Butterbur?" asked Frodo.
Couldn't we have a few ponies in the village, or even just one? Just for carrying luggage? I suppose we couldn't hire them, but perhaps

"I doubt it," said the owner, looking unhappy. The two or three
The riding ponies that were in Bree were stabled in my stable, and they've left. As for the other animals, horses or ponies... Whether it's drought or something else, they are very few in number in Bree, and
They won't be for sale. But I'll do what I can. I'll track Bob down and send him on the rounds as soon as possible.

"Yes," Strider said reluctantly, "you'd better do it. I am..." We fear we'll have to try and get at least one pony. But then... dashes We could just as easily have honked our horn to announce our departure. That was probably part of their plan.

There is a crumb of comfort, said Merry, and more.
Rather than a crumb, I hope: we can have breakfast while we wait. So, let's sit down and get to work. Let's go get Nob!


234

In the end, there was a delay of more than three hours. Bob
returned with the report that no horse or pony should be. Everything was found in the neighborhood, at any price - except one:
Bill Ferny had one he might eventually sell. A poor old thing
"It's a half-starved creature," Bob said; "but he doesn't want to part with it." Buying it for less than three times its value, given y I know Bill Ferny.

"Bill Ferny?" asked Frodo. "Isn't there a catch?"
Did the beast return to him with all our belongings, or did it help us find it, or something like that?

"I wonder," Strider said. "But I can't imagine any animal."
I ran back to his house once the dog had escaped. I guess that's all it was. A last-minute idea from kind Master Ferny: just a way to i He's profiting from this situation. The main danger is that...
The poor animal is probably on its deathbed. But there seems to be no other option. What does he want in return?

Bill Ferny's asking price was twelve silver pieces; and that was all. Indeed, at least three times the value of a pony in those parts. It turned out to be a thin, underfed, and listless animal; but
He didn't seem ready to die yet. Mr. Butterbur paid the price.
himself, and offered Merry an extra eighteen pence as a sort of compensation for the lost animals. He was an honest man, and well-to-do The few cents were a hard blow for him, and being cheated by Bill Ferny made it even harder to bear.

In reality, he came out of it on the right side in the
The end. It later turned out that only one horse had actually been stolen. The others had been chased away or had run off.

Terrified, they were found wandering in different parts of the town. Merry's ponies had all escaped, and Finally (using their common sense), they found their way. They arrived at the Downs in search of Fatty Lumpkin. under Tom Bombadil's care for a while, and they were doing well-But when Tom learned what had happened in Bree, He sent them to Mr. Butterbur, who thus obtained five good animals.
at a very reasonable price. They had to work harder in Bree, but Bob treated them well; so overall, they were lucky: they


235
They missed a dark and dangerous journey. But they never came. To Rivendell. However, in the meantime, as far as Mr. Butterbur knows,
The money had disappeared, permanently or not. And there were other things, troubles. For there was great unrest as soon as the The remaining guests became agitated and learned of the raid on the inn. The southern travelers had lost several horses and
He loudly blamed the innkeeper, until it was known that one of them, among them, had disappeared during the night. Except for Bill Ferny's squinty-eyed companion, suspicion fell on him immediately.

If you catch a horse thief and bring him to my
"It's at home," Butterbur said angrily, "that you should pay for everything!" Go ahead and hurt yourself and then come yelling at me. G Ferny, where is your handsome friend! But it would seem that
He was no one's friend, and no one remembered the date he had joined their party.

After their breakfast, the hobbits had to repack their bags and get ready. Together, they had taken extra provisions for the long journ They waited now. It was almost ten o'clock when they finally arrived. He got off. At that moment, all of Bree was in a frenzy.
The excitement. Frodo's disappearance; the appearance of the Black Riders; the looting of the stables; and above all, the news that Strider the Ranger had joined the mysterious
The hobbits invented a story that would last for many years without incident. Most of the inhabitants of Bree and Staddle, and many Even those in Combe and Archet were crowded on the road to
Watching the travelers begin. The other guests at the hostel were either at the doors or leaning out of the windows.

Strider had changed his mind and decided to leave
Bree, near the main road. Any attempt to cross the countryside
Immediate intervention would only make things worse: half the inhabitants would follow them, to see what they were doing, and to prevent them from entering without authorization.

They said goodbye to Nob and Bob, and took their leave of Mr. Butterbur, thanking him profusely. I hope we'll meet again.


236





"One day, when joy returns," said Frodo. "I should wish for nothing more than to stay home in peace for a while."

They shuffled away, anxious and discouraged, under the watchful eyes of the crowd. Not all faces were friendly, nor were all words shou the admiration of most of the inhabitants of Bree, and of those he gazed upon. They closed their mouths and walked away. He walked ahea Frodo; then Merry and Pippin; and finally Sam.
leading the pony, which was loaded as much as possible with their
They carried the luggage as they had the heart to give it away; but already, this seemed obvious. Less dejected, as if she approved of

Sam chewed an apple thoughtfully. His pockets were full. Among them: a parting gift from Nob and Bob. Apples for "Walking and smoking a pipe," he said. "But I think I'm going to miss it." Both very quickly.
The hobbits paid no attention to the curious heads that
They peered through the gates, or jumped over walls and fences, as they passed. But as they approached the farthest gate, Frodo I glimpsed a dark, dilapidated house behind a thick hedge: the last house in the village. Through one of the windows, he saw
A pale face with sly, slanted eyes; but he disappeared immediately.
So that's where that southerner is hiding! he thought. Looks more than half like a goblin. Over the hedge, another man stared boldly at them. He had
Thick, black eyebrows, dark, contemptuous eyes; his large mouth. He wore a disdainful grin. He smoked a short, black pipe. As they appr "Hello, Longshanks!" he said. "Did you leave early? I found a few. Finally, some friends?" Strider nodded, but didn't reply.
"Hello, my little friends!" he said to the others. "I suppose you know who you started with? It's Stick-at-" Strider, that is! Although I've heard other names... So pretty. Watch out tonight! And you, Sammie, don't leave. "You're mistreating my poor old pony! Pff!" he spat again.

Sam turned around abruptly. "And you, Ferny," he said, "put on your... Hide that ugly face, or he'll get hurt." With a sudden movement,





237


Quick as lightning, an apple flew from his hands and landed right in Bill Square. Bullseye! He dodged too late, and curses erupted from Behind the hedge. What a waste for such a good apple, said Sam regretfully, and continued with a determined step.

Finally, they left the village. The children's escort
And the stragglers who had followed them grew weary and turned back. Returning to the south gate, they passed through it and continued The road stretched for several kilometers. It turned left, then curved back towards... its eastern line, as it skirted the foot of Bree She began to descend rapidly towards a wooded area.
To their left, they could see some houses and hobbit holes of Staddle on the gentler southeast slopes of the hill; Deep in a hollow, far north of the road, there was
Wisps of smoke rose, indicating the location of Combe; Archet was hidden in the trees beyond .

After the road had stretched for some distance, and ended, Bree-hill stood proudly, its brown back, they arrived at a A narrow path led north. That's where
"We are leaving the open area and taking cover," Strider said.
"This isn't a shortcut, I hope," said Pippin. "Our last shortcut..." The journey through the woods nearly turned into a disaster. "Ah, but I wasn't with you at that time," he laughed.
Strider. My haircuts, short or long, are always successful. He took one. He looked both ways along the road. No one was in sight; and h

His plan, insofar as they can understand it without knowing it...
When crossing the country, you should first head towards Archet, but bear right and pass it to the east, then head as straight as possi He could thus cross the wilderness to Weathertop Hill.
If all went well, they would allow a large loop of the road to be cut out, which further on forked south to avoid the Midgewater. Marsh. But, of course, they should cross it.
the marshes themselves, and Strider's description of them, was not encouraging.

However, in the meantime, the walk was not unpleasant. Indeed, without the disturbing events of


238





The night before, they would have appreciated this part of the journey better than ever before. The sun was shining, the air was clear, He guided them confidently through the numerous intersections.
even though, left to their own devices, they would soon have found themselves at a loss. He followed a winding and tortuous path, and duplicates, to fend off any prosecution.

Bill Ferny will have followed the place where we left the road, because
"Certainly," he said; "although I don't think he'll follow us himself. He knows the area quite well, but he knows He's no match for me in the woods. That's what he might say. Others worry me. I suppose they're not far away.
If they think we've done projects for Archet, all the better.

Whether it's due to Strider's talent or for some other reason,
They saw no signs and heard no sounds from any other living being. On that day, there were neither bipeds, except for birds, nor quadru

except for a fox and a few squirrels. The next day, they began to maintain a steady course eastward; and all was still calm and peaceful. On the third day after leaving Bree, they left Chetwood. The ground had been steadily sinking ever since they
They turned off the road and entered a wide plain, a vast territory, much more difficult to manage. They were Far beyond the borders of Bree country, in the untrailed wilderness, and approaching the Midgewater marshes.

The ground then became damp, and in places marshy and
Here and there they encountered ponds and wide expanses of Reeds and rushes filled with the song of hidden little birds.
They had to choose their path carefully to keep their feet dry and on their normal route. At first, they made satisfactory progress, bu And there was no permanent path, not even for the forest rangers, through their shifting mud. Flies began to torment them, and the air


239

"I'm being eaten alive!" cried Pippin. "Midgewater!" There are more midges than water!

"How do they live when they can't get a hobbit?" asked Sam, scratching the back of his neck.

They spent a miserable day in that lonely and unpleasant rural spot. Their campsite was damp, cold, and uncomfortable; and the biting i There were also abominable creatures that haunted the reeds and
Clumps of grass, judging by their sound, were ugly relatives of crickets. There were thousands of them, and they all chirped. round, neek-breek, breek-neek, without ceasing all night, until the hobbits were almost frantic.

The next day, the fourth day, was hardly better, and the night almost as uncomfortable. Although the Neekerbreekers (like Sam) (called such) had been left behind, the midges continued to pursue them.

As Frodo lay tired but unable to close his eyes, he seemed to glimpse a light in the eastern sky in the distance: It blinked and went out several times. It wasn't dawn yet, because it was still a few hours late.

"What is that light?" he asked Aragorn, who had stood up. He was standing, his gaze lost in the night.
"I don't know," Strider replied. "It's too far for me to do." It's like a flash of lightning from the hilltops. Frodo went back to bed, but he was able to sleep for a long time yet.
to see the white flashes, and against them the large, dark silhouette of Strider, motionless and vigilant. Finally, he passed into Restless sleep.

They hadn't gone very far on the fifth day when they left the last scattered ponds and reedbeds of the marshes behind them. The ground in front of them began to rise gradually.
In the distance, to the east, they could now see a line of hills. The highest was to the right of the line and a It was slightly different from the others. It had a conical top, slightly flattened at the top.

"That's Amon Sûl," said Strider. "The Old Road, which..."


240

We left it far to our right; it runs south and passes not far from its base. We could reach it around noon tomorrow if we go straight t You'd better do it.

"What do you mean?" asked Frodo.

I mean, when we get there, we don't know exactly what we'll do. You'll find it. It's near the road. But we were still hoping to find Gandalf there? Yes; but the hope is slim. If he comes this far, he He might not go through Bree, and therefore he might not know what
We're doing this. And anyway, unless we get lucky, we're almost not going to make it. Together, we're going to miss each other; it won' or that we might have to wait there for a long time. If the Riders fail to find us in the wilderness, they will likely head towards Amo It offers a panoramic view. Indeed, there is
many birds and animals in this country that could see us, like
We stand here, atop this hill. Not all birds are meant to be. They are trustworthy, and there are other spies more malevolent than they

The hobbits gazed anxiously at the distant hills. Sam
He raised his eyes to the pale sky, fearing he might see falcons or eagles, looming over them with a sharp, hostile gaze. You do it "You make me uncomfortable and feel alone, Strider!" he said. "What do you advise us to do?" asked Frodo.
"I think so," Strider replied slowly, as if he wasn't entirely sure. Of course, I think the best way is to go straight east from
Here, as much as possible, we will head towards the line of hills, not towards Amon Sûl. There, we can take a path I know that leads to their feet; this will lead us to Amun-Sul from the north and less openly. We shall see then what we shall see.

They advanced with difficulty all day, until the cold and the early morning. Evening fell. The earth became drier and more arid; but mists and vapors spread behind them over the marshes.
A few melancholy birds sang and moaned, until the circle of the red sun slowly sank into the western shadow; then a void
Silence fell again. The hobbits reflected on the soft light of the sunset, glancing out of the cheerful windows of Bag End in the dista

241

At the end of the day, they arrived at a stream that meandered down the hills to disappear into the stagnant marshes. And they climbed back up its branches as long as the light lasted. It was
Night had already fallen when they finally stopped and set up camp under some stunted alders, by the stream.
Before us now rose, against the twilight sky, the grim and bare back of the hills. That night they set up a watch, and Strider, it seem and, in the early hours of the night, a cold grey glow hung over the earth.

The next morning, they set off again shortly after sunrise. The air was frosty and the sky was a pale, clear blue.
The hobbits felt invigorated, as if they had spent a night without interruption sleeping. They were already beginning to get used to wa The common lands were short-shorter, at any rate, than those of the Shire; they would have thought it barely enough to keep them on the

"Very strange," said Frodo, tightening his belt, considering that in reality, I am much less present. I hope that The slimming process will not continue indefinitely, otherwise I will become a ghost.

"Don't talk about such things!" Strider said quickly, and with surprising seriousness.

The hills drew closer. They formed an undulating ridge, often rising to nearly a thousand feet, and here and there then falling back into crevasses or shallow passes leading east beyond. Along the ridge, the hobbits could
One could see what appeared to be the remains of walls covered in vegetation and dikes, and in the crevices still stood the ruins of an They camped on the slopes. It was the night of the fifth day in October, and they were six days from Bree.

In the morning, they noticed, for the first time since they had left Chetwood, a clearly visible trail. They turned right and followed which seemed to have been chosen in such a way as to conceal as much as possible.


242

From the vantage point, it offered views both of the hilltops upstream and of the plains stretching westward. It plunged into valleys a where it passed over flatter and more open terrain, either
On the side, there were rows of large rocks and hewn stones, which protected the travelers almost like a hedge.

"I wonder who laid out this path, and for what purpose," said Merry, as they walked along one of those avenues, where the stones They were exceptionally large and very close together. I'm not sure I like that.
It has a... well, rather ghostly appearance. Is there... a wheelbarrow on Amon Sûl?

No. There is no burial mound at Weathertop, nor at any other site. "These hills," replied Aragorn. "The Men of the West..."
They lived here; although, in their last days, they defended the hills for a time against the evil that came from Angmar.
A path was built to serve the forts located along the ramparts. But long before that, in the early days of the Northern Kingdom, they b large watchtower on Amon Sûl, which they called Amon Sûl.
It was burned and destroyed, and nothing remains of it now, but
A rolled-up ring, like a rudimentary crown, on the summit of the old hill. Yet once, it was grand and beautiful. It is said that Elendi watching for the arrival of Gil-galad from the West, in The Days of the Last Alliance.

The hobbits observed Aragorn. He seemed learned.
in ancient legends, as well as in savage customs. Who was Gil-galad? asked Merry; but Aragorn did not answer, and He seemed lost in thought. Suddenly, a low voice was heard, murmuring:

Gil-galad was an elf king.

The harpists sing sadly about him:
the last one whose kingdom was just and free Between the mountains and the sea.

His sword was long, his spear was sharp; in the distance, one could see his shining helmet; the countless stars of the celestial field were reflected in his silver shield.





243


But he left on horseback a long time ago, and where he remains, no one can say; for his star fell into darkness in Mordor, where shadows reign.

The others turned around in astonishment, for the voice was Sam's. Don't stop! said Merry.
"That's all I know," Sam stammered, blushing. "I learned it from Mr. Bilbo when I was a child. He used to tell me stories like that, kn Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo who taught me to read. He was
The great scholar was dear old Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote On Poetry. He wrote what I just said.
"He didn't invent it," Strider said. "It's part of the secular narrative. It's called the Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient lan There was much more, said Sam, everything about Mordor.
I didn't learn that part, it gave me chills. I never would have thought... I should go that way too!

"On our way to Mordor!" cried Pippin. "I hope it doesn't come to that..."
"Don't say that name so loudly!" said Strider. It was already noon when they approached the south.
At the end of the path, and they saw before them, in the pale and clear light under the October sun, a grey-green bank rising like a They decided to build a bridge on the north side of the hill to reach the summit immediately, while the day was still long. Concealment He was seen moving about on the hill. If Gandalf was in the area, there was no trace of him.

On the west side of Weathertop, they found a hollow shelter, at the bottom of which was a bowl-shaped hole. with grassy sides. They left Sam and Pippin there with the
The pony, their bags and luggage. The other three continued on their way. After a half-hour of arduous climbing, Strider reached the su


244




From the top of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last slope was steep and rocky. At the summit, they found, as Strider had said, a wide ring of
Ancient stone structures, now in ruins or covered with traces of time. Grass. But in the center, a cairn of broken stones had been erec They were piled up. They were blackened as if by fire. Around them,

The turf was burned to the roots and all the grass inside the circle was burned; it was scorched and shriveled, as if the flames had ra at the summit; but there was no sign of life.

Standing on the edge of the ruined circle, they saw everything
Far below stretched a vast panorama, mainly composed of deserted and featureless land, except for a few wooded clearings in the distanc to the south, beyond which they caught here and there the
A reflection of water in the distance. Below them, on this south side.
The Old Road ran there like a ribbon, coming from the West
and winding up and down, until it disappeared behind a ridge of dark earth to the east. Nothing moved there. Next With their own eyes, they saw the line stretching eastward, the mountains:
The nearest foothills were brown and dark; behind them rose
taller grey shapes, and behind these were again tall white shapes. Sparkling peaks among the clouds.

"Well, here we are!" said Merry. And very gloomy and
It doesn't look welcoming! There's no water or shelter. And no
Gandalf's sign. But I don't blame him for not waiting - if He has already come here.

"I wonder," said Strider, looking thoughtfully around him. "Even if he'd been a day or two behind us in Bree, he might have He arrived here first. He can move very quickly if needed.
Suddenly, he bent down and looked at the stone at the top of
the cairn; it was flatter than the others, and whiter, as if it had escaped the flames. He picked it up and examined it, turning it ove He had it in his hands. "This problem was recently resolved," he said. What do you think of these marks?

On the flat underside, Frodo saw some scratches: I*- III There seems to be a line, a dot, then three more lines. he said. The line on the left could be a G rune with thin strokes.




245


"Branches," said Aragorn. "It could be a sign left by Gandalf," though one cannot be certain. The stripes are thin, and they They look brand new. But these markings could have a meaning.
This is completely different and has nothing to do with us. The Rangers use runes, and they sometimes come here. What could they possibly mean, even if Gandalf had created them? asked Merry.
"I would say," replied Strider, "that they represented G3. And were a sign that Gandalf was here on October 3rd." This was three days ago. This would also show that he was at
An imminent emergency and danger meant he had neither the time nor the inclination. He didn't dare write anything longer or simpler. If

I would like us to be sure that he has made his mark, whatever happens.
"Perhaps that's what they mean," said Frodo. "It would be a great comfort to..." know that he was on his way, either ahead of us or beh

"Perhaps," Strider said. "Personally, I believe he was." He was there, and in danger. There were blazing flames. here; and now the light we saw three nights ago in the eastern sky comes back to me. I suppose it was
He was attacked at the top of this hill, but I couldn't say with what result. He's no longer here, and now we must take care of ourselv and make our way to Rivendell, as best we can.

"How far is Rivendell?" asked Merry, looking around wearily. The world seemed wild and vast from Amon Sûl.

I don't know if the road has ever been measured in miles. beyond the Forgotten Inn, a day's walk east of Bree,

Strider replied. Some say that's been the case so far, and others say the opposite. Wise. It's a strange road, and people are happy to The end of the journey, whether long or short. But I know
How long would it take me on my own, in good weather? And no harm done: twelve days from here to the ford of Bruinen, where the road crosses the flowing Loudwater
We will leave Rivendell. It will take us at least two weeks of travel before we can return. We, because I don't think we'll be able to "Fifteen days!" said Frodo. "A lot can happen between now and then."
"It's possible," said Strider.


246

They remained silent for a moment at the top of the hill, near its southern side.
On the edge of the precipice. In this lonely place, Frodo, for the first time fully aware of his homelessness and the danger. He bitter he stared at the cursed road that led back west-to his home. Suddenly, he noticed two black dots were
advancing slowly along it, heading west; and looking again, he saw that three others were sneaking east to meet up. He let out a cry and grabbed Strider's arm.
"Look," he said, pointing downwards. Immediately, Strider threw himself to the ground behind the The circle was broken, drawing Frodo to his side. Merry threw himself to his side.

"What is it?" he murmured.
"I don't know, but I fear the worst," Strider replied. Slowly, they crawled back to the edge of the ring, and
She peered through a crack between two jagged stones. The light had vanished, for the clear morning had dissipated, and the clouds, com as the light began to fade. They could all see the black dots, but neither Frodo nor Merry could distinguish their shapes.
Some; yet something told them that down there, far below, the Black Riders were gathering on the road beyond the foot of the hill.

"Yes," replied Strider, whose keen eyesight left him with no doubt. "The enemy is here!"

They slipped away hurriedly and slipped along the north side of the hill to rejoin their companions.

Sam and Peregrin hadn't been idle. They had explored the small valley and the surrounding slopes. Not far from there, they I found a spring of clear water on the hillside, and near it footprints more than a day or two old. In the valley itself
They found recent traces of a fire and other signs of a hasty intervention at the camp. There were fallen rocks at the edge of the vall as close as possible to the hill. Behind them, Sam discovered a small shop with neatly stacked firewood.





247

"I wonder if old Gandalf ever came here," he said to Pippin. Whoever put these things here intended to get them back, it seems. Strider was very interested in these discoveries. I wish I had waited and explored the terrain here myself.
he said, rushing towards the source to examine the fingerprints. "That's exactly what I was afraid of," he said upon his return. Sam
He and Pippin stomped on the soft ground, and the markings are spoiled or blurred. The Rangers were here recently. It was them.
who left the firewood behind. But there are also several more recent trails that weren't made by the Rangers. At least one set was made I can't be certain now, but I think there were many who were fired. He stopped and remained there, lost in his anxious thoughts.

Each of the hobbits had a vision of the hooded man in their mind's eye.
and the booted riders. If the riders had already found the valley, the sooner Strider took them somewhere else, the better. Sam He looked at the hollow with great aversion, now that he had heard news of their enemies on the road, only a few kilometers away.

Wouldn't we be better off getting out of here quickly, Mr. Strider? he asked impatiently. It's getting late, and I don't like this hole It tugs at my heartstrings in a way.

"Yes, we absolutely must decide immediately what we are going to do," replied Strider, looking up and considering the time and The weather. Well, Sam, he said finally, I don't like it
another place; but I can't imagine a better place where we
We could arrive before nightfall. At least we're out of sight for the moment.
At the moment, if we moved, we would be much more likely to be in a better position to be seen by spies. All we could do was get out. On our return north along this side of the hill range, the landscape is much the same as here. The road is
We observed it, but we would have had to cross it if we had tried to hide in the bushes to the south. On the north side of The road beyond the hills, the land is bare and flat for miles.

"Can the Riders see?" asked Merry. "I mean, they seem to..." usually, they used their noses rather than their eyes,

248





our sense of smell, if smell is the right word, at least in the
In broad daylight. But you forced us to lie flat on our stomachs when you saw them down below; and now you're talking about being seen

"I was too reckless at the top of the hill," replied Strider. "I was..." very anxious to find a sign of Gandalf; but it was a
It was a mistake on all three of our parts to ride up and stay there so long. Black horses can see, and the Riders can use men and othe they do not see the world of light as we see it, but our forms cast shadows in their minds, which only the midday sun dispels;
And in the darkness, they perceive many signs and forms that are hidden from us; then they are the ones we should fear most. And someti There are other senses besides sight and smell. We can
We felt their presence; it troubled our hearts, as soon as we...
They came here, and even before we saw them, they felt more at home. He insisted. Then, he added, his voice dropping to a whisper, the The ring attracts them.

"Is there no way out then?" asked Frodo, looking around anxiously.
If I move, I'll be seen and hunted! If I stay, they'll be drawn to me!

Strider placed his hand on his shoulder. "There's still hope," he said. "You're not alone. Let's take this wood that's ready." because fire is a sign. There are few shelters or defenses here, but
Fire will serve both. Sauron can use fire for evil purposes, as He can do anything, but these Riders do not like that and fear those wh who wields it. Fire is our friend in the wilderness.

"Maybe," Sam murmured. "That's also a good way of saying..."
"Here we are," is the only thing that comes to mind, apart from the shouts. Down below, in the lowest and most sheltered corner of the

They lit a fire and prepared a meal. The shadows of evening
The rain began to fall and the cold set in. They suddenly became aware of the situation. They were very hungry, as they hadn't eaten an quick; but they dared not do more than a frugal supper.
The lands that stretched before us were deserted, except for birds and animals. Inhospitable places, deserted by all the races of the w





249


Forest rangers sometimes passed beyond the hills, but they were few in number, and he did not linger. Other travelers were rare, and of Sometimes trolls venture out of the northern valleys of the Misty Mountains. Only travelers on the road could
They are most often found as dwarves, hurrying to get on with their own business, without any help and with few words to offer. foreigners.

"I don't see how we could keep our food fresh," said Frodo. "We've been careful enough these past few days, and this..." The supper is not a feast; but we consumed more than we should have, if we still have two weeks, and perhaps more, left.

"You can find food in nature," Strider said; "berries, roots, and..." Aromatic herbs; and I know how to hunt when the opportunity arise Hunting is a long and arduous task, and we must act quickly. Buckle up and think hopefully of the tables of
Elrond's house!

The cold intensified as night fell. Looking out at the edge of the valley, they saw nothing but a gray expanse, quickly disappearing in The sky cleared again and slowly filled with twinkling stars. Frodo and his companions huddled around the fire, wrapped in each
They had clothes and blankets; but Aragorn was content dressed in a simple cloak, and sitting a little apart, he was drawing thoughtful

As night fell and the light from the fire began to shine
He began to tell them stories with enthusiasm to distract them from their fear. He knew many stories and legends of old, of The Elves and Men, and the good and bad deeds of the Ancient of Days. They wondered how old he was and where he had gone.
I learned all this knowledge.

"Tell us about Gil-galad," Merry said suddenly, when he
I stopped at the end of a story about the elven kingdoms.
Do you know any other details about that old song you mentioned?

"Yes, indeed," replied Aragorn. "Frodo too, for..."
This worries us greatly. Merry and Pippin looked at Frodo, who was staring at the fire.


250

"I only know what Gandalf told me," said Frodo. Slowly. Gil-galad was the last of the great Elven kings of
Middle-earth. Gil-galad means "Starlight" in their language. Elendil, the friend of the elves, went to the land of -

"No!" Strider exclaimed, interrupting him, "I don't believe that story."
We should say it now, while the Enemy's servants are nearby. If we manage to reach Elrond's house, perhaps you will hear it. There, it is recounted in detail.

"Then tell us another story from the good old days," Sam begged; a tale about the Elves before the decline. I would wish that with all I would like to know more about the Elves; the darkness seems oppressive, so close.
"I will tell you briefly the story of Tinuviel," said Aragorn, "for it is a long story whose end is not known; and there is No one, except for Elrond, remembers it correctly anymore.
It used to be told. It's a beautiful story, though sad, like all the others in the tales of Middle-earth, and yet it might just cheer y He remained silent for a while, then he stopped talking, but sang softly:

The leaves were long, the grass was green, the hemlock umbels were tall and beautiful, And in the clearing, a light was seen. Sparkling stars in the shadows.

Tinuviel was dancing there
To the sound of an invisible flute,

And the starlight shone in her hair, and in her sparkling clothes.
Then Beren arrived from the cold mountains, and lost, he wandered beneath the leaves. And where the elven river flowed, he walked alone and sad.

He looked between the hemlock leaves.
And I saw with wonder golden flowers on her coat and sleeves, And her hair followed her like a shadow.




251


The enchantment healed her tired feet.
That they were condemned to wander beyond the hills; And he darted forth, strong and swift,

And she caught the shimmering moonbeams. Through the intertwined woods of Elvenhome She slipped away lightly on dancing feet,
And left him alone, still wandering. In the silent forest, listening. He often heard the sound of flying there.
Feet as light as linden leaves, or music that springs forth from underground, In hidden, trembling hollows.
The sheaves of hemlock were now withered, and one by one, with a sigh Beech leaves fell whisperingly in the flickering winter woods.

He searched for her endlessly, wandering far away.

Where the leaves of years carpeted the ground in a thick layer. By the light of the moon and the beam of the stars In a freezing, shivering sky.
Her coat shimmered in the moonlight, Like on a hill, high and far away
She danced, and at her feet lay objects, a shimmering silver mist. Last winter, she returned.
And his song unleashed a sudden spring.
Like the lark that soars and the rain that falls, and the melting water that bubbles. He saw the spring of elven flowers
About his feet, and healed again
He dreamed of dancing and singing with her. On the quiet grass.


252

She ran away again, but he quickly returned. Tiniwiel! Tiniwiel! He called her by her elven name; and then she stopped listening.
She remained motionless for a moment, and a spell cast. His voice resonated over her: Beren has come.

And misfortune befell Tiniwiel. That which, in her arms, glittered. Beren looked into her eyes, in the shadow of her hair.

The flickering glow of the stars in the sky; he saw a shimmering reflection there. Tiniwiel the beautiful elf,
Immortal virgin, wise as an elf,

His dark hair began to float around him. And his arms shimmered like silver.

Long was the road that fate made them travel, Beyond the rocky mountains, cold and grey, Through iron corridors and a dark door, And th The Seas of Separation stretched between them, and yet, at last, they met again.
And they died a long time ago. In the forest, singing without sadness.

Strider sighed and paused before continuing. "It's... a song," he said, "in the mode called ann-thennath."
among the Elves, but difficult to render in our everyday language, this is only a rough echo of it. It recounts the meeting of Beren, s an Elven king in Middle-earth, in the days when the world was young; and she was the most beautiful maiden who ever existed among all t her beauty lay in the mists of the northern lands, and in her

253


His face was a radiant light. In those days, the Great Enemy, of whom Sauron of Mordor was but a servant, dwelt in Angband in the North, and the Elves of the West who are arriving
Back in Middle-earth, they waged war against him to reclaim the Silmarils he had stolen; and the fathers of Men aided them, the Elves. killed, and Beren escaping at the peril of his life, arrived over the Mountains of Terror in the hidden kingdom of Thingol
the forest of Neldoreth. There he saw Lúthien singing and
dancing in a clearing by the enchanted river Esgalduin; and He named her Tinuviel, that is, Nightingale in the language
of olden times. Many misfortunes befell them afterward, and they were separated for a long time. Tinuviel saved Beren from the dungeons Sauron, and together they went through great dangers, and He even overthrew the Great Enemy from his throne and took
from his iron crown one of the three Silmarils, the brightest of all jewels, to be Lúthien's dowry to Thingol, his Father. Yet, in the end, Beren was killed by the Wolf that came from the gates of Angband, and he died in the arms of
Tinuviel. But she chose mortality, and to die far from the world, so that she could follow him; and it is sung that they met.
Once again beyond the Seas of Separation, and after a short time walking... Living once more in the green woods, they passed together, Long ago, beyond the limits of this world. And so it is. Luthien Tinuviel, the only one of the elves, is dead.
And they left this world, and they lost the one they loved most. But it was from her that the elven lords of old descended, descended a Luthien was the ancestor, and it is said that his lineage will continue.
Never fail. Elrond of Rivendell is of this line. For from Beren and Lúthien was born Dior Thingol, heir; and from him Elwing the White one whom Eärendil married, he who sailed his ship far from the mists of the world into the seas of the sky with the The Silmaril on his brow. And from Eärendil came the Kings of Numenor, that is to say, the West.

While Strider spoke, they observed his strange eagerness
Her face, dimly lit by the red glow of the wood fire. Her eyes


254





He shone brightly, and his voice was rich and deep. Above him was a dark, starry sky. Suddenly, a pale light appeared above the sky. The crown of Amun-Sul stood behind him. The waxing moon was slowly climbing over the hill that overlooked them, and
The stars above the hilltop faded.

The story ended. The hobbits stirred and stretched. "Look!" said Merry. "The moon is rising: it must rise." late.

The others looked up. At the same moment, they saw on
At the top of the hill, something small and dark stood out against the sea-like glow of the rising moon. Perhaps it was just a large st A protruding rock stood out in the dim light.

Sam and Merry got up and moved away from the fire. Frodo and Pippin sat in silence. Aragorn was
I gazed intently at the moonlight on the hill. All seemed calm. And yet, Frodo felt a cold dread creep into his heart. Now that Strider to the fire. At that moment, Sam came running back. edge of the valley.

"I don't know what it is," he said, "but I was suddenly scared."

I didn't dare leave this valley for money; I felt that some... The thing was crawling up the slope. "Did you see anything?" asked Frodo, jumping up.

No, sir. I didn't see anything, but I didn't stop to look. I saw something, said Merry; or at least I thought I saw one. westward, where the moonlight illuminated the plain
Beyond the shadows of the hilltops, it seemed to me that there were two or three black shapes. They appeared to be moving in that direc "Come closer to the fire, face outwards!" Strider shouted. "Prepare your hands with some longer sticks!"
For a long time, they sat there, silent and attentive, with their backs to the wood fire, each staring at the... shadows surrounded them. Nothing happened. There was no sound, no movement in the night. Frodo stirred, feeling that he had to break the silence: he was burning with the desire to shout out loud.

"Shh!" whispered Strider. "What is it?" exclaimed Pippin, panting, at the same time.





255


Above the edge of the small valley, on the opposite side of it
On the hill, they felt, rather than saw, a shadow rise, a shadow or more than one. They squinted, and the shadows seemed to be growing. Soon, there was no longer any doubt: three or four
Tall, black figures stood there on the slope, seemingly watching. They were so black they appeared Black holes in the deep shadow behind them. Frodo thought
He heard a faint hissing sound, like a venomous breath, and felt a fine, piercing cold. Then the shapes slowly drew closer.

Terror seized Pippin and Merry, and they threw them...
They lay flat on their stomachs. Sam huddled against Frodo. Frodo was scarcely less terrified than his companions; he was trembling. as if he had an icy chill, but his terror was swallowed up by a sudden temptation to put on the ring. The desire to do that
He seized it, and he could think of nothing else. He had not forgotten the Tumulus, nor Gandalf's message; but something seemed to comp Despite all the warnings, he was burning with the desire to give in. Not in the hope of escaping anything, good or bad: he simply
He felt he had to take the ring and put it on his finger.
He was unable to speak. He felt Sam's gaze on him, as if he knew... that his master was in a very difficult situation, but he couldn't He turned towards him. He closed his eyes and struggled for a moment;
But the resistance became unbearable, and finally he slowly resolved to pull. He removed the chain and slipped the ring onto his index left hand.

Immediately, although everything else remained unchanged,
In the darkness and twilight, the shapes became terrifyingly clear. He was able to see beneath their black bandages. There were five of silhouettes: two standing at the edge of the valley, three moving forward.
On their white faces burned piercing, merciless eyes; beneath their cloaks were long gray robes; upon their gray hair were
Silver helmets; in their wild hands were steel swords. Their eyes fell upon him and pierced him as they rushed towards him. In despair, It seemed to him that she was flickering red, like a burning ember.
Two of the figures stopped. The third was taller than the others.


256

His hair was long and shiny, and a crown adorned his helmet. In one hand he held a long sword, and in the other a knife; The knife and the hand that held it gleamed with a pale light. He leaped forward and charged at Frodo.

At that moment, Frodo lunged forward onto the
on the ground, and he heard himself shouting aloud: O Elbereth! Gilthoniel! At the same instant, he struck his enemy's feet. A piercing cry rang out in the night; and he felt a pain like an arrow
Shards of poisoned ice pierced his left shoulder. Even as he fainted, he glimpsed, as if through a swirling fog, a corner of Grand-Pas. leaping out of the darkness with a flaming wooden mark in
with each hand. In a final effort, Frodo, dropping his sword, removed the ring from his finger and closed his right hand. squeezed on it.


12





When Frodo regained consciousness, he was still clutching the Ring in his hand, desperately. He lay near the fire, which was now filled overlooking it.
What happened? Where is the pale king? he asked, frantically. They were too delighted to hear him speak to respond.
For a while, they didn't understand his question either. Finally, Sam made them understand that they had seen nothing but the vague Dark shapes were approaching them. Suddenly, at its
Sam discovered with horror that his master had disappeared; and at that moment, a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. I heard Frodo's voice, but it seemed to come from a great distance, or from underground, shouting strange words.
They saw nothing more until they stumbled upon Frodo's body, lying face down on the grass as if dead, with his sword beneath him. Arago

And they placed it near the fire, and then it disappeared. That was quite some time ago.

Sam was visibly beginning to have doubts about Strider again; but while they were talking, he returned, suddenly appearing from the sha his sword and stood over Frodo; but Aragorn knelt down quickly at his side.

"I'm not a Black Rider, Sam," he said softly, "nor a member of the league." I tried to find out something about them. There was movement, but I found nothing. I don't understand why. They left and stopped attacking. But we felt nothing. of their presence wherever they are.

When he heard what Frodo had to say, he was filled with


258





He showed his concern, shook his head, and sighed. Then he ordered Pippin and Merry to heat as much water as possible in their small kettles, and to bathe the wound with them. Keep the
"May the fire burn brightly and keep Frodo warm!" he said. Then he... I got up, left, and called Sam. I think I... "I understand things better now," he said in a low voice.
It seems there were only five enemies. Why were they there?
Not all of them here, I don't know; but I don't think they expected them to. We will resist them. They have withdrawn for the moment. B I'm very afraid they won't come back another night if we can't.

They are only waiting, because they believe their escape is possible. They are only waiting, because they believe their objective is al Much further. I fear, Sam, that they believe your master has a mortal wound that will bend him to their will. We shall see!

Sam choked on tears. "Don't despair!" Strider said. "You
You must trust me now. Your Frodo is of a more robust nature than... I suspected as much, even though Gandalf had hinted that this migh He is not killed, and I think he will resist the evil power of
I will be injured for longer than his enemies anticipate. I will do everything in my power to help him and heal him. Please take good c He hurried away and disappeared back into the darkness.

Frodo was dozing, although the pain of his wound was slowly intensifying.
An intense chill spread from his shoulder, and a deathly cold intensified against his arm and side. His friends watched over him, comfo him, and while cleaning his wound. The night passed slowly and
Wearily. Dawn was breaking in the sky and the valley was filling up. Under a grey light, when Strider finally returned.

"Look!" he cried; and bending down, he picked up from the ground a black cloak that lay there, hidden by the darkness. One foot Above the bottom hem, there was a slit. That was the blow
"From Frodo's sword," he said. "The only wound it had inflicted was... enemy, I fear; for he is unharmed, but all blades perish. To pie And this was even more deadly for Frodo! He ducked down again.




259


and he raised a long, thin knife. There was a cold glint in him.
As Strider lifted it, they saw that near the end, its edge was notched, the tip was broken. But even holding it,
In the growing light, they gazed in astonishment, for the blade seemed to melt and vanished like smoke into the air.
Only the hilt remained in Aragorn's hand. "Alas!" he cried. "It was this cursed knife that inflicted the wound. Few still possess it." Healing skills to match these evil weapons. But I will do what I can.

He sat down on the ground and, taking the handle of the dagger, placed
He knelt down and sang a slow song in a strange language. Then, putting it aside, he turned to Frodo and in a
In a soft voice, he uttered words that the others could not hear. He took the long leaves of a plant from his belt pocket.

"These leaves," he said, "I walked a long way to find them; for..." This plant does not grow on bare hills, but in thickets. South of t of its leaves. He crushed a leaf between his fingers, and it released a sweet and pungent fragrance. Luckily I was able to
Find it, for it is a medicinal plant that the Men of the West
They brought her to Middle-earth. They named her Athelas, and she grew. Now, only sporadically and near the places where they once live Some of those who wander in the wilderness. It possesses great virtues, but on an injury like this, its healing powers may be
little.

He threw the leaves into the boiling water and washed Frodo's children's shoulders. The scent of the steam was refreshing, and Those who hadn't been injured felt their minds calm and clear. The grass also had some effect on the wound, for Frodo.
He felt the pain and the icy chill subside on his side; but life did not return to his arm, and he could not lift or use his hand. He b and reproached himself for his weakness of will; for now
He realized that by putting on the ring, he had not obeyed his own orders. His own desire, but the imperious will of his enemies. they wondered if he would remain maimed for life, and how they

260




They could now continue their journey. He felt too weak to stand. The others were discussing this very issue.
I quickly decided to leave Weathertop as soon as possible. "Now imagine," said Strider, "that the enemy is watching us."
this place for a few days. If Gandalf ever came here, then he must have been forced to leave, and he will not return.
In any case, we are in great danger here after nightfall, since last night's attack, and we can hardly encounter greater danger whereve

As soon as day broke, they had some
food and luggage. It was impossible for Frodo to walk, so they divided most of their luggage among the four and put Frodo on the pony. These last few days,
The poor creature had done wonders; she already looked quite plump, stronger, and had begun to show affection for her New masters, especially for Sam. Bill Ferny's treatment must
were very difficult to make the trip into the wilderness seem so much better than before.

They headed south. That would mean
crossing the road, but it was the fastest way to more
wooded land. And they needed fuel; because Strider said that
It's important to make sure Frodo stays warm, especially at night, while the fire will offer them all some protection. That was also hi of the road: to the east, beyond Weathertop, it changed course and took a wide turn to the north.

They slowly and cautiously skirted around the
on the southwest slopes of the hill, and soon after arrived at
at the side of the road. There was no trace of the riders. But even as they hurried across, they heard two cries in the distance: a col They leaped forward and headed towards the thickets that stretched out before them. The ground sloped gently southward, but it
The terrain was wild and without paths; bushes and stunted trees grew in dense thickets, patches interspersed with large bare areas. Th





26 l


sparse, coarse, and gray; and the leaves in the thickets were withered and dilapidated. It was a bleak land, and their journey Time was slow and dark. They spoke little as they trudged along. Frodo's heart sank as he watched them walk.
beside him, heads bowed and backs bent
Under the weight of their burdens, even Aragorn seemed tired and overwhelmed.

Even before the first day of walking was over, Frodo's pain began to worsen, but he didn't speak of it for a long time. Four The days passed without the ground or the landscape changing.
many things, except that behind them, Weathertop was slowly sinking, and ahead of them, the distant mountains were drawing ever closer. The enemy had spotted their escape or had followed them.
They dreaded the dark hours and stood guard in pairs at night, expecting at any moment to see dark shapes prowling in the
A grey night, dimly lit by the moon veiled in clouds; but they saw nothing, and heard no sound other than the sighing of withered leave and grass. Not once did they feel the present evil.

who had attacked them before the attack in the valley. It seemed
It would be futile to hope that the Cavaliers had already lost track of them. Again. Perhaps they were waiting to ambush them. In a nar

At the end of the fifth day, the ground began to
They slowly emerged from the wide, shallow valley in which they had settled. They descended. Strider then resumed his course northward. eastward, and on the sixth day they reached the top of a long, slowly ascending slope, and in the distance saw a group of
Wooded hills. In the distance, below, they could see the road sweeping the foot of the hills; and to their right, a gray The river shimmered pale in the weak sunlight. In the distance, they
I glimpsed yet another river in a stony valley, half-veiled in mist.

I'm afraid we'll have to go back on the road for a while.
said Strider. We have now arrived at the River Hoarwell, that is to say, the Elves call it Mitheithel. It flows from the Etten moors. The troll hills north of Rivendell flow into the Loudwater.


262





all the way to the south. Some call it the Grey Flood after that. It's

a large body of water before it reaches the sea. There is no way to cross it downstream from its source in the Ettenmoors, except by th Bridge over which the road passes.
"What is that other river that we can see in the distance?" they asked. Cheerful. "It's Loudwater, the Bruinen of Rivendell," he replied.
Strider. The road runs along the edge of the hills for many kilometers, kilometers from the bridge to the Bruinen ford. But I haven't We wondered how we were going to cross this river. One river at a time. Time flies! We'll be really lucky if we don't find the last bri

The next morning, early, they went back down to near the road. Sam and Strider stepped forward, but
They found no trace of travelers or riders. Here, under the shade of the hills, it had rained. Strider judged that she had fallen two days earlier and had taken everything away
Footprints. No rider had passed since then, as far as he could see.

They hurried as fast as they could,
And after a kilometer or two, they caught sight of the Last Bridge in the distance, at the foot of a short, steep slope. They dreaded s Figures were waiting for them there, but they saw none. Strider had created them. They took refuge in a thicket by the side of the road eager to explore.

He returned in haste soon after. "I see no sign of the enemy," he said, "and I wonder what that means." Which means. But I discovered something very strange.

He held out his hand and showed a single pale green jewel.
"I found it in the mud, in the middle of the bridge," he said.
It's a beryl, an elven stone. Whether it was placed there or fell by chance, I couldn't say; but it gives me hope. I'll take it; it's a I don't dare stay on the road without a clearer sign.





263


They immediately resumed their journey. They crossed the bridge in

safe, hearing no sound other than the water swirling against its three great arches. A mile further on, they arrived at a narrow ravine that led north through the steep lands on
to the left of the road. There, Strider turned to the side, and soon they were lost in a dark country of gloomy trees winding among at

The hobbits were happy to leave those dreary lands and
the perilous road behind them; but this new land seemed menacing and hostile. As they advanced, the hills rose steadily around them. He The ruins of the towers had an ominous appearance. Frodo, who
He wasn't walking; he had time to look ahead and think. He remembered Bilbo's story about his journey and the threat that surrounded hi the Troll Woods where his first real adventure had taken place
That's what happened. Frodo assumed they were now in the same situation. region, and wondered if they might happen to pass near the place.

"Who lives on this land?" he asked. "And who built these towers? Are we in the land of trolls?"

"No!" said Strider. "Trolls don't build. Nobody builds here." Earth. Men once lived here, centuries ago; but none remain. They became a The war that brought an end to the Northern Kingdom. But that's all.
It has been so long since the hills forgot them, although... The shadow still hangs over the land.

Where did you learn such stories, if the whole earth is empty?
"And distracted?" asked Peregrin. "Birds and beasts are not." (telling stories of this kind.)

The heirs of Elendil do not forget the past, he said.
Sttider; and many other things besides that I cannot recall. Bered at Rivendell. "Have you often been to Rivendell?" asked Frodo.
"Yes," said Aragorn. "I once lived there, and I return there again."


264

When I can. Therein lies my heart; but it is not my destiny to sit still. Peace, even in the beautiful dwelling of Elrond.

The hills began to encircle them. The road behind
held back on its way to the Bruinen River, but both were now hidden from view. The travelers arrived in a long valley; Narrow, deeply cleft, dark and silent. Trees with old and
Twisting roots overhang the cliffs and piled up behind them, on slopes wooded with pine trees.

The hobbits were very tired. They moved slowly, because
They had to make their way through a pathless, overgrown country

scraped by fallen trees and tumbled rocks. For as long as they could, they avoided climbing for Frodo, and because it was
In fact, it's difficult to find a way out of these narrow valleys. They had been in this country for two days when the weather began to The hills were covered in a fine, torrential rain. By nightfall, they were all soaked, and their camp was bleak, for they had no water The slope ahead was steeper, and they were forced to head north. The guards moved out of their way. Strider seemed to be growing anxiou us: they were almost ten days from Weathertop, and their supply reserves were beginning to run out.
It's raining.

That night, they camped on a rocky ledge against a stone wall. Behind them was a shallow cave, a simple notch. at the foot of the cliff. Frodo was restless. The cold and damp had made him

his injury more painful than ever, and the pain and feeling of
An icy chill kept him awake. He lay there, tossing and turning, listening fearfully to the furtive night sounds: the wind in Rock creaking, water droplets, a crack, a sudden click, a loose stone falling. He sensed dark shapes.
They advanced to smother him; but when he straightened up, he saw nothing. Only Strider's back, sitting hunched over, smoking his pipe, and observing. He lay back down and fell into a restless sleep. dream, in which he walked on the grass of his garden in the


265
County, but it seemed faint and obscure, less clear than the great. Black shadows stood there, watching over the hedge. In the morning, he woke up and found that the rain had stopped.
The clouds were still thick, but they were dissipating and becoming pale. Blue bands appeared between them. The wind was changing direc Again. They didn't start early. Immediately after their colds and a rather uninspiring breakfast, Strider left alone, telling the other He would climb, if he could, to take a look at the terrain.

Upon his return, he was not reassuring. "We came too far north," he said, "and we must find a way to
Let's head south again. If we continue along this path... we'll reach the Ettendales, far north of Rivendell.
This is troll country, and I know little of it. We might find our way and reach Rivendell from the north; but that would take too long, the road, and our provisions wouldn't last. So, one way or another, we must find the ford of Bruinen.

They spent the rest of the day climbing rocks.
They found a passage between two hills that led to a floor.
leading them into a southeast-facing valley, the direction they had intended to take; but towards the end of the day, they found Their route was once again blocked by a ridge of high ground; its dark edge. The sky stood out in many bare spots, like teeth. with a blunt saw. They had the choice between going back or climbing it.

They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very difficult. Soon, Frodo was forced to dismount and
They trudged on, struggling to make progress. Despite this, they often despaired of ever reaching their destination, of ever being able They were all exhausted when they finally reached the summit. They had climbed a narrow pass between two higher peaks.
and the ground dropped sharply again, but only for a short distance. Frodo dropped to the ground and lay down on the earth.


266





He was trembling. His left arm was limp, as were his side and shoulder.
They felt as if icy claws had laid upon them. The trees and rocks seemed enveloped in a dark and indistinct aura.

"We can't go any further," Merry told Strider. "I'm..." I'm afraid this is too much for Frodo. I'm terribly sorry. We're worried about Will we be able to cure him in Rivendell, if we ever manage to get there?

"We'll see," Strider replied. "There's nothing more I can do in the desert; and that's mainly thanks to His injury, which I'm so eager to heal. But I agree that we can't go any further tonight.

"What's wrong with my master?" Sam asked in a low voice, looking pleadingly at Strider. His wound was small, And it's already closed. There's nothing to see, except for the icy cold. A white mark on his shoulder.
Frodo was hit by the enemy's weapons.
said Strider, and there is some poison or evil at work.
I don't have the skills to get her out. But don't lose hope, Sam!

The night was cold on the ridge. They lit a small fire under the gnarled roots of an old pine tree that overhanged
a shallow pit: it looked as if stone had once been extracted from it. They were there, huddled together. The wind was blowing cold. Through the pass, they heard the moans and sighs from the treetops below. Frodo, half asleep, imagined...
that dark and endless wings were surging above him, and
that on the wings rode pursuers who hunted him down in every hollow of the hills.

The morning promised to be bright and clear; the air was pure, and the pale, clear light in a rain-washed sky. Their hearts
They were encouraged, but they longed for the sun to warm their cold, numb limbs. As soon as day broke, Aragorn took Merry with him and to the east of the pass. The sun had risen and was shining.
They smiled broadly when he returned with more reassuring news. Things were now more or less heading in the right direction. If they

267


They continued, descending the other side of the ridge. The mountains were to their left. A little further on, Strider had caught sight that, although hidden from view, the road leading to the ford
was not far from the river and was on the side closest to them.

"We must get back on the road," he said. "We can't. I hope to find a way through these hills. Whatever the danger, the road is our only

As soon as they had eaten, they set off again. They climbed slowly along the south side of the ridge; but the path was much easier than He could ride again. Bill Ferny's poor old pony was developing an unexpected talent for choosing a path and sparing his
The rider endured as much jolting as possible. The group's mood improved. Again. Even Frodo felt better in the morning light, but each From time to time, a mist seemed to obscure his vision, and he passed his hands over his eyes.
Pippin was slightly ahead of the others. Suddenly, he turned around. He spun around and called to them. "There's a path here!" he cried When they found him, they saw that he had done
There's no mistaking it: the beginnings of a path were clearly visible, this one. He climbed, following numerous winding trails to emer It faded away at the top of the hill behind. In places, it was now faint, and overgrown with vegetation, or cluttered with stones and f It seems that it was once very busy. It was a path made by strong arms and heavy feet. Here and there, old trees had been cut down or b moved aside to clear a path.

They followed the trail for a while, as it offered many
the easiest way down, but they went cautiously, and their anxiety increased as they entered the dark woods, and the The path became clearer and wider. Suddenly, emerging from a
A belt of fir trees descended steeply down a slope, then turned abruptly to the left, around a rocky shoulder of the hill. 268




Reaching the corner of the street, they turned around and saw
The path continued along a flat strip beneath the face of a low embankment, a cliff overhung with trees. In the stone wall was a door,

They all stopped in front of the door. There was a cave or
a rocky chamber at the back, but in the darkness inside, nothing could be seen. Strider, Sam, and Merry pushed with all their might. Force was used to open the door a little wider, and then Strider and Merry entered. They didn't go far, because on the
The ground was covered with many old bones, and nothing else was visible.
near the entrance, with the exception of a few large empty pots and some broken pot objects.

"It's definitely a troll's den, if ever there was one!" he said. Pippin. Get out, you two, and let us go. Now we
We know who paved the way - and we'd better get off it quickly.

"I don't think it's necessary," Strider said as he left. "It's..."
A veritable troll lair, certainly, but it seems to have been abandoned for a long time. I don't think we should be afraid. But let's pr And we'll see.

The path resumed from the gate, and turning towards the
Once again across the flat space, he plunged into a thick, wooded slope. Pippin, not wanting to show Strider that he was
Still frightened, she continued with Merry. Sam and Aragorn arrived. Behind, one on each side of Frodo's pony, for the path was now wide enough for four or five hobbits to walk side by side. But they hadn't gone far when Pippin came running up.
They returned, followed by Merry. They both looked terrified.

"There are trolls!" gasped Pippin. In a clearing...
The woods are not far below. We glimpsed them through the tree trunks. They are very large!

"We'll come and see them," said Strider, speaking again. "A stick." Frodo said nothing, but Sam seemed frightened.

The sun was now high in the sky, its rays glistening through the trees' half-bare branches, illuminating the clearing with Brilliant patches of light. They stopped abruptly at the edge of the precipice and peered at the tree trunks, holding their breath.


269

There stood the trolls: three large trolls. One of them was leaning over, and the other two remained there staring at him. Strider stepped forward nonchalantly. "Get up, old stone!" he said, and he broke his staff over the bent troll.
Nothing happened. A murmur of astonishment rippled through the room. The hobbits laughed, and even Frodo laughed. Well!

"We're forgetting our family history!" he exclaimed. "These must be the people who should be here!"-the same three that Gandalf had ove The right way to cook thirteen dwarves and a hobbit.

"I had no idea we were so close to this place!" said Pippin. He knew the story well. Bilbo and Frodo had told it to him often; but in r He believed it. Even now, he looked at the stone trolls with suspicion, wondering if a little magic might suddenly bring them back to l

You are not only forgetting your family history, but everything
"Have you ever heard of trolls?" Strider asked. "It's broad daylight." With a bright sun, and yet you come back trying to scare me. with a story of living trolls waiting for us in this clearing! In any case, you may have noticed that one of them has an old
A bird's nest behind its ear. That would be very unusual. Decoration for a living troll! They all laughed. Frodo felt his spirits return: the re
The tale of Bilbo's first successful adventure was encouraging. The sun, too, was warm and comforting, and the mist before Her eyes seemed to lift slightly. They remained motionless for a moment.
They spent time in the clearing and ate their midday meal just below it, in the shadow of the trolls' long legs.

Could someone play us a little bit of a song while the sun rises?
"Up?" asked Merry, once they had finished. "We haven't had..." a song or a story for days.

"Not since Amon Sûl," said Frodo. The others looked. "Don't worry about me!" he added. "I feel much better."
But I don't think I could sing. Maybe Sam could find something. Something from his memory. Come on, Sam! said Merry. There's more in your stash. You're smarter than you let on.

270





"I don't know," said Sam. "But how is that possible..."
A costume? That's not what I call real poetry, if you know what I mean: A bit of nonsense, certainly. But these old images gave birth t In my opinion. Standing with hands behind your back,
As if he were at school, he began to sing an old tune. The troll sat alone on his stone seat, And he gnawed and muttered to an old, bare bone;

For many years, he had gnawed at it until he was very close. Because meat was hard to find. Made by! Erased by!

He lived alone in a cave in the hills, and meat was hard to find. Tom arrived, wearing his big boots.

He said to the Troll: Tell me, what is this? Because it looks like my Uncle Tim's shinbone.
As he should rest in the cemetery. Underground cemetery! Paved cemetery! It's been so many years since Tim left, and I thought he was r "My boy," said Troll, "I stole that bone. But what are bones lying in a hole? Your uncle was dead as a stone."
Before I found his shinbone.

Tinbone! Thinbone!

He can give a share to a poor old troll, because he doesn't need his shinbone.

Tom said: 7 don't see why people like you, Sans Axin, should go and do free
With the shinbone or the shinbone of my father's family; So, give me that old bone! Rover! Trover!

Though he is dead, it belongs to him; So give me that old bone!




271


"For a few pins," said Troll, smiling,

I'll eat you too, and I'll gnaw your shins. A little fresh meat goes down really well! I'm going to bite you now.

Hey! Look now!

I'm tired of gnawing on old bones and old skins; I really want to devour you now. But as he feared, his dinner was ruined. He realized his hands were holding nothing.
Before he could notice, Tom slipped behind him and kicked him out to teach him a lesson.

Warn him! Damn him!

A kick to the seat, thought Tom, that would be the way to teach him a lesson.
But harder than stone are the flesh and bones of a troll who hides alone in the hills.

And dig your boot down to the roots of the mountain, For the seat of a troll, do not feel it. Peel it! Heal it!

The old troll laughed when he heard Tom moan. And he knew his toes could feel it.
Tom's leg is in perfect shape, since his return home, And his bare foot constantly limps; But Troll doesn't care, and he's still there. With the bone he snatched from its owner.

Doner! Erection!

The troll's old seat is still the same, and the bone he tore from its owner!
"Well, that's a warning for all of us!" Merry exclaimed, laughing. "It's like, 'Well, you used a stick, not your hand, Strider!'" "Where did you get that, Sam?" asked Pippin. "I..." I had never heard those words before.
Sam mumbled something inaudible. It was of his own volition.


272

"The head, of course," said Frodo. "I'm learning a lot about Sam." Gamgee on this journey. First a conspirator, now he is A jester. He'll end up becoming a magician... or a warrior!

"I hope not," said Sam. "I don't want to be either of them!"

In the afternoon, they continued their journey through the woods. They were probably following the same path as Gandalf, Bilbo, and The dwarves had used it many years before. After a few kilometers, they arrived at the top of a high embankment overlooking the road.
By this time, the road had passed well past Hoarwell in its narrow valley, and now clung to the foot of the hills, undulating and windi At the bottom of the bank, Strider pointed to a stone in the grass.
It was crudely hewn and, although now very weathered, could still be seen: dwarven runes and secret markings.
"There!" said Merry. "That must be the stone that marked..." The place where the trolls' gold was hidden. How much is left? And Bilbo's Frodo looked at the stone and wished that Bilbo had
I have brought back no treasure more perilous, nor easier to share. Absolutely not, he said. Bilbo has revealed everything. He said He didn't think it really belonged to him, because it came from thieves.

The road was silent under the long shadows of the early days. Evening. No other travelers were in sight. Since there was no other possible way for them,
They went down the bank and, turning left, they sped off as fast as they could. Soon, a hillside blocked the light from
The sun was setting rapidly towards the west. A cold wind was descending to meet them, making them visible from the distant mountains.

They were starting to look for a place away from the road where they could camp for the night when they heard a a sound that rekindled a sudden fear in their hearts: the
The sound of hooves behind them. They turned around, but they couldn't see far because of the many twists and turns of the road. As qui





273


path and down to the depths of the heather and blueberries on the upper slopes, until they reach a small plot of
densely growing hazelnut trees. While they glanced between the
Through the bushes, they could glimpse the road, faint and gray against the failing sky. A light, some ten meters below. The sound of h They were getting closer. They were moving fast, with a slight clicking sound. Then, faintly, as if carried by the breeze,
They seemed to perceive a faint tinkling, like that of small bells.

"It doesn't look like a Black Rider's horse!" he said.
Frodo listened attentively. The other hobbits nodded hopefully, hoping that nothing of the sort would happen, but they all remained ful had lived so long in fear of being pursued that the slightest noise coming from behind seemed threatening and hostile. But Strider was one ear, and a look of joy on his face.

The light faded and the leaves of the bushes rustled softly.
The bells were now ringing more clearly and closer, and clippety-clip, the quick trot could be heard. Suddenly, below, appeared... A white horse, shining in the shadows, galloping at full speed.
At dusk, his stirrup wobbled and glittered, as if it were studded.

adorned with gems like living stars. The rider's cloak billowed in the wind behind him, and his hood was thrown back; his blond hair She floated, shimmering, in the wind of her speed. For Frodo, it was... It seemed as if a white light shone through the shape and the rider's clothes, as if seen through a thin veil.

Strider emerged from his hiding place and rushed towards the
The road, bounding with a cry through the heather; but even before he had moved or called, the rider had held his horse back and
They stopped, looking up at the thicket where they stood. When he saw Aragorn, he dismounted and ran to meet him, shouting: "Ai na vedu And his clear, resounding voice left no doubt in their hearts: the rider was of the elven people. No other people in the wide world was voices so pleasant to hear. But there seemed to be a note of neither haste nor fear in his call, and they saw that he was now speaking

Soon, Aragorn beckoned to them, and the hobbits left the


274

We went through some bushes and hurried down towards the road. This is Glorfindel. "who dwells in the house of Elrond," said Aragorn.

"Hello, and finally delighted to meet you!" said the Elven lord to Frodo. "He was sent from Rivendell to find you. We feared you were i "So Gandalf has arrived in Rivendell?" exclaimed Frodo joyfully.
No. He didn't have any when I left; but it had been nine days.
"A long time ago," replied Glorfindel. Elrond received the news, and it troubled him. Some of my kin were traveling in your land. Beyon They sent messages as quickly as possible. They said the Nine were outside, and you were lost, carrying a great burden. A burden withou Even in Rivendell, few dared to ride openly against the Nine; but those who did, Elrond sent north, west, and south. It was thought you

It was up to me to take the road, and I arrived at the bridge.
from Mitheithel, and left a token there nearly seven days ago. Three of Sauron's servants were on the bridge, but
They withdrew, and I pursued them westward. I came after two others, but they turned south. Since then, I have searched for your trail. I followed him onto the bridge; and today I marked the spot where you came down from the hills. But come! There is no time.
for more information. Since you're here, we have to take the risk of the road and we're going. There are five behind us, and when they Find your trail on the road, they'll chase us like the
Wind. And they're not all here. Where the other four are, I don't know. I'm afraid Ford is already occupied. against us.

As Glorfindel spoke, the nuances of deep evening... Frodo felt a great weariness overcome him. From then on. The sun began to dissipate the mist before her eyes had even darkened.


The Brandywine River.





275


and he felt a shadow come between him and the
The faces of his friends. Suddenly, pain assailed him and he felt cold. He staggered, clinging to Sam's arm.

"My master is sick and injured," Sam said angrily.
He cannot continue riding after nightfall. He needs rest.

Glorhndel caught up with Frodo as he sank to the ground, and
Taking him gently in his arms, he looked at him with grave anxiety.

Strider briefly recounted the attack on their camp beneath Amon Sûl, and the deadly knife. He took out the handle, which he had kept, a He shuddered as he picked it up, but he looked at it carefully.

"There are evil things written on this handle," he said; however
Perhaps your eyes cannot see them. Keep it, Aragorn, until we reach Elrond's dwelling! But be careful and handle it with care. As you wish! Alas! The wounds inflicted by this weapon are beyond my capabilities.
I will do everything I can to get better. But I urge you all the more to encourage me to get better. You must now continue without rest

He probed Frodo's shoulder wound with his
his fingers, and his face grew more serious, as if what he had learned disoriented him. This calmed him. But Frodo felt the cold biting A gentle warmth spread from his shoulder down his arm; a soft heat spread from his shoulder down his arm. The pain subsided. Twilight s It enveloped him in a lighter light, as if a cloud had dissipated. He saw the faces of his friends more clearly, and to some extent a n

"You will ride my horse," said Glorfindel. "I will shorten..."
With your stirrups up to the skirts of the saddle, you must sit as close together as possible. But have no fear: my horse will not let The rider falls, I order him to bear it. His gait is light and smooth; and if the danger becomes too pressing, he will carry you off. with a speed that even the enemy's black steeds cannot match. rival.

No, he won't! said Frodo. I won't ride him, even if I am taken to Rivendell or elsewhere, leaving behind me

Friends are in danger behind here.

Glorfindel smiled. "I very much doubt," he said, "that your


276





Your friends would be in danger if you weren't with them!
The pursuit would follow you and leave us in peace, I think. You, Frodo, and what you wear that unites us all danger.

To this, Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded that
mount Glorfindel's white horse. The pony was loaded instead with much of the other burdens, so that they now walked more lightly and, for a while, made good speed; but the
The hobbits began to struggle to keep up with the Elf's swift and tireless pace. He then led them into the maw of darkness, and still under the deep, cloudy night. There was neither
neither star nor moon. It was only at the gray dawn that he allowed them to stop. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were by then almost asleep on His shoulders slumped, a sign of weariness. Frodo sat on the horse, lost in a dark dream.

They lay down in the heather a few meters away.
They stopped at the side of the road and fell asleep immediately. They seemed to have barely had time to close their eyes when Glorfind The sun was now high in the sky, and the clouds and mists of the night had dissipated.

"Drink this!" Glorfindel told them, pouring each of them a glass.
He drew some alcohol from his leather flask adorned with silver studs.

It was clear as spring water, tasteless, and imperceptible. It was either cool or warm in the mouth; but strong and vigorous.
The liquid seemed to spread through their limbs as they drank it. After this dry spell, the stale bread and dried fruit (which were now Much better than many a good breakfast in the Shire.

They had rested for a little less than five hours when they took
Back on the road again. Glorfindel was still encouraging them, and only two brief stops were allowed during the day's march. In this wa They covered nearly thirty kilometers before nightfall and reached a point where the road turned right and descended towards





277


at the bottom of the valley, now heading straight for Bruinen. So far, no sign or sound of pursuit had been heard. The hobbits could se Anxiety clouded his face. He spoke to Strider once or twice in Elvish.

But however anxious their guides might be, it was clear
that the hobbits could go no further that night. They were staggering, dizzy with fatigue, and unable to think of Everything except their feet and legs. Frodo's pain had intensified.
And during the day, things concerning him faded until they became ghostly gray shadows. Fie almost welcomed the coming of night with jo Then the world seemed less pale and less empty.

The hobbits were still tired when they left early.
The next morning. There were still many kilometers to cover between them and the Ford, and they moved forward, limping as best they cou at a pace they could manage.

"Our danger will be greatest just before we reach the river," said Glorfindel; "for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now A swift danger follows us, and other dangers may await us near the Ford.

The road continued to descend steadily, and there was
There was now in places a lot of grass on either side, in which the hobbits walked whenever they could, to relieve their tired feet.
Late in the afternoon, they arrived at a place where the road... suddenly, under the dark shade of tall pine trees, and then
plunged into a deep trench with steep, damp, red-stone walls. Echoes spread as they hastened forward; and there it sounded like the noi Suddenly, as if through a door of light, the road ended. Again, from the end of the tunnel, outwards. There, at
At the bottom of a steep slope, they saw before them a long, flat expanse, a mile long, and beyond, the ford of Rivendell. Further stil The side was a steep brown embankment, crisscrossed by a winding path;
And behind that rose the high mountains, shoulder-high, and peak beyond peak, into the fading sky.


278

The echo of footsteps following in the trench could still be heard. Behind them, a whooshing sound, as if the wind were rising and pour Glorfmdel turned around and listened, then he leaped forward with a piercing scream.

"Run!" he cried. "Run! The enemy is upon us!"
The white horse leaped forward. The hobbits raced down the slope. the slope. Glorfmdel and Strider followed in the rearguard.
We had only gone halfway through the apartment when suddenly there was the sound of horses galloping. Outside the gate, in the trees, They had just set off, riding a Black Rider. He brought his horse under control and stopped, tossed about in the saddle. Another follow then another; then two more.

"Forward! Forward!" Glorfindel shouted to Frodo.

He did not obey immediately, for a strange reluctance seized him. After bringing the horse back to a walk, he turned and looked The riders seemed to be sitting on their great steeds as
menacing statues on a hill, dark and massive, while all the surrounding woods and lands faded as if into a mist. Deep down, he knew they were giving the orders in silence.
ordering him to wait. Immediately, fear and hatred awoke within him. His hand left the bridle and gripped the hilt of his sword, and He drew it with a flash of red.

Forward! Forward! cried Glorfmdel, then loud and
He called the horse in the Elvish tongue: now, now lim, Asfaloth!

Immediately, the white horse leaped and bounded off like the The wind on the last lap of the road. At the same time, Black horses raced down the hill in pursuit, and
The Riders let out a terrible cry, like the one Frodo had heard fill the ground. The woods in the eastern quarter, far away, shuddered replied; and to the great dismay of Frodo and his friends
On the left, among the trees and rocks, four other horsemen
They arrived flying. Two rode towards Frodo; two galloped at full speed, heading for the ford to cut him off. They seemed to him to run like the wind and grow and darken quickly, as their paths converged with his.





279


Frodo glanced over his shoulder.
He could no longer see his friends. The riders behind him were...
He retreated: even their greatest steeds could not compete in speed with Glorfindel's white elven horse. He looked ahead.
Again, and hope faded. There seemed to be no chance of reaching the Ford before he was cut off by the others who had remained lying in They cast aside their hoods and black cloaks, and were dressed in white and gray. Their swords were naked in their pale sheaths. Helmet

Fear now filled Frodo's entire mind. He no longer thought of his sword. No cry escaped his lips. He closed his eyes and clung to the ho The harness bells jingle wildly and shrilly. A deadly blast
The cold pierced him like a spear, like a final breath, like a flash of white fire; the elven horse, gliding as if on wings, passed by. right in front of the face of the first Horseman.

Frodo heard the splash of water. It foamed around his feet.
He felt the sudden movement and the push as the horse left the river and he laboriously climbed the rocky path. He was scaling the stee

But the pursuers were right behind. At the top of the
The horse stopped abruptly on the bank and turned around, neighing fiercely. There were nine riders at the water's edge below, and Frodo's spirit trembled at the threat posed by their raised faces. He knew nothing that could stop them from crossing.
as easily as he had done; and he felt it was useless to try to escape by the long and uncertain road that leads from Ford to
at the edge of Rivendell, if the Riders had ever crossed it. In any case, in case he felt he had been ordered to stop immediately. Hatr a new desire awoke within him, but he no longer had the strength to

refuse.

Suddenly, the lead rider spurred his horse.
He checked the water and reared up. With a great effort, Frodo straightened up and raised his sword. "Go back there!" he cried. "Go back to the land of Mordor, and..."

280





Don't follow me anymore! Her voice was weak and shrill.
their own ears. The Riders stopped, but Frodo did not have the power of Bombadil. His enemies mocked him with a harsh laugh and

Chilling laughter. "Come back! Come back!" they cried. "Mordor, we'll take you!" "Go back!" he whispered.
The Ring! The Ring! they cried in a deadly voice; and immediately their leader charged his horse into the water, closely followed by two others.

"By Elbereth and Lúthien the Fair," said Frodo with a final effort, raising his sword, "you shall have neither the Ring nor the Ring." Me neither !

The leader, who was now halfway across the ford, stopped. He straightened menacingly in his stirrups and raised his hand. Frodo He remained speechless with astonishment. He felt his tongue stick to his mouth.
And his heart was pounding. His sword shattered and fell from his hand. His hand trembled. The elf horse reared up and neighed. The largest of the black horses had almost set foot on the bank.

At that moment, there was a rumble and a crash: a noise
tumultuous waters rolled many stones. Frodo vaguely glimpsed the river below, which rose, and along its course came a a cavalry of feathered waves. White flames seemed to Frodo
Glimmers flickered on their crests, and he almost thought he glimpsed in the middle the white water, riders on white horses with foam The manes. The three riders who were still in the middle of the Ford were overwhelmed: they disappeared, suddenly buried
Beneath a furious spray, those behind retreated in consternation.

With his last failing senses, Frodo heard shouts, and it seemed to him that he saw, beyond the Riders who hesitated on the
On the shore, a brilliant silhouette of white light; and behind it ran small, dark shapes waving flames, which glowed red in the gray m which was collapsing onto the world.

The black horses were filled with madness and leaped
Terrified, they carried their riders into the raging torrent. Their piercing cries were drowned out by the roar of the river.





28 l


as he carried them away. Then Frodo felt himself falling, and the rumbling and confusion seemed to rise up and engulf him and his enemi


BOOK TWO


I

Frodo woke up and found himself lying in his bed. At first, he thought he had slept late, after a long and unpleasant dream. which still lingered on the periphery of his memory. Or perhaps he had...
Had she been ill? But the ceiling looked strange; it was flat and had richly carved dark beams. I stayed a little longer looking at the of a waterfall.
Where am I, and what time is it? he asked aloud. ceiling. In Elrond's house, it is ten o'clock in the morning.
"It's the morning of October 28th," said a voice. Fourthly, if you must know.
"Gandalf!" cried Frodo, sitting up. "There's the old wizard!" sitting on a chair by the open window. Yes, he said, I'm here. And you're lucky to be here.
And then, after all the absurd things you've done since you left... home.

Frodo lay back down. He felt too good and at peace.
to argue, and anyway he didn't think he'd win with a better argument. He was now fully awake, and the
The memory of his trip came back to him: the short and disastrous cut across; the accident in the Cabriolet
Pony; and his folly in placing the ring in the valley beneath Amon Sûl. While he was thinking of all these things and trying in vain to bring back his memory of his arrival
In Rivendell, a long silence reigned, broken only by the soft murmur of Gandalf's pipe as he blew rings of white smoke out of the windo "Where's Sam?" Frodo finally asked. "And the others? Okay?"

286





"Yes, they are all safe and sound," replied Gandalf. Sam
He was there until I sent him to rest, about half an hour ago. An hour ago.

"What happened at the ford?" asked Frodo. "Everything seemed so dark, in a way; and it still is."

Yes, that would be the case. You were beginning to decline, Gandalf replied. The wound was finally overwhelming you. A few A few more hours and you would have been beyond our reach. But you have strength within you, my dear hobbit! As you
The match took place in Barrow. It was a close call: maybe...
The most dangerous moment of all. I wish you could have held me back. At Weathertop.

"You seem to know a lot already," said Frodo. I haven't told the others about the burial mound. At first, It was too horrible, and then there were other things to do. Think about it. How do you know?

"You talked a lot in your sleep, Frodo," said Gandalf. gently, and it wasn't difficult for me to read your thoughts.
And memory. Don't worry! Although I said "absurd," it's just... I didn't mean it. I have a lot of respect for you, and for the others. It is no small feat to have come this far, and through such dangers, still carrying the Ring.

"We should never have done it without Aragorn," said Frodo. But we needed you. I didn't know what to do without you.

"I was delayed," said Gandalf, "and that almost proved our..." ruin. And yet, I'm not sure: perhaps it would have been better that way. I would like you to tell me what happened!
Everything comes to those who wait! You're not supposed to speak or worry about anything today, on Elrond's orders.

But talking would prevent me from thinking and asking myself questions, which
"It's just as tiring," said Frodo. "I'm wide awake now, and I..." I remember so many things that need explaining. Why... Are you late? You should have at least told me.

"You will soon hear all that you wish to know," said Gandalf. "We will have a Council as soon as you are well enough." For now, I will only say that I was being held captive.

"You?" exclaimed Frodo.





287


"Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey," said the wizard solemnly.
There are many forces in this world, for good and for evil. Some are greater than I. Against some, I have yet to be... measured. But my The Black Riders have appeared. War is brewing!
So you already knew about the Cavaliers before I even met them? Yes, I knew about them. I even told you about them once; Because the Black Riders are the Nazgûl, the Nine Servants, from The Lord of the Rings. But I didn't know they had
I heard him get up, otherwise I would have run away with you right then and there.
I only heard from them after I left in June; but that story must wait. For the moment, we have been saved from disaster, by Aragorn.

"Yes," said Frodo, "it was Aragorn who saved us. Yet I was..."
Sam was afraid of him at first. I don't think Sam ever really trusted him. Not at least not before we met Glorfindel. Gandalf smiled. "I've heard all about Sam," he said. He had no doubt now.
"I am happy," said Frodo. "For I have become very attached to..."
Strider. Well, "affectionate" isn't quite the right word. I mean he's dear to... me; even though he's strange and sometimes dark. In fa It often makes me think of you. I didn't know that one of the Great People was like that. I thought they were just tall.
And rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid and mean like Bill Ferny. But then again, we don't really know much about about the men of the Shire, with the possible exception of the inhabitants of Bree.

"You don't even know much about them, if you think old Barliman is stupid," said Gandalf. "He's quite wise about his..."
his own land. He thinks less than he speaks, and more slowly; yet he With time, one can see through a brick wall (as they say in Bree). But few remain in Middle-earth like Aragorn, son of Arathorn. The race of the Trans-Sea Kings is almost extinct.
In the end. This War of the Ring may well be their last adventure.

Do you really mean to say that Strider is one of the people who
"The ancient kings?" asked Frodo, amazed. "I thought they had everything." Long gone. I thought he was just a simple forester.


288

"A mere Ranger!" cried Gandalf. "My dear Frodo, it's..." What the Rangers are: the last vestige of the North
The great men, the men of the West. They helped me.
previously; and I will need their help in the days to come; for We have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is not yet at rest.

"I suppose not," said Frodo. "But so far, my only thought
I had to travel a long way to get here; and I hope I won't have to go back.
Furthermore, it's very pleasant to rest. I had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that it was everything I wanted.

He fell silent and closed his eyes. After a moment, he spoke.
Again. I've done my calculations, he said, and I can't bring the total up to October 24th. It should be the twenty-first. We must have reached the ford around the twentieth.

You talked and thought more than was reasonable.
"Gandalf said. How are you now, in your flank and shoulder?"

"I don't know," Frodo replied. "They feel absolutely nothing." Which is an improvement, but-he made an effort-I can I move my arm a little again. Yes, it's coming back to life.
"It's not cold," he added, touching his left hand with his right.

"Perfect!" said Gandalf. "It heals quickly. You'll soon be..."
The sound returns. Elrond has healed you: he has cared for you for days, since your arrival. "Days?" asked Frodo.
Well, four nights and three days, to be exact. Elves, I brought you from Ford on the night of the twentieth, and
That's where you lost count. We were terribly anxious, and Sam hardly left your side, day or night, except for Execution Messages. Elro little hope; for I suspected that there was some fragment of
The blade was still in the closed wound. But it couldn't be found.
Until last night. Then Elrond removed a splinter. It was deeply embedded, buried, and working inwards. Frodo shuddered at the memory of the cruel, serrated knife that had vanished from Strider's hands.




289


"Beware!" said Gandalf. "It has disappeared. It has melted away."
And it seems the hobbits are disappearing quite reluctantly. I learned this from powerful warriors of the Great Peoples who would soon to have been defeated by this splinter that you carried for seventeen years and days.

"What would they have done to me?" asked Frodo. "What were the Riders trying to do?"

They tried to pierce your heart with a Morgul knife, which remains in the wound. If they had succeeded, you would have done it. have become like them, only weaker and under their control. You would have become a ghost under their yoke.
of the Lord of Darkness; and he would have tormented you for
trying to keep his ring, if a greater torture was possible than having it stolen and seeing it on his hand.

"Thank God, I hadn't realized the terrible danger!" he said weakly. "I was terrified, of course; but if I had Knowing that, I wouldn't have even dared to move. It's incredible that I escaped that!

Yes, fortune or fate has aided you, said Gandalf, not to evoke courage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder was pier I resisted to the very end. But it was a close call, so... Speak. You were in great danger when you wore the Ring, because then you you

"I know," said Frodo. "They were a terrible sight! But why could we all see their horses?"
Because they are real horses; just as black dresses are real dresses that they wear to give form to their nothingness when they have re So why do these black horses tolerate such riders? The other animals are terrified when they approach, even Glorhndel's Elven Horse. Th Because these horses were born and bred for service in
The Dark Lord in Mordor. Not all of his servants and slaves.


290

They are specters! There are ores and trolls, there are wargs and werewolves; and there have been and still are many Men, warriors and under his control. And their numbers are increasing every day.

What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?

Yes, for now, until everything else is defeated. The Elves can
They will fear the Dark Lord, and they may flee from him, but will they ever listen to him again or serve him? And here in Riven...
In this valley still live some of his principal enemies: the elven sages, the lords of the Eldar who came from beyond the farthest seas the Nazgûl, for those who dwelt in the Blessed
The kingdom lives simultaneously in both worlds, and against both the Seen and the Invisible possess great power. I thought I saw a shining white figure, but it didn't. They darkened like the others. Was it Glorfindel, then?

Yes, you caught a glimpse of it for a moment, because it's on the other one.
On one side: one of the powerful Firstborn. He is an Elven lord from a house of princes. Indeed, there is a power in Rivendell to resis Other powers remain. There is also a power of another kind in the Shire. But all these places will soon become islands.
besieged, if things continue like this. The Dark Lord is deploying all his forces.

"Nevertheless," he said, standing up abruptly and extending his hand.
His chin, while his beard stiffened and stood erect like a bristling wire, We must keep our spirits up. You'll be better soon, if I can I'm not going to overwhelm you with words. You're in Rivendell, and you need to... Don't worry about anything for the moment.

"I don't have the courage to follow," said Frodo, "but I am..."
I'm not worried at the moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell me how things turned out at Ford, while I continue
I will ask, and I will be content with the present moment. After that, I think I will sleep a little longer; but I will not be able to

Gandalf moved his chair to the bedside and took a good... Look at Frodo. Color had returned to his face, and his His eyes were clear, fully awake and conscious. He was smiling.





291

and he seemed to have no apparent problems. But for the
The magician's eye perceived a slight change, just a slight indication, so to speak, of transparency, concerning him, and especially co which were outside, on the cover.

"But that's to be expected," Gandalf told himself.
It's not even halfway there yet, and we don't know what will happen at the end.
Even Elrond can't predict it. Not too evil, I think. He can
to become like a glass filled with clear light so that the eyes can see that it can.

"You are splendid," he said aloud. "I will venture a brief tale," without consulting Elrond. "But very briefly, mind you, and
You must then go back to sleep. That's what happened, as far as... I understand. The Riders headed straight for you as soon as...
You fled. They no longer needed to be guided by their horses: you had become visible to them, already on the threshold of their world. Friends stepped out of the way, otherwise they would have been... They knew that nothing could save you, if the
The white horse couldn't. The riders were too fast to overtake. There were too many of them to oppose. Even on foot, Glorfindel and Aragorn, even when reunited, could not withstand the Nine at once.

When the Nazgûl rushed past, your friends ran uphill behind them. Near the ford, there's a small hollow beside the
The road was hidden by a few stunted trees. There, they hurried. The fire was lit; for Glorfindel knew that a flood was coming. below, if the Cavaliers tried to cross, then he should
He had to take care of those still on his side of the river. As soon as the flooding began, he rushed outside, followed by
Aragorn and the others, brandishing flaming torches. Caught between fire and water, and the vision of an elven lord revealed in his ang Three of them were swept away by the first wave of the flood; the others were then thrown into the water by their horses and overwhelme

"And is this the end of the Black Riders?" asked Frodo.

"No," replied Gandalf. "Their horses must have perished. And without them, they are paralyzed. But the Nazgûl


292

They cannot be destroyed so easily. However, there is something you have nothing to fear from them for the time being. Your friends They crossed after the floodwaters receded and found you lying on your face at the top of the bank, with a broken sword beneath you. Th They were pale and cold, and they feared you were dead, or worse. Elrond's people met them, slowly leading you to Rivendell.
"Who caused the flood?" asked Frodo. "Elrond commanded it," replied Gandalf. "The river of
This valley is under his control, and it will rise up in anger when he absolutely needs to block the ford. As soon as the captain of The Nazgûl rode through the water, and the flood was unleashed.
If I may, I've added a few personal touches: you can... I hadn't noticed, but some waves took the form of
large white horses with riders of dazzling whiteness; and there were many rocks that rolled and creaked. For a moment, I feared I had u It would become uncontrollable and sweep you all away. There are great things, the vigor of the waters that flow down from the snows of Misty mountains.

Yes, it all comes back to me now, said Frodo: the trem
The waves were roaring. I thought I was going to drown, along with my friends and
Enemies and all that. But now we are safe! Gandalf glanced quickly at Frodo, but he had closed his eyes.
Yes, you are all safe for the moment. Soon there will be feasts and revelry to celebrate the victory at the ford of Bruinen, and you wi "Splendid!" said Frodo. "It's wonderful that Elrond, and Glorfindel, and other great lords, not forgetting Aragorn,
They should go to so much trouble and show me so much kindness.

"Well, there are many reasons why they should," said Gandalf, smiling. "I am one good reason. The Ring is another." You are the Ring-bearer. And you are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-seeker.

"Dear Bilbo!" said Frodo sleepily. "I wonder where he is. I wish he were here and could hear everything. It would have been..."

293

That made him laugh. The cow jumped over the moon! And the poor old troll! With that, he fell fast asleep.

Frodo was now safe in the Last Welcoming Home east of the Sea. This home was, as Bilbo had reported long ago, a sea.
The perfect home, whether you love good food, sleep, or stories, or singing, or simply sitting and reflecting, or a pleasant "A mixture of everything." Simply being there was a remedy for weariness, emotion, fear, and sadness.

As the evening wore on, Frodo awoke again and he
He noticed that he no longer felt the need for rest or sleep, but had
a pronounced taste for food and drink, and probably also for singing, and then he began to tell stories. He got out of bed and discover that his arm was already almost as useful as before.
He found clean clothes made of green fabric, ready to be worn.
It suited him perfectly. Looking at himself in a mirror, he was surprised to see his reflection much thinner than he remembered. He bore a striking resemblance to Bilbo's young nephew who
He used to go for walks with his uncle in the Shire; but with his eyes he looked at him thoughtfully.

Yes, you've seen a lot since the last time you took a look.
"Through a mirror," he said to his reflection. But now, for a joyous reunion! He stretched out his arms and whistled a settle.

At that moment, there was a knock at the door, and Sam
He went in. He ran to Frodo and clumsily took his left hand. He stroked him gently, then he blushed and he turned away abruptly.

"Hey, Sam!" said Frodo.

"It's warm!" said Sam. "It's your hand, Mr. Frodo." It had been so cold during the long nights. But glory and trumpet "Animals!" he cried, turning around with shining eyes.
dancing on the dance floor. It's good to see you up and about. Once again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were here. He w "I'm ready," said Frodo. "Let's go and get the rest of the..." feast!

294





"I can take you there, sir," said Sam. "It's a big house. It's very special. There's always something more to discover, and
You never know what you'll find around the next bend. And elves, sir! Elves here, elves there! Some love lungs, terrible and splendid; singing - not that I've had the time or the inclination to
I've been listening a lot since we arrived. But I'm starting to understand. some local customs.
"I know what you've done, Sam," said Frodo.
taking his arm. But you will be happy tonight, and you will listen to "At Your Pleasure." Come on, guide me around the bends!

Sam guided him through several passages and down many staircases.
and opening onto a raised garden overlooking the steep riverbank. He found his friends sitting on a porch beside the
The house faced east. Shadows had lengthened in the valley below, but light still shone on the slopes of the distant mountains.
Above. The air was warm. The sound of running and falling. The water crashed loudly, and the evening was imbued with a light fragrance. trees and flowers, as if summer were still lingering in the kingdom of Elrond gardens.
Hooray! cried Pippin, leaping up. Here is our noble Cousin! Make way for Frodo, the Lord of the Rings! "Hush!" said Gandalf from the shadows at the back of the porch. "Evil does not enter this valley; but all the
Likewise, we shouldn't name them. The Lord of the Rings isn't Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of Mordor, whose Power spreads across the world once more. We sit in a fortress. Outside, night falls.

Gandalf said many cheerful things like this,
said Pippin. He thinks I need to be put in my place. But it seems somehow impossible to feel gloomy or depressed in this I feel like I could sing, if I knew the right song for the occasion.

"I feel like singing myself," Frodo laughed. Although... At that moment, I feel more like eating and drinking.

"It'll all be sorted out soon," said Pippin. "You've shown." Your usual trick of getting up just in time for dinner.





295

More than a meal! A feast! exclaimed Merry. As soon as
Gandalf reported that you had been recovered; preparations began. He had barely finished speaking when they were summoned into the hall

The hall of Elrond's house was filled with people: elves for
Most of the time, even though there were a few guests of a different kind. Elrond, as was his custom, sat in a large armchair at the en Glorfindel was sitting on the other side, as was Gandalf.

Frodo gazed at them in wonder; for he had never before seen Elrond, of whom so many tales spoke; and as they saw Glorfindel sitting on as lords of dignity and power.

Gandalf was smaller than the other two; but his
His long white hair, his long silver beard and his broad shoulders gave him the look of a wise king of antiquity.
legend. On his aged face, beneath thick, snow-white eyebrows, his dark features were etched. Their eyes were like embers ready to sudde

Glorfindel was tall and straight; his hair was shining gold, his face clear, youthful, fearless, and full of joy; his His eyes were bright and piercing, and his voice like music; on his brow breathed wisdom, and his hand was strong.

Elrond's face was timeless, neither old nor young, though it contained the memory of many things joyful and sad. Her hair was as black as shadows.
Twilight, and a silver circle was set over him; his eyes were

Gray as a clear evening, and in them shone a light like starlight. Venerable, he appeared like a king crowned with many stars. Winters, Elves and Men.

In the middle of the table, against the woven tablecloths on
Along the wall, there was a chair under an awning, and there sat a beautiful lady to look at, and she looked so much like a woman. Frodo guessed that she was one of his own.


296

close relatives. She was young, yet not so young. The braids of her black hair hadn't been touched by the gel; her arms were white and Her face was clear, flawless, and smooth, and the starlight in her eyes shone, gray as a cloudless night; yet regal she gazed, and thou Above her eyebrows, her head was covered with a silver headdress.
Lace adorned with small precious stones, of a sparkling white; but its soft grey. The clothes had no ornament, except a belt of woven l money.

Thus Frodo saw her whom few mortals had yet seen; Arwen, daughter of Elrond, of whom it was said that The image of Lúthien had returned to earth; and it was
She was called Undomiel, for she was the evening star of her people. She had long lived in the land of her mother's family, in Lorien b Dell at his father's house. But his brothers, Elladan and
Elrohir were on a wandering journey; for they often rode far into the fields with the Northern Rangers, never forgetting their mother torment in the caverns of the ores.

Frodo had never seen such beauty in a living being, nor imagined it in his mind; and he was both astonished and
He was embarrassed to find himself seated at Elrond's table among all the others. These people, so noble and so handsome. Although he h And, elevated on several cushions, he felt very small, and
It was a little out of place; but that impression quickly faded. The feast: He was joyful and the food satisfied all his desires. Some time passed before he looked around again, or even turned towards his neighbors.

He first looked for his friends. Sam had begged to be there. He was allowed to serve his master, but he had been told that for this He was then a guest of honor. Frodo could see him now, sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper end of one of the
the side tables near the stage. He saw no sign of Strider.

To Frodo's right sat a dwarf of important appearance. He was richly dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was





297

White, almost as white as the snow-white fabric of his clothes. He wore a silver belt, and a chain hung around his neck. Silver and dia "Welcome and pleased to meet you!" said the dwarf, turning to face him. Then he rose from his seat and bowed. Gloin
"At your service," he said, and bowed even lower.

"Frodo Baggins at your service and that of your family," said Frodo, quite rightly, stood up in surprise and scattered his cushions. Did I understand correctly that you are Gloin, one of the twelve companions of the great Thorin Oakenshield?

"Absolutely," replied the dwarf, picking up the

cushions and courteously helping Frodo back to his seat.
And I'm not asking the question, because I've already been told that you are the relative and adoptive heir of our friend Bilbo.

You are renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery. "Thank you very much," said Frodo.
"I've heard you've had some very strange adventures," he said. "Gloin. I wonder what could possibly keep four hobbits away for so long. a journey. Nothing like it has happened since Bilbo's arrival.
with us. But perhaps I shouldn't ask too many questions, since Elrond and Gandalf don't seem willing to talk about it?

"I don't think we'll discuss it, at least not yet," said Frodo politely. He assumed that even in Elrond's house, the question
The Lord of the Circle wasn't one for idle chatter; and anyway, he wished to forget his troubles for a while. "But I am just as curious so far from the Lonely Mountain.

Gloin looked at him. If you haven't heard it yet, I think we'll soon. Let's not talk about it yet. Master Elrond will summon us. All of this will happen soon, I believe, and then we will all hear many things. But there is still much to say.

They continued to talk together for the rest of the meal, but Frodo listened more than he spoke; as far as news of the Shire was concer important, while Gloin had much to tell about the events in the northern regions of Wilderland. Frodo learned that Grimbeorn
Old, son of Beorn, was now lord of many sturdy men,


298
and to their lands situated between the Mountains and the Black Forest. Neither the ore nor the wolf dared venture there. Indeed, said Gloin, without the Beornings, the
Dale's passage to Rivendell would have long since become Impossible. It is valiant men who keep the Upper Town open.
The pass and the ford of Carrock. But the price to pay is high, he said. He added, shaking his head; and like Beorn of old, they
I don't particularly like dwarves. Nevertheless, they are reliable, and that's why I like them. Such a person is very common these days For us, Dale's men are good folic, the Bardings.
The grandson of Bard the Bowman rules them, son of Brand
of Bain, son of Bard. He is a powerful king, and his kingdom now extends far south and east of Esgaroth. "And your own people?" asked Frodo.
There's a lot to tell, good and bad, says Gloin; yet, overall, everything is fine: we've been lucky so far, even if we... cannot escape If you hear of us, I'll gladly tell you the news. But stop me when... You're tired! Dwarves talk non-stop.
They say it's their work.

And with that, Gloin launched into a long account of
the actions of the Dwarf kingdom. He was delighted to have
Frodo showed no sign of weariness, for he showed no sign of fatigue, and made no attempt to change the subject, although In fact, he quickly got lost among the strange names of
people and places he had never heard of before. He was, however, interested to learn that Dain was still king under
the Mountain, and was now old (having passed his two hundred and fiftieth year), venerable, and fabulously wealthy. Of the ten companio He couldn't move from his sofa to his dining chair, and it took six young dwarves to lift him.

"And what became of Balin, Ori, and Oin?" asked Frodo. A shadow passed over Gloin's face. We do n't know, he




299


I replied. It's largely thanks to Balin that I arrived. I sought advice from those who live in Rivendell. But tonight Let's talk about happier things!

Gloin then began to speak of the works of his people, recounting
Frodo speaks of their great works in the valley and under the mountain. "We did very well," he said. "But in metallurgy, we..."
We cannot compete with our fathers, many of whose secrets are lost. We can make good armor and sharp swords, but we can no longer make And the fountains, and the basins! You should see the stone!
Paved roads of every color! And halls and caverns of underground streets with arches sculpted like trees; and terraces and towers on th

"I'll come and see them if I ever get the chance," said Frodo. How surprised Bilbo would have been to see all the changes that had take The desolation of Smaug!

Gloin looked at Frodo and smiled. "You were very fond of Bilbo, weren't you?" he asked.

"Yes," replied Frodo. "I'd rather see him than anyone else." Towers and palaces all over the world.

The feast finally came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose and descended the corridor, followed by the company. In order. The doors opened wide and they entered.

He crossed a wide passage and other gates, and arrived
in another room. There were no tables, but a bright fire burned there, burning in a large hearth between the carved pillars. on each side.

Frodo found himself walking with Gandalf. That's the
"Fire Room," said the magician. "Here, you will hear many songs and stories, if you manage to stay awake. But not on holidays."
It is usually empty and silent, and people come here seeking peace and reflection. There is always a fire here, all year round, but the


300

Elrond entered and walked towards the seat prepared for Then, elven minstrels began to play sweet music. Slowly,
The hall filled, and Frodo gazed in rapture at the many beautiful people gathered around him; the golden glow of the fire played
on them and sparkled in their hair. Suddenly, he noticed, not far from the edge of the fire, a small, dark figure sitting on a stool, i There was a cup and some bread on the floor.
Frodo wondered if he was ill (if people could even be ill in those days). Rivendell), and had been unable to come to the feast. His Her head seemed sunk in sleep on her chest, and a fold of her dark cloak covered her face.

Elrond stepped forward and stood beside the silent figure.
"Wake up, little master!" he said, smiling. Then, turning to Frodo, he beckoned. The time has finally come. "What you wished for, Frodo," he said. "Here is a friend whom you have long regretted."

The dark figure raised its head and revealed its face. "Bilbo!" cried Frodo, suddenly recognized, and he leaped forward.
"Hello, Frodo, my boy!" said Bilbo. "So you've arrived here at..." Finally. I was hoping you'd manage it. Well, well! So all that
I heard the feast was held in your honor. I hope you enjoyed it yourself?
"Why weren't you there?" cried Frodo. "And why didn't you come? Have I ever had permission to see you?" Because you were sleeping. I saw you a lot.
I was by your side with Sam every day. But as for the
As for feasting, I'm not very fond of that sort of thing anymore. And I had other things to do. What were you doing?
Why? By sitting and thinking. I've been doing that a lot lately, and this is usually the best place to do it. Wake up! he said, glancing sideways at Elrond. There was a bright glow. There was no visible sign of drowsiness in Frodo.
Up! I wasn't asleep, Master Elrond. If you must know, you all left your feast too soon, and you





301


bothered me - right in the middle of composing a song. I was stuck on one or two phrases, and I was thinking about them; But now I suppose I'll never get them right. There will be so many songs that the ideas will get lost.
He'd get it out of my head. I'll have to ask my friend Dunadan to... Help me. Where is he?

Elrond laughed. "We'll find him," he said. "Then you..."
Two of you will go to a corner and finish your task, and we... Listen to him and judge him before we end our festivities. Guards were sent to search for Bilbo's friend, but no one knew where he was, or why he had not been present at the feast.

Meanwhile, Frodo and Bilbo were sitting side by side, and Sam quickly arrived and sat down near them. They talked. together in hushed voices, unconcerned with gaiety and music in
The room surrounded them. Bilbo didn't have much to say about himself. After leaving Hobbiton, he had wandered off without a specific p along the road or in the countryside on either side; but one way or another He had always set his course for Rivendell.

I arrived here without much adventure, he said, and after a
After resting, I continued my journey with the dwarves to Dale: my last trip. I will travel no more. Old Balin had left. Then I arrived Here I am again, and here I am. I've done this and that.
I continued writing my book. And, of course, I do
They sing a few songs now and then, just to please me. I think; because, of course, they're not really good enough for Rivendell. And I Just come this way: it's simply the way it is. A truly remarkable place.

I hear news from all the countries, from beyond the mountains, and from the South, but almost nothing from the Shire. I've heard tell About the Ring, of course. Gandalf came here often. Not that he told me much, he became closer than
In recent years, the Dunadan has taught me more. Imagine that my ring could cause such a stir! It's a pity Gandalf didn't know sooner. I brought it myself a long time ago without too much difficulty. No problems. I've thought several times about going back to Hobbi.
I would love to; but I'm getting old, and they wouldn't let me:

302

Gandalf and Elrond, I mean. They seemed to think that the enemy was looking for me everywhere and was going to hunt me down. to reduce me to dust if he caught me staggering in the Wild.

And Gandalf said: "The Ring has passed, Bilbo.
It would bring you and others no good if you tried to interfere.
"Again!" A strange remark, just like Gandalf. But he said he was watching over you, so I let it go. I'm scared. I'm so glad to see you safe and sound. He paused and looked. At Frodo, no doubt.

"Do you have it here?" he asked in a low voice. "I can't help."
I'm curious, you know, after everything I've heard. I really should. As if I just wanted to take one last look.

"Yes, I understand," replied Frodo, with a strange reluctance. "It looks exactly the same as before." "Well, I'd like to see him for a moment," said Bilbo. Once dressed, Frodo noticed that while he had slept,
A ring had been fastened around his neck by a new chain, light but strong. Slowly, he took it out. Bilbo reached out. But Frodo quickly removed the Ring. To his great dismay and astonishment... he realized that he was no longer looking at Bilbo; The shadow seemed to have seeped between them, and through it he found himself observing a small, wrinkled creature with a A hungry face and groping, bony hands. He felt the urge to strike. Him.

The music and singing around them seemed to fade away, and
A silence fell. Bilbo glanced quickly at Frodo's face and walked on. He covered his eyes with his hand. "I understand now," he said. "P Go away! I'm sorry: sorry you came here with this burden; sorry for everything. Do adventures never end?
I suppose not. Someone else always has to continue the story. Oh well, there's nothing we can do about it. I wonder if it's even worth Have you finished my book? But don't worry about it now-let's move on. I've got some juicy information! Tell me all about the Shire!

Frodo hid the Ring, and the shadow passed, leaving him Almost no memory. The light and music of Rivendell





303


It was about him again. Bilbo smiled and laughed happily. All the news from the Shire that Frodo could tell- helped and corrected from time to time by Sam - was of
What interested him most, from felling the smallest tree to the pranks of the smallest child in Hobbiton, were so many...
Deeply involved in the affairs of the Four Farthings, they did not. Note the arrival of a man dressed in dark green cloth. For many, He stood there for a few minutes, watching them with a smile.

Suddenly, Bilbo looked up. Ah, there you are at last, Dun- "Adan!" he cried.

"Aragorn!" said Frodo. "You seem to have many names."

Well, Strider is a name I'd never heard of before, anyway. "Said Bilbo. Why do you call it that?"

"They call me that in Bree," Strider said, laughing, "and that." That's how I met her. "And why do you call him Dunadan?" asked Frodo.
"The Dunadan," said Bilbo. "That's often what Fie is called around here."

But I thought you knew enough Elvish at least to know dun- adan: Man of the West, Númenórean. But this is not the time.
"For the lessons!" He turned to Aragorn. "Where have you been, my..." Friend? Why weren't you at the feast? Lady Arwen was there. there.
Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. "I know," he said. "But often I have to put aside my cheerfulness. Elladan and Elrohir returned u "Well, my dear friend," said Bilbo, "now you've heard the... Could you spare me a moment? I need your help with..."
Something urgent. Elrond says that song I sang needs to be finished. I finished before the end of the evening and I'm stuck. Let's go. Go to a corner and refine it!
Strider smiled. "Let's go!" he said. "Let me hear it!" Frodo was left alone for a moment, for Sam had fallen. asleep. He was alone and felt rather sorry, although everything
The inhabitants of Rivendell had gathered around him. But those near him remained silent, absorbed by the music of the voices and the


304

They were concentrating on the instruments and paying attention to nothing else. Frodo began to listen.

At first, the beauty of the melodies and the interweaving of words in Elvish languages, even though he understood them, captivated him.

Little by little, he was captivated by her charm, as soon as he began to take care of them. Almost, it seemed as if the words were taki Visions of distant lands and brilliant things he had never seen before opened up before him; his imagination unfolded before him; and t like a golden mist above seas of foam that sighed at the ends of the world. Then the enchantment became more intense.
and more dreamlike, until he had the impression that an endless river of gold and silver was overflowing over him in abundance. dinous so that his scheme would be understandable; he became part of the pulsating air around him, and he enveloped and drowned him He quickly sank beneath his shining weight into a deep sleep.

There, he wandered for a long time in a dream of music that transformed into running water, then suddenly into a voice. He seemed To be the voice of Bilbo singing verses. Faint at first, and then the words became clearer.

Earendil was a sailor
who lingered in Arvernian;
He built a boat with wood felled in Nimbrethil to travel;
He wove his sails of beautiful silver, His lanterns were made of silver, He fashioned his prow like a swan, and the light fell upon its banners.

In the panoply of ancient kings, he wrapped it with chained rings; His shining shield was adorned with runes.
to protect him from all injury and harm; his bow was made of dragon horn, his arrows were devoid of ebony, his hauberk was made of silver,





305


its chalcedony sheath;
His steel sword was valiant, from his high and unyielding helmet, An eagle feather on its crest, an emerald on its breast.
Under the moon and under the stars, he sailed away from the northern shores, Disoriented on enchanted paths Beyond the days of mortal lands.

The creaking of the narrow ice
where the shadow stretches across the frozen hills,
emanating from the infernal heat and incandescent waste, he turned abruptly and continued to wander. On starless waters, far lost, he finally arrived at the Night of Nothingness.
And it passed away, and he never saw anything again. He was seeking neither a radiant shore nor light.

The winds of anger drove him, and he fled blindly through the foam from west to east, without running, Without warning, he rushed home.

Then Elwing the Flying came to him. and a flame lit up in the darkness;
Brighter than the light of a diamond, the fire on its carcanet.

The Silmaril she had bound to him and crowned him with living light, and then fearless, his brow ablaze, he turned his prow; and into t There, strong and free, a storm arose, a powerful wind at Tarmenel;
along paths rarely trodden by mortals. His boat, he carried it with a breath as sharp as the power of death through the grey


306





and seas long abandoned in distress: from east to west, he died.

Through Evernight, his back was brought back
on black, roaring waves that crashed beyond leagues, from unknown, sunken shores that drowned before the Days began, until he heard on where the world ends, the music is long,
where the foaming waves ceaselessly pour forth yellow gold and the jewels tarnish.

He saw the mountain rise in silence, where twilight rests on the knees of Valinor and Eldamar. glimpsed in the distance, beyond the seas.

A vagabond escaped from the night. He finally arrived at the white haven. towards Elvenhome, the green and the just
where the air is crisp, where pale as glass at the foot of the hill of Ilmarin a glimmer in a steep valley
The towers lit by Tirion's lamps are reflected on the Shadowmere.

He lingered there after wandering around, and the melodies they taught him,
And the wise men told him marvelous things, and golden harps were brought to him. They then clothed him in elven white, and seven lights preceded him.

as by the calacrian
He went to a hidden and desolate land.

He reached the timeless halls where countless years shine, and reigns endlessly over the Elder King. at Ilmarin on the steep mountain;
and then inaudible words were spoken.





307


Men and Elves,
Visions have manifested beyond this world, forbidding those who inhabit it.

A brand new ship they had built for him of mithril and elven glass
with a shining prow; no shaved oar nor sail it carried on a silver mast:
the Silmaril as a lantern light
and a banner illuminated by a living flame to shine by Elbereth
She herself was installed, she who had come there, and immortal wings created for him, and inflicted upon him an eternal fate,
to sail in the shoreless skies and come beyond the sun and the moonlight.

From the high hills of Evereven
where fountains of silver flow gently, his wings carried him, a wandering light, Beyond the imposing Mountain Wall. Then he turned away from World's End,
and longed once more to find his home far away, traveling through shadows, and burning like an island star He appeared above the mists,
a distant flame before the Sun, a marvel before the dawning day where the grey waters of Norland flow.

And he crossed Middle-earth.
and at last I heard the wound weeping of the elven women and servants In ancient times, in the years of yesteryear.

But a terrible fate befell him,
until the Moon fades, a spherical star passes, and never lingers again


308





on the shores here where mortals dwell; forevermore a herald upon
a mission that should never rest, carrying its bright lamp far and wide. The Western Flame-Bearer.

The singing stopped. Frodo opened his eyes and saw that
Bilbo was sitting on his stool in the middle of a circle of listeners, who were smiling and applauding. "We'd better take it back," said an elf.
Bilbo stood up and bowed. "I am flattered, Lindir," he said. "But it would be too tiring to repeat everything."

"Not too tiring for you," the Elves replied, laughing. "Know that you will never tire of reciting your own verses." We really can't answer your question in a single hearing!

"What!" cried Bilbo. "We can't say which parts were mine!" And which were the Dunadans?

It is not easy for us to distinguish between two "mortals," said the Elf.
"Nonsense, Lindir," grumbled Bilbo. "If you can't tell-" Between a man and a hobbit, your judgment is weaker than I imagine. They are a Perhaps. For other sheep, it probably looks different. Lindir laughs. Or at the shepherds. But mortals have not been
Our office. We have other matters to attend to.

"I won't argue with you," said Bilbo. "I'm sleepy afterwards..."

Lots of music and singing. I'll let you guess, if you like.

He stood up and approached Frodo. "Well, that's it," he said. He said in a low voice. "It went better than I expected. I don't We are often asked for a second hearing. What are your thoughts on that?

"I'm not going to try to guess," said Frodo, smiling.

"You don't need to," said Bilbo. "In fact, that was all." Mine. Except Aragorn insisted I put a green one
Pierre. He seemed to attach importance to it. I don't know why.
Otherwise, it was obvious that he found the whole affair rather above average.





309


my head, and he said that if I had the audacity to write verses
As for Eärendil in Elrond's house, that was my business. Let's suppose he's right.

"I don't know," said Frodo. "It seemed to fit somehow." I couldn't explain it. I was half asleep when you started. and it seemed to be related to a dream I had had.
I didn't realize it was really you speaking, until almost the end.

"It's hard to stay awake here, until you get used to it," said Bilbo. Not that hobbits would ever quite acquire the The elves' appetite for music, poetry, and stories. They seem
I love them as much as food, maybe even more. They'll continue to be broadcast, and not for a long time. How about we take a break? More discreet conversations?

"Can we?" asked Frodo.
Of course. It's for fun, not for work. Come and go as you please, as long as you don't make any noise. They stood up and silently withdrew into the shadows, and
They headed towards the doors. Sam, whom they left behind, was fast asleep, still with a smile on his lips. Despite his pleasure at bei Frodo felt a pang of regret as he left the Great Hall.
Fire. At the very moment they crossed the threshold, a single clear flame. The voice rose in song.

To Elbereth Gilthoniel, silivren penna miriel
0 menel aglar elenath!

Na-chaered palan-diriel
0 galadhremmin ennorath,

Fanuilos, the linnathon nave aear, si nave aearon!

Frodo paused for a moment, turning around. Elrond was inside. His chair and the fire lit his face like the light of summer. The trees.


3io





Thrown back, he appeared to be clad in elven chainmail, and a star shone on his chest. They spoke together, then suddenly... Frodo had the impression that Arwen turned towards him.
and the light from her eyes fell upon him from afar and pierced his heart.

He remained motionless, enchanted, while the sweet syllables of The elven song fell like clear jewels, mingling words and melody. "It's a song for Elbereth," said Bilbo. "They'll sing it, and..."
More songs from the Blessed Kingdom, several times this evening. Come join us!

He led Frodo back to his small room. It overlooked... the gardens and looked south, across the ravine.
Bruinen. They sat there for a while, scanning the
window overlooking the bright stars above the steeply sloping woods, and talking in hushed voices. They no longer spoke of the small ne the distant Shire, nor the dark shadows and perils that
enveloped them, but with the beautiful things they had seen in the world together, Elves, stars, trees and the gentle fall of the lumin

Finally, there was a knock at the door. They begged you to...
"Sorry," said Sam, bending his head, "but I was just wondering..." to ask if you would like anything.

"And I beg you to accept, Sam Gamgee," replied Bilbo. "I suppose so." "You mean it's time for your master to go to bed?"

Well, sir, there is a Council meeting early tomorrow morning, if I understand correctly, and He only got up for the first time today.

"Quite right, Sam," laughed Bilbo. "You can trot off and..." Tell Gandalf he's gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! God bless me, but what a pleasure to see you again!
Ultimately, nobody appreciates hobbits for good conversation. I'm beginning to understand. Very old, and I've begun to wonder if I'll l chapters of our story. Good night! I think I'll go for a walk. And gaze at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Good night!


2





The next day, Frodo woke up early, feeling rested and in great shape. I walked along the terraces overlooking the noisy Bruinen and watched the pale, fresh sun rise over the distant mountains, and shine obliquely through the thin silvery mist;
The dew sparkled on the yellow leaves, and the fabric
Threads of gauze shimmered on each bush. Sam walked beside him, saying nothing, but sniffing the air and looking at each one. From time to time, my eyes filled with wonder at the dizzying heights to the east. The snow was white on their peaks.

On a seat carved from stone, at the edge of a bend in the road, they I stumbled upon Gandalf and Bilbo, deep in conversation. Hi! Good "Good morning!" said Bilbo. "Ready for the Great Council?"

"I feel ready for anything," replied Frodo. "But most of the

All I want to do is go for a walk today and explore the valley. I'd love to go to those pine forests up there. He pointed. very far north of Rivendell.
"Perhaps you'll have a chance later," said Gandalf. "But we cannot. Don't make any plans yet. There's much to hear and much to decide t Suddenly, while they were talking, a clear and distinct bell rang.
"This is the alarm bell for the Council of Elrond!" they cried. "Gandalf! Come! We need both of you, Bilbo and you."

Frodo and Bilbo quickly followed the wizard along the winding path leading to the house; behind them, intruders and "Forgotten for the moment," Sam trotted.

Gandalf led them to the porch where Frodo had found his friends the previous evening. The clear autumn light Morning was now shining in the valley. The sound of bubbles
Sparkling waters gushed from the foaming riverbed. Birds sang, and a wholesome peace reigned over the land. To Frodo


312

his dangerous escape and the rumors of growing darkness
In the outside world, nothing seemed to remain but the memories of a troubled dream; but the faces that turned to greet them They entered and the atmosphere was serious.

Elrond was there, and several others sat in silence.
about him. Frodo caught sight of Glorfindel and Gloin; and in a corner Strider sat alone, dressed in his old clothes worn from the journey.
Elrond once again sat Frodo down beside him and introduced him... told him at the company:

Here, my friends, is the hobbit, Frodo, son of Drogon.
never came here at the risk of greater danger or for a more urgent mission.

He then pointed out and named those whom Frodo had
He had never met him before. A younger dwarf stood beside Gloin, his son Gimli. Besides Glorfindel, there were several others the advisors of the house of Elrond, of which Erestor was the leader; and with him was Galdor, an elf of the Grey Havens. who had come to run an errand for Cirdan the shipwright. There was also a strange elf dressed in green and brown,
Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil, the king of The Elves of the Northern Mirkwood. And sitting a little apart
He was a tall man, with a fair and noble face, black hair and grey eyes, with a proud and stern look.

He was dressed in a coat and boots as if for a journey on horseback; and indeed, although his clothes were rich, and his The coat was lined with fur and stained from the long journey. He wore a silver necklace adorned with a single white stone.
His hair was cut short, reaching his shoulders. On a baldric, he wore a large, silver-ornamented horn, which was now resting on His knees. He gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with sudden astonishment.

"This is Boromir," said Elrond, turning to Gandalf, "a man."
From the South. He arrived in the gray early morning and is looking for
to advise. I asked him to be present, because here his [name] will answer your questions.

Not everything that was said and debated in the Council needed to be necessary. Now, we will tell you. There has been much talk about e

313


particularly in the South and in the vast lands east of the mountains. Frodo had already heard a lot about it. rumors; but the story of Gloin was new to him, and when the

The dwarf spoke, he listened attentively. It seemed that amidst the splendor of their works, the hearts of the dwarves... The inhabitants of the Lonely Mountain were troubled.

"For many years now," Gloin said, "a shadow of unease has hung over our people. We didn't know where it came from. Words began to be wh Wealth and splendor would be found in a vaster world. He spoke of Moria: the mighty works of our fathers, which are called in our langu that we finally had the power and the numbers necessary to return.

Gloin sighed. Moria! Moria! Wonder of the North
The world! We have dug too deep and awakened the nameless. Fear. Its vast dwellings have remained empty for a long time since the child Durin's children fled. But now we spoke of them again with nostalgia, and yet with apprehension; for no dwarf has dared to cross those of Khazad-dûm for many kings' lives, save only Thror, and He perished. Finally, Balin listened to the whispers,
and resolved to leave; and although Dain had not given permission, he took with him Ori and Oin as well as many of our people, and they set off towards the south.

That was almost thirty years ago. For a while, we had news that seemed good: messages indicated that Moria had been entered and a great Silence followed, and since then, not a single word has come from Moria.

About a year ago, a messenger came to Dain, but not from Moria-from Mordor: a rider in the night, who He summoned Dain to his door. Lord Sauron the Great, thus he
He said he desired our friendship. He would give rings for it, as he used to. And he asked insistently about the hobbits, what country Sauron knows, he said, that one of them was known to you at some point.

This greatly disturbed us, and we did not respond.


314





Then his deep voice lowered, and he would have liked
He softened it if he could. "Just a small testimony of your
"Sauron asks this: that you find friendship," he said, "that you find it." "This thief," were his words, "and obtain from him, willingly or unwillingly."
No, a small ring, the most insignificant of rings, which he once stole. It is, however, a trifle that pleases Sauron, and a token of yo Find it, along with the three rings that the dwarven ancestors once possessed. It will be returned to you, and the kingdom of Moria wil Yours forever. Seek only news of the thief, if he is still there. Lives and where, and you will have a great reward and a lasting life. The friendship of the Lord. Refuse it, and things will no longer seem real.
"So good. You refuse?"

At that moment, his breath became like the hissing of snakes, and all those who remained there shuddered, but Dain said, "I say neither No. I must take this message and its meaning into account. His beautiful coat.

"Think carefully, but not for too long," he said.

"The time for my reflection belongs to me," he replied. Dain.
"For now," he said, and he disappeared into the darkness. Our leaders' hearts have been heavy ever since.
night. We didn't need the messenger's ominous voice to warn us.
We understood that his words contained both threat and deceit; for we already knew that the power that returned to Mordor did not He has changed, and yet he has always betrayed us. Twice the messenger

returned, and remained unanswered. The third and final moment, he said, is near, before the end of the year.

And that's how Dain finally sent me to warn Bilbo that
He is sought by the enemy, and to know, if possible, why he desires this ring, the smallest of rings. We also desire Elrond's counsel. discovers that messengers have also come to King Brand. Dale, and that he is afraid. We fear he will give in. Already
War is looming on its eastern borders. If we do not respond, the enemy may send men under its command to attack King Brand, and Dain as





315

"You did well to come," said Elrond. "You will hear..." Today, all you need to understand the enemy's objectives. There is nothing you Resist, with or without hope. But you are not alone.
You will learn that your problem is only part of the problem of the entire Western world. The Ring! What will we do with the Ring? The Ring, the least of rings, the trifle that Sauron cherishes? is the grim fate we must consider.

That's why you were called here. Called,
I tell you this, even though I did not call you to me, strangers from distant lands. You came and we are here, in this same place.
At the last moment, by pure chance, as improbable as it may seem. Yet, it is not so. Believe rather that it is so ordained that we, who and no one else, must now find counsel in the face of the world's peril.

Now, therefore, the things that have been said openly will be said. It has been hidden from all but a few until this day. And first, so This story will be told from the beginning to the present day. And I will begin this story, but others will finish it.

Then all listened to Elrond speak in his clear voice. Sauron and the Rings of Power, and their forging in the The second age of the world, long ago. Part of its history was
Some there knew the secret, but no one knew the full story, and many
All eyes turned to Elrond, a mixture of fear and wonder, as he told his story: the Elven smiths of Eregion and their friendship with Mo and their thirst for knowledge, by which Sauron ensnared them
them. Because at that time, it wasn't yet a bad sight, and they
He received their help and became powerful in his craft, while he learned all their secrets, and betrayed them, and secretly forged in The Mountain of Fire, the One Ring, to be their master. But Celebrimbor knew of its existence and hid the Three they had made; and ther and the gate of Moria was closed.

Then, over the years that followed, he retraced the Ringing; but since this story is told elsewhere, even as


3i6





Elrond himself recorded it in his books of knowledge, but it is not here.
Let us recall it. For it is a long story, full of great and terrible deeds, and while Elrond spoke briefly, the sun rose in the sky, and the morning was passing when he stopped.

He spoke of Númenor, of its glory and its fall, and of the return
From the Kings of Men to Middle-earth, from the depths of the Sea, borne on the wings of the storm. Then Elendil the Great

and his powerful sons, Isildur and Anarion, became great lords; and the northern kingdom they created in Arnor, and the southern- kingdom of Gondor, beyond the mouths of the Anduin. But Sauron of Mordor assailed them, and they formed the Last Alliance of Elves and

Elrond then paused and sighed. I remember
"Well, the splendor of their banners," he said. It reminded me... of the glory of the Old Days and the armies of Beleriand.
So many great princes and captains were gathered. And yet not as many, nor as magnificent, as when Thangorodrim was shattered. And the Elves decreed that evil was vanquished forever, and so it was. Not quite.

"Do you remember?" said Frodo, expressing his thoughts aloud.
in his astonishment. But I thought, he stammered as Elrond Me turned to him, I thought that the fall of Gil-galad was A very long time ago.

"That was indeed the case," Elrond replied gravely. "But my..." The memories go back even to ancient times. Earendil was my father, bor His mother was Elwing, daughter of Dior, son of Luthien of Doriath. I have seen three ages in the Western world, and
Many defeats and many fruitless victories.

I was Gil-galad's herald and I marched with his army. I was at the Battle of Dagorlad before the Black Gate of Mordor, where we held sw I resisted. I witnessed the final battle on the slopes of Orodruin.
There where Gil-galad died, where Elendil fell, and where Narsil was shattered beneath him; but Sauron himself was overthrown, and Isil


317

He cut off the ring on her hand with a fragment of the hilt of her father's sword. He took the sword and made it his own.

It was then that the stranger, Boromir, burst in. So this is what
"Become of the Ring!" he cried. "If ever such a tale was told..." The South, it has long been forgotten. I have heard tell of the Great Ring of Him Whom We Do Not Name; but we believed that He vanished from the world with the ruin of His first kingdom. Isildur I took it! That's excellent news!

Alas! Yes, said Elrond. Isildur took him, as he should not have. He should have been thrown into the fire of Orodruin.
near the place where it was made. But few noticed what Isildur did. He was the only one to remain by his father's side during that fina Only Círdan and I were still standing near Gil-galad. But Isildur wouldn't. Heed our advice.

"This, I will take as a dowry for my father and my..."

"Brother," he said; and so, whether we like it or not, he
He took it with him to cherish. But soon, he was betrayed by it for the sake of his Death; that is why in the North it is called the Ba Death was perhaps preferable to what else might have happened to him.

This news only reached the North, and only to one
Few in number. It is therefore not surprising that you did not hear them. Boromir. From the ruins of the Gladden Fields, where Isildur They perished; only three men returned through the mountains after long wanderings. One of them was Ohtar, Isildur's squire, who carrie A child had remained here in Rivendell. But Narsil was broken, and its light was extinguished, and it has not yet been forged.

Did I call the victory of the Last Alliance futile? No.
Absolutely, and yet she did not achieve her goal. Sauron was diminishing. He was broken, but not destroyed. His ring was lost, but not The Dark Tower was destroyed, but its foundations were not.

withdrawn; for they had been made by the power of the Ring,
And as long as this remains the case, they will survive. Many Elves and many valiant Men, and many of their friends, had perished in th


318

War. Anarion was killed, and Isildur was killed; and Gil-galad and Elendil were no more. There will never be anything again. such a league of Elves and Men; for Men multiply and the number of elders decreases, and the two families drift apart.
Since that day, the race of Númenor has declined, and the length of their lives has been shortened.

In the North, after the war and the Gladden massacre
The fields of the men of the West were reduced, and their
The city of Annuminas, on the shores of Lake Evendim, fell into ruin; and Valandil's heirs withdrew and settled in Fornost on the
The highlands of the North Downs are now desolate as well. The men call it that. The Dyke of the Dead, and they fear to venture there. The troops of Arnor dwindled, and their enemies devoured them, and their
The lordship disappeared, leaving behind only green mounds in the grassy hills.

In the south, the kingdom of Gondor endured for a long time; and its splendor grew somewhat, recalling the power
of Númenor, before its fall. High towers built by men, and strongholds and havens for many ships; and the winged crown of the kings of They then built the Tower of the Rising Moon, to the east, on the slope of the Shadow Mountains; and to the west at the
At the foot of the White Mountains, Minas Anor they built, Tour of the Setting Sun. There, in the King's courts, grew a white tree, grown from the seed of this tree that Isildur brought
over the deep waters, and the seed of this tree previously came from Eressa, and before that from the Far West in The eve of the days when the world was young.

But as the years of Middle-earth passed swiftly,
The line of Meneldil, son of Anarion, died out, and the Tree withered, and the blood of the Númenóreans mingled with it. Men of lesser worth. Then the guard on the walls of Mordor. They slept, and dark things returned to Gorgoroth. And on a In time, evil things happened, and they took Minas Ithil and settled there and made it a place of terror; and it is





319


called Minas Morgul, the Tower of Witchcraft. Then Minas Anor was renamed Minas Tirith, the Watchtower; and these two cities were still at war, but Osgiliath, which was located
Between the two lay a deserted place, and in its ruins wandered shadows.

This has been the case for many human lives. But the Lords of Minas Tirith continue to fight, defying our enemies, and now the crossing Part of the story I am about to tell you is coming to an end. For in The Days of Isildur, the Ring of Destiny has fallen into oblivion. And the Three were freed from his grasp. But now, in Today Again, they are once again in peril, much to our regret.
The one who was found has been discovered. Others will speak of his discovery, for I played a small part in it.

He stopped, but immediately Boromir stood up, tall and proud, before them. "Allow me, Master Elrond," he said first.
To say more about Gondor, because it is truly from the land of Gondor that I arrived. And it would be good if everyone knew what is hap There. Because few, in my opinion, know about our actions, and consequently
They shouldn't speculate too much, at their own risk, if we were to ultimately fail.

Do not believe that in the land of Gondor the blood of
Numenor is exhausted, but all its pride and dignity are not forgotten.
Our valor, the savage peoples of the East are still contained, and the terror of Morgul held at bay; and thus alone reigns peace and li And then what?

Yet that hour may not be so far off. The Name... The enemy has returned. Smoke rises once more. Orodruin, which we call Mount Doom. The power of the Black
The land expands and we are severely besieged. When the enemy returns... Our people were driven from Ithilien, our beautiful domain in of the river, although we maintained a presence and a force of arms there. But this very year, in June, a sudden war
They surprised us, coming from Mordor, and we were swept away. We were outnumbered, for Mordor had allied itself with the Easterlings a

320





The numbers suggested we had been defeated. A force was there, a force I had never felt before.

Some said he could be seen, like a large black horse. A man, a dark shadow beneath the moon. Wherever he went,
Madness seized our enemies, but fear gripped our bravest, so that horse and man yielded and fled. Only a vestige of our The forces from the East returned, destroying the last remaining bridge. It stood amidst the ruins of Osgiliath.

I was with the company that owned the bridge until it was sunk behind us. Only four people were rescued by swimming: my
My brother, myself, and two others. But we continue the fight, holding all the western banks of the Anduin; and those who shelter behin Praise, but little help. Only the men of Rohan can now give us answers. Come and find us when we call you.

In this fateful hour, I have come to fulfill a mission to many... dangerous leagues to Elrond: one hundred and ten days I have
I traveled alone. But I do not seek allies in war. Strength. It is said that Elrond's wisdom lies not in weapons. I come to ask for adv The day before the sudden attack, my brother had a dream in a
a restless sleep; and afterwards, he often had a similar dream. again, and once to me.

In this dream, I thought the eastern sky was darkening and thunder was rumbling, but in the west, a pale light The silence persisted, and then I heard a voice, distant but clear, crying:


Look for the broken sword:

He resides in Imladris;
Deliberations will be held. More powerful than Morgul's spells. A token will be presented.
Disaster is near.

For the Scourge of Isildur will awaken, and the hobbit will rise. 321

We hardly understood these words, and we were speaking to
Our father, Denethor, lord of Minas Tirith, wise in matters of Gondor traditions. He only said this, that Imladris was of old. the name, among the Elves, of a valley in the Far North, where
Elrond the Half-elf remained there, the greatest of all teachers of knowledge. For my brother, seeing how desperate our need was, was eager to listen to the dream and to set out in search of Imladris; but since the path was full of doubts and dangers, I undertook the j myself. My father was reluctant to give me permission, and for a long time I wandered on forgotten roads, searching for Elrond's house, many had heard of it, but few knew where it was.

And here, in the house of Elrond, it will be made clearer.
"Your turn," said Aragorn, rising to his feet. He threw his sword at
The table that was in front of Elrond, and the blade was in two pieces. Here is the broken sword! he said.

And you, who are you, and what is your connection to Minas?
Tirith? asked Boromir, looking in astonishment at the Ranger's thin face and his weather-stained cloak.

"This is Aragorn, son of Arathorn, called Elrond; and this is..." descended through many fathers from the son of Isildur Elendil of Min And there isn't much left of those people.

"So it belongs to you, and not to me at all!" cried Frodo. Stunned, he jumped to his feet, as if he had been expecting... The bell must be called immediately.

"This does not belong to either of us," said Aragorn; "but it has been ordered that you keep it for a certain time."
"Bring the Ring, Frodo!" said Gandalf solemnly. The moment has come. Raise it, and then Boromir will understand the rest of his riddle. A silence fell, and all eyes turned towards Frodo.
He was seized with sudden shame and fear; and he felt a great hesitation to reveal the Ring and longed to touch it. He wished he were far away. The ring glittered and flickered. He held it up in front of them with his trembling hand.


322





"Here is Isildur's Bane!" said Elrond.

Boromir's eyes shone as he gazed at the golden object.
"The hobbit!" he murmured. "Is this the end of Minas Tirith?" Finally arrived? But then why search for a broken sword?

These words did not seal the fate of Minas Tirith, he said.
Aragorn. But tragic fate and heroic deeds are indeed close. For the broken sword is the sword of Elendil that has been broken.
It was beneath him when he fell. This object was carefully preserved by his heirs. When all the other family heirlooms were lost; for t among us that it should be remade when the Ring,
Isildur's Bane has been discovered. You have now seen the sword that... What would you ask for if you had sought it? Would you wish to

I was not sent to beg for any favor, but only to seek the
"The meaning of a riddle," Boromir replied proudly. "And yet, we are." In a difficult situation, the sword of Elendil would be of great Beyond our hopes-if indeed such a thing could ever return from the shadows of the past. He looked at Aragorn again, and
Doubt was evident in her eyes.

Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently beside him. Clearly, he

He was upset for his friend. Standing up abruptly, he burst out:

All that glitters is not gold.

Not all who wander are lost; what is old and strong does not fade.
The deep roots are untouched by frost. From the ashes, fire will be reborn. A light will emerge from the darkness; the broken blade will be reforged.
He who has no crown will be king again.

Perhaps not great, but it gets straight to the point; if you need more information... Beyond Elrond's words. If it were worth the journ One hundred and ten days to hear, you'd better listen. He sat down, sniffling.

"I invented it myself," he murmured to Frodo, "because..."





323

Dunadan, a long time ago, when he first told me about himself... me. I almost wish my adventures weren't over, and that I could accompa Aragorn smiled at him; then he turned back to Boromir.
"For my part, I forgive your doubt," he said. "I don't doubt it for a moment. They resemble the figures of Elendil and Isildur as they a long one; and the leagues that lie between here and Gondor are but a small part of my travels. I have crossed many.
mountains and many rivers, and trodden many plains, even in the distant lands of Rhûn and Flarad, where the strange stars shine.

But my home, if indeed I have one, is in the North. For here, the heirs of Valandil have always lived in a long, unbroken line. From father to son for generations. Our days have
The darkness deepened and we diminished; but the Sword always passed to a new guardian. And this I will tell you, Boromir, Before I finish. We are solitary men, rangers of the wilderness, hunters.
- but always in pursuit of the servants of the Enemy; for they are found in many places, not only in Mordor.

If Gondor, Boromir, was an unshakeable tower, we have played another role. There are many bad things that your
Strong walls and shining swords don't last. You don't know that. Lands beyond your borders. Peace and freedom, make them What did you say? The North would have hardly known them without...
us. Fear would have destroyed them. But when dark things came from the deserted hills, or crept from the sunless woods, They are fleeing far from us. What paths would they dare to take, what
Is security guaranteed in peaceful areas, or in the homes of ordinary people?
What about the men at night, if the Dúnedain were asleep or had all gone to their graves?

And yet, we thank you less than you thank us. The travelers frown.
We, and our compatriots, give us derogatory names. "Strider," I am a stout man who lives a day's walk from his enemies
It would freeze his heart, or reduce his small town to ruins, if it were not guarded relentlessly. Yet, we would not want it any other


324

If simple people are freed from worries and fears, they will remain simple.
And we must remain secret to keep it that way. That's how it happened. My family's task, as the years dragged on and The grass has grown.

But the world is changing again. A new hour begins. The Sword is coming. Isildur's Bane has been found. Battle is imminent. The Sword w

"Isildur's Bane has been found, you say?" asked Boromir. "I have..." He saw a shining ring in the hobbit's hand; but Isildur perished. Do you know that this ring belongs to him? And how did it get passed down from generation to generation? For years, until it was brough

"That will be told," said Elrond.

"But not yet, please, Master!" cried Bilbo. "The sun is already up. It's almost noon, and I need something for strengthen me.

"I hadn't named you," said Elrond, smiling. "But I'm doing it now."
Now come! Tell us your story. And if you haven't cast any spells yet, cast some for us. If you put your story in verse, you can tell it The shorter the better, the faster you'll be refreshed.

"Very well," said Bilbo. "I will do as you have asked. But I will do it now." (To tell the true story, and if some here have already he otherwise - he glanced sideways at Gloin - I ask them to
Forget it and forgive me. I only wanted to seize the treasure, like mine at that time, and rid myself of the name of
A thief they blamed me for. But maybe I understand things differently. A little better now. Anyway, here's what happened.

For some, Bilbo's story was completely new, and they listened in amazement as the old hobbit, not at all displeased, recounted his adve as well as an account of his celebration and his disappearance from the
The Shire, if he had been given permission; but Elrond raised his hand.

"Well said, my friend," he said, "but that is enough for now." Time. For now, it is enough to know that the Ring has passed. To Frodo,





325


Then, with less enthusiasm than Bilbo, Frodo recounted his entire agreement. He had played with the Ring since the day he took possessi Each stage of his journey from Hobbiton to the Ford of
Bruinen was questioned and taken into consideration, and everything that
He remembered that the Black Riders case had been examined. Finally, he sat back down.

"Not bad," Bilbo told him. "You would have made a..."
It would have been a good story if they hadn't kept interrupting me. I tried to take some notes, but we'll have to go over everything a We could do it together for a while, if I have to write it. There are whole chapters of stories from before you arrived!
"Yes, it made for quite a long story," replied Frodo. "But..." The story still doesn't seem finished to me. I still want to know many t Galdor des Havres, who was sitting nearby, heard it.
"Speak for me too!" he cried, and turning to Elrond, he said: "The wise may have good reason to believe that
The hobbit's treasure is indeed the Great Ring, the subject of much debate. As improbable as that may seem to those less familiar with Couldn't we hear the evidence? And I would also ask this question: what? Saruman? He is well-versed in the lore of the Rings, and yet h

He is not among us. What is his opinion, if he knows what we have heard?

"The questions you ask, Galdor, are all connected," said Elrond. "I had not forgotten them, and they will be..."
replied. But these things are Gandalf's role to make clear; and I call him last, for it is the place of honor, and in all this matter,

Some, Galdor, said Gandalf, would think that the news of Gloin and the pursuit of Frodo were sufficient proof that the
The hobbit's treasure is of great value to the Enemy. Yet, it is a ring. And so what? The Nine that the Nazgûl guard. The Seven are tak Speak. The three we know. What is this one that he desires so much?

There is indeed a great deal of time lost between the river


326





and the Mountain, between loss and discovery. But the
The gap in the knowledge of the Sages has finally been filled. Yet Too slowly. Because the enemy was very close behind, even closer.
that I didn't fear it. And fortunately, it was only this year, and especially this year, that it happened. It seems that it was during

Some here will remember that many years ago, I myself dared to cross the threshold of the Necromancer in Dol Guldur,
and secretly explored its paths, and thus discovered that our fears were true: he was none other than Sauron, our ancient Enemy, finall Let us not forget that Saruman dissuaded us from acting openly against him, and for a long time we did nothing but observe him. But fin As his shadow lengthened, Saruman yielded and the Council put an end to his actions.
He unleashed his strength and drove the evil out of the Black Forest - and it was the very year that this ring was discovered: a strang

But we had arrived too late, as Elrond had predicted. Sauron, too, had been watching us and had long been preparing for our attack, gov catching sight of Mordor in the distance through Minas Morgul, where his
Nine servants remained there until everything was ready. Then he yielded. before us, but they only pretended to flee, and soon after th The last time the Council met, we learned that it was still searching ever more ardently for the One. We feared then that
He had news about it that we knew nothing about. But Saruman said no and repeated what he had already told us: that The Chosen One would never be found again in Middle-earth.

"At worst," he said, "our enemy knows that we have
That's not the case, and it remains lost. But what has been lost can still be found.
Found, he thinks. Have no fear! Elis's hope will deceive him. Have I not seriously studied this matter? In the Great Anduin fell; and long ago, while Sauron slept, it was rolled along the river to the sea. May he rest there until the end.

Gandalf fell silent, his gaze turned eastward from the porch.
the distant peaks of the Misty Mountains, from which the great roots of the world's peril had remained hidden for so long. He sighed.





327


"It was I who made the mistake," he said. "I was lulled by his words." I should have sought the truth. earlier, and our danger would then be less.

We were all guilty, said Elrond, and without your vigilance... If the darkness had already arrived, perhaps. Say it!

From the very beginning, my heart betrayed me, against all reason. "That I knew it," said Gandalf, "and I wished to know how it
The thing happened to Gollum, and I knew how long he had possessed it. I watched him, guessing he would come soon. He emerged from his darkness to search for his treasure. He came, but
He escaped and was never found. And then, alas! I gave up on the case. Just to rest, watch, and wait, as we have done far too often.

Time passed, filled with worries, until my doubts awoke.
I was seized by a sudden fear once more. Where had the hobbit's ring come from? What should I do if my fear was justified?
I still have things to decide. But I haven't yet spoken of my fear to anyone, aware of the danger of an untimely whisper, should it be In all the long wars against the Dark Tower, has treachery ever existed? It has been our greatest enemy.

That was seventeen years ago. I quickly realized that
Spies of all kinds, even beasts and birds, were gathered around the Shire, and my fear grew. I called for help. the Dúnedain, and their guard was doubled; and I opened My heart is with Aragorn, the heir of Isildur.

And I, said Aragorn, advised that we go hunting for the Gollums, even though it seems too late. And since it seemed fitting that Isildu He accompanied Gandalf on this long and futile quest.

Gandalf then recounted how they had explored the entire length of the wild lands, as far as the Shadow Mountains and The barriers of Mordor. There, we had rumors about him, and we
I suppose he lived there for a long time, in the dark hills; but we never found him, and finally I despaired. And then, in my despair, he thought back to a test that might reveal Gollum
It's unnecessary. The ring itself might reveal whether it's the right one. The memory of the words spoken in the Council came back to me: words of


328




Saruman, to whom I had only paid superficial attention at the time. I heard them now clearly, in my heart. "The Nine, the Seven, and the Three," he said, "each had their true jewel. Not this one. It was round and
without ornament, like a minor ring; but its creator adorned it. markings on it that perhaps the most skilled could still see and read.

He hadn't specified the nature of these marks. Who would know now? You know? The creator. And Saruman? But despite the grandeur of his Perhaps, but it must have a source. Whose hand saved Sauron's? Who held it before it was lost? Isildur's hand alone.

With that thought, I abandoned the pursuit and moved swiftly to Gondor. In the past, the members of my order had
He was well received there, but especially by Saruman. He had often been a guest of the city's lords for a long time. Less Lord Denethor welcomed me then more warmly than ever before.
and reluctantly, he allowed me to rummage through his amassed treasures of scrolls and books.

"If, as you say, you are only looking for old documents
"The days and beginnings of the city, read on!" he said. "For
For me, what has been is less dark than what is to come, and that is what is said. My care. But unless you have even more skill than Sa "Well known to me, master of the traditions of this city." Thus spoke Denethor. And yet, there are many among its treasures

documents that even few masters of knowledge can still read, because
Their writings and languages became obscure to later men. Boromir still rests in Minas Tirith, unread, I suppose, by
All except Saruman and me, since the kings have failed, a parchment that Isildur himself made. For Isildur did not go away. Straight from the war in Mordor, as some have recounted.

Some in the North, perhaps, Boromir burst in. Everyone in Gondor knows that he first went to Minas Anor and stayed there. while he was with his nephew Meneldil, whom he was instructing, before he entrusted him with power over the southern kingdom. at the time when he planted the last young sapling of the White Tree there, a memory of his brother.

But it was also at that time that he made this scroll, said Gandalf;





329


and this does not seem to be remembered in Gondor.
This scroll concerns the Ring, and this is how Isildur wrote on it:

The Great Ring will now become a legacy of the
Northern Kingdom; but traces of its existence will be left in Gondor, where the heirs of Elendil also dwell, lest a time come when the And after these words, Isildur described the Ring, just as he found it.
It was hot when I first took it, hot as a bell, and my hand was burned so badly that I doubt I'll ever be able to do it again. freed from this pain. Yet, even as I write, it has cooled, and it seems to be shrinking, though it loses neither its beauty nor its shape. Already the writing on it, which at the beginning was like
Clear as a red flame, it fades and is barely ready to be read. It is written in the Elvish script of Eregion, for they
They have no letters in Mordor for such a subtle task; but the language is unknown to me. I suppose it is a tongue of the Black Earth, I don't know; but I've made a copy here, for fear it might fade. Indelible. The Circle perhaps lacks the warmth of
The hand of Sauron, which was black and yet burned like fire, and thus Gil-galad was destroyed; and perhaps the gold
If the subject were relevant again, the writing would be refreshed. But for my part, I won't risk any harm to this thing: of all Sauron with great pain.

When I read those words, my quest came to an end.
The writing was indeed, as Isildur had surmised, in the language of Mordor and the servants of the Tower. And what was said This was already known. For, the day Sauron first
Celebrimbor, creator of the Three, was aware that the One had been put in the spotlight. From afar, he heard him utter these words, and Thus, his evil plans were revealed.


330





I immediately took my leave of Denethor, but even as I left
Messages reached me from Lorien, from the north, saying that Aragorn had passed through and found the creature
called Gollum. That is why I first went to meet him and listen to his story. Into what mortal perils he had ventured alone, I dared to not to guess.
"There's hardly any need to recount them," said Aragorn. "If a man must absolutely walk within sight of the Black Gate, or tread the gr The deadly flowers of the Morgul valley, then perils awaited him. I, too, eventually despaired and began my journey home.
And then, by chance, I suddenly stumbled upon what I was looking for: the
Light footprints near a muddy puddle. But now the path was fresh and swift, and it didn't lead to Mordor but away from it. Along the
I followed him to the edge of the Dead Marshes, and I finally found him. Crouching near a stagnant pond, scanning the water as the dark Eve fell, I grabbed him, Gollum. He was covered in green
He drools. He'll never love me, I'm afraid; because he bit me, and I wasn't gentle. I never got anything more from his mouth than the marks of his teeth. I considered that the worst thing of my whole trip, the journey home, watching over him day and night, doing seeing him walk in front of me, a halter around his neck, gagged, until
He was subdued by the lack of food and water, which kept driving him towards Mirkwood. I finally brought him there and gave him to the Elves, for we had agreed that this should be done; and
I was glad to be rid of him, for he stank. For my part, I never wished to see him again; but then Gandalf came. and endured a long conversation with him.

Yes, long and arduous, said Gandalf, but not without
profit. On the one hand, his account of his loss coincided with what Bilbo had just openly recounted for the first time; but that matte They then learned that Gollum's ring came from the Great River near the Gladden Fields. And I also learned that he had possessed it for The power of the ring had prolonged his years far beyond their extent; but this power is exercised only over the Great Rings.

And if that's not enough proof, Galdor, there's the other





331

The test I told you about. On this very ring you have here. Views held up, round and unadorned, the letters that Isildur
The reports can still be read, if one has the willpower. I put the golden object in the fire for a moment. That's what I did, and here' Ash nazg diirhatuliik, ash nazg gimbatul, ash nazg thrakatuluk agh burzum-ishi krimpatul.
The change in the magician's voice was astounding.
She quickly became menacing, powerful, and hard as stone.
The shadow seemed to pass over the sun high in the sky, and the porch for
A moment of darkness fell. Everyone trembled, and the Elves stopped. Their ears.

Never before had any voice dared to utter such words.
"Gandalf the Grey," said Elrond, speaking of Imladris. The shadow passed and the company could finally breathe.

And let's hope no one ever says it here again.
"Replied Gandalf. Nevertheless, I do not ask your forgiveness." Master Elrond. For if this voice is not soon heard...
in every corner of the West, while all put aside the doubt that this thing is indeed what the Sages declared: the treasure of
The Enemy, laden with all his malice; and within him resides a great part of his former strength. From the dark years were born the wor One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, One Ring to gather them all and bind them in the darkness.
Know also, my friends, that I have learned even more from Gollum. He was reluctant to speak and his account was confused, but there is He knew that it had been taken from him. And so the Enemy knows.
Now that the One is found, and has long dwelt in the Shire; and since his servants have pursued him almost to our door, he soon 332



He will know, he may already know, even as I speak, that we... I have him here. They all remained silent for a moment, until Boromir finally spoke.
"He's a small thing, you say, this Gollum?" Small, but big in Misdeeds. What became of him? What fate did you reserve for him? him?

He's in prison, but no worse, said Aragorn. He had
He has suffered greatly. There is no doubt that he has been tormented, and the fear of Sauron weighs heavily on his heart. Yet, I...
I am glad he is safe under the watchful eyes of the elves. Mirkwood. His malice is great and grants him almost unimaginable strength. H

Alas! Alas! cried Legolas, and on his handsome elven face, there
It was a great distress. The news I came to bring was meant to... Now, know this. They are not good, but it was only here that I learne

"You've escaped?" cried Aragorn. "That's very bad news."
I fear they will bitterly regret it. How did the people of Thranduil come to this? To betray their trust?

Not through lack of vigilance, said Legolas; but through...
This happens through excessive kindness. And we fear that the prisoner received help from others, and we know more about our actions. that we could not have hoped for. We watched over this creature day and night, on Gandalf's orders, although we were weary of the task. But Gandalf told us to still hope for his recovery, and we did not have the heart to keep him forever in dungeons beneath the earth. where he would plunge back into his old, dark thoughts.

"You were less kind to me," said Gloin with a flash of his
his eyes, as old memories of his imprisonment awoke in the depths of the elf king's halls.

"Come!" said Gandalf. "Please don't interrupt me, my..." Well done, Gloin. It was a regrettable misunderstanding, long Settle things. If all the grievances that exist between the Elves and


333

Dwarves must be raised here, so we might as well abandon this Council.

Gollum rose and bowed, and Legolas continued. In fine weather, we led Gollum through the woods; and there stood a great tree, standing He loved to climb. We often let him climb all the way to the top.
branches, until he felt the wind free; but we posted a guard at the foot of the tree. One day, he refused to come down, and the The guards had no desire to follow him: he had learned...
the feat of clinging to the branches with their feet as well as with their hands; so they remained seated near the tree late into the n

It was that peculiar summer night, moonless and starless... Less than that, the ores attacked us by surprise. We repelled them. After a Once the battle was over, we noticed that Gollum had disappeared, and his guards had been killed or captured. It then seemed obvious to that the attack had been carried out to rescue him, and that he knew it
We knew it in advance. How it was orchestrated, we couldn't possibly know; but Gollum is cunning, and the enemy's spies are numerous. The dark things that were banished the year the Dragon fell have returned in greater numbers, and Mirkwood is once again a

An evil place, except where our kingdom is preserved.

We failed to recapture Gollum. We were on his trail. Among the many ores, he plunged deep into the Forest, heading south. But soon, he Guldur, and that is yet another very evil place; we will not go there.

"Well, well, he's gone," said Gandalf. "We don't have time to..."
We must search for him again. He must do as he pleases. But he might do it, playing a role that neither he nor Sauron have foreseen.

And now I will answer Galdor's other questions. What about Saruman? What advice does he give us in this difficult situation? I must tel In short; but this will have an impact on everything we need to resolve. This is the final chapter of The Tale of the Ring, at least so


334





At the end of June, I was in the Shire, but a cloud of anxiety hung in the air.
I was thinking about it, and I drove to the southern borders of the little land; for I had a premonition of danger, still hidden
Far from me, yet drawing closer. Messages reached me telling me...
He was talking to me about the war and the defeat in Gondor, and when I heard about the Black Shadow, a shiver ran through my heart. Bu apart from a few fugitives from the South; however, it seemed to me that
A fear they did not speak of weighed upon them. I turned around, then east and north, and travelled along the greenway; and not far fro by the roadside, his horse grazing beside him. Radagast the Brown, who once lived in Rhosgobel,
near the borders of the Black Forest. He is from my order, but I hadn't seen him for years.

"Gandalf!" he cried. "I've been looking for you. But I am a Stranger in the area. All I knew was that you might be...
"Found in a wild region with the rather unrustic name of Shire."

  "Your information was correct," I said. "But don't put it that way if you meet one of the locals. You're close." the borders of the Shire now. And what do you want with
Me? It must be urgent. You've never been a traveler, unless... driven by a great need.

"I have an urgent errand to run," he said. "My news is bad." Then he looked around him, as if the hedges might have ears. "Nazgûl," he murmured. "The Nine are abroad again. They have crossed the river in secret and are heading west."
They took the form of horsemen dressed in black. I then knew what I had unknowingly feared. "The enemy must have an important need or goal."
said Radagast; "but what makes him turn to these remote and desolate regions, I could not say. "What do you mean?" I asked.
"I've been told that everywhere they go, the Horsemen ask..." "News from a region called the County."

"The Shire," I said; but my heart sank. For even the Wise might fear to resist the Nine, when they are gathered together under their


335

He was old, and now he inspires deadly fear. "Who said that?" "And who sent you?" I asked.
"Saruman the White," replied Radagast. "And he said
I just wanted to let you know that if you feel the need, it will help you; but you must... "Seek his help immediately, otherwise it will be too late."

And this message gave me hope again. For Saruman,
White is the greatest of my order. Radagast is, of course, a worthy magician, master of shapes and color changes; and
He possesses extensive knowledge of herbs and animals, and birds are particularly important to him and his friends. But Saruman has lon The enemy himself, and that is how we were often able to outmaneuver him. It was through Saruman's cunning that we drove him out of Dol Guldur. He may have found weapons that would repel the Nine.

"I will go see Saruman," I said.

"Then you must leave now," said Radagast; "for I have wasted time looking for you, and the days are passing.
In short. I was told to find you before Saint-Jean, and that's all.
And now here. Even if you left from this place, you'll hardly reach your destination. Reach him before the Nine discover the land they I'll turn around immediately. And with that, he mounted his horse and left at once.

  "Wait a moment!" I said. "We'll need your help, and..." the help of anyone who can contribute. Send messages to to all the beasts and birds that are your friends. Tell them to bring Saruman any news concerning this matter. and Gandalf. That messages be sent to Orthanc.

"I will do it," he said, and he walked away as if the Nine were after him.

I couldn't keep up with him right away. I had been driving very fast.
I was already far away that day, and I was as tired as my horse; and I needed to think. I spent the night in Bree, and I decided I didn't have time to go back to the Shire. I never did. I'm making an even bigger mistake!

However, I wrote a message to Frodo and confided in my friend. I asked the innkeeper to send it to him. I left at dawn;


336





And I finally arrived at Saruman's dwelling. That is to say, at the very south of Isengard, at the edge of the Misty Mountains, not far It is a large, open valley that stretches between the Misty Mountains and the northernmost foothills of Ered Nimrais, the White Mountai The mountains of his homeland. But Isengard is a circle of steep rocks that enclose a valley as if by a wall, and in the middle of it The valley is a stone tower called Orthanc. It was not built by Saruman, but by the Men of Númenor long ago; and it is
very large and full of secrets; yet, it does not appear to be a work of craftsmanship. It can only be reached by passing through the ci Isengard; and within this circle, there is only one gate.

Late one evening, I arrived at the gate, like a great arch in the rock wall; and it was heavily guarded. But the gatekeepers were watch Saruman was waiting for me. I passed under the arch and through the gate.
It closed silently behind me, and suddenly I was afraid, although I did not know the reason.
But I rode to the foot of Orthanc, and arrived at Saruman's stairway; and there he met me and led me to his upper chamber. He wore a ri "So you've come, Gandalf," he said gravely; but
There seemed to be a white light in his eyes, as if a cold Laughter filled his heart.
"Yes, I came," I said. "I came to ask for your help." "Saruman the White." And this title seemed to anger him.

"Really, Gandalf the Grey!" he scoffed. "For
Help? It's rarely been said that Gandalf the Grey ever sought help. To obtain help, a person so cunning and wise, wandering through the lands, and meddling in all matters, whether they concern land or material goods.
"Whether it belongs to him or not."

I looked at it and wondered, "But if I'm not mistaken..."
I said: "Things are changing and this will require the intervention of the union." with all our strength.

"It's possible," he said, "but that idea comes too late." I'm coming to you. How long, I wonder, have you been hiding...
From me, the head of the Council, a question of the utmost importance?





337

What brings you here now, you who are hiding in the Shire? "The Nine are back," I replied. "They
"We crossed the river. That's what Radagast told me."

"Radagast the Brown!" laughed Saruman, and he...
He concealed his contempt for longer. "Radagast the bird tamer! Radagast! Radagast the Simple! Radagast the Mad! Yet, he had just the r to play the role I assigned him. For you came, and that was the whole point of my message. And you will stay here.
Gandalf the Grey, and rest from your travels. For I am Saruman. The Wise, Saruman the Ring-Maker, Saruman of a Thousand Colors!

I looked then and saw that her clothes, which had seemed
white, were not like that, but were woven with all colors, and if
As they moved, they sparkled and changed color, so that the eye was perplexed. "I preferred white," I said.
"White!" he sneered. "That marks a beginning. White."
The fabric can be dyed. The blank page can be rewritten; and "White light can be broken."

"In that case, it's no longer white," I said. "And whoever breaks something to discover what it is has strayed from the path of wisdo

"There's no point in talking to me like I'm an idiot."
"Take them for friends," he said. "I did not bring you here to be instructed by you, but to leave you the choice.

He then straightened up and began to declaim, as if he
They were repeating a speech they had rehearsed at length. "The Ancient Days are
It's over. The intervening years are ending. The years of youth are over. The time of the Elves is over, but our time begins.
Main: the world of Men, which we must govern. But we must have the power, the power to order everything as we please, for that good whi

"And listen, Gandalf, my old friend and ally!" he said, approaching and now speaking in a softer voice. "I said we,
Because it is possible that this will happen, if you join me. A new power is
This rise to power will be our undoing. Against it, our former allies and our old policies will be of no help whatsoever. Nothing. Ther So there's only one choice left to make. We can join


338

that power. That would be wise, Gandalf. There is hope that
path. Her victory is near; and a rich reward will follow. those who helped her. As the Power grows, so too will her true friends; and t Patience eventually guides its course, mastering it.
We can be patient, we can keep our thoughts in our hearts, perhaps deploring the wrongs committed along the way, but approving of the u things that we have hitherto striven in vain to accomplish, rather than being helped by our weak or idle friends.
There will not necessarily be, there will not be, any real change in our creations, only within the limits of our means.
  "Saruman," I said, "I have heard speeches of this kind before, but only from the mouths of emissaries sent by Mordor to deceive the i He looked at me out of the corner of his eye and paused, looking thoughtful.
"Well, I see that this wise path does not recommend itself"
"To you," he said. "Not yet? Not if there's a better solution." Artificial?

He came over and placed his long hand on my arm. "And why?"
"No, Gandalf?" he murmured. "Why not? The One Ring?" If we could command it, then the power would be ours.
That is truly why I brought you here. For I have many eyes at my service, and I believe you know where that is. This precious treasure now lies there. Isn't it? Or why are the Nine asking this question?
"As for the Shire, and what are you doing there?" he said.
This lust, which he could no longer conceal, suddenly shone in his eyes.

"Saruman," I said, walking away from him, "only one
You can handle the One hand after the other, and you know that very well.
So don't bother saying "we." But I wouldn't give it, no, I... I wouldn't even have mentioned it to you, now that I know you... You were at the head of the Council, but you were exposed.
yourself, finally. Well, it seems the choice boils down to submitting to Sauron, or yourself. I will take neither. Do you have other people to offer?"





339


He was cold and dangerous. "Yes," he said. "I didn't do it." I expect you to show wisdom, even for yourself; but I gave you the opportu You will cause yourself a lot of problems and suffering. The third option is to stay here until the end.

"Until what end?"

"Until you reveal to me where He who is is."
You might find ways to persuade yourself. Or until it is found in your despite this, and the sovereign has time to turn to lighter subj to devise, for example, an appropriate reward for the obstruction and insolence of Gandalf the Grey.

"This might not be a trivial matter," I said. He laughed at me, for my words were empty, and he knew it.

They took me and placed me alone on the summit of Orthanc, in the place where Saruman used to
Gaze at the stars. There is no other way down than a narrow staircase, thousands of steps, and the valley below seems far away.
I looked at it and saw that, although it had been green before, it had turned green. And just then, it was now filled with pits and for The ores were stored at Isengard, because Saruman was gathering troops.

great force for its own sake, in rivalry with Sauron and not
in his service, though. A dark smoke hovered over all his works, and it coiled around the flanks of Orthanc. I stood alone on an island in the clouds; and I had no chance of escaping, and
My days were bitter. I was pierced by the cold, and I had only a small space to pace back and forth, brooding over the the arrival of the Cavaliers in the North.

I was certain that the Nine had indeed stood up, except for...
Saruman's words, which might be lies. Long before I came, I had heard on the way, at Isengard, news that could not be I was wrong. I was always afraid for my friends in the
Shire; but I still had a little hope. I hoped that Frodo had ended his life. He left at once, as I had asked in my letter, and he had a

Rivendell before the deadly pursuit began. And both my fears and my hope proved futile. For my hope was well-founded


340





about a fat man in Brce; and my fear was based on the
Sauron's cunning. But the great brewers have many calls to answer; and Sauron's power is still less than fear. She succeeds. But in the It was not easy to imagine that the hunters before whom all had fled or fallen would falter in the Shire, so far away.

"I saw you!" cried Frodo. "You were walking backwards! And forwards. The moon was shining in your hair."

Gandalf stopped, astonished, and looked at him. It was only "A dream," said Frodo, "but it suddenly came back to me."
I had completely forgotten about it. It was some time ago, after I left the County, I think.

"So she was late in arriving," said Gandalf, "as you will see."
I was in a desperate situation. And those who know me will confirm that I have rarely been in such need, and that I cannot bear such a Misfortune has befallen Gandalf the Grey, caught like a fly in a trap.
The spider's treacherous web! Yet even the most subtle spiders can leave a weak thread.

At first, I feared, as Saruman had probably foreseen, that Rada-Gast had also fallen. Yet, I had noticed nothing unusual.
There was something false in his voice or his gaze when we met. If I had known that, I would never have gone to Isengard, or perhaps I more cautiously. That is what Saruman supposed, and he had concealed his true intentions and deceived his messenger. That would have be It's pointless, in any case, to try to convince the honest Radagast.
to betrayal. He sought me out in good faith and thus persuaded me.

This was the downfall of Saruman's plot. For Radagast
He saw no reason why he wouldn't do what I asked; and he rode off towards Mirkwood where he had many long-standing friends. And the Eagles of the Mountains went far away, and they
I saw many things: the gathering of the wolves and the raising of the flocks; the ores; and the Nine Horsemen going to and fro in the lands; and they learned of Gollum's escape. And they sent a messenger to bring me the news.

And so, as summer waned, came a night
of the moon, and Gwaihir the Lord of the Wind, the fastest of the Great Ones





341


Eagles arrived unexpectedly at Orthanc; and he found me standing on the summit. Then I spoke to him, and he endured

They took me away before Saruman noticed. I was far from Isengard. Before the wolves and hordes came out of the gate to chase me. "How long can you put up with me?" I asked Gwaihir.
"Several leagues," he said, "but not to the ends of the earth." "I was sent to bring news, not burdens."

"Then I need a horse on earth," I said, "and a horse
"Extraordinarily fast, because I've never felt such a need to hurry before."

"Then I will take you to Edoras, where the Lord of Rohan
"He sits in its halls," he said; "for it is not very far." And I was happy, for in the Riddermark of Rohan, the Rohirrim, Lords of horses, stay, for there are no horses like those bred in this great valley between the Misty Mountains and the White.

"Do you think the men of Rohan are still trustworthy?"
I told Gwaihir, because Saruman's betrayal had shaken my faith.

"They pay tribute in horses," he replied, "and send
Every year, many pilgrims travel to Mordor, or so they say; but they are not yet... under the yoke. But if Saruman has become evil, as Therefore, their fate cannot be delayed much longer.

He dropped me off in the land of Rohan before dawn; and now I have made my story too long. The rest must be longer.
In short. In Rohan, I found the evil already at work: the lies of Saruman; and the king of the land refused to listen to my
warnings. He ordered me to take a horse and leave; and I chose one. I liked one very much, but he didn't really. I took the best horse. on his land, and I have never seen his like.

"Then he must be a truly noble beast," said Aragorn; and
This pains me more than many pieces of news that might seem worse: learning that Sauron is demanding such a tribute. It wasn't like thi

The last time I was in that country.

"That's not the case now, I swear," said Boromir. "That's a lie-" "It comes from the enemy. I know the men of Rohan, true and


342





valiant, our allies, still remaining on the lands we gave them long ago.
"The shadow of Mordor hangs over distant lands," replied Aragorn. "Saruman fell there. Rohan is besieged. Who knows what you will find "Not that, in any case," said Boromir, "they'll buy their
They live with the horses. They love their horses as if they were their own family.
And this is not without reason, for the horses of the Riddermark came from the northern fields, far from the Shadow, and Their race, like that of their masters, descends from free men of ancient times.

"That's quite true!" said Gandalf. "And there's one among them who could have been born at the dawn of the world."
The horses of the Nine could not compete with him; tireless, swift as the wind. He was called Shadowfax. By day, his cloak It shines like silver; and at night it is like a shadow, and it
He passes unseen. Light is his step! Never before had there been a man who rode him, but I took him and tamed him, and so on.
He quickly informed me that I had arrived in the Shire when Frodo was... on the Barrow-downs, although I only left Rohan when he left H But fear grew within me as I rode. The further north I went, the more I
I had heard of the Cavaliers, and although I had gotten ahead of them that day, they were still ahead of me. They had divided their I learned that some forces remained on the eastern borders, not far from the Green Way, and some have invaded the Shire from the south. I arrived in Hobbiton and Frodo had left; but I had
Words with old Gamgee. Lots of words, but few relevant elements.
He had a lot to say about the shortcomings of the new owner of Cul-de-Sac.

  "I can't stand change," he said, "not at my age," and especially not negative change. "The worst," he repeated several times.

"The worst is a dirty word," I told him, "and I hope you will."
"Not living long enough to see it." But amidst his words, I finally understood that Frodo had left Hobbiton less than a week before, an The black rider had arrived on the hill that same evening.





343


I continued on my way, terrified. I arrived in Buckland and found it in complete chaos, as busy as an anthill that had been stirred wit They arrived at Crickhollow's house, and it was broken down and empty; but on the threshold lay a cloak that had
I was Frodo. Then, for a time, hope left me, and I did not. I would have waited for news, otherwise I might have been comforted; but I It led in many directions, and I was lost. But it seemed to me that one or the other had ridden towards Bree; and that is the way I wen

"They call him Butterbur," I thought. "If this delay
It was his fault, I'm going to melt him like snow in the sun. I'm going to roast him.
"An old fool before a smoldering fire." He expected nothing less, and when He saw my face, he collapsed and began to melt onto the place.
"What did you do to him?" cried Frodo, alarmed. "He was really very kind to us and did everything he could." Gandalf laughed. "Don't be afraid!" he said. "I didn't bite."
and I hardly barked at all. I was so happy to hear the news that
I pulled away from him when he stopped trembling, and I embraced him.
the old man. How it had happened, I couldn't have guessed at the time. But I heard you spent the previous night in Bree, and had left that morning with Strider.

"Strider!" I shouted, yelling with joy.

"Yes, sir, I'm afraid so," said Butterbur, mistaking him for
me. "He managed to reach them, despite everything I did, and they got together. They behaved very strangely all the time. They were the

"Donkey! Fool! Barliman, thrice worthy and beloved!" I said.
"This is the best news I've had since Midsummer; it's worth it." At least a gold coin. May your beer be placed under a "The enchantment of surpassing excellence for seven years!" he declared
I. "Now I can finally sleep one night, the first since I forgot..." ten when.

So I stayed there that night, wondering what had happened. What had become of the Cavaliers? For there had only been two until now.

344





We were getting news from Bree, it seemed. But during the night, we learned more.

At least five of them came from the west and threw down the gates and swept through Bree like a howling wind; and The residents of Bree are still trembling and awaiting the end of the
The world. I got up before dawn and went in search of them.

I don't know, but it seems clear to me that's what happened. Their captain remained hidden south of
Bree, while two others rode through the village, and four others invaded the Shire. But when these attempts were thwarted at Bree and C and thus left the road unguarded for some time, except by their spies. The captain then sent some of them directly east across the coun A road gripped by great anger.

I galloped to Amon Sûl like a tornado, and I reached it before
At sunset, the second day after I left Bree, they were there, in front of me. They moved away, sensing my approach.
of my anger and they did not dare to face it while the sun was in the sky. But they closed ranks at night, and I was besieged.
at the top of the hill, in the ancient ring of Amon Sul. I was indeed difficult to place: such light and such flame could not have been Weathertop since the old wartime lighthouses.

At sunrise, I escaped and fled north. I could do no more. It was impossible to find you, Frodo. in the middle of nature, and it would have been foolish to try it with everything
The Nine were after me. So I had to trust Aragorn. But I hoped to lure some of them away and reach Rivendell. Send reinforcements ahead. The Four Horsemen did it.
They followed me, but after a while they turned around and headed towards La Ford, apparently. That helped a little, because there were

I finally arrived there after a long and difficult journey, going up the Hoarwell and across the Etten moors, and coming down from the It took me almost fifteen days from Weathertop, because I could
Don't ride among the rocks of the troll mountains, and Shadowfax is gone. I sent him back to his master; but a great friendship A relationship has developed between us, and if I need him, he will come to my aid.





345


call. But that's how I arrived in Rivendell only two days later. before the Ring, and news of its danger had already been brought here - and it turned out to be excellent.

And so, Frodo, that is the end of my tale. May Elrond and the others forgive its length. But such a thing has
This had never happened before, that Gandalf had broken the appointment and not kept it. He came when he had promised. A report to the I think it took such a strange event.

Well, the story is now told, from beginning to end. Here we all are, and here is the Ring. But we have not yet reached our destination. Closer to our goal. What will we do with it?

A silence fell. Finally, Elrond spoke again.

"These are terrible reports concerning Saruman," he said;
We trusted him and he was central to all our advice. It's perilous to study the Enemy's arts too deeply, for better or for worse. But such falls and betrayals, alas, have already occurred.
The tales we heard today, the story of Frodo, was... It seemed very strange to me. I've known few hobbits, except for Bilbo. Here; and Just as unique as I had imagined. The world has changed a lot since the last time I traveled west.

We know the specters of the mounds by many names; and of
In the Old Forest, many stories have been told: only these remain. It is but a vestige of its northern march. There was a time when a

The squirrel could move from tree to tree in what is now the Shire. In Dunland, west of Isengard. I once traveled in those lands.
And I knew many strange and wild things. But I had forgotten Bombadil, if it was indeed he who traveled the
woods and hills long ago, and even then it was older than the old. It wasn't called that yet. We called it Iarwain Ben-adar.
He, the eldest and fatherless. But he goes by many other names, since given by others: Forn by the Dwarves, Orald
by men from the North, and other names besides. It is a strange creature, but perhaps I should have summoned it to our Council. "He wouldn't have come," said Gandalf.

346

Couldn't we still send him messages and get his contact details?
"Help?" asked Erestor. It would seem that he possessed power even over... the Ring.

No, I shouldn't put it that way, said Gandalf. Let's say rather that the Ring has no power over him. He is master of himself.
He can neither alter the Ring itself, nor break its power over others. And now he is withdrawn to a small country, within boundaries he for once, and he will not cross those lines.

But within these limits, nothing seems to disconcert him.
said Erestor. Wouldn't he take the Ring and keep it there, forever harmless?

No, said Gandalf, not of his own free will. He could do it, if all the The free peoples of the world begged him, but he refused to understand.
He could bear the need. And if he were given the Ring, he would not hesitate to do so. Forget it, or more likely, throw it away. Such t He would keep that in mind. He would be a most dangerous guardian; and that alone is sufficient as an answer.

But in any case, said Glorfindel, sending him the Ring would only postpone the day of evil. It is far off. We
could no longer return it to him without him noticing, without him being affected. Any spy. And even if we could, sooner or later, the power over him. Could Bombadil defy that power?
Alone? I don't think so. I think that in the end, if everything else is stupid, Bombadil will fall, last as he was first; and then Night will come.

"I know little of Iarwain, save his name," said Galdor; but Glorfindel is right, I believe. The power to defy our enemy is not in him, unless that power resides in the earth itself. And yet we see that Sauron can torture and destroy the hills themselves.
What power do we have left, here in Imladris, or with Cirdan in the Havens, or in Lorien? But do they have the strength? Do we have the The rise of Sauron at the end, when everything else has been overthrown?

"I have not the strength," said Elrond; "nor do they." Then, if the Ring cannot be hidden from him forever by 347
"Force," said Glorfindel, "we have only two options left: send it across the sea, or destroy it."

But Gandalf revealed to us that we cannot destroy it "By any machine we have here," said Elrond. "And they
Those who live beyond the sea would not receive it: forever or
It belongs to Middle-earth; it is for us who still live here, to face it.

"Then," said Glorfindel, "let's throw it into the depths, and"
So let Saruman's lies come true. For it is now clear that even in the Council, his feet were already on a crooked path. path. He knew the Ring wasn't lost forever, but he wished
To make us believe that; for he began to covet her for himself. Yet, often truth hides in lies; in the sea, it would be safe.

"It is not certain forever," said Gandalf. "There are many things..." in the depths of the sea; and the seas and the lands can change. Few human lives, or for a fleeting age of the world. We should seek a definitive end to this threat, even if we do not expect to create

And that, we will not find on the sea routes, said Galdor. If the return to Iarwain is deemed too dangerous, The escape to the sea is now extremely perilous.
My intuition tells me that Sauron will expect us to take the western route, somehow, when he learns what has happened. He will know soo Nine horses were indeed unhorsed, but this is only a temporary reprieve.
before they find new and faster steeds. Only decline could stop Gondor, which now stands between him and a march to power. along the coasts to the north; and if he comes, attacking
the White Towers and the Havens, now the Elves can
have no way to escape the growing shadows of the Middle East. Earth.
"This march will be delayed for a long time yet," said Boromir. Gondor is declining, you say. But Gondor remains, and even its zenith i And yet, his vigilance can no longer hold back the Nine.
said Galdor. And other roads he might find, which Gondor knows. No guard.


348





Then, said Erestor, there are only two ways, as Glor-Hndel has already declared: hide the Ring forever; or to Cancel it. But both are beyond our control. Who will read this riddle for us?

"No one here can do that," Elrond said gravely. "At least, no one can predict what will happen if we take this path or That. But it now seems clear to me what path we should take.
We must take this route. The road to the west seems the easiest. Therefore, it must be avoided. It will be watched. Too often, the elve They fled that way. Now we must take a difficult path. An unexpected path. Therein lies our hope, if there is any. Marching in peril-to

Silence fell once more. Frodo, even in this beautiful house, seemed to be gazing out into the middle of a sunlit valley filled with the

He felt a deathly darkness in his heart. Boromir stirred, and Frodo looked at him. He fiddled with his great horn, frowning. He finally spoke.

"I don't understand all this," he said. "Saruman is a traitor." But hasn't he glimpsed wisdom? Why are you speaking? Never any concealment or destruction? Why shouldn't we think that the Great Ring fell into our hands to serve us in the Whenever needed? The Free Lords of the Free use it. It will surely defeat the enemy. That's what he fears most.
I believe.

The men of Gondor are valiant, and they will never submit.
They may be defeated; but they can be overcome. Valor first requires courage, then strength, and then a weapon. Let the Ring be thy wea If she possesses the power you claim, take her and go for it. Victory!

"Alas no," said Elrond. "We cannot use the One Ring. We know that all too well now. It belongs to Sauron and was made by him alone; it Boromir is too powerful for anyone to wield at will, except perhaps him. Those who already possess great power. But for
It harbors an even more deadly danger. The mere desire for it corrupts the heart. Think of Saruman. If one of the Sages





349


He should, thanks to this Ring, overthrow the Lord of Mordor, using it. He would then use his own arts to sit on Sauron's throne. And a The reason the Ring should be destroyed: as long as it remains, the world will be a danger even to the wise. For nothing is
Evil was in the beginning. Even Sauron was not like this. I fear to take. I will not take the Ring to conceal it. I will not brandish i "Me neither," said Gandalf.
Boromir looked at them dubiously, but he lowered his head.
"So be it," he said. "Then, in Gondor, we must rely on such-weapons as we have. And at least, while the Wise Men
Let us protect this ring, we will continue the fight. Perhaps the Sword-that-was-Broken can still stem the tide-if the hand that wields She inherited not only a legacy, but also the muscles of the King of Men.
"Who can say?" asked Aragorn. "But we shall find out. One day." "May that day not be too long in coming," said Boromir.
Even if I don't ask for help, we need it. It would comfort us to know that others also fought with all the means at their disposal.

"Then take heart," said Elrond. "For there are others-powers and realms you do not know, and which are hidden." of you. The Great Anduin flows along many shores, before it reaches Argonath and the gates of Gondor.

"However, this could be a good thing for everyone," said Gloin the Dwarf, "if everything..."
These forces were united, and the powers of each were
used in the league. There may be other, less dangerous rings that could be useful to us. The Seven are lost to us - if Balin did not fi We haven't heard from him since Thror's death in Moria.
I can now reveal that it was partly in the hope of finding that ring that Balin left.

Balin will find no ring in Moria, said Gandalf. Thror
He gave it to Thrín, his son, but Thrín did not give it to Thorin. It was carried off with torment by Thrín to the dungeons of Dol. Guldur. I arrived too late.


350





"Ah, alas!" cried Gloin. "When will the day of our vengeance come? But there are always the Three. What can be said of the Three? Of th Do the elven lords still possess them? Yet they too were created by the Darkness. Lord, long ago. Are they inactive? I see elven lords

The Elves did not answer. Didn't you hear me?
"Gloin?" asked Elrond. "The Three were not created by Sauron." He never touched them. But they are not allowed to attack them.

To talk. That's all I can say in this hour of doubt.
They are not inactive. But they were not designed as weapons. War or conquest: that is not their power. Those who made them desired nei Wealth, but also understanding, creation, and healing, to preserve All that is immaculate. These things, the Elves of Middle-earth have won to some extent, albeit with sorrow. But everything forged by those who wield the Three will turn against them.
to their doom, and their minds and hearts will be revealed to Sauron, if he recovers the One. It would be better. What if the Three had "But what would happen then if the ruling Ring were destroyed, as you advise?" asked Gloin.
"We do not know for certain," Elrond replied sadly. "I hope that the Three Rings, which Sauron never touched,"
They would then become free, and their leaders could heal their wounds. of the world he created. But perhaps when the One When power is gone, the Three will fail, and many beautiful things will fade away and be forgotten. That is my conviction.

Yet all the Elves are ready to take this risk, said Glorfindel, if by it Sauron's power can be broken, and the fear of his dominion dis

So we come back once again to the destruction of the Ring,
said Erestor, and yet we do not get closer. What strength do we have? We for the discovery of the fire in which it was made? That is to The path of despair. Of madness, I would say, if the long wisdom of Elrond had not forbidden it.

Despair or madness? asked Gandalf. It is not despair, for





351


Despair is only found in those who see the end without a shadow of a doubt. We do not. It is wise to acknowledge necessity when all oth Those who cling to false hopes. Well then, let folly be our cloak, a veil before the eyes of the Enemy! For he is very wise, and
He weighs everything with extreme precision in the balance of his malice. The only measure he knows is desire, the desire for power; And so he judges all hearts. No thought will penetrate his heart. Only whoever refuses to enter, whoever possesses the Ring, can enter. seek to destroy it. If we seek that, we will render it harmless.

"At least for a while," said Elrond. "We must take this route."
But it will be very difficult. And neither strength nor wisdom can remedy it. May he take us far on his path. This quest can be underta The weak have as much hope as the strong. And yet, this is often the case. A series of actions that make the world go round: small
The hands do it because they must, while the eyes of the great one are elsewhere.

"Very good, very good, Master Elrond!" said Bilbo suddenly.
No need to say more! What you're pointing out is perfectly clear.
It was Bilbo, the silly hobbit, who started this whole thing, and Bilbo had better see to it. Finish it, or do it himself. I felt very I'm continuing with my book. If you're curious, I'm currently writing one. I had thought of concluding it like this: and he lived happi And this will continue until the end of his days. It's a beautiful ending, and no less good for having already served. Now, I'm going t Changing that: it doesn't seem likely; and anyway, it will obviously take several more chapters, if I survive. Writing them. It's a rea

Boromir looked at Bilbo in surprise, but the laughter died away.
His lips lit up when he saw that everyone else was looking at the old hobbit with deep respect. Only Gloin smiled, but his smile It came from old memories.
"Of course, my dear Bilbo," said Gandalf. "If you really had
If you started this relationship, one might expect you to end it. But you


352





I now know quite well that the term "startup" is too ambitious a statement for anyone, and that only a small role is played in major ac any hero. No need to bow down! Although the word was intentional,
And we have no doubt that, under the guise of jest, you are doing courageous work. An offer. But an offer that is beyond your strength, This thing has returned. It has passed away. If you need my advice,
To put it more simply, I should say that your role is over, unless you're a recorder. Finish your book and leave the ending as it was! There is still hope. But be prepared to write a sequel, when... they return.

Bilbo laughed. I've never seen you do anything to please me.
"I'd already given advice," he said. "Like all your unpleasant advice..."
If all went well, I wonder if this advice isn't bad. Still, I don't know. Let's suppose I still have the strength or the luck to deal w She's grown up, and I haven't. But tell me: what do you mean by "them"?

The messengers sent with the Ring.

Exactly! And who will they be? That's what it seems to me. This Council must decide, and everything it must decide.
Elves can prosper through the power of words alone, and dwarves endure great hardships. I am weary; but I am but an old hobbit, and I l At noon. Couldn't we find some names now? Or postpone it until after dinner?

No one answered. The midday bell rang. Still no one spoke.
Frodo glanced at all the faces, but they were not turned towards
him. The entire Council sat with their eyes downcast, as if plunged into deep disarray.
A great terror gripped him, as if he were expecting... the harbinger of a misfortune he had long foreseen and
It was hoped in vain that this would never be said. A feeling of despondency, yearning to rest and remain at peace beside Bilbo in Rive and was astonished to hear his own words, as if another will were using his small voice.

"I will take the Ring," he said, "although I do not know the way."

353


Elrond raised his eyes and looked at him, and Frodo felt
Her heart was pierced by the sudden intensity of that gaze. If I "I understand everything I've heard," he said, "I believe that..."
This task is entrusted to you, Frodo; and if you do not fulfill it, you shall not do it. Finding a solution, no one will. This is the h and the advice of the Great Ones. Who, among all the Wise Men, could have
Did they foresee it? Or, if they are wise, why would they expect... You know, until the time comes?

But it is a heavy burden. So heavy that no one could bear it. I do not impose it upon you. But if you take it freely, I will say that y Old elven friends, Hador, Hurin, Turin and Beren
If you were all together, your place should be among them.

"But surely you're not going to let him go alone, Master?" he cried. Sam, unable to contain himself any longer, jumped up and down. from the corner where he was sitting quietly on the floor.

"Absolutely not!" replied Elrond, turning to him with a smile. "At least you'll be accompanying him. It's practically impossible to sep And you are not.

Sam sat down, blushing and muttering. A good pickle...
"What a mess we've gotten ourselves into, Mr. Frodo!" he said, shaking his head.


3





Later that day, the hobbits held their own meeting in Bilbo's bedroom. Merry and Pippin were indignant when they I learned that Sam had infiltrated the Council and had been chosen as Frodo's companion.

"It's really unfair," said Pippin. Instead of throwing it away
After dragging him out and chaining him up, Elrond will reward him for his insolence!

"Rewards!" said Frodo. "I can't imagine a more cruel pun." You don't think about what you're saying: con-
Condemned to undertake this hopeless journey, a reward? Yesterday I dreamt that my task was accomplished and that I could rest here, fo

"I don't ask myself the question," said Merry, "and I wish you would. But it's Sam we envy, not you. If you have to go, then so be it." It would be a punishment for each of us to be left behind, even in Rivendell. We have come a long way with you and have been
We have gone through difficult times. We want to continue.

"That's what I meant," said Pippin. "We hobbits should stick together, and we'll manage. I'll go, unless they chain me up. There. Surel

"Then you certainly won't be chosen, Peregrin Took!" said Gandalf, looking out of the window, which was close to the ground. "But you'r Nothing has been decided yet.

"Nothing is decided!" cried Pippin. "So, what were you all?" What are you doing? You've been silenced for hours.

"We were talking," said Bilbo. "There was a lot of discussion, and everyone..."
One of them had a revelation. Even old Gandalf. I think it was the same for Legolas. A little tidbit about Gollum even took him by surp although he downplayed the matter.





355


"You were wrong," said Gandalf. "You were inattentive."
I'd already heard about it from Gwaihir. If you want to know,
The only true revealers, as you said, were you and Frodo; and I was the only one who wasn't surprised.

"Anyway," said Bilbo, "nothing beyond that has been decided." Choosing poor Frodo and Sam. I was afraid the whole time that
That could happen if I were released. But if you ask me, Elrond will send a good number of soldiers as soon as the reports arrive. Have

"Yes," said the wizard. "Some scouts have been sent out." Already gone. Others will leave tomorrow. Elrond is sending Elves, and they w Thranduil's people are in Mirkwood. And Aragorn has left with them.
The sons of Elrond. We will have to search the surrounding lands to find them. It will take many more leagues before any change is made "Ah!" said Sam darkly. "We'll just have to wait quite a while for winter to come."

"There's nothing we can do about it," said Bilbo. "It's partly your fault." My son, Frodo, insists on waiting until my birthday. That's funny.
What a way to pay tribute to him, I can't help but think. Not on the day I should have chosen to let the S.-B. into Cul-de-Sac. But There you have it: you can no longer wait for spring; and you can no longer wait until the reports return.

When winter begins to make itself felt and the stones creak in the icy night.
When the pools are black and the trees are bare, it is wrong to live in nature. But I'm afraid this might be your chance.

"I'm afraid so," said Gandalf. "We cannot begin until we..." have discovered the existence of the Riders. "I thought they had all perished in the flood," said Merry.
"We can't destroy the Nazgûl like that," said Gandalf.
Their master's power resides within them, and they succeed or fail by him. We hope they have all been unseated and unmasked.


356





and thus rendered, for a time, less dangerous; but we must discover for sure. In the meantime, you should try to forget your Trouble, Frodo. I don't know if there's anything I can do to help you; but I'll whisper this in your ear. Someone said that We would need information from within the party. He was right. I think I'll come with you.

Frodo's joy at this news was so great that Gandalf left the windowsill where he had been sitting, and
He removed his hat and bowed. I simply said, "I think I will come." Don't expect any certainty just yet. Elrond will have his say on th I have much to say, and so does your friend the Strider. Which reminds me... I want to see Elrond. I must go.

"How long do you think I'll be here?" Frodo asked Bilbo after Gandalf left.

"Oh, I don't know. I can't count the days in Rivendell," Bilbo said. "But quite a long time, I think. We can have a lot of them." Interesting discussion. And what if you helped me with my book and its completion? A starting point for what comes next? Have you thoug

"Yes, several, and all are dark and unpleasant," said Frodo.

"Oh, that won't do at all!" said Bilbo. "Books must be good endings. What do you think of this: 'And they all settled down and lived ha "It'll be all right, if it ever comes to that," said Frodo. "Ah!" said Sam. "And where are the five of them going?" That's what I
I often ask myself that question.
For a while, the hobbits continued to talk and think about the journey past and the perils to come; but such was the virtue of the land of Rivendell, which soon everyone feared and
Anxiety dissipated in their minds. The future, good or bad, was not forgotten, but ceased to have all power over the
present. Health and hope grew stronger within them, and they were content with each good day as it came, taking pleasure in every meal,

And so the days passed, each morning dawning bright and sunny, and each evening was cool and clear. But Autumn was declining rapidly; slowly the golden light paled.





357


silver, and the last leaves fell from the bare trees.
The wind began to blow an icy chill from the Misty Mountains eastward. The Hunter's Moon was waxing in the night sky, and They scared away all the secondary stars. But low in the South, a star
It shone with an intense red. Every night, as the moon waned, it shone brighter and brighter. Frodo could see it from his window. Deep in the heavens, burning like a watchful eye staring above the trees, at the edge of the valley.

The hobbits had been in the house for almost two months. Elrond, and November had passed with the last remnants of
Autumn was approaching, and December was drawing to a close when the scouts began to return. Some had gone north, beyond the Hoarwell s lands far downstream from the Greyflood, as far as Tharbad, where the old Northern Road crossed the river near a ruined town.
had gone east and south; and some of them had crossed the
The mountains and penetrated into the Black Forest, while others had climbed the pass at the source of the River Gladden, and had arriv going down towards Wilderland and passing through Gladden Fields, and so on, the length had reached Radagast's old home at Rhosgobel.
Radagast was not there; and they had gone back up the hill.
the passage that was called the Gate of the Red Horn. Elrond's sons, Elladan and Elrohir, were the last to return; they had made a grea country, but they didn't want to talk about their mission to anyone except people from the country in Elrond.

In no region had the messengers discovered any signs or news of the Riders or other servants of the Enemy. Not even of the Eagles of th

Fresh news. Nothing had been seen or heard of Gollum; but the wild wolves continued to gather and hunt again, far upstream on the Great In the rapids downstream, rescuers discovered the bodies of five people, and also a long black cloak, torn and in tatters.


358





The Black Riders, no other trace was visible, and nowhere else was their presence felt. It seemed they had disappeared. from the North.

At least eight of the nine people have been found, he said.
Gandalf. It is unwise to be overconfident, but I think we can. I hope now that the Nazgûl have been scattered and that they have been f empty and formless.

If that is the case, it will be some time before they can begin.
The hunt resumes. Of course, the Enemy has other servants, but they will have to travel to the borders of Rivendell. before they can find our trail. And if we're careful, he'll be hard to find. But we mustn't delay any longer.
Elrond summoned the hobbits. His gaze was grave.
to Frodo. The time has come, he said. If the Ring is to be placed
It needs to leave soon. But those who leave with it, don't count on it.
provided their mission is facilitated by war or force. They must succeed in enemy territory, far from any help. Are you still holding o At your word, Frodo, that you will be the Ring-bearer?

"Yes," said Frodo. "I'll go with Sam."

"So I cannot help you much, not even by giving you advice," said Elrond. "I can foresee very little on your path; and how your task is She was now crawling to the foot of the mountains and approaching evening, to the borders of the Grey Flood; and beneath the Shadow all It's unclear to me. You will encounter many enemies, some overt, others disguised; and you may find friends along the way when
You least expect it. I will send messages, to the best of my ability, to those I know in the wider world; but so The land has become so treacherous that some might well make a mistake. Carry, or come no faster than yourself.

And I will choose companions to accompany you, to the limit of distance.
as they wish, or as fortune allows. Their numbers must be limited, since your hope lies in speed and secrecy. If I had an army of elves The armor of ancient times would be useless, except to awaken the power of Mordor.





359


The Fellowship of the Ring will consist of nine people; and the nine Walkers will be opposed to the Nine Evil Riders. Gandalf will go with you and your faithful servant; for this will be his great task, and perhaps the end of his labors.

For the rest, they will represent the other free peoples of the World: Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Legolas will be for the Elves; and Gimli, son of Gloin, for the Dwarves. They are ready to go at least as far as the mountain passes, and
perhaps beyond. For the men, you will have Aragorn, son of Arathorn, because the Ring of Isildur is of particular concern to him. "Aragorn!" cried Frodo.
"Yes," he said with a smile. "I ask permission again to be Your companion, Frodo."

"I would have begged you to come," said Frodo, "but I I thought you were going to Minas Tirith with Boromir.

"I am," said Aragorn. "And the Sword-that-was-Break..."
will be redesigned before I go to war. But your road and ours... The roads follow one another for hundreds of kilometers. Boromir will also be part of the Company. He is a valiant... man.

"There are two more to find," said Elrond.
I'll think about it. Among my family members, I might find people who... It seems wise to send it.

"But that will leave us no room!" cried Pippin, dismayed. We don't want to be left behind. We want to go with Frodo.

"It's because you don't understand and you can't imagine what awaits you," said Elrond.

Frodo, too, said Gandalf, unexpectedly does not support Pippin. None of us sees clearly. It is true that if These hobbits understood the danger; they would not have dared
to leave. But they would still want to go, or would want to dare.

and be ashamed and unhappy. I think, Elrond, that in this
In this matter, it would be better to rely on their friendship rather than their friendship, on great wisdom. Even if you were to choos As Glorfindel, he could neither storm the Dark Tower, nor open the path of Fire through the power within him.

"You speak gravely," said Elrond, "but I have my doubts."


360

I have a feeling the county is no longer safe from danger; and those two... I had thought of sending messengers there to do what They could, according to the custom of their country, warn people of their danger. In any case, I believe that the
The younger of the two, Peregrin Touque, is expected to stay. His heart is against leaving.

So, Master Elrond, you will have to lock me up in prison.
"Or send me home, tied up in a sack," said Pippin. "For otherwise I will follow the Company."

So be it. You shall go, said Elrond, with a sigh.
Nine's story is now over. In seven days, the Company must leave.

Elendil's sword was reforged by elven smiths,
and on its blade was drawn a pattern of seven stars arranged between
The crescent moon and the radiant sun, and around them was... He wrote many runes; for Aragorn, son of Arathorn, was about to go to war the sword once reassembled; the sunlight
It shone a brilliant red, and the moonlight was cold on it, and its edge was hard and sharp. And Aragorn gave it a new name. and called it Anduril, the Flame of the West.

Aragorn and Gandalf walked together or sat talking, discussing their route and the perils they would encounter; and they pondered the maps and illustrated, story-rich books of knowledge that were kept in Elrond's house. Sometimes Frodo was with them; but
He simply relied on their advice and spent his time as much as possible with Bilbo.

In these last days, the hobbits sat together in the evenings in
the Hall of Fire, and there, among many stories, they heard tales told in their entirety: the story of Beren and Lúthien and the victor Great jewel; but during the day, while Merry and Pippin were Frodo and Sam were walking in the company of Bilbo.
in his small room. Then Bilbo would read passages from
his book (which still seemed very incomplete), or fragments of his verses, or took notes on the adventures of Frodo. On the morning of the last day, Frodo was alone with Bilbo.

361
And the old hobbit took out a wooden plank box from under his bed. He lifted the lid and groped inside. "Here is your sword," he said. "But it was broken, you know."
I took it to put it in a safe place, but I forgot to ask the blacksmiths
I could fix it. But there's no time left. So I thought maybe... You'd be interested, wouldn't you?

He took a small sword out of the box, in an old, shabby leather sheath. Then he drew it, and its polished and The well-maintained blade suddenly began to sparkle, cold and bright.
"It's Sting," he said, and effortlessly pushed it deep into a wooden beam. "Take it, if you like. I won't have it anymore." I expect it.

Frodo accepted it with gratitude.

And then there's this! said Bilbo, taking out a package which
It seemed rather heavy for its size. He unrolled several of them.
folds of old fabric, and he was holding a small chainmail shirt. It was

tightly woven from many rings, almost as supple as linen, cold as ice, and harder than steel. It shone like silver in the moonlight, an It was adorned with white precious stones. It was accompanied by a belt of pearls and crystals.

"It's pretty, isn't it?" said Bilbo, moving it into the
Light. And useful. This is my dwarf chainmail that Thorin gave me.
I got it from Michel Delving before I started, and I packed it up. I put it with my luggage. I took all the memories of my day with me. Don't take me with you, except for the Ring. But I didn't expect to
I use it, and I don't need it anymore, except to glance at it from time to time. You hardly feel any weight when you put it on. "I should look... well, I don't think I should look straight into it," said Frodo.
"That's exactly what I was saying," replied Bilbo. "But never mind. It looks fine. You can wear it under your clothes. Go on!" You must tell me this secret. Don't tell anyone else! But I would be happier if I knew you were wearing it.
I have the imagination for it; it would even turn the knives of the Black man inside out. "Horsemen," he concluded in a low voice.

"Very well, I'll take it," said Frodo. Bilbo put it on his head and fastened Sting to the glittering belt; then Frodo

362




He put on his old trousers, his tunic and weather-faded trousers, over his jacket. "You look like just an ordinary hobbit," said Bilbo. "But there's more."
There's more to know about you now than meets the eye. Good luck to "You!" He turned away and looked out the window, trying to hum a tune.

I cannot thank you enough, Bilbo, for this, and for everything else. "Your past acts of kindness," said Frodo.

"Don't even try!" said the old hobbit, turning around and slapping him on the back. "Ow!" he cried. "You're too hard on Smack now!" But Especially Baggins. In return, I simply ask that you take the greatest care of him. Do your best to find out more and report back all t Second book, if my life is spared. He paused and turned back to the window, singing softly.

I sit by the fire and think about everything I've seen,
meadow flowers and butterflies during the summers that have been;

Of yellow leaves and gauze in autumn,
with the morning mist and the silvery sun and the wind in my hair.

I sit by the fire and think about how the world will be when winter arrives without a spring that I will ever see.

Because there are still so many things I've never seen:
In every wood, every spring, there is a different shade of green. 363

I sit by the fire and think about people of the past,
and the people who will see the world that I will never know. But all this time, I just sit and think. There was before,
I listen to the return of feet and voices at the door.

It was a cold, grey day, towards the end of December. The wind whistled through the bare branches of the trees. and bubbling in the dark pines of the hills. Jagged clouds
They hurried above our heads, dark and low. While the gloomy souls, the shadows of early evening, began to fall upon the Company They prepared to leave. They were to leave at dusk, for Elrond advised them to travel by night as often as possible.
They could do so, until they were far from Rivendell.

You should fear the many eyes of Sauron's servants, he said. I have no doubt that the news of the disarray of The riders have already reached it, and it will be filled with
Anger. Soon, his spies on foot and in planes will be abroad, in the northern lands. Even from the sky above you, be wary. while you continue on your way.

The Company carried little war equipment, for their hope lay in secrecy, not in battle. Aragorn had Anduril, but no other weapon, and h brown, like a forest ranger in the wilds. Boromir had a long sword, in the manner of Anduril but of less prestigious lineage, and he ca

It can be heard loud and clear in the valleys of the hills, it
he said, and let all the enemies of Gondor flee! Thus he breathed a sigh of relief from his lips, and echoes sprang from the rock to rock, and all those who heard that voice in Rivendell jumped to their feet.

Boromir, it will take you a long time to wind up that horn.


364

said Elrond, until you stand again at the borders of Your land, and an urgent need weighs upon you.

"Perhaps," said Boromir. "But I always let my horn sound." at first, and although afterwards we could walk in the In the shadows, I will not emerge like a thief in the night.

Gimli the dwarf was the only one openly wearing a short steel shirt.
rings, for dwarves take burdens lightly; and at his belt was a broad-bladed axe. Legolas had a bow and quiver, and
At his belt, a long white knife. The young hobbits carried the swords they had taken from the burial mound; but Frodo took Sting alone; Glamdring, the elven sword, Orcrist's companion, which now lay upon Thorin's chest, at the foot of the Lonely Mountain.

They were all well provided by Elrond with thick, warm clothing. And they wore jackets and capes lined with fur. Reserve food
Clothing, blankets, and other necessities were loaded onto a pony-none other than the poor animal they had brought along.

From Bree.

The stay in Rivendell had brought about a miraculous change.
As for him: he was gleaming and seemed to have the vigor of youth. It was Sam who had insisted on choosing him, declaring that Bill (as he called him) would miss him terribly if he didn't come.

This animal can almost talk, he said, and it would talk, if
He stayed here much longer. He gave me a look as clear as Mr. Pippin could tell: if you don't let me go with you, Sam, I'll follow you of burden, yet he was the only member of the Company who did not seem depressed.

Their farewells had been spoken in the great hall, by the fire, and they were only waiting for Gandalf, who had not yet arrived. Nevert The doors were open and a soft light shone in many of the windowed rooms. Bilbo, huddled in his cloak, stood silently by the door. Arag knees; only Elrond fully knew what this hour meant to him.





365


The others were distinguished by grey shapes in the darkness.

Sam stood near the pony, sucking his teeth, and
staring gloomily at the darkness where the river roared rockily below; his desire for adventure was at its lowest.

"Bill, my boy," he said, "you shouldn't have started to..."
We did. You could have stayed here and had the best hay until the end. New grass is growing. Bill wagged his tail and said nothing.

Sam gently placed the bag on his shoulders and stepped over. He anxiously thought back to all the things he had packed away. He wondere his treasure, his kitchen utensils; and the small box of salt which
He always carried some with him and refilled it whenever he could; a good supply of pipeweed (but not enough, I'm sure); flint
and tinder; woolen stockings; linen; various small items belonging to his master that Frodo had forgotten and that Sam had hidden to ma I've reviewed them all.

"A rope!" he murmured. "No rope! And just last night..." You think to yourself, "Sam, how about some rope? You'll need it." "If you don't already have it, take it." Well, I'd like to. I can't have it now.

At that moment, Elrond went out with Gandalf, and he
He called the company. "These are my last words," he said in a low voice. The Ring-bearer sets out on his quest.
of Mount Doom. All blame rests on him alone: neither for throwing away the Ring, nor for handing it over to any servant of the
The enemy, and above all, do not let anyone deal with it except members of the company and the board, and only in cases of extreme need The others accompany him as free companions, to help him to
in its own way. You can linger, return, or turn off onto other paths, as chance dictates. The further you go, the fewer there are.
It will be easy for you to withdraw; yet, no oath or commitment is imposed upon you. You will not go further than you intend. For you d The strength of your hearts, and you cannot foresee what each of you may encounter on the road.

"He is unfaithful who says goodbye when the road darkens," said Gimli.


366





"Perhaps," said Elrond, "but let him not swear to walk in the dark, who has not seen the night fall." Yet, a promise made can strengthen a trembling heart, it has been said. Gimli.
"Or break it," said Elrond. "Don't look too far ahead! But go!"
Now, with kind hearts! Farewell, and may the blessing of the Elves be with you. And may men and all free peoples be with you. May the s

"Good... good luck!" cried Bilbo, stammering with cold.
I suppose you won't be able to keep a journal, Frodo my friend, but I expect a full report upon your return. Don't be too long! Goodbye!

Several other members of Elrond's household stood in the shadows and watched them leave, saying goodbye in hushed voices. There was no laughter, no singing, no music. Finally, he turned away and disappeared silently into the twilight.

They crossed the bridge and slowly walked up the long road.
steep paths that led from the split valley of Rivendell; and they finally arrived on the high moor where the wind whistled. through the heather. Then, with a single glance towards the Last
The family home glittered below; they strode away into the night.

At the Bruinen ford, they left the road and turned back.
We continued south along narrow paths through the folded land. Their objective was to maintain this course west of the mountains.

for many kilometers and days. The country was much more rugged and drier than the green valley of the Great River
Wild lands lay on the other side of the mountain range, and their departure would be slow; but they hoped in this way to escape the A notice of hostile glances. Sauron's spies had until then... rarely seen such things in this desolate land, and the roads were Little known, except to the inhabitants of Rivendell.

Gandalf walked ahead, and with him went Aragorn, who
I knew this land even in the darkness. The others were waiting. Behind them, and Legolas, whose gaze was piercing, formed the rearguard





367


The first part of their journey was difficult and bleak, and Frodo
I had few memories of it, apart from the wind. For many, the sun was absent. For days on end, an icy blast blew from the eastern mounta No garment seemed able to resist her exploring fingers.
Although the Company members were well-dressed, they were rarely warm. They were either on the move or motionless. Their sleep was rest under the tangled thorn bushes that grew in thickets in many places. In the late afternoon, they were awakened by the watch,
and ate their main meal: generally cold and dreary, because
They could rarely afford to risk lighting a fire. In the evening they continued, always as close to the south as they could. Find a solution.

At first, it seemed to the hobbits that, although they walked And they stumbled until they were exhausted; they crawled to
They moved like snails, going nowhere. Each day, the earth's appearance was much the same as the day before. Yet, steadily, the mountai rose ever higher and curved westward; and at about the feet of
The main mountain range had collapsed, giving way to an ever-expanding and desolate land of hills and deep valleys with turbulent water few in number and winding, and often led them only to the edge of a steep fall, or a descent into treacherous marshes.

They had been on the road for two weeks when the weather turned bad. The wind suddenly weakened and then shifted to
The south. The rapidly moving clouds lifted and melted away. And the sun appeared, pale and bright. A chill settled in. The clear dawn at the end of a long, stumbling night walk.
The travelers reached a low ridge crowned with ancient holly trees, whose grey-green trunks seemed to have been constructed. from the very stone of the hills. Their dark leaves shone and their berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun.
To the south, Frodo could see the indistinct shapes of high peaks, mountains that now seemed to stand across the path the company was t peaks; the highest and closest rose like a tooth at the end of


368





snow; its great northern precipice, bare and denuded, was still largely under the snow; the shadow, but where the sunlight struck it ob red.

Gandalf stood beside Frodo and looked down at his feet. "We did well," he said. "We reached the
on the borders of the land Men call Frollin; many Elves lived here, in a happier time, when it was called Eregion. Five and-
We have traveled forty leagues as the crow flies, although many long kilometers further on, our feet have traversed the earth and the The weather will be milder now, but perhaps all the more dangerous.

Dangerous or not, a proper sunrise is always welcome, said Frodo, throwing back his hood and letting in the morning light. fall on his face.
"But the mountains are ahead of us," said Pippin. "We must have turned east during the night." No, said Gandalf. But you see further, clearly.
light. Beyond these peaks, the range curves towards the southwest.
There are many maps in Elrond's house, but I suppose you never thought to look at them?
"Yes, sometimes," said Pippin, "but I don't remember it." Them. Frodo is better at that sort of thing. "I don't need a map," said Gimli, who had imagined Legolas, and looked ahead with a strange light.
in his deep eyes. This is the land where our fathers worked long ago, and we have shaped the image of these mountains in many works of metal and stone, and in many songs and tales. They reign in our dreams: Baraz, Zirak, Shathur.

I had only seen them once before, from afar, upon waking. But I know them and their names, for beneath them lies Khazad-dûm, the Dwarro Pit, Moria in the Elvish tongue. There stands Barazinbar,
The Red Horn, the cruel Caradhras; and beyond him are the Silvertine and Cloudhead: Celebdil the White, and Fanuidhol the Grey, which we call Zirakzigil and Bundushathur. There, the Misty Mountains split, and between their

369

In the arm lies the deeply shaded valley that we cannot obtain: Azanulbizar, the Valley of Dimrill, which the Elves call Nanduhirion. "It is for the Valley of Dimrill that we are creating," said Gandalf. If we cross the pass called the Redhorn Gate, under
On the other side of Caradhras, we will descend via the Dimrill
Descend the stairs leading to the deep Dwarf Valley. There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River Silverlode springs from its icy wat springs.
"The water at Kheled-zaram is dark and cold," said Gimli.
These are the springs of Kibil-nala. My heart trembles at the thought. May I see them again soon.

May you rejoice at the sight, my good dwarf! said
Gandalf. But whatever you do, we cannot at least remain in this valley. We must go down the Silverlode to the secret woods, then to the He paused.
"Yes, and where next?" asked Merry.

"Until the very end of the journey, at the end," said Gandalf.
We shouldn't look too far ahead. Let's be glad that the first step has already been completed. It's all over without a hitch. I think w A misfortune must befall a country before it completely forgets the Elves, if they once lived there.

"That's true," said Legolas. "But the Elves of this land were..." of a race foreign to us, of the woodland foliate, and the trees and t Weep for them: they dug deep within us, they worked us well, they built us up; but they left. They left. They searched for the Havens,

That morning, they lit a fire in a deep hollow surrounded by
large holly bushes, and their supper-breakfast was more cheerful than it had been since their departure. They did not hurry to
Then, they planned to have all night to go to bed, because they thought they had all night to sleep. They slept in and didn't intend to The following evening, only Aragorn remained silent and agitated.


370

After a while, he left the Company and wandered along the ridge path; there he stood in the shade of a tree, gazing into the distance. facing south and west, his head resting as if he were
He listened. Then he went back to the edge of the ravine and looked down, watching the others laugh and talk. "What is it, Strider?" called Merry. "What is-" Are you looking for something? Do you miss the east wind?
"No, indeed," he replied. "But I'm missing something. I have
I have stayed in the land of Hollin many times. No one lives there now, but many other creatures live here permanently, especially bird It sounds like it's making the ground resonate. I don't understand.

Gandalf looked up, suddenly interested. But what do you know?
"What is the reason?" he asked. "Is there more to it?" What a source of pride to see four hobbits, not to mention the rest of us! Where "I hope that's all," replied Aragorn. "But I have a feeling that..." A vigilance and a fear I had never felt here before.
"Then we must be more careful," said Gandalf. "If you-" Take a ranger with you; it's wise to keep an eye on him, especially if the Rang Speak out loud, rest quietly and set your watch.

That day, it was Sam's turn to take the first watch, but Aragorn joined him. The others fell asleep. Then silence. It intensified until even Sam could feel it. The sleepers' breathing. The rustling of the pony's tail and the
The occasional movements of his feet turned into loud noises. Sam could hear his joints crack with the slightest movement. A deathly si It was surrounded by a clear blue sky that stretched above it, while the sun rose in the east. To the south, a dark patch.
appeared, grew, and moved north like smoke in the wind.
"What is it, Strider? It doesn't look like a cloud," Sam said, she whispered to Aragorn. He didn't answer; he stared into space. He stared intently at the sky; but soon Sam was able to see it for himself.





371


what was approaching. Flocks of birds, flying at high speed, circled and crisscrossed the entire country as if They were looking for something; and they were constantly getting closer.

"Stay lying down and don't move!" hissed Aragorn, pulling Sam down into the shadow of a holly tree; for a whole regiment of birds had It suddenly broke away from the main group and flew low, straight towards the ridge. Sam thought they were being friendly.
of a large raven. As they passed overhead, in a cloud so dense the crowd that their shadows followed them darkly above the On the ground below, a harsh croak could be heard.

It was only when they had moved far away, to the north and
To the west, and the sky was clear again, Aragorn would rise. He jumped up and went to wake Gandalf.

Regiments of black crows fly over the whole country between the Mountains and the Grey Flood, he said, and
They've gone beyond Hollin. They're not from here; they're Crebains from Fangorn and Dunland. I don't know what there might be trouble What they are fleeing from; but I think they are spying
the country. I also saw many falcons flying high in the sky. the sky. I think we should move again tonight. Hollin is no longer healthy for us: it is being monitored.

And in that case, the Red Horn Gate is too, said Gandalf; and how to get past that without being seen, I cannot Imagine. But we'll think about it when the time comes. As for...
You move as soon as it gets dark, I'm afraid you're right.

Fortunately, our fire produced little smoke and burned only superficially.
"Before the arrival of the crebain," said Aragorn. "It must be extinguished." And it never reignited.

"Well, if that isn't a plague and a nuisance!" exclaimed Pippin. The news: no fire, and a nighttime move was planned. He was told the news as soon as he woke up in the late afternoon.
Because of a flock of crows! I was looking forward to a real, good meal tonight: something hot. "Well, you can continue to look to the future," said Gandalf.

372





Many unexpected celebrations may be in store for you.
I myself would like to smoke my pipe comfortably and warmly.
feet. However, we are certain of one thing in any case: it will do. It gets warmer going south.

"Too hot, I shouldn't be surprised," Sam murmured to Frodo. "But I'm beginning to think it's time we saw that. Burning Mountain, and I I initially thought it was that Redhorn, or whatever its name is.
Perhaps it was until Gimli had said what he had to say. A real puzzle. It must be the language of the dwarves! The cards meant nothing The mind, and all the distances in these strange lands, seemed so vast that it was completely out of his control.

The Company remained hidden all day. The darkness
Birds flew by from time to time; but as the setting sun receded, turning red, they disappeared southward. At dusk, the Company
They set off and, now turning halfway east, continued on their way towards Caradhras, which in the distance still shone faintly with an The last rays of the sun disappeared. One by one, the white stars appeared as the sky faded.

Guided by Aragorn, they found a good path. It seemed Frodo liked the remains of an old road, which had once been wide and well-made, fr The moon, now full, rose above the mountains and cast a pale light where the shadows of the stones were black.
Some of them appeared to have been handcrafted, although now they lay in ruins, dilapidated, in a desolate and barren land.

It was the cold, icy hour before the first light of dawn, and the moon was low. Frodo looked up at the sky. Suddenly He saw or felt a shadow pass over the high stars, as if, for a moment, they faded and then reappeared. He shivered.

"Did you see anything go by?" he whispered to Gandalf, who was right in front.

No, but I felt it, whatever it was, he replied. It may be nothing, just a light cloud. "That was fast then," murmured Aragorn, "and not with..." the wind.




373


Nothing else happened that night. The next morning
The day dawned brighter than before. But the air was cold again; the wind was already shifting eastward once more. For two
They continued their march night after night, climbing steadily but ever more slowly as their path wound through the hills, and the The mountains rose up, drawing ever closer. The third morning... Caradhras stood before them, a majestic peak, crowned with
silvery snow, but with bare and transparent sides, a dull red as if stained with blood.

The sky was dark and the sun pale.
The wind had now shifted to the northeast. Gandalf sniffed and turned around.

"Winter is deepening behind us," he said softly to Aragorn. The northern peaks are whiter than before; the snow lies just below their s Very high up, towards the Redhorn Gate. We may well be spotted by the watchers on this narrow path, and intercepted by some evil spirit Any one. What do you think of your journey now, Aragorn?

Frodo heard these words and understood that
Gandalf and Aragorn were continuing a debate that had taken place. It had started long before. He listened anxiously.

I don't think our journey has been good from beginning to end, as you well know, Gandalf, replied Aragorn. And the perils
The known and the unknown will develop over time. But we must move forward, and there's no point in delaying the crossing of the mounta mountains. Further south, there are no mountain passes, until you reach the
The Rohan chasm. I don't trust that route since your news of Saruman. Who knows which side the marshals of the Do the horse lords serve?

Who knows, indeed! said Gandalf. But there is another
the way, and not through the Caradhras pass: the obscure and secret way of the way we have spoken.

But let's not talk about it anymore! Not yet. Don't say anything to
The others, I beg you, not until it is clear that there is no other way. "We must decide before going any further," replied Gandalf.

374





"So let us consider the matter conscientiously, while others rest and sleep," said Aragorn.

In the late afternoon, while the others were finishing their breakfast, Gandalf and Aragorn went off together and
I stood there gazing at Caradhras. Its flanks were now dark and the air gloomy, and its head was in a grey cloud. Frodo watched them. wondering what turn the debate would take. When they
Back with the Company, Gandalf spoke, and then he knew that it had been decided to brave the harsh weather and intense heat.
He succeeded. He was relieved. He couldn't have guessed what the other option was, a dark and secret path, but the mere mention of the This was enough to fill Aragorn with consternation, and Frodo was glad that it had happened, but it was abandoned.

From the signs we have seen lately, said Gandalf, I fear that the gate of Redhorn is being watched; and I also
Doubts remain about the weather forecast. It might snow. Come on. We need to go as quickly as possible. Despite this, It will take us more than two steps to reach the summit of the pass. Night will fall early tonight. We must leave.
As soon as you are ready.

"I would like to add a piece of advice," said Boromir. "I was born in the shadow of the White Mountains and knew..."
Something like traveling in the highlands. We will encounter bitter hardships. It will be cold, or worse, before we descend back down t will not help us keep a secret so deep that we will die of cold.
When we leave here, where there are still a few trees and
bushes, each of us should carry a bundle of wood, as big as He can bear.
"And Bill could take a little more, couldn't he, boy?" said Sam. The pony looked at him sadly. "Very well," said Gandalf. "But we must not use the wood."
- unless it is a choice between fire and death.

The Company resumed its journey, at first at a good speed; but soon their path became steep and difficult. The winding trail and the ro





375


and was obstructed by many fallen stones. The night was darkening. A deadly darkness beneath heavy clouds. An icy wind swirled among th large mountains. The narrow path now wound its way beneath a steep wall.
a cliff face to the left, above which rose the grim slopes of Caradhras, stood invisible in the darkness; to the right was an abyss of darkness where the earth suddenly plunged into a deep ravine.

They laboriously climbed a steep slope and stopped for a moment. At the top, Frodo felt a gentle caress on his face. He stretched out his arm and saw the pale white snowflakes settle on his sleeve.
They continued on their way. But soon, the snow was falling heavily. filling the air and swirling in Frodo's eyes. The darkness
The distorted silhouettes of Gandalf and Aragorn were a step or two ahead. They could barely be seen. "I don't like this at all," Sam gasped from just behind. Snow

It's lovely on a beautiful morning, but I prefer to be in bed when the weather is nice. I hope this group goes to Hobbiton! We will welcome him there. Except on the high moors of the North.
A major waterfall was rare in the Shire and was considered, as such, a pleasant event and an opportunity for fun. No living hobbit (with the exception of Bilbo) remembered the terrible winter of 1311, when white wolves invaded the Shire from beyond the frozen waters

Gandalf stopped. The snow was thick on his hood and shoulders; the water already reached his ankles, up to the level of his boots. "That's what I feared," he said. "What do you say to that now, Aragorn?"
"I too feared it," replied Aragorn, "but less than..."
other things. I knew about the risk of snow, even though it rarely falls. Very heavily so far south, except in the high mountains. But are not yet high; we are still far below, where the paths are generally open all winter.

"I wonder if this is a trick by the enemy," he said.
Boromir. They say in my land that he can tame the storms in the Mountains of Shadow that rise on the borders of Mordor. He possesses st


376





His arm has grown really long, said Gimli, if he can bring down the snow from the North to torment us here three hundred leagues away. "His arm has grown longer," said Gandalf. During their stop, the wind died down and the
The snow had eased until it had almost stopped. They trampled on
again. But they hadn't traveled any further furlongs when the storm returned with renewed violence. The wind whistled and
The snow turned into a blinding blizzard. Soon, even Boromir and the hobbits struggled to continue. They were almost doubled over, They struggled to keep up with the best, but it was clear that they
They couldn't go much further if the snow kept falling. Frodo's feet were heavy as lead. Pippin lagged behind. Even Gimli, "As squat as a dwarf can be," he grumbled, dragging his feet.

The Company came to an abrupt stop, as if it had reached a point of no return.
They agreed without a word being spoken. They heard a strange sensation. Noises in the darkness that surrounded them. Perhaps it was ju the wind whirred through the cracks and ravines of the rock face, but the sounds were shrill cries and wild howls of
laughter. Stones began to fall from the side of the mountain, while... hovering above their heads, or crashing onto the path beside the From time to time, they heard a low rumble, like a great rock rolling down a hidden slope high above.
"We cannot go any further tonight," said Boromir. "Let them be." Call it the wind, who knows; sinister voices echo in the air; and thes "I call it the wind," said Aragorn. "But that doesn't mean..." to make your words false. There are many evils and
There are hostile things in this world that have little love for those who walk on two legs, and yet are not allied with Sauron, but ha longer than him.

Caradhras was nicknamed the Cruel and had a bad reputation, he said

Gimli, a long time ago, when the rumor of Sauron had not yet circulated... heard in these lands.


377

It doesn't matter who the enemy is, if we cannot defeat them. "Attack!" said Gandalf.

"But what can we do?" cried Pippin, miserable. He was leaning on Merry and Frodo, shivering.

"Either we stop where we are, or we turn back," said Gandalf. Nothing good is going to happen. Just a little further up, if I remember This path leaves the cliff and opens onto a wide, shallow ravine at the foot of a long, steep slope. We shouldn't have any shelter ther

And there's no point in going back while the storm is raging, Aragorn said. We didn't come across any place on the way up that offered A shelter larger than this rock face under which we currently find ourselves.
"A shelter!" Sam murmured. "If that's a shelter, then a wall..." And without a roof, a house. The Company then gathered as close as possible to the cliff.
as they could. It was facing south, and near the bottom, they leaned over a little, hoping that this would give them some protection against the north wind and against falling
stones. But swirling gusts surrounded them on all sides. On the side, and the snow fell in increasingly dense clouds.

They huddled together, their backs to the wall. Bill the
The pony stood patiently but dejectedly before the hobbits, and concealed them a little; but soon the drifting snow It was above his hocks, and it kept rising. If they had
If they hadn't had more imposing companions, the hobbits would soon have been completely buried.

A great drowsiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking.
He quickly sank into a warm, hazy dream. He thought a fire was lit, warming his toes, and emerging from the shadows on the other side o He heard Bilbo's voice by the hearth. "I don't think much of your agenda," he said. "Snowstorms on January 12th: there are..."

There was no need to come back to report it!

"But I wanted to rest and sleep, Bilbo," Frodo replied with an effort, when he felt himself shaken, and he came back with pain. He regained full consciousness. Boromir had lifted him from the ground, out of a snow nest.


378





"This will be the death of the hobbits," said Gandalf.
Boromir. There's no point in sitting here until the snow covers our house. We have to do something to save ourselves.

"Give them this," said Gandalf, rummaging in his bag.
They each took out a leather flask. Just a sip each-for all of us. It's very precious. It's miruvor, the cordial of Imladris. Elrond ga

As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the hot drink, the fragrant alcohol gave his heart renewed strength, and the
A deep drowsiness left its members. The others also regained their senses, and a new hope and renewed vigor would be born. But the snow The whirlpools around them were denser than ever, and the wind was blowing harder.

"What do you say to the fire?" Boromir asked suddenly.
The choice now seems close between fire and death, Gandalf. We will likely be hidden from all hostile eyes when The snow has covered us, but it won't help us.
"You can make a fire, if you can," replied Gandalf.
If there are spectators capable of enduring this storm, then they can see us, fire or no fire.

But although they brought wood and kindling by the
On Boromir's advice, he passed on the know-how of the Elves, and even the Dwarves, of how to light a flame that would withstand the swi in the wet fuel. Finally, reluctantly, Gandalf himself took a hand. Picking up a bundle of sticks, he held it in the air for a moment, then, on command, naur an edraith ammen! he
He plunged the end of his stick into the middle of it. At once, a great jet of green and blue flames erupted, and the wood It caught fire and sputtered.

If there are people to see, then at least I reveal myself to them.
"I have written 'Gandalf is here' by signs that all can see," he said. "Gandalf is here." Read from Rivendell to the mouths of the Andu

But the Company no longer cared about observers or non-observers.
Friendly eyes. Their hearts rejoiced to see the light of the fire. The wood burned merrily; and although all around
The snow whistled and puddles of slush formed under their feet. They readily warmed their hands by the fire. There, they





379


stood, hunched in a circle around the little dancers, and blew.
Flames rose. A red glow illuminated their tired and anxious faces; behind them, the night was like a black wall.

But the wood burned quickly and the snow continued to fall. The fire died down, and the last log was thrown on top. "The night is getting old," said Aragorn. "Dawn has not yet arrived." in the distance.

"If a dawn can pierce these clouds," said Gimli.

Boromir stepped out of the circle and looked up at the sky. The darkness. The snow is falling less, he said, and the wind is calmer.

Frodo gazed wearily at the snowflakes that continued to fall from the darkness, appearing white for an instant in the light of death. the fire; but for a long time, he could see no sign of them slowing down. Then suddenly, just as sleep began to creep over me...
He noticed again that the wind had indeed died down, and
The snowflakes became larger and less numerous. Very slowly, a faint glow appeared. The light began to intensify. Finally, the snow sto

As the light intensified, it revealed a silent veil
world. Below their refuge rose white humps and domes and formless depths beneath which lay the path they had trod, entirely lost; but t Large clouds, still laden with the threat of snow.

Gimli looked up and shook his head. Caradhras didn't
"He's forgiven us," he said. "He still has snow to throw on us, if..." We continue. The sooner we get back down, the better.

They all agreed on this point, but their retreat was now difficult. It might well prove impossible. Just a few steps from the ashes. From their fire, the snow rose several feet thick, higher than the heads of hobbits; in places, they had been gathered and piled up. Th

If Gandalf were to precede us with a blazing flame, he

"She might clear a path for you," said Legolas. The storm had... it didn't bother him much, and he was the only one of the Company to r always with a light heart.
If the elves could fly over the mountains, perhaps they could bring back the sun.


380

"To save us," replied Gandalf. "But I need something to..." I'll keep working. I can't burn the snow.

"Well," said Boromir, "when heads are lost, bodies must... serve, as we say in my country. The strongest among us must
Looking for a path. Look! Although everything is now covered in snow, our path, as we arrived, we went around that rocky promontory ove That's when the snow started to weigh us down. If we
We could reach that point, and perhaps the rest would be easier. It's only a furlong away, I suppose. "Then let us make our way, you and I!" said Aragorn.
Aragorn was the tallest of the Company, but Boromir, short
He was shorter, but broader and more stout. He led the way, and Aragorn followed him. Slowly, they moved away, and
Soon, they were working hard. In places, the snow reached their chests, and often Boromir seemed to be swimming or digging burrows. with his long arms rather than by walking.

Legolas watched them for a moment, a smile on his lips, then he turned to the others. The strongest must
Looking for a solution, you say? But I say: let the farmer plow, but choose an otter for swimming and for running lightly on Grass and leaves, or on the snow - an elf.

With that, he leaped nimbly, and Frodo then noticed
as if, for the first time, although he had known it for a long time, the
Elf had no boots, but wore only light shoes, as always, and her feet left few footprints in the snow.

"Farewell!" he said to Gandalf. "I am going in search of the Sun!" Quick as a runner on firm sand, he set off, and swiftly, passing the and they sped off into the distance, and disappeared behind the rocky bend.

The others waited huddled together, watching until Boromir and Aragorn were reduced to mere black dots in the The whiteness. Finally, they too disappeared from my sight. Time
The rain dragged on. The clouds lowered, and now a few snowflakes began to fall again in a spiral. Perhaps an hour passed, although it seemed much longer.




381


And finally, they saw Legolas return. At the same moment,
Boromir and Aragorn reappeared around the bend in the path, far away. Behind him, he was painfully climbing the slope.

"Well!" cried Legolas, running off. "I didn't bring..." Sun. She walks through the blue fields of the South, and a little The snow crown on that little Redhorn hill doesn't bother her. Not everyone. But I brought back a glimmer of hope for those.
who are condemned to continue on foot. There is the greatest drift due to the wind of all just after the turn, and there were our Stron They were almost buried. They were desperate, until my return and the revelation of their situation: that the sandbar was barely wider The snow suddenly thins out on one side, while lower down it's abundant. No more than a white blanket to refresh a hobbit's toes.

"Ah, that's what I was saying," Gimli grumbled. "This was no ordinary storm. It's Caradhras's malice. He doesn't like Elves." and the Dwarves, and this channel had been constructed to cut off our escape.

But fortunately, your Caradhras forgot that you have
"Men with you," said Boromir, who arrived at that moment.
And brave men too, if I may say so; though lesser men. A game of spades might perhaps have been more judicious. Nevertheless, we have.. grateful to those who cannot run as lightly as the Elves.

But how are we going to achieve this, even if you've cut it?
"Across the drift?" said Pippin, expressing the thought of all the hobbits.

"Keep hope!" said Boromir. "I am weary, but I still have..."
We still have some strength left, and Aragorn does too. We will endure what little we have. The others, without a doubt, will adapt to Behind us. Come, Master Peregrin! I'll start with you.

He lifted the hobbit up. Hold on to my back! I'll need my
"Arms," he said, stepping forward purposefully. Aragorn arrived with Merry behind him. Pippin marveled at his strength, seeing the pass which he had already forced with no other tool than his great limbs. Even now, despite his burden, he widened the tracks for those who He left.

They finally reached the large sandbank. It was thrown across

382





the mountain path like a sudden, steep wall, and its crest, sharp as if shaped with a knife, rose more than twice as high as Boromir's beaten, rising and falling like a bridge. On the other side, Merry and Pippin were set down, and they waited there with Legolas for the

After a while, Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind him,
Gandalf took the narrow but now well-traveled path in the lead. Bill and Gimli were perched among the luggage. The last one arrived. Aragorn carrying Frodo. They crossed the path; but no sooner had Frodo touched the ground than a deep
A deep rumble sent a cascade of stones and slippery snow tumbling down.
The gas spray half-blinded the Company as they crouched against the cliff, and when the air dissipated again, they saw that The path was blocked behind them.

"That's enough!" cried Gimli. "We're leaving as quickly as possible!"
as we can! And indeed, with this last blow, the malice of The Mountain seemed exhausted, as if Caradhras was satisfied. that the invaders had been repelled and would not dare again
Back. The threat of snow dissipated; the clouds began to clear, and the light spread.

As Legolas had reported, they observed that the snow had become
The pores gradually became shallower as they descended, so that even the hobbits could barely move forward. Soon, they all stood up. on the plateau at the top of the steep slope where they had I felt the first snowflakes the previous night.

The morning was already well advanced. From the top of the hill, they looked westward, far away, towards the plains.
in the maze of landscapes that stretched out at the foot of the mountain. It was the valley from which they had begun to climb the pass

Frodo's legs ached. He was numb with cold and hungry; and his head was spinning at the thought of this long and painful
He was walking down the hill. Black spots swam before his eyes. I rubbed them, but the black spots remained. In the distance Below him, but still well above the lower foothills, dark dots circled in the air.

"Birds again!" said Aragorn, pointing downwards. 383

"It's too late to do anything about it now," said Gandalf. "Let them..."
Whether they are good or bad, or whether they have absolutely nothing to do with us, we must not collapse immediately. Not even on Cara We're waiting for nightfall!

A cold wind was blowing behind them as they turned. With their backs to the Redhorn gate, they staggered down the slope, exhausted. Car


4





It was evening, and the grey light was fading rapidly again when they stopped for the night. They were very tired.
The mountains were veiled by a thickening twilight, and the wind was cold. Gandalf let each of them have one last bite of Miruvor of Rivendell. After they had eaten, he convened a council.

"We obviously can't start again tonight," he said. "The attack on the Redhorn Gate has exhausted us, and we must Rest here for a while.
"And then, where shall we go?" asked Frodo. Our journey and our mission still await us.
"Gandalf replied. We have no choice but to continue, or..." Back to Rivendell.

Pippin's face visibly lit up at the mere mention of
Back in Rivendell, Merry and Sam looked up, full of hope. But Aragorn and Boromir made no sign. Frodo seemed preoccupied.

"I wish I were back there," he said. "But how can I go back?" without shame-unless there really is no other way, and we Have they already been defeated?

"You're right, Frodo," said Gandalf: "to go back is to admit
Defeat, and an even greater defeat to come. If we go back now, then the Ring must stay there: we won't be able to put it in place. Outside again. Then, sooner or later, Rivendell will be besieged, and after a brief and bitter period, it will be destroyed.
The Nazgûl are deadly enemies, but they are only shadows.
but also of the power and terror they would possess if the power of the ring were once again on their master's finger. "Then we must continue, if there is a way," said Frodo with a sigh. Sam sank back into melancholy.

"There is one way we can try," said Gandalf.





385


I thought of it from the very beginning, when I first considered this journey. I think we should try it. But it's not a pleasant method against that, until the mountain pass has at least been tried.

If this road is worse than the Redhorn Gate, then it must
"Be really nasty," said Merry. "But you'd better tell us about..." and warn us immediately if the worst happens. "The road I speak of leads to the Mines of Moria," said Gandalf. Only Gimli raised his head; a smoldering fire
It was written all over his eyes. Terror gripped everyone else at the mere mention of that name. Even for the hobbits, it was a vague l fear.

The road may lead to Moria, but how can we hope that it
"Will he pass through Moria?" asked Aragorn in a somber tone.

"It's an ominous name," said Boromir. "I don't see it either..." We must go. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us journey south unt where the men are friendly to my people, following the route I took on my journey here. Or we could pass through and cross the Isen at Gondor, from the regions near the sea.

Things have changed since you arrived in the north, Boromir, replied Gandalf. Didn't you hear what I told you?
Saruman? I might have some personal matters to settle with him first. That's over. But the Ring must not go near Isengard, if that can be prevented by all means. The Rohan Chasm is closed. to us while we accompany the Bearer.

As for the longest route: we don't have the time.
We could spend a year on such a journey, and we would have to pass through many deserted and homeless lands. Yet, they
would not be safe. The watchful eyes of Saruman and the enemy are upon them. When you came north, Boromir, in the eyes of the enemy, yo was busy pursuing the Ring. But you are returning now.
as a member of the Circle Company, and you are in danger as


386




as long as you stay with us. The danger will increase with each league we descend south under the bare sky. Since our open attempt on the mountain pass, our situation
The situation has become more desperate, I fear. I see little hope left.
If we don't soon disappear from sight for a while and cover our path, then I advise you not to go any further. The mountains, not around them, but beneath them. That's it.
a route, in any case the one where the enemy will least expect us to take.

"We don't know what he's waiting for," said Boromir. "He might be doing it. Watch all roads, probable and improbable. In this case, ent the gates of the Dark Tower itself. The name of Moria is black.

You're talking about what you don't know when you compare "From Moria to Sauron's fortress," replied Gandalf.
Only one of you has ever entered the dungeons of Darkness.
Lord, and only in his older and more modest abode of Dol Guldur.
Those who pass through the gates of Barad-dûr do not return. But I... would not lead you to Moria if there were no hope of
which reappears. If there are minerals, it could prove disastrous. That's true for us. But most of the minerals in the Misty Mountains The Eagles report that ores are gathering again in the distance; but there is hope that Moria is still free.

It's even possible that dwarves are there, and that
In some deep chamber of his ancestors, Balin, son of Fundin, may be found. In any case, we must follow the path that You need to choose!

"I will walk the path with you, Gandalf!" said Gimli. "I will." Go and behold Durin's halls, whatever awaits you there.
- if you manage to find the doors locked.

"Good, Gimli!" said Gandalf. "You encourage me. We will... Let us search together for the hidden doors. And we will go through them." In the ruins of the Dwarves, a dwarf's head will be less easy to grab.
More disconcerting than Elves, Men, or Hobbits. Yet, it will not be. This is my first time in Moria. I have long searched for a place t


387

For Thrain, son of Thror, after his disappearance. I went through that. And I came out alive!
"I too have passed through Dimrill's gate," said Aragorn calmly; "But even though I managed to escape again, the memory remains very un "And I don't even want to go in there once," said Pippin. "Me neither," murmured Sam.
"Of course not!" said Gandalf. "Who would? But the question... The question is: who will follow me if I lead you there?" "I will do it," Gimli replied enthusiastically.
"I will do it," said Aragorn gravely. "You almost followed my example." (I was caught in the snowy disaster, and I uttered no word of r I will now follow your instructions-if this last warning changes nothing. It is neither the Ring nor the rest of us that I am thinking Now, but from you, Gandalf. And I tell you: if you pass through the Gates of Moria, beware!

"I will not go," said Boromir; "not unless the vote of the whole Company is against me. What are Legolas and the others doing?" What do the common folk say? Surely the voice of the ring-bearer should be heard?
"I do not wish to go to Moria," said Legolas. The hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. Finally Frodo spoke up. "I don't wish to go," he said; "but neither do I."
I wish to reject Gandalf's advice. I beg you to ensure that there is no vote until it has been considered. Gandalf will receive votes. Easier in the morning light than in this cold darkness. How the wind howls!

At these words, they all fell into a thoughtful silence. They heard the wind whistling between the rocks and trees, and there was a how night.

Suddenly, Aragorn jumped to his feet. Let the wind howl!
"He's howling!" he cried. "He's howling like wolves! The Wargs have..." Come west of the mountains!

"Do we have to wait until morning?" asked Gandalf. "It's like..." I said, "The hunt is on! Even if we live until dawn, who..."


388





Will they now want to travel south at night with wild wolves on their trail? "How far away is Moria?" asked Boromir.
There was a gate southwest of Caradhras, about fifteen kilometers away as the crow flies, and perhaps twenty at a wolf's pace. replied Gandalf in a somber tone.
"So let's begin as soon as it's light tomorrow, if possible," said Boromir. "The wolf we hear is worse than the ore we fear." "That's true!" said Aragorn, drawing his sword. "But where the warg howls, so too does the ore."
"I wish I had followed Elrond's advice," murmured Pippin. Sam. I'm worthless after all. There isn't enough
Bandobras race, the Bullroarer in me: these howls freeze my blood. I don't remember ever feeling so bad.

"My heart is pounding, Mr. Pippin," said Sam.
But we're not there yet, and there are some tough people here with us. Whatever fate awaits old Gandalf, I bet it's not the belly of a

For their nighttime defense, the Company climbed up to the
at the top of the small hill under which they had taken shelter, was crowned with a tangle of old, gnarled trees, forming a broken circ They then lit a fire, for there was no hope that the darkness and silence would allow them to avoid being spotted by the hunters.

They were sitting around the fire, as were those who weren't on watch. He was dozing, feeling unwell. Poor Bill the pony was shivering The place where he stood. The howls of wolves now echoed all around them, sometimes closer, sometimes farther away. In the
In the dead of night, many shining eyes were seen scanning the horizon. The hilltop. Some approached almost to the stone circle. At a g They stopped, staring at them. A shuddering howl escaped him, as if he were a captain calling his men to assembly.





389


Gandalf stood up and strode forward, holding his staff. "Listen, Hound of Sauron!" he cried. "Gandalf is here."
Run, if you value your filthy skin! I'll reduce you to ashes from tail to head, snout to snout, if you enter this circle. The wolf growled and leaped at them with great force.

a jump. At that moment, there was a sharp crack. Legolas had
He loosed his arrow. A horrible cry rang out, followed by the leap.
The shape crashed to the ground; the elven arrow had pierced its throat. The eyes that had been watching suddenly went dark.
Gandalf and Aragorn advanced, but the hill was
deserted; the packs of hunters had fled. All around them,
The darkness became silent, and no cry reached the sighing wind.

The night was old, and in the west the waning moon was
The sun was setting, shining intermittently through the detaching clouds. South Frodo woke with a start. Suddenly, a storm broke. Fierce and savage howls erupted throughout the camp.
A horde of Wargs had silently gathered and was now attacking, assailing them from all sides at once. "Throw oil on the fire!" Gandalf shouted to the hobbits. "Your blades, and stand back to back!"
In the flashing light, as the fresh wood caught fire, Frodo saw many grey shapes emerge from the circle of stones. More And others followed. Through the throat of a huge chief
Aragorn swung his sword with a single thrust; with a sweeping movement, Boromir severed another's head. Beside them, Gimli He stood there, his sturdy legs spread apart, brandishing his dwarf axe. Legolas's bow sang.

In the flickering light of the fire, Gandalf suddenly seemed to grow taller:
He stood up, a large, menacing shape like the monument of an ancient stone king, standing on a hill. Bent like a
Above the cloud, he lifted a flaming branch and advanced to meet the wolves. They retreated before him. He threw high into the air the flamboyant mark. It lit up with a sudden whiteness like lightning; and its voice rolled like thunder.

Naur and Edraith Ammen! Naur dan i ngaurhothF, he cried. There was a rumble and a crack, and the tree above him

390





It transformed into a leaf and an explosion of blinding flames. The fire leaped. From tree to tree, the entire hill was crowned with
A dazzling light. The defenders' swords and knives gleamed. And flickered. Legolas's last arrow burst into flames in the air. as it flew, it plunged in flames into the heart of a great wolf leader. All the others fled.

Slowly, the fire died down until only falling ashes and sparks remained; acrid smoke rose above the charred tree stumps. and blew darkly down the hill at the breaking dawn
faintly in the sky. Their enemies were routed and could not return.

"I told you so, Mr. Pippin?" said Sam, sheathing his... sword. The wolves won't get it. It opened my eyes, and Absolutely! I almost burned my hair!

When the full light of morning appeared, there was no sign of them. The wolves could not be found, and they searched in vain for them. The bodies of the dead. No trace of the battle remained, except for the bodies of the dead. Charred trees and Legolas's arrows lay at t All were intact, except for one whose tip was damaged only. left.

"That's what I feared," said Gandalf. "These were not ordinary things." Wolves are hunting in the wild. Let's eat quickly. Go ahead!

That day, the weather changed again, almost as if it were... on the orders of a power that no longer had any use for it. for the snow, since they had withdrawn from the pass, a power
who now wished to have a clear light in which things could be seen from afar, the wild movements. The wind had turned from north to northwest during the
The night, and now it has failed. The clouds have disappeared to the south and the sky was open, high, and blue. While they stood on the hillside, ready to leave, a pale sunlight shone on the mountain peaks.

"We must reach the gates before sunset," said Gandalf, or "I fear we shall never reach them. It is not far, but our way may be winding,


391
I have rarely walked in this country, and I have only been there once, under the western wall of Moria, and that was a long time ago. "He's there," he said, pointing southeast.
where the mountain slopes plunged abruptly into shadow at their feet. In the distance, a line of bare cliffs could be faintly discerned And in the middle of them, higher than the others, rises an immense grey wall. When we left the pass, I guided you south, not back.
To get back to our starting point, as some of you may have noticed, it's: Well, it's a good thing I did, because we now have several fe

"I don't know what to hope for," said Boromir darkly, "that Gandalf will find what he seeks, or that he will reach the edge of the clif Ahead !

Gimli was now walking ahead, beside the wizard, who was so impatient. He had to come to Moria. Together, they brought the Company back. towards the mountains. The only ancient road leading to Moria from the West ran along the course of a stream, the Shannon,
which sprang from the foot of the cliffs, near where the gates stood, had held firm. But either Gandalf had lost his way, or the earth had changed in recent years; for it did not strike the current
where he was looking for it, just a few kilometers south of where they started.

The morning was approaching noon, and yet the Com
The company wandered and struggled in an arid land of red
Stones. They saw no glimmer of water anywhere and heard nothing. Not a sound. Everything was desolate and barren. Their hearts sank. They saw no living being, and no bird flew in the sky; but what the night would bring them, if it surprised them in that lost land, non

Suddenly, Gimli, who had continued forward, shouted backwards.
They were there. He stood on a hill and pointed to the right. Hurrying, they spotted a deep, narrow canal below.
It was empty and silent, and there was hardly a trickle of water flowing between the brown and red-stained stones of its bed;


392





but on the nearest side, there was a path, very rutted and dilapidated, which wound between the ruined walls and paving stones of an old main road.

"Ah! There he is at last!" said Gandalf. "This is where..."
The stream flowed: Sirannon, the stream of the Gate, as it was once called. But what became of the water, I could not say; it was used We need to be quick and noisy. Let's go! We must hurry. We're late.

The men of the company had sore feet and were exhausted; but they continued to advance painfully and stubbornly for many kilometers alo The sun, which was at noon, began to set in the west. After a brief stop and a quick meal, they resumed their journey.
The mountains frowned, but their path led through a deep furrow of earth, and they could only see the highest peaks and the peaks located in the far east.

They finally reached a sharp bend. There, the road, which had veered south between the edge of the a canal and a steep slope of the land on the left, turned and
They resumed their eastward journey. As they rounded a bend, they saw what had happened before: a low cliff, about five fathoms high, w Jagged summit. Water trickled over it, through a wide opening, a cleft that looked as if it had been carved by a waterfall.
Once strong and full.

"Things have certainly changed!" said Gandalf. "But there is..." It's impossible to go wrong. There's only the staircase left. Falls. I the rock beside them, but the main road branched off to the left and the ascent involved several loops up to the flat ground at the sum There was once a shallow valley beyond the falls, high up to the walls of Moria, and the Sirannon flowed through it.
with the road next to it. Let's go see what it looks like. Now!

They found the stone steps without difficulty, and Gimli
They bounded swiftly down the slopes, followed by Gandalf and Frodo. When they reached the summit, they saw that they could go no furth Furthermore, and the reason for the drying up of

The gate's current was revealed. Behind them, the setting sun filled





393


the cold western sky, with its golden reflections. Before them
A dark, still lake stretched out. Neither the sky nor the sunset was reflected in its gloomy surface. The Shannon had been dammed and had filled the entire valley. Beyond the threatening waters lay
Vast cliffs rose up, their austere faces paling in the fading light: Final and impassable. No sign of a door or entrance, not a crack. or a crack that Frodo could see in the frowning stone.

"Those are the walls of Moria," said Gandalf, pointing. "On the other side of the water. And there once stood the Gate." At the time, the Elven Gate at the end of the Hollin road was where we came from. But that path is blocked. None of the The company, I suppose, will want to wade into these murky waters. Ultimately, it looks unhealthy.

"We need to find a way around the north side," Gimli said. The first thing the company needs to do is climb up the main path and see wh No lake, we couldn't bring our luggage pony up that staircase.

But anyway, we can't take the poor animal into the
"Mines," said Gandalf. "The road under the mountains is a..." dark road, and there are narrow and steep places that it we cannot walk, even if we can.

"Poor old Bill!" said Frodo. "I hadn't thought of that." "Poor Sam! I wonder what he'll say?"

"I'm sorry," said Gandalf. "Poor Bill was a... useful man." my companion, and it breaks my heart to leave him adrift now.
I would have traveled lighter and wouldn't have brought any animals, especially not pets. All of which Sam loves so much, if I'd had th All this time, we were told that we would have to take this route.

The day was drawing to a close and the cold stars were twinkling.
in the sky, high above the sunset, when the Company, with them, climbed the slopes at full speed and reached the side of the lake. In width, it didn't seem to be more than
Two or three furlongs at its widest point. What was its extent? To the south, they could see nothing in the fading light; but its north stood there, between the rocky ridges that enclosed the valley


394

and at the water's edge, there was a strip of open land.
They hastened forward, for they still had a mile or two to go before they could reach the place on the opposite bank where Gandalf was. He was heading towards it; and he still had to find the doors.

When they arrived at the northern end of the lake
They found a narrow stream blocking their path. It was green and stagnant, stretched like a slimy arm towards the enclosure. Gimli stepped forward undeterred and observed that
The water was shallow, no more than ankle-deep at the edge.
Behind him, they walked in single file, carefully making their way through the crowd.
For beneath the weed-covered pools lay slippery, greasy stones; the ground was treacherous. Frodo shuddered with disgust. upon contact with the dark, impure water on his feet.

Sam, the last of the Company, led Bill onto the dry beach.
On the other side of the field, a faint noise could be heard: a rustling, followed by a splash, as if a fish had disturbed the still su water. Turning quickly, they saw ripples with dark edges. With the shadows in the fading light: large rings were widening.
outwards from a point far out in the lake. There was a bubbling. A metallic sound, then silence. The twilight deepened, and the The last rays of the setting sun were veiled by clouds.
Gandalf then continued on his way at a brisk pace, and the others followed as quickly as they could. They reached the band of
The dry land between the lake and the cliffs was narrow, often barely a dozen meters wide, and cluttered with fallen stones and rocks; As they traveled south along the coast, they discovered holly trees.
Stumps and dead branches were rotting in the shallow water,
It seemed that only remnants of old thickets, or of a hedge that had once existed, remained. It bordered the road that crossed the floo There stood the cliff, still strong and alive, two great trees, bigger than any holly trees Frodo had ever seen or imagined.
Their deep roots extended from the wall to the water. Under
the imposing cliffs which at the time appeared to them as mere bushes,
glimpsed from afar from the top of the stairs; but now they stood majestically. Above us, steep, dark, and silent, casting deep nocturn


395
at their feet, standing like sentinel pillars at the end of the road. "Well, here we are at last!" said Gandalf. "Here come the Elves..."
The path from Hollin was ending. Holly was the symbol of the people of this land, and they planted it here to mark the end of their domain; for the west gate was primarily designed for their use in their dealings with the Lords of Moria. Those were happier. days, whe People of different races, even between Dwarves and Elves.

It wasn't the Dwarves' fault that friendship "has decreased," Gimli said.

"I haven't heard that it was the Elves' fault," Legolas said.

"I have heard both," said Gandalf; "and I will not give it." "I beg you, Legolas and Gimli, now."
At least be your friends, and help me. I need both of you. The doors are closed and hidden, and the sooner we find them, the better. Ni

Turning to the others, he said: While I search,
Are you all getting ready to go down into the Mines? Because here, I'm afraid we'll have to say goodbye to our trusty workhorse. We hav Apart from most of the things we brought to protect ourselves from the freezing cold: You won't need them inside, nor, I hope, when we cross over and continue your journey south. Instead, each of us must take our share of what the pony carried, especially the food and w

But you can't abandon poor old Bill in this desert.
"If I were you, Mr. Gandalf!" cried Sam, angry and distraught. He won't accept it, that's all. After all he's been through and everythi

"I'm sorry, Sam," said the magician. But when the door...
I don't think you'll be able to get your bill through the deep darkness of Moria. You'll have to choose between Bill and your master.

He would follow Mr. Frodo right into a dragon's lair, if I led him.
"Sam protested. 'It would be murder to turn him over,' he concluded. Free at large with all those wolves prowling around."

396





"I hope it won't be murder," said Gandalf. He lay down, placed his hand on the pony's head, and spoke in a low voice. "Go."

"He said, 'With words of protection and guidance upon you.' You are... a wise beast, and I learned much in Rivendell. Make your paths to places where grass can be found, and thus arrive in time at Elrond's, or wherever you wish to go.

There you go, Sam! He'll have just as much chance of escaping. chase away the wolves and go home as we did.

Sam stood there, looking glum, near the pony, without answering.
Bill, seeming to understand what was happening, rubbed against his muzzle. He approached him, his nose pressed against Sam's ear. Sam b He would take the packages and throw them on the ground. The others would sort them.
They brought out the goods, making a pile of everything that could be left behind, and dividing the rest among themselves.

Once that was done, they turned to observe Gandalf. He seemed to have done nothing. He stood between
The two trees gazed at the bare cliff face, as if He were piercing it with His gaze. Gimli wandered. Legolas, tapping the stone here and there with his axe, was pressed against the rock, as if listening.

"Well, here we are, ready for anything," said Merry; "but where? Are these the Doors? I don't see any trace of them."

Dwarf doors are not meant to be seen when closed, Gimli said. They are invisible, and even their own creators cannot find them. or open them, if their secret has been forgotten.

But this door was not designed to remain a secret known only to
"Dwarves!" exclaimed Gandalf, suddenly springing to life and transforming into... a circle. Unless things change completely, the knowin What you need to look for can reveal the signs.

He walked towards the wall. Right between the shadows.
Between the trees, there was a clear space, and he walked through it.
He waved his hands back and forth, muttering words through his teeth. He stepped back.
"Look!" he said. "Do you see anything now?" The moon now illuminated the grey face of the rock; but They saw nothing else for a while. Then slowly on the





397


On the surface, where the magician's hands had passed, faint lines appeared, like fine veins of silver running through the stone.
At first, they were just pale threads of gauze, so fine
that they only twinkled intermittently where the Moon caught them,
but little by little, they broadened and refined, until their design could be guessed.

At the very top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was an arch of intertwined letters in Elvish script. Below, however, the
The threads were blurry or broken in places; the outline could be seen as depicting an anvil and hammer surmounted by a crown. with seven stars. Below were two trees, each
wearing crescent moons. More clearly than anything else, in the middle of the door, there was a single star with many rays.

"Those are the emblems of Dunn!" cried Gimli. "And here is the Tree of the High Elves!" said Legolas. And the star of the house of Fëanor, said Gandalf.
are made of ithildin which reflects only the light of the stars and the moon, and sleeps until it is touched by the one who speaks word Long forgotten in Middle-earth. It has been a long time since I last heard of them. I thought of them, and I reflected at length before spirit.

"What does the scripture say?" asked Frodo, who was trying
Decipher the inscription on the ark. I thought I knew the Elvish letters, but I can't read them.

The words are in the Elvish language of the Western Middle East.
"In the land of the Elder Days," replied Gandalf. "But they do not." They only say: The gates of Durin, Lord of Moria. Speak, friend, and come in. And below
It is written in small, barely visible print: I, Narvi, made them. Celehrimhor of Hollin designed these panels "What do 'speak, friend, and enter' mean?" asked Joyeux.
"That's pretty clear," said Gimli. "If you're a friend,
Say the password, and the doors will open, and you can enter.

"Yes," said Gandalf, "these doors are probably governed by..." Words. Some dwarven doors only open at particular times, or

398





r


t


Eerc' is written in the agreement FeanorUm cViaroders ing to the 'mode' of Beleriand: Grown Duriu \tarL ruoria; pedo meUonamiuno/Jm uar ant: Cetebvimboro Greyon teithontri thiw nin.





399


for some people; and some have locks and keys that are
always necessary even when all the necessary moments and words are known. These doors have no key. In Durin's time, they had none. secret. Usually, they stood facing the door and sat there. But if the doors were closed, anyone who knew the opening word could Say it and pass. At least, that's what it says, isn't it, Gimli?

"That's the case," said the dwarf. "But the word spoken is not." We remember Narvi, his art, and all his people. vanished from the face of the earth.

"But you don't know the word, Gandalf?" asked Boromir in surprise. No! said the magician.
The others seemed dismayed; only Aragorn, who knew Gandalf, remained silent and impassive.

So what was the point of bringing us to this cursed place?
"Where?" cried Boromir, glancing back with a shudder at the dark water. "You told us you'd passed by here." The Mines. How would that be possible if you didn't know how to get in?

The answer to your first question, Boromir, said the magician
The problem is, I don't know the word yet. But we'll know it soon. "Look." And he added, with a glint in his eyes beneath their
You might be wondering, with a furrowed brow, what the point of my actions is, when it's proven they're useless. As for your other ques Do you doubt my story? Or have you lost your mind? I didn't come in. This way. I'm from the East.
If you want to know, I'll tell you that these doors open
outwards. From the inside, you can open them by pushing them with your hands. From the outside, nothing will move them, except The power to command. They cannot be forced into introspection.

"So what are you going to do then?" asked Pippin, unperturbed by the wizard's raised eyebrows.

"Knock on the doors with your head, Peregrin Took," he said. Gandalf. But if that doesn't break them, and if I have permission A little peace away from stupid questions, I will seek the opening words.

I once knew all the spells in all the languages of the Elves and Men


400

or minerals that had ever been used for such a purpose. I can still remember it as if it were yesterday, without even having to search But I think a few tries will suffice; and I won't do it.
I must call upon Gimli to obtain the words of the dwarves' secret language, which they teach to no one. The first words were Elvish, li He approached the rock again and touched it lightly with his staff, the silver star in the middle under the anvil symbol.

Annon Edhellen, Edro hi ammen! Fennas nogothrim, lasto heth lammen!
he said in an imperious voice. The silver lines faded, but the smooth grey stone did not move.

He repeated these words several times in a different order, or he varied them. Then he tried other spells, one after another. Sometimes The cliff rose up in the night, studded with countless stars.
The embers lit up, the wind blew cold, and the doors remained closed.

Gandalf approached the wall again and raised his arms.
He spoke imperiously, his anger rising. "Edro, Edro!" he shouted, striking the rock with his staff. "Open, open!" he shouted, then repeated the same order each time.
a language that had never been spoken in the western Middle East. Then he threw his staff to the ground and sat down. in silence.

At that moment, a distant wind blew to their ears.
He heard the howls of the wolves. Bill the pony jumped in fear, and Sam leaped up beside him and whispered softly.

"Don't let him escape!" said Boromir. "It seems that we
We'll need him again, if the wolves don't find us. How I hate this filthy pond! He bent down and, picking up a large stone, Throw it far away into the dark water.

The stone disappeared with a slight crack; but at the same instant





401


There was a rustling sound and a bubble. Large, undulating rings formed on the surface, beyond where the stone had fallen, and They slowly made their way towards the foot of the cliff.

"Why did you do that, Boromir?" asked Frodo. "I hate it." The place too, and I'm scared. I don't know what: no Wolves, or the darkness behind doors, but something else. I'm afraid of the swimming pool. Don't disturb it!

"I wish we could escape!" said Merry.

"Why isn't Gandalf doing anything quickly?" asked Pippin.

Gandalf paid them no attention. He remained seated, his head bowed, inclined either in despair or anguish. The sad
The howls of the wolves could be heard again. The ripples on the surface of the water. The water was rising and drawing closer; some pa the shore.

With a suddenness that surprised them all, the magician appeared.
He jumped up. He was laughing! "I've got it!" he cried. "Of course..." Of course! Absurdly simple, like most riddles when you see... the answer.
Grabbing his staff, he stood before the rock and said in a clear voice: Mellon! The star shone for a moment, then went out. Then, in silence...
A large door was drawn, without any visible cracks or joints. It had already been visible before. Slowly, it split in two and swung. They pushed the doors outwards, inch by inch, until they were completely flush against the wall. Through the opening, a dark staircase the steep climb; but beyond the lower steps, darkness
was deeper than the night. The Company gazed in wonder.

"I was wrong after all," said Gandalf, "and so was Gimli. Cheerful,
Of all the people, he was on the right path. The first word was permanently inscribed on the ark! The translation should
All I had to do was say "Friend" and enter. I simply had to pronounce the Elvish word for friend, and the doors opened. It was that sim Those were happier times. Now, let's go!

He strode forward and placed his foot on the lowest step. But at that moment, several things happened. Frodo felt


402

Something grabbed his ankle, and he fell screaming. Bill
The pony let out a wild whinny of fear, then turned tail and galloped off. Sam jumped after it, along the lake, into the darkness. Then, hearing Frodo's cry, he came running back, crying.
and uttering curses. The others turned around and saw the waters of
the lake was bubbling, as if a multitude of snakes were rising to the surface from the southern end.

A long, winding tentacle had crawled out of the water;
It was pale green, bright and moist. Its fingertip had... It held Frodo's foot and pulled it into the water. Sam, on his knees, was now slashing him with a knife.

Frodo's arm loosened, and Sam led him away, weeping.
They sought help. Twenty more arms appeared in a cascade. Darkness. The water was boiling and a nauseating stench rose from it.
"Into the portal! Up the stairs! Quick!" cried Gandalf, leaping back. Pulling them from the horror that seemed to grip them, he pinned They arrived just in time. Sam and Frodo were only a few.
Steps rose, and Gandalf had just begun to climb them, when the tentacles groped their way up the narrow bank and the fins. He crossed t He paused. If he were to think about the word that would close the chapter...
The door was opened from the inside again; it wasn't necessary. With many arms coiled around them, they seized the doors on either side

They spun them around. With a deafening echo, they crashed down.
And all light disappeared. A sound of tearing and crashing was heard. slowly through the massive stone.
Sam, clinging to Frodo's arm, collapsed on a step in the darkness. "Poor old Bill!" he said, his voice choked with emotion. "Poor old B They heard Gandalf descend the steps and strike. Employees leaned against the doors. The stone shook. The stairs trembled, but the door




403


"Well, well!" said the magician. "The passage is blocked."
That's behind us now, and there's only one way out: the other way.
on the mountainside. I'm afraid, from the noises the rocks are making, they've been piled up, and the trees uprooted and thrown across the door. I'm sorry; because the trees were magnificent and we stood there for so long.

I sensed from the very first moment that something horrible was near.
"that my foot first touched the water," said Frodo. Was that one thing, or were there several?

"I don't know," replied Gandalf; "but the weapons were all guided by a single purpose, something has crept in insidiously, or has been. Things older and more foul than the ores in the depths of the world. He did not express aloud his thought that whatever the case may be It was the one who lived by the lake who had first captured Frodo. The whole of society.

Boromir muttered under his breath, but the stone resounded.
The sound was amplified until it became a hoarse murmur that everyone could hear: Into the depths of the world! And that is where we ar Against my will. Who will guide us now through this deadly darkness?

"I will accept," said Gandalf, "and Gimli will walk with me." My staff!

As the magician climbed the grand staircase, he stopped with his staff raised, and a faint glow emanated from its tip. The wide staircase was solid and intact. Two hundred
They counted the steps, wide and shallow; and at the top, they found a vaulted passage with a flat floor leading into the dark interior

Let's sit down, rest, and eat something here on the
"We'll land, since we can't find a dining room!" said Frodo.
had begun to rid himself of the terror inflicted upon him by the arm that was strangling him, and suddenly, he felt an extreme hunger.

The proposal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on
the upper steps, indistinct silhouettes in the gloom. After they had eaten, Gandalf offered each of them a third sip of the Rivendell m


404





"This won't last much longer, I'm afraid," he said; "but I..."
I think we need it after this horror at the door. And unless we get lucky, we'll need everything that's left before we see the
On the other side! Be careful of the water too! There are many streams and wells in the Mines, but they shouldn't be touched. We might "How long will this take?" asked Frodo.
"I couldn't say," replied Gandalf. "It depends on several factors. Chances. But by going straight ahead, without incident or loss of ou We'll therefore do three or four marches, I think. It can't be less than forty miles from West-door to East-gate in a straight line, an

After a brief rest, they resumed their journey.
They were eager to finish the journey as quickly as possible, and were prepared, despite their fatigue, to continue walking for several He pointed to the ground in front of his feet; in his right hand he held his sword, Glamdring. Behind him appeared Gimli, his eyes shin Behind the dwarf walked Frodo, and he had drawn the short sword, Sting. No light came from Sting's blades or from
Glamdring; and it was a certain comfort, for it was the work of the elven smiths of the Old Days, these swords shone with a cold light, if there were ores nearby. Behind Frodo Sam set off, followed by Legolas and the young hobbits.
and Boromir. In the darkness, at the rear, somber and silent, walked Aragorn.

The path wound its way around a few bends, then began to
descend. The speed decreased steadily for a long time before it slowed. The level stabilized again. The air became hot and stifling, bu The air wasn't nauseating, and at times they felt fresher drafts on their faces, emerging from half-seen openings in the walls.
There were many of them. In the pale light of the wizard.
Frodo saw stairs and arches, as well as other elements of the scenery.

405


passages and tunnels, with steep upward or downward slopes,
or opening on either side into total darkness. It was disconcerting. Beyond any hope of remembering.

Gimli did little to help Gandalf, except through his unwavering courage.
At least, unlike most others, he wasn't troubled by the darkness itself. The magician often consulted him.
in places where the choice of path was uncertain; but it was always Gandalf who had the final say. The Mines of Moria were vast and com Gloin's son, a dwarf of the mountain race despite belonging to that race.
Gandalf, the distant memories of a journey long ago were
now of minimal help, but even in the darkness and despite everything he knew the twists and turns of the road where he wanted to go, an He did not waver, as long as there was a path that led to his goal.

"Don't be afraid!" said Aragorn. There was a longer silence than usual, and Gandalf and Gimli whispered together;
The others were crowded behind, waiting impatiently. Don't do it. Be afraid! I've accompanied him on many trips, perhaps never.
on such a dark one; and there are even greater tales in Rivendell. His deeds are greater than any I have seen. He will not go astray.
- if there is a way to find it. He led us here against all odds. He overcame our fears, but he will lead us again, whatever the cost. himself. He is safer finding his way back even on a night with zero visibility than Queen Beruthiel's cats.

It was a good thing for the company to have such a guide. They had neither fuel nor the means to light torches; in the
A desperate scramble at the doors; many things had been left behind. But without light, they would soon have arrived at grief. There weren't just many paths to choose from, there were
There were also, in many places, holes and traps, as well as dark wells, at the edge of the path where their footsteps echoed.
There were cracks and crevices in the walls and the floor, and every now and then, a crack would open up right in front of their feet. Its maximum width exceeded seven feet and its length was considerable. Before Pippin had the courage to jump over it

406

the terrifying chasm. The sound of boiling water rose from
very low down, as if a large mill wheel were turning in the depths.
"A rope!" Sam whispered. "I knew I'd need it, if I didn't already have it!" As these dangers became more frequent, their march They slowed down. It was as if they were already treading water.
Further and further, endlessly, to the very roots of the mountains. They were more and more weary, and yet there seemed to be no comfor to stop anywhere. Frodo's morale had improved for a while after his escape, and after eating and drinking a glass of cordial; but
A profound unease, turning into anguish, seized him.
again. Although he had been healed in Rivendell of his knife wound-
His stroke, that terrible injury, had not been without consequences. His senses were sharper and more aware of things that could not be that he could see better in the dark than any of his fellow companions, with the possible exception of Gandalf. And he was, in any case And at times, it felt like a heavy burden to him. He felt the certainty; he foresaw the evil to come and the evil to follow; but he sai He gripped the hilt of his sword tighter and continued relentlessly.

The company that supported him rarely spoke, and only then
hurried whispers. There was no other sound than that of their own feet: the dull stump of Gimli's dwarf boots; the heavy Boromir's step; Legolas's light step; the sweet and rare
They heard the sound of a hobbit's footsteps; and behind them, the slow and steady clatter of Aragorn's footsteps. They heard Aragorn's Frodo began to hear, or to believe he heard, something
Otherwise: like the soft, bare footsteps. It was never loud enough, or almost loud enough, for him to be certain he had heard it.
She; but once she got going, she never stopped, while the Society was in motion. But it was no echo, for when they stopped her, she con





407


It was after nightfall that they entered the mines.
They had been traveling for several hours, with only brief stops, when Gandalf faced his first real setback. Before him, a wide, dark a The middle lane seemed to continue, smooth and level, but very narrow.

"I have absolutely no recollection of this place!" said Gandalf, standing up. He walked hesitantly under the arch. He raised his staff. I hoped to find some markings or inscriptions that might help me choose, but nothing of the sort appeared. Me neither.
"I'm having trouble deciding," he said, shaking his head. "And I expect..." that you're all as tired as I am, if not more so. We'd bett It is still dark here; but outside, the late moon is rising in the west, and the middle of the night has passed.
"Poor old Bill!" said Sam. "I wonder where he is. I hope those wolves haven't caught him yet." To the left of the large arch, they found a stone door:
It was half closed, but it easily snapped back into place with a gentle push. Beyond, there appeared to be a wide chamber carved into t "Calm down! Calm down!" shouted Gandalf, as Merry and Pippin moved forward, happy to have found a place to rest.

with at least a greater sense of shelter than in the open passage. Gently! You don't yet know what's inside. I'll begin.

He entered cautiously, and the others followed him. There! he said, pointing to the middle of the room with his stick.
Before his feet, they saw a large, round hole like the mouth of a a well. Broken and rusty chains lay at the edge and trailed about.
They descended into the black chasm. Fragments of stone lay nearby.

One of you may have fallen into the trap and is still asking yourself questions. "When you were about to hit rock bottom," Aragorn said to
Happy. Let the guide go first while you still have one.

It appears to have been a guardroom, designed for the
"He was watching all three crossings," said Gimli. "That hole was..."
It was clearly a well for the use of the guards, covered with a stone lid.


408

But the lid is broken, and we all need to be careful in the dark.

Pippin felt strangely drawn to the well. While the others unrolled blankets and made beds against the bedroom walls, as far away from t He crept to the edge and peered in. A chill seemed to strike him. His face, emerging from unseen depths, was moved by a sudden
Driven by instinct, he groped for a stray stone and dropped it. He felt his heart beat several times before there was the slightest sou very low down, as if the stone had fallen into deep waters. In a cavernous place, there was a plonk, very distant, but magnificent formed and repeated in the hollow tube.

"What is it?" cried Gandalf. He was relieved when Pippin arrived. He confessed what he had done; but he was angry, and Pippin
His eye gleamed. "Foolish Took!" he snarled. "This is a serious journey, not a mere hobbit stroll. You yourself next time, and you won' Dance. Now, be quiet!

Nothing was heard for several minutes; then...
From the depths rose faint taps: tom-tap, tap-tom. They stopped, and when the echoes had dissipated, they were repeated: tap-tom, tom-t strangely like signals of some kind; but after a while the knocking stopped and was no longer heard.

It was the sound of a hammer, or else I've never heard one. "One," said Gimli.

"Yes," said Gandalf, "and I don't like it. It may be that..." Nothing to do with the mad stone of Peregrine; but probably something has Leave them alone. Let us pray, let us do nothing more to this earth! Let us hope that you can rest without further problems. You, Pippi "You'll do the first quarter, as a reward," he snorted, rolling onto his side, himself wrapped in a blanket.

Pippin sat miserably by the door in total darkness; but he kept turning around, fearing that something unknown might happen. He crawled out of the well. He wished he could have covered himself.
the hole, even with just a blanket, but he dared neither move nor go near it, even though Gandalf seemed to be asleep.





409

In reality, Gandalf was awake, though lying motionless and silent. He was deep in thought, trying to recall every memory of his old jou the next step he should take; a misstep now could be disastrous. After an hour, he got up and came towards
Reinette apple.

"Go to a corner and sleep, my boy," he said in a...
In a soft tone. You want to sleep, I imagine. I can't get a wink of sleep. So I might as well watch.

"I know what's wrong with me," he murmured as he sat down.
Downstairs, near the door. I need a smoke! I haven't had one since the morning before the snowstorm.

The last thing Pippin saw before falling asleep was a
a dark glimpse of the old wizard huddled on the ground, protecting a glowing chip in his gnarled hands, between his knees. For a brief moment, his pointed nose appeared, and a puff of smoke.

It was Gandalf who woke them all up. He had
He sat watching alone for about six hours, and let others rest. And in the watches, I made my decision.
"I don't like the feeling the middle path gives; and I don't..." he said. Like the smell of the left path: the air is stale down below Otherwise, I'm not a guide. I'll take the right-hand path. Time to start climbing again.

For eight hours of darkness, not counting two brief interruptions, they
They continued on their way; they encountered no danger and heard nothing, and saw nothing but the faint glow of the magician's light. floating before them like a will-o'-the-wisp. The passage
They had chosen to curl up steadily. As far as they
It was clear that it followed large, ascending curves, and as it climbed, it became taller and wider. There were no more openings towar

other galleries or tunnels on each side, and the floor was flat and sound, without holes or cracks. Obviously, they had
They came upon what had once been an important road; and they went on, they advanced faster than on their first march. They thus advanced about fifteen miles, measured in

410

a straight line eastward, although they actually had to walk twenty miles or more. As the road climbed, Frodo
His morale improved somewhat; but he still felt oppressed, and at times he heard, or thought he heard, behind the company and beyond the noise and the pounding of their steps, a following foot, a step that was not an echo.

They had walked as far as hobbits could endure without respite, and all were thinking of a place where they
I was able to sleep, when suddenly the walls to the right and left of the van... They seemed to have passed through some kind of arch. A door leading to a black, empty space. There was a strong, warm draft behind them, and in front of them the
The darkness was cold on their faces. They stopped and huddled together, anxiously.

Gandalf seemed satisfied. "I chose the right path," he said. We are finally reaching the habitable parts, and I suppose that We're not far from the east bank anymore. But we're at a higher altitude, much higher than the Dimrill Gate, unless I'm mistaken. Error. Judging by the feel of the air, we must be in a very large hall. I'll now risk some real light.

He raised his staff, and for a brief moment there was a flame. Like a flash of lightning. Great shadows appeared and fled.
And for a second, they glimpsed an immense roof high above their heads, supported by numerous powerful columns hewn from stone. Before Polished and smooth like glass, sparkling and shimmering. Three
They glimpsed other entrances, dark and gloomy arches: one straight ahead to the east, and one on either side. Then the light out.

That's all I'll dare to discuss for the moment, he said.

Gandalf. There were once great windows in the mountain, on the side, and shafts leading to the light in the heights. Mines. I think we've reached them now, but it's
Night has fallen again, and we won't know for sure until morning. If I'm right, perhaps tomorrow we'll finally see the sunrise. But in the meantime, it's best not to go any further. Let's leave it be.


4II

we rest, if we can. Things have gone well so far, and the
The hardest part of the journey is over. But we are not there yet. And yet, the road is long to the gates that open onto the world.

The Company spent that night in the large, cavernous hall,
huddled together in a corner to escape the drafts: There seemed to be a constant flow of cold air through the
Eastern arch. All around them, as they lay, darkness floated. A void, hollow and immense, and they were oppressed by the the solitude and immensity of the dark and endless rooms
Staircases and passageways that branch out. The wildest imaginations that
A dark rumor had always suggested that hobbits had completely disappeared, except for the genuine terror and wonder inspired by Moria.

There must have been a huge crowd of dwarves here at "Once," said Sam; "and each of them was busier than..."
It took idiots five hundred years to accomplish all this, and most of them were into hard rock too! Why did they do all this? They didn In those dark holes, surely?

"These are not holes," said Gimli. "This is the great kingdom." And the city of Dwarrowdelf. And long ago, it was not dark, but full of light and splendor, as we still remember in our songs.

He stood up and, standing in the darkness, began to sing in a deep voice, while the echoes were lost in the roof. The world was young, the mountains were green,
No spots had yet been observed on the Moon.

No word was written on the stream or on the stone. When Durin awoke and walked alone.

He gave names to the hills and valleys that had none; He drank from wells yet unexplored; He leaned over and looked into Mirrormere,

And I saw a crown of stars appear, like gems on a silver thread, Above the shadow of his head.


412

The world was beautiful, the mountains high, in ancient times, before the fall
The mighty kings of Nargothrond and Gondolin, who now have vanished beyond the western seas:
The world was just in Durin's time. A king, he sat on a carved throne.
In stone halls with multiple pillars, with a golden roof and a silver floor, And runes of power on the door.
The light of the sun, stars, and moon in brilliant cut-crystal lamps
Neither cloud nor shadow of night obscured it. There it shone forever, beautiful and radiant.

There, the hammer struck the anvil,
There the chisel scribbled, and the engraver wrote; There the blade was forged, and the handle was bound; The miner dug, the mason built. There, the beryl, the pearl, and the opal fade.
And metal forged like a fish chainmail, shield and corset, axe and sword.
And gleaming spears were gathered. Durin's people were then tireless; Beneath the mountains, music awoke: The harpists played the harp, the minstrels sang, and at the gates, the trumpets sounded.
The world is grey, the mountains are old, the forge fire is cold as ash; no harp twists, no hammer falls: Darkness reigns in Durin's halls;

A shadow hangs over his grave in Moria, in Khazad-dûm. But the sunken stars always appear.




413


In the dark and windless Mirrormere;

There rests his crown in the deep waters, until Dnrin awakens again. "I like that!" said Sam. "I'd like to learn it." In Moria,
To Khazad-dûm! But that makes the darkness even heavier,
Thinking about all these lamps, I wonder if there aren't piles of jewelry and gold lying around here. Are they still lying around here? Gimli remained silent. After singing his song, he would have said no more.
"Lots of jewels?" asked Gandalf. "No. Ores often have
Moria has been looted; nothing remains in the upper halls. Since the dwarves' flight, no one dares search the wells and Treasures lie at the bottom of the abyss: they are submerged by water.
- or in the shadow of fear.

"So why do the dwarves want to come back?" asked Sam.

"For mithril," replied Gandalf. "The wealth of Moria was..." neither in gold and precious stones, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, their servant. Such things have been found here, it's true, especially

iron; but they didn't need to dig to find it: all the things they wished could be introduced into circulation. For here only The world was discovered in Moria silver, or in real silver, as some have said.
It is called mithril: that is its Elvish name. The Dwarves have a
a name they are not revealing. Its value was ten times greater than that of
Gold, and now it is priceless; for there is almost nothing left above ground, and even the miners dare not dig here to find it. The vei northward, towards Caradhras, and into the darkness.
The dwarves tell no stories; but even the mithril was the foundation. Their wealth was also their ruin: they dug
with too much greed and too deeply, and disturbed that from which they fled, Durin's Bane. From what they brought to light... The ores have gathered almost everything and given it as tribute to Sauron, who covets it.

 Mithril! Everyone coveted it. It could be hammered like copper and polished like glass; and the Dwarves could make a Metal, light yet harder than hardened steel. Its beauty


414





was similar to that of ordinary silver, but the beauty of mithril neither tarnished nor darkened. The Elves loved it deeply, and
Among the many uses they made of it, one could mention the ithildin, the starry moon, which you saw on the gates. Bilbo wore a corset o that Thorin had given her. I wonder what became of it? Still covered in dust in Michel Delving Mathom's house, I suppose.

"What?" cried Gimli, breaking his silence. "A corset." Money from Moria? It was a royal gift!

"Yes," said Gandalf. "I never told him, but its value was..." greater than the value of the entire Shire and everything in it.

Frodo said nothing, but he slipped his hand under his tunic.
and touched the rings of his chainmail. He felt unsteady. I think he was walking around with the prize money.
The Shire was hidden beneath his jacket. Had Bilbo known? He had no doubt. Bilbo knew perfectly well. It was indeed a royal gift.
His thoughts had now drifted away from the dark mines, from Rivendell, from Bilbo, and from Bag End, back when Bilbo was always there. He wished with all his heart to be back there, and at that time, mowing the lawn or strolling. among the flowers, and that he had never heard of Moria, or mithril - or the Ring.

A profound silence fell. One by one, the others fell asleep. Frodo was on his guard. As if it were a breath entering through Invisible doors emerged from the depths, and terror gripped him. His hands were cold and his forehead damp. He listened. All his The mind was entirely absorbed in listening and nothing else for two hours; but it heard no sound, not even the imaginary echo. with one step.

His guard was nearing its end when, in the distance, where he could see...
As if the western arch were still standing, he imagined he could see two pale points of light, almost like luminous eyes. He jumped. Hi "Watch out," he thought. "I was on the verge of a dream. He was standing there."
He got up, rubbing his eyes, and remained standing, peering into the darkness, until Legolas came to his aid.





415


When he went to bed, he fell asleep quickly, but he seemed
He understood that the dream continued: he heard whispers and saw

The two pale points of light were slowly approaching. He woke up and noticed that the others were speaking in hushed tones near him, an that a faint light illuminated his face. High above, a long eastern arch passed through a well near the roof.
a faint glow; and across the hall, through the north arch, a faint glow also twinkled in the distance.

Frodo sat up. "Good morning!" said Gandalf. "For morning!"
That's it at last! I was right, you see. We're very high up on the East Side of Moria. Before the end of the day, we should find the Gr the Dimrill valley in front of us.

"I shall be happy," said Gimli. "I have gazed upon Moria, and..." It is immense, but it has become dark and frightening; and we I found no trace of my family. I now doubt that Balin ever came here.

After having breakfast, Gandalf decided to leave.
Right away. We're tired, but we'll rest better when we're outside, he said. I don't think any of us will want to spend time there. Another night in Moria.
"No, indeed!" said Boromir. "Which way should we take?" "The arch over there to the east?" "Perhaps," said Gandalf. "But I don't know exactly yet."
where we are. Unless I'm completely mistaken, I suppose we're above and north of the Great Gates; and it may well be not so
It's easy to find the right path down there. The eastern arch. It will probably turn out to be the way we need to go; but before making Let's go towards that light near the north door. If we could find a window, that would help, but I'm afraid the light only comes from.. in deep wells.

Following his example, the Company passed under the north
They found themselves in a wide corridor. As they walked along, the light intensified, and they saw that she was coming. They entered through a door on their right. It was tall and had a flat lintel.


416

and the stone door was still on its hinges, half-erected
open. Beyond was a large, square room. It was dimly lit, but to their eyes, after such a long period in darkness, it seemed They blinked as they entered, their eyes dazzling with light.

Their footsteps stirred up a thick layer of dust on the ground, and
He stumbled among objects lying in the doorway, whose shapes he could not at first discern. The room was lit by a
a large, high well in the far eastern wall; it sloped upwards and, high up there, a small square of blue sky could be seen. The light from the well fell directly onto a table in the
In the middle of the room: a single oblong block, about two feet high, on which was placed a large slab of white stone.

"It looks like a tomb," murmured Frodo, leaning forward.
With a strange sense of foreboding, he felt compelled to examine it more closely. Gandalf hurried to his side. On the slab were runes,


khm

417


These are the runes of Daeron, as they were used in the past.
"Moria," said Gandalf. "Here it is written in the tongues of men." And the dwarves:

BALIN SON OF FUNDIN THE LORD OF MORIA.

"So he is dead," said Frodo. "I feared it." Gimli pulled his hood over his face.


5





The Fellowship of the Ring stood silently by Balin's tomb. Frodo thought of Bilbo and his long friendship with
the dwarf, and Balin's visit to the Shire long ago. In this dusty room in the mountains, it seemed like a thousand years ago, and on th

Finally, they became agitated, looked up, and began searching for anything that might give them news of Balin's fate, or show what had door on the other side of the room, under the well. Through it, they could now see that many bones lay behind both doors.
lying there, and among them were broken swords and axe heads, and split shields and helmets. Some of the swords were twisted: orc scimitars with blackened blades.

The walls were carved with numerous niches in the rock, and
They contained large wooden chests bound with iron. All of them had been broken open and looted; but beside the broken lid of There lay the remains of a book. It had been torn to shreds.
and stabbed and partially burned, and he was so stained with
black spots and other dark marks like old blood, in very small quantities. It was readable. Gandalf carefully lifted it, but the leaves He cracked and broke it when he placed it on the slab. He examined it carefully. He remained silent for a moment. Frodo and Gimli staye The person beside him could see, as he delicately turned over the sheets, that they had been written in runes by many different hands. both of Moria and Dale, and here and there in elven scenario.

Gandalf finally looked up. It seemed to be a recording of
"The fortune of the people of Balin," he said. "I suppose it all started with..." their arrival in Dimrill Dale nearly thirty years ago The pages appear to contain numbers referring to the years following their


419

Arrival. The first page is numbered from one to three, so at least two have been missing from the start. Listen to this!

  We brought the ores out of the main gate and the guardhouse-I think; the next word is blurry and burnt: probably coin-we killed Many in the bright sunlight-I think-of the valley. Floi was killed by an arrow. He killed the big one. Then a blur followed by Floi under the grass near Mirror Lake. The following lines, I
cannot read. Then comes We took the twenty-first hall
on the north side to live there. There's something I can't read. A well is mentioned. Then Balin set up his seat in the Chamber of Mazarbul

"The Archives Chamber," said Gimli. "I suppose that's... "where we are now.

"Well, I can't read for a long time," said Gandalf, "except for the word 'gold,' Dunn's axe, and a helmet." Balin is now Lord of Moria. This seems to bring a chapter to a close.
After a few stars, another hand begins, and I can see that we have found real silver, then the word well-forged, and then something els I've got it! mithril', and the last two lines Oin to search for the superior armories of the Third Depth, something goes west, a blur,
Gandalf paused and set aside a few leaves. There are several pages of the same kind, written rather hastily and
"Very damaged," he said; "but I can't get much out of it in this..." light. A number of leaves must be missing now, because They're starting to be numbered five, the fifth year of the colony, I suppose. Let's see! No, they're too cut and stained; I They're impossible to read. Perhaps we'll be able to in daylight. Wait! Here's something: a large, bold hand using Elvish script.

"That would be Ori's hand," said Gimli, looking over... the magician's arm. He could write well and quickly, and often used Elvish char

"I fear he had some bad news to record impartially," said Gandalf. "The first word that stands out clearly is 'sorrow,' but the rest... The line is lost, unless it ends with "estre". Yes, it must be "yestre". Followed by the day being November 10th, Balin, Lord of Moria


420

He fell at Dimrill Dale. He went alone to see at Mirror Mere, a
A projectile fired at him from behind a rock, we killed the miner, but there were many others.
...moving up from the east to the Silverlode vein. Continued on the page The image is so blurry that I can barely make anything out, but I think

I can read that we have barricaded the gates, and then we can hold them back. For a long time, and perhaps horrible and painful. Poor B seems to have retained the title he obtained in less than five years
years. I wonder what happened next; but there's no answer. It's time to decipher the last pages. Here is the last page of Everything. He paused and sighed.

"It's a macabre read," he said. "I fear their end was cruel. Listen! We can't get out. We can't get out. They've taken us."
The bridge and the second room. That's where Frar, Loni, and Nali fell. Then there are four illegible lines, so I can only read I went there 5 days ago. The last lines run along the pool to the wall. At Westgate. The Watcher in the water took Oin. We can't
Get out. The end is near, and then the drums, the drums in the depths. I wonder what it means. The last thing written is at the end of Gandalf stopped and remained silent, lost in thought.
A sudden terror and horror of the chamber fell upon the Company. "We can't get out," Gimli murmured. It was just as well for us that th Gandalf raised his head and looked around. They seemed
put up a final resistance at the two gates, he said; but there weren't many left by then. Thus ended the attempt to
To retake Moria! It was courageous, but foolish. The time has not yet come. Yet. Now, I fear we must bid farewell to Balin, son of Fund He must rest here, in the houses of his fathers. We will take this
Read the book, the Book of Mazarbul, and examine it more carefully later. You'd better keep it, Gimli, and take it back to Dain, if You'll have the chance. It will interest him, even if it pains him. It will deeply affect him. Let's go! The morning is drawing to a cl

"Which way are we going?" asked Boromir.

"Let's return to the hall," replied Gandalf. "But our visit to this..." The space has not been in vain. I now know where we are.


THE ICHAZAD-DOUM BRIDGE


421


It must be, as Gimli says, the Chamber of Mazarbul; and the
The room must be the twenty-first on the north side. Therefore, we must exit through the eastern arch of the hall and turn right. and south, then down. The twenty-first hall should
We're on the seventh level, which is six levels above the level of the Gates. Let's go! Let's return to the hall!

Gandalf had barely uttered these words when...
A terrible noise: a deep rumble that seemed to come from the depths, much lower down, and tremble on the stone at their feet.
They rushed towards the door, alarmed. Woe, woe, it rolled again. As if immense hands were transforming the very caverns of Moria into Trumpet blasts resounded in the hall, answered by horns and raucous shouts. In the distance, there was a sound of hurried footsteps, li

"They're coming!" cried Legolas. "We cannot go out," Gimli said.
"Trapped!" cried Gandalf. "Why did I delay? Here we are." Trapped, as before. But I wasn't there then. We'll see what- "Doom, doom," went the drum, and the walls shook. "Slam the doors and lock them!" shouted Aragorn. And
Keep your bags as long as possible: we might have a chance to make our way here.

"No!" said Gandalf. "We mustn't end up locked in. Keep the
The door is ajar! We'll go through there if we get the chance.

Another shrill blast of the horn and piercing screams rang out. Footsteps were coming down the corridor. There was a rattling and clatt The Company drew their swords. Glamdring shone with a peculiar brilliance. A pale light, and Dard glittered at the edges. Boromir reste

Wait a moment! Don't close it yet! said Gandalf. He leaped up to Boromir's side and hoisted himself up to his full height. "Who comes here to disturb the rest of Balin, lord of Moria?" he cried in a loud voice.
A burst of raucous laughter rang out, like the sound of a fall and a slide.


422





stones in a pit; amidst the din, a deep voice rose
At the controls. Boom, boom, boom, the drums resonated in the depths.

With a swift movement, Gandalf stepped forward in front of the narrator. He opened the door and extended his staff.
A blinding flash illuminated the room and the passageway. Outside. For a moment, the magician looked outside. Arrows were whistling. He

There are minerals, many, he said. And some
They are large and evil: the black Uruks of Mordor. For now. They remain in the background, but there is something else. A large cave troll, I think, or even several. There's no hope of escaping that way.

And there's no hope if they also come through the other door, said Boromir.

"There's still no sound outside," said Aragorn, who was standing near the east gate, listening. The passage over
This side plunges directly into a staircase: it clearly doesn't lead back to the hall. But there's no point in flying blindly. We are being closely pursued. We cannot block the gate.
His key is gone, the lock is broken and it opens inwards. We must do something to delay the enemy first. We will "Make them fear the Chamber of Mazarbul!" he said darkly. Anduril felt the edge of his sword.

Heavy footsteps were heard in the corridor. Boromir threw him to the ground.

He leaned against the door and pulled it towards him; then he wedged it shut with broken sword blades and splinters of wood. The Compan They withdrew to the other side of the room. But they hadn't
There's still a chance to steal. There was a knock at the door, which caused it to tremble; then it began to creak slowly open, pushing the corners. An enormous arm and shoulder, with dark skin
Greenish scales were propelled through the widening opening. A large, flat, toeless foot was forced through from below. Outside, there was a deathly silence.

Boromir leaped forward and struck the arm with all his might; but his sword clanged, veered off course, and fell from his hand. The bla


423

Suddenly, and to his own surprise, Frodo felt a burning anger.
A flame ignited in his heart. "The Shire!" he cried, and leaping beside Boromir, he bent down and stabbed him with Sting. A hideous foot. There was a bellow, and the foot jerked back. It nearly pulled Sting from Frodo's arm. Black drops
Liquid dripped from the blade and steamed on the floor. Boromir threw himself against the door and slammed it shut again. "One for the Shire!" cried Aragorn. "The hobbit's bite is..." Deep! You have a good blade, Frodo, son of Drogo!
There was a dull thud against the door, followed by another dull thud, then a crash. Battering rams and hammers pounded on it. It crack The arrows whistled, but they struck the north wall, and
fell harmlessly to the ground. There was a honk of the horn and a stampede. feet, and the ores jumped one after the other into the chamber.

The company was unable to count their number.
The confrontation was violent, but the miners were appalled by the ferocity of the defense. Legolas shot two of them in the throat. Gim he trimmed the feet under another that had sprung up on
Balin's tomb. Boromir and Aragorn killed many. When their
The teenager had fallen, the others ran away screaming, leaving the defenders alone. Unharmed, except for Sam who had a scratch on his A quick dodge had saved him; and he had brought down his ore: a powerful blow with his wheelbarrow blade. A fire smoldered in his brown backwards, if he had seen him.

"Now is the time!" cried Gandalf. "Let's go, before..." The troll is back!

But even as they were retreating, and before Pippin and Merry had reached the outside staircase, an enormous orc chieftain, almost A tall man, dressed in a black jumpsuit from head to toe, jumped into the room; behind him, his supporters were massed at the door. His broad, flat face was swarthy, his eyes were like coals, and his tongue was red; he wielded a large spear. With a
With a blow from his enormous leather shield, he turned Boromir's sword around and pulled him backward, throwing him to the ground. Div Under Aragorn's blow, delivered with the swiftness of an attacking serpent, he


424

He charged into the Company and hurled his spear straight ahead at Frodo. The blow struck him on the right side, and Frodo was thrown against the wall and immobilized. Sam, shouting,
He struck the shaft of the spear, and it broke. But even though the ore Anduril threw down his club and brandished his scimitar. A flame struck his helmet. There was a flash like a flame, and the helmet shattered. The ore fell with a split head. His
The partisans fled screaming, while Boromir and Aragorn leaped upon them. Doom, doom, the drums resonated in the depths. The great voice redeployed. "Now!" cried Gandalf. "This is your last chance! Run!"
For that!

Aragorn took Frodo in his arms where he was lying near the wall and he headed towards the stairs, pushing Merry and Pippin ahead of him The others followed; but Gimli had to be taken away by force.
Legolas: despite the danger, he lingered near Balin's tomb with
Her head bowed. Boromir pulled the east door towards her, making it creak. It was hinged; it had large iron rings on each side, but the "I'm fine," Frodo gasped. "I can walk. Put me down!"
Aragorn almost dropped him, he was so stunned. "I thought you were dead!" he cried.

"Not yet!" said Gandalf. "But there's no time for questions. All of you, go down the stairs! Wait a few minutes."
For me, it's all the way down, but if I don't come back soon, keep going! Go! Quickly and choose the paths leading to the right and dow

"We cannot leave you alone to hold the door!" said Aragorn.
"Do as I say!" Gandalf roared fiercely. "The swords are no more. Use them here. Go!" The passage was not lit by any skylights and was plunged into total darkness.
They groped their way down a long staircase, then looked
return; but they could see nothing, except, very high above them, a faint gleam shone on the magician's staff. He seemed motionless. Frodo, standing guard in front of the closed door, was breathing heavily.


425

and leaned against Sam, who embraced him.
He stood there, peering into the darkness of the stairs. Frodo thought He could hear Gandalf's voice above, murmuring words
which descended along the sloping roof with a sighing echo. He could... I didn't understand what was being said. The walls seemed to tr From time to time, the drumbeats pulsed and rolled:
Oh no, oh no.

Suddenly, at the top of the stairs, there was a flash of white. A light. Then a low rumble and a dull thud.
Wild drumbeats erupted: doom-boom, doom-boom, and then stopped. Gandalf flew down the steps and landed on the ground in the middle of t

"Well, well! It's over!" said the magician, struggling to his feet. "I did all I could. But I've met my match." and were almost destroyed. But don't stay there! Go!
Turn it on! You'll have to do without light for a while: I'm rather shaken. Come on! Come on! Where are you, Gimli? Come here. With me! Stay right behind you!

They followed him, staggering, wondering what had happened.
Doom, doom, the drumbeats resounded again: they now sounded muffled and distant, but they followed. There was no noise. No other sounds of pursuit, no footsteps, no voices.
Gandalf turned neither right nor left, for the passage seemed to lead in the direction he wished. From time to time and
He descended another flight of stairs, some fifty steps or more, to a lower level. At that point, this was their main danger; for in th In the darkness, they could not see the descent until they reached it and advanced with their feet dangling over the void. Gandalf felt with his stick like a blind man.

After an hour, they had covered a mile, or perhaps a There wasn't much left, and he had gone down many floors.
There was still no sound of pursuit. They were almost beginning to hope they would escape. At the bottom of the seventh floor Gandalf stopped.

"It's hot!" he gasped. "We should at least be downstairs."
Now, let's look at the doors. Soon, I think we should be looking at... 426
I'm going to turn left to head east. I hope it's not far.
I am very tired. I must rest here for a moment, even though all the ores, all those that have been created, are pursuing us.

Gimli took his arm and helped him sit down on the
"What happened up there, near the door?" he asked. "Did you meet the drummer?"

"I don't know," replied Gandalf. "But I found myself..."
Suddenly confronted with something I had never encountered before.
I couldn't see any other option but to try and cast a locking spell on the door. I know plenty of them; but doing things like that This takes time, rightly so, and even then the door can break down by force.

As I stood there, I heard orcish voices from the other side: I had the feeling that at any moment they were going to blow it up. I coul My own language is awful. I only understood "ghask," which means "fire." Then something entered the room-I felt it through
The door, and the ores themselves, frightened, fell silent.
He seized the iron ring, then he perceived me and my spelling.

I couldn't say what it was, but I've never felt anything like it. The challenge. The counter-spell was terrible. It almost broke me. For a moment, the door slipped from my grasp and began to open!
An order had to be given. This proved too difficult.
A tension. The door exploded into pieces. Something dark, like a cloud, blocked all the light inside, and I was thrown backwards. The guards went down the stairs. The whole wall collapsed, and the roof of the room too, I think.

I'm afraid Balin is buried deep, and perhaps something else is buried there too. I couldn't say. But at least the passage behind us was It's over, but it'll pass. And you, Frodo?
I didn't have time to say it, but I've never been so
I was happier in my life than when you were speaking. I feared that was the case. A brave but dead hobbit that Aragorn carried with him "And what about me?" asked Frodo. "I'm alive and well. I think. I have bruises and I'm in pain, but it's not too serious."

427

"Well," said Aragorn, "I can only say that hobbits are made for this," said Aragorn. "of a material so hard I've never seen anything li If I had known, I would have spoken more gently at the inn in Bree! A spear thrust would have pierced a boar!

"Well, it didn't go through me, I'm glad to say," said Frodo; "I felt as if I were caught between a hammer and a hammer." An anvil. He added nothing. Breathing was painful for him.

"You look like Bilbo," said Gandalf. "There's more to it."
You are more complex than you seem, as I said of him a long time ago. Frodo. I wondered if that remark meant more than it implied.

They then continued on their way. Shortly after, Gimli spoke. He
He had keen eyesight in the dark. "I think," he said, "that there is a Light in the distance. But it's not daytime. It's red. What could it be?

"Ghash!" murmured Gandalf. "I wonder if that's what they..."
Does this mean the lower levels are on fire? Nevertheless, we can only... continue.

Soon, the light became unmistakable and could be seen by everyone. It sparkled and shone on the walls in the distance. passing in front of them. They could now see their way: ahead the road descended steeply, and a little further on there A low archway stood; the nascent light entered through it. The air became very hot.

Having arrived at the arch that Gandalf passed through, they signed.
He made them wait. As he stood just beyond the opening, they saw his face illuminated by a red glow. He immediately stepped back.

"There is some new diabolical plot here," he said, "designed for our..."
Welcome, no doubt. But I now know where we stand: we have reached the First Abyss, the level immediately below the Doors. This is the second hall of old Moria; and the doors are near: beyond the eastern end, on the left, no further
Less than a quarter of a mile. On the other side of the bridge, up a wide staircase, along a broad road, through the First Hall, and ou And look!

They glanced outside. Before them stretched another immense hall. It was taller and much longer than the one they had been in. They were asleep. They were near its eastern end; to the west, it was fleeing.


428

in the darkness. In the center stood a double row of towers. pillars. They were sculpted like majestic tree trunks, of which
Branches supported the roof, forming a network of stones with branching shapes.
Their stems were smooth and black, but a red glow was darkly reflected on their sides. Just opposite, on the ground, near the foot of t An intense red light burst forth, and from time to time, flames licked at the edges and curled around the bases of the columns. Swirls Wisps of black smoke floated in the hot air.

If we had come down the main road from the top, we would have been better off.
"We should have been trapped here in these corridors," said Gandalf. "We hope the fire now separates us from the pursuit. Come! There i

Even as he spoke, they heard again the rhythm of the drum pursuing them: Woe, woe, woe. Far away, beyond the shadows, to the west At the end of the corridor, cries and horn blasts resounded. Woe, woe... The pillars seemed to tremble and the flames to flicker.

"And now, the final race!" said Gandalf. "If the sun is shining..." Outside, we can still escape. After me!

He turned left and sprinted across the smooth hall floor. The distance was greater than it had seemed. As I ran, I heard the rhythm and A piercing scream rang out: they had been seen. There was a ringing sound and clash of blades. An arrow whistled over Frodo's head.

Boromir laughed. They weren't expecting that, he said.
The fire has cut them off from the world. We're on the wrong side!
"Look ahead!" cried Gandalf. "The bridge is near. Dangerous and narrow." Suddenly, Frodo saw a black chasm before him. At the end
In the hall, the floor disappeared and sank to an unknown depth. The outer door was accessible only by a narrow bridge.
a stone, without edge or railing, spanning the chasm in a single sweep. A curved spring fifty feet long. It was an ancient defense of t The dwarves defended themselves against any enemy that might seize the First Hall and the outer passages. They could only cross it in In single file. At the edge of the precipice, Gandalf stopped and the others arrived, bringing up the rear.


429

"Gimli, lead the way!" he said. "Pippin and Merry next." Straight ahead, and go up the stairs behind the door!

Arrows fell among them. One struck Frodo and bounced back. Another pierced Gandalf's hat and stuck to it like a black feather. Frodo lo Swarming black figures: there seemed to be hundreds of ores. They brandished spears and scimitars that shone a brilliant red.
Blood by the light of the fire. Misfortune, misfortune, the drums resounded. It's getting worse and worse, oh dear, oh dear.
Legolas turned around and placed an arrow on the string, although

It was a risky shot with his small bow. He drew the bow, but his hand fell back. And the arrow slid to the ground. He let out a cry of and fear. Two large trolls appeared; they carried large stone slabs, and threw them down to serve as walkways over the
The fire. But it wasn't the trolls that had terrified the elf. The rows of ore had opened up, and they were crowding into them.
As if they themselves were afraid. Something was brewing behind them. They couldn't see what it was: it was like a great shadow, in the Perhaps human in form, but even greater; and a power and a terror seemed to be part of it and to precede it.

She approached the edge of the fire and the light faded as if a cloud had leaned over it. Then, with a leap, he crossed the crack. The flames roared to welcome her and curled around her; and black smoke swirled in the air. Her flowing mane
It lit up and blazed behind her. In her right hand was a blade.
like a sharp tongue of fire; in her left hand, she held a whip with many branches. flip-flops. Ouch! Ouch! groaned Legolas. A Balrog! A Balrog has arrived!
Gimli stared at him, his eyes wide. "Durin's bane!" he cried. Dropping his axe, he covered his face.

"A Balrog," murmured Gandalf. "Now I understand."
He staggered and leaned heavily on his staff. What a bad omen! And I'm already tired.

The dark figure, ablaze with flames, rushed towards them. The ores screamed and poured onto the stone walkways.


430





Boromir raised his horn and blew. The challenge resounded loudly and bellowed, like the cry of many throats beneath the cavernous roof. For a moment, the ores trembled and the fire
The shadow froze. Then the echoes died away as suddenly as a flame. Driven back by a dark wind, the enemy advanced again.

"Over the bridge!" cried Gandalf, regaining his strength.
Flee! This enemy is more formidable than all of you. I must hold the narrow passage. Forward! Flee! Aragorn and Boromir disobeyed the o But they remained in their positions, side by side, behind Gandalf at the end of the bridge. The others stopped just inside the
They found themselves at the door at the end of the corridor and turned around, unable to leave their home. A leader facing the enemy a

The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf was standing there.
In the middle of his wingspan, leaning on the staff in his left hand, but in his other hand, Glamdring shone, cold and white.
The enemy stopped again, facing him, and the shadow that surrounded him spread out like two immense wings. She raised the whip, and the The straps creaked and crunched. Fire came out of his nostrils. But Gandalf remained steadfast.

"You cannot pass," he said. The ores remained motionless, and a dead man... Silence fell again. I am a servant of the Secret Fire, bear Flame of Anor. You cannot pass. The dark fire will be of no use to you. You, flame of Udun, return to the Shadow! You cannot!
pass.

The Balrog did not answer. The fire that animated it seemed to die out, but the darkness intensified. It advanced slowly onto the bridg His wings were spread from wall to wall; but Gandalf was still there. He could be seen, glittering in the darkness; he looked small, and completely alone: grey and bent, like a stunted tree before the arrival of a storm.

Emerging from the shadows, a blazing red sword flashed forth. Glamdring glittered white in response.
There was a resounding crash and a burst of white fire. Balrog recoiled, and his sword flew into incandescent fragments. The magician staggered on the bridge, took a step back, and then remained motionless.


THE ICHAZAD-DOUM BRIDGE


431


"You cannot pass!" he said.

With a bound, the Balrog leaped full length onto the bridge. The whip whirled and whistled.

"He can't stay alone!" Aragorn suddenly cried before running back along the bridge. "Elendil!" he shouted. "I'm with you." Gandalf!

"Gondor!" cried Boromir, leaping after him.

At that moment, Gandalf raised his staff and, shouting, struck the bridge in front of him. The staff broke and
It slipped from his grasp. A sheet of blinding white flames erupted. The bridge cracked. It collapsed right at the Balrog's feet.
and the stone on which it rested collapsed into the gulf, while the rest remained motionless, frozen, trembling like a tongue of rock. hurled into the void.

With a terrible cry, the Balrog collapsed, and its shadow
She dove and disappeared. But even as she fell, she swung her whip, and the thongs wound and whipped around the sorcerer's knees pulled

He tried in vain to grab onto the stone and slipped into the abyss. Run away! "Fools!" he cried, and he disappeared.

The fires went out and total darkness descended. The Company remained frozen in horror, staring into the abyss. Even Aragorn Boromir flew back, the rest of the bridge cracked and fell. Aragorn woke them with a shout.

"Come! I'll guide you!" he cried. "We must obey him. Last command. Follow me!"

They staggered up the great staircase behind the door, Aragorn in the lead, Boromir at the rear. At the top was a wide, echoing passage He was crying as he ran. Woe, woe, woe, the drums were beating. Behind him, now melancholy and slow; fate!

They kept running. The light grew brighter before them; great beams of light pierced the roof. They ran faster. They entered a hall, ba


432
And suddenly, before them opened the Great Gates, an arch of brilliant light. There was a mineral guard lurking in the shadows behind
The imposing doorposts stood on either side, but the doors themselves were shattered and thrown to the ground. Aragorn struck them down The captain who stood in his way was killed, and the others fled in terror. The Company rushed past them and took no action.
Watch out for them. They ran out of the gates and jumped to the ground. The immense, time-worn steps, the threshold of Moria. Thus, finally, they arrived beyond all hope under the sky and they felt the wind on their faces.
They only stopped when they had no more arrows to shoot. Dimrill Dale stretched around the walls. The shadow of the Misty
Mountains stretched above, but to the east a golden light shone upon the earth. It was barely one o'clock in the afternoon. The sun was The sky was radiant; the clouds were white and high.

They turned around. The archway of the Gates opened wide in the darkness. In the shadow of the mountain. Weak and deep beneath the eart The slow drumbeats resonated: destiny. A thin black smoke rose outside. Nothing else was visible; the valley all around was
Empty. Despair. Grief finally overwhelmed them, and they
They wept for a long time: some remained standing and silent, others gave themselves over to contemplation. Woe, woe. The drumbeats fad


6





Alas! I fear we cannot stay here much longer, said Aragorn. He looked at the mountains and raised his sword. Fare
"Well, Gandalf!" he cried. "Didn't I tell you: if you pass through the Gates of Moria, beware! Alas, I spoke truly! What hope! What wou

He turned to the Company. We must do without hope.
"At least we can still be avenged," he said. "Let's prepare ourselves."
And don't cry anymore! Come! The road is long, and there is still much to do!

They stood up and looked around. The valley stretched northward to a shaded valley between two large branches of the mountains, above which shone three white peaks:
Celebdil, Fanuidhol, Caradhras, the mountains of Moria. HAS
At the bottom of the valley, a torrent flowed like white lace.
an endless ladder of small falls, and a mist of foam suspended in the air around the feet of the mountains.
"Over there is Dimrill's Staircase," said Aragorn, pointing to the spot. Falls. We should have come down the deep, cleft path that clim Or Caradhras, less cruel, said Gimli. There he is.
Smiling in the sun! He raised his fist towards the furthest of the snow-capped peaks, then turned away.

To the east, the extended arm of the mountains stretched as far as
a sudden end, and distant lands could be seen beyond them, vast and indistinct. To the south, the Misty Mountains receded. As far as the eye can see. Less than a kilometer away,
and a little below them, for they were still standing on high ground. To the west of the valley, there was a pond. It was long and oval the valley; but its southern end lay beyond the shadows beneath the


434





Sunny sky. Yet its waters were dark: a deep blue like clear water. The evening sky, seen from a room lit by a lamp, was still. imperturbable. Around it, a smooth lawn stretched out, covering all sides to its bare and untouched edge.

There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled-zaram! he said
Gimli, sadly. I remember him saying, "May you have the joy of

What a view! But we cannot linger there. Now, how long shall I stay? Before I find joy again, I must leave as quickly as possible. It i

The Company then set off along the road that led from the gates.
It was a rough, rutted path, transforming into a winding track between heather and moans that erupted among the creaking stones. But One could nevertheless see that long ago, a great paved road had existed, winding its way up from the lowlands to the kingdom of the dw In places, there were ruined stone structures along the path, and mounds of greenery topped with slender birch or fir trees.
Sighing in the wind. A turn to the east brought them close to the Mirrormere lawn, and there not far from the roadside A solitary column stood, broken at its top.
"It's Durin's Stone!" cried Gimli. "I can't pass without..." turning away for a moment to admire the splendor of the valley! "Then hurry up!" said Aragorn, turning back to the
Gates. The sun sets early. The ores may not come.
We stay outside until after dusk, but we must be far away before nightfall. The moon is almost set, and it will be dark tonight.

"Come with me, Frodo!" cried the dwarf, leaping out of... the road. "I wouldn't want you to leave without seeing Kheled."
Zaram. He ran down the long, green slope. Frodo followed him. Slowly, drawn by the blue, calm water despite the pain and fatigue; Sam a

Near the standing stone, Gimli stopped and looked up.
It was cracked and weathered, and the barely visible runes on its side were illegible. This pillar marks the spot where Durin looked first into the Mirror-mother, said the dwarf. Let's go. Let's look at ourselves one last time, and off we go!

They leaned over the dark water. At first, they could see.





435


Nothing. Then, slowly, they made out the shapes of the encirclement.
The mountains were reflected in a deep blue, and the peaks were like plumes of white flames above them; beyond there was a
The expanse of the sky. There, like jewels sunk in the depths, shone with a sparkling brilliance, stars, even though the sun shone brig The curved shapes cast no shadows.

"O Kheled-zaram, beautiful and wonderful!" said Gimli.
Durin's crown lay at rest until he awoke. Farewell! He bowed, turned away, and hurried back up the lawn to The road again.

"What did you see?" Pippin asked Sam, but Sam was too deep in thought to answer.

The road then forked south and descended rapidly, gushing between the arms of the valley. Somehow. Downstream from the lake, they disco "This is the source of the Silverlode," said Gimli. "Don't drink it! It's icy cold."
Soon, it transforms into a swift river and collects the waters of "Many other mountain streams," said Aragorn. "Our route."
Paths run alongside the road for many miles. For I will take you along the road that Gandalf chose, and I hope first to reach the woods where the Silverlode flows into the Great River - exit
Over there. They looked as he pointed, and before them they could see the stream leaping in the hollow of the valley. then running and moving away towards the lower lands, until it was lost in a golden mist.
"There lie the woods of Lothlórien!" said Legolas. "It is... the fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There is none like it." trees similar to the trees of this region. For in autumn their leaves do not fall, but turn to gold. Not before spring and the
New green shoots appear, then fall, and then the branches become laden with yellow flowers; and the forest floor is golden, and The roof is of gold, and its pillars are of silver, for the bark of
The trees are smooth and grey. Thus, our songs remain silent in the Black Forest.


436

Let's say. My heart would be happy if I were under the eaves of that wood, and it was springtime! "My heart will rejoice, even in winter," said Aragorn. But he is miles away. Let us hurry!
For a while, Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with the others; but Aragorn was leading them at a brisk pace.
And after a while, they fell behind schedule. They hadn't eaten anything. Since early morning, Sam's hut had been burning like a fire, His head was light. Despite the bright sun, the wind seemed... He shivered after the heat and darkness of Moria. Frodo
Each step seemed more painful to him and he had difficulty breathing.

Finally, Legolas turned around and, seeing them now far behind, addressed Aragorn. The others stopped, and Aragorn ran. He retraced his steps, calling Boromir to follow him.

"I'm sorry, Frodo!" he cried, full of concern. "So much has happened..." Something happened today, and we're in such a hurry that I for have spoken. We did nothing to relieve you, as we should have. Though all the ores of Moria coveted us. Come!

A little further on, there's a place where we can rest for a while. There, I'll do everything I can for you. Come, Boromir! We'll go Wear them.

Soon after, they discovered another stream flowing down from the west, and joined the hurried Silverlode in its rushing waters. Togethe of greenish-tinted stone, and foamed as it descended into a valley. By the way, it was bordered by short, bent fir trees, and its sides and covered with hound's-tongue and bilberry bushes. Below was a flat space through which the
The stream flowed noisily over glistening pebbles. That's where they rested. It was almost three o'clock in the afternoon, and they had Just a few kilometers from the gates. The sun was already up. To the west.

While Gimli and the two young hobbits lit a fire
Aragorn, feeding on brushwood and fir trees, drew water and tended to Sam and Frodo. Sam's wound was not deep, but it was awful.


437
Aragorn's face was grave as he examined it. After a moment, he looked up in relief. Good luck, Sam! he said. Many have received worse than
This is payment for the extraction of their first ore. The share is
not poisoned, as is too often the case with injuries caused by ore blades.
It should heal well if I take care of it. I'll bathe it when Gimli has some warm water.

He opened his purse and took out some withered leaves.
They are dry, and some of their power has dissipated, he said. But I still have a few athelas leaves that I gathered near Weathertop. C Frodo!

"I'm fine," said Frodo reluctantly, removing his clothes. I was touched. All I needed was to eat and rest a little.

"No!" said Aragorn. "We must go and see what's going on." The hammer and anvil did you so much harm. I'm still amazed.

that you were still alive. Gently, he undressed Frodo.
An old jacket and a worn tunic, and she let out a sigh of surprise. Then he laughed. The silver corset glittered before him. Eyes like light on a rippling sea. He took it carefully.
He took it off and brandished it, and the precious stones that adorned it glittered like stars, and the sound of the shaking rings rese pool.

"Look, my friends!" he cried. "Here's a fine hobbit skin, perfect for wrapping an elf prince! If only people knew that hobbits If all the hunters of Middle-earth possessed such pelts, they would be... On their way to the Shire.

And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would be
"That would be pointless," said Gimli, gazing at the letter in wonder. "It's a..." Mithril coat of arms. Mithril! I've never seen or he So beautiful. Is this the cloak Gandalf spoke of? Then he... I underestimated it. But it was generously given!

I've often wondered what you and Bilbo were up to, so
"Shut her in her little room," said Merry. "God bless the old hobbit!" I love him more than ever. I hope we'll have a chance to say so. Talk to him about it!


438





Frodo had a dark, blackened bruise on his right leg.
Side and chest. Under the chainmail, there was a soft fabric shirt. Leather, but at some point, the rings had pierced it. in the flesh. Frodo's left side was also cut and bruised, where he had been thrown against the wall. While the others
After preparing the meal, Aragorn washed the wounds with water in which the athelas had been soaked. The acrid scent filled the And all those who leaned over the steaming water could feel it. Invigorated and strengthened, Frodo soon felt the pain fade away. his breathing became easier, although he was stiff and sore
to the touch for several days. Aragorn made soft cushions from a piece of fabric at his side.

The mail is remarkably light, he said. Put it back in its place, if you can bear it. My heart is glad to know you have it
Such a cloak. Do not put it down, even to sleep, unless fortune smiles upon you. It will bring you to where you are safe for a time; an

After eating, the Company prepared to leave again.
They extinguished the fire and erased all traces of it. Then, having left the valley, they resumed their climb. They hadn't left. Long before the sun sets behind the western heights and the great
Shadows descended slowly down the mountainside. Twilight enveloped them in a veil. The mist rose in the hollows. Far away, to the east, The evening light reflected palely on the dark lands of the distant plain and the woods. Sam and Frodo now felt calm and greatly reliev Once rested, they were able to proceed at a reasonable pace, and with only one
brief interruption. Aragorn led the Company for nearly three more days. hours.

It was dark. Night had fallen. There were many bright things.
The stars were visible, but the moon, which was rapidly waning, would not be visible until late at night.

Gimli and Frodo were at the rear, walking slowly and not
While talking, while listening to every little noise on the road behind them, Gimli broke the silence.

"All we hear is the wind," he said. "There are no goblins near me, or else my ears are made of wood. Let's hope Ores is content to driv





439

That was their sole purpose, and they had nothing else to do.
with us-with the Ring. Though the Ores often pursue their enemies for several leagues across the plain, if they have a fallen captain to avenge.

Frodo did not reply. He looked at Sting, then at the blade.
was dull. Yet he had heard something, or at least he thought he had. As soon as the shadows had fallen around them and the road
Behind him, darkness reigned; he heard the rapid sound of footsteps again. He heard it once more. He turned around abruptly. There were Tiny glimmers of light behind him, or for a moment he thought he saw them, but they immediately slipped away and disappeared.

"What is it?" asked the dwarf.
"I don't know," replied Frodo. "I thought I heard footsteps. And I thought I saw a light, like eyes. I've thought it often, ever since Gimli stopped and lowered himself to the ground. I can't hear anything.
But the nocturnal language of plants and stones, he said. Come! Let go! Hurry! The others are out of sight.

The night wind blew an icy chill that rose up the valley to greet them. A large gray shadow loomed before them, and they heard a The incessant rustling of leaves, like that of poplars in the breeze.

Lothlórien! cried Legolas. Lothlórien! We have come to the eaves of the Golden Wood. Alas, it is winter!

Under the night sky, the trees stood proudly before them, arched over the road and the stream that suddenly flowed beneath them.
Their branches stretched out. In the faint starlight, their stems
were grey, and their trembling leaves had a golden tint, like those of fallow land.

Lothlorien! said Aragorn. What a pleasure to hear the
Wind in the trees! We are still barely more than five leagues from the gates, but we cannot go any further. Let us hope here. that the virtue of the Elves will preserve us tonight from the peril that lies behind.

"If elves still live here, in this darkening world," said Gimli.

It has been a long time since one of my own folics has traveled this far back to the land from which we came centuries ago.


440





said Legolas, but we hear that Lórien is not yet deserted, for there is a secret force here that prevents evil from existing. land. However, its inhabitants are rarely seen, and perhaps they now live deep in the woods, far from the north.
border.

"They truly live deep in the forest," said Aragorn, and
He sighed, as if a memory were stirring within him. We must defend ourselves tonight. We'll advance a little, until The trees surround us all, and then we will turn away from the path and look for a place to rest.

He stepped forward; but Boromir remained undecided and did nothing.
Don't follow me. Isn't there another way? he said. What other, more just path would you prefer? asked Aragorn. A simple path, though it crossed a hedge of swords,
said Boromir. This Company has been led down strange paths,
And so, bad luck caught up with us. Against my will, we passed under the shadows of Moria, much to our regret. And now we must enter the

Golden wood, you say. But from this perilous land, we have
It was heard in Gondor, and it is said that few return who once went there. They entered; and among those few, none came out unscathed.

Say not unharmed, but if you say unchanged, then perhaps Thou art telling the truth, said Aragorn. But tradition is fading. Gondor, Boromir, if you find yourself in the city of those who were once wise, they now slander Lothlórien. Believe what you will. There is no other solution for us, unless you return to the Gate of Moria, or climb the mountains without a path, or swim
The Great River, all alone.

"Then, let's go!" said Boromir. "But it's dangerous."

Perilous indeed, said Aragorn, beautiful and perilous; but only let the wicked fear it, or those who carry evil within them.

Follow me!

They had only traveled a little over a kilometer through the forest when they discovered another stream that had been flowing swiftly s the wooded slopes that rose westward towards the
They heard it lapping over a distant waterfall, among the mountains. They heard it splashing in the distance, among the mountains, the


44 1
the path ahead of them, and joined the Silverlode in a whirlpool of dark pools among the roots of the trees. "Here is Nimrodel!" said Legolas. "From this stream, the Silvan..."
The elves composed many songs long ago, and we still sing them today. The North, remembering the rainbow over its falls, and the Golden flowers floated in its foam. Everything is dark now, and the Nimrodel Bridge is destroyed. I'm going to wash my feet.
For it is said that water is beneficial to the weary. He went forward, descended the deeply cleft bank, and took a step into the stream

"Follow me!" he cried. "The water isn't deep. Let's walk across. Opposite! On the other bank, we can rest, and the sound of The waterfall can bring us sleep and oblivion. Sorrow.

One by one, they went down and followed Legolas.
For a moment, Frodo stood near the edge and let the water flow. on his tired feet. It was cold, but the touch was pure, and like
He continued and the pain rose to his knees; he felt that the stain, the traces of the journey, and all the fatigue had disappeared fro

When the whole Company had crossed, they sat down and rested, and ate a little; and Legolas told them stories of Lothlórien that the El Before the world turned grey.

Finally, silence fell and they heard the music of Frodo. A waterfall flows gently in the shadows. Almost. He thought he heard a voice singing, mixed with the sound of the water.

"Do you hear Nimrodel's voice?" asked Legolas. "I will..."
I will sing you a song about young Nimrodel, who bore the same name. She is named after the stream near which she once lived. It is a b Westron's speech, as some in Rivendell now sing it. In a soft voice, barely audible amidst the rustling leaves
Above them, he began:


442





There once lived a young elf girl there, A bright star by day:
His white coat was trimmed with gold, his shoes silver-grey.

A star was stuck on her forehead, a light illuminated her hair. Like the sun on golden branches at the fair in Lorien.

Her hair was long, her limbs were white, and she was beautiful and free; And in the wind, she flew away like a light, like a linden leaf.
At the foot of the Nimrodel Falls, By the clear, cool water,
Her voice as the money fell into the glittering pool.

No one knows where she now wanders. In the sun or in the shade;
For the loss of old was Nimrodel, and he wandered off into the mountains. The elven ship in the grey harbor Beneath the mountain wind
I waited for her for many days by the edge of the raging sea.

A night wind in the northern lands. He rose and let out a loud cry, And he drove the ship from the elven shores across the current.




443

When dawn broke, the earth was lost. The mountains sank into the gray. Beyond the crashing waves that tossed their plumes of blinding spray.

Amroth gazed at the fading shoreline. Now low beyond the swell,

And he cursed the faithless ship that carried Him away from Nimrodel. He was once an elf king,
A lord of the trees and valleys,

When the branches were golden in springtime in fair Lothlórien.

From the rudder to the sea, they saw it leap, like an arrow released from the string. And dive into the deep water,

Like a meow on the wing.

The wind blew through her flowing hair, the foam that surrounded her shone; From afar, they saw him strong and handsome, riding like a swan.

But no news has come from the West, and on the opposite shore The elves heard nothing new. From Amroth forever.

Legolas's voice broke, and the song stopped. I cannot...
"I will sing no more," he said. "This is only part of it, because I have..."
It has been largely forgotten. It is long and sad, for it tells how sorrow came to Lothlórien, Lothlórien of the Flower, when the The dwarves have awakened evil in the mountains. But the dwarves did not create evil, said Gimli.
"I said no; yet misfortune has occurred," replied Legolas sadly.


444





Many elves of Nimrodel's line left their homes, and she departed, and she wandered far south, into the mountain passes.
of the White Mountains; and she did not come to the ship where Amroth, her lover, awaited her. But in the spring, when the
The wind blows through the young leaves, perhaps the echo of her voice still resonates, heard by the falls that bear her name. And when In the south, the voice of Amroth rises from the sea; for
Nimrodel flows into Silverlode, which the Elves call Celebrant, and Celebrant flows into the Great Anduin, and the Anduin flows into th Neither Nimrodel nor Amroth ever returned.

It is said that she had a house built in the branches of a tree that grew near the falls; for such was the custom of
The elves of Lorien, who dwell in the trees, and perhaps still do. That is why they were called the Galadhrim, the people of the trees. In the heart of their forest, the trees are very tall. The inhabitants of the woods did not burrow into the ground like the Dwarves, no

And even in these last days, living in the trees could
"You'd think it was safer than sitting on the ground," Gimli said. He looked across the stream at the road that led to Dimrill Dale, then up to the roof of dark branches above.

"Your words are good advice, Gimli," said Aragorn.
We cannot build a house, but tonight we will do as the Galadhrim did and seek refuge in the treetops, if we can. I have been sitting here by the side of the road for much longer than it was prudent.

The Company then left the road and went away.
in the shade of the deeper woods, westward along the Mountain Stream away from Silverlode. Not far from Nimrodel Falls, they found a gr They overlooked the stream. Their large grey trunks were of immense strength.
Their circumference could be estimated, but their size was impossible to guess.

"I'm going to climb," said Legolas. "I'm at home among the trees."
by the roots or the branches, although these trees are of a strange kind to me, except as a name in a song. They are called Mellyrn, an Those with yellow flowers, but I've never climbed them.

445

in one of them. I'm now going to see what their shape is and how they grow. Whatever it is, said Pippin, it will be wonderful. Trees, indeed, if they can offer any kind of rest at night, except to birds. I can't sleep on a perch!

"Dig a hole in the ground," said Legolas, "if that suits you better. In the manner of your kind. But you must dig quickly and deeply if On the ground, he grabbed a branch that grew from the trunk high above
above his head. But even as he swung there for a moment, a voice was suddenly heard from the shadows of the trees above him. "Daro!" he said imperiously, and Legolas dropped

He returned to earth, surprised and frightened. He curled up against the trunk of the tree. "Stay still!" he whispered to the others. "Don't move!"
Muffled laughter could be heard above their heads, and
Then another clear voice was heard in the Elvish tongue. Frodo
could understand very little of what was being said, because the discourse that the forest peoples east of the mountains used among the was different from that of the West. Legolas looked up and replied in the same language.*

"Who are they, and what are they saying?" asked Merry.
"They are elves," said Sam. "Can't you hear their voices?" "Yes, they are elves," said Legolas; "and they say that you Breathe so hard they could shoot you in the dark. Sam hurriedly brought his hand to his mouth. But they also say that
You have nothing to fear. They've known us for some time. For a long time. They heard my voice through the Nimrodel, and knew I was one They did not stop us from crossing; and then they heard my song. Now they order me to climb with Frodo; for it seems they have received They ask the others to wait a little while and keep an eye on things.
at the foot of the tree, until they decided what to do.




446

A ladder emerged from the shadows: it was made of
a rope, silvery-grey and glittering in the dark, and although this
Although she looked slender, she proved strong enough to support the weight of many men. Legolas approached with a light jog, and Frodo Sam arrived, trying not to breathe heavily. The branches of the mallorn tree grew almost straight from the trunk, and
then it rose; but near the top, the main stem split
in a crown of many branches, and among these they found that a wooden platform, or jiet, had been built.
That's what they called things back then: the Elves called it a talan. You accessed it through a round hole in the center, through whic The ladder has been crossed.

When Frodo finally arrived on the fleet, he found Legolas.
seated with three other elves. They were dressed in dark, grey clothing, and could not be seen among the tree trunks, except They moved suddenly. They stood up, and one of them
She discovered a small lamp that emitted a thin silver beam. He held it up, looking at Frodo's face and Sam's. Then he He turned off the light again and spoke words of welcome in his voice.
"Elvish," replied Frodo hesitantly. "Welcome!" said the elf again in the Common Tongue.

gauge, speaking slowly. We rarely use a language other than our own
We possess; for we now dwell in the heart of the forest, and we do not possess. We are ready to do business with anyone else. Even with Our relatives in the North are separated from us. But there is
Some of us continue to travel abroad to gather intelligence and monitor our enemies, and they speak the languages from other lands. I am one of them. Haldir is my name. My brothers, Rumil and Orophin, speak little of your language.

But we have heard rumors about your coming, for the disorder... Elrond's warriors passed through Lorien on their way back.
Dimrill's Staircase. We had never heard of hobbits... for many years, and we didn't know anyone still lived there. Middle-earth. You do Elf of our line, we are ready to become your friend, as Elronds have requested; though we do not usually guide strangers through Our la





447


"Eight," said Legolas. "Myself, four hobbits; and two men. One of them, Aragorn, is an elf, a friend of the folk of..." Westerness.

The name of Aragorn, son of Arathorn, is known in Lorien, said Haldir, and he is in the Lady's favor. All is well then. But you have on The eighth is a dwarf, said Legolas.
"A dwarf!" exclaimed Haldir. "That's not a good sign. We haven't had dealings with the dwarves since the Dark Days. They are He is not allowed to enter our territory. I cannot let him through.

But he comes from the Lonely Mountain, one of Dain's faithful.
"People were friendly to Elrond," said Frodo. "Elrond himself. We chose him to be one of our companions, and he was. Brave and faithful

The Elves spoke together in hushed voices and questioned Legolas in his own tongue. "Very well," said Haldir at last. We will do it, even if we dislike it. If Aragorn
And Legolas will protect him and answer for him, he will.
He will be able to pass; but he will have to cross Lothlórien blindfolded.

But there's no need to debate anymore. Your folic acid shouldn't... We're staying put. We're monitoring the situation. rivers, ever since we saw a large troop of Ores heading north towards Moria, at the foot of the mountains, for many days Some time ago, wolves howled at the edge of the woods. If you have indeed come from Moria, danger cannot be far away.
You have to leave early tomorrow.

The four hobbits will come up here and stay with us.
We're not afraid of them! There's another talan in the next one
Tree. That's where the others must take refuge. You, Legolas, you must... Answer us for them. Call us if there's a problem! Keep an eye on that dwarf!

Legolas immediately climbed down the ladder to take Haldir's message; and soon after Merry and Pippin climbed up They climbed onto the raft. They were out of breath and seemed rather frightened.

"There!" said Merry, out of breath. "We've assembled your


448

blankets, including ours. Strider hid everything else; our luggage buried under a thick carpet of dead leaves.

"You didn't need all these burdens," Haldir said. "It's cold." in the treetops in winter, although the wind is blowing tonight in the South; but we have enough to feed and quench your thirst that will make you want to drive. Once the night cold has dissipated, we have

The hobbits accepted this second (much better) supper.
very willingly. Then they wrapped themselves up warmly, not only
in the Elves' fur coats, but in their own blankets as well, they tried to fall asleep. But, tired as they were, they were only so tired Do not sleep upstairs, even if there are stairs.
The Flet room was completely unsuitable for them. It had no walls, not even a railing; there was only a thin screen on one side, which at the mercy of the wind.

Pippin continued talking for a while. I hope that if I go to
"I'm going to sleep in this bird loft, so I don't fall," he said.

"Once I'm asleep," Sam said, "I'll keep sleeping."
Whether I withdraw or not. And the less I talk about it, the sooner I'll withdraw. If you know what I mean...

Frodo stayed awake for a moment, and looked up at the stars. They twinkled through the pale roof of shimmering leaves. Sam was snoring I could vaguely make out the grey shapes of two elves sitting motionless, arms around their knees, speaking in hushed voices.
Another had gone down to take his turn on watch on one of the lower pontoons. Finally, rocked by the wind in the branches above, and To the gentle murmur of the Nimrodel Falls below, Frodo fell asleep, Legolas's song echoing in his head.

He woke up late in the night. The other hobbits were still asleep. The elves had left. The sickle-shaped moon shone faintly.
Among the leaves. The wind was calm. A little further on, he heard a raucous laugh and the sound of many footsteps on the ground. Below. There was a metal ring. The sounds slowly faded away. She moved away and seemed to head south, disappearing into the woods.





449


A head suddenly appeared through the hole in the shell.
Frodo sat up in alarm and saw that it was an elf with a grey hood. He looked towards the hobbits. "What is it?" asked Frodo.
"Yrch!" said the elf in a hissing whisper, and he launched himself onto the coiled rope ladder. "Ores!" cried Frodo. "What are they doing?" But the Elf had... disappeared.
There was no more noise. Even the leaves were silent.
and the falls themselves seemed silent. Frodo sat down and began to stab, wrapped in his bandages. He was grateful they hadn't been Trapped on the ground; but he sensed that the trees offered little protection, except concealment. The ores were as quick as dogs.
It was said that they relied on their sense of smell, but that they also knew how to climb. He drew Sting out: he shone and sparkled li slowly faded again and became dull. Despite the dimming of his sword, the feeling of immediate danger did not leave Frodo.
On the contrary, she grew stronger. He stood up and crawled to the opening, then looked down. He was almost certain he could hear furtive movements at the foot of the tree, far below.

Not elves; for the inhabitants of the woods were completely silent.

in their movements. Then he faintly heard a sound like sniffling; and something seemed to be scratching at the bark of the tree trunk. breath.

Something was slowly climbing, and its breath was rising.
like a faint hiss between clenched teeth. Then, going back up, near the stem, Frodo saw two pale eyes. They stopped.
And they looked up without blinking. Suddenly, they turned away, and a dark figure slipped around the tree trunk and disappeared.

Immediately afterwards, Haldir climbed quickly.
through the branches. There was something in that tree that

"I've never seen anything like it," he said. "It wasn't ore. It ran away."
As soon as I touched the tree trunk, it seemed to become wary, and
to have some skill with trees, otherwise I might have thought that was the case. was one of you, hobbits.


450





I didn't fire because I didn't dare provoke a shout: we can't have a battle of risks. A powerful mining company has been dismantled. They crossed the Nimrodel - cursed be their dirty feet in its clear waters!
- and they continued along the old road that ran alongside the river. They seemed to smell something and searched the ground.
For a while, near where you stopped. The three of us. Impossible to challenge a hundred, so we took the lead and spoke, with feigned vo

Orophin has now returned in haste to our homes to warn our people. None of the ores will ever return from Lorien. And many Elves will b The border before nightfall. But you must hit the road south as soon as it's fully light.

The day dawned pale in the east. As the light grew, it filtered through the yellow leaves of the mallorn, and it seemed
the hobbits that the morning sun of a fresh summer morning was bright. A pale blue sky could be glimpsed between the swaying branches. Frodo saw the whole valley of the Silver Mine stretched out like a sea of fallow gold, rippling gently in the breeze.

The morning was still young and cold when the Company
They set off again, this time guided by Haldir and his brother Rumil. Farewell, sweet Nimrodel! cried Legolas. Frodo turned around. and glimpsed a flash of white foam among the grey tree trunks.
"Goodbye," he said. It seemed to him that he never would.
to hear again such beautiful flowing water, forever mingling with its waters countless notes in a changing and infinite music.

They resumed the path that continued along the
on the west side of Silverlode, and they followed for some time southwards. There were orc footprints in the ground. But soon Haldir turned towards the woods and stopped on the riverbank, in their shade.

One of mine is over there, on the other side of the stream, he
he said, even if you might not see it. He made a call like a light bird's whistle, and from a thicket of young trees a Elf advanced, dressed in gray, but with his hood thrown back; her





451


Her hair shone like gold in the morning sun. Haldir skillfully threw a spool of gray rope over the stream, which he caught and tie the end around a tree near the skein.
"Celebrant is already a significant current here, as you can see," he said. Haldir, and its waters are both fast-flowing and deep, and We don't venture that far north unless absolutely necessary. But on these days of vigilance, we don't build bridges. Here's how
We're crossing! Follow me! He tied one end of the rope to about
another tree, then ran lightly along it, over the river and back again, as if he were on a road.
"I can take this path," said Legolas; "but the others have..." Not that skill. Do they have to swim? "No!" said Haldir. "We still have two ropes. We'll tie them together."
stacked one above the other, one at shoulder height and the other halfway up, and holding them, the strangers should be able to cross carefully.

Once this slender bridge was built, the Company
some crossed cautiously and slowly, others more easily. Among the hobbits, Pippin proved the best because he had a sure footing, and he He kept his eyes fixed on the bank ahead and didn't look down. Sam moved forward in small steps, clenching his fists tightly and lookin

He breathed a sigh of relief once he reached the other shore safe and sound. And learn! as my boss used to say. Although he thought
Gardening, not perching like a bird, nor trying to walk like a spider. Even my Uncle Andy never did anything like it.

When finally the entire Company was assembled in the east
On the banks of the Silverlode, the Elves untied the ropes and wound two of their own. Rumil, who had remained on the other side, He removed the last one, threw it over his shoulder, and, with a
His hand gesture faded, he returned to Nimrodel to stand guard.

Now, my friends, said Haldir, you have entered the Naith of Lorien, or the Gore, as you would say, for that is the land
which stands like a spearhead between the arms of Silverlode and Anduin the Great. We do not allow any foreigner to spy on the


452

The secrets of the Naith. Few are authorized to reveal them. (foot there)

As agreed, I will now blindfold Gimli.
Dwarf. The others may wander freely for a while, until our arrival. Closer to our dwellings, down at Egladil, in the angle between the waters.

Gimli was not at all happy about this. The agreement was
"Done without my consent," he said. "I will not walk blindfolded."
like a beggar or a prisoner. And I'm not a spy. My family never was. I've never had dealings with any of the Enemy's servants. Have we harmed the Elves? I am no more likely to betray you than Legolas, or any of my other companions.

"I have no doubt about you," said Hal. "Yet, such is our law. I am not master of the law and cannot set it aside. I have done a lot by allowing you to set foot on Celebrant.

Gimli was stubborn. He spread his feet firmly apart, and
He placed his hand on the handle of his axe. "I will go forward, free," he said, "or else I will return to my own land, where I I am known for my faithful word, even if I perish alone in the desert.
"You cannot go back," Haldir said sternly. "Now you..." To get here, you must be brought before the Lord and the Madam, they will judge you, to decide whether to keep you or let you go.
as they will. You can no longer cross the rivers, and behind
There are now secret sentinels there that you cannot cross. They would be killed before you even saw them.

Gimli took his axe from his belt. Haldir and his companion
They strung their bows. Woe to the Dwarves and their stiff necks! said Legolas.

"Come now!" said Aragorn. "If I must still lead this Company,
You must do as I command. It is difficult for the Dwarf to be like this.
We will all be kept apart. We will all be blindfolded, even Legolas. This would be the best solution, even if it makes the journey long

Gimli suddenly burst out laughing. A merry band of fools we're going to see! Look! Is Haldir going to lead us all astray, like so many Beggars with only one dog? But I'll be happy, if only for Legolas. These are the ones who share my blindness.


453
"I am an elf and a relative here," said Legolas, becoming angry in turn. Now let us shout: "A curse upon the stiff necks of the Elves!"
said Aragorn. But all members of the Company will be treated the same. Come, close our eyes, Haldir!

I will claim full compensation for every fall and every stubbed toe, if
"You're not leading us well," said Gimli as they tied a piece of cloth, referring to his eyes.

"You will have no rights," said Haldir. "I will guide you well." And the paths are smooth and straight.

"Alas for the madness of these times!" said Legolas. "There is everyone! Enemies of the one Enemy, and yet I must walk blindly, while t

"This may seem like madness," said Haldir. "In truth, nothing is as it seems..." the power of the Dark Lord shown more clearly than in A break that divides all those who still oppose him. Yet
We find so little faith and trust today in the world beyond Lothlórien, except perhaps in Rivendell, but we dare not think of it. Our own overconfidence puts our land at risk. We now live on an island, amidst many perils, and our hands are more often on the The bow string rather than on the harp.

The rivers have long protected us, but they are no longer an infallible protection. Moreover, the Shadow has spread northward all aroun There's talk of leaving, but it already seems too late.
The mountains to the west become malevolent; to the east, the lands
are desolate lands, and full of creatures of Sauron; and the rumor goes
that we can no longer safely cross Rohan to the south, and the mouths of the Great River are being watched by the Enemy.
Even if we could reach the sea shores, we would have to... There's no shelter to be found there anymore. Apparently, there are still so havens of the High Elves, but they are located far to the north and west, beyond the land of the Hobbits. But wherever they may be,
The Lord and Lady may know, but I do not.

"You should at least try to guess, since you've seen us," he said. Cheerful. "There are elven havens west of my lands, the Shire," Where the Hobbits live.

Happy are the Hobbits to live near the shores of the


454

"Sea!" said Haldir. "It's been a long time since mine..."
We saw it, and yet we still remember it in song. Tell me about those havens of peace along our path.
"I can't," said Merry. "I've never seen them."
I had never left my country before. And if I had known...
I don't think I should have known what the outside world was like. I had the heart to leave it.

Not even to see beautiful Lothlórien? said Haldir. The world is indeed full of perils, and it contains many dark places;
But there are still many things that are right, and although love is present in all countries, now mingled with sorrow, it is all the g

Some among us sing that the Shadow will be
Back down, and peace will return. Yet, I don't believe it. that the world around us will never be the same again, or Sunlight as it once was. For the Elves, I fear,
At best, it will be a truce, during which they can move on to the next stage. With the sea free and unhindered, leave Middle-earth fore Lothlorien, which I adore! It would be a miserable life in a land where no mallorn grew. But if there are mallorns beyond the
The Great Sea, nobody reported it.

As they spoke, the Company slowly marched along the
Haldir led the way along paths through the woods, while the other elves continued behind. They felt the ground beneath their feet smoot gentle, and after a while they walked more freely, without fear of hurting themselves or falling. Deprived of his sight, Frodo found hi His hearing and other senses sharpened. He could smell the trees and the trampled grass. He could hear many different notes.
In the rustling of leaves above our heads, the murmur of the river in the distance to his right, and the clear, faint voices of birds h crossed a clearing.

As soon as he set foot on the opposite bank of Silverlode,
A strange sensation had invaded him, and it intensified as he entered the Naith: it seemed to him that he had crossed a temporal bridge and entered a corner of the Ancient
Days later, she walked in a world that no longer existed. In Rivendell, only the memory of old things remained; in Lorien,





455


Ancient things still remained in the waking world. Evil had been seen and heard there; the Elves
They feared and distrusted the outside world: wolves howled at the edge of the woods, but on the lands of Lorien, no shadows to set down.

All day long, the Company continued to march, until it felt the
The evening coolness arrived, and I heard the whisper of the early night wind amidst many leaves. Then they rested and slept without fe Their eyes were opened, and they could not climb. In the morning they resumed their walk, without haste. At noon, they
They stopped, and Frodo realized that they had fainted in the bright sunlight. Suddenly, he heard many voices. all around him.

An army of Elves on the march had silently approached: they were hastening towards the northern borders to guard against any attack fro Haldir gave his report. The looted ore convoys had been intercepted and almost entirely destroyed; the survivors had fled west into the He had also been seen running with his back bent and his hands clasped.
close to the ground, like a beast, and yet without having the appearance of a beast. It had escaped capture, and they had not killed it Haldir added that they were bringing me a message from the Lord.
and Lady of the Galadhrim. You are all free, even
Gimli the dwarf. It would seem the Lady knows who and what. Every member of your company is receiving new messages. From Rivendell, per

He first removed the bandage from Gimli's eyes.
"Excuse me!" he said, bowing deeply. "Now look at us with kindness."
Eyes! Look and rejoice, for you are the first dwarf to behold the trees of the Naith of Lorien since the day of Durin! When his eyes were uncovered in turn, Frodo looked up. He caught his breath. They were in an open space.

456

To the left stood a large mound, covered with grass Grass as green as the spring of olden times. Inside, as
a double crown, two circles of trees grew: the outer one had snow-white bark, and were leafless but magnificent in their a harmonious nakedness; within, tall, large-fruited trees, still adorned with pale gold. High among the branches of
A huge tree stood at the center of it all, and a white arrow shone brightly. At the foot of the trees, and all around the green The hillsides were dotted with small, golden, star-shaped flowers. Among them, drooping at the ends of slender stems,
There were other flowers, white and very pale green: they shimmered like mist amidst the rich hue of the grass. The sky was everywhere

"There you are! You have arrived in Cerin Amroth," said Haldir. "This is the heart of the ancient kingdom as it once was, and This is the mound of Amroth, where, in happier times, his high house was built. Here the winter flowers still bloom.
The grass that never fades: the yellow eland and the pale niphredil. Here we will stay a while, then we will come to the city of the Ga

The others collapsed onto the fragrant grass,
But Frodo remained motionless for a moment, lost in wonder. It seemed to him... that he had passed through a high window overlooking a vanished world. A light shone upon it, for which its language
had no name. Everything he saw was well-defined, but the forms seemed immediately clear, as if they had been conceived from the beginni They had lasted forever. He saw no colors except those he knew: gold, white, blue, and green, but they were fresh
and poignant, as if he had perceived them for the first time at that moment and given them new and wonderful names. In winter Here, no heart could weep for summer or spring.
Imperfections, diseases, or deformities could be observed in anything that grew on the earth. In the lands of Lorien, there were no stains.





457


He turned around and saw that Sam was now standing next to him, looking around with a puzzled expression, and rubbing himself
His eyes seemed to indicate that he wasn't sure he was awake. "It's sunlight, and a beautiful day, that's right," he said. "I thought e We were all for the moon and the stars: but this is more elven than
Everything I've ever heard told. I feel like I'm inside a song, if you know what I mean.

Haldir looked at them, and he seemed to make up his mind. He understood the meaning of the thought and the word. He smiled. You feel th "The power of the Lady of the Galadhrim," he said.

Would you like to climb with me to the summit of Cerin Amroth?

They followed him as he climbed gently up the grassy slopes. Though he walked and breathed, and around him life-the leaves and flowers- Frodo fanned his face; he felt as if he were in a timeless land. It had not disappeared, nor changed, nor sunk into oblivion. When he Frodo had left again and returned to the outside world, the wanderer from the Shire still walking there on the grass.
among Elanor and Niphredil in beautiful Lothlorien.

They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so,
The south wind blew over Cerin Amroth and sighed among the
branches. Frodo remained motionless, hearing in the distance the great seas on beaches that had long since disappeared, and seabirds cr

Haldir had continued on his way and was now climbing towards the upper fleet.
As Frodo was about to follow him, he placed his hand on the
tree near the ladder: never before had he been so suddenly, and therefore so sensitive, to the touch and texture of a tree's bark and the life it holds. He felt great joy for the wood and for touching it, neither as a forester nor as a carpenter; it was the the delight of the living tree itself.

As he finally stepped onto the high platform, Haldir took his hand and turned him to face south. "Look at this. First of all!" he said.

Frodo looked and saw, still some distance away, a hill with many peaks, majestic trees, or a city of green towers: which was it, he cou Don't say it. It seemed to him that power and light were excluded from it.


458





Then came the one who ruled the whole country. He suddenly felt the urge to
He flew like a bird to rest in the verdant city. Then he looked eastward and saw all the land of Lorien stretching to the Pale He raised his eyes towards the Anduin, the Great River.
The river and all the light went out, and he found himself once again in the world he knew. Beyond the river, the land seemed flat. and empty, formless and vague, until it reappears in the distance.
Like a wall, dark and gloomy. The sun setting over Lothlórien had no power to illuminate the shadow of that distant height.

There lies the refuge of the Southern Black Forest, said
Haldir. It is covered with a dark fir forest, where the trees strain against one another, their branches rotting and drying out. In the The hidden enemy had its lair. We fear it is now... inhabited again, and with seven times the power. A dark cloud hangs over it.
It's been talked about a lot lately. From this high place, you can see the two powers opposing each other; and they are always fighting

now in thought, but while the light perceives the very heart of darkness, its own secret has not been discovered. However. He turned around and got out quickly, and they followed him.

At the foot of the hill, Frodo found Aragorn, motionless and
Silent as a tree; but in his hand was a small golden Elanor flower, and a gleam shone in his eyes. He was enveloped in a beautiful memory: and as Frodo looked at him, he knew that he
They gazed at things as they had once been in that place. The dark years had faded from Aragorn's face, and
He seemed to be dressed in white, a tall and handsome young lord; and he addressed words in the Elvish tongue to the one whom Frodo cou He took a breath, then, coming out of his thoughts, he looked at Frodo and smiled.

"This is the heart of the elven world on earth," he said, "and here" My heart remains forever, unless there is a light beyond the darkness.

Roads we still have to travel, you and I. Come with me! And taking Frodo's hand in his own, he left the hill of Cerin Amroth and never


7





The sun was setting behind the mountains and the shadows
They were heading deeper into the woods when they resumed their journey.
Their paths now led into thickets where twilight had settled. They were already gathered. Night fell beneath the trees as they They stepped forward, and the Elves unveiled their silver lamps.

Suddenly, they came back out into the open and found
themselves under a pale evening sky, pricked by a few morning glimmers of stars. Before them stretched a vast, treeless expanse, runnin It was a deep ditch lost in soft shade, but the grass on its edge was green, as if it still shone in memory of the sun.
which had disappeared. On the other side rose a large
a green wall encircling a verdant hill teeming with people
Mallorns larger than any they had ever seen anywhere in the world. Their size was impossible to guess, but they stood upright.
They rose in the twilight, like living towers. In their multiple tiers of branches, and among their perpetually moving leaves, countles They were sparkling, green, gold, and silver. Haldir turned back to the Society.

"Welcome to Caras Galadhon!" he said. "This is the city of the Galadhrim where Lord Celeborn and Galadriel reside
The Lady of Lorien. But we cannot enter here, for the gates do not face north. We must go around to the south, to the side, and the way

There was a road paved with white stones that ran alongside the
outer edge of the ditch. They headed west along it, with the city rising steadily like a green cloud on their left;
And as the night deepened, more lights appeared, until the whole hill seemed ablaze with stars. They finally arrived at a white place.


460

bridge, and on the way, we found the great gates of the city: they were oriented southwest, situated between the ends of the city wall. which overlapped here, and they were tall and strong, and hung with many lamps.

Haldir knocked and spoke, and the doors opened wide.
less; but Frodo saw no sign of guards. The travelers entered and the doors closed behind them. They were at
a deep alley between the ends of the wall, and passing quickly Through it, they entered the City of Trees. No one could They neither saw nor heard any footsteps on the paths; but there were
Many voices, around them, and in the air above. Very far away, up there. On the hill, they could hear the sound of songs descending fro

They took many paths and climbed many staircases,
until they reach the high places and see before them in the middle
A vast lawn, a sparkling fountain. All lit by silver lamps. She was swinging from the tree branches, and she fell into a basin. of silver, from which sprang a white stream. To the south
On the lawn side stood the most majestic of all the trees;
The large, smooth trunk gleamed like grey silk, and it rose to an imposing height, until its first branches, very high up, unfurled the beneath clouds shaded by leaves. Beside it, a large white patch. A ladder stood, and at its foot sat three elves.
Stars appeared as the travelers approached, and Frodo saw that
They were tall and dressed in grey chainmail, and from their shoulders long white cloaks hung. "Flowers remain Celeborn and Galadriel," said Flaldir. "It's their..."
I would like you to come up and talk to them.

One of the elven guardians then blew a clear note on a small horn. A horn sounded, and he was answered three times from above. I will "Go first," said Haldir. "Let Frodo come next, and with him..." Legolas. The others may follow if they wish. It is a long way.
Climbing these stairs can be difficult for those who are not used to it, but... You can rest along the way.

As he climbed slowly, Frodo passed many islets: some on one side, some on the other, and still others around the trunk.

461

of the tree, so that the ladder passed between them. At a great
At a certain height above the ground, he reached a broad slope, like the deck of a large ship. A house so large that almost, it would have served as the men's room on the
earth. He entered behind Haldir and found himself in an oval-shaped chamber, in the middle of which grew the trunk of the great mallorn, which now tapers towards its summit, and yet still forms a pillar of wide circumference.

The room was bathed in soft light; its walls were
Green and silver, with a golden roof. Many elves were sitting there. On two chairs beneath the tree trunk and canopy.
At the foot of a living branch, Celeborn and Galadriel sat side by side. They rose to greet their guests, following the Elven ways, eve kings. They were very tall, and the Lady was no less tall than the kings.
Lord; and they were dignified and handsome. They were dressed
She was entirely dressed in white; and the Lady's hair was a deep gold, and Lord Celeborn's hair was long and silver.
brilliant; but there was no sign of aging in them, except perhaps the depth of their eyes; for these were piercing like spears in the Starlight, and yet profound, the sources of deep memory.

Haldir had Frodo go ahead of them, and the Lord welcomed him in his own tongue. Lady Galadriel said not a word, but He gazed at her face for a long time.

"Now sit down beside my chair, Frodo of the Shire!" said Celenés. "When we have all come, we will talk together."

He greeted each of his companions courteously, calling them by name. As they entered, he said, "Welcome, Aragorn, son of Arathorn!" It has been thirty-eight years since you left the outside world. You came to this earth; and these years weigh heavily on you. But the The end is near, for better or for worse. Lay your burden down here for a moment. While!

Welcome, son of Thranduil! My relatives make this journey far too rarely. From the North.

Welcome, Gimli, son of Gloin! It has been a long time since we... I saw one of Durin's people at Caras Galadhon. But today, we have bro


462

The world is dark, but better days are coming, and this friendship... "Peace between our peoples will be renewed." Gimli bowed deeply.

When all the guests were seated before his throne, the Lord looked at them again. "Here are eight," he said. "Nine," the messages said, There has been a change of lawyer of which we were unaware. Elrond is far away, and darkness spreads between us, and all this year
The shadows lengthened.

No, there has been no change of lawyer, said Lady Galadriel, speaking for the first time. Her voice was clear and
Musical, but deeper than what women are used to doing. Gandalf the Grey left with the Company, but he did not cross the borders. of this country. Now tell us where he is; for I have longed to know.

I want to talk to him again. But I can't see him from a distance, unless...
He crossed the borders of Lothlórien: a grey mist was about to form. He, and the paths of his steps and his mind, were hidden. From me.

"Alas!" said Aragorn. Gandalf the Grey vanished into the shadows. He remained in Moria and did not escape.

At these words, all the elves present in the room cried out in pain and astonishment. "This is bad news," said Celeborn, the the worst horrors that have been uttered here for many long years filled with heinous acts. He turned to Haldir. Why nothing "Has anyone told me that before?" he asked in the Elvish language.

We did not speak to Haldir about our actions or our purity.
"Peace," said Legolas. "At first, we were tired and the danger was too close behind; and afterwards, we almost forgot our sorrow." for a time, as we walked joyfully along the beautiful paths of Lorien.

"Yet our grief is immense and our loss irreparable," said Frodo. "Gandalf was our guide, and he led us through Moria; and when our esca He fell.
"Tell us the whole story!" said Celeborn. Aragorn then recounted everything that had happened. the crossing of Caradhras, and in the days that followed; and he


463

He spoke of Balin and his book, as well as the fight in the Chamber of Mazarbul, and the fire, and the narrow bridge, and the The coming of Terror. An evil from the ancient world.
"It looked like nothing I'd ever seen before," said Aragorn. It was both a shadow and a flame, strong and terrible.
It was a Balrog of Morgoth, said Legolas; a scourge among the elves. The deadliest, save only the One who sits in the Dark Tower. Indeed, I saw on the bridge that which haunts our darkness...
"In my dreams, I saw Durin's Bane," said Gimli in a low voice, "And terror was written in his eyes."

"Alas!" said Celeborn. "We have long feared that beneath Caradhras, a terror lay dormant. But had I known that the Dwarves... If this e You crossed the northern borders, you and all those who accompanied you. And if it were possible, it would seem that at the end

Gandalf fell from wisdom into madness, venturing needlessly into the net of Moria.

It would be truly unwise to say such a thing, he declared. Galadriel gravely. Needless to say, the acts of
Gandalf during his lifetime. Those who followed him knew nothing of his mind and could not reveal the full extent of his intentions. Bu Thank you for your welcome among the Dwarves. If our people had been exiled far from Lothlórien, who, among the Galadhrim, even Celeborn the Wise would pass near us and would not wish... to look at their old home, even though it had become a dwelling place for dr

The water at Kheled-zaram is dark, and the waters are cold.
The springs of Kibil-nala, and beautiful were the multi-pillared halls of Khazad-dûm in ancient times before the fall of the mighty lun under the stone. She looked at Gimli, who was sitting with a somber and sad expression, and she smiled. And the Dwarf, hearing the name Speaking in his own ancient language, he raised his eyes and met her gaze; and it suddenly seemed to him that he was looking into her h of an enemy, and saw love and understanding there. Amazement.
A thought appeared on his face, and he smiled in response. He stood up awkwardly and bowed like a dwarf, saying: Y and 464
More beautiful is the living land of Lorien, and Lady Galadriel is above all the jewels that lie beneath the earth!

A silence fell. Finally, Celeborn spoke again. "I did it."
"Not knowing how terrible your fate was," he said. "Leave Gimli alone..." Forget my harsh words: I spoke in the heat of the moment, ove I will do what I can to help you, each according to their wish and need, but especially that of one of the little people who bears the

"We know your quest," Galadriel said, looking up.
Frodo. But we won't discuss it any more openly here. However, not
Perhaps it will be proven in vain that you came to this land seeking something, help, as Gandalf clearly foresaw. For the Lord of the Galadhrim is considered the wisest of the Middle-elves, and a giver of gifts beyond the power of kings. He has dwelt in the West since With him countless years; for before the fall of Nargothrond, or in a gondola, I crossed the mountains, and together through Throughout the ages of the world, we have fought against the long defeat.

I was the one who convened the White Council first. And if
My drawings weren't badly designed; they would have been governed by Gandalf the Grey, and then perhaps things would have changed.
It disappeared in another way. But even now, there's still hope. I won't do it.
They give you advice, telling you to do this or that. Because it's not by doing or imagining, nor by choosing between this course and another, can I profit from it; but only by knowing what was and what is, and partly also what will be. But here is what I will tell you The quest is a constant struggle. One wrong move and...
This will fail, to everyone's ruin. Yet hope remains, while all the enterprise is real.

And with these words, she fixed them with her gaze, and in
Silence watched them in turn, intently. None but Legolas and Aragorn could bear its gaze for long. Sam blushed immediately and lowered

Finally, Lady Galadriel removed them from her eyes.
And she smiled. "Do not let your hearts be troubled," she said. Tonight, you will sleep peacefully. Then they sighed and felt


465

suddenly weary, like those who have been questioned long and hard, although no word has been spoken openly.

"Go now!" said Celeborn. "You are exhausted by grief and..." much toil. Even though your quest did not directly concern us, you
You should take refuge in this city until you are healed and rested. Now you will rest, and we will not speak of you again. We will con

That night, the Company slept on the bare ground, to everyone's great joy. The hobbits were very satisfied. The Elves offered them a
a pavilion among the trees near the fountain, and inside they settled themselves on soft sofas; then, words of peace were exchanged wit and of the Lord and of the Lady; for they did not yet have the heart to look further into the future.

"Why did you blush, Sam?" asked Pippin. "You're going to collapse soon. One might have thought you were guilty." conscience. I hope it was nothing worse than an evil plot. Stealing one of my blankets.

"I never thought of anything like that," Sam replied, without the slightest hint of anger. Just kidding. If you must know, I felt like It lit up, and I didn't like it. It was like it was reading my soul, wondering what I would do if it gave me the chance to
I'm going home to the Shire, to a nice little hole with - with a little garden of my own.

"That's funny," said Merry. "That's almost exactly how I felt myself; only, only, well, I don't think I'll say any more, it ended abrup

They all, it seemed, had suffered the same fate: each had felt that they were being offered a choice between a shadow full of fear whic An event awaited him, and something he ardently desired: a light before him. He thought of it constantly, and to obtain it, he simply h the road and leave the Quest and the war against Sauron others.

And it also seemed to me, said Gimli, that my choice would remain secret and known only to me.


466

"That seemed extremely strange to me," said Boromir.
Perhaps it was just a test, and she thought of reading our thoughts for her own good; but I almost should have
They said she was tempting us and offering us what she claimed to have the power to give. It goes without saying that I refused to listen. The men of Minas Tirith are true to their word. But what he thought the Lady had offered him Boromir said nothing.

As for Frodo, he didn't want to say anything, although Boromir
He bombarded her with questions. She stared at you for a long time. "A bearer of alliances," he declared.

Yes, said Frodo; but whatever came into my head then, I will stay here.

"Well, be careful!" said Boromir. "I'm not very sure about this elven lady and her plans."

"Speak no ill of Lady Galadriel!" said Aragorn sternly. "You know not what you say. There is in her and in this land
Evil does not exist unless a man brings it about. Let him do so then. Beware! But tonight, for the first time, I will sleep without fea Since I left Rivendell, may I sleep soundly and forget for a time, while my sorrow... I am weary in body and soul. He threw
He collapsed onto his sofa and immediately fell asleep.

The others soon did the same, and no sound or dream was heard. Their sleep was disturbed. When they awoke, they found that Daylight flooded the lawn in front of the pavilion, and the fountain rose and fell, sparkling in the sun.

They stayed a few days in Lothlórien, insofar as they
They could neither say it nor remember it. For the entire time they lived there. The sun shone brightly, except for a light rain that f and went out, leaving everything fresh and pure. The air
The air was cool and mild, like early spring, and yet they themselves felt almost the deep, pensive calm of winter. It seemed They did little more than eat, drink, rest, and walk among the trees; and that was enough.

They had not seen the Lord and Lady again, and they had





467


I spoke little with the elven folk, for few of them knew or would use the Westron tongue. Haldir wished them safe travels, and I return A high level of vigilance was now in place following the announcement of Moria's disappearance.

The company had brought Legolas. He was often absent, among the others.
Galadhrim, and after the first night, he no longer slept with
the other companions, although he returned to eat and talk with them. Often, he took Gimli with him when he went abroad, in the country, and others were astonished by this change.

As the companions sat or walked together, they talked about Gandalf, and everything each of them had known and seen of him.
The truth became clear to them. As their wounds healed and their physical fatigue subsided, the grief of their loss intensified. Often they heard elven voices singing nearby, and they knew they were singing laments over his downfall, for they
His name was chosen among the bittersweet words they could find. I don't understand.

Mithrandir, Mithrandir, sang the Elves, O Grey Pilgrim! then they loved to call him. But if Legolas were with the Com- company, he refused to perform songs for them, saying that
He lacked the talent, and for him, the grief was still too great. Soon, a matter of tears, but not yet of songs.

It was Frodo who first poured some of his sorrow into Hesitant Words. He was rarely inclined to sing or rhyme; even at Rivendell, he ha although his memory was entangled in many things that others
had done before him. But now, as he sat by the fountain in Lorien and heard of him from the voices of the Elves, his
His thought took shape in a song that seemed right to him; yet when he tried to repeat it to Sam, only fragments remained, faded like a

When evening was gray in the Shire, his footsteps were heard on the hill; before dawn, he was gone. While travelling, for a long time without a word.


468





Wild lands on the west coast,
From the northern wastelands to the southern hill, through the dragon's lair and the hidden gate and in the dark woods, he wandered as he pleased.

With dwarves and hobbits, elves and men, mortals and immortals,
with a bird on a branch and a beast in its den, He spoke in their secret tongues.

A deadly sword, a healing hand, a back bent under the weight of the burden; a trumpet voice, a flaming torch, a weary pilgrim on the road.

He sat on a throne of wisdom, quick to anger, quick to laugh; an old man with a dented hat leaning on a thorny stick.

He stood alone on the bridge
Both Fire and Shadow challenged him; his staff broke on the stone. At Khazad-dum, his wisdom died.

"Well, you'll beat Mr. Bilbo next!" said Sam.
No, I'm afraid so, said Frodo. But it's the best I can do. I can still do it. Well, Mr. Frodo, if you try your luck again, I hope you...
"Say a word about his fireworks," said Sam. "Something like..." this:

The most beautiful rockets ever seen:
They burst into blue and green stars, or after the golden showers of the storm fell like a rain of flowers.


469

But that doesn't really do them justice, far from it.
No, I'll leave that to you, Sam. Or maybe Bilbo. But... well, I can't talk about it anymore. I can't think about it anymore. I have to One evening, Frodo and Sam were walking together in
the coolness of twilight. They both felt restless again. On Frodo
Suddenly, the shadow of separation had fallen: he knew somehow that the moment of his departure from Lothlórien was fast approaching.

"What do you think of elves now, Sam?" he said. I asked.
I already asked you the same question - it seems very long some time ago; but you have seen more since then.

"Absolutely!" said Sam. "And I suppose there are elves and..."
The elves. They are all elven enough, but they are not all the same.
These people are neither vagrants nor homeless, and seem a little closer to us: they seem to belong to this place, even more so than th Or perhaps the earth shaped them, it's hard to say, if you take my... It's wonderful, it's calm here. Nothing seems to move.
It continues, and nobody seems to want it to. If there is
The magic is working, it's deep down, where I can't put my hands. On it, somehow.
"You can see and smell it everywhere," said Frodo. "Well," said Sam, "you can't see anyone using it." No
Fireworks like the ones poor old Gandalf used to put on. I wonder if we... I see nothing of the Lord and Lady in all these days. I imagine now that she could do wonderful things, if she had any wit. I'd love to see some Elven magic, Sir Frodo!

"No," said Frodo. "I am happy. And I regret nothing."
Gandalf's fireworks, but also his bushy eyebrows and his quickness, his temperament and his voice.

"You're right," said Sam. "And don't think I'm nitpicking."
I have often wished to see a little magic like the kind that is discussed in
Old stories, admittedly, but I've never heard of a better place. It's like being both at home and on vacation, if you Understand me. I don't want to leave. Despite everything, I am


470




I'm starting to think that if we have to continue, then we'd better do it. Let's finish this. It's the job that never started because it takes the longest to finish.
As my old boss used to say. And I don't think those people
They can do so much more to help us, magic or not. It's when we leave this land that we'll miss Gandalf even more, I think.

"I'm afraid that's all too true, Sam," said Frodo. "Yet, we earnestly hope to see the Lady before we leave." More elves.

As he spoke, they saw that she had come in response to their words, Lady Galadriel approaching. Tall and white And she walked calmly under the trees. She didn't say a word, but she waved to them.

Turning away, she led them towards the southern slopes. from the hill of Caras Galadhon, and passing through a high
They entered an enclosed garden, bordered by a green hedge. There were no trees.

It had grown there, and it was open to the sky. The evening star had risen and shone with a white fire above the west.
The lady descended a long staircase and entered the woods, a hollow of deep green, where the silver stream that sprang from the fountai below, on a low pedestal sculpted like a branching tree,
There was a silver basin, wide and shallow, and next to it was a silver ewer.

With water from the stream, Galadriel filled the basin to the brim, and blew on it, and when the water was still She spoke again. "This is the Mirror of Galadriel," she said.
I brought you here so you could take a look, if you wish.

The air was perfectly still, the valley was dark, and the Elf-
The lady next to him was tall and pale. What should we be looking for? "And what shall we see?" asked Frodo, filled with admiration.

I can ask the Mirror to reveal many things to me, she
They responded, and to some I can show what they wish to see. But the Mirror will also show unexpected things, and these are often stra to contemplate. What you will see, if you leave the Mirror free to





471


Work, I couldn't say. For it shows things that were, and things that are, and what could still be. But what it is, is that it Even the wisest cannot always say for sure. Would you like to look? Frodo did not answer.
"And you?" she said, turning to Sam. "Because that's what your
Folic acid would call that magic, I think; though I don't understand. We understand clearly what they mean; and they seem to be using t Galadriel's magic. Didn't you say you wanted to see it? Elven magic?
"Yes," said Sam, trembling slightly between fear and curiosity. "I'll take a look, Madam, if you don't mind." And Fd wouldn't be against a glimpse of what's going on at his place.
"It seems like an eternity," he said to Frodo aside.
that I was absent. But there, it is very likely that I will only see the stars, or something that I will not understand.

"That's quite likely," said the Lady, laughing softly. "But let's see..." You'll look and see what you can. Don't touch the water!

Sam climbed onto the base of the pedestal and leaned over
above the pool. The water looked hard and dark. The stars were reflected in it.

"There are only stars, just as I thought," he said. Then he nodded. A short breath, for the stars faded. As if a dark veil had lifted. The sun shone, and the tree branches swayed and swayed. The wind blew. But before Sam could decide
What he had seen, the light faded; and now he thought. He saw Frodo, his face pale, fast asleep beneath a great
dark cliff. Then he had the impression of walking along a dark cliff, a passage, and the ascent of an endless spiral staircase. He sudd He changed direction and retraced his steps, and he saw the trees again. But this

When they weren't so close, he could see what was happening. They weren't swaying in the wind, they were falling. crashing to the ground.


472





"Hey!" Sam exclaimed indignantly. "There's Ted!"
Sandyman was cutting down trees, which he shouldn't have done. They didn't. It should be cut down: it's that avenue beyond the mill tha The road to Bywater. I wish I could reach Ted, and I would have fallen for him.

But then Sam noticed that the old mill was gone, and
A large red brick building was under construction on the site where it had previously stood. It stood there. Many people were busy work A chimney stood nearby. Black smoke seemed to obscure the surface. The Mirror.

"Something diabolical is afoot in the Shire," he said. Elrond knew what he was doing when he wanted to send Mr. Merry. backwards. Then suddenly, Sam screamed and ran away. I
"I can't stay here!" he cried furiously. "I have to go home. They've..." They've dug up Bagshot Row, and now poor old Gaffer is leaving He went down the hill with his belongings on a wheelbarrow. I have to go home!

"You can't go home alone," the woman said. "You didn't."
You wish to return home without your master before you look inside the Mirror, and yet you knew that bad things could very well be ther What's happening in the Shire. Don't forget that the Mirror shows
Many things have happened, and not all have yet come to pass. Some have never happened at all. They will come to pass, unless those who to stop them in their path. The Mirror is dangerous as a guide to actions.

Sam sat down on the floor and put his head in his hands.
I wish I had never come here, and I never want to go back.
"Magic," he said before falling silent. A moment later, he spoke again.
in a thick voice, as if she were fighting back tears. No, I'll go home by the
"A long road with Mr. Frodo, or none at all," he said. "But I hope... I will return someday. If what I saw turns out to be true, Someone's going to get caught alive!

"Do you wish to watch now, Frodo?" asked Lady Galadriel. You did not wish to see any Elven magic, and you were content with that. "Do you advise me to watch?" asked Frodo.
No, she said. I'm not giving you advice one way or the other.





473


I'm not an advisor. You might learn something, and that...
What you see, whether right or wrong, can be beneficial, and yet...
It may not be. Seeing is both a good thing and a danger. Yet, I think... Frodo, that you have enough courage and wisdom to... If you had dared venture here, I wouldn't have brought you. Do as you please!

"I will look," said Frodo, and he stepped onto the pedestal and leaned over the dark water. At once the Mirror brightened and
He glimpsed a twilight landscape. Dark mountains loomed in the distance. Against a pale sky, a long grey road wound its way to the hori In the distance, a figure was slowly descending the road, weak and
Small at first, but becoming larger and clearer as it approached. Suddenly, Frodo realized that it reminded him of Gandalf.
He almost shouted the magician's name out loud, then he saw

that the figure was dressed not in gray but in white, a white that shone faintly in the twilight; and in its hand was a white staff. It The road disappeared from the Mirror's field of vision. Doubt crept in.
Frodo's thoughts: was this a vision of Gandalf's about one of his... Many solitary journeys a long time ago, or was it Saruman?

The vision had changed. Brief and restricted, but very vivid. I caught sight of Bilbo pacing his room with restless steps. The table was strewn with messy papers; the rain was beating down... showing itself at the windows.

Then there was a pause, followed by numerous quick scenes.
It followed that Frodo knew, in one way or another, that he was part of a grand story in which he had found himself involved. The fog l a violent storm. Then he saw, against the sun, blood-red reflections. In a mass of clouds, the black silhouette of a large ship with Torn sails coming up from the west. Then a wide river flowing through a populous city. Then a white fortress with seven
towers. And then again a ship with black sails, but this time, it was morning. Morning rose again, the water rippled with light, and a adorned with the emblem of a white tree that shone in the sun. A smoke


474





as if fire and battle were rising, and again the sun set in a blazing red that melted into a gray mist; and in the mist a The little creature vanished, sparkling with light. Frodo sighed and prepared to walk away.

But suddenly, the Mirror became completely dark, as dark as
as if a breach had opened in the world of sight, and Frodo was staring into the void. In the black abyss appeared a single
An eye that grew slowly, until it almost filled the entire mirror. It was terrible that Frodo remained rooted to the spot, unable to sh herself icy, yellow like a cat's nose, vigilant and attentive, and the
The black slit of her pupil opened onto an abyss, a window onto nothingness.

Then the Eye began to wander, searching in all directions; and Frodo knew with certainty and horror that among the
He himself was one of the many things he was searching for. But he also knew she couldn't see it-not yet, not unless he wanted her to. heavy, heavier than a large stone, and his head was being dragged downwards. The mirror seemed to heat up and curl.
Steam rose from the water. It slid forward.

"Don't touch the water!" Lady Galadriel said softly. The vision faded, and Frodo found himself face to face with The cold stars glittered in the silver pool. He stepped back. Trembling all over, she looked at the Lady.

"I know what you saw last," she said; "for it is
also in my mind. Don't be afraid! But don't think that only by the song among the trees, nor even by the fine arrows With elven bows, is this land of Lothlórien maintained and defended against its enemy? I tell you, Frodo, even
As I speak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord and I know his mind, or his entire mind concerning the Elves. And he She keeps groping around to see me and read my thoughts. But the door remains closed. Closed!

She raised her white arms and extended her hands.
towards the East in a gesture of rejection and denial. Earendil, the Evening Star, dearest to the elves, shone brightly. above. It was so bright that the silhouette of the elf lady stood out.

475


a diffuse shadow on the ground. Its rays grazed a ring around her finger; it glittered like polished gold covered with
a silvery light, and a white stone glittered there as if evening... The star had descended and rested on his hand. Frodo gazed at it. H Understood.

"Yes," she said, guessing his thoughts, "it is not permitted that Elrond could speak of it. But it cannot be hidden from the Ring-bearer, and from him who has seen the Eye.
In truth, it is in the land of Lorien, on Galadriel's finger, that one of the Three dwells. It is Nenya, the Ring of the Unyielding, an

He has his suspicions, but he doesn't know for sure yet. What about you? Now you see why your arrival is for us like the step of
Destiny? Because if you fail, we will be exposed to the enemy. But if you succeed, then our power is diminished, and Lothlórien will fade away, and the tides of Time will carry it away.
We must head west, or we will be reduced to a rustic people, valley and cave, slowly forgetting and being forgotten. Frodo lowered his head. "And what do you wish?" he asked. Last.
"What will be, will be," she replied. The love of
The Elves' attachment to their land and their works is deeper than... the depths of the sea, and their regret is immortal and can never submit to Sauron: for they know him now. For the fate of Lothlórien, you are responsible only for the acts of
your own task. Yet I might wish, if it had any use, that the Ring had never been forged, or had remained forever. lost.
"You are wise, brave, and just, Lady Galadriel," he said. Frodo. "I will give you the One Ring, if you ask me. It is... This is too imp Galadriel burst into a sudden, clear laugh. Wise man
"Perhaps Lady Galadriel is," she said, "but she met her here." Show some courtesy. Gently, are you taking revenge for my tests? From our very first meeting, you felt a deep empathy. You began to perceive with a certain intensity the


476





Eagle eye. I don't deny that my heart has ardently desired
Ask what you propose. For many years, I wondered what I could do if the Great Ring were to fall into my hands, and Here it was! It was within my reach. The evil that was
Designed long ago, it works in many ways, whether Sauron stands or falls. Wouldn't that have been noble? An act to be credited to her ring, if I had taken it by force, or out of fear of my guest?

And now, finally! You will give me the Ring of your own free will!
In place of the Dark Lord, you will establish a Queen. And I will not be dark, but beautiful and terrible as the morning And the Night! Beautiful as the Sea, the Sun, and the Snow on the mountain! Terrible as the storm and the light
Ning! Stronger than the foundations of the earth. All will be. Love me and despair!

She raised her hand and the ring she was wearing
A great light burst forth, illuminating her alone and leaving her alone, otherwise dark. She stood before Frodo, now appearing immense.

of measure, and of indestructible beauty, terrible and
with adoration. Then she let her hand fall, and the light went out. And suddenly she laughed again, and there! She had shrunk: a a slender elf, dressed in a simple white dress, whose sweet voice was gentle and sad.
"I passed the test," she said. "I will diminish and enter the..." To the west, and remain Galadriel. They remained silent for a long time. Finally, the Lady
She spoke again. "Let's get back to it!" she said. "Tomorrow morning, you..."
We must leave, for we have made our choice, and the course of destiny is inevitable. [They are in circulation.]
"I would like to ask you one thing before I go," said Frodo, "one thing I often intended to ask Gandalf in Rivendell. I am condemned to "You didn't try," she said. "You only tried three times. The ring on your finger since you knew what you were asking."
Sessed. Don't try it! It would destroy you. Gandalf didn't.





Ml

I'm telling you that the rings grant power based on each wearer's size? Before you can use this power, you Your willpower needs to become much stronger and train itself to become
the domination of others. Yet, even so, as the Ring-bearer and as the one who has worn it on his finger and seen what is hidden, Your eyesight has sharpened. You have perceived my thoughts.
more clearly than many others who are accounting experts. You saw the Eye of the one who holds the Seven and the Nine. And did Didn't you see and recognize the ring on my finger?
"Do you see my ring?" she asked, turning back to Sam.

"No, Madam," he replied. "To tell you the truth, I was wondering... what you were talking about. I saw a star through your..." fingers. But if you'll allow me to speak this way, I think my
The master was right. I wish you had taken his ring. You would have put things in the hands of the rights holders. You would have preve Leaving it adrift. You'd be making someone pay for their dirty work.

"Yes," she said. "That's how it would start. But..." We wouldn't leave it at that, alas! We won't say any more. Let's go!


8




That night, the Company was summoned once more to Celeborn's chamber, and there the Lord and Lady greeted each other with fitting words The time has come, he said, for those who wish to...
Those who continue the quest must harden their hearts to leave this land. Those who no longer wish to move forward may remain here. For a time. But whether they stay or leave, no one can be sure. Peace. For we have reached the edge of the precipice. Here those Those who wish to do so may wait for the fateful hour until... the ways of the world open again, or we summon them.
Lorien's last need. Then they can return to their lands, or join the eternal home of those who fall in battle. There was a silence. They all decided to move forward, he said. Galadriel looked them in the eyes.
As for me, said Boromir, my path to home leads through the future and there is no turning back. "That's true," said Celeborn, "but will this whole company go... with you to Minas Tirith?"
"We have not yet decided our path," said Aragorn. Beyond Lothlorien, I do not know what Gandalf intended to do. Indeed, I don't think he had a specific goal of his own.

"Perhaps not," said Celeborn, "but when you leave this country," You can no longer forget the Great River. Like some of you
As you know, travelers with luggage cannot cross between Lorien and Gondor except by boat. And they are not the The bridges of Osgiliath were destroyed and all the landing stages were blocked. Now by the enemy?

Which way will you go? The road to Minas Tirith
is located on this side, to the west; but the straight road of the


479

The quest lies east of the river, on the darker bank. Which shore will you now take?

If you follow my advice, it will be the west bank, and
"The road to Minas Tirith," replied Boromir. "But I am not," said the leader of the Company. The others said nothing, and Aragorn seemed doubtful and troubled.

"I see you still don't know what to do," said Celeborn.
It is not for me to choose for you; but I will help you as much as I can. There are some among you who know how to sail boats: Legolas, whose people know the swift river of the Forest; and Boromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the traveler.

"And a Hobbit!" cried Merry. "We're not all here to watch."
The boats are like wild horses. My people live on the banks of the Brandywine.

"That's good," said Celeborn. "Then I will provide you with..." Company with boats. They must be small and light, because if
You travel long distances by sea; there are places where you will be forced to transport them. You will arrive at the Sarn Gebir rapids and perhaps finally to the great falls of Rauros where the river thunders from Nen Hithoel; and there are other perils.
Boats can make your journey less arduous for a while. However, they won't offer any advice: in the end, you'll have to leave. them and the river, and turn west - or east.

Aragorn thanked Celeborn several times. The gift of the ships comforted him greatly, especially because there would now be
There's no need to decide on your route for a few days. Neither do the others. The situation seemed more promising. Whatever dangers la rather than trudging forward with a bent back. Only Sam doubted it.
ful: In any case, he always thought that boats were as dangerous as wild horses, or worse, and all the dangers he had survived had not to make him have a better opinion of them.

Everything will be prepared for you and will be waiting for you in the haven of peace.
"Before noon tomorrow," Celeborn said. "I will send my men to you in the morning to help you prepare for the journey." We wish you all a good night and a peaceful sleep. Good night, my friends! said Galadriel. Sleep in peace!

480

Don't get too upset thinking about the
The road tonight. Perhaps the paths you will each take are already laid out before your feet, although you cannot see them. Good night!

The company then took its leave and returned to its business.

Legolas accompanied them, for this was to be their last journey. A night in Lothlórien, and despite Galadriel's words They wanted to consult with each other.

They debated at length what they should do, and how best to try to achieve their goal. with the Ring; but they reached no decision. It was clear that
Most of them wished to first reach Minas Tirith and escape, at least for a time, safe from the terror of the enemy. They would do so were ready to follow a leader across the river and into the shadow of Mordor; but Frodo said nothing, and Aragorn was still divided in

His own plan, while Gandalf stayed with them, had
He was to accompany Boromir and, with his sword, help him deliver Gondor. For he believed that the message of dreams was a summons, and that the time had finally come when the heir Elendil would have to appear and fight against Sauron for the
Mastery. But in Moria, Gandalf's burden had been placed upon him; and he knew he could no longer abandon the Ring, if Frodo had ultimat What help could he, or any member of the Company, offer Frodo, other than blindly walking with him into the darkness?

I will go to Minas Tirith, alone if necessary, because it is my city.
"Duty," said Boromir; and after that, he sat silently for a moment, his eyes fixed on Frodo, as if he were trying to
He read the hobbit's thoughts. Finally, he spoke again, in a low voice, as if he were debating with himself. If all you want is to dest "The Ring," he said, "then war and weapons are useless;
And the men of Minas Tirith can do nothing. But to wish to destroy the armed might of the Dark Lord would be folly. To enter his domain He stopped abruptly, as if he had realized that he was





481


He expressed his thoughts aloud. It would be madness to throw lives away. "It's a choice between defending..."
a safe place and walking openly into the arms of death. At least, that's how I see it.

Frodo sensed something new and strange about Boromir.
He glanced over and stared intently. This was clearly Boromir's thought. It was different from his last words. It would be madness to t "What? The Ring of Power?" he had said something like that to the Council, but then he had accepted the correction
of Elrond. Frodo looked at Aragorn, but he seemed lost in thought. Lost in thought, he showed no sign of having paid attention. Boromir Pippin was already asleep, and Sam was dozing. The night was growing old.

In the morning, as they were starting to pack their bags... possessions, and elves who could speak their language came to them and brought them many gifts of food and clothing for the
journey. The food consisted mainly of very thin cakes, made from a dish baked until lightly golden on the outside, and cream-colored in cakes, and looked at them with a doubtful eye.

"Cram," he murmured, breaking off a piece of crusty bread.
He retreated to a corner and nibbled at it. His expression quickly changed, and he ate the rest of the cake with relish. "Never again!" cried the Elves, laughing. "You have..." I've already eaten enough for a long day's walk.
I thought it was just some kind of squat, like the Dale-men
"Prepare yourselves for journeys into the wilderness," said the Dwarf. "That's right," they replied. "But we call it lembas or travel bread."
and it is more fortifying than any food made by men, and it is, in general opinion, more pleasant than intensive revisions.

"That's true," said Gimli. "It's even better than honey..." The Béornings' cakes, and that's high praise indeed, for the
Beornings are the best bakers I know; but they aren't very inclined to give their cakes away to travelers these days. You are very kind


482

Nevertheless, we ask you to spare the food, they said. Eat.
Little at a time, and only when necessary. For these things are given to us, to serve you when all else fails. The cakes will remain de

Packets of leaves, like the ones we brought. One will keep a traveler going for a long day of labor, even if he is one of the great men of Minas Tirith.

The Elves then unwrapped the gifts and gave them to each of the Commanders.
They had brought the clothes they owned. For each person, they had planned... he provided her with a hood and a coat, made to her size, A silky fabric, light but warm, woven by the Galadhrim.
It was hard to say what color they were: gray with a hint of twilight under the trees seemed to be; and yet, if they
When they were moved or lit differently, they were green like shaded leaves, or brown like fallow fields at night, at twilight-silvery The neck was adorned with a brooch in the shape of a green leaf veined with silver.

"Are those magic cloaks?" asked Pippin, looking at them in wonder.

"I don't understand what you mean," replied the Elven chief. "They are beautiful clothes, and the fabric is..."
Good, because it was made in this country. They are elven robes. Certainly, if that's what you mean. Leaf and branch, water and stone: under the twilight of Lorien that we love; for we have placed the
We've incorporated everything we love into everything we create. Yet, they are clothes, not armor, and they won't turn the handle or th But they should be very useful to you: they're lightweight, and warm or cool enough as needed. And you'll find them.
Invaluable help in keeping away from hostile eyes. Whether you walk among stones or trees, you are... Indeed, she enjoys the Lady's favor! For she herself and
Her maids wove this fabric; and never before have we clothed strangers disguised as members of our own people.

After their breakfast, the Company bid farewell to
lawn near the fountain. Their hearts were heavy; for it was a





483


a beautiful place, and it had become like a home to them, although
They couldn't count the days and nights that had passed there. While they stood for a moment contemplating the tumultuous waters. In th The green grass of the clearing. Frodo welcomed it with joy.

"I have returned from the Northern Fences," said the Elf,
And here I am again, sent to be your guide. The Dimrill Valley is filled with steam and clouds of smoke, and the mountains are ominous. If you had thought of returning north, to your home, you wouldn't have been able to pass this way. But come!
Your path now leads south.

As they crossed Caras Galadhon, the green paths
were empty; but in the trees above them, many voices were murmuring and singing. They themselves departed in silence.

Haldir led them down the southern slopes of the hill, and they returned to the great gate illuminated by lamps, and
as far as the white bridge; and so they went out and left the city of the Elves. Then they moved away from the paved road.
and took a path that led into a thicket of mallorn trees, and continued, winding through hilly forests in silvery shade, leading them e

They had covered about ten kilometers and noon was approaching when they arrived at a high green wall. Passing through a thicket, they a long lawn of shining grass, dotted with golden eland
which sparkled in the sun. The lawn stretched out in a narrow tongue. Between clear margins: to the right and west, the Silverlode
It flowed sparkling; to the left and east, the Great River rolled its vast, deep, and dark waters. On the more distant banks, The woods continued to stretch south as far as the eye could see.
But all the banks were desolate and deserted. No embankment rose. Its branches laden with gold beyond the land of Lorien.

On the Silverlode vein, some distance upstream from the confluence of the streams, there was a bank of white stones and white wood. Man


484

Some were painted in bright colors and shone with silver and gold, and green, but most were white or gray. Three small Grey boats had been prepared for the travelers, and in
The Elves stored their belongings there. And they also added reels of rope, three per boat. They looked thin, but were strong. Soft to the touch, a grey similar to that of elven cloaks.

"What is it?" asked Sam, manipulating an object that was resting on... the lawn.

"Ropes, indeed!" replied an elf from the ships. "Never travel far without a rope! And a long, strong rope and light. These are them. They can be useful in many situations.

"No need to tell me!" said Sam. "I came without..." any of them, and I've been worried ever since. But I wondered Knowing a little about rope making, what they were made of: It's a family affair, as they say.

"They are made of hithlain," said the Elf, "but there is no
Now it's time to teach you the art of making them. Knowing you enjoyed this activity, we could have taught it to you much more. But ala Come back here; you must be content with our gift. May it be useful to you. You are well!

"Come!" said Haldir. "Everything is ready for you. Come in." Boats! But be careful at first!

Listen to these words! said the other Elves. These ships are
Lightly built, they are cunning and unlike other ships. They won't sink, load them as you like; but they are temperamental if mishandle landing place, before going down the current.

The Company was organized as follows: Aragorn, Frodo,
Sam and Boromir were in the same boat; Merry and Pippin in theirs; another; and in the third were Legolas and Gimli, who had
They had now become very good friends. Most of the merchandise was on that last boat. The luggage was stowed away. The boats were moved with short-handled paddles that had broad, leaf-like blades. When everything was ready, Aragorn put them to the test.





485

the silver vein. The current was swift and they moved forward. Slowly. Sam sat at the front, gripping the sides, and watched
They returned nostalgically to the shore. The sunlight sparkled on the beach. The water dazzled her eyes. They walked past the green fi On the side of the Langue, the trees descended all the way to the edge of the river.
And there, golden leaves floated and swayed on the ripples of the water. A stream. The air was very clear and still, and there was a Silence, except for the distant, high-pitched song of larks.

They took a sharp turn in the river, and there, navigating
They proudly spotted a swan coming down the stream towards them.
Large in size. The water rippled on either side of its white breast. Beneath its curved neck, its beak shone like polished gold. And its eyes glittered like jet in yellow stones; its enormous white wings were half-spread. Music drifted down from the river.
He approached; and suddenly they understood that it was a ship, fashioned and sculpted with elven skill in the image of a bird. Two elv her hair, and in her hand she held a harp, and she sang. Sad, and the sound of her voice was sweet in the fresh, pure air:

I sang of the leaves, the golden leaves, and the golden leaves grew there:

I sang of the wind, a wind came and blew through the branches. Beyond the Sim, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea, And near the beach of Ollmarin grew a golden tree. Beneath the stars of Ever-eve in Eldamar, it shone brightly,
In Eldamar, near the walls of Elven Tirion.

There, for a long time, golden leaves have been growing on the branches for years. While here, beyond the Seas of Separation, the Tear-Elves now fall.
O Lorien! Winter is coming, the day is bare and leafless; The leaves fall into the stream, the river flows. O Lorien! I have stayed too long on this shore here.

And in a faded wreath, the golden elk were intertwined.


486





But if I were to sing about ships, which ship would come to me? Me, What ship could ever take me back across such a vast sea?
Aragorn remained in his boat as the swan-ship approached. The Lady finished her song and greeted them. "We have come." to say goodbye to you one last time, she said, and to hasten you with Blessings from our land.

"Although you were our guests," said Celeborn, you
have not yet eaten with us, and so we invite you to a farewell feast, here between the flowing waters that will carry You are far from Lorien.

The swan swam slowly towards the sandbank, and they turned their boats around and followed it. There, at the end of Egladil On the green grass the farewell feast took place; but Frodo

They ate and drank little, paying attention only to the Lady's beauty and her voice. She no longer seemed dangerous or terrible, nor fi with a hidden power. Already, she seemed to him, as if by men
In more recent times, elves are still sometimes glimpsed: present yet distant, a living vision of what has already been left behind. behind, by the waves of Time.

After eating and drinking, sitting on the grass,
Celeborn spoke to them again of their journey, and raising his eyes he pointed south, towards the woods beyond the Tongue.

As you go down the water, he said, you will find that
The trees will wither and you will arrive in an arid country.
The river flows through stony valleys amidst high moors, until finally, after many leagues, one arrives at the high island of Tindrock.

which we call Tol Brandir. There, he stretches his arms around the
the steep shores of the island, and then waterfalls with a great noise and smoke above the cataracts of Rauros as far as Nindalf,
The Wetwang, as it's called in your language. It's a large, lazy marshland area where the stream becomes meandering and very divided. There, the Entwash arrives through many
The mouths of Fangorn Forest lie to the west. On this side of the river lies Rohan.





487


Further on rise the desolate hills of Emyn Muil. The wind blows from the east, for they watch over the dead. From marshes and wastelands to Cirith Gorgor and the Black Gates of Mordor.

Boromir, and all those who accompany him in the search for Minas Tirith,
It would be wise to leave the Great River upstream from Rauros and cross the Entwash before it reaches the marshes. However, they shoul going too far upstream of this current, nor risking becoming entangled in it
Fangorn Forest. It is a strange land, and it is now small. Known. But Boromir and Aragorn probably don't need a warning.

"Indeed, we heard about Fangorn in Minas Tirith," Boromir said. "But what I heard seems to me mostly
partly from old wives' tales, like the ones we tell our children. All of this... The north of Rohan is now so far removed from us that roam freely there. Ancient Fangorn stretched to the borders of
our kingdom; but many lifetimes have passed since one of us visited it, to prove or refute the legends that took place there descended from a distant past.

I myself stayed at Rohan for a while, but I never
I crossed it northward. When I was sent as a messenger, I crossed the chasm at the foot of the White Mountain. and crossed Isen and Greyflood to enter the Northland. A long and arduous journey. Four hundred leagues
I calculated it, and it took me many months; for I lost my horse at Tharbad, at the ford of the Greyflood. After that travel, and the road I traveled with this Company, I
I have little doubt that I will find a way to cross Rohan. And Fangorn too, if need be.

"So I have nothing to add," said Celeborn. "But not..." to despise traditions passed down since time immemorial; It often happens that old women retain in their memory words of things that wise people used to know.

Galadriel then rose from the grass and, taking a cup of
She filled the container with white mead and gave it to one of her servants in Celeborn.


488

"It's time now to drink the farewell glass," she said.
Wood, Lord of the Galadhrim! And let not your heart be sad, though night follows midday, and already our evening draws near.

Then she brought the cup to each member of the Company, and
She offered them drinks and said goodbye. But when they had drunk, she ordered them to sit down again on the grass, and chairs were arr prepared for her and for Celeborn. Her attendants remained silent about her, and for a moment she contemplated her guests. Finally, she

We drank the cup of farewells, she said, and the
Shadows stretch between us. But before you leave, I brought
On my ship, gifts offered by the Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim. I offer them to you now in memory of Lothlórien. Then she called each

Here is Celeborn and Galadriel's gift to the leader of "Your Company," she said to Aragorn, and she handed him a
a scabbard that had been custom-made for his sword. It was covered with an interlacing of flowers and leaves worked in silver and made of gold, and on it were set elven runes formed of many gems, the name Anduril, and the lineage of the sword.

The blade that is drawn from this scabbard must not be
"Even tainted or broken by defeat," she said. But is there anything? Anything else you desire from me after our parting? For darkness w A current flows between us, and it's possible we may never see each other again, unless it's very far away, on a road with no return.

And Aragorn replied: Lady, you know all my desires,
And for a long time I carefully guarded the only treasure I seek. Yet you have no right to give it to me, even if you wanted to; and on

But perhaps this will comfort you, said Galadriel; for
It was entrusted to me to be given to you, should you ever die in this country. Then she lifted from her knees a large, light green sto the likeness of an eagle with outstretched wings; and as she held the jewel, it sparkled like sunlight filtering through leaves.
of spring. This stone, I gave it to Celebrian, my daughter, and





489

She gave it to her own; and now it comes to you as a sign of hope. In this hour, take the name that was foretold to you, Elessar, The Elven Stone of the House of Elendil!

Aragorn then took the stone and fixed the brooch onto
his chest, and those who saw him were astonished; for they had
No one had ever noticed before how tall and imposing he was, and it seemed to them that those many years of hard work had fallen off hi "Thank you for the gifts you have given me," he said. O Lady of Lorien, from whom were born Famous and
Arwen Evenstar. What more can be said?

The lady inclined her head, then turned towards Boro- Mir, and she gave him a golden belt; and to Merry and
Pippin gave her small silver belts, each with an ornate clasp resembling a golden flower. She curtsied so deeply to Legolas that The Galadhrim used bows longer and sturdier than those of Mirkwood, and adorned with a strand of elven hair. With it went
a quiver of arrows.

"For you, little gardener and lover of trees," she said to Sam,
I only have a small gift. She placed in his hand a small, plain gray wooden box, unadorned except for a single silver rune on it.

the lid. Here is set G for Galadriel, she said; but it can also be the word "garden" in your language. In this box, there is soil from So be it. This will not keep you on your path, nor protect you from all peril; but if you keep it and finally see your way back home, p You should find it all deserted and devastated; there will be few gardens in Middle-earth that will flourish like yours.
If you spread this soil there, then perhaps you will remember Galadriel, and see in the distance Lothlórien, that you
We only saw that during our winter. For our spring and summer, they're gone, and we'll never see them again on Earth, except in memory.

Sam turned bright red and mumbled something inaudibly. He clutched the box to his chest and bowed as low as he could. "And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves?" they asked. Galadriel, turning to Gimli.

490





"None, Madam," replied Gimli. "It is enough for me to have..." seen the Lady of the Galadhrim and heard her sweet voice.

"Listen, elves!" she cried to those around her. No one... They say again that Dwarves are greedy and graceless! Yet Gimli, son of Gloin, surely you desire something that I could give? Tell me! You will not be the only guest.
no gift.

"There is nothing, Lady Galadriel," said Gimli, bowing deeply.
and stuttering. Nothing, unless it's possible-unless it's permitted to ask, or even name, a single strand of your hair, which surpasses the gold of the earth as the stars surpass the
Jewels from the mine. I don't ask for such a gift. But he ordered me to name my desire.

The Elves stirred and murmured in astonishment, and
Celeborn gazed at the Dwarf in wonder, but the Lady smiled. It is said that the talent of Dwarves lies primarily in their hands. that in their languages, she said; but that is not true for Gimli.
For no one has ever made such a bold yet courteous request to me. And how could I refuse, since I ordered him to? Speak? But tell me, what would you do with such a gift?

"Cherish it, Madam," he replied, "in memory of your
These words were spoken to me during our first meeting. And if I ever return to the forges of my home, they will be set in imperishable to become an inheritance of my house, and a pledge of goodwill between the Mountain and the Woods until the end of
days.

Then the lady undid one of her long braids and cut
She plucked three golden hairs and placed them in Gimli's hand.
"Words will accompany the gift," she said. "I'm not making any predictions, because..." All predictions are now futile: on one side, da On the other hand, there is only hope. But if hope were not to fail, then I tell you, Gimli son of Gloin, your hands will flow
with gold, and yet gold will have no dominion over you.

"And you, Ring-bearer," she said, turning to Frodo, "I come
To you last, you who are not last in my thoughts. For you, I have... She had prepared this. She held up a small crystal vial: it sparkl





491

When she moved it, beams of white light burst from her hand. "In this vial," she said, "is captured the light of Eärendil's star; plant When night envelops you, let it be a light to you in the darkness of places, when all other lights go out. Remember Galadriel and her m

Frodo took the flask, and for a moment, as it shone between... He saw her again, standing like a queen, tall and Beautiful, but more terrible. He bowed, but found no words to say.

Then the Lady rose, and Celeborn led them back home. A golden midday stretched across the green land of the Tongue, and the water spark The Company members returned to their places on the boats as before. (In tears)
"Farewell!" called the Elves of Lorien to them with long grey staffs. Out of the current, and the rippling waters plunged deeper. They moved them away slowly. The travelers remained motionless, without moving. talking. On the green skein, near the very tip of the Lady Galadriel's tongue stood alone and silent. While they
They passed by her, turned around, and followed her slowly with their eyes as she moved away from them. For that is how it seemed to th slid backwards, like a shining ship equipped with
enchanted trees, sailing towards forgotten shores, while they sat helplessly on the edge of this gray and leafless world.

Even as they watched the spectacle, the Silverlode transformed into the currents of the Great River, and their boats turned around and Small and distant. It shone like a pane of glass on a
a distant hill bathed in the setting sun, or like an isolated lake seen from a mountain: a crystal fallen into the heart of the earth. It seemed to Frodo that she raised her arms in a final farewell. And in the distance, but with piercing clarity, the next wind arrived. the sound of her singing voice. But now she was singing in the ancient language of the Elves beyond the sea, and he did not understand. These words remain: the music was beautiful, but it brought no comfort to him.


492





But, as is often the case with Elvish words, they remained engraved in his memory, and long afterward he also interpreted them. as much as he could: the language was that of Elvish song and spoke of little-known things of Middle-earth.

Ai! Laurie Lantar Lassi Surinen,
You have a moment and Ramar Aldaron!

Yeni ve linte yuldar avanier mi oromardi smooth-miruvoreva Andurie pella, Vardo tellumar no luini yassen tintilar i eleni omaryo airetdri-lirinen.

Si man iyulma nin enquantuva?

And if Tintalle Varda Oiolosseo
ve fanyar maryat Elentdri ortane, ar ilye tier undulave lumbule; ar sindanoriello caita mornie
I falmalinnar I met, ar hisie untupa Calaciryo miri oiale.

Si vanwa na, Romello vanwa, Valimar! Namarie! Nai hiruvallye Valimar. Nai elye hiruva. Namarie!

Ah! Like gold, leaves fall in the wind, the long years are counted... Less than the wings of trees! The years have passed in a flash. sips of sweet mead in high halls beyond the West, beneath the blue vaults of Varda where the stars tremble
in the song of her voice, holy and royal. Who now
Refill my cup? For now, the Kindler, Varda, the Queen of the Stars, of Mount Everwhite, has raised her hands
like clouds, and all the roads are plunged into deep shadow; and in the middle of a grey country, darkness looms over the foaming waves Between us, and the mist forever shrouds the jewels of Calacirya. Valimar is now lost, lost to those of the East! Farewell!





493

Perhaps you will find Valimar. Perhaps you will even find It. Farewell! Varda is the name of this Lady whom the Elves in these lands of Suddenly, the river made a turn and the banks
Lights rose on either side, and the light of Lorien was hidden. Frodo never returned to that beautiful land.

The travelers then turned their attention to the journey;
The sun was in front of them, and their eyes were dazzled, for all were filled with tears, Gimli was crying openly.

"I have contemplated last what was most beautiful," he said to Legolas, his companion. "From now on, I will call nothing That's right, unless it's his gift. He put his hand to his chest.

"Tell me, Legolas, why did I come on this quest? Did I not know where the main danger lay!" exclaimed Elrond.
saying that we couldn't foresee what we might encounter on our path. The torment in the darkness was the danger I dreaded, and it didn' I have known the danger of light and joy. Now I have borne the worst wound of this separation, even if I must leave tonight, straight t

"No!" said Legolas. "Alas for us all! And for all who walk!" the world in these days to come. For such is the way: to To find and to lose, as seem those whose boat is on the flowing stream. But I consider you blessed, Gimli son of Gloin:
You are suffering a loss of your own free will, and you could have chosen otherwise. But you have not renounced your com

companions, and the least reward you will have is that the memory of Lothlórien will remain forever clear and pure. in your heart, and there it will neither fade nor wither.

"Perhaps," said Gimli; "and thank you for your words." True. Words, certainly; but all that comfort is in vain. Memory, however, is not What the heart desires. It is but a mirror, may it be as clear as spring water. Kheled-zaram. At least, that is what the heart of Gimli They may see things differently. Indeed, I've heard that for them, memory is more like the waking world than a dream.
This is not the case for Dwarves.


494





But let's not talk about it anymore. Look at the boat! She too
The river is low in the water, laden with all this baggage, and the Great River is swift. I don't want to drown my sorrows in cold wate He took a paddle and headed towards the west bank, following
Aragorn's ship, which was ahead, had already left the shore. Average current. The Company therefore continued its long journey, along the wide
Turbulent waters, driven ever southward. Bare woods prowled on either side of the bank, and they could see no end of the river. The lan Without a sound. Not a bird's song broke the silence. The sun
The sky grew veiled in mist throughout the day, until it shimmered in a pale sky, like a brilliant white pearl. Then it faded in the we the dark and calm hours they let drift by, guiding their boats beneath the plunging shadows of the western woods. Tall trees
They passed like ghosts, driving their twisted, thirsty roots deep into the mist. I plunged into the water. The weather was gloomy and Frodo sat and listened to the faint lapping and gurgling of the river, stirring among the tree roots and driftwood near the shore, unti


9





Frodo was woken by Sam. He discovered he was lying, well...
enveloped, under large grey-skinned trees, in a quiet corner of the woods on the west bank of the Great River, the Anduin. He had slept all night, and the gray of the morning was
A faint light rose between the bare branches. Gimli was busy with a small task. A fire nearby.

They started again before daybreak was fully up. Not that
Most of the Company members were eager to hurry south: they were satisfied with the decision they had to make at the latest
When they arrived at Rauros and the island of Tindrock, they were still there a few days later; and they let the river carry them at it The future remained uncertain, whatever path they ultimately chose. Aragorn wished them to drift with the current, as they pleased, tak their strength in the face of the fatigue to come. But he insisted that at least they should leave early each day and travel far, until and he feared that the Dark Lord had not remained inactive while they lingered in Lorien.

Nevertheless, they saw no sign of the enemy that day, nor
The next day. The gray, monotonous hours passed without incident. As the third day of their journey passed, the landscapes slowly chang On the left bank, they saw long, shapeless slopes stretching upwards and into the distance towards the sky; they appeared brown and wit as if the fire had passed through them, leaving not a single living green blade: a harmful waste without even a broken tree or a
An imposing stone to fill the void. They had come to the Brown Lands that stretched, vast and desolate, between the southern Black Fore


496





Either war or an evil act by the Enemy had ravaged this entire region. Even Aragorn could not have said.

To the west, on their right, the land was also treeless, but it was flat, and in places green with vast plains of
On the other side of the river, they crossed forests of tall trees and reeds, so high that they obscured any view to the west, like the Small boats rustled along their floating shores.
Their dark, withered feathers curled and stirred in the cold light. The breezes whistled softly and mournfully. Here and there, through and far beyond, from the hills at sunset, and in the distance on the
At the limit of visibility, a dark line, where the southernmost ranks of the Misty Mountains marched.

There was no sign of life, except for the birds.
There were many: small birds whistling and chirping in the reeds, but they were rarely seen. Once or twice, the travelers They heard the rustling and moaning of swan wings, and raising their eyes, they saw a great phalanx marching across the sky.

"Swans!" exclaimed Sam. "And enormous swans at that!"
"Yes," said Aragorn, "and they are black swans." How vast, empty, and sad this land seems! said Frodo. I always imagined that when we traveled south

It was warmer and happier, until winter was left behind forever.

"But we haven't traveled very far south yet," replied Aragorn. "It's still winter, and we're far from the sea. Here
The world is cold until the sudden spring, and we might still see it snowing again. Far away, in the bay of Belfalas, all the way to The Anduin, which flows beneath our feet, is perhaps warm and joyful, or would be.
Without the enemy, we'd be in a much worse situation. But we're not more than sixty leagues away here. I suppose it's south of the Sout Hundreds of kilometers to the horizon. You are now looking southwest, across the northern plains of Riddermark, Rohan, the land of
The lords of the horses. Soon we will arrive at the mouth of the Limlight, which flows down from Fangorn to join the Great
River. This is the northern border of Rohan; and since time immemorial, everything between Limlight and the White Mountains belonged





497


to the Rohirrim. It is a rich and pleasant land, and its grass
has no rival; but in these difficult times, people no longer settle near the
People often travel upriver or ride along its banks on horseback. The Anduin is wide, yet the ores can shoot their arrows far beyond th They declared that they had dared to cross the water and plunder the herds and gudgeons of Rohan.

Sam looked anxiously from one bank to the other. The trees had
They had seemed hostile before, as if they were concealing secret glances and latent dangers; now he regretted that the trees were no l He felt the Company was too poorly equipped, adrift in a confined space, with boats in the middle of unsheltered land, and on a river t the frontier of war.

In the following days, they continued their journey, carried regularly.
Further south, this feeling of insecurity was growing throughout the region. For a whole day, they took their paddles and hurried ahead The sea became shallower; long pebble beaches stretched to the east, and the water was dotted with gravel banks, requiring careful navi from which a cold air was blowing from the East. On the other side,
The meadows had turned into vast expanses of withered grass amidst a land of marsh and tufts of grass. Frodo shuddered at the thought o and the fountains, the bright sunshine and the gentle rains of Lothlórien. Hardly a word or a laugh could be heard on any of the ships. Each member of the Company was preoccupied with their own thoughts and affairs.

Legolas's heart was pounding under the stars of a
one summer night in a northern clearing, amidst the beech trees; Gimli caressed gold in his mind, and wondered if... were suitable to b Merry and Pippin, in the middle boat, were uneasy, because Boromir sat muttering, sometimes biting his nails, as if some agitation or d He grabbed a paddle and steered the boat right behind Aragorn's. Pippin, sitting at the bow and looking back, then spotted a
A strange gleam shone in his eyes as he stared at Frodo. Sam had long ago decided that, even if the ships were 498




perhaps not as dangerous as he had been taught,
They were much more uncomfortable than he had imagined. He felt cramped and unhappy, with nothing to do.
but to gaze at the wintry lands passing by and the grey water on either side of him. Even when paddles were used, they didn't trust Sam

At dusk on the fourth day, he was looking
return over the bowed heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the
He followed the boats; he was drowsy and longed for the camp and the sight: at first, he stared at it absently, then he sat up and He rubbed his eyes; but when he looked again, he could no longer see.

That night, they camped on a small islet near the west
bank. Sam was lying wrapped in blankets next to Frodo. I had a funny moment. Dreaming for an hour or two before we stopped, Mr. Frodo, he said. Or maybe it wasn't a dream. It was funny either way.

"Well, what was it?" asked Frodo, knowing Sam would answer. He didn't calm down until he had told his story, whatever it was. I haven't seen or thought anything that could make me smile since we left Lothlórien.

It wasn't funny like that, Mr. Frodo. It was weird.
If it weren't a dream, it would be false. And you'd better listen to that. It was a dream. Like this: I saw a log with eyes! "The log is in good condition," said Frodo. "There are plenty more in the..." River. But forget the eyes!
"I won't do it," said Sam. "It was the eyes that made me sit down."
upwards, so to speak. I saw what appeared to be a tree trunk floating along the shore in the twilight behind Gimli's boat; but I didn't Listen to him. Then, it seemed as if the log was slowly getting stuck.
We turned up the pressure. And it was strange, as you might say, given that they were all floating together on the current. That's when eyes: two kinds of pale, shiny spots on a bump at the base
near the end of the trunk. Moreover, it wasn't a trunk, because it had
Paddle-shaped legs, almost like a swan's, only they seemed bigger, and it kept diving and coming out of the water.

499


That's when I sat up abruptly and rubbed my eyes, which is to say, to scream, to see if it was still there when I rubbed it
I was losing consciousness. Because whatever was going to happen, he was moving quickly now and getting closer to Gimli. But what Those two lamps spotted me moving and staring, or maybe... I came to my senses, I don't know. When I looked again,
wasn't there. Yet, I think I glimpsed a bit of it, with the tail of my eye, as they say, something dark that pulls under The shadow of the bank. I could no longer see any eyes.

I said to myself, "I'm still dreaming, Sam Gamegie," I said;
And I didn't say anything more at the time. But I've been thinking about it ever since. And now I'm not so sure anymore. What do you think, sir? Frodo?

I should only see a log, the twilight, and...
"Your eyes are stinging, Sam," said Frodo, "if this were the first time those eyes had been seen. But it wasn't. I saw them disappear." We headed north before reaching Lorien. And I saw something strange. A creature with eyes climbing up to the raft that night. Haldir sa

That too. And do you remember the Elf report that... did they go looking for the ore deposit?

"Ah," said Sam, "yes; and I remember many other things besides. I don't remember my thoughts like they do; but thinking of one thing an With all the stories about Mr. Bilbo, I think I could give a name to the creature, in my opinion. A frightening name. Gollum, perhaps?

"Yes, that's what I've been fearing for some time," said Frodo.
Since that night spent in the water, I suppose he's been lurking around.
Moria, and we picked up our trail again at that point; but I hoped that our stay in Lorien would throw him off the scent again. That wretched creature must have been hiding in the woods. The Silverlode, watching us start up!

"That's it," said Sam. "And we'd better be a little more..."
We must remain vigilant, otherwise we will feel nasty hands around our...
You might experience neck pain one of these nights, if you happen to wake up and feel anything. And that's what I meant. No need to wor Strider or the others tonight. I'll stand guard. I can sleep. Tomorrow, being nothing more than luggage on a ship, as you might say.


500

"I might," said Frodo, "and I might well say 'baggage with eyes'. You will look; but only if you promise to wake me halfway there." towards morning, if nothing happens between now and then.

In the dead of night, Frodo awoke from a deep sleep to
Sam shook him. "It's a shame to wake you," he murmured. Sam, but that's what you said. There's nothing to add, or not much. I thought I noise, some time ago; but one hears many strange sounds of this kind by the river at night.

He lay down, and Frodo sat up, snuggled under his blankets.
and fought against sleep. The minutes or hours passed slowly, and nothing happened. Frodo simply gave in to temptation.
I was going back to bed when a dark, barely visible shape floated near one of the moored boats. A long, whitish hand could have... It was barely visible when it sprang forth and grabbed onto the gunwale; two
Pale eyes, like lamps, shone coldly as they looked inside, and then they raised their eyes and beheld Frodo on the chessboard.
They were no more than a meter or two away, and Frodo heard a faint hiss of inspiration. He stood up, removing Sting from its sheath, a It went out. There was another hiss and a plop, then darkness. A log-shaped projectile drifted downstream into the night. Aragorn stirr

"What is it?" he murmured, leaping to his feet and reaching Frodo. "I sensed something while I was sleeping. Why did you draw your swor "Gollum," replied Frodo. "At least, I suppose so."
"Ah!" said Aragorn. "So you know our little shoe, then."
And you? He followed us stealthily through Moria and all the way down to Nimrodel. Since we took the boat, he's been lying on a... I tr he once or twice a night; but he is more cunning than a fox, and as
As elusive as a fish. I hoped the river trip would finish him off, but he's too skilled a boatman.

We'll need to try to go faster tomorrow. Lie down. I will now watch over the rest of the night. I wish





501


I could get my hands on that wretch. We could silence him.

Useful. But if I can't manage that, I'll have to try to lose him. He's very dangerous. Not to mention the nighttime murders on his On his own initiative, he can blame any nearby enemy on us.

The night passed without Gollum showing any sign of life. The shadow returned. After that, the Company remained on its guard, but they He continued to follow us, very wary and cunning.
On Aragorn's orders, they now paddled for long periods, and the
The banks passed by quickly. But they saw little of the country, as they traveled mainly at night and at dusk, resting during the day. and hiding as much as the terrain allowed. In this way, the seventh day passed without incident.

The weather was still grey and overcast, with a wind coming from the
To the east, but as evening gave way to night, the sky receded westward. Clear skies, and pools of faint light, yellow and pale green, opened beneath the gray shores of clouds. There, the white bark
The glow of the new moon could be seen twinkling in the remote region of the lakes. Sam looked at it and frowned.

The next day, the countries on both sides began to change.
quickly. The banks began to rise and harden. Soon, they crossed a hilly and rocky region, and on both banks There were steep slopes buried under thick thickets of thorns and
Sloe berries, tangled with brambles and vines. Behind them stood low, eroded cliffs, and chimneys of weathered grey stone. dark with ivy; and beyond, high ridges rose again, crowned with fir trees twisted by the wind. They were approaching
the gray hills of the Emyn Muil, the southern march of Wilderland.

There were many birds around the cliffs and rocks, and all day long flocks of birds had been
swirling, black against the pale sky. As they lay in their camp that day, Aragorn watched the flights with a doubtful expression, wonde if Gollum had done something wrong and the news of
Their journey now continued in the heart of nature. Later, while


502





The sun was setting, and the Company was coming to life and preparing.
Ready to start again, he noticed a dark spot on the background that was fading. Light: a large bird, high and far away, sometimes circl "What is it, Legolas?" he asked, pointing north. "The sky. Is it, as I suspect, an eagle?"
"Yes," said Legolas. "It's an eagle, a hunting eagle. I wonder..." What this foretells. It's far from the mountains.
"We will not begin until it is completely dark," said Aragorn. The eighth night of their journey arrived. It was silent and No wind; the gray east wind had died down. The thin crescent moon had disappeared early into the pale twilight, but
The sky was clear above, and although far away, in the South
Vast expanses of clouds still shone faintly, in the western stars twinkled brightly.

"Come!" said Aragorn. "We shall undertake one last journey. By night. We are coming to parts of the river I do not know."
I know them well; for I have never travelled by water in these parts. Not before, however, between here and the rapids of Sarn Gebir. B If my calculation is correct, that's still many kilometers ahead. There are still dangerous spots even before we arrive. There: rocks a

The watch duty was assigned to Sam, who was in the lead boat.

The man. He was lying down, his gaze lost in the darkness. The night was getting darker.
It was dark, but the stars above were strangely bright, and there was a shimmer on the surface of the river. It was almost midnight. and they had been drifting for some time, barely using the
paddles, when suddenly Sam shouted. Just a few meters away.
Dark shapes appeared further down the stream, and he heard... a swirling of rushing water. There was a swift, oscillating current. to the left, towards the eastern bank where the channel was clear.
As they were carried away by the current, the travelers could see, now very close, the pale foam of the river crashing against the shar which advanced far into the current like a crest of teeth. The boats were all grouped together.





503


"Well, Aragorn!" cried Boromir, as his ship crossed paths with the chieftain. "This is madness! We can't dare!" The rapids at night! But no boat can live at Sarn Gebir, be there day or night.

"Back up! Back up!" shouted Ar agorn. "Turn! Turn if you can!" He plunged his paddle into the water, trying to hold the boat back and Give it a spin.
"I am out of my reach," he said to Frodo. "I didn't do it. I know we've come so far: the Anduin flows faster than I could. I thought Sa With great effort, they inspected the boats and slowly
They created them; but at first, they could only do small things. They progressed against the current, and all the time they were carried closer and closer to the eastern shore. Now dark and looming, menacing, in the night.

"All together, row!" cried Boromir. "Row! Or we'll..."
will be pushed onto the sandbanks. Even as he spoke, Frodo felt the keel beneath him creak against the stone.

At that moment, a faint snap of bowstrings was heard: several arrows whistled above them, and some fell among them. He struck Frodo bet With a cry, he dropped his paddle: but the arrow fell back, thwarted by his concealed chainmail. Another passed by.
Aragorn's hood; and a third stood firmly on the gunwale of the second boat, very close to Merry's hand. Sam thought he could Black silhouettes can be seen running in all directions along the long beach.
Pebble banks stretched out beneath the eastern shore. They seemed very close. Yrch / said Legolas, falling back into his own language.
"Ore!" cried Gimli.

"It's the work of Gollum, I'm certain of it," Sam told Frodo.
A lovely spot to choose, too. The river seems to want to carry us away, straight into its arms!

They all leaned forward, straining their paddles: even Sam
They took the lead. At any moment, they expected to feel the sting of black-feathered arrows. Many whistled above our heads or struck t


504

Water was nearby; but there were no more sure shots. It was dark, but not too dark for the night eyes of the Minerais, and in the star- a glimmer of light they must have offered to their cunning enemies
mark, unless it is the grey cloaks of Lorien and the grey wood of the ships forged by the elves that defeated the malice of the archers Blow after blow, they strove. In the darkness, it was
It was difficult to be sure that they were actually moving; but slowly the swirling water subsided and the shadow in the east faded.
The bank disappeared into the night again. Finally, as far as they could tell, they had reached the middle of the stream again and
had pushed their boats back some distance above the rocky promontory. Then, turning around, they drove them in with all their might, fo Bushes leaned over the water; they stopped and began to draw. Breath.

Legolas put down his paddle and took up the prow he had brought from Lorien. Then he jumped ashore and He climbed a few steps up the bank. He strung his bow and
He nocked an arrow, turned around and peered across the river. The darkness. On the other side of the water, shrill cries could be hear

Frodo looked up at the elf who stood tall above him, while... He scanned the night, searching for a target to strike. His head was dark, crowned with sharp white stars that glittered in the
Black expanses of sky behind. But now they rise and fly away. From the south, large clouds advanced, casting shadows
Scout riders in the starry fields. A sudden terror descended upon the Enterprise.

Elbereth Gilthonieir sighed Legolas, looking up. Even
As it did so, a dark shape appeared, like a cloud and yet not a cloud, for it moved much faster, emerging from the darkness in the Sout A light rose as she approached. Soon, she appeared as a great winged bird. A creature, blacker than the abyss of night. Fierce voices r Frodo stood up to greet him on the other side of the water. He felt a sudden shiver. A sensation ran through him and gripped his heart;


505

A deadly cold, like the memory of an old shoulder injury. He crouched down, as if to hide.

Suddenly, the great bow of Lorien began to sing. A shrill cry rang out. Arrow shot from the elven thread. Frodo looked up. Almost above The winged form swerved. A harsh croak was heard, a cry, as it fell from the sky, disappearing into the darkness of the eastern shore. Darkness, then silence. Neither the ray of light nor the cry could be heard again, coming from the east that night.

After a while, Aragorn brought the boats back upstream. They groped along the shore for some distance, until
They discovered a small, shallow bay. A few low trees grew there, very close to the water, and behind them rose a steep rocky spur. The Company then decided to stay and wait for dawn:
It was pointless to try to make further progress at night. They did
No campsite, no fire lit, but huddled together in the moored boats, very close to each other.

Praise be to Galadriel's bow, and to the hand and eye of
"Legolas!" said Gimli, biting into a lembas wafer. That was quite a gamble, my friend! "But who can say what it affected?" asked Legolas.
"I can't," said Gimli. "But I'm glad the shadow has come."
No closer. I didn't like it at all. It reminded me too much of... the shadow in Moria-the shadow of the Balrog, it ended in a whisper.

"It wasn't a Balrog," said Frodo, still shivering with cold. A chill ran through him. "It was something colder. I think that's it..." T "What do you think?" asked Boromir eagerly, leaning out of his boat as if trying to catch a glimpse of Frodo's face.
I think... - No, I won't say, replied Frodo. In any case

And his downfall dismayed our enemies.

"It would seem so," said Aragorn. "But where are they, and how..." Many, and we do not know what they will do next. Tonight, we must all be sleepless! Darkness now envelops us. But what to do?


506

Time will tell, who can say? Keep your weapons close at hand!

Sam sat tapping the hilt of his sword as if counting on his fingers, and looking up at the sky. It's very strange. he murmured. The moon is the same in the Shire and at
Wilderland, or at least it should be. But either it's out of the running,
Or perhaps I'm completely wrong in my calculations. You'll remember, Sir Frodo, the moon was waning while we were lying on the float up Tree: a week before full maturity, I think. And it had been going on for a week. Last night, on the way, a new moon appeared, as thin a a nail trim, as if we had never spent a single moment in the Elven land.

Well, I distinctly remember spending three nights there, and I seem to remember several others, but I would swear it. It was never a whole month. You might think time dragged on. Don't count on it!

"And perhaps that was how it was," said Frodo.
Earth, perhaps, we were in a time that, elsewhere, has long since vanished. It was, I believe, only when Silverlode brought us back to that we have returned to the flow of time across the mortal lands to the Great Sea. And I remember no moon either.
New or old, in Caras Galadhon: only stars at night and the sun by day.

Legolas stirred in his boat. No, time never lingers.
he said; but change and growth are not present in all things and in all places. In the same way. For the Elves, the world moves, and it Fast and very slow. Fast, because they change themselves.
Little things happen, and everything else passes quickly: it's a sorrow for them. Slow, because they don't need to count the years of r The passing of the seasons is but ripples that repeat endlessly in the long, long stream. Yet, under the sun, all things eventually wea Finally, the end.

But wear and tear is slow in Lothlórien, said Frodo. The power
The Lady takes care of it. The hours are rich, though short. It seems, in Caras Galadhon, that Galadriel wields the Elven-ring.





507


That shouldn't have been said outside of Lorien, not even
"To me," said Aragorn. "Let's not talk about it anymore! But that's how it is, Sam:
In this land, one loses all sense of time. There, time flowed by at breakneck speed, for us as for the Elves. The old moon passed, and The moon waxed and waned in the outside world while we lingered. There. And last night, a new moon appeared. Winter is here.
Almost gone. Time flows towards a source of little hope.

The night passed in silence. No more voices or calls were heard from the other side of the water. The travelers, huddled in their boats beneath the heavy, humid clouds that had risen from the south and the distant seas. The roar of the river on
The sound of the rocks in the rapids seemed to grow louder and closer. The twigs of the trees above them began to drip.

When that day arrived, the world's mood towards them had
They became soft and sad. Slowly, dawn transformed into a pale light, diffuse and without shadows. There was mist on the river, and A white fog enveloped the shore; the shore could not be seen in the distance.
"I can't stand fog," said Sam; "but this one seems to bring good luck." Now maybe we can manage without these damned things. Goblins are watching us.

"Perhaps," said Aragorn. "But it will be difficult to find..."
The path, unless the fog lifts a little later. And we must find the path if we are to go through Sarn Gebir and reach Emyn. Muil.

I don't see why we should cross the rapids or follow the
"The river doesn't go any further," said Boromir. "If the Emyn Muil are before... then we can abandon these cockle-fishing boats and he on my own land.

"We can, if we march for Minas Tirith," said Aragorn, "but that has not yet been agreed upon. And such a path might be more More perilous than it seems. The Entwash valley is flat and marshy.
And the fog poses a deadly danger to those walking and carrying heavy loads. We wouldn't abandon our boats unless absolutely necessary.


508

But the enemy holds the eastern bank, objected Boromir.
And even if you pass through the gates of Argonath and arrive safely at Tindrock, what will you do next? Jump down the falls and land i

"No!" replied Aragorn. "Say rather that we will bear our
Boats along the old route to the foot of Rauros, and from there to the water again. Don't you know this, Boromir, or are you choosing? forget the North Staircase and the high seat on Amon Hen,
Which ones were made in the time of the great kings? I have at least one. The desire to stand in that high position again, before makin will guide us.

Boromir long resisted this choice; but when he
It became clear that Frodo would follow Aragorn, wherever he might be.
He left, he gave in. This is not the way of the men of Minas Tirith; he will abandon his friends in need, he said, and you too. You will need my strength if you ever want to reach Tindrock.
I will go as far as the large island, but no further. There, I will turn to my home, alone if my help has earned no reward. camaraderie.

The day was progressing and the fog had dissipated a little.
It was decided that Aragorn and Legolas should leave immediately. They advanced along the shore, while the others remained near the boa

The elves' ships might not sink, he said, but that doesn't mean we have to go through Sarn Gebir.
living. None have ever done so until now. No road has been built by the Men of Gondor in this region, for even at their height, Their kingdom did not extend along the Anduin beyond the Emyn Muil; but there is a portage route somewhere on the west bank,
If I can find it. It can't have perished yet; for light boats
I used to leave the Wildlands and go down to Osgiliath, and I still do. This was the case until a few years ago, when the Mordor Ores s multiply.





509


Rarely in my life has a boat come from the North, and
"The Ore people are prowling on the east bank," said Boromir. "If you go looking for..." Be warned, the danger will increase with every kilometer, even if you find a way.
"Danger lurks on every road leading south," Aragorn replied. "Wait for us one day. If we do not return by then... In time, you will kno You must accept a new leader and follow him as best you can.

It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and
Legolas climbed the steep slope and disappeared into the mist; but
His fears proved unfounded. Only two or three hours had passed. Time passed, and it was barely noon when the dark shapes appeared. The explorers reappeared.

"Everything is fine," said Aragorn as he descended the rope.
There's a runway that leads to a good landing spot, which is still usable. The distance isn't great: the start of the rapids is only half a mile below us, and they are scarcely more than a mile long. Soon after, the stream becomes clear.
and smooth again, although it's running fast. Our most difficult task
We need to transport our boats and luggage to the old portage route. We've found it, but it's quite a distance from the water's edge. here, and flows sheltered by a rock face, over a furlong or more
From the shore. We couldn't find where the landing was heading north. Lies. If it's still there, we must have passed it last night. We could be working very far in advance and yet miss it in the fog.
We fear we may have to leave the river now and head towards the portage as best we can from here. "It wouldn't be easy, even if we were all men," Boromir said.
"But, as we are, we will try," said Aragorn.

"Yes, we will," said Gimli. "The men's legs will drag on a..."
A difficult road indeed, while a Dwarf continues on his way, may his burden be twice as heavy as your own weight, Master Boromir!

The task proved difficult, but it was eventually accomplished. The goods were unloaded from the boats and transported to the top of the Boats were taken out of the water and hauled aboard. They were


510

Much lighter than expected. What tree does it grow from?
In the elven land, they were made, though even Legolas didn't know it; but the wood was hard and yet strangely light. Joyful and Pippin alone could easily transport their boat on flat ground.
Nevertheless, it took the strength of both men to lift and transport them to the ground that the Company now had to
cross. It rose gently, away from the river, a desert of mud and debris. Gray limestone blocks, with many hidden and concealed holes. with weeds and bushes; there were thickets of brambles, and
steep valleys; and here and there marshy pools fed by streams flowing from the terraces further inland.

Boromir and Aragorn carried the boats one after the other, while the others struggled and hurried behind them with the baggage. Finally with few other obstacles, apart from the encroaching brambles and

Many stones had fallen; they all advanced together. The fog persisted, suspended like veils from the ruined rock face, and from their The mist enveloped the river: they could hear its murmur and foam before the sharp shelves and stone teeth of Sarn Gebir, but they coul

There, the portage path, leading back towards the water's edge, flowed gently to the shallow edge of a small pool. It seemed were collected from the riverbanks, not by hand, but by the swirling water of the Sarn Gebir against a low jetty of
A rock that jutted out slightly into the stream. Beyond it, the
The shoreline rose abruptly into a grey cliff, and there was no further passage for pedestrians. The afternoon, already short, had passed, and a dark, cloudy sky.
Twilight was approaching. They were sitting by the water's edge, listening to the confused tumult and the roar of the rapids hidden in They were tired and drowsy, and their hearts were just as dark, like the day of twilight.

Well, here we are, and we have to spend another night here.
said Boromir. We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had a slumber, the idea of crossing the gates of Argonath at night frightens us all. W





511


Gimli did not reply: he nodded his head while remaining seated.

"Let's rest as much as possible now," said Aragorn. "Tomorrow, we'll have to travel by day again. Unless..."
The weather is changing again and playing a trick on us; we have a high chance of going unnoticed, without being seen by anyone on the east bank. But tonight, two people must take turns watching together: Three hours of rest and one hour of watch.

Nothing worse happened that night than a brief drizzle of
It was raining an hour before dawn. As soon as it was fully light, they
The fog was already beginning to lift. They stayed as close as possible; they could head west and glimpse the twilight. Low cliff shapes rising ever higher, shaded walls with their bases in the rushing river. By mid-morning, the clouds
They lowered the rain level, and it began to rain heavily. The tarpaulins covering their boats to prevent them from being flooded, and they were drifting; almost nothing could be seen in front of them or about them through the falling grey curtains.

The rain, however, did not last long. Slowly, the sky above cleared, and then suddenly the clouds dissipated and their Jagged fringes stretched northward, up the river.
The fog and mist had dissipated. Before the travelers stretched a vast expanse, a ravine with great rocky sides upon which clung, on sh and in narrow crevices, a few uprooted trees. The channel widened and narrowed, and the river became faster. They sped along.
with little hope of stopping or turning back, whatever they
They might cross paths further on. Above them stretched a band of pale blue sky.
Around them flowed the dark and shadowy river, and before them, black, obscuring the sun, were the hills of Emyn Muil, in which no open

Frodo, looking straight ahead, saw two large rocks approaching in the distance: like great pinnacles or stone pillars, they
They seemed. Tall, slender, and menacing, they stood one atop the other, on the side of the stream. A narrow passage appeared between t and the river carried the boats towards it.

"Behold the Argonath, the Pillars of Kings!" they cried. Aragorn. We'll pass them soon. Keep the ships in single file.


512
And as far apart as possible! Stay in the middle of the stream! As Frodo was carried towards them, the great pillars rose up Towers rose up to meet him. They seemed like giants, immense and gray, silent but menacing silhouettes. Then he saw that they were indeed shaped and molded: the know-how and power of yesteryear had
Despite the hardships they endured, they managed to preserve their youth through the ages, and the rains of forgotten years, the powerf They had been carved. On large pedestals founded in the
In the deep waters stood two great stone kings: motionless and indistinct. Their eyes and furrowed brows cast a stern gaze towards the Each man's left hand was raised, palm outward, in a gesture of warning; in each right hand was an axe; on each head were a ruined helme They still retained their majesty, silent guardians of a bygone era.

kingdom. Fear and terror seized Frodo, who cowered.
He lowered his eyes, closed them, and dared not look up as the boat approached. Even Boromir bowed his head as the boats circled. There in the shadow of the sentinels of Númenor. So they passed into the dark chasm of the Gates.

The steep cliffs rose to unexpected heights on either side. In the distance, the dark sky was visible. The black waters roared and An echo resounded, and a wind howled above them. Frodo crouched
He heard Sam, in front of him, muttering and moaning, bent over his knees: What a place! What a horrible place! Just let me out! that boat, and I'll never dip my toes in a puddle again, left alone by a river!

"Don't be afraid!" said a strange voice behind him. Frodo turned around.
and saw Aragorn, and yet not Aragorn; for Ranger's weather-worn face was no longer there. At the stern sat Aragorn, son of Arathorn, proud and upright, skillfully guiding the boat
blows; his hood was thrown back and his black hair floated in the wind. In the wind, a gleam shone in his eyes: a king returning from exiled in his own country.

"Do not be afraid!" he said. "I have long desired to contemplate the portraits of Isildur and Anarion, my ancestors. Beneath their shad





513

The son of Isildur of Valandil, heir of Elendil, has nothing to fear! Then the light in his eyes went out, and he spoke to himself: If only Gandalf were here! My heart yearns for him.
Minas Anor and the walls of my own city! But where are we going now? Shah, I'm leaving?

The chasm was long and dark, and filled with the sound of
The wind, the rushing water, and the echoing stones. It bent slightly. westward, so that at first everything was dark before us; but soon
Frodo saw before him a great shaft of light that kept growing larger. Rapidly. He approached, and suddenly the boats sped off in a wide and clear light.

The sun, long since set, shone in
A windy sky. The contained waters spread out in a long oval.
Lake, pale Nen Hithoel, surrounded by steep grey hills whose banks were covered with trees, but their tops were bare, gleaming coldly i The middle one stood slightly ahead of the others and separated from them by an island in the waters, around which
The river flowed, spreading out pale, shimmering arms. Distant, but
Deep within him, a low rumble, like a rolling sound, rose up, carried by the wind. Thunder heard in the distance.

"Here is Tol Brandir!" said Aragorn, pointing south. High peak. To the left rises Amon Lhaw, and to the right
To the right are Amon Hen, the hills of hearing and sight. In the time of the great kings, there were high seats upon them, and a guard No beast has ever been unleashed on Tol Brandir. Before the shadow
At nightfall, we will join them. I hear the endless voice of Rauros calling.

The Company paused, drifting south with the current that flowed across the middle of the lake. They ate a little, then they took their paddles and
They hastened onward. The hillsides to the west sloped down into shadow, and the sun became round and red. Here and There, a hazy star appeared. The three peaks rose before it.
They, darkening into the twilight. Rauros roared in a powerful voice 514
the voice. Night had already fallen on the rushing waters when the travelers finally arrived in the shadow of the hills.

The tenth day of their journey was over. Wilderland was behind them. They had no other choice but to go between the east and west route


io





Aragorn led them to the river's right bank. There, on its western side, in the shadow of Tol Brandir, a greenery The lawn sloped down to the water from the feet of Amon Hen.
Behind her rose the first gentle slopes of the hill, covered with trees, and the trees stretched westward along the curving shores. from the lake. A small spring cascaded down and nourished the grass.

"We shall rest here tonight," said Aragorn. "This is the lawn of Parth Galien: a pleasant place in the fine summer days of yesteryear." We hope that no harm has yet come here.

They hauled their boats onto the green banks, and next to
They then set up camp. They posted a guard, but had nothing to eat, nor could they see or hear their enemies. If Gollum had intended to They followed them, but he remained invisible and inaudible. Nevertheless,
As the night wore on, Aragorn grew increasingly uncomfortable and tossed and turned in his bed, tossing and turning. Early in the morni to Frodo, whose turn it was to look.
"Why are you waking up?" asked Frodo. "It's not your watch." "I don't know," replied Aragorn; "but a shadow and a
The threat grows while I sleep. It would be wise to gather information. Your sword. "Why?" asked Frodo. "Are there enemies nearby?"
"Let's see what Dard can show us," replied Aragorn.

Frodo then drew his elven sword from its scabbard. To his great dismay...
Perhaps the edges shone faintly in the night. Ores! he said. Not very close, and yet too close, it seemed.

"I feared so too," said Aragorn. "But perhaps they are not on this side of the river. Sting's light is dim, and it
This could indicate nothing more than spies from Mordor wandering the slopes of Amon Lhaw. I had never heard of ores before.

5i6





on Amon Hen. But who knows what might happen in these
Dark days ahead, now that Minas Tirith no longer controls the Anduin Passages. We must proceed with caution tomorrow.

The day arrived like fire and smoke. Down to the east, there
They were black bars of clouds, like the smoke from a large fire.
The rising sun illuminated them from below with flames of a dark red darkness; but soon it rose above them, into a clear sky. The summit of Tol Brandir was covered in gold. Frodo looked
I looked east and gazed at the high island. Its sides rose sharply from the rushing water. High above the towering cliffs.
They were steep slopes up which the trees climbed, rising one head above another; and above them still, gray faces of inaccessible rock, crowned by a large stone spire. Many

Birds were circling around, but there was no sign of any other living beings. You could see it.

After eating, Aragorn called the Company together. "The day has finally arrived," he said, "the day of
A choice we have long postponed. What will now become of our Company, which has traveled such a long road in camaraderie?
We turn west with Boromir and depart for the wars of Gondor; or turn east, towards Fear and Shadow; or else we will break our to meet up with friends and go here and there, according to each person's wishes?
Whatever we do, we must do it quickly. We cannot afford to linger here. The enemy is on the eastern bank, we know that; but I am afraid that the minerals may already be found on this side of the water.

A long silence settled in, during which no one spoke or moved.

"Well, Frodo," said Aragorn at last. "I fear the burden is placed upon you. You are the bearer designated by the Council." Your own path, only you can choose. On this point, I
I cannot advise you. I am not Gandalf, and although I have tried, I could not tell you how. I am not there to play his part; I do not k for this hour, if he had one. It seems highly likely that if he were here now, the choice would still be yours.
It's your destiny.

Frodo did not answer immediately. Then he spoke slowly. I know I have to hurry, yet I have no choice. The burden


517
This is heavy. Give me another hour, and I'll talk. Let me be alone! Aragorn looked at him with benevolent pity. Very well, Frodo.
"Son of Drogo," he said. "You will have one hour, and you..."
We will be alone. We will stay here for a while. But don't go far away or out of service.

Frodo sat for a moment, his head bowed. Sam, who
had observed his master with great concern, shook his head
He tilted his head and muttered: It's as clear as crystal, but it's no use. Sam Gambee has just set up his beam.

Shortly after, Frodo got up and walked away; and Sam saw
While the others held back and avoided eye contact, Boromir followed Frodo attentively until he disappeared from my sight into the trees at the foot of Amon Hen.

Wandering aimlessly at first in the woods, Frodo discovered that His feet were leading him towards the slopes of the hill. He arrived at a path, at the dilapidated remains of an old road.
In the steep places, stone staircases had been carved, but now they were cracked, worn and split by tree roots.
For a while he climbed, without worrying about which way he was going, until he came to a grassy place. Rowan trees grew there, and in In the middle was a large, flat stone slab. The small raised lawn, open to the east, was now bathed in the first rays of sunlight.
Frodo stopped and looked down at the river far below.
Towards Tol Brandir and the birds swirling in the great gulf of air between him and the uncharted island. The voice of Rauros It was a powerful roar mixed with a deep, throbbing rumble.

He sat down on the stone and rested his chin in his hand.
His hands were outstretched, his gaze turned eastward, but he saw little with his eyes. What had happened since Bilbo left the Shire wa that he remembered Gandalf's words. Time passed,
And yet, he was still no closer to having a choice.

Suddenly, he snapped out of his thoughts: a strange sensation. He sensed that there was something behind him, this hostile thing
All eyes were on him. He jumped up and turned around; but all that


5 1 8

To his great surprise, he recognized Boromir, and his face was smiling and kind.

"I was afraid for you, Frodo," he said, stepping forward.
Aragorn is right and the ores are close, so none of us should wander alone, and you least of all: so much depends on you. My heart is heavy too. May I stay and talk for a moment? Since I found you? It would comfort me. Where?
There are so many of them that every conversation turns into an endless debate. But perhaps two people together can find wisdom.
"You are kind," replied Frodo. "But I don't think that..." Any words will help me. For I know what I must do, but I'm afraid to do it, Boromir remained silent. Rauros roared incessantly.
The wind whispered in the branches of the trees. Frodo shivered.

Suddenly, Boromir arrived and sat down next to him. Are you sure?
"So that you don't suffer unnecessarily?" he said. "I want to help you. You need advice to make this difficult choice. Would you accept "I think I already know what advice you would give me, Boromir," said Frodo. "And it would seem wise, but only to warn my heart." Warning? Warning against what? Boromir asked sharply.
Against delay. Against the seemingly easier path. Against refusing the burden that falls upon me. Against-well, if that's the case. It must be said, against the trust in the strength and truth of men.

Yet, this strength protected you for a long time, far from home, in your small country, even if you didn't know it.

I have no doubt about the bravery of your people. But the world is changing. The walls of Minas Tirith may be strong, but they are not We will fall valiantly in battle. Yet, there remains hope. They will not fail.
"There is no hope as long as the Ring exists," said Frodo.

"Ah! The Ring!" exclaimed Boromir, his eyes shining. "The Ring! Is it not a strange fate to suffer so much fear and doubt for so little It was only a moment in Elrond's house. Could I not have...? Have you seen him again?


519

Frodo looked up. His heart suddenly froze. He was seized.
The strange glint in Boromir's eyes, yet his face remained kind and friendly. "It's better if he stays hidden," he replied.

As you wish. It's all the same to me, said Boromir. Yet I can't even speak of it? For you seem to think only of its power.
in the hands of the Enemy: of his evil uses, not his good ones. The world is changing, you say. Minas Tirith will fall, if the The ring endures. But why? Certainly, if the ring were with the Enemy. But why, if it were with us?

"Weren't you at the Council?" replied Frodo. "Because" We cannot use it, and what we do with it becomes evil.

Boromir stood up and began pacing the room impatiently. Then go ahead.
"Let's go!" he cried. "Gandalf, Elrond... all those people taught me." You can say that again. They might be right. Those elves As for half-elves and wizards, they might well face difficulties. Yet, I often doubt that they are wise and not simply timid.
Every man for himself. Sincere men, however, will not be.

corrupted. We, of Minas Tirith, remained steadfast even to the point of corruption. Long years of hardship. We do not desire the power Lords, our only strength is to defend ourselves; our strength lies in justice, in the cause. And there it is! In our need, chance illum The Ring of Power. It is a gift, I tell you; a gift to the enemies of Mordor. It is madness not to use it, to use the enemy's power aga History. What could a warrior, a great leader, not do at this hour? What could Aragorn not do? Or if he refuses, why not?
Boromir? The Ring would give me the power to command.
As I would drive out the armies of Mordor, and all men would gather under my banner!

Boromir paced the place, speaking louder and louder.
He seemed to have almost forgotten Frodo, while his conversation
They inhabited the walls and the weapons, and the gathering of men; and
He devised plans for great alliances and glorious victories; and he overthrew Mordor, and himself became a mighty one. King, benevolent and wise. Suddenly, he stopped and waved his hand. His arms.

"And they tell us to throw it away!" he exclaimed. "I'm not saying..."


520





Destroy it. That might be a good thing, if reason still offered a glimmer of hope. But it doesn't. The only plan proposed to For us, it's the fact that a hobbit can walk blindly through Mordor and offer the enemy every chance of recovering it.
Madness!

Surely you can see it, my friend? he said, now turning south. Denly again to Frodo. You say you're afraid. If that's the case, The most audacious among you should forgive you. But isn't it truly for your own good? A sense that rebels?

No, I'm afraid, said Frodo. I'm simply afraid. But I'm happy.
Hearing you speak so clearly has made me think. I see things more clearly now.

"So you will come to Minas Tirith?" Boromir exclaimed. His eyes shone and his face was full of enthusiasm. "You misunderstand me," said Frodo.
"But you will come, at least for a while?" Boromir insisted.
My city is not far now; and it is scarcely farther from there to Mordor than from here. We have been in the desert for a long time, And you need information about what the enemy is doing before you.
Take a step forward. Come with me, Frodo, he said. You need rest before your undertaking, if you must go. He laid his hand on the hobbi Trembling with suppressed excitement, he took a quick step.
She stepped back and looked anxiously at the tall man, almost twice her size and, on many occasions, of equal strength.

"Why are you so unpleasant?" asked Boromir. "I am a real Man, neither a thief nor a tracker. I need your ring: that you
You know it now; but I give you my word that I don't desire it. Keep it. Won't you at least let me put my plan to the test? Lend me the No! no! cried Frodo. The Council has forced me to endure this.
"It is through our own folly that the Enemy will conquer us," they cried. "Boromir. How that makes me angry! Fool! Obstinate fool! He i It is the men of Númenor who claim the Ring, not the men of Númenor. Hobbits. It is to you only by unfortunate chance. It could
She was mine. She should be mine. Give her to me!

5 21

Frodo did not reply, but walked away to the large apartment. A stone separated them. "Come, come, my friend!" he said. Boromir, in a softer voice: Why not get rid of it? Why not be... Free from your doubts and fears? You can blame me for that.
If you like. You could say I was too strong and took matters into my own hands. "For I am too strong for you, hobbit," he cried; and Suddenly, he jumped over the stone and threw himself at Frodo.
A beautiful and pleasant face was horribly transformed; a raging fire was in her eyes.

Frodo dodged and placed the stone between them again.
There was only one thing he could do: trembling, he pulled the ring from its chain and quickly slipped it onto his finger, even as Boro She gasped, gaped open for a moment, then started running at full speed, wandering and searching here and there among the rocks and tre

"You wretched scoundrel!" he shouted. "Let me get my hands on..."
You! Now I see what you're thinking. You will carry the Ring to Sauron.
and sell us all out. You were just waiting for your moment to leave us. In trouble. Cursed be you, you and all the hobbits, to death an and lay down on his face. For a moment, he remained motionless as if nothing had happened. The curse had overcome him; then suddenly, h

He stood up, passed his hand over his eyes, and ran away.
Tears. What have I said? he cried. What have I done? Frodo, Frodo! he cried. Come back! Madness has taken hold of me, But it is in the

There was no reply. Frodo didn't even hear his cries.
He was already far away, blindly climbing the path leading to
at the top of the hill. Terror and grief shook him, seeing in his mind the mad and ferocious face of Boromir, and his burning eyes.

Shortly afterwards, he reached the summit of Amon Hen alone, and
He stopped, panting. Through the fog, he glimpsed a wide, flat circle, paved with imposing flags and surrounded by a ruined rampart; and in the middle, set on four
Carved pillars formed a raised seat, accessible by a multi-step staircase. He climbed the steps and sat down on the ancient chair, feel


522

a lost child who had climbed onto the throne of the mountain-kings.

At first, he could see almost nothing. He seemed to be in a world of mist where only shadows reigned: the Ring was on Him. Then, in places, the mist dissipated and he could see him.
Numerous visions: small and clear as if they were right before his eyes, on a table, and yet so far away. There was no sound, only Vivid and luminous images. The world seemed to shrink, and He fell silent. He was seated on the Seat of Vision, on Amon
Hen, the hill of the Eye of Men in Númenor. To the east
He gazed upon vast unexplored lands, nameless plains, and uncharted forests. He looked north, and the Great The river stretched out beneath him like a ribbon, and the Misty Mountains
He stood small and hard like broken teeth. His gaze was directed westward, and he saw the wide pastures of Rohan; and Orthanc, the The summit of Isengard, like a black peak. To the south, it
He looked, and beneath his feet the Great River wound like a breaking wave and plunged over the Rauros Falls into a foaming Pit; a glit And he saw Ethir Anduin, the mighty delta of the river, and
Myriads of seabirds swirling like white dust in the sun, and below them a green and silver sea, undulating endlessly. lines.

But everywhere he looked, he saw signs of war.
The Misty Mountains teemed like anthills: ores gushed forth from a thousand holes. Beneath the branches of the Black Forest
There was a bloody struggle between the Elves and Men and ferocious beasts. The land of the Beornings was in flames; a cloud hung over

Smoke rose from the borders of Lorien.

Riders galloped across the grass of Rohan; wolves poured forth from Isengard. From the harbors of Harad ships The war took to the sea; and men sailed away from the East. To infinity: swordsmen, spearmen, mounted archers, Chiefs' chariots and loaded wagons. All the power of the
The Dark Lord was on the move. Then, turning south again, he saw Minas Tirith. It seemed distant and magnificent: white walls, with multiple towers, proud and beautiful on its mountainous seat;


523

The ramparts gleamed with steel, and its turrets shone brightly. Many banners flew. Hope was reborn in his heart. But against Minas Tir There, to the east, his gaze was involuntarily drawn. He passed
the ruined bridges of Osgiliath, the grimacing gates of Minas Morgul, and the haunted mountains, and he gazed Gorgoroth, the valley of terror in the land of Mordor. Dark
Ness lay there, under the sun. The fire glowed red amidst the smoke. Mount Doom was ablaze, and a great stench emanated from it. Finall Steel gate, adamant tower, he saw it: Barad-dûr, the fortress of Sauron. All hope had left him.

And suddenly, he felt the Eye. There was an eye in the The Dark Tower that did not sleep. He knew it had become
Aware of his gaze, a fierce and ardent will animated her. She leaped towards him; almost like a finger he felt, searching for him. Very quickly, this would nail him to the pillory, we would know exactly where.
He was. Amon Lhaw touched him. He glanced at Tol Brandir. He jumped out of his seat, bent down, and covered his face. head with its grey hood.

He heard himself shout: Never, never! Or was it: Truly...
I'm coming, I'm coming to you? He couldn't say. Then, like a flash... another point of power came to his mind, another Thought: Take it off! Take it off! Fool, take it off! Take off the Ring!

The two forces clashed within him. For a moment, perfectly balanced between their sharp points, he writhed and writhed. Suddenly, he re Neither the Voice nor the Eye: free to choose, and with a
He had a moment left to do it. He removed the ring from his wrist. He was kneeling in the full sun in front of the raised seat. A black shadow seemed to pass over him like an arm; Amon Hen missed, he groped westward and fainted. Then everything
The sky was clear and blue, and birds were singing in every tree.

Frodo stood up. He was overcome with great fatigue, but His will was firm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to


524

himself. I will now do what I must, he said. At least this is clear: the evil of the Ring is already at work, even in the The company, and the Ring, must leave them before it gets worse.
I won't go and do any harm. I'll go alone. Some are untrustworthy, others are not. Trust is too precious to me: poor old Sam, and Merry Pippin. Aragorn too: his heart yearns for Minas Tirith, and
He will be indispensable there, now that Boromir has turned to the dark side. I will go alone. Immediately.

He quickly went down the path and returned to the lawn, where Boromir had found him. Then he stopped, listening. He thought he could hear shouts and calls coming from the woods near the riverbank below.

"They're going to hunt me down," he said. "I wonder how long I..." I was gone. Hours, I suppose. He hesitated. What?
"What can I do?" he murmured. "I have to leave now, or I'll never leave. I'll never have this chance again. I hate leaving them, and I Without any explanation. But they'll surely understand. Sam will. And what else can I do?
Slowly, he took out the ring and put it back on his finger. He disappeared and descended the hill, less than a whisper of wind.

The others remained by the river for a long time. For quite some time. They had remained silent, constantly moving about; but now they They tried again to talk about other things, about their
A long journey and many adventures; they questioned Aragorn about the kingdom of Gondor and its ancient history, and
the remains of his great works that could still be seen in this strange border region of the Emyn Muil: the stone kings and the seats of Lhaw and Hen, and the grand staircase beside the
Rauros's falls. But still their thoughts and words strayed. Let us return to Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose? What to do? Why was he hesitating?

I think he's wondering which solution is the most desperate. said Aragorn. And he's quite right. It's now more hopeless than
Ever since we were monitored, the Company has always wanted to move eastward.


525

by Gollum, and we must fear that the secret of our journey has already been betrayed. But Minas Tirith is no closer to the Fire. and the destruction of the Burden.

We can remain there for a while and resist bravely; but Lord Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do

What Elrond himself acknowledged was beyond his power: either keeping the burden secret, or containing the enemy's full power. When he comes to take it, which of us would we choose?
Instead of Frodo? I don't know. We really miss him. Gandalf especially.

"Our loss is terrible," said Legolas. "Yet we must..." Decide without his help. Why can't we decide? And thus help Frodo? Let's remember that and then vote! should vote for Minas Tirith.

"Me too," said Gimli. "We were, of course, only a few." sent to help the Bearer on the way, so as not to go any further than we wished it; and none of us is bound by any oath or order. I seek Mount Doom. Flard was my departure from Lothlórien.
Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we have reached our destination. Ultimately, it is clear to me that I cannot abandon Frodo. would choose Minas Tirith, but if he does not, then I will follow him.
"And I too will go with him," said Legolas. "That would be..." Infidels, we must now bid farewell. It would indeed be a betrayal if we all left him, he said.
Aragorn. But if he goes east, then not everyone needs to go with him;
I also don't think everyone should do it. This undertaking is hopeless: it's about as much for eight people as it is for three or two, companions: Sam, who couldn't bear it any other way; and Gimli; and myself. Boromir will return to his hometown, where his
The father and his people need him; and with him, the others
We should go, or at least Meriadoc and Peregrin, if Legolas is there. He doesn't want to leave us.

"This is not going to work at all!" cried Merry. "We cannot abandon Frodo!"
Pippin and I always intended to go with him wherever he went, and we still do. But we hadn't realized what it would entail.


526

It seemed different from so far away, in the Shire or in Rivendell.
It would be madness and cruelty to let Frodo go to Mordor. Why? Can't we stop him?

"He must be stopped," said Pippin. "And that's what he is."
I'm sure he's worried. He knows we won't accept his proposal. He's heading east. And he doesn't like asking anyone to come with him. Po Pippin shuddered. But that poor old foolish hobbit, he should... you should know he doesn't need to ask. He should know that if we can'

"Please excuse me," said Sam. "I don't think you understand..."
He doesn't distance himself from my master at all. He doesn't hesitate for a second about the path to follow. Leave? Of course not! Wha In short? To him, I mean, forgive me, Master.
Boromir, he added, and turned around. That's when they parted.
Boromir, who had remained silent at first, covered up what Boromir had covered up. The outside of the circle had disappeared.

"Where has he gone?" Sam cried, looking worried. "He's..."
He's been acting a bit strange lately, in my opinion. But anyway, he's not involved in this. He's going home, like he always said; and It's his fault. But Mr. Frodo knows he must find...
Fatal cracks, if he can. But he's afraid. Now we've reached the point where, in fact, he's simply terrified. That's his problem. Of course, he received a certain education, so to speak - as all of us did.
We've been doing that since we left the house, otherwise he'd be so terrified he'd throw himself back into the River and run away. But to begin. And he's not worried about us either: if we go
With him or not. He knows we intend to do it. That's another point.
What's bothering him is that if he puts himself in an impossible situation to get there, he... I want to go alone. You'll see! We'll ha There will be trouble when he returns. Because he's going to mess everything up. Exactly, as sure as his name is Baggins.

"I think you speak with more wisdom than any of us, Sam," he said. "Aragorn. And what shall we do, if you are right?" Stop him! Don't let him go! shouted Pippin.
"I wonder?" said Aragorn. "He is the Bearer, and fate..." The burden rests on him. I don't think it's for us to...


527

Pushing it one way or the other. I don't think we should do that either.
We could not succeed, even if we tried. Other forces are at work much further away, much stronger.

Well, I'd like Frodo to get himself into trouble and come
"Come back, and let's get this over with," said Pippin. "This waiting..." Horrible! Has the time run out?
"Yes," said Aragorn. "The hour has long since passed. In the morning..." The situation is worsening. He must be called upon. At that moment, Boromir reappeared. He came out of
He approached the trees without saying a word. His face
He looked somber and sad. He paused, as if to count those present, then sat apart, his eyes fixed on the ground.
"Where have you been, Boromir?" asked Aragorn. "Have you seen Frodo?" Boromir hesitated for a moment. Yes and no, he replied.
Slowly. Yes: I found him a little higher up the hill, and I spoke to him. I urged him to come to Minas Tirith and not to leave.

To the east. I got angry and he left me. He disappeared. I've never seen anything like it, even though I've heard about it. In the stories. He must have put on the Ring. I couldn't find it. Again. I thought he would come back to you.

"Is that all you have to say?" asked Aragorn sternly. and not very kindly towards Boromir.
"Yes," he replied. "I won't say any more for the moment."

"That's terrible!" Sam cried, jumping up. "I don't know what..."
This man has done incredible things. Why should Mr. Frodo blame him? What on earth did he light? He shouldn't have; and if he did, damn We don't know what could have happened!

But he didn't want to keep it, said Merry. Not when he had escaped the intruder, as Bilbo used to do. "But where has he gone? Where is he?" cried Pippin. "He's... It's been ages since I left."
Boromir, how long has it been since you last saw Frodo? he asked. Aragorn. Half an hour, perhaps, he replied. Or perhaps one

528





hour. I have wandered for some time since. I don't know! I don't know! He put his head in his hands and sat down as if bent under the w "An hour since he disappeared!" Sam exclaimed. "We have to try... and find him immediately. Go!"
"Wait a moment!" cried Aragorn. "We must split into pairs, and arrange-here, wait! Wait!"

It was no use. They didn't even pay attention to him. Sam had... they left first. Merry and Pippin had followed them, and were already Legolas and Gimli were running. A sudden panic, even madness, seemed to have fallen upon society.

"We shall all be scattered and lost," lamented Aragorn. "Boro-Mir! I do not know what part you played in this misdeed,"
But help me now! Go and find those two young hobbits and keep them safe. At least find them, even if you don't find Frodo. Come back. If you find him there, or even the slightest trace of him, I will tell you. I will return soon.

Aragorn quickly set off in pursuit of Sam.
Just as he reached the small lawn among the rowan trees, he... carried it away, struggling to climb the hill, panting and calling: Frod

"Come with me, Sam!" he said. "Neither of us should be alone. There's something fishy going on. I can feel it. I'm going to the To the summit, up to the seat of Amon Hen, to see what can be seen. And
Look! That's what I suspected, Frodo has gone that way. Follow me. "Me, and keep your eyes open!" He quickened his pace.

Sam did his best, but he couldn't keep up with Aragorn's pace.
The Ranger, and he quickly found himself lagging behind. He hadn't gone far before Aragorn disappeared from his sight. Sam stopped and Suddenly, he put his hand to his head.

"Oh dear, Sam Gamgee!" he said aloud. "Your legs are too..." It's short, so think about it! Let me see! Boromir doesn't lie, That's not like him; but he hasn't told us everything.
This thing terrified Mr. Frodo. He became quite distressed. Suddenly, he made his decision: to leave. Where to?


529
Eastward? Not without Sam? Yes, even without her Sam. It's hard, terribly hard. Sam ran his hand over his eyes, wiping away the tears.
Tears. Calm down, Gamgee! he said. Think, if you can! He can't.
He can't fly across rivers, but he can't jump over waterfalls either. He doesn't have the equipment. So he has to go back to the boats. Return to the boats, Sam, like lightning!


French	English?


were.

He could hear shouts in the woods behind him, but he paid no attention.
He stood motionless for a moment, his mouth agape. A boat was gliding along the bank all by itself. With a shout, Sam He sped across the grass. The boat glided into the water.

"I'm coming, Mr. Frodo! I'm coming!" shouted Sam, and he threw it.
He grabbed onto the boat as it was pulling away from the shore. He missed it. He was a meter away. With a cry and a splash, he fell fac in the deep, fast-flowing waters. Gurgling, he sank down, and the river closed over his curly head.

A cry of distress rose from the empty boat.
The paddle whirled and the boat veered off course. Frodo had just arrived.
It was time to grab Sam by the hair as he stood up, seething and struggling. Fear was written all over his round, brown eyes. "Get in, Sam my boy!" said Frodo. "Now take my hand!"
"Save me, Mr. Frodo!" gasped Sam. "I'm drowning. I can't..." look at your hand.

There. Don't pinch, boy! I won't let you go. Walk. Don't splash around in the water, or you'll capsize the boat. Now, hold on to the si "Of all the troublemakers, you're the worst, Sam!" he said.

"Oh, Mr. Frodo, it's difficult!" said Sam, shivering. "It's


530





It's difficult; they're trying to manage without me and everything. If I hadn't guessed... Well, where would you be now? On the way without incident.
"Safe and sound!" said Sam. "All alone and without me to help you?" I couldn't have borne it, it would have killed me. "Coming with me would be fatal for you, Sam," he said. "Frodo, and I couldn't have borne that."
"It's not as certain as being left behind," Sam said. "But I'm going to Mordor." I know that very well, Mr. Frodo. Of course you are. And I'm coming with you.

"Sam," said Frodo, "don't stop me! The others will. I'll be back any minute. If they catch me here, I'll..."
I have to argue and explain, and I will never have the heart
or the possibility of going down. But I have to go immediately. It's the only way.

"Of course," replied Sam. "But not alone. I'm coming."
Either I go too, or neither of us goes. I'm going to wreck everything! The boats first.

Frodo actually laughed. A sudden warmth and joy overwhelmed him.
That touched his heart. "Leave one!" he said. "We'll need it. But you... I can't come like this without your equipment, your food, or a

"Wait a moment, I'll go get my things!" Sam exclaimed.
Impatiently. Everything is ready. I thought we should be leaving today. He hurried towards the campsite, took his backpack out of pile where Frodo had placed it when he had emptied the ship of its
I took some company belongings, a spare blanket and a few other items. Some food packets, and they came running back.

"All my plans are ruined!" exclaimed Frodo. "It's no use trying to escape. But I'm glad, Sam. I can't tell you how glad."
Come! It's obvious we were meant to go together. We'll leave, and may the others find a safe path! Strider, take care of them. I don't "It's possible, Mr. Frodo. It's possible," said Sam.
So Frodo and Sam set off together for the final stage of their quest. Frodo rowed away from the shore, and the river


531

carried them away quickly, along the western arm, and beyond the
The menacing cliffs of Tol Brandir. The roar of the great falls. It was getting closer. Even with the help Sam could provide, it was a difficult task to cross the current at the southern end of the island and steer the boat eastward, towards the opposite shore.

They eventually landed again on the southern slopes.
of Amon Lhaw. There they found a gently sloping shore, and they
He pulled the boat far out, well above the water, and hid it as well as they could hide behind a large rock. Then, carrying their shoul They set out, burdened by their loads, searching for a path that would lead them back, beyond the grey hills of Emyn Muil, and down tow of the Shadow.







