
Spanish About the hobbits

This book deals mainly with the hobbits, starting from them
pages the reader can discover much about its character and a
little about its history. You will also find more information
in the selection of the Red Book of Westmarch that
I've published it, based on the title of The Hobbit. Hex
history derives from the previous chapters of the Red Book,
composed by his own Bilbo, the first hobbit in action
famous in the world in general, and called for in Italy
Come back, those who narrate their journeys to the East and
on return: an adventure that later involved all the hobbits
in the great events of that era that were related here.

However, many people may want to know more about this
notable people from the beginning, while some may not poser
the previous book. For readers' tales, here are some notes above
most important points of the hobbit tradition, y
If you briefly recall your first adventure.

The hobbits are a discreet but very old-fashioned community
as numerous as in actuality; Because they love peace
, tranquility and well-cultivated land: a well-organized field and
cultivado was on favorite place. No
entienden not appreciate more complicated machines
like a forge fuel, a water mill or a manual cloth, anyway
there were workers with the herramientas. Included in the antigüedad
, solían rehuir a la «corpulent people», como nos llaman, y
now we avoid with disappointment and are difficult to return to
meet. Keep a quick eye and a sharp view, and everywhere
keep them corpulent and don't be unnecessarily afraid, they are
Agile and agile in your movements. Poseyeron


from


 


the beginning is the art of quickly disappearing
silently when corpulent people with whom they don't want to meet pass by
torpidly; and they have developed this art to the point where men are concerned
it seems magical. But, in reality, hobbits have never been studied
magic of no kind, and its unique character must only be
a professional skill that includes knowledge, practice and practice
Amistad with the land they have an inimitable para
razas más grandes y torpes.

They are a small people, smaller than the Enanos: less corpulent
and robust, although in reality they are not very much
lower. On high ground it is variable, swinging between two
four pies of our medicine. Rare vez llegan now a three pies;
but they have lamented, they say, and in the antigüedad
they were taller. Follow the Red Book, Bandobras Tuk
(Bramador de Toros), hijo de Isumbras III, half four pies and five pulls
and he knew how to ride a horse. It was surpassed in all
the hobbit registers only for two famous characters of the antigüedad; but it was curious
assumption is discussed in this book.

As for the hobbits of the Comarca, of quienes
they deal with these matters, on the days of their peace and prosperity
a happy village. Dress in bright colours, being
notable aficionados of amarillo and green; but rarely used
zapatos, ya que sus pies tenían la soles duras y correosas y estaban cubiertos
of an expensive rolled hair, very similar to the one of your hairs, that
she was commonly brown. Thus, the only office that is not very practised
between them was the manufacture of zapatos; but they held on
They are large and difficult and can do a lot of other useful and good things.
Their faces were, as a general rule, more kindly than beautiful
, even, with bright eyes, colored lips, with mouths leaning towards the
laughter, comer and drink. Y reían, comían y
baby, eating and drinking, being aficionados of simple things
at all times, you are happy every day (when you can get it
). They were hospitalaries and delied themselves at parties and parties
the gifts, which are given freely and accepted with enthusiasm.

It is evident, in effect, that the hobbits weigh the distance behind them
they are our relatives: much more they look to us than the elves, or even that
the enanos. Previously they spoke the languages ​​of men, above


 


manner


, and they practically enjoy and disgust them the same things
to the men. But that's not possible
Find out exactly what our parenthesis is. The origin of the hobbits goes back to them
Old days, now lost and forgotten. Only the elves
they also preserve some register of this disappeared era, and on  
traditions center cases exclusively in their own history.
history has not been mentioned. However, it is clear that the hobbits, indeed, lived.
They lived silently in the Middle East for many years before those people
you want to know about your existence. Y, to be the world, after all,
full of countless extra creatures, these little people
they seem to have very little importance. But on Bilbo's days
and Frodo, on his heir, suddenly turned away, without complaining to him
, important and renowned, and they disturbed them
planes of the Sabios and the Grandes.

Today, the third day of the Middle Tierra, ya
they have passed a lot, and the shape of all the lands has changed; but leave
the regions where the hobbits lived and were without doubt the same
where they still persist: the north east of the Old
World, to the east of the sea. From the original place, the hobbits
From Bilbo's era, no knowledge was preserved. Love for acquaintance
(except for genealogical knowledge) was not generalized among
ellos, but also some people in the older families who
study their own books, and even collect the related ones
ancient times and dirty lands of elves, elfs and men. Sus
own registers only start after the arrival in the county, y
The most ancient leyendas can only be reassembled
on Wandering Days. Sin embargo, estas
leyendas, and the evidence of its peculiar words and
customs, let it be clear that, like many other peoples, hobbits have
left in the west in a remote past. The first few reports seem to be visible to you
era in which they lived in the upper Anduin valleys, among
the trees of the Bosque Verde el Grande and the Montañas Nubladas.
Ya no se sabe con certeza
why they subsequently embarked on the difficult and hairy journey of the mountains of Eriador. Sus propios
related to the multiplication of men in the world and in
a
shadow that fell over the forest, obscuring it
y llamándolo Bosque Negro.
Before crossing the mountains, the hobbits
They have been divided into three different breeds:
the Pies de Arpa, the Pies de Piedra and the Pies de Falo. Los Pies de Arpa were
of more dark skin, more small and short, beardless and
corpulent; his feet and hands were larger; y




 


 
botas; his hands and feet were clean and agile; y...
they prefer the high lands and the lowlands. The Stoors were larger,
time; but one of the first people in the world would be important to survive.
They prefer the llanuras and the river banks. Los Fallohides were
clearer skin and hair, taller and thinner
that the others; they love the trees and the woods.

The Harfoots had a lot of relationship with the Enanos in the anti-güedad
, and they lived for a long time on the slopes of the mountains. If
they left ready to go to the west and wandered around Eriador until then
the Summit of the Winds, while the others still encounter each other in the Saved Lands. They were
the most normal and representative variety of the hobbits,
and with the most numerous differences. They were the most inclined to
They were established in a single place, and were preserved for a long time in their ancestral habit
to live in tunnels and torments.

The Stoors spent a lot of time in the orillas of the Gran Río
Anduin, and they were less shy with the men. They left to the west afterward
Harfoots and followed the course of Aguafuerte hacia el Sur
; and there many of them lived for a long time between Tharbad
and the limits of the Tierras Dundas before turning to the north.

Los Fallohides, los menos numerousos, were one
septentrional rama. They were more friendly to the Elves than to others
Hobbits, and they were more skilled with the language and song that
with the artesanías; and in the past they preferred the horse to the heart.
Cross the mountains north of Rivendel and lower
by the Hoarwell River. En Eriador ready if mixed with
the other species that have preceded them, but at the same time they are something else
more daring and adventurous, we would meet them as we went
leaders or jefes among the clans of the Harfoots or the Stoors. Included
in Bilbo's era, the mighty head of Fallohidish could still happen
noticed among larger families, such as Tuk and them
Señores de los Gamos.


 


5


In the western lands of Eriador, between the Cloudy Mountains
and the Mountains of Moon, the Hobbits met men as well as men
Elfos. Indeed, a remnant of the Dúnedain lived there,
kings of the men who sailed across the sea from the Western Sea; but
They were talking rapidly in the lands of the Northern Kingdom
they are going wide and also in the heart. Have a place
From above for the next few people, and in a short while the hobbits came out,
even as a veteran; This occurred in Bree and in the Bosque Chet,
who was encountered among the elders, at a thousand thousand in the east of the Comarca.
 
It was on these first days, without doubt, that the hobbits
They learned the letters and began to write them the way they were
the Dúnedain, who many times before have learned the
art of the Elves. And on those days they also forgot something
idiom that hubieran used before, and spoke from there
Common language, the Oestron as he called it, that was
running in all the lands of the reyes from Arnor hasta
Gondor, and on all the coasts of the Sea from Belfalas hasta
Moons. Without embargo, they kept some of their own words, as above
own names of months and days, and a great number of
personal names of the past.

For this time, the legend about the hobbits was first used
history with a count of years. Because it happened in him
año mil seiscientos one of the Third World Edad que los
hermanos Fallohide, Marcho y Blanco, partieron de Bree;
Y tras obtain permission of the supreme king of
Fornost, cruzaron el río Baranduin with a
great hobbits sequel. Crossaron el Puente de
the stone arches, built in time
Kingdom of the North, and they occupied the entire land that extended farther away
live in it, between the river and the Quebradas Lejanas. Todo lo que
if
the demands were to be maintained
in good condition the Great Bridge and all the other bridges and chimneys,
que apuraran a los
mensajeros of the king and who recognize his señorío.


Así
comenzó the count of the Comarca, pues the year of the cross
of the
Brandywine (as the hobbits gave him the name) was converted into
the first year of the region, and all the later years were counted starting from
el. Immediately, Western hobbits fell in love with him again
linked to the history of Men and Elves. While they still exist
a king, they were nominally their subditos, but, in fact, they were
governed by their own jefes and not to be confused absolutely
los contecimientos del mundo exterior. Hasta la última battle en Fornost con




 



El Señor Brujo de Angmar sent bows with his help.
Greenfields, SR 1147, where Bandobras Took derotó to a
del rey, o eso stenían, aunque ninguna historia de los Hombres
records it. But in this war the Northern Kingdom ended; y
Entonces los hobbits tomaron la terra como suya y eligieron
from entering his jefes to a thain to flaunt the authority of
rey disappeared. There, during a thousand years
The wars disturbed them little, and they prospered and multiplied
tras la Plaga Oscura (SR 37) until the disaster of the Largo
Winter and the shadow that followed her. Miles
perecieron entonces, pero los Días de Escasez (1158-1160) ya habían
passed in the era of this story and the hobbits were there
newly accustomed to abundance. The earth was rich and peaceful, y
although he left for a long time when he left,
previously it had been well cultivated, and there the king had numerous pastures
granjas, cornfields, vineyards and forests.

If you extend four words from the Quebradas Lejanas until it
Brandy Wine Bridge, and five minutes from the northern corners
the southern seas. The hobbits called the Comarca,
to be the region of authority of its Thailand and a district
well organized trade. and there, in this pleasant rincó del
world, if they dedicate themselves to their orderly life, every time
pay less attention to the world outside, whence
If dark things moved, they had to believe that peace and abundance were the rule in the Middle East


y
the right side of all sensible people.
Forgotten
or they ignored the little they had learned about
the
Guardians and people's workers hicieron possible the large peace of the Comarca. De
hecho
, estaban protegidos, pero
habían dejado de recordarlo.
At no time did the hobbits of any class become warlike, and,
Therefore, many have seen themselves obliged to fight to support themselves
in a harsh world; but in Bilbo's time that was it
historia muy antigua. The last battle, before the beginning of this story, and that's it
the only one that hovered inside the front
of the Comarca, was inmemorial: the Battle of
the Invasion of the Orcs. Even if the climate had softened, y
the lobos that once flew voraciously from the North to


 




 
the raw white winters were now only a piece of abuelos. So,
although they still had some reserves of weapons in the region,
These are mainly used as trophies, worn on footballs or
en paredes, or gatherings in the Michel Delving museum.
The Mathom house was called; because whatever the hobbits do
they didn't want immediate use, but they weren't willing to pull,
I called him mathom. Their lives were inclined to
llenarse of mathoms, and many of the gifts that
they passed from hand to hand they were from that class.

However, tranquility and peace have curiously disappeared from this town
resistant. They were, as the case may be, difficult to intimidate
matar; And they were, quizás, so tirelessly aficionados
good things, above all because, when they are needed, they can ignore
ellas and survive the cruelty of pain, the enemies or
the climate of a form that shadowed people no
They know them well and don't see any more about their best friends and theirs
well-fed rostros. Even slow to peel and for diversion do not mataban
nothing alive, there were valientes corralados and, in case of necessity,
they can also use weapons. Disparaban well with the bow, you can
they had a sharp view and were safe in the white. Not only with arcos y


 


flechas. If any hobbit were to stand on a stone, it was good to stand
quickly, as well as all the intruding beasts.

All the hobbits were originally vivid as agujeros in the soil, or
they created it, and in such experiences they also felt like it
house; but with the passage of time they were obliged to do so
adopt other forms of residence. In reality, in the region, in Bilbo's time
As a general rule, only the most well-known and poorest hobbits
they preserve the ancient customs. The poorest people follow living
with only one ventana or ninguna; while the adinerados
They build brighter versions of the simple excavations
from antaño. But they are not found in all parts suitable places for these large and branched tunnels
(o smials, como los llamaban)
; and in the hills and the lowlands, the hobbits,
as they multiplied, they began to build on the surface. De hecho, included
In the mountainous regions and the most ancient mountains, like Hobbiton
art is found, perhaps, in the old mansion of Bree, El Pisador.
or Tuckborough, or in the main municipality of the Comarca, Michel
When you enter the Quebradas Blancas, you still have many houses
de madera, ladrillo or piedra. These were especially favored by
millers, herders, cordlers, carriages and others by them
style; even when they were wondering where to live, the hobbits had
I have been accustomed for a long time to build caps and tall ones.

It is said that the custom of building granjas and graneros
started among the inhabitants of Marish, now
at Brandivino. Los hobbits de ese barrio, el
Este notebook, they were big enough and heavy enough, and they were used
bottles of wine when there is barro. But it was well known
there were blood from the Stoors in a large part of their blood, as he showed it
the fleece that many grew up in the barbilla. Ningún Harfoot ni
Fallohide had some stubble on his beard. De hecho, the people of
Marish and de los Gamos, to the east of the Rio, where I am
occupied, they arrived in their major part later in the region
from the top; and they also have many peculiar names
and foreign words that are not encountered anywhere else in the region.

It is probable that the art of construction, like many other workshops
, derived from the Dúnedain. But the hobbits can
have learned it directly from the elves, the masters of the men above


 


youth


. Because the elves of the High Lines still don't have it
abandoning the Middle East, and still living there for the same time
Puertos Grises, read to the west, and in other places to the
alcance of the Comarca. Three elf towers of inmemorial edad
they can also see the hills of the Tower, even beyond them
western frontiers. They shine in the light of the moon. The highest
she was the greatest woman, erudite and solitary above a green hill. Los
Hobbits of Westgarthing say that they can reach the sea
I know how to scale it up. Indeed, few hobbits have seen it
sailed by the sea, and fewer still have returned to






 


clannish and reckoned up their relationships with great care.
They drew long and elaborate family-trees with innumerable
branches. In dealing with Hobbits it is important to remember
who is related to whom, and in what degree. It would be
impossible in this book to set out a family-tree that included
even the most important members of the most important
families at the time which these tales tell of. The genealogical
trees at the end of the Red Book of Westmarch are a small
book in themselves, and all but Hobbits would find them
exceedingly dull. Hobbits delighted in such things, if they were
accurate: they liked to have books filled with things that they
already knew, set out fair and square with no contradictions.


2

Concerning Pipe-weed

There is another astonishing thing about Hobbits of old that
must be mentioned, an astonishing habit: they imbibed or
inhaled, through pipes of clay or wood, the smoke of the
burning leaves of a herb, which they called pipe-weed or leaf,
a variety probably of Nicotiana. A great deal of mystery
surrounds the origin of this peculiar custom, or art as the
Hobbits preferred to call it. All that could be discovered about
it in antiquity was put together by Meriadoc Brandybuck
(later Master of Buckland), and since he and the tobacco of
the Southfarthing plays a part in the history that follows, his
remarks in the introduction to his Herblore of the Shire may
be quoted.

This, he says, is the one art that we can certainly claim
to be our own invention. When Hobbits first began to smoke
is not known, all the legends and family histories take it for
; for ages folk in the Shire smoked various herbs, some
fouler, some sweeter. But all accounts agree that Tobold
Hornblower of Longbottom in the Southfarthing first grew up
the true pipe-weed in his gardens in the days of Isengrim the
Second, about the year 1070 of Shire-reckoning. The best


 


II


home-grown still comes from that district, especially the
varieties now known as Longbottom Leaf, Old Toby, and
Southern Star.

How Old Toby came by the plant is not recorded, for to
to confirm that it is, I believe, probable that it is certain. And certainly, it was
recent letters between Enanos and other people,
Explorers, Magos or vagabundos, who also pass by
because of this ancient cross of fireplaces. The house and the center of
Pony, who has been maintained by the Mantecona family since
tiempos inmemoriales.

Of all the forms, observations that I made for me
Many trips above me have convinced me that the grass is there
It is not native to our regions until it arrived in the north
from the bottom Anduin, where, I suspect, was
Originally made on the sea by Western men. It grows abundantly
in Gondor, and there it is richer and greater than in there
North, whence it never becomes sylvan, and only flowers there
Warm and protected places like Longbottom. Los Hombres de Gondor
They call it sweet galenas and appreciate it only for its fragrance
flores. From this earth it must be transported by you
Camino Verde during the long journeys between the streets
Elendil y nuestros days. But including the Dúnedain of Gondor
we attribute this merit: the hobbits were the first to introduce it into pipes. No siquiera
the magicians thought about this before us. Anyway one
The magician who knew us learned the art a long time ago and moved on a lot
fit in the way everything was proposed.


12


 


3

Of the Ordinance of the Condado

El Condado was divided into four barrios, the Farthings
you mentioned, North, South, East and West; y estos
often in various popular lands, which still bring them up
names of some of the ancient main families, even for the
It's the era of this story and you won't find these names alone
in your country popular correspondents. In all cases the Tuk still live there
Tierra de los Tuk, but this was not so in the case of many other families, as
los Baggins or los Boffin. Fuera de los Farthings estaban
las Marcas del Este y del Oeste: la Tierra de los Gamos (pág. 129); y la
Marca del Oeste, added to Condado in SR 1452.

El Condado at this moment would only be taken into account.
Getting and buying food took up most of your time. En
other hired men were, by general rule, generous and not codeicious,
until satisfied and moderate, in the way that fincas, granjas, talleres
and small businesses tend to remain unchanged throughout
generaciones.

Quedaba, above all, the ancient relative tradition
to the great king of Fornost, or Norbury as the llamaban,
to the north of the Comarca. But you don't have to be king during cases
during a thousand years, and including the ruins of Norbury del Rey were
cubiertas de hierba. However, the hobbits still talk about saving people
Evil things (like trolls) that you don't know
rey. You can attribute to the king of the past all his
essential leyes; and for the general, observe the laws of the free tree, because
they were the Reglas (as they said), old and just.

It is certain that the Tuk family has been pre-eminent for a long time;
may the Thai cargo have passed (of the Oldbucks
) some letters before, and the jefe Tuk has been taken
This is the title from the words. El Thain was the señor of the Assembly of the Comarca
, and captain of the list of the Region and of the Hobbitry in it
weapons; but like the list and the assembly only if they celebrate at the same time
emergency, what you don't know, the title of Thain has
Dejaded to be more than nominal dignity. The Tuk family


 


13


he followed, de secho, enjoying a special respect, he could follow being
numerous and extremely rich, and was inclined to
produce strong characters in each generation
Peculiar habits and even adventurous temperament. These are the latest qualities
, without embargo, they were now more well tolerated (among the ricos) than
generally approved. No matter what, the custom persisted
refer to the family head like El Tuk, y de
add to your name, if necessary, a number: like Isengrim
II, por ejemplo.

The only royal official in the Comarca at that time was the Alcalde
of Michel Delving (or of the Comarca), who was elected each
you are years old at the Feria Libre de las Colinas Blancas en Lithe,
It is decided on the Verano solstice. As mayor, in only one case he had to be
preside over the banquets that take place at the fiestas of the Comarca, which
they celebrate at frequent intervals. But the cargoes of Jefe de Correos
They manage both the Mensajeros Service and the Guard. Estos
they were the only services in the region, and the Mensajeros were the
more numerous and much more active than the two. No
all the hobbits were read, but those who were wrote them
constantly to all your friends (there is a selection of yours
relatives) who live longer than a late walk.

The hobbits call their sheriffs
), only a pluma en sus gorras; and in practice they were...
policy, or the equivalent more sought that poseían. Ellos
So, they didn't wear uniforms (such things were quite inappropriate,
more well-informed than police, more concerned about them
extra videos of the beasts and the people). Throughout the Comarca
only have two of them, three in each Penacho Cuarto, for the Internal Work.
A larger enough body, which varies according to necessity, can be used to demarcate
the limits" and to ensure that the Forests of any land, large or
small, they will not be converted into harassment.

At the time this story began, the Limitators, as they were
call, they have increased a lot. There were a lot of them
inform and ask about extra people and creatures
who wonder over the front or above them: the first signal of that
everything was not as it should be, and he always had it except


in


 


the stories and legends of the year. Few people paid attention to the signal, y
no one knew Bilbo had any idea what he foresaw.
They have spent sixty years since embarking on memorable journeys,
and it was once included among the hobbits, who were born in the past
with the greatest frequency possible; but evidently there was a lot of it
considerable remark that he had made.
I didn't tell anyone how much or so little it contained, I didn't ask Frodo, come on
favorite sobrino. And he continued looking secretly at the ring he had
found.


4

Of the hallazgo of the Ring

As told in The Hobbit, one day I went to Bilbo's door and
great Wizard, Gandalf el Gris, and three enanos with
él: nada less than Thorin Escudo de Roble, descendant
of kings, and his two companions in exile. With ellos
he left, on his own account, one morning
April, year 1341 of the Cálculo de la Comarca, hacia una
bush mountain, at the foot of Erebor in the Valley, many miles in the East. There
searched for everything, and the Dragon who guarded the treasure



 






I cannot advance or retreat. Bilbo accepted the offer; y
the game, more through intelligence (as it seems) than through ingenuity; pues
at the end I didn't know the enigma resolver, and I shouted to Al
meet the ring that was remembered and forgotten,
Gollum did not respond,
although he asked for three answers.

It is certain that the authorities disagree on this last question...
It was a simple question and not a certain thing in the strictest sense...
to the miserable creature in desventaja. At the end, reuniting
rules of the game; but everything coincides in that, accept it and
Trying to get the answer, Gollum asked straight away
promise. And Bilbo pressed him to fill his mouth; pues
The idea struck her that this viscous creature could result
false, although such promises are considered sacred, and in the past
everyone, except the most evil, fear breaking it. But





 


After the first days alone in the darkness, Gollum's heart was black, and
the journey involved it. He got out and went back up
island, of which Bilbo did not know anything, not much light in the dark
water. Here, he thought, yacía su ring. Now let's hambre
and he was furious, and once his treasure was with him,
no temería a ninguna arma.

But the ring was not on the island; I have lost it, I have it
disappeared. His grit caused an escalofrío on Bilbo's sword, anyway
I didn't understand what happened. But Gollum finally has it
led to a conclusion, too late. What he has in them
bolsillos?, gritó. The light in his eyes was like one
green llama while he ran back to ask the hobbit and get back up
Treasure. Just in time, Bilbo left the pilgrim and left the blind
after passing by, drain the water; and once again
his sister saved him. As he ran, he put his hand in the bag
and the ring slipped silently on its side. That's how it was
Gollum came to him and was there to keep watch
the salt, so that the thief does not escape. Bilbo
I followed it with caution while I followed it fast, slandering and talking about the same advice
above on Treasure; of which conversation finally included Bilbo
He gained truth, and he brought hope to her in the darkness: it
I had encountered the marvelous ring and had an opportunity to escape
de los minerales y de Gollum.

Finally they detuvieron before an invisible opening
which led to the lower doors of the mines, on this side
of the mountains. Then Gollum grabbed himself, oiling himself
y escuchando; And Bilbo was trying to kill him
sword. But I took pity on him, and still kept the ring, it
he who resided on his only hope, I can't use him to help him get married
on coraje. He jumped over Gollum in the darkness and found himself
by the pass, I pursue the grits of hatred of my enemy.
and desperation: ¡Ladrón, thief! ¡Bolson! We will hate him forever!

Now well, it's a curious thing that this isn't the story like Bilbo
he told it to his companions first. Para ellos, su relato fue que
Gollum promised to give her a gift if he liked it


 


game


; but when Gollum went to look for it on his island, he discovered that the treasure had disappeared: a magical ring that
the
they have given away a lot of time at their birthdays. Bilbo assumes this is it
it was the same ring he had met, and how he had gotten it
I play, ya was suyo por derecho. But being in the open,
I say nothing to the respect and hizo that Gollum will show her
Salida, as a reward instead of a gift. Bilbo
I am aware of this story in my memories, and it seems that I will never alter it
él mismo, ni siquiera después del Concilio de Elrond. Evidently,
followed by appearing in the original Red Book, as in various versions
the copies and summary. But many copies contain it
true story (as an alternative), derived without doubt from notes of
Frodo or Samwise, those who discover the truth, anyway
apparently no one was willing to drink anything
escrito por el viejo hobbit.
Gandalf, without embargo, described the first story of Bilbo in this way
I listened to it, and continued feeling a lot of curiosity about it
ring. Finally, among many questions, I delivered the true story to Bilbo
, which I kept close to me for a while; but
The magician seemed to consider the truth important. Anyway
no if I tell Bilbo, he will also consider it important, y
true from the beginning: quite the opposite of your custom. The idea of ​​a
The gift was not, in all ways, a mere Hobbit invention.
Bilbo, after confessing, was prompted by Gollum's conversation
that had been lost by chance; Gollum, of course, called the ring «up
"cumpleaños" gift many times. Gandalf also liked it
strange and suspicious; But I didn't find out the truth
This point has been around for many years, as will be true in this one
book.
Of Bilbo's later adventures, little more can be said here.
often on his quest, mainly to help his friends; but it's...

 
With the help of the ring, he escaped from the guardians of the mineral
He crossed the door and was reunited with his companions. He used the ring y
I kept it secret as much as I could. Trans regress
at home, he never went back to talking to Nadie, except with Gandalf





y Frodo; and most people in the region knew about its existence,
or at least I would create it. Only to Frodo did he show her the story of
on Viaje que estaba escribiendo.

On the sword, Aguijón, Bilbo took over the chimenea, and up
marvelous cowhide, gift from los Enanos del
Treasure of the Dragon, I lent it to a museum,
realized at Casa Michel Delving Mathom. But I looked at it in a cajón de Bolsón Cerrado
the old hat and cap that he used on his travels;
and the ring, tied with a thin string, remains on
pocket.

Returned to your house in Bolsón Cerrado on June 22nd, to
the five and two years (SR 1342), and nothing notable
It will take place in the region until Mr. Bolsón begins the preparations
for the celebration of one hundred ounces
cumpleaños (SR 1401). At this point this history begins.




At the end of the Third Edad, the paper was desempeñado por los hobbits
in the great contributions that led to the inclusion of the Region in the
Reino Reunido despertó entre ellos un
more interested in his own history; and many of its traditions
, hasta entonces mainly orals, fueron recopiladas y
written. The largest families also took care of it
the rewards of the King in general, and many of his friends
they studied their ancient histories and legends. At the end of the
Third Edad, in the region various libraries have been created which contain numerous
historical books and registers. The mayor of these collections probably was
written by Barahir, nephew of the mayordomo Faramir,

in Underworld.
The Findegil copy page contains the entire copy
the «Elvish Bilbo Translations». These are three volumes
20
It turned out to be a work of great skill and erudition, in which,
between 1403 and 1418, use all available sources
in Rivendel, both alive and written. But how
Frodo used them little, in only dedicated cases
on the Old Days, no mention here.
















 
Since Meriadoc and Peregrin were converted into their jefes
large families, and at the same time maintained their connections
con Rohan y Gondor, las bibliotecas de Bucklebury y
Tuckborough contains much that does not appear in it
Red Book. In Brandy Hall there were many jobs that were processed above
Eriador and the history of Rohan. Some of these are fueron
made or started by your own Meriadoc, even in the Region
It was recorded mainly through the Herbario de la Comarca, y
for the Years' Count in which the relationship was discussed
of the calendars of the Comarca and Bree with the Rivendel,
Gondor and Rohan. I also wrote a short review above
Palabras y Nombres Antiguos en la Comarca, showing especial interés en
discuss the parenthesis with the language of the Rohirrim
of words from the Comarca such as mathom and ancient elements in them
nombres de lugares.

In Great Smials the books were of less interest for the
people of the Comarca, even more important for the wider history. Not one of them
It was written by Peregrin, but he and his successors copied it
many manuscripts written by writers of Gondor: mainly
copies or summaries of stories or words related to Elendil
and their herederos. Only here in the Comarca can they be found
extensive materials for the history of Númenor and its healing
Sauron. It was probably in Gran Smials whence
La Historia de los Años* was compiled, with the help of the material
collected by Meriadoc. Even the old dads are here
conjectures, especially for the Second Age, need attention
. It is probable that Meriadoc will obtain help and
information from Rivendel, which I visited more than once.
There, although Elrond had him, his children will remain for a long time,

* Represented in very reduced form in Appendix B asta el
final de la Tercera Edad.





21


together with some of the High Elves. If he says that
Celeborn was to live after Galadriel's departure;
But I don't have a record of the day that until then I was looking for them
Puertos Grises, and with him was the last living memory of
the Oldest Days in the Middle Tierra.


THE COMMUNITY
OF THE RING


THIS IS THE FIRST PART
FROM

THE LORD OF THE RINGS


BOOK ONE


 THE





When Señor Bilbo Bolsón de Bolsón Cerrado announced that
Ready to celebrate on the tenth first anniversary with
a celebration of special magnificence, with much conversation and
enthusiasm in Hobbiton.

Bilbo was very rich and very peculiar, and he was there
marvelous village of the Comarca for sixty years, from its notable
disappearance and unexpected return. Las riquezas que había
your travel routes have been converted into a local list,
and if it was popularly created, they would say what the elderly would say
, which the Hill of Bolsón Cerrado was filled with full tunnels of
treasures. And because there was little for fame, it was also
on prolonged vigor to marvel. The time passed, however
it seemed to have little effect on Señor Bolsón. For ninety years I was there
practically the same as the five. In the nineties and new years they began to decide
which was well preserved, but which no longer had to be changed
confirmed. Some denied with their heads, thinking
which was demasiado; This seems unfair
some had (apparently) eternal youth así
as (supposedly) an inagotable answer.

Habrá que pagar por
ello, dijeron. It's not natural, and it will cause problems!

But until now no major problems have arisen; and how Mr. Bolsón was
generous with their money, the majority of the people were willing to forgive them
your rares and your good luck. Mantuvo
the visiting relationship with their relatives (except, above all, them
Sacovilla-Bolsón), and had many devoted admirers
among the hobbits of poor families and without importance. But
no more friends are looking for, until some of the younger ones come out
to grow.


28


 


The eldest of these, and Bilbo's favourite, was young Frodo
Baggins. When Bilbo was ninety-nine he adopted Frodo as
his heir, and brought him to live at Bag End; and the hopes of
the Sackville-Bagginses were finally dashed. Bilbo and Frodo
happened to have the same birthday, September 22nd. You
had better come and live here, Frodo my lad, said Bilbo
one day; and then we can celebrate our birthday parties
comfortably together. At that time Frodo was still in his
tweens, as the hobbits called the irresponsible twenties
between childhood and coming of age at thirty-three.

Twelve more years passed. Each year the Bagginses had
given very lively combined birthday-parties at Bag End; but
now it was understood that something quite exceptional
was being planned for that autumn. Bilbo was going to be
eleventy-one, ill, a rather curious number, and a very king
spectable age for a hobbit (the Old Took himself had only
reached 130); and Frodo was going to be thirty-three, 33, an
important number: the date of his coming of age'.

Tongues began to wag in Hobbiton and Bywater; and
rumor of the coming event traveled all over the Shire. The
history and character of Mr. Bilbo Baggins became once
again the chief topic of conversation; and the older folk
suddenly found their reminiscences in welcome demand.

No one had a more attentive audience than old Flam
Gamgee, commonly known as the Gaffer. Fie held forth at
The Ivy Bush, a small inn on the Bywater road; and he spoke
with some authority, for he had tended the garden at Bag
End for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same
job before that. Now that he was himself growing old and
stiff in the joints, the job was mainly carried on by his young¬
est son, Sam Gamgee. Both father and son were on very
friendly terms with Bilbo and Frodo. They lived on the Hill
itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End.

A very nice well-spoken gentlehobbit is Mr. Bilbo, as I've
always said, the Gaffer declared. With perfect truth: for Bilbo
was very polite to him, calling him Master Hamfast', and





29


constantly consulting him about the cultivation of vegetables;
in matters of crops, especially potatoes, the Tio was
recognized as the principal authority for all in the neighborhood
(incluido él mismo).

But what happens with this Frodo who lives with him?, he asked the old man
Noakes de Bywater. Bolsón is its name, but they say it is more than
medium Brandigamo. Don't worry about a Bolsón
of Hobbiton would be exposed to it
Los Gamos, where the people are so rare.

And with reason they are rare, following Father Dos Pies.
(next to the Tío side), we live there
ambiguous side of the Brandivino river, and on the opposite side.
It is a dark and evil place, if only half of the words are certain. ¡

Tienes razón, papa!, dijo el Tío. It's not the Brandibucks
de Gamos live there; but I am one
rare breed, apparently. They are entertained with large bottles
river, and this is not natural. It's not a matter of leaving aside that problems will arise
ahí, I say. But sea as sea, Señor Frodo is a
young hobbit as pleasant as anyone you might want to know. Muy parecido
to Señor Bilbo, and the more he appears. After all, his father was
a Bolson. A decent and respectable hobbit was Señor Drogo
Bolson; There's never much to count on it, as long as it is
ahogó.

¿Ahogado?, I said in various voices. I have seen this y
other more obscure noises before, above all; but the hobbits are alive
they have a passion for family history, and they are willing to listen to it
again.

Good, as they say, I say the Tío. See: Señor Drogo
if it happened with the poor señorita Prímula Brandigamo. Era
first wife of our señor Bilbo on the mother's side (being on the mother's side
la menor de las hijas del Viejo Tuk); and Señor Drogo
it was on first second. So Lord Frodo is his first and second brother
, once eliminated from each side, as I say, yes
follow me. And Señor Drogo stayed in Brandy Hall with
on my side, the old Gorbadoc country, as I only did
after your wedding (being an aficionado of your life, and your life
Gorbadoc maintained a very generous table); y went up to


to sail


 


by the Brandigamo river; y él y su esposa se
ahogaron, and the little señor Frodo was only a child and everything.

I hate that they were in the water after having dinner there
light of the moon, I say the old Noakes; And it was the weight of Drogo that
hundió el bote.

And now she pumped it, and it was the next one
He is, I say Sandyman, the millstone of Hobbiton.

Don't forget everything you see, Sandyman, tell me
Guys, this guy didn't like the molinero very much. No, there's no reason
to go about loading and pulling. The bottles are quite complicated
for people to sit quietly without looking further ahead.
cause of problems. In short: there was a certain Mr. Frodo who asked
Huérfano and varado, so I can say it, among those extraños...
Los de los Bucklands, criados en Brandy Hall. A
authentic madriguera, as they say. El viejo señor Gorbadoc nunca
fewer than two relatives there.
Señor Bilbo has never produced a more lovely work than when I draw it
many people want to live among decent people.

But I believe it was a very hard coup for Sacovilla.
Bolson. I believe that I can get to Bolsón Cerrado
that time he was and believed himself dead. Y
then it returns and the orders that go on; y follows
living and living, without seeming like a day longer, blessed sea!
And suddenly he has a heredero and he holds all the papeles
en regla. Los Sacovilla-Bolsón ya no verán
inside the Bolsón Cerrado, or at least I hope. «

There's a good amount of hidden money, here it comes, next I'll keep it in mind"
, I say a stranger, a visitor to Michel's shops
Delving in the Westfarthing. Toda the top of your hill is full of
Túneles full of gold chests, plata and jools, por
lo que he oído.

—Etonces I have heard more than I can count —I replied
el Tío—. No se nada de jools. El señor Bilbo is generous with
on money, and it seems that it doesn't matter; but not as a nadie
that has tunes. See Señor Bilbo when he returns, he has one
I felt like years ago, when I was very old. There isn't much that was
I learned from old Holman (he was my father's first), but he kept me in Bolsón





Cerrado


helping him to prevent people from escaping
. In the middle of this, Señor Bilbo suffers the fall
with a pony, a huge bag and a couple of chests.
No doubt that they will find many treasures that they have collected
in foreign lands, where they say there are mountains of gold
; but it doesn't have enough to loosen the tuners. But I'm very fond of Sam
will know more about this. Enter and go up to Bolsón Cerrado.
The stories of old times and stories enchant you
all the things of Señor Bilbo. El señor Bilbo taught her the letters,
without bad intentions, stop, and I hope that nothing will happen to you badly
.
of your superiors, or you will measure yourself in a much bigger place for you, I tell you.
 
 ¡Elfos y dragones!, I tell her. The coles and the potatoes are...
Better for me and for you. No goals in your assumptions
. And you could decide it to others, then look at it
to the forester and the miller.

But the guy didn't suit his audience. The legend
Bilbo's answer was long forgotten in his mind
the young generation of hobbits.

Ah, but surely I have continued to do more of that
I went to the beginning, argued with the molinero, expressing the general opinion.
A menudo is outside the house. Y aims at extravagant people
who visits him: they come at night, and they are old
wandering wizard, Gandalf, and all that. You can decide what you want, Tio,
but Bolsón Cerrado is a rare place, and its people are even rarer.

And you can decide what you want about what you don't know
more than sailing, Señor Arenoso, he replied
the boy, feeling even more dislike for the mill. Yes eg
it would be rare, so we would sell it a little more rare
here. There are some people looking for here who won't offer you one
pint of beer to a friend who won't even live in a husband with
paredes goldenas. But in Bolsón Cerrado they do the same things as they should. Nuestro Sam says
that everyone will be invited to the party, and have
gifts, gifts, gifts for everyone, this same thing
month


Ese


 


My month was September, and as good as it could be
pedir. A day or two later there was a rumor (probably started by him...) that
there will be artificial fires; artificial fuegos, además, como no
if they have seen a symbol in the region, no less than that
murió el Viejo Tuk.








Inside the Bolsón Cerrado, Bilbo and Gandalf were sent together
open window of a small habitation that looked forward to the west, in the garden.
The late hours were bright and pleasant. The flowers
shine red and gold: dragon mouths and sunflowers, y
capuchins that extend over the grass walls and are attached to them
las ventanas redondas.

How bright is your garden!, said Gandalf.

Yes, I say Bilbo. I keep them very cute, all the same
the old and old Comarca; but I think I need a holiday. ¿

What plans should you follow with your plan?

Yes. I made a decision a few months ago, and no
la he cambiado.  

Muy bien. It's not worth saying more. Maintain you
plan, remember, and hope that everything goes up
well, for you and for all of us.

I hope. Ultimately, I can enjoy the games
and tell me what you asked.

"Where will he return, I wonder?" said Gandalf, pointing to his head.

Ya veremos, dijo Bilbo.

On the following day, more carriages were hit by the hill, and even more
carros. You may find some questions about the trade
local, but for the same week I have to send orders from the Bolsón
Look for all the types of supplies, products or articles you are looking for
they can achieve it in Hobbiton, Bywater or any other place
the alrededores. The people were enthusiastic;
they started marking the days in the calendar; and they hope
anxiously at the carter, waiting for invitations.

In a short time, the invitations began to arrive, and there
Hobbiton Correos Workshop


34 which was blocked, and the Bywater which was collapsed, y
if necessary
voluntary carters. There was a constant flow of ellos undergoing
the hill, bringing hundreds of educated variations of "Gracias
, sin duda iré".
A notice appeared at the door of Bolsón Cerrado: no permit
the entrance except for party pick-ups. Included to those who held,
or they pretended to hold, assumptions of the rare celebration if they were allowed
enter. Bilbo was busy: writing invitations, marking
its own preparations. From the moment of Gandalf's arrival,
remained hidden from sight.
from the main door of Bilbo, closed with keys and posts for tiendas
and pabellones. If you dug a special entrance into the terraplén
que conducía al camino, y
large staircases and a large white door were built. The three hobbit families of Bagshot Row,
contiguous to the camp, they were intensely interested and generally
envidiadas. The old Gaffer Gamgee even pretended he was working
in his garden.
The tiendas began to rise. Había a
especially large balloon, so large that the tree that grew in the field was just
inside him, and he was proudly looking for an extreme, at the head of
the main table. On all branches there are lights.
More prometedor aún (para los hobbits): a huge one


 





A kitchen was erected in the open air on the north side of the camp.  
A group of cooks, from all the restaurants and food houses,...
Kilometers on the backside, attached to complement the wines and others
curious people who live in Bolsón Cerrado. The emotion llegó to
on cold point.

Once the time was over. This was the honey
, look forward to the Fiesta. The anxiety was intense. Entonces
I'll love you on September 22nd. The sun rose, last
the clouds disappeared, the flags unfolded and the diversion began.

Bilbo Bolsón called it fiesta, but in reality it was a variation
of entertainment in one. Practically everyone who lives
search for invited guests. A few people passed away by accident,





but


how to prepare everyone once in a while, it didn't matter.
Many people from other parts of the region were also invited; And
including some hubs from the front. Bilbo received
to those invited (those who were invited) in the new white door in person.
We will distribute gifts to everyone; these are the last ones
those who went up for a walk walked away and entered
by the door. The hobbits give gifts to other people in them
own birthdays. No many dears, by general rule, and no
as luxuriant as on this occasion; but it wasn't a bad system.
Indeed, in Hobbiton and Bywater every day of the year it was
someone's birthday, so that every hobbit in those places would take
a good opportunity for the less, a gift for the less, once a week. But
nunca se cansaban de ellos.

The little hobbits were as excited as they often were
forget about comer. Había juguetes como
never seen before, all the beautiful and some obviously magical things
. Many of them, of those, have been encargados a year ago,
and they have come from the Mountain and the Valley,
and they were authentic hechura enana.

When all the guests were welcomed and finally satisfied
inside the door, hubo songs, bailes, music, plays and,
for supuesto, tasty and drinkable. Have three official instructions:
lunch, tea and dinner. But the food and the tea are
They are characterized mainly by the fact that in these moments all the guests are invited
They were sent and started right away. In other moments,
it simply had a lot of people eating and drinking, all the time.
from once until the six and half, when the artificial fuegos erupt.

The artificial fires were Gandalf's work: not only the traitors
by him, but designed and made by him; y los
special effects, the decorations and the chest pieces were launched by
el. But there was also a generous distribution of firecrackers,
firecrackers, backrappers, bengalas, antorchas, velas enanas,
sources of elves, goblins-brakers and truenos. All fueron
magnificent. Gandalf's art improved with his reading.

Había cohetes like a band of brilliant pájaros singing
with sweet voices. It has green trees with dark humus trunks


:


 


Your hojas will open like every spring, unfurling them in one
moment, and its brilliant branches dejaban near brilliant flowers
over the atónitos hobbits, disappearing with a sweet
aroma just before you touch your car when you arrive. Habia
marine sources that fly brightly around the trees;
It has columns of colored lights that rise up and transform into it
águilas, or sailing boats, or in a phalanx of winged cisnes;
there is a red storm and an amarilla rainstorm; habia
a forest of plated lanzas that suddenly arose in the air
with a cry like an army in battle, and they returned to descend...
There was also a last surprise, in honor of Bilbo, and he was surprised at
it was seen from afar, and began to shine at the top. Lanzo
green and scarlet calls. Suddenly, a golden red dragon came flying up
, not very natural, but terribly realistic: he would escape from his life
jaws, their eyes shine down; I found a rugido, and passed by zumbating
three times over the heads of the multitude. All if agacharon,
and many cayeron de bruces. The dragon passed like a
Express train, God once and I stayed above Bywater
with an explosive explosion.

“This is the signal for dinner!”, said Bilbo. El pain y
the alarm disappeared instantly, and the hobbits behind it were put off
foot of a leap. Here's a splendid dinner for everyone; para
everything is said, except for those invited there
special family dinner. This was celebrated on the big pabellón with him
tree. The invitations were limited to a few documents (one number
Also called by the hobbits a Gross, no matter what the word
not if it was considered appropriate to refer to people); and the guests were invited
selected from among all the families who belong to Bilbo and Frodo  
related, with the addition of a few special unrelated friends).
(like Gandalf). If they included many young hobbits, y
they were present with the permission of their fathers; pues the hobbits were tolerantes
with your children where you want to travel, especially
when there is the possibility of obtaining a free gift. The crianza of
The young hobbits required a lot of love.





37


There were many Bolsón and Boffin, and many too
Tuk y Brandigamo; había varios Grubb (parientes
of Bilbo Bolsón's abuela) and various Chubb
(connections from his abuelo Tuk); and a selection of
Madrigueras, Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Brockhouses, Goodbodies,
Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of these are very related
happily with Bilbo, and some cases never happen
I was in Hobbiton before, who lived in remote corners of
the Comarca. Los Sacovilla-Bolsón were not forgotten. Otho
and on display Lobelia were present. I didn't like Bilbo y
they hate Frodo, but the invitation card,
written in gold, it was so magnificent that it turned out to be impossible
deny yourself. Also, first Bilbo specialized in...

The hundred and four invited people hope for one
pleasant party; even though they fear the discussion of overtime is enough
de su amfitrión (un inevitable plato). He was inclined to arrastrar fragmentos
of what it was called poetry; ya veces, after one o
two copas, he would hear the absurd adventures of his mysterious one
travel. Those invited were not disappointed: they enjoyed one
very pleasant party, in fact, an absorbent entertainment: rich,
abundant, varied and prolonged. The purchase of provisions
there are only a few cases in the whole district
next weeks; but like Bilbo's catering the mayor's existence was longed for
of the shops, shops and stores in kilometers in the redonda, eso
no importó mucho.

After the party (more or less) I read the speech.
However, the majority of those present now encounter a state of tolerant soul, in this
delicious stage that calls «train the rincones».
They are savoring their favorite drinks and enjoying them
favorite delicacies, and your fears have been forgotten. Estaban
willing to find out what you will win each time you are told.

“I wonder about the people,” Bilbo said, rising. «¡Escuchen!».
¡Escuchen! ¡Escuchen! they shouted, and followed, repeating it in chorus,
apparently ready to follow their own advice. Bilbo sat up
place and was to pararse in a lower seat
illuminated tree. The light of the linternas shines above the radiant beak; los


38


 


Golden buttons shine on the edged waistcoat.
Everyone can see it from the foot, waving a hand in the air, there
another one was in the pocket of his trousers.

My queridos Bolsón and Boffin, comenzó new; y size
queridos Libros y Brandigamo, y Grubbs, y Chubbs, y
Madrigueras, y Hornblowers, y Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Goodbodys
, Brockhouses y Proudfoots. ¡ProudFEET! he shouted
old hobbit from the bottom of the pabellón. On name, por
supuesto, era Proudfoot, y bien merecido; his pies were large,
exceptionally plush, and both are on the table.

—Proudfoots —replied Bilbo—. And also to my good friends Sacovilla-Bolsón,
to anyone until today the new welcome to Bolsón Cerrado. Hoy es mi
cumpleaños number one hundred once: ¡cumpleo once y uno hoy! Hurray! Hurray!
This was the type of thing they enjoyed: short and obvious.

I hope everyone is having as much fun as I am.
Victors ensordecedores. Gritos de Sí (y No). Ruidos de trumpets y
horns, flutes and flautas, and other musical instruments. Habia
As I said, many young hobbits are present.
Hundreds of musical firecrackers have been fired. The mayoría
llevaban the dale brand; what I didn't transmit much to
the majority of the hobbits, but they all coincided in who they were
wonderful firecrackers. Contains small, small instruments
perfect manufacturing and enchanting tones. Here, in a ring, some of them
the young men Tuk and Brandigamo, assuming that their son Bilbo
I've finished (and I've clearly said everything necessary
), they improvised an orchestra and started one
happy song melody. El señor Everard Tuk and la señorita Melilot
Brandigamo stood on a table and, with bells in his hands,
they started dancing in the spring ring: a good dance, but enough
vigorous.

But Bilbo hasn't finished yet. Tomó a heart of a young man
who was looking for and heard three loud howls. The noise settled.
Don't bother me much, I'll cry. Applause from the entire assembly.  
I called them all with a purpose. Algo en el
The form in which I said this caused an impression. Hubo cases





39


silence, and one or two of the Tuks sharpened the sound.

In effect, for three purposes! First, to decide what I want
much to everyone, and that once and a year is longed for
little time to live among such excellent and admirable hobbits.
Tremendous approval facility.

I don't know the half of you nor the half of the good that I would enjoy; and I appreciate it
less than the half of you nor the half of what you need. This was
unexpected and quite difficult. Hubo some
Dispersed applause, but the mayor tried to decipher it and
if they were converted into a full-body.

Next, to celebrate my birthdays. Greetings again. Deberia
decir: OUR cumpleaños. Because, above all, it is also my birthday
heredero and sobrino, Frodo. Today you will find the mayority of edad and recibe on herencia
. Some superficial applause from the elderly; Y some
loud grits of "¡Frodo! ¡Frodo! ¡The happy old Frodo!
What did it mean to receive on herencia?".

Here we sum up one hundred and four. Your numbers
we were chosen to stand in this notable sum: A Gross, if you allow me
the expression. Sin vitores. This was ridiculous. Lots of them
invited, and especially the Sacovilla-Bolsón, felt insulted,
agreed that only if they were asked to train it
required quantity, as they were merchandise in a package. ¡A Gross, yes!
Una expresión vulgar.

Also, if you allow me to refer to the old history, it
anniversary of my arrival in the barrel in Esgaroth, in the
Largo Lake; although I forgot that it was my birthday
on this occasion. Only five years ago and one year ago, and the birthdays were not me
they seem so important. The banquete was splendid, without embargo,
although I remembered that I was very refreshed and just pude
decir "thag you very good". Now I'll say it more precisely:
Many thanks for coming to my little party. Obstinate silence.
Everyone fears that a song or some poem was eminent
; and they were bored. So I can't stop
say and forget that they will drink your health? But Bilbo didn't sing.
or act? Hizo pause for a moment.

In the third and last place, I say: «I want to do something


40».


 


ANNOUNCEMENT. Pronounced this last word so loudly
suddenly all those who could soon be incorporated were incorporated. Lament
announce that, even as you say, once and a year is desired
little time to pass between you, this is the end. Me voy. Me
voy AHORA. ¡ADIÓS!

Down and disappeared. Here's a beautiful looker
of light, and all the invited guests shone. When they opened them
Hey, Bilbo couldn't see it. Careful y
Four atónitos hobbits were heard without a word. The old smell
Proudfoot left the feet of the table and patted the soil.
Then there was a sepulchral silence, until suddenly, after several
deep breathing, all the Bolsón, Boffin, Tuk, Brandigamo,
Grubb, Chubb, Madriguera, Bolger, Bracegirdle, Brockhouse,
Goodbody, Hornblower and Proudfoot started talking again.

All the world was aware that the brome was in very bad taste,
and what is needed is more tasty and drinkable to disappoint the guests of the
which was probably the most popular commentary. Including the Tuk (with
Some exceptions) thought that Bilbo's behavior was absurd. Por
at the moment, the mayoría God por sentado above
Disappearance was no more than a ridiculous joke.

But the old Rory Brandigamo wasn't that safe. Ni la edad ni
I've had a big dinner and I'll tell you about it
daughter, Esmeralda: «There is something rare in this,
sweet! I think the Bolsón place has been there again. Old dumb guy
. But why should you worry? No if you have taken the provisions."
He shouted to Frodo that he was going to get the wine.

Frodo was the only one present who didn't say anything. During
a story remained silently heard at Bilbo's vacancy,
ignoring all the comments and questions. Have enjoyed the broth,
por supuesto, no matter what surpasses it. It cost her
contain the laughter before the indignant surprise
of the guests. But at the same time he felt deeply worried:
Suddenly God knows what the old hobbit wanted a lot. The mayoría
the guests followed as they began, drank and commented
the rarities of Bilbo Bolsón, pasts and presents; but the Sacovilla-





Bolsón


They were marched furiously. Frodo no quería...
know nothing more about the party. I ordered that
they sirvieran más wine; he rose up, opened up
Copa in silence for Bilbo's health and salt of the
pabellón.

As for Bilbo Bolsón, including during his speech,
he had been touching the gold ring that was inside the pouch: up
magical ring that he had watched secretly for many years. At the bajar,
se lo puso en el dedo, y
no hobbit returned to Hobbiton.

He walked at a rapid pace towards the hide and I took a moment
to shake the dough and the dough with a smile
sounds of the party in other parts of the field. Luego
within. If he left the party clothes, he doubled it and wrapped it up
in paper bag on bordered seat belt, and I looked at it
. So if I quickly use one of the pictures and take them off,
he caught a short sword in a stained black leather pouch.
Of a closed cajón with llave, which oiled in mothballs, sacó
una vieja capa y capucha. They were watched below as they were
They were very valuable, but they were so many reminders
missed by the climate that was barely possible
Adivinar on original color: could be dark green. They were exhausted
large for the child. Luego was his study, and a great one
a strong box with a package wrapped in old canvases, and a
manuscript encuadernado en cuero; and also a large and voluminous top.
The book and package are placed in the top part of a heavy bag
who was there, where is she? Inside the above
I slipped on the gold ring, and on the fine chain, and there
he saddled it, and gave it to Frodo. At first I use it over the answer
chimenea, but suddenly she quit it and put it on her
bolsillo. At this moment the door opened and Gandalf entered
quickly.

¡Hola!, I say Bilbo. I was wondering if they would appear.

I'm happy to be visible,” replied the magician, feeling himself
in a sylla—. This is about and said


latest


 


words. I guess you think everything has gone up
of wonder and followed the plane.

Yes, I think so,” said Bilbo. However this was surprising:
I was shocked enough to not talk about them. A small add-on  
tuyo, I suppose?

It was. I have wisely kept this ring secretly all these years,
and I thought it necessary to give them to you when you invited me
more than it would seem to explain your sudden disappearance.

And it would ruin my broma. Here is a very old time
, said Bilbo, but I suppose he knows better, as always.

I have it when I get there. But this is not very safe
of all this is assumed. Now we have reached the final point.
You have kept your broma, and you have alarmed and offended the mayor of the city
you relatives, and I gave you all the Comarca something to talk about
during new days, or ninety and more probably. ¿Vas
to continue forward?

Yes, I have it. I feel like I need a holiday, a very large holiday, as in
I told you before. Probably a permanent holiday: no
I hope to get better. Of course, it's not my intention, y'all
hecho todos los arreglos.

I'm old, Gandalf. I don't think so, but I'm busy

















to shine in your eyes. I believe, Bilbo, I say in my voice that I will be happy

Good, yes... y no. Now that I understand, I don't like parting
of it absolutely, I must decide. And I really don't know why it would happen. ¿
Why do you want to have it?, he asked, and a curious change
if he will master his voice. She was sharp, with suspicion and annoyance
. I'm always giving my hand for my ring; but
He never bothered me about the other things he achieved
my trip.

No, but I had to badger you, said Gandalf. I wanted the
truth. It was important. Magic rings are - well, magical; and
they are rare and curious. I was professionally interested in
your ring, you may say; and I still am. I should like to know
where it is, if you go wandering again. Also I think you have


44


 


had it quite long enough. You won't need it any more, Bilbo,
unless I am quite mistaken.

Bilbo flushed, and there was an angry light in his eyes. His
kindly face grew hard. Why not? he cried. And what
business is it of yours, anyway, to know what I do with mine
own things? It is my own. I found it. It came to me.

Yes, yes, said Gandalf. But there is no need to get angry.

If I am it is your fault, said Bilbo. It is mine, I tell you.
My own. My Precious. Yes, my Precious.

The wizard's face remained serious and attentive, and only
a flicker in his deep eyes showed that he was startled and
indeed alarmed. It has been called that before, he said, but
not by you.

But I say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said the
same once. It's not his now, but mine. And I shall keep it, I
say.

Gandalf stood up. He spoke sternly. You will be a fool if
you do, Bilbo, he said. You make that clearer with everything
word you say. It has got far too much hold on you. Let it go!
And then you can go yourself, and be free.

I'll do as I choose and go as I please, said Bilbo obstinately.

Now, now, my dear hobbit! said Gandalf. All your long
life we ​​have been friends, and you owe me something. As!
Do as you promised: give it up!

Well, if you want my ring yourself, say so! cried Bilbo.
But you won't get it. I won't give my Precious away, I tell
you. His hand strayed to the hilt of his small sword.

Gandalf's eyes flashed. It will be my turn to get angry
soon, he said. If you say that again, I shall. Then you will
see Gandalf the Gray uncloaked. He took a step towards the
hobbit, and he seemed to grow tall and menacing; his shadow
filled the little room.

Bilbo backed away to the wall, breathing hard, his hand
grab the bag. If they quedaron a rate one in front of the
other, and the air of the hormigueó habitation. The eyes of Gandalf
children remain in the hobbit. Slowly their hands relaxed
began to temblar.





45


No se qué te pasa, Gandalf, dijo.
It has never been like this before. What is all this about? Ex
mine, isn't it? I met him, and Gollum loved me,
yes no it will be preserved. I'm not a thief, I'll say what I'll say.

—I never called you like that —replied Gandalf—. Y
I know it shortly. No intent to robarte, but to help you
. Ojalá confiaras en me, as before. God knows, the tour
and the shadow disappeared. It seems to be reduced again
to a gray old man, cheered and worried.
 
Bilbo raised his hand to his eyes. —Lo siento —I say.
But it felt so rare to me. And in this way, in a certain way, it would be a no-brainer
keep worrying more about him. He has been growing a lot
he lies to me lately. Sometimes I felt it was like an eye
mirandome. I always wanted to ask myself this
desaparecer, ¿sabes?; or asking me if I'm sure
sacándolo to secure myself. I intended to watch it below, but I discovered it
I couldn't scan without it in my bag. No se por qué.
And it seems that I'm not capable of deciding. «

Entonces confía en el mio», I said to Gandalf. «It's completely decided. Vete
and leave it later. Deja de poseerlo. Give it to Frodo,
y yo cuidaré de él».

Bilbo had a tense and indecisive moment. Luego
he sighed. «De acuerdo», I say with energy. «Lo haré». Luego if
I welcomed the men and sounded with a certain sadness. Después de todo
That's what this party is all about: giving as a gift
lots of birthday gifts and, in any case, making them easier
to the final. But it would be a shame to waste all my preparations.
Arruinaría la broma.

After all, she would get the only feeling that ever came to her
assumed, said Gandalf.

Very well, I say Bilbo, it's up to Frodo with all the rest.
He breathed hondo. And now yes I want to fill up,
or someone else will follow me. I sent it to you
I couldn't bear to want to do it. Cogió on bag
y se dirigió a la puerta.

Everyone keeps the ring in the bag, I tell the magician.


¡


 


Pues yo también!, Bilbo shouted. And my will and all of them
documents also. It will be better if you take it to me and give it to me.
Será lo más seguro.

No, no me from the ring, I say Gandalf. Ponlo en la
repisa de la chimenea. There you will be safe until Frodo arrives.
I will wait for it.

Bilbo picked up the item, but just when he was about to place it
upon reaching the clock, the hacia is closed by hand and the package is placed at the
suelo. Before being able to accept it, the magician agreed,
I will hold it and place it there. A fire of anger at God
Good, that's all, I say. ¡Me voy!
quickly the hobbit's beak. Suddenly, I gave in to...
A glimpse of food and a laugh.
quería irse. Always only brome about serious things.


Salteron at the recibidor. Bilbo elected on favorite post
of the atril; luego silbó. Tres enanos salieron
of different habitats where they were occupied.

"Is this all the list?" asked Bilbo. ¿Todo empacado y
etiquetado?

Todo, respondieron.

Good, let's start with each other! He went up to the main door.

It was a beautiful night, and the black sky was filled with stars.
Miró arrives, smelling the air. This is fun! What fun it is to be
again on the Camino with enanos! This is what
I've really been longing for years! ¡Adiós!, I say, looking
on the old house and leaning towards the door. Goodbye, Gandalf!   

Goodbye, now, Bilbo. ¡Cuídate!
Here is the sufficiently mayor, and let's ask him the sufficiently wise one.

¡Cuídate! No, I don't care. Don't worry about me! Estoy
good. But the time has come. I'm being arrested by my pies
he sang sweetly in the darkness:

The Camino continues and continues
From the door where he came from.

Ahora el Camino se ha ido muy lejos,

And I have to follow him, if I can,





47


Following it with anxious pies,

Wait until there's one more path too
Where many senders and diligences come from.

What's next? I can't say that.

If I found out, in silence for a moment. Word, without saying another word,
if he flew from the lights and voices in the field and
the tiendas, and followed by his three companions, God the round
to his garden and trotó along the wide path on the slope.
He jumped a low place on the silk at the bottom and headed towards it
at the meadows, passing at night like a whisper of wind
en la hierba.

Gandalf asked for a rat, looking at it carefully there
darkness. Goodbye, I wonder Bilbo, until our next meeting
!, I said it again and went back inside.

Frodo entered shortly afterwards and met him without warning
the darkness, summarized in your thoughts. Do you have an idea? —asked.

—Yes —replied Gandalf—, as long as he can.

—Ojalá... I want to decide, until this night I'll wait until I was alone
a broma —I say Frodo—. But in the background I knew that it really was
I thought it would have returned beforehand, just to send it back.

I believe that, in reality, I preferred to escape without making a mistake at the end.
I say Gandalf. Don't worry too much. It will be fine now.
I gave you a package. Here it is!

Frodo took away the answer from the chimenea and
I looked at it, but didn't open it.

You will find your will and all the other documents ahí,
I create, I tell the magician. Now you are the love of Bolsón Cerrado.
And also, I imagine, you will find a golden ring.

The ring! exclaimed Frodo. Have you left me with this? I wonder
so. In this way, it can be useful.

You may, and you may not, I say Gandalf. Yo no
I'll use it, if it's you. But keep it secret and watch it!
Ahora me voy a la cama.

* * *


48


 


How I love Bolsón Cerrado, Frodo felt it was painful to say
I think everything will clear up in the morning. Alrededor de la medianoche
llegaron carts for important people. One by one
if they were wandering, all the hobbits were very unhappy but very dissatisfied.
The jardineros were picked up and carried on carts
to those who have been asked without giving credit.

The night passed slowly. The sun rose. The hobbits were enough
later. The morning continued. People come and go (for orders)
to collect the bags, the mesas and the saddles,
the cucharas, the cuchillos, the bottles and the plates, the linternas,
the flowering shrubs in the cajas, the migas and
the paper of galletas, the bags, the gloves and the
forgotten bread, and excess food (a small cantidad). Luego
llegaron other people (without orders): the Bolsón,
the Boffin, the Bolger, the Tuk and others huéspedes que
vivían or if alojaban searches. In the middle, when even the best
fueled by new salts, there was a large quantity in Bolsón
Cerrado, inesperada, but not inesperada.

Frodo waited on the escalator, smiling, but with a sufficient look
sad and worried. God welcome all visitors, but don't worry
much more than I said before. Please reply to all questions
it was simply this: Aire. Bilbo Bolsón has ide; que
yo sepa, para always. He invited some visitors to come in
, pues Bilbo les había dejado mensajes.
 
Inside, in the vestibule, there was a great clarity of...
packages and packages and small items. Fall
article had a label. Había varies etiquetas de este
type:

Para Adelardo, para su PROPIA, de Bilbo, en
a paraguas. Adelardo had learned a lot without labelling.

For Dora Bolsón, in memory of a large correspondence
, with cariño de Bilbo; in a big paper bag.
Dora was Drogo's sister and the surviving pariente mayor
de Bilbo and Frodo; I was ninety and new years old and had written
good advice for sheep during the middle ages.


 49

For Milo Burrows, with the hope that it would be useful, from BB;
in a plume and a whole lot of gold. Milo never contested the cards.

For use of Angélica, by your Bilbo; in a
I look round and convex. She was a young Bolsón and, of course, I considered that
on the rostrum it was well formed.

For the collection of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE, by a collaborator
; in a room (vacation). Hugo was a great tomador
of books, and worse than the usual return.

Para LOBELIA SACKVTI J E-BAGGTNS, como REGALO,
in a box of platinum spoons. Bilbo thought she had it
I bought a lot of my cucharas, while it was outside
on previous travel. Lobelia knew it very well. When
I came later in the day, I got to the point immediately, but
the cucharas were also taken.

This is just a small selection of combined gifts.
Bilbo's residence has been sufficiently decluttered with things in it
the course of his long life. It was a trend of the hobbits' tormentors
the desire to give so much
birthday gifts were largely responsible. No ex
that the birthday gifts were always new, above all; had one
or two old maths of forgotten uses that have been around for all
the district; But Bilbo only gave new gifts
and he quedaba with the ones he received. The old agujero was there
clarifying a little.

All delivered gifts are labeled and written
personally for Bilbo, and various people had some purpose or some
broma. But, above all, most of the things come from
They would be necessary and welcome. Los hobbits más pobres, y
especially those from Bagshot Row, if they decorate them very well. El Viejo Tio
Gamgee received two bags of potatoes, a new shovel and a
woolen chaleco and a bottle of ointment for the joints. Viejos
Rory Brandigamo, in exchange for his hospitality, received a dinner from
bottles from Old Wineyards: a strong wine tinto del
piece of money from the south, it's enough hard, just as it was worn by him
father de Bilbo. Rory forgave Bilbo completely and named him a
excellent man after the first bottle.


50


 


That's all in abundance for Frodo. Y, por
above all the main treasures, as well as the books, cuadros
and the more sufficient ones, put them in their position.
Without embargo, no hubo rastro no mention of money or joys















. Frodo, with the wind returned, marched. But Lobelia was not so calm
because of how things are, and I met her again and again,
investigating crimes and giving blows to the ground.
He listened to it with signature outside the venue, after having finished it
various small (but sufficiently valuable) objects that in some way have
I fell inside my paraguas. On the list there will be as many as you can
I'm thinking about a really demolishing task
; but everything he encountered to decide, taking turns on the stage,
fue:

Go ahead and complain about it, young man! So no one was there
also? You don't belong here; you are not Bolsón, you... ¡eres
a Brandigamo!

Hello, Merry? It was an insult, if you want to say it like this,
I say Frodo while he closes the door.

It was a cumplido, I say Merry Brandigamo, and so much, so
supposed, false.

Entonces gave the return to the agujero and abandoned three young people
hobbits (two Boffins and a Bolger) who are being tormented
on the walls of one of the trees. Frodo also has a lot of fun with
the young Sancho Proudfoot (the nieto of the old Odo Proudfoot),
who had begun an excavation in the largest pantry, whence
it would create an echo. The legend of Bilbo's gold was lost
both curiosity and hope; Because of the legendary gold (
obtained mysteriously, if it is not that bad), as everyone knows,
anyone can meet him, unless the search is interrupted.

Tras dominar a Sancho y empujarlo,
Frodo lay down in one of the bowls. «It's time to find out
tienda, Merry», I say. «Close the door with the key and don't scratch it


nobody


 


hoy, ni siquiera a ram is drawn». Entonces
He was to revive his mind with a slow cup of tea.

Just heard, when they called softly to you
the door. Surely it was Lobelia again, he thought. Debio
I had thought about something really despicable and moved on
to tell me. You can hope.

He followed with his tea. The coup was repeated, a lot
stronger, but not the case. De sudden, the magician's head
apareció en la ventana.

If you don't let me come in, Frodo, you'll fly away
for you I will agujero and I will throw it on the hill, I say.

I wonder Gandalf! ¡Middle minute!, shouted Frodo, running
outside the house has the door. Enter! Enter! He thought about it
it was Lobelia.

Entonces I forgive you. But there is a rat, leading
a coche pulled by ponis hacia Bywater with a darling he had
cuajado la leche fresca.

In some cases I've had trouble with it. Honestly, cases
try Bilbo's ring. Deseaba disappear.

¡No hagas eso! —I say Gandalf, feeling—. ¡Cuidado
with this ring, Frodo! Indeed, it is partly because of what he is
I come to say one last word.

Bueno, ¿qué hay de eso?

¿Qué sabes ya?

Only what Bilbo told me. I read about history: how I do it
I found out and how I used it: on my journey, I'd like to decide.

This story, I wonder —I say Gandalf—.

Oh, no, I didn't tell you about it and I can use it in your book
—I say Frodo—. He told me the truthful story shortly after the wine
to live here. I told you that I had bothered you until I told you
, so it's even more worth knowing for me. —There are no secrets among us,
Frodo —dijo—; but you shouldn't go further. It's mine
de todos modos.   

—This is interesting —I say Gandalf—. Good, what do you think?
todo esto?

If you want to invent everything about a "gift", good, he thought
that the true story was much more probable, and I didn't see it


 the

I feel like altering it absolutely. In all forms, it was very improper for Bilbo to do so
; and it seemed extra enough to me.

To me too. But it's the people who care
I don't understand, Frodo said.
These treasures can be rare things if you use them. This is a warning to you.
—Ten much looked after with you. You may have other farms attached to you
you will certainly disappear when you ask.
The second disappearance of Señor Bilbo Bolsón was...


—Yo shortly —the magician replied—. Only he was busy
to doubt the ring, above all from now on. No hay de qué
worry. But if you follow my advice, you will use it much
a few times, or you won't use it at all. At least I worry that you don't use it anywhere
how to tell the Levant you suspect. I'll tell you again: keep it
a salvo y en secreto! ¡   

You are very mysterious! What do you want to eat?

I'll tell you more when you come back. I'm following you;
so that I despido for now. He rose.

He left for less than a week in the house. Hope you help.

I wanted to do it, but I wanted to change my opinion. You can ask
this was a good time; but it will come back to the point
pueda. Hope when you see me! Enter
discreetly. I will not return to visit the Comarca openly in menudo.
I've become quite unpopular. They say I'm one
nuisance and a disturber of peace. Some people
I accuse myself of having brought myself to Bilbo, or something worse. Yes quieres
knowing that, you're supposed to have a conspiracy between you
and I want to take care of your research.

"Some people!" exclaimed Frodo. You refieres a Otón y
Lobelia. This is abominable! Les daría Bolsón Cerrado y
all the more you can recover to Bilbo and start the excursion
por el campo con él. I love the Comarca. But I'm busy wanting to,
In any case, I know it too. I hope you will turn to
verlo alguna vez.

I also say Gandalf. And I wonder about many other things.
Goodbye! ¡Cuídate! ¡Cuídame,
especially in the least desperate moments! Goodbye!


Frodo


 


He accompanied him to the door. Hizo made a last gesture with the
hand and flowed at an astonishing pace; but Frodo thought
that the old magician seemed unusually surrounded, as he stood up
a great weight. The night falls, and on
Encapuched figure disappears quickly at dusk. Frodo
I didn't want to see it for a long time.


 2


 


The conversation does not stop again, nor does it stop on ninety or new days.
Maldijo in Hobbiton, and that's all over the county, for a year
and a day, and it was recorded for much longer.
he was converted into a story joined by the fire for the young hobbits; and with the weather,
el Loco Bolsón, which alone will disappear with a place and a place
and he returned with bags of joy and gold, converted into one
favorite person in the story and lived a lot after all the real events
they will forget.

But anyway, the general opinion in the neighbor
it was that Bilbo, who always had enough chiflado,






 





I love and Mr. Bolsón de Bolsón Cerrado was quite pleasant.
For a few years he was quite happy and didn't worry much
for the future. However, I don't know for sure, the fear for it
no longer did I grow with Bilbo constantly. If he met
wondering often, especially in the dark, above
the earths saved, and extrañas visions of mountains that
never seen wine in their dreams. He started to decide on this same thing:
Sometimes the river crosses me every day. A lo que
the other half of his mind always replied: Not todavia.

So he continued, as long as his heart was searched for, and on
Five years ago we looked for it: fifty was a number that
it was felt as significant (or sinister); was in any way
This was the case when the adventure suddenly fell on Bilbo.
Frodo began to feel restless, and the old paths seemed to be exhausted


 


trilled


. I looked at maps, and wondered what it had
further away from its borders: the maps found in the region mainly show them
white spaces further in front. He started wandering
more light and more alone; y Merry y
His other friends watched him anxiously. As soon as he saw them
walking and talking with the strangers who started walking
to appear in the region at this time.

There were noises from extra things happening in it
world exterior; and like Gandalf he never appeared
After sending a message at this time over several years, Frodo received all the news
that I can. The elves, who rarely walk through the county, can now
verse passing hacia the west through the woods to the tardecer,
passing and without returning; But they were abandoning the Middle East
and you don't worry about your problems. Habia
Puertos Grises, and enamels have always used it on their fireplace
eat on the fireplace in unusual places.
The old Camino Este-Oeste crossed the county until it left the area
mines de las Montañas Azules. They were there
main source of news about the hobbits, if you need them: por
general rule, the dwarfs don't talk much and the hobbits don't ask more. But now
they took refuge in the West. They were worried, and some talked about it
whispers of the Enemigo and the Land of Mordor.

This is a name that hobbits only know in terms of the dark
passed, like a shadow at the bottom of your records; but
it was ominous and disturbing. It seems that the power is evil
of the Black Forest had been expelled by the White Council,
only to repair with more strength in the ancient fortresses of
Mordor. It was decided that the Dark Tower had been rebuilt. Desde
there, the power extended to all parts, and into the wood
this and above had wars and a growing honey. Los orcos se
multiply again in the mountains. The trolls go away slowly,
Ya no torpes, sino astutos y armados con
fearsome weapons. And they murmuraban indices of more creatures
terribles that all these, but they don't keep name.


5th


 


A little of all of this, above all, took to the eyes of
the common hobbits. But even the most deaf and homeless people camenzaron
to read extrañas stories; and those whose shops take them there
fronteras vieron things extrañas. The conversation in El
Green Dragon in Bywater, late spring
Frodo's fifth year, he showed that included in the comfortable heart of the
Regions have heard noises, although the majority of the hobbits still exist
se reían de ellos.

Sam Gamyi was found in a ring looking for fire, y
in front of him was Ted Sandyman, the boy of the mill; y había
various other rustic hobbits listening to conversation.

Extra things if you see these days, without doubt, I say Sam.

Ah, dijo Ted, yes, yes escuchas. But I can listen
things at the fire and children's things at home, yes I'm here.

—Sin duda puedes —replied Sam—, and I was ready to decide that
some are more certain of what you believe. ¿Quién invented
the stories? Tomemos los dragones.

—No, thank you —I say Ted—, no haré. Now let's talk about them
when he was young, but there was no reason to believe in him.
I want to talk about them. Only have a Dragon in Bywater, and it's Green
—I said, causing general laughter.

—De acuerdo —I say Sam, I'm back with the others—. But that's it
There are these human beings, these giants, how can we call them?
They say that a bigger tree than a tree was seen more
Beyond the Northern Páramos there isn't much.

¿Quiénes son?

My first Hal, for example. Work for Sr. Boffin en
Overhill y sube a Northfarthing a cazar.
Vio one.

He says yes, sometimes. You Hal always says what he saw
things; and sometimes there are things that don't exist.

But it was as big as an elm tree, and it walked...
you walked six yards by zancada, yes it was a pugada.

Entonces apuesto a que no pugada. What I saw was an elm,
lo más probable es que no.

But this journey, I assure you; y no hay ningún
elm in the Northern Páramos.


 


—Then


You can't have seen one — I say Ted. Hubo some
laughter and applause: the public seemed to think that
Ted había ganado un punto.

In all ways —I say Sam—, you can't deny that others, as well
our Halfast, they saw rare people cruzando the Comarca; cruzándola
, it's clear: there are more people who are there
fronteras. The refugees have never been so occupied.

And I hope to say that the Elves are heading west. Dicen
who go to the ports, even beyond
Torres Blancas. Sam waved his arm vaguely: ni él ni
no one knows how far away the sea was, farther from the streets
towers, further away from the western borders of the Comarca. But it was
a old tradition that the Puertos Grises established there,
from where they often zarpaban élficos boats so as not to return jamás.

Ship, ship, ship by the sea, if
they head to the West and we live there — I say Sam, while singing
the words, sealing the head with sadness and solemnity. But Ted
he got back—.

Good, this is nothing new, you believe in the old things.
And I don't know what matters to you or me. ¡Que naveguen!
But I assure you that you have not seen him do it; no nadie
más en la Comarca.

Good, no self, I say Sam thoughtfully.  
I had once seen an elf in the woods, and I was hoping to see him.
One more day. Of all the words you have read above
first years, these fragments of stories and recorded in media...
The stories about the elves, as we know the hobbits, are always moving
To get to know the Pueblo Justo and get news about them, I say.
Now he's Señor Bolsón, for him to work. I tell myself that they are
sailing and knowing something about elves. And the old master Bilbo knew
more: many were the conversations you had with him when he was little.

Oh, the two best places, I say Ted. At the menos el viejo Bilbo
He was there, and Frodo was there. Yes de ahí sacan
the news, you will never miss the illegal alcohol. Good,
amigos, I'm going home. Let's have good health! Opened up
taza and rose loudly. Sam asked himself


in


 


silence and I don't say anything more. I cared a lot about that
think. To get started, you have to do a lot in it
Bolsón Cerrado garden, and I would spend a day in the morning,
if the weather was better. The grass grew quickly. But Sam
keep thinking about gardening. At the head of a crime,
he sighed, got up and went up.

It was early April and the sky was clearing in a storm
lluvia. The sun was clear, and it was cool and pale late
vanished silently at night. I walked to the house below the morning stars,
crossing Hobbiton and undergoing the hill, silbando suave y
thoughtful.

It was just that when Gandalf reappeared in full
ausencia. For three years after the Fiesta, it had been absent.
Then I paid a short visit to Frodo, and observed him carefully,
he marched again. During the next year or two, it will be
I start with enough frequency, unexpectedly leaving after the night and
yesndose without warning before the amanecer. No
he talked about his own travel expenses, and so on
mainly interested in small news about Frodo's health and recovery.

Entonces, de suddene, sus visitas cesaron. More than new years ago
that Frodo didn't see him, he didn't even talk about him, and he was busy with
to think that the magician would never return and would be abandoned
everyone is interested in the hobbits. But this night, while Sam walked
at home and the twilight disappeared, he looked at the family
coup in the studio window.

Frodo received his old friend with great surprise
joy. They looked hard. "

"Everything is fine, eh?", said Gandalf. "It is the same as always,
Frodo!"

—You also —replied Frodo; but secretly he thought what it was
For news about the whole world, you will be ready
engrossed in a conversation, and asked despiertos until well into the night.

The next morning, after a late break, the magician was sent
with Frodo arriving at the open window of the studio. A brilliant fire


 


6l


I was burning on the chimenea, but the sun was hot and the wind was overcoming me
of the south. Everything seemed fresh, and the new green of
Spring shone in the fields and in the tips
dedos de los árboles.

Gandalf thought about it one spring, maybe a few years ago
before, when Bilbo went uphill running from Bolsón Cerrado without a cloud
. The cable was whiter than before,
and about the beard and what are the biggest questions, and about it
my face more overwhelmed by worry and wisdom; but their eyes shine
as always, I smoked and had rings of humor with it
mismo vigor y deleite.

Now he smoked in silence, Frodo was already heard,
summarize your thoughts. Even in the morning light you felt the dark
shadow of the news that Gandalf had told. Finally
broke the silence.

You were also busy telling me things extrañas about me
anillo, Gandalf, dijo. And then you'll find out, because you'll read it
that it was better to leave those hired until he loved them. ¿No crees
What would be better to end now? He says the ring is dangerous
, much more tricky than I suppose. What do I hear?

In many heartfelt terms, the magician replied. It's much more powerful
of what jamás I had to think about at the beginning, as powerful as the
final victory for complete to any mortal race that
he would pose it. I would put it on there.

In the region, over a long time, many elfish rings were made,
magical rings like llamáis, and they were, above all, various
types: some more powerful and others less. The smaller rings were
just test them in the office before they are completely unrolled, and for them
the elven herdsmen were no more than nimiedades; anyway, in my opinion,
dangerous for mortals. But the Big Rings, the Rings of
Poder, eran peligrosos.
 
A mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great Rings, no...
We don't die, but we don't grow, we don't get more life, simply
He continues, until at the end of each minute it's a mess. Y yes
if it turns invisible to the end always and walks in it
low twilight the sight of the Dark Power that consumes the Rings.


62


 


Yes, late or tempered - more late, if you are strong or well-mannered at the
beginning, but neither strength nor good purpose will last—,
late or hard the Dark Power will devour him.

¡Qué aterrador!, said Frodo. Hubo other wide
silence. The sound of Sam Gamyi cutting the llegó grass
desde el jardín.

'How much time does this know?' asked Frodo at the end.
¿Y cuánto sabía Bilbo?

Bilbo no longer knows what I'm telling you, that's for sure, I'm telling you
Gandalf. Of course you won't be able to send it
no one would ever think that he was a criminal, no matter what
promise to be careful. I thought the ring was very
beautiful and very useful in case of need; and if something went badly
or it was extraño, it was él mismo. I said I was growing up
mind", and who was always worried about him; but no
I suspected that the ring was to blame. Even if he had it
learned that you need care; not apparently
always keep the same size or weight; whether it shrinks or expands
extraña form, and suddenly it could slip away from a source
había estado apretado.

Yes, I noticed it on the last card, I said Frodo,
so I always kept it in its rhythm.

Much wisdom, I say Gandalf. But as for your long life, Bilbo
I never connected her with the ring absolutely. All the credit was awarded
, and I was very proud of him. Anyway if
He was walking around restless and uncomfortable. Removed and pulled, I say.
A signal that the ring was returning to control. ¿

How long does it take for everyone to know this? asked Frodo again.

¿Sabes?, said Gandalf. I knew a lot that only him
Sabios saben, Frodo. But if you refer to "sabido about this ring",
good, no matter what, you could decide. There is one last question
hacer. But you don't doubt my assumption.

Are you ready to help? I reflected, searching
en on memory. Let me tell you: it was the year that it was
White Council expelled to the Dark Power of the Black Forest, just before...
the battle of the five men when Bilbo met his ring. A shadow


 


cayó


above my heart lies, even though I don't know what...
Fearful. At the same time I wondered how Gollum had bought me a Big Ring,
it was so clear; at least that is clear from the beginning. Entonces
Here is the extra story of Bilbo about how he was "ganado", y
I couldn't believe it. When I finally learned the truth,
I understood what I had been trying to do right away
ring outside of all doubts. Just like Gollum with "
birthday gift". The minds were almost equal to reassure me.
Clearly, the ring had an unhealthy power that was forced to work
I will watch you immediately. This was the first real warning you received
of which something is not good. I told Bilbo what it was
better not to use those rings; but he resisted and was ready to eat.
It doesn't have much more to do. You can't stop it
without causing her harm; and in every way I didn't want to do it
. Only you could observe and hope. Quizás podría haber
I consulted Saruman el Blanco, but always the same
he prevented me. "

"Where is this?" asked Frodo.
.

—Quizás no —answered Gandalf—. The hobbits are not, or were not,
assumed suyo. Sin embargo, es grande entre los Sabios. Eg el
jefe of my order and the head of the Council. About acquaintance
It's deep, but my pride has grown with him, and it doesn't come back any better
intromision. The knowledge of the elfish rings, large and small, is above
incumbents. He studied it for a long time, searching for the lost secrets of it
on creation; but when the Rings were debated in the Council
, everything that we revealed about the knowledge of the contradictory rings
my fears. As I doubted I lasted, even if I was restless. He continued observing
and hoping.

And everything seemed to be good with Bilbo. And the years passed.
Yes, they passed, and they didn't seem to affect it.
No sign of the edad. The shadow flew over me. But me
I say: «After all, he comes from a long-lived family
mother's side. Todavía hay time. ¡Espera!”.

Y esperé. Hasta to that night, when I went up from this house. Dijo
and here are the things that reminded me of a dream that no one ever knew
Saruman's word may disappear. Over as long as something has passed


64


 


years later, to discover the truth.
 
Frodo, anxious. If he wondered well over time, no
? Can I scan in peace, I want to decide?

If I felt better at the moment, I say Gandalf. But only have one
Power in this world that knows it all about rings and rings
effects; and that I separate, there is no power in the world
that separates everything from the hobbits. Entre los Sabios, soy el
The only one who is interested in the hobbit knowledge: a dark branch of the
acquaintance, but plenty of surprises. Soft as the mantequilla,
and yet, sometimes as hard as the roots of a tree. I think it's probable
that some resist the Rings much longer than the majority of
los Sabios creerían. I don't think you should worry about it
Bilbo.

So, I put the ring on for many years
I used it, so it could take a long time for the flu to disappear
; before that I was sure to want to see it, for example.
On the contrary, you could live for years, happily: simply ask yourself
as he was when he separated from him. Because at the end I gave up
por propia voluntad: an important point. No, ya no me
the sweet Bilbo was worried once he was gone
ir the thing. That's why I feel responsible.

Since Bilbo was, I was deeply worried about
you and for all these enchanting, absurd and defenseless hobbits.
It would be a harsh coup for the world and the Dark Power
saleswoman in the Comarca; yes all of you lovely, happy and stupid Bolgers,
Hornblowers, Boffins, Bracegirdles and the rest, por no
mention the ridiculous Bolsón, they will convert into exclavos.

Frodo was extreme. But why should we be there?, he asked. ¿Y
why did you ask these exclavos?

To tell the truth, replied Gandalf, I believe that
Hasta ahora —hasta ahora, fijate— he passed up to complete
the existence of the hobbits. Please be welcomed. But you
security has passed. You don't need it - it takes a lot
More useful services—, but you won't want to forget them. Y
holding hobbits as miserables exclavos would please her much more than she would hold


  65

happy and free hobbits. Malicia y exists
the vengeance.

'Venganza?' said Frodo. Venganza por qué? Sigo without understanding it.

Keep everything with me, I say Gandalf. Aún no
know the peligro verdadero; but you will know it. Yo
I wasn't sure the last time I was here; but it was time to talk.
Dame el anillo un momento.

Frodo stole the bag from his trousers, from where he was
attached to a chain that attached to your belt. I desabrocho him
y he fed it slowly to the magician. Suddenly I felt it a lot
weighed, as you or your own Frodo will resist in any way
to which Gandalf will touch him.

Gandalf took it away. Looks like this
pure and solid gold. Can you see any brand there? I asked.

No, I say Frodo. No hay anyone. It's quite simple
never shows a hint or sign of use.

Well, look! For the darkness and distress of Frodo,
the magician suddenly turned it into the middle of a man
brilliant rincón of the fire. Frodo God a grito and tried to tie the tenazas;
But Gandalf told him.

Wait!, I say in an authoritative voice, aiming
quickly to Frodo for under his cejas creasadas.

The ring did not show any apparent change. At the head of a crime,
Gandalf rose, looked for the contraventanas and
ran the curtains. The habitation became dark and silent, however
the shell of Sam's buckets, now look for the winds,
even if it was forgotten from the garden. For a moment, el
the magician wondered while looking at the fire; where I'm happy, I'm happy
the ring and I lifted it to the chimenea with the tenazas, and following it I picked it up
. Frodo jadeó.

It's very cool, I say Gandalf. ¡Cógelo! Frodo received it
in the palm of his engraved hand: he seemed to have a bigger and bigger turn
pesado que nunca.

¡Sosténlo!, said Gandalf. Look great!


66


 


While Frodo did it, via fine lines, as fine as they
longer lengths of a plume, which follow the ring, outside and inside: lines
of fire that seem to form the letters of a fluid writing.
They shine with a penetrating intensity, yet remote, as they emerge from a
great depth. «


I cannot read the letters of fire,” Frodo said with
voz temblorosa. «

Ancient way, but the language is the Mordor, which
no pronunciaré here. But this in common language is what...»

A ring to govern everyone. A ring to meet him,

A ring to carry them all and in the darkness close them.

They are only two lines of a verse known for a long time in the elven tradition:

Three rings for the kings below the sky,

You are for the elderly men in their stone halls,

New for mortal men condemned to die,

One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows yacen.

A ring to govern everyone, A ring to meet them,

A ring to carry them all and in the darkness close them
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows yacen

After a pause and then I say slowly with a deep voice: This is it
the master ring, the single ring to govern everyone. Este es el
The only ring that has been lost for many years, due to its great debilitation


 


of


on power. You want it very much, but you don't have to get it.

Frodo remained silent and immovable. My name is a couple of extenders
an enormous hand, like a dark cloud that rose above it and closed
above the el. ¡This ring!, he stammered. Like, like demons
llegó a mí?

¡Ah!, said Gandalf. This is a very large story. Los comienzos
only the masters of knowledge return to the Black Years
remember now. If you know everything related,
We will still be feeling here when Spring soon gives way to Winter.

But also the words of Sauron the Great, el
Dark Lord. The noises they have heard are certain:
effectively, it has resurgenced, it has abandoned its dominion in the Black Forest and
He returned to his ancient fortress in the Dark Tower of Mordor.
These names including ustedes, the hobbits, are seen as a shadow in
the limits of old stories. Always after one step and one breath,
the Shadow returns to another form and continues to grow.

Oh no, I don't think it will happen in my time, I say, Frodo.

I also say Gandalf, and also all those who live for this
times. But this is not up to us to decide. Everything we care about
deciding is what to do with the time we have been given. Y
the enemy is quickly getting stronger. On these planes there are several
madurar, I create, but I'm madurando. It will cost us a lot
. We would cost a lot, even if not outside...

Al Enemigo aún the other thing that gives her strength and
Knowledge to overcome all resistance, break the last defenses
and cover all the lands in a second darkness. The false el
Unique Ring.

The Three, the most beautiful of all, the Señores Elfos hid it, and
on the hand never touch or miss. You are
Reyes Enanos posed, but he recovered three of them, and they
they have consumed the dragons. New entregó a los
Deadly men, proud and grandiose, and so they captured them. Hace much time
they climbed below the dominion of the Unique, and they converted
in Spectros del Ring, shadows lower on great Shadow, more


terribles


 


sirvientes. Hace much time. Many years have passed since the New One
if extraviaron. But who knows? When the shadow grows again
, they can also walk again. But they come! We won't talk
Such things were not available in the morning of the Comarca.

Así es ahora: ha reunido a los Nueve;
either you are, or on the contrary you will be destroyed. Los Tres siguen ocultos
. But that doesn't worry you. Only one needs it;
it's the same thing as the Ring, it's its own, and I've found a large part of it
of his ancient power passed to him, to be able to govern everyone
the others. If you recover it, it will go back to everyone
again, where you are, including the Three, and everything you have
Strengthened with him, he will ask you to sleep, and that will be it
más fuerte que nunca.

This is terrible coincidence, Frodo. Create that
the only one had perished; that the Elves destroyed it, as it were
must be done. But now you know that it doesn't have
perecido, who has been encountered. As he gets it,
he's looking for it, and all his thoughts are there. It's about great hope y
our great fear.

'Why, why not was it destroyed?' cried Frodo. How
llegó el Enemigo to lose him, he was so strong
Was it that expensive for him? He opened the ring in his hand,
how do you see the dark ones extending to be able to understand them.

If they stopped him, I said Gandalf. The strength of
The Elves had a lot of time to resist him; and not all
which would be a good record; then there was pain.
Demasiado, no one looked above the darkness, without great valor and great hazañas
who were not entirely vain. Some days, some days, I'll tell you.
everything about the matter, or it will be counted in its entirety by this person
better know it.

But for now, you need to know everything about it
How I brought this to you, and that will be enough, this
That's all I'll say. Fueron Gil-galad, Rey Elfo, y Elendil de
Westernesse quienes derrocaron a Sauron, aunque ellos mismos
perecieron en el hecho; and Isildur, son of Elendil, cut the Ring


 


69


of the hand of Sauron and took him away. Entonces Sauron
he was slain and on his spirit he remained hidden throughout the ages
years, until his shadow took shape again in the Black Forest.

But the ring was lost. Cayó en el Gran Río, Anduin,
and it disappeared. Because Isildur marched to the north by her
eastern orilla del Rio, and search for the Campos Gladios was
attacked by the Orcs of the Mountains, and in all cases of people
she was asesinada. He jumped into the water, but the ring was there
the tossed of the dedo while nadaba, and thus the Orcs saw it and
lo mataron con flechas.

Gandalf if I deduced. And there, in the dark places between them
Gladios fields, I say, the ring passed into the shadows
ya la leyenda; and so, much of its history is known now
just for a little while, and the Consejo de los Sabios cannot discover it
more. But in the end I can continue the story, I think.

Much later, but for a long time, I lived in Orillas
del Gran Río, at the limit of the Tierras Salvajes, a
small people, with gentle hands and peaceful feet. I suppose they were from there
and hobbit species; related to the fathers of the fathers of the Fuertes, yes
I love the river and I just want to build small boats in it.
juncos. Both had a family of great reputation, yes
it was numerous and richer than the majority, and was governed by one
abuela del pueblo, severe and sandy in the ancient traditions,
called Sméagol. They are interested in the roots and
the origins; it was immersed in great depths; excavaba low
growing trees and plants; excavated tunnels in green hills;
and stop looking at the tops of the hills, the trees of
the trees or flowers that are blooming in the air: they held the head and the look
bay.

I had a friend called Déagol, of a similar type,
sharper in sight but not so fast or strong. On one occasion, they took a bottle
and they went to the Gladios fields, where they were great
maces de lirios y juncos en flor. Here, Sméagol went up
if I can poke around the orillas, but Déagol felt in the bottle and fished. De sudden, a great
piece
he bit on Anzuelo, and before that
above where it was, it was arrested outside and inside
water, until the bottom. Entonces only the sedal, because it created
see something shine in the lecho of the river; y containing the
respiración, lo agarró.
Luego underwent resolando, with seaweed in his hair
a puñado de lodo; and no more until the orilla. ¡Y he here!,
when he washed the praise, there was a beauty in his hand
gold ring; and it shone and shone in the sun, in that way
his heart was happy. But Sméagol had been observing it from now on
away from a tree, and while Deagol settled with the ring, Sméagol
if carefully looked for further.
  "Danos eso, Deagol, mi amor", I say Sméagol, por encima
del hombro de su amigo.
  "Por qué?", ​​​​said Deagol.
  “Because it is my cumpleaños, my love, and I want it,” I say
Sméagol.
  “It doesn't matter to me,” Deagol said. "
I've given you a gift, more than what you could allow me. Meet this, y voy
to take it from me".
  “Oh, the truth is that you were, my love,” said Sméagol; y
I grabbed Deagol by his ass and pulled him out, because of him
gold seemed very bright and beautiful. Then I'll give you the ring
the finger.
Above Nadie never had Deagol's side; fue
assinado lejos de casa, y cuerpo fue cunningly
I hide. But Sméagol only returned; and I discovered what nadie
of his family he could see it, when he lifted the ring.
He was very complacent with his discovery and concealed it;
I used it to discover secrets, and I use it on acquaintance
everyone will damage it. The ring has locked her
power according to your age. It's not extraneous...
"It's certain in every way," replied Gandalf. Above
origins, in any case, even more than their own hobbits.
And including the story of Bilbo sugiere el paresce. Había a...




 


















 
There is a lot in the depths of your minds and memories.


72


 


This was very similar. They were noticed noticeably
good, much better than what a hobbit would understand,
digamos, to an enan, or to an orc, or even to an elf. Think about the certainties
that both of them knew, to get involved.

Yes, I say Frodo. Even other people like the Plantean hobbits
certain, and very similar type. And the hobbits don't make trouble.
Gollum had the intention to continue all the time. Just trying
I despised little Bilbo. And I'll have to decide how much fun it was
Unfortunately, you can play a game that you could end by telling them
an easy victim, but getting lost wouldn't hurt her.

Certainly desired, I fear, I say Gandalf. But it had something
more in it, I believe, that no one else sees it. Don't worry about Gollum
everything was ruined. It was shown to be harder than even one
de los Sabios had a vision, as a hobbit might. Habia
a little recognition of his mind that still pertains to it, and the light
It passed through him, like a smile in the darkness: the light of the
passed. De hecho, it was pleasant, I believe,
turn to hear a lovely voice, evoking memories of the wind, the trees,
the sun above the grass and so many forgotten things.

But this, above all, will only enrage even more on the evil side
unless the modesty is dominated. Except that
pudiera ser curado. Gandalf sighed. ¡Ay! You have little hope
that I will take over. But no hope. No, no, no matter what
the ring for a long time, cases from which it could be recorded. Porque
there was a lot that I didn't use it much: in the black darkness
Rare if necessary. Of course, he never had to be "devanetic". Continue being
delicate and strong. But the thing was eating away at her mind, por
supuesto, and the torment was sometimes unbearable.

All the "great secrets" below the mountains have been revealed
it would only be a vacant night: there would be nothing more than to discover,
Nothing worth doing, just a stealthy and despicable thing
resentful darkness, and I hated the light even more: I hated everything, and it
Anillo sobre todo. "

"What do you want to decide?", said Frodo. Surely the ring was there,
You must begin to understand, Frodo, after all of you
darling and the only one who cared about you? But if he hated it,
So why don't you forget about it or leave it and enjoy it?


 


-The


I hear —I say Gandalf—. I hated him and loved him, as if
he hated and loved so much. You can't shake your hair.
I didn't ask for it voluntarily.

An Anillo de Poder looks after himself, Frodo. It can slip
Traicionemente, but on guard he never abandons it. How much,
plays with the idea of ​​engaging with someone else,
and that's only in a temporary age, when it's time to grab.
But as far as I'm concerned, only Bilbo has ide in the story
more at the game and he really has it. I also need all my help
. And neither would anyone have abandoned him
I had him left on the side. It wasn't Gollum, Frodo, until his own ring did
I decided the things. El Anillo left it.

What? Just in time to meet Bilbo? —I say Frodo—. No
Have you ever seen an Orc better?

—It's not a laughing matter —said Gandalf—. No for you. Fue
The greatest success in the whole story of the Ring has been written
the time: call Bilbo just at this moment, and place your first hand on her
, a ciegas, en la oscuridad.

He has more power in the game: Frodo. El
Anillo tried to turn to his love. If he had escaped
the hand to Isildur and he had him pulled; Then, when the opportunity presented itself,
he captured the little Deagol, and assed him; and then again
Gollum, and I devoured him. Ya no podía
use it: it was demasiado pequeño y mezquino; y meentras
I will remain with him, I will never want to abandon his profound loneliness.
So now, when I love you, I've new and sent
on dark thoughts from the Black Forest, he abandoned to Gollum.
Only to be recognized by the most unlikely person imaginable:
Bilbo of the Comarca!

Besides, there was more in the game, more than anyone
design of the Ring Creator. I can't say it more clearly
that Bilbo was destined to meet the Ring, and not by...
It may be a cool idea.

But how did you learn everything about the ring,


74


 


and about Gollum? In truth, everyone knows or just knows it
divining?

Gandalf looked at Frodo and his eyes shone. Sabia...
—A lot, and I learned a lot —I replied—. But no
I want you to know everything I know. The story...
of Elendil and Isildur and the Unique Ring is known to all
Sabios. Your ring will be a unique ring
only for the writing of fire, apart from any other evidence.

"When do you discover this?" asked Frodo, interrupting
.

Just now in this room, above all, the magician responded
abruptly. But I was hoping to meet him. I have returned
dark journeys and a long quest to make this final decision. It's there
Last question, and now everything is clearer. Decipher
the part of Gollum and put it in the vacío in the story required something else
of reflexion. You may have started with conjectures about Gollum, though
I'm not wondering now. The self. He saw it. ¿

“Have you seen Gollum?” exclaimed Frodo sadly.

Yes. Of course, of course, it's a pudding. The
intenté hace mucho tiempo; but in the end I log it.

So, what happened after Bilbo escaped from there? ¿
Do you know?

Not so clearly. What I told them is what Gollum was
willing to count, although not, so to speak, of the form in that
I related it. Gollum is a liar, and let him filter his words.
For example, call the ring on «cumpleaños gift», y
if I kept signatures in this. I said it came from your abuela, that
I had sheep with beautiful things of this type. A ridiculous story.
No idea that the abuela de Sméagol was a matriarch,
a great person in his way, but he says he poses a lot
Elf rings were absurd, and as a gift, it was
a lie. But a lie with a grain of truth.

Déagol's asesinato tormented Gollum, and he invented it
a defense, repitiéndosela on «Preciosa» another
instead, while red hues in the darkness, as long as that happens
I created it. It was on cumpleaños. Deagol must have given up.


 





He tolerated it all he could, but the truth was desperate
important, and in the end everything will be severe.
I infused her with fire and learned the truthful story a little while ago
little, between lloriqueos and gruñidos. I thought about it
they have been misinterpreted and mistreated. But when it comes down to it
insinuations. Something else dominated him, more than mine. El
He told me about his history, until the end of the Game of Acertijo and...
Bilbo doesn't say anything more above the air, I'm safe
murmur in the darkness that is about to come. People will be true
they tolerated that they would pat it, put it in a corner
and then they will rob him. Gollum had good friends now, good friends
y very strong. They will help him. Bolsón will pay
for him. This was my main thought. I hated Bilbo and cursed him
on name. More than that, I knew where it came from.

'But how did I discover it?' asked Frodo.

Good, in my name, Bilbo, very stupidly, if I say it to Gollum
; and after that it would not be difficult to discover
on country, once Gollum salt shaker. Oh, yes, he went up.
On the ring through the ring it turned out stronger than on me
los Orcos, or even in the light. After a year or two, I abandoned them
montañas. Verán, although still attracted by the desire, el
Anillo ya no devoraba; I started to relive a little.
He felt older, terribly older, but less shy, and he kept it
a mortal hambre.

The light, the light of the Sun and the Moon, even feared it and hated it,
and I believe he will always fear it and hate it; but he was smart. I'll find out what
he could hide from the light of the day and the moon, and open up every now and then
quickly and stealthily in the darkness of the night with his pale and cold eyes,
and pick up small things you like or dislike. If hizo
more strength and boldness with new food and new air. Meet me
on the way to the Black Forest, as it was to hope for. ¿   

Where did you meet him? asked Frodo.

There you are, replied Gandalf, but before that
I had wandered a lot, following Bilbo's track. It was difficult
learn something about him with certainty, you can always tell about charla
interrupted by curses and pleasantries. "What I wanted to do


?


 


It's not just a question. Primero hizo trampa, lo hizo. Brompió las
reglas. We must have it expressed, yes, precious. ¡Y we will have it
, precious!"

This is a muestra de su charla. I suppose you don't want to
more. Every day many days. But for the indirect ones that were dejaron caer entre
the grunts, I deduce that over the past few months they have brought him up
finally to Esgaroth, and including to las calles de Valle, escuchando
secretly and escudriñando. Good, the news of the great discounts has extended
Away and also from the Lands Salvajes, and many have heard of Bilbo  
the name of Bilbo and I knew where he came from. We have nothing hidden.
on our journey back to our home in the West.
The keen eye of Gollum will soon discover what he wanted.

So, why didn't I follow Bilbo's trail? asked Frodo.
Why didn't you go to the Comarca?

Ah, I say Gandalf, now let's go to this. I believe Gollum
he attempted it. I left and returned to the west, until it
Gran Rio. But then he deviated. No he remembered it
the distance, that's safe. No, something more attracts me
. I believe my friends, the ones who bought it for me.

The Forest Elves raked him first, an easy task for them,
You can put it on the rack and it was fresh too. They drove through the Black Forest and back
, although they never catch it. The forest
There was a lot of noise about it, terrible stories included
beasts and pájaros. Los Hombres del Bosque decían que había un
new terror in the world, a ghost that baby bloods. Trepaba a los árboles
to meet nests; He met with his friends to meet his parents; if it drips
for the winds to meet someone.

But in the extreme western part of the Black Forest, the rastro is
desvió. If you left the surface, you left the
knowledge of the Forest Elves and he was lost. Y entonces cometí a gran
error. Yes, Frodo, and not the prince; although I fear what it is
the peor. Dejé el asunto ahí. Lo dejé ir; because I had to
many other things to think about in this moment, and I also confide in wisdom
of Saruman.

Good, that was ago years. I paid for it from the beginning with a lot
dark and dangerous days. The sign had time to be lost when it


 


retomé


, after Bilbo left here. And I was looking for it
I am in vain not to ask for the help of a friend:
the world. We are looking for Gollum everywhere
extension of the Tierras Salvajes, without hope in the end. But
at the end, when he abandoned the persecution and returned to others
fireplaces, meet Gollum. My friend has returned great
peligros trayendo consigo to the miserable creature.

I can't decide what he was doing. Only lloró
and we called cruelly, with many cries in our throats; y
when we opened it, it groaned, cheered and rubbed.
With your large hands, lamiéndose the dedos as they do, as they do  
record any old torture. But I'm afraid it won't happen
the question was possible: he had to walk on a slow and tight path, step by step
step by step, thousand to thousand, hacia el sur, until reaching the Land of Mordor.

A quiet silence happened in the house. Frodo podía oír
the sides of your heart. Even outside everything seems quiet.
You don't hear the sound of Sam's tijeras.

Yes, in Mordor, I say Gandalf. ¡Ay! Mordor attracts everyone
the evil things, and the Dark Power was doubling all over the will to
reunite them there. El Anillo del Enemigo
we will also leave the brand, leaving it ready for the invocation. Y'all people
he whispered about the new light in the South, and above
I hate hacia el Oeste. There are new and good friends here
lo ayudarían en su venganza!

¡Miserable necio! In this land I would learn much, much more
for your convenience. Y late or temprano, while acechaba y
Husmeaba on the fronts, would be caught and carried by
be questioned. That's what those things were, I'm afraid. When I
they met, they took a long time there and they returned
. In some guise. But yes
ya don't care. Su peor travesura ya estaba hecha.

Yes, ay! Because of that, the Enemigo has entered that
The only one has been met. Know where Isildur fell. Sabe
where he met Gollum on the ring. You know what it is
Great Ring, may you give a long life. You know it's not one


of


 


The Tres, they can never be lost and not sufren
bad anyone. You know that he is not one of the Siete, nor of the New;
I believe that until now I have heard about the hobbits and the region.

The Comarca... you may be looking for it now, if you don't have it
I explained to you where it comes from. De hecho, Frodo, me temo que
even one might think that the name of Bolsón, for so long inadvertently, has
cobrado importancia.

“But this is terrible!” cried Frodo. Mucho peor que lo peor
that I imagined starting from your tracks and advertisements. Oh, Gandalf,
my best friend, what should I do? Because now I have a lot of money.
What should I do? That's the estimate that Bilbo didn't agree with
vile creature when I had the opportunity!

¿Piedad? It was the Piedad that I deduced firsthand. Piedad y Misericordia.
do not attach if necessary. You have been well rewarded,
that you can run at any time, even if you are light
Frodo. Please be sure that you will receive very little harm from the pain, y
At the end he escaped, so he came to his position
Ring. With compassion.

I feel it, I say Frodo. But I keep my food; y no
I feel no sympathy for Gollum.

He hasn't seen it, interrupted Gandalf.

No, no quiero, I say Frodo. No
you entiendo. ¿Quieres decir que tu y los Elfos
Have they stopped living after all these horrible things? In any case, e.g
as bad as an ogre, and only an enemy. We deserve death. ¡

If the commodity! I'll wait to decide yes. Much that lives merecen
death. And some who die take their lives. You can give it away
? Indeed, I am not anxious to share death in the judiciary
. Because even the very best can't see all the finals. I don't care
many hopes that Gollum can be cured before he dies, however
you have a chance that this is the case. And you are tied to the destiny of
Anillo. My heart tells me that I still have a paper to desempeñar,
for good or for bad, before the end; and when this follows, compassion
Bilbo can decide the fate of many, and yours no less. In any case
case, we don't sleep it: it's very old and very longed for.
The Elves of the Forest keep him in prison, but they treat him with
all the kindness that can be found in your heartfelt sabios.


 


79


In all ways, I say Frodo, including Bilbo, no matar pudiera
to Gollum, he wished he wouldn't look at the Ring again. Never mind again
the huber was found, and you didn't get the huber! So why don't you ask me
? Why didn't you oblige me to pull it, or destroy it? ¿

Dejarte? ¿Obligarte?, I said the magician. It hasn't happened
listening to everything I say? Don't be thinking about that
he says. But as long as you pull it, obviously you're right
bad. These rings have a form of being met. In bad hands
they could have caused great damage. The worst thing is that you might have fallen
in the hands of the Enemigo. De h echo, without doubt he would hear it; pues
He is the only one, and he is doing everything he can to meet him or
atraerlo hacia sí.

Por supuesto, I wonder Frodo, he was dangerous for you; y
This worried me deeply. But he had a lot in play
who never had a day in which the region was not...
supervised by ojos vigilantes. While you won't use it,
I didn't think that the ring would have a lasting effect on it
you, it doesn't hurt, at least not for much time. Y
you must record that it is new years, the last time you are there,
aún sabía poco con certeza.

But then don't destroy it, as they say it should be done
Has much time? cried Frodo again. If you have warned me, or included
Please send me a message, I will have destroyed it. ¿

Do you have it? How did you get it? Have you tried it once?

No. But I suppose it could be hammered or melted.

¡Inténtalo!, I say Gandalf. Think about it now!

Frodo went to save the ring from his bag and
I admired it. Now it seemed threadbare and threadbare, without any decoration
visible. The gold seemed very beautiful and pure, y
Frodo thought about the rich and beautiful thing that was his colour, in it
perfect that was on redondez. It was an admirable thing
absolutely precious. When I bagged it, I had the intention
roast it at the hottest part of the fire. But
I now discovered that I couldn't do it, not without a big deal
lucha. He held the ring in his hand, wavering, y


obliging


 


to record everything that Gandalf told her;
and then, with an effort of will, I created a movement, as
I've read it, but I've discovered that I've had to look at it
pocket.

I can't just do it easily, I don't want to damage it. Y no podría
"oblige", except by force, which will break your mind.








 


The desire to fill it would be too great for my strength. If

I reached for the fan and pulled the curtains aside
the contraventanas. The light of the sun began to enter the room.
Sam passed on the outer path slowly. Yes now, I say
the wizard, turning to Frodo, the decision is yours.
But I will always help you. I use on hand above
Frodo's man. I will help you to bear this burden, while at sea
tuya. But we have to do something, ready. The enemy
it moves.

There was a long silence. Gandalf returned to hear y
god a drop on your pipe, as I lose in your thoughts. Your eyes seem...
I closed it, but Frodo looked carefully at the objects below.  
Frodo looked carefully at the red brasas of the house, as long as...
Look at the vision all the time, and you seem to be looking down,
deep pools of fire. I was thinking about the legends
Grietas de la Perdición y el terror de la Montaña Ardiente.

¡Bien!, I say Gandalf at the end. What are you thinking about? ¿
Has decidido qué hacer?

¡No!, replied Frodo, turning away from the darkness
, and discovering to your surprise that it wasn't obscure, and that
from the wind I could go towards the garden illuminated by the sun. Or sometimes,
Yes. By understanding what I said, I suppose I must
keep me with the ring and protect it, at least for the moment,
I know what can happen to me.

If what you can do, it will be slow, slow for the pain, yes
Look at it with this purpose, I say Gandalf.

I hope, I say Frodo. But I hope you'll be ready to meet
other better guardian. But in the meantime it seems so


soy


 


a pilgrim, a pilgrim for all those who live looking for me. I can't ask myself with
the ring and ask me here. Debería irme de Bolsón Cerrado, de la
Comarca, dejarlo todo e irme. He sighed.

I would like to save the Comarca, yes modesty, no matter what
There were moments when I thought that its inhabitants were often stupid
and worries to express, and I felt an earthquake or a
invasion of dragons would be nice. But
Now I don't feel that way. As long as you stay in the region, it's safe
and comfortable, you will meet the wanderer more: you will know
that in some place there is a point of support signatures, even my pies
they can't go back there.

I imagined it as a kind of vacation, a series of adventures
like Bilbo or the best, who ended in peace. But this would mean
el exile, a huida del peligro hacia el peligro, tras tras de me.
And I suppose I have to be alone if I have to do it and save myself
the Comarca. But I feel very small, and very desolate, and good
... desperado. The Enemigo is so fierce and terrible.

Not if I say it to Gandalf, but in the meantime, great
I desire to follow Bilbo if he burned in his heart: to follow Bilbo,
and even quizzes to meet him. It was so hot
I exceeded my limit: in cases I could have climbed while running and...
I walk along the path without my sombrero, as Bilbo had him in a place  
similar work has happened for a long time.

I wonder Frodo! exclaimed Gandalf. The hobbits really are
shadowy creatures, as I said before. You can learn everything
what you have to know about your customs in a month, and without embargo,
After many years you can still surprise yourself in an open space.
It was difficult to expect to get such a response, I didn't want you.
But Bilbo was not mistaken about choosing his hereditary, anyway
He thought little about the importance that would result. I'm afraid that it holds
reason. The ring cannot remain hidden there
Comarca for much longer; and it's good for you, as well as for God
they will tend to come and stay
beyond the name of Bolsón. It will not be safe to keep this name outside of it
Comarca or in Naturaleza. I'll give you a travel name now.
Whenever you go, you'll see Mr. Underhill.


 


83


But I don't think you need it alone. No one knows
someone can trust me that you are willing to go there
you are there, and you are willing to run
unknown peligros. But if you're looking for a companion, you'll be looked after
to elect! I'm careful with what you say, including to you
More friends are looking for! The enemy holds many spies and many forms
de oír.

Soon I will find out how you will learn by listening. Frodo knows what God knows
of which everything was very silent, inside and out. Gandalf got angry
a side of the wind. Entonces, with a dart, jumped to the
wrap and extend a wide arm towards the front and towards the bottom. If you see one
Thank you, and Sam Gamgee's curled head appeared pulled by
an ear.

Is that what? Now what will you be doing?

¡God bless him, señor Gandalf, señor!, I say Sam. ¡Nada!
At least he was cutting the edge of the grass below
ventana, si me sigues. Tomó sus tijeras y
las exhibió como prueba.

No I have it, I say Gandalf with gravedad. Time has passed since the last time
Here is the sound of your days. How much time does it take
listening?

Are you listening, señor? No te entiendo, con su
permitted. There are no escuchas in Bolsón Cerrado, and that's a hecho.

Don't be stupid! That's what you're looking for and why you heard it
? Gandalf's eyes shone and his eyes were as bright as they were
look.

—¡Señor Frodo, señor! —gritted Sam temblando—. Don't forget that
Come on, señor! Sam shouted, taking a leap like a man invited to a dinner.
—A mí, señor! Don't forget that I am converted into something anti-natural! Me
my father took charge of it. No harm done to this, for my honor,
sir!

"No harm to you," Frodo said, barely able to contain her
laughter, even though everything was overjoyed and quite disconcerted.
He knows, as well as I am, that he doesn't want to do any harm. But
Get up and respond to your inquiries immediately!

—Good, señor —I said Sam hesitating a little—. Here's what
do not understand well, over an enemy, and rings, y


the


 


Señor Bilbo, señor, and dragons, and a mountain of fire, y... y
elfos, señor. Because you can't avoid it, yes
you know what I refer to. God bless me, sir, but the words enchant me
this type. And I also believe them, say what Ted says.
¡Elfos, señor! I would love to see him. I can't help you
a ver elfos, señor, cuando vayas?

Suddenly, Gandalf returned. ¡Enter!, shouted, y
extending both arms raised to the shaded Sam, with tijeras,
cuts of grass and everything, for the wind and
I left him on the floor. I'll take you to the elf, eh?, I say, looking
Sam looks for it, but with a fleeting smile on his face. As you see it
que el señor Frodo se va?

Yes, sir. And because of this he attracted me: what he apparently oíste
. I didn't intend to do it, sir, but if I escaped: it was too much
altered.

"It can't be helped, Sam," Frodo said sadly. Había tenido
sudden and painful despatches that simply say goodbye to you
familiar comforts of Bolsón Cerrado. Tendré que irme. But —y here I saw it
Sorry to Sam - if you really care, you'll see
it was secret. ¿Ves? Yes no he haces, yes he says
a reminder of what I've heard here, as I hope for Gandalf
Convierta en aso moteado y llene the garden of culebras
.

Sam cayó de rodillas, temblando. ¡Levántate, Sam!, I say
Gandalf. I thought of something better than this. Algo
that closes your mouth and punishes you as it is due to escuchar
. Stay with Señor Frodo!

Come on! I'm going to see the elves and everything! ¡Hurra!, shouted, y
luego rompió a llorar.


 3





You should be in silence, and you should be ready, I say.
Gandalf. They had passed two or three weeks, and Frodo followed
without giving signals to be listed for irse.

The self. But it is difficult to do both things, objects. I disappeared
like Bilbo, the story will run throughout the county in a saint. ¡

Of course we must not disappear!, I say to Gandalf. ¡Ex
I won't serve anything! Say ready, no immediately. Yes if you are interested
some form of escape from the Comarca without being
sepa, it will be worth delaying it a little. But
no debes demorarte demasiado.

What is this otone, after our birthday?, I asked
Frodo. I think that for those things I could make some arrangements
.

To tell the truth, I resisted for a long time to start, now that
I had the moment: Bolsón Cerrado seemed like one
more desirable residence than in years, and I wanted to taste it
maximum on the last veranda in the Comarca. When
llegó the otone, after that at least a part of his heart would think
with greater kindness on my journey, as I always do on this road
station. From there, he had decided to leave secretly
the day of his fifth birthday: Bilbo's hundredth vein
. Either way, it seemed like a suitable day to leave
y follow him. Following Bilbo was the most important thing
mente, y lo único que hacía
the idea of ​​leaving is bearable. I thought as little as possible on the ring
then you could take it to the end. But I didn't count them all
thoughts on Gandalf. What the magician always believed was
difícil de adivinar.

I looked at Frodo and sonrió. Muy bien, dijo. I create
It will be useful, but it shouldn't be any later. I'm asking a lot


anxious


 


. In the meantime, I'm looked after and not
no trail left behind! And ensure that Sam Gamyi
no problem. If you do it, I will convert it into a flavor.

As far as where I go from - I said Frodo -, it would be difficult
to reveal it, I still don't have a clear idea.

No seas absurdo! —I say Gandalf—. I'm not advising you
that no direction in the corrections workshop! But you...
Leaving the region, you shouldn't know that until now  
estés lejos. Y must go, or at least leave, ya sea
to the north, to the south, to the west or to the east, and the direction certainly
no debería saberse.

I was so absorbed in the idea of ​​leaving Bolsón
Please try and send me back, I didn't think so
direction, I say Frodo. Why should I go there? ¿Y
what will guide me? What will I want? Bilbo went to get it
a treasure, day and time; but I want to lose one, y no
regresaré, as long as I can see it.

But you can't see many others, I say Gandalf. Yo shortly
. You might want to meet the Grietas of Perdiction; but yes
Búsqueda can be used by others: not by itself. In any case,
There is no list for this wide fireplace.

¡No, in any way!, said Frodo. But even in the meantime, that's how I rumble
should I take?

Hacia el peligro; but not wanted hastily, not wanted directly,
the magician replied. If you want, I advise you, see you
Resell. This trip should not result in being unwanted, dangerous,
although the Camino is less easy than before and will end
a medida que el año termine.

¡Rivendel!, said Frodo. Very well: go back to this and me
I will head to Rivendel. Llevaré to Sam to visit the Elfos; will be
enchanted. Habló con ligereza; but his heart was moved
suddenly with the desire to go to the house of Elrond, the Half-Elf,

Link to the Mata de Hiedra and the Green Dragon. Giants and others





87


wonders on the frontiers of the county were forgotten by
most important facts: Señor Frodo sells Bolsón Cerrado; de hecho,
I had it for sale... to the Sacovilla-Bolsón!

For a good part, some say. At the price of the gang, I say
others, and this is most probable when the
Purchaser is Señora Lobelia. (Otón died a few years ago, in the madura but
disappointed and 102 years old).

The reason why Lord Frodo sold his handsome tormentor was also
more questionable than the price. Some supported the theory - supported
for the assentimientos and insinuations of the own Aire Bolsón—de que
Frodo's money was agonizing: he left to leave
Hobbiton and live peacefully with the product of the wind
en Los Gamos, entre sus parientes Brandigamo. Tan lejos
of the Sacovilla-Bolsón as possible, add some. But so...
The harm of the immeasurable reward of the  
Bolsón de Bolsón Cerrado, who for the majority found it difficult...
creencia was firmly arraigned, more strongly than any other reason or sin that above
modest imagination would suggest: for the most part, I would suggest a dark one and also
no revealed conspiracy of Gandalf. However it was maintained very much
Called and no salt of the day, it was well known that it was
hideout in Bolsón Cerrado. But regardless of whether it is a change
fit with the designs of its magic, no doubt
: Frodo Bolsón returns to Los Gamos.

«Yes, I will change this tone», I say. «Merry
Brandigamo I'm looking for a good agujero, oh
quizás una casita».

Indeed, with Merry's help, you have been chosen
and I bought a house in Crickhollow, in the field,
further away from Bucklebury. Everyone, except Sam, pretended that he was
It will be permanently installed there. The decision to leave
that this person suggested the idea to you; pues Los Gamos
It was in the eastern limits of the Comarca, and how vivid it was
at night, it would seem like it would return to the least
creíble.

Last year, at the end of June, shortly after Frodo's plan ended


completed,


 


I returned to the next morning. «Only for a while, I hope»,
I say. «But I'm going to go further to the southern border
get news, you can. I have been inactive for longer than I should have been."

She said it lightly, but Frodo thought it seemed like it
enough worried. «Have you passed anything?», he asked.

«Pues no; but I hate something he asked me
anxious and who needs to be investigated. Afterwards I think everything is necessary
that you go immediately, you will be followed,
or at least I'll warn you. In the meantime, keep your plan;
but take more care than ever, above all with the ring. Tea
I'll take it one more time: don't use it!»

. If he was at love. “You can go back any day,” I said. "TO
It will take longer for the despatched party to arrive. I believe that,
After all, you will need my company on the Camino."

At first, Frodo was quite disturbed and worried
the moment I heard Gandalf; But on anxiety
he disappeared and in good time forgot his problems for a while.
while. The rare region has ever seen a very beautiful veranda
a very rich man: the trees were loaded with manzanas, the honey was
It rolled into the pans, and the corn was high and plentiful.

The voice was in full gear when Frodo started to worry
again for Gandalf. September was passing and following
without news above. The cumpleaños and the mudance are
they looked for it, and followed it until they sent news. Bolson Cerrado
I was busy being busy. Some of Frodo's friends came to quedarse y
to help him with the embalaje: estaban Fredegar Bolger y
Folco Boffin, and for your special friends Pippin Tuk
y Merry Brandigamo. Entre all revolutionaries all
lugar.

On September 20th, two cubiertos wagons left loaded hacia
Los Gamos, transporting the muebles and the goods of Frodo
I don't have to sell it to my new home, across the street
Brandigamo Bridge. The next day, Frodo was really anxious and tired
Gandalf slope. El jueves,
the morning of your birthday, love so quick and clear as there was a lot of time for it
Bilbo's big party. Gandalf followed without appearing. En el





89,


a dinner for him and his four helpers; but I was worried
and he didn't feel with heart. The idea to keep
that parting so quickly with her young friends weighed on her heart.
He wondered how he would know.

The four younger hobbits, without embargo, were very good humored,
and the party soon turned very happily to weigh the absence of Gandalf
. The comedor was empty, except for one table
sillas, but the food was good and had good wine:
Frodo's wine was not included in his package
Sacovilla-Bolsón.

It happens what happens with the rest of my things, when the S.-B.
I put them on the hooks, unless I found a good house
for this!, I say Frodo, while I clear up his cup. It was the last one
gota de Old Wineyards.

Trans sing many songs and talk about many
what they have here now, they toasted Bilbo's birthday
and they toasted together for their health and Frodo's, next
the custom of this. Luego salieron a tomar el aire y
towards the stars, and then they approached. Frodo's party
was finished and Gandalf was not connected.

The next morning they will be busy loading another cart.
With the rest of the team. Merry took care of this
y if he was with Fatty (es decir, Fredegar Bolger). Alguien
you must bring and warm the house before you arrive, I say
Merry. Good, we'll see you again, last morning, yes
no te duermes en el camino!

Folco was at home after coming, but Pippin left.
Frodo was restless and anxious, listening in vain to some sound
de Gandalf. I decided to wait until the end of the year. After that, yes
Gandalf needed it urgently, went to Crickhollow,
and even you could get it first. Porque Frodo iba a pie.
On plan, for pleasure and for a final look at the Comarca as much as possible
for any other reason, it was to walk from Hobbiton to Bucklebury
Ferry, take it calmly enough.

I'll also teach myself a little, I say, looking at it in a moment


polvooriento


 


in the middle of a vacant day. On
The reflection seemed quite flimsy, he thought.

After the almuerzo, the Sacovilla-Bolsón, Lobelia and above
hijo of red hair, Lotho, appeared, to great disgust of Frodo
. ¡Por fin, nuestro!, I said Lobelia as we entered.
No fue cortés; Not strictly certain, you can find the Bolsón Cerrado window no
if hizo efectiva hasta la medianoche. But let's see if we can forgive Lobelia
: if you were forced to wait for one, you are old
more by Bolsón I found what I had once hoped for, and I wanted to
cien años. In the end, there was something that didn't
if they had taken none of what they had paid for; and I asked for it
laves. It took a long time to convince her, she might have bought it
I recommend a complete inventory and review it from start to finish. Al
finally, if it was with Lotho, the name of the repuesto and the
promise that the other girl would leave her at the Gambis en
Bagshot Row. I realized and clearly demonstrated that
he believed that the Gamgis were capable of saquering the agujero during
the night. Frodo did not offer her tea.

Tomó on own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee there
kitchen. It was officially announced that Sam
I would go to Los Gamos to help Señor Frodo and look after him
tenera a Lobelia como vecina.
small garden; an insight that was approved by the...
¡Jefe, although the perspective of it did not console him

our last meal in Bolsón Cerrado! I say Frodo, empujando up
silla hacia atrás. Dejaron los platos para Lobelia. Pippin and Sam
put on three mochilas and apilaron on the porch.
Pippin went up to take a last walk through the garden. Sam disappeared
.

Only if I can. Bolsón Cerrado seemed sad, sombrio y
desaliñado. Frodo walked through the familiar habitations and
I see how the light of the atardecer fades into the walls and the shadows
they get arrested by the rincones. Little by little the interior darkened.
I went up and walked until the end of the day
I would send, and then a short trecho along the Camino de la Colina. Cases





he waited


come to Gandalf and look for the great claws in the twilight.

The sky was cleared and the stars shone more and more. Go
for a beautiful night, I say in a loud voice. This is good for
empzar. I have walking gums. I can't bear to see more of me, and Gandalf must follow me. If
I turned to get back, and once I found out, I could hear the voices, just
at the turn of the esquina, at the end of Bagshot Row. A voice was
without doubt the old Capataz; the other one was extraña, and so on
degradable. I can't understand what he said, but hey
the Capataz's responses, which were quite striking. The old man
parecía molesto.

No, Señor Bolsón has an idea. If it was this morning, y
I Sam was with him: at the end, all his things were. Yes, if they sold
and if they were, I'll tell you. Why? It's not my assumption
ni tuyo. What's next? This is not a secret. If he has changed to
Bucklebury or somewhere else, below. Yes, e.g
a clean site. I've never been so many; hay rare people
in Los Gamos. No, I can't give any mensaje. Good nights
!

Steps that are alejaban hilla below. Frodo wondered
vaguely why he who doesn't fly Colina arrives
it seemed like a lot of food to her. I guess I'm full of questions and curiosity
over my journeys, he thought. ¡Qué curiosis
they are all! I'm about to go to ask them at Tío
who was the investigator; but I thought it better (or worse), god mean
Return and return quickly to Bolsón Cerrado.

Pippin was heard on his mochila on the porch. Sam wasn't there
there. Frodo entered through the dark door. ¡Sam!, he shouted.
Sam!

Now it's time!, I'll take the answer from the very beginning, follow it
ready for his own Sam, limpiándose his mouth. If you have been
despidiendo del barrel de cerveza en el sótano.

"Everyone on board, Sam?" said Frodo.

Yes, sir. I'll take you a little further, sir.

Frodo looked for the red door with his hand and gave him his hand
to Sam. "Go back to your house, Sam!" I say.
Luego, short down the path and enter as quickly as you can on the


door


 


of the journey you take further to the meadows. We won't stop
for the community this night. Desired careful attention and eyes
curious. Sam went up running at full speed.

'Good, now we're going!' says Frodo. If echaron
the man's mochilas, tomaron on his sticks and walked to the rededor of the house
looking at the dark empty winds. He waved his hand, y
Then he turned around and (following Bilbo, if he knew it) he opened up














one or two thousand more in the south. Cruzaron unsuradamente the great fireplace
and, making sure you are sure, they headed there
Green Hills Region. As they begin to ascend the first ladders, they look on
once again the Hobbiton lighthouses came to light, shining on them
peaceful Agua valley. Ready to disappear within the folds
of the dark earth, and was followed from Poragua up
Estanque grey. When the light of the last granja faded much later,
wondering among the trees, Frodo turned and left with a
hand gesture.

«I'm wondering if someone will turn to look at this valley again»,
dijo en voz baja.

After walking for three hours, they walked away.
The night was clear, fresh and bright, but deliberate
of the clouds, like humus, they ascend through the slopes from the arroyos and
the deepest prayers. Leaves on a fine head, mixed with a light brisa
above their heads, they form a black red against the pale sky.
They had a very frugal dinner (for hobbits) and continued
. Ready to attach to an extended fireplace, which will undergo
and below, fading gray in the darkness they kept behind: the fireplace
in Woodhall, Stock y el Ferry de Bucklebury. Subia
from the main path into the Valle del Agua y serpentiaba.
on the slopes of the Green Hills there is Woody End, a salvation
I took my hand, pale and humid. Frodo was the first to despair.
rural rincón of Eastgardthing.

After one day, they entered a deeply profound path
among the tall trees the dry trees whisper at night. Estaba
very dark. At first they spoke or played a melody in their voice
, I am now full of curious eyes. Luego siguieron


marching


 


in silence, and Pippin began to rezagarse. Por
until I'm forced to suffer this punishment, if I find out
bostezó.

«I care so much», I say, «that I'm ready to take it
the fireplace." «Are you going to sleep with pie?». E.g. cases
midnight.

“I thought you enjoyed walking in the dark,” said Frodo. «But
no hay mucha prise. Merry our hopes passed
mañana; but this is the case for two days more."
«We will stop in the first probable place».

“The wind of the west,” I said Sam. «We'll take it
suficientemente lejos, señor». There is a fir forest with you just right away, yes
but I don't remember. Sam knew the terrain well within twenty thousand years
Hobbiton, but that was the limit of its geography.

Just on the other side of the hill, they went to the forest
fir trees. Leaving the path, they entered the depths
darkness of the trees, impregnated with resin color, and they collected dry branches and
piñas para hacer una fugata. Ready oyeron a happy crackling of llamas
at the foot of a large fir tree and they heard a shout to their elder,
until they started to head. Luego, drop one in a ring of the las
roots of the great tree, if grown on its heads and mantas, y
ready if they lasted deeply. No pusieron guard; no one would fear Frodo
Some cruel man can still be in the heart of the Comarca. Unas
How many creatures tried to observe them when the fire broke out
apago. A zorro that passed through the woods by Asuntos
I just noticed one minute and smelled it.

¡Hobbits!, he thought. Good, now what? I don't want to talk about it
things extrañas in this country, but rare once I hear about one
hobbit sleeping in the open air under a tree. ¡Tres!
There is something very extra beyond this. Keep it all
right, but never above anything else.
that kept the ass stiff. Walk for pleasure! Why not...?

and I discovered that the root of a tree had a sharp edge on it, ¿y
lead?, he thought, as one usually does at the start of one





expedition


. All my beautiful plum camas were sold to us
Sacovilla-Bolson! These roots are well sold.
I'll pull it out. ¡Despierten, hobbits!, he shouted. It's a beauty
morning.

“What's so beautiful?”, Pippin said, wondering about it
edge of his manta ray with an eye. ¡Sam! ¡Prepare the dessert
for news and media! Is the bath water hot?

Sam jumped up, looking quite handsome. ¡No, señor, I don't have it,
señor!, dijo.

Frodo left the mantas to Pippin, the god
the tour and the place headed towards the edge of the forest. A lo lejos,
hacia este, the sun would rise red from the darkness that it was living in
the world. Gold and red threads for brown trees,
once it was over, the path descended abruptly into a smooth path
disappearance.

“Water!” Pippin shouted. Where is the water?

—I don't take water in the bottles —I say Frodo—.

Let's think that they have to get it —I say Pippin, busy
preparing the meal and the tazas—. It will be better than if you go.

—You can also come —I say Frodo—, and take them all
sing. There was an arroyo at the foot of the hill. Llenaron
sing the songs and the little water sprinkler in a small waterfall from which
the water fell one meter above a flowering of gray stone. Hacia
a glacial chill; and they put away and jadeaban while they wash it
cara y las manos.

When they finished desayunar and turned
to get your mochilas, they were more than the last ten, and the day was filled
to return pleasant and warm. Bajaron ladera, cruzaron
the arroyo from which the path arose below the path, suffered the following
they undertook and undertook and landed on the other side of the hills; y para
entonces, its capas, mantas, water, food and the same team
you seem to have a heavy load.

The promise of the day will be a warm and enjoyable work.
Without embargo, after a few kilometres, the journey stops and
lower: ascend to the top of a steep hill in a canopy


zigzag


 


, and then prepare to descend
last day Before you see the lowlands of salt
among small groups of trees that get lost in the distance
in a brown mist of the forest. Look at the other side of the...
Woody End hacia el Rio Brandywine. The serpentine path
ante ellos like a horny trozo.

The journey continues eternally, I say Pippin; but I can't
without a descanso. It's time to die. It was felt in the orilla
on the side of the fireplace and I saw the summer, the mist,
further to where the river extends and the end of the region in which
I have spent all my life. Sam was on the side. Your red eyes
They were very open, because they were looking across the land that
never seen a new horizon.

“Do elves live in these woods?” he asked.

Don't ever hear me again, I say Pippin. Frodo looked in silence. The
have seen before. Of sudden hablo, in high voice but as for so much,
saying slowly:

The journey continues eternally
From the door where it started.







That sounds like a bit of old Bilbo's rhyming, said Pippin.
Or is it one of your imitations? It doesn't sound altogether
encouraging.

I don't know, said Frodo. It came to me then, as if I was
making it up; but I may have heard it long ago. Certainly it
reminds me very much of Bilbo in the last years, before him
went away. He often used to say there was only one Road;
that it was like a great river: its springs were at every doorstep,
and every path was its tributary. “It's a dangerous business,





97


Frodo, going out of your door," he used to say. "You step
into the Road, and if you don't keep your feet, there is no
knowing where you might be swept off to. Do you realize
that this is the very path that goes through Mirkwood, and
that if you let it, it might take you to the Lonely Mountain
or even further and to worse places?” He used to say that on
the path outside the front door at Bag End, especially after
he had been out for a long walk.

Well, the Road won't sweep me anywhere for an hour at
least, said Pippin, unslinging his pack. The others followed
his example, putting their packs against the bank and their
legs out into the road. After a rest they had a good lunch,
and then more rest.

The sun was beginning to get low and the light of afternoon
it was on the land as they went down the hill. So far they had
not met a soul on the road. This way was not much used,
being hardly fit for carts, and there was little traffic to the
Woody End. They had been jogging along again for an hour
or more when Sam stopped a moment as if listening. They
they were now on level ground, and the road after much winding
lay straight ahead through grass-land sprinkled with tall trees,
outliers of the approaching woods.

I can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road
behind, said Sam.

They looked back, but the turn of the road prevented them
from seeing far. I wonder if that is Gandalf coming after us,
said Frodo; but even as he said it, he had a feeling that it was
not so, and a sudden desire to hide from the view of the rider
came over him.






 






now, as long as he gets lost in the distance. No more
I'm sure of everything, but it seemed to her that suddenly, before
lost sight of him, the horse deviated and went inside him
árboles de la derecha.

“Good, yes that is extraño, and that's disturbing,” I say
Frodo as he walked to his companions.
Pippin and Sam have been shooting on the grass to the left
ver nada; as Frodo described it on the page and on the outside
behavior.





99


Not sure why, but I was sure that I was looking for it
oil me; and I was also sure that I didn't ask that
I'll be exposed. He never saw or heard anything there
Comarca. «

But why do you want to see one of the great people with us?”,
I say Pippin. «What happens in this part of the world?» , I say Frodo

. “There are some men over here,” Frodo said. «Creo que allá en la
Cuaderna Sur have problems with the Great Persons"
. But I never dare mention anything to this day.
Me pregunto de dónde viene.

Disculpen, he asked Sam suddenly, «self
from where it comes from». This
every black man comes from Hobbiton, unless he has more than one. And that's it
go.

What do you want to decide? —asked Frodo sharply, looking at him
with asombro—. Why don't you blast before?

Please record it, sir. It was like this: when I turned
when they come home for the night. With the mayoría
I went to our agujero ayer late with my daughter, my father,
he says to me: ¡Hola, Sam! he says. I thought that was it
with Mr. Frodo this morning. You have an extra customer
praying for Mr. Bolsón de Bolsón Cerrado, and acaba de irse. Eve
he sent it to Bucklebury. It's not like I'll enjoy it soundly. Parecio
very annoying when I told you that Mr. Bolsón had left on
ancient home for always. Me siseó, lo hizo. Good luck to me
escalofrío. What class of men was he? I'll tell them to Tío.
No lo se, says él; but he wasn't a hobbit. He was tall y
black man, and he leaned over me. Calculus that he was one of the Grandes
from foreign parties. Hablaba rare.

Don't ask me to ask me more, sir, who was waiting;





 











path to the end of the wide level above which you had to run directly
the lowlands of Yale en route to Stock; But a sendero
it branched off to the back, winding through a forest of old robles
Woodhall fireplace. "This is our path," said Frodo.

Not many people at the crossroads were overwhelmed by their enormous size
of a tree: it was still alive and had trees in the small branches





what


it has extended the edge of the round tones on its side
ramas caídas hacía time; but it was small, and it could be entered in a big way
Grieta on the side opposite the fireplace. The hobbits entered
carefully and they felt there on a floor of old men and women
madera podrida. Descansaron and comieron something light, talking in your voice and
escuchando de vez en cuando.

The twilight envelops them while they return carefully to the road.
The wind of the west whispered in the ramas. Las hojas
whisper. Once the fireplace is ready it starts to cool softly but constantly
in the darkness. A star appeared above the trees in it
this, which was darkened before us. They walked one to the other's side, to liven up
. After a while, thinking that the stars are moving more densely and
brilliant, the feeling of restlessness abandoned them and you didn't
listen to the sound of the helmets. They started to calm down softly,
how hobbits usually walk, especially
the hobbits, it's a dinner or bedtime song; but these are hobbits
sing a walking song (although not, above all, without
mención de supper y la cama). Bilbo Bolsón had this done
spoke, for a melody that was as old as the hills, and I heard it
Frodo while walking along the paths of the Valle del Agua and
hablaban de Aventuras.

Sobre el hogar el fuego está red,

Bajo el techo hay una cama;

But our pies are still not forgotten.

On the way to the corner we can meet again
A sudden tree or a vertical stone
What nadie saw except us.

Árbol and flor and hoja and hierba, ¡

Let it go! Let us stop!

Colina and water below the sky, ¡

Pasadlos de largo! ¡Pasadlos de largo!

Even at the turn of the horse you can hope
A new fireplace or a secret door,

And yet we pass by today.


102


 


Now we can come along this path
To the Moon or to the Sun.

Manzana, espina, nuez y endrina, ¡

Dejadlos ir! ¡Dejadlos ir!

Arena and stone and stone and canada, ¡

Adiós! ¡Adiós!

The house is atrás, the world by delante,

and there are many paths to travel
through the shadows until the edge of the night,

until all the stars are illuminated.

Luego, the world away and the house behind,

we will return to the house where we are.

Night and twilight, clouds and shadows,

they will disappear! They will disappear!

Fire and lamp, meat and bread,

y luego a la cama! Here's to the house!

The song ended. Now to the house! Now to the house! he sang
Pippin en voz alta.

Quiet! I say Frodo. I believe I have new helmets.

They suddenly disappeared and remained as silent as they were
the shadows of the trees, escuchando. I heard a sound of helmets on the road,
at a certain distance, but it came slowly and clearly through the wind.
Quickly and silently they slipped off the road and ran
the deepest shadow below the clothes.

Don't let me forget you! I say Frodo. No wonder what me
Vean, pero quiero ver si es otro Jinete Negro.

¡Muy bien! I say Pippin. But don't forget your sense of smell!

The helmets are removed. There was no time to meet someone
hide better than the general darkness below the trees;
gray and pale, a line of light that disappeared across the woods. Arriba
Sam and Pippin fell apart from a large trunk, meanwhile
Frodo carefully retreated one meter from the road. If you noticed
The stars were dense in the dark sky, but there was no moon.

The sound of the helmets ceased. While Frodo observed, I read something





dark


pass through the clearest space between two
trees and places to keep. It looked like the black shadow of a horse
driven by a smaller black shadow. The dark shade if you detuvo look for
of the point where they left the journey and it was balanced
one side to another. Frodo thought he'd see a relic.
The shadow tilted towards the ground and where it began to settle
hacia él.

Once again, the desire to get the Ring took over from Frodo;
cases before giving a clue of what was done, on hand it was
looking for tickets in your wallet. But at this moment I heard a sound: ¡





















extraña casualidad!

The hobbits were sitting in the shade by the fireplace. In a short time, los
Elfos bajaron por el sendero hacia el valley. Pasaron
slowly, and the hobbits could see the light of the stars shining in it
on your hair and in your eyes. They don't bring out any lights, but inside
they walk, a shine, like the light of the moon above the edge
from the hills before climbing, it seemed to fall on his feet.
Now they watched in silence, and as the last Elf passed, he turned around,
miró a los hobbits y rió.

Greetings, Frodo! he shouted. Late days. OR
Has he lost you? He then called to them in a high voice, and all the time
He gathered company and reunited with his elder.

“This is really amazing!”, he said. Three hobbits in one


 forest

de noche! We haven't seen anything like this since Bilbo
if it was. What does this mean?

The meaning, beautiful people, I say Frodo, is simply that
we seem to be going down the same path as you. I like walking
below the stars. But I would appreciate your company.

But we don't need another company, and the hobbits are
so boring, rieron. And how did we know that we were going there?
same path you take, if you don't know where we are going? ¿

And how do you know my name? —asked Frodo in exchange—.

We know a lot of things —said—. We saw you
hanging out with Bilbo, even though we haven't seen him before.

Where are you and who is your señor? —asked Frodo—.

I'm Gildor —I responded to the leader, the elf who had...
—I greeted him. Gildor Inglorion, of the House of Finrod. Somos
exiled, and the majority of our lines left for a long time, and
we also stayed here for just a while, before returning to
the Great Sea. But some of our relatives still live in peace
en Rivendel. Let's go, Frodo, what have you done?
Because we see that a shadow of mine invades you.

¡Oh, Sabios! —interrupted Pippin enthusiastically—. ¡Háblanos de
los Jinetes Negros! ¿

Jinetes Negros? —dijeron en voz baja—. ¿For what you ask
por los Jinetes Negros?

—I've done it twice —I say Pippin—; only a moment ago
escabulló al verte acercar.

The Elves did not respond immediately, until they spoke in their voice
in your own language. Finally, Gildor returned to the hobbits.
—Let's not talk about this here —I say—. We believe that it will be
better than coming with us. This is not our custom, but this time
We will take you off the road and join you with us
esta noche, si quieres.

¡Oh, Bella Folic! This is good luck that surpasses all hope, I say
Pippin. Sam asked without saying anything. I appreciate it in truth, Gildor
Inglorion, I say Frodo haciendo a reverence. Elen sila lumenn omentielvo,
a star shines in our time, next to it
lenguaje de los altos elfos.


¡


 


Take care, friends! Gildor shouted as he returned. ¡No digan
secrets! Here I have a scholar in the Antigua language. Bilbo was
a good teacher. “Hello, my elf friend!” I say, paying homage to Frodo. ¡
Come now with your friends and join our company! Evening
Better than walking through the middle so that you don't go out of your way.
You may be forgotten before we hold them.

Why? 'Where are you coming?' asked Frodo.

Because this night we went to the woods of the hills above Woodhall
. They are some thousands, but they will disappear at the end,
and it will shorten your morning trip.

They marched again in silence, and they passed as they did
shadows and soft lights: like the elves (including more than the hobbits)
they could walk when they stopped walking.
Pippin was ready to listen to the sound and danced once or twice;  
but once in a while, a tall elf extended his arm to his side and saved him.
él, por una caída. Sam walked to Frodo's side, like one
I dream, with an expression on the beak between the heart and the
alegría asombrada.

The woods on both sides became denser; the trees were there
now more young and leafy; think that the journey would descend, descending
have a fold of the hills, if they extend abundant green leafy trees
on the ascending sides on both sides. Finally, los Elfos
they strayed from their journey. A green letter extends invisible cases
between the matorrales at the back; and they followed him while they entered
serpentine through the wooded slopes until the top of the
river valley. Suddenly, they rise from the shadow
of the trees, and before them there was a wide extension of the grass,
gris bajo the night. Por tres lados, el bosque
the presiona; but because of the summer, the ground would descend abruptly and the hills would fall
of the dark trees that grow at the foot of the slope are
bajo sus pies. More so, the lower lands extend darkly and flatly
below the stars. More search, some bright lights shine on it
Woodhall village.

The Elves were sitting on the grass and talking on the floor;
They seem not to pay more attention to the hobbits. Frodo





107


and their companions became involved in their roles
Mantas, and sleepiness invaded him. The night advanced
and the lights of the valley faded away. Pippin lasted,
hidden on a green hill.

Allá in the heights of the East rested Remmirath, the Enclosed Stars,
and slowly above the darkness the red Borgil rose, shining like one
joya de fuego. Once in a while, through a change of air, all the clouds were disposed of
like a veil, and there it was worn, while trepaba for it
edges of the world, el Espadachín del Cielo, Menelvagor,
with its shiny belt. All the Elves sang in songs. De sudden,
below the trees, a fire arose with a red light.

Come!, called the Elfos to the hobbits. Come! ¡Ex
hora de hablar y divertirse!

Pippin incorporated himself and rubbed his eyes. If extreme. Hay
I'm running in the living room and waiting for the guests, I'm an Elf
de pie frente a él.

At the very top of the grass there was an opening.  
There, the green soil extended beyond the forest and formed a...
A large space like a living room, equipped with branches of trees. Sus
large trunks extend like pilares on each side. In the center
I would dare a long hour of wood, and above the pillars of the trees...
Antorchas with gold and silver lights glow constantly.
The elves feel the fire above the grass or above them
closed rings from old trunks. Some people move from one side to the other, lifting up their hands
serving drink; others eat well on platos y
fuentes colmados.

This is a simple meal, told to the hobbits; because we are here
alojando in the green forest lejos of our salons. Yes sometimes I am
our guests at home, we will treat us better.

It seems good enough to me for a birthday party, I say
Frodo.

Pippin there recorded little of the food or drink, because
His mind was full of light in the beaks of the elves and them
the sound of voices so varied and so beautiful that it felt like one
I dream deserted. But I recorded that he had bread,
which surpassed the taste of a hearty white bread for someone who is dying of the shadow
; and sweet fruits like wild bayas and more fruits than there are
cultivated fruits of the gardens


;


 

Apuró una copa llena de una
Fragrant drink, fresh like a crystalline stream, golden like one
late summer.

I can't even describe it in words or visualize it clearly
, what I felt or thought yesterday, however remained
in his memory as one of the most important memories of his life. The
more try what was said: «Good, señor, si pudiera cultivar
manzanas like this, I would consider myself a gardener." But it was
the song that brings me to my heart, I feel.

Frodo felt himself, sitting, drinking and talking with delight; but
His mind was mainly in the words pronounced. Know something
of the Elvish language and learned with attention. Again and again
Please contact us and we will serve you and welcome you
own language. They dreamed and said: «Here
hay a joy among the hobbits!

At the end of a crime, Pippin thought deeply, and was raised
I took a glorieta below the trees; there he was accosted
in a bland bed and I lasted the rest of the night. Sam
he refused to leave his love. When Pippin was gone, he returned
and he felt himself curled up at Frodo's feet, whence he finally left
and I'll look for my eyes. Frodo remained deserted for a good while, talking with
Gildor.

They talked about many things, old and new, and Frodo wondered...
He told Gildor a lot about his successes in the vast world
outside the Comarca. The news was among the saddest and most obscure people:
over the darkness that arose, the wars of men and the silence of men
Elfos. Finally, Frodo asked the most
le llegaba al corazón:

Tell me, Gildor, have you seen Bilbo since we left?

Gildor smiled. Yes, I replied. Two times. If he despided
of us in this same place. But I turned it back, lejos de
here. I said nothing more about Bilbo, and Frodo looked
silence.

Frodo, I say Gildor. But you know a little, you can
Read more in your face and in your thoughts beyond your questions





.


You are from the region, and without doubt you will encounter them
what you are looking for, or what you will get what you propose, or
of which it will return some time. Isn't it like this?

Yes, I say Frodo; but I thought that my departure was a secret
who only knew Gandalf and my beloved Sam. Miro
to Sam, who snored sweetly.

—The secret will not be linked to the enemy from us —said Gildor—.

El Enemigo? —asked Frodo—. ¿Entonces sabes por que qué abandono
the Comarca?

—No sé por qué
you pursue the Enemigo —Gildor replied—; but therefore yes,
for anything else that seems to me. I warn you that the pilgrim
Now let's see as much as you can, both of you
sides.

Do you refer to the Jinetes? I fear that they were servants of the
Enemigo. What are the Jinetes Negros? ¿

No te ha dicho nada Gandalf?

Nada sobre esas criaturas.

So I think it doesn't belong to me to say more, no matter what the terror
It's hard for you to undertake your journey. Because it seems like this to me
it left just in time, if it is connected in time.
Now you must give art first, and don't ask yourself not to march again;
because the Comarca does not protect you.

—I can't imagine what information might land more
“What are your insinuations and adverts,” exclaimed Frodo. Sabía
that the pilgrim acechaba, por supuesto; but I didn't hope to meet him
in our Comarca. Sometimes a hobbit can't walk into the water
Río en paz?

But it's not your Comarca, I say Gildor. Other morabans
Here before the hobbits existed; and others will return to die here
when hobbits don't exist. The vast world of rodea:
You can look for it, but you can't always remove it
.

The self, and without embargo, has always seemed so safe and familiar to me.
What can I do now? My plan was to leave the region secretly
and head to Rivendel; but now I'm pursuing it
, including antes de llegar in Los Gamos.


No,


 


I don't think the Camino is too difficult for your worth. But

I hope so. But that is another thing that makes me anxious.
I have been expecting Gandalf for many days. He was to
have come to Hobbiton at the latest two nights ago; but he
has never appeared. Now I am wondering what can have
happened. Should I wait for him?

Gildor was silent for a moment. I don't like this news,
he said at last. That Gandalf should be late, does not bode
well. But it is said: Do not meddle in the affairs of Wizards, for
they are subtle and quick to anger. The choice is yours: to go
or wait.

And it is also said, answered Frodo: Go not to the Elves
for counsel, for they will say both no and yes.

Is it indeed? laughed Gildor. Elves rarely give a¬
guarded advice, for advice is a dangerous gift, even from the
wise to the wise, and all courses may run ill. But what would
you? You have not told me all concerning yourself; and how
then shall I choose better than you? But if you demand advice,
I will for friendship's sake give it. I think you should now
go at once, without delay; and if Gandalf does not come
before you set out, then I also advise this: do not go alone.
Take such friends as they are trusty and willing. Now you should
be grateful, for I do not give this advice gladly. The Elves
have their own labors and their own sorrows, and they are
little concerned with the ways of hobbits, or of any other
creatures upon earth. Our paths cross theirs rarely, by
chance or purpose. In this meeting there may be more than
chance; but the purpose is not clear to me, and I fear to say
too much.

I am deeply grateful, said Frodo; but I wish you would
tell me plainly what the Black Riders are. If I take your advice





III


I may not see Gandalf for a long while, and I ought to know
what is the danger that pursues me.

Is it not enough to know that they are servants of the
Enemy? answered Gildor. Flee them! Speak no words to
them! They are deadly. Ask no more of me! But my heart
forbodes that, ere all is ended, you, Frodo son of Drogo, will
know more of these fell things than Gildor Inglorion. May
Elbereth protect you!







 







seeing a whole lot of them didn't seem very alarming
.

I hope to cross the river until we come. ¿

Have you had trouble with something about Gildor?

Not much, just tracks and certainties, I said Frodo evasively. ¿

Preguntaste por el olfateo?

Let's not discuss it, I'll say Frodo with my clear mouth.

Deberías haberlo hecho. I'm sure it's very important.

In this case, I'm sure that Gildor was unable to explain it
, I said Frodo sharply. Now let me calm down for a moment!


  113

I don't want to respond to a seamstress with questions like this. ¡
I want to think!

Heavens!, I say Pippin. ¿En el desayuno? If alejó
hacia el borde del verde.

From the mind of Frodo, the brilliant mañana —traidmente
brilliant, he thought—he would not have abandoned the minedo to the persecution; y
I reflected on Gildor's words. The happy voice of Pippin
llegó to él. He ran through the green and singing grass.

No! ¡No podría!, if I say the same. One thing is to lift
to my young friends to walk through the region with me, as long as we are
hambrientos and cansados, and the food and the bed are sweets. Llevarlos
to exile, where the hambre and the cansancio cannot be held
care, it is very distinct, even if you are willing to come. There
herencia is mine alone. I don't think I should be raised
Sam. I looked at Sam Gamyi and discovered that Sam
lo estaba observando.

¡Good, Sam!, I say. What happens with this? I travel to the Comarca
as ready as you can; de hecho, I decided
Don't wait for a day in Crickhollow, if that's possible.

¡Muy bien, señor! ¿

Aún piensa venir conmigo?

Yes.
 
Go to be very peligroso, Sam. Ya es peligroso
. The most probable is that none of the two return.

If you don't return, sir, I'm safe, this is safe,
I say Sam. '¡No lo deje!', I said. '¡Déjelo!',
say. You don't even intend to do it. Voy con él, si sube a la
Moon; and if some of these Jinetes Negros intend to detain it, they will tend
that vérselas with Sam Gamyi, say. If they came back. '

'What are they and what are you talking about?' he said.















'I'm going to pie in any place in this country.

We can attack more directly than the road in all ways', I replied
Frodo. El Ferry is east of Woodhall; but the hard path
turn to the izquierda; you can see a curve to the north


  .

Rodea el far north of Marish para
attach the shoe from the Puente above Stock. But yes
It's a thousand miles away. We can look forward to a moment of the
distance is taken to the ferry from where we are.

 The players get great advice, argued Pippin. The ground
It's crashed here, and there are accidents and all sorts of things
difficulties in the Marish; I know the terrain for these
lares. If you're worried about the Jinetes Negros, no
I know it's worse to meet them on a fireplace than on a
bosque o en un campo.

It is more difficult to meet people in the woods and fields,
replied Frodo. And if one assumes that one must be on the fireplace,
you have any possibility of getting yourself caught in the fireplace
y no fuera de él.

¡De acuerdo!, said Pippin. I will follow you for each story
y zanja. But it's difficult! Contaba with pasar la
Golden Perch in Stock before the anochecer. The best beer of the
piece of money from the East, or just wear it: it does a lot that I don't care about.

¡He decides it!, said Frodo. Los atajos traen retrasos, pero
the lodges make them larger. We must keep you relaxed
from the Perca Dorada to the whole coast. We would like to go to Bucklebury before
of the anochecer. What do you think, Sam?

I accompany you, Señor Frodo, I say Sam (to weigh
of his memories and of his deep sorrow for the best brain of
Eastfarthing).

—¡If we go to abrirnos step between ciénagas and zarzas, let's go
ya! —said Pippin.

There was as much warmth as the day before,
but the clouds are forced to suffer from the west. Parecía
that iba a llover. The hobbits started all day for one
They plowed the green slope and entered the leafy trees below.
They have chosen the path to leave Woodhall to their izquierda,
on the eastern side of the hills, just get there
The open land, except for so many fangs and valleys.


Frodo    

I calculated that there would be ten thousand miles in a straight line.

Ready to find out that the item was more searchable and more accurate
of what seemed. There are no senders within the bag
, and they did not advance very quickly. When they tied it with
Difficult at the bottom of the slope, they encountered an arroyo
that bajaba of the hills of others, in a deeply excavated lecho, with
loaded and sliding blades, cubiertas de zarzas. For your major inconvenience,
crossed the line they had chosen. No later
skip it, you can't cross it without
mojarse, arañarse and suciarse. If you know, ask yourself what
hacer. “First look again!”, Pippin said, smiling somberly.

Sam Gamgee looked at me. Across a clear path between them
trees visible the top of the green terraplén of
que habían bajado.

¡Miren!, I say, grabbing Frodo's arm. All
they looked, and on the edge, very close to each other, they were recorded against
in the sky a horse. Next to it a black figure was inclined.

They instantly gave up on the idea of ​​going back. Frodo abrió
the chimney and quickly entered the thick shrubs towards the
arroyo. ¡Uf!, I tell Pippin. We both have reason! El
atajo ya se ha torcido; but we can't wait to find it
just in time. Keep good news, Sam: you can watch
algo que se aproxima?

If they were quiet, they kept breathing while listening
; but there was no sound of persecution. —I don't think so
who intends to ride with his horse on this side —I say Sam—.
But I guess you know what we're doing. It will be better than we are
forward.

Follow ahead and it won't be easy at all. Keep the mochilas to load,
and the shrubs and zarzas resist dejamming them  
passar. They are wind islands by the crest.
furthermore, the air was quiet and suffocating. When
finally they opened the most open land, they were heated,
cansados ​​and many scratches, and you are not safe
of the direction in which Iban. Las orillas del
lower, wandering across the Marish and the River.


  117








Frodo placed the sword against the trunk of the tree and closed it
the eyes. Sam and Pippin felt like they were looking, and started to tarrear,
y luego a cantar suavemente:

¡Jo! ¡Jo! ¡Jo! a la botella voy
To heal my heart and take away my pain.

May he llueva and que suple the wind,

And yet I ask many thousands to go back,

But just a tall tree will bring me near,

And I'm sure the clouds go flying.

¡Jo! ¡Jo! ¡Jo! they came out stronger again. If they detuvieron
de sudden. Frodo takes a leap from the foot. A low prolonged moan
of the wind, like the cry of some evil and solitary creature.
It went down and down, and ended on a sharp and penetrating note. Mientras
they were heartfelt and on their feet, as they suddenly froze, another cry responded to me
, more painful and less painful, but no less irritating
. If you hear silence, I only hear the sound
del viento entre las hojas.

"What do you think it was?" asked Pippin at the end.
Trying to talk lightly, but shaking a little. If he was a pájaro,
he was someone who had never seen it in the Comarca.

He was no pájaro nor beast, I say Frodo. It was a llamada, or a
signal; I should have spoken in this gritty matter, even without modesty
capture it. But no hobbit has such a voice.

I don't say anything more respectable. Everyone thinks about it
Jinetes, but nadie hablaba de ellos. Now if they resist
to quedarse or to follow adelante; but as they get older they tend to cross
the open field was before the Ferry, and it was better to leave
how many days ago. In one instant they echoed
the mochilas to the man and they marched.

In a short time, the forest led to a sudden ending. Expanded
Praderas extend before them. Now let's see what, de
hecho, if they have gone astray, perhaps they have gone to the south. A lo lejos, over the llanuras,
they can see the lower Bucklebury hill, on the other side of the river.
But now he was at his izquierda. Alejándose cautiously of

 
  ...

edges of the trees, they crossed the light as quickly as
they could.

At the beginning we felt sorry, we left the refuge of the forest.
Another time, the high place from which they had seen it was raised
the figure of a jinete on the crest, dark against the sky; but
the clouds, on the descender, are the hills that have passed away, revolve
to shine with force. I abandoned them, no matter what they followed
feeling restless. But the ground will move more easily and more easily
sorted. Ready to take them to the fields and
Prados well cared for: have silks, doors and drain points.
Everything seemed calm and peaceful, a ringing anyone
of the Comarca. His soul rose with each step. There
the river line was rough; y los Jinetes Negros comenzaron a
like ghosts of the forest, now much more.

They passed by the edge of a huge field of nabos and
They were attached to a sturdy door. More then, a full shipment of message boards will run in
Small and well-traveled silks make a small group of trees. Pippin
if I detuvo.

“I know these fields and this door!”, I say. These are
the lands of Bamfurlong, the old great Maggot. It's on granja
allá, entre los árboles.

“A different problem!”, Frodo said, looking tan
alarmed as Pippin declared that the shipment was there
slot that led to the healing of a dragon. The others looked at him
surprised.

'Where does Maggot go to the old town?' asked Pippin. It's a
good friend of all the Brandigamos. So, above all, be terrified
to the intruders and holds ferocious perros, but after all, the people
From here you are looking for the front and want to be more alert
.

The self, I say Frodo. But in every way, added with one
Risa avergonzada, I keep them close to my lips. Heh
I avoid my granja for years and years. I took various ones
He used to look for sets without permission, when he was young
en Brandy Hall. The last time he hit me, and then


120


 


He took me and showed me to his brothers. «Miren, muchachos», I say,
«The next time this young boy bribón enters my land, if
he can comer. ¡Ahora despídanlo!». I will continue to pursue it
El Ferry. I never recovered any of this, although I'll have to decide what
the beasts know what they do and they don't have it  
me habrían tocado.

reir to Pippin. Good, it's time for you to reconcile. Over all
you want to live in Gamos. Old Maggot
you'll know it, I'll talk. He is Merry's friend, and alone
come here with you many times.

Follow the fireplace until the tejados de paja are visible
of a large house and the buildings of the granja looking between them
trees. Los Maggots, los Puddifoots de Stock y
the majority of the inhabitants of Marish live in homes;
and this granja was sturdy, built with thieves and had a high wall
alrededor. It has a wide Madeira door that goes up from the
muro hacia el camino.

Suddenly, when approaching,
if he heard a loud robber and thieves, and a loud voice shouted: "Agarra! Colmillo!
Lobo! ¡Vamos, muchachos!".

Frodo and Sam left with them, but Pippin advanced one of them
pasos. The door opened and three huge pears came running up
on the road and they ambled over the travellers, stealing
ferociously. No hicieron case of Pippin; but Sam enjoyed it
against the wall, between two pears with lobe aspect
They smelled it with the gift and grunted if it moved. The biggest y
Feroz de los tres se tuvo in front of Frodo, erizado
y gruñendo.

A burly hobbit appeared through the door
and dear redundant and red. ¡Hola! ¡Hola! ¿Y quién
Are you looking for them?, he asked.

¡Good late, señor Maggot!, said Pippin.

The granjero looked at it carefully. Good, if I don't love you
Pippin... Señor Peregrin Tuk, must decide!, shouted, changing


 


his rusty dinner


for a joking smile. How long does it last?
here! That's what I know about you. Salía
to look at my pearls against anyone unknown. Today I'm looking at rare things
. Of course,
Sometimes we meet rare people here. «Demasiado cerca del río», I say, denying with
the cabeza. «But this guy was the rarest he was
seen in my life. I won't cross the land without allowing a second one
vez, no si puedo impedirlo».
 
What type do you refer to?” asked Pippin.

«Have you ever seen it?», I said to the granjero. If it was.
He was a nice customer and he had nice questions. But anyway
comfortable. I have a little good beer from the barrel, yes you and you
friends are displeased, señor Tuk.

It seemed clear that the granjero would matter more, yes
if you were allowed to do it in your own time and style, as everyone
they accepted the invitation. ¿Y los perros?, asked Frodo
with anxiety.

The granjero is back. No harm will come to you unless I do
if you say it. Here, Grip! ¡Colmillo! ¡Talón!, he shouted. ¡Talón, Lobo!
For Frodo and Sam's food, the perros alejaron y
los dejaron en libertad.

Pippin introduced the others to the granjero. El señor Frodo
Bolson, I say. You may not remember it, but alone
live in Brandy Hall. Behind the name of Bolsón, the granjero
he jumped and directed a penetrating gaze at Frodo. For a moment, Frodo
I thought he had lost track of the memory of his stuff
and they will tell them to the pears who will despise them. But
el Granjero Maggot took him away.

“Go on, this is not as rare as ever!”, he exclaimed. ¿
Is he Mr. Bolsón? ¡Enter! Let's talk about it.

They entered the granjero's kitchen and entered it as it expanded
chimenea. Mrs. Maggot sacó cereveza in a huge jar y
I collected four large jars. It was a good drink, and Pippin felt it
more than compensated for missing the Golden Perch.
Sam baby on neck with receipt. There was a natural loss of confidence


hacia


 


the inhabitants of other parts of the Comarca; y además, no estaba
willing to be an immediate friend of the girl who was hit by a coup
to your love, for a long time that passed.

After some comments about the climate and the weather
agricultural perspectives (which were not ordinary peores), the Granjero Maggot
I stood on the jar and looked at them all in turn.

Now, Sr. Peregrin, I say, where does it come from
y adónde va? ¿Vienes
to visit me? —If so, you have passed through my door to the left
que te viera.

"You can't," replied Pippin. To tell the truth, that's it
we have guessed it, let's get on the journey to the other end:
we have passed through your fields. But it was purely by chance.
We lost ourselves in the woods, looking for Woodhall, trying  
take a trip to the ferry.

mejorar, dijo el granjero. But it didn't worry me.
You have permission to walk around my lands, if you like them,
Señor Peregrin. You are welcome, Señor Bolsón, although I will wait to decide what
they would still enjoy the silks. If it comes back. Ah, yes, I recognized it
name. I remember when the young Frodo Bolsón was
one of the little peores de Los Gamos. But no
I was thinking about silk. Acababa de oír the name
de Bolsón before the appliances. ¿What crees que
I asked you, are you a curious customer?

They were anxious to continue. Good,
the granjero continued, focusing on this point with slow deletion, he
mounted on a large black horse by the door, which was
open, and just at my door. It's also all black
, with capa y capucha, como si no quisiera ser
I know. "Now what demons will come?" he thought
. We don't see many of the Gran Folic on the other side of the front;
and, in all ways, I never heard of someone like this black man.

  "Good days!", say, once again. "This fireplace
don't take it anywhere, and from where you go, there
The fastest way is to go on the road." I didn't like it
on aspecto; and when Grip went up, I smelled only one


  wavy

how to pick them up: drink the cola y
he went up disparately, lulling. The black man was left immobile.

  "I come from there", I say, slowly and stiffly,
Reporting hacia el est, over my fields, please. "¿Has
seen in Bolsón?", he asked with an extraña voice, and he inclined
hacia me. You can't see the dear one, because on capucha she'll take it
muy baja; and I felt a sort of escalofrio on the shoulder. But I didn't mean it
why did he attack my lands with such audacity.

  “¡Fuera!”, he said. No hay ningún Bolsón here. Tea
misunderstandings about where in the Comarca. It will be better than returning to the west, to
Hobbiton, but this time you can go on the road.

  —Bolsón has an idea —he replied in a whisper—. Ya
he comes. No more. I want to meet him. We pass,
Will you tell me? Regresaré with gold.

—No, no harás —say. "Volverás a donde..."

Only one species of life. Podría haber estado riendo, o
podría no. He then exposed his great horse directly to me,
and he jumped just in time. Llamé a los
perros, but it was God's turn and he crossed the door and suffered
the sendero has the shoe as a trueno. "¿Qué
do you think?"

Frodo wondered for a moment looking at the fire, but only one
thought was like demons brought to the Ferry. "
No need to think about it", I finally say. "

So I'll tell you what to think", said Maggot. "
You never have to mix with the people of Hobbiton, sir
Frodo. People are rare to arrive." Sam removed himself from his seat
I looked at the granjero with a hostile gaze. "But
you were always a very imprudent person. When you have left the Brandibucks
and I've told you I'm with this old man, Señor Bilbo
to measure the problems. Remember what I tell you, everything comes from here
extraños hechos del señor Bilbo. They say I get some money
extraña manner in the extranjero. Sometimes
some people would like to know what the gold is like
the joys that I entered on the hill of Hobbiton, I keep in mind.


Frodo


 


I don't say anything: the granjero's clever conjectures were there
bastante desconcertantes.

—Good, Señor Frodo —continued Maggot—, I am happy that you have
I keep the sense of turning to Los Gamos. My advice is: ¡quédese
there! And don't mix with these extraphalous people.
Tendrá friends over here. Yes some of these blacks
come and get it, I'll pack it. I'll say he's dead,
either you have an idea of ​​the Comarca, or you want it. You can do that
sure; because the most probable thing is that they would want to
news from old señor Bilbo.

—Quizás tenga razón —I say Frodo, avoiding the gaze of the granjero
y mirando fijamente el fuego.

Maggot looked at him—. Thoughtful. —Good, see what you have
your own ideas —I say—. It's as obvious as I can tell
Damn I'll get you and you'll find the same thing here
late; and let me know if it's such a big thing, next
to look at it for you; but I know it's the same thing in some places.
Quizzes you think that it won't be very easy to connect to... —Ya lo
pie en la luz. "Cuídate, Gusano!" he shouted. “¡No te vayas!”
Ferry sin que te atrapen?

—Ya thought so —said Frodo—. But let's try
llegar; and you won't forget feeling and thinking. Like me
I'm afraid we owe it to each other. Many thanks
for your kindness! I kept my fingers and my pears
For more than three decades, Granjero Maggot, although he may be
at the oírlo. It's a lament: I lost less to a good friend. Yes now
I feel ready. But I'll turn, quiz, some
día, si tengo oportunidad.

—It will be welcome when he comes —said Maggot—. But
Now I have an idea. If the sun arises, let's go
to have dinner; because we normally approach a little later
of the amanecer. If you are, Señor Peregrin and everyone can ask you
comer something with us, we'll be happy! ¡

And we too! —I say Frodo—. But I fear that we must be followed
. Included now it will darken before we can
llegar al transbordador.

¡Ah! But wait a moment! Iba to decide: after dinner a little


 


,


I'll save a cart and take it all away
Ferry. This will give you a good night's sleep, and you will also be able to
worry about other types of problems.

Frodo accepted the friendly invitation, for food
de Pippin y Sam. The only thing that has been hidden behind you is
hills of the west, and the light was meandering. Dos de los hijos de Maggot y sus
three hijas entered, and a generous dinner was served there
the big mesa. The kitchen was lit with lights and fire
there was a fire. Señora Maggot entered and went up breathlessly. One or two
hobbits most belonging to the house of the granja entered. Al
little rat, catorce if they felt to comer. Había cerveza en
abundance, and a generous plate of mushrooms and tocino, as well
much more solid farm food. The perros were tumbados junto al fuego
, breaking cáscaras and breaking hues.

When they finished, the granjero and his children went up
with an internal lantern they prepared the cart. It was dark in the room
patio when guests come up. Cargaron sus mochilas y
azotaron sus dos robustos ponis. On display there was little light

discussing with anyone else, and getting back on track!

I've got it!, I said it, and I went up the door. Now había
Not a wind breeze moved; the night was quiet and silent, y
the air was cold. They were without lights and they tomaron him
calmly. After one or two thousand, the journey continued to the end, cruzando
a deep dique and undergoing a short slope hacia la
calzada de altos terraplenes.

Maggot looked up and saw a good view on both sides, to the north
y sur, but no one saw anything in the darkness, y
there was not a single sound in the quiet air. Delgadas hebras de niebla del river
they gather on the top of the two and gather around the fields.

Go to ser espeso, I say Maggot; but no encenderé mis
linternas hasta go back home. Let's go somewhere on the fireplace
long before we met him this night.


126


 


Five thousand miles or more from the Maggot route until the Ferry.
The hobbits were born, but kept their eyes
pay attention to any sound by the top of the crux of the streets and the
slow coup de los helmets de los ponis. The cart seemed slower
what a caracol to Frodo. On his side, Pippin headed, leaning
hacia el sueño; but Sam miraba hacia adelante, a la
niebla que se alzaba.

They ended up at the entrance of the Ferry chimney. Estaba
marked by two high white posts that suddenly appeared
on derecha. The great Maggot took his ponis and the cart
if I deduce with a chirrido. They are eager to go up toda start,
when they suddenly looked at what everyone had been fearing:
helmets on the fireplace. The sound was ready
ellos.

Maggot jumped and stood there, touching the heads of the ponies,
looking at the twilight. Clip-clop, clip-clop, let's go
the jine that you were looking for. The sound of the helmets sounded loud
el aire quieto y brumoso. «

It will be better than hiding you, Señor Frodo,” I said Sam anxiously. «¡
Drive on the road and cúbrete with mantas,
and we will send this jinete to the back of the esquina!». Salió
and he headed to the granjero. Los Jinetes Negros tendrían que
go to the top of it to get to the cart.

Clop-clop, clop-clop. The rider was nearly on them.

Hello there! called Farmer Maggot. The advancing hoofs
stopped short. They thought they could dimly guess a dark
cloaked shape in the mist, a yard or two ahead.

Now then! said the farmer, throwing the reins to Sam and
striding forward. Don't you come a step closer! What do
you want, and where are you going?

I want Mr. Baggins. Have you seen him? said a muffled
voice - but the voice was the voice of Merry Brandybuck. TO
dark lantern was uncovered, and its light fell on the astonished
face of the farmer.

Mr. Merry! he cried.

Yes, of course! Who did you think it was? said Merry
coming forward. As he came out of the mist and their fears


 


127


subsided, he seemed suddenly to diminish to ordinary hobbit-
size. He was riding a pony, and a scarf was swathed round
his neck and over his chin to keep out the fog.

Frodo sprang out of the waggon to greet him. So there
you are at last! said Merry. I was beginning to wonder if
you would turn up at all today, and I was just going back to
sup. When it grew foggy I came across and rode up
towards Stock to see if you had fallen in any ditches. But I'm
blest if I know which way you have come. Where did you
find them, Mr. Maggot? In your duck pond?

No, I caught 'em trespassing, said the farmer, and nearly
set my dogs on 'em; but they'll tell you all the story, I've no
doubt. Now, if you'll excuse me, Mr. Merry and Mr. Frodo
and all, I'd better be turning for home. Mrs. Maggot will be
worrying with the night getting thick.

He backed the wagon into the lane and turned it. Well,
good night to you all, he said. It's been a queer day, and no
mistake. But all's well as ends well; though perhaps we should
don't say that until we reach our own doors. I'll not deny that
I'll be glad now when I do. He lit his lanterns, and got up.
Suddenly he produced a large basket from under the seat. THE
was nearly forgetting, he said. Mrs. Maggot put this up for
Mr. Baggins, with your compliments. He handed it down and
moved off, followed by a chorus of thanks and good-nights.

They observed the pale rings of light that rode on their insides while inside
they disappeared in the misty night. Suddenly, Frodo said:
the packed basket that supported,
the aroma of the silks ascended.


 5


 


—Now it will be better than we go home —I say Merry—.
I see that everything is somehow curious; but we must wait until we get there
.

Tomaron the chimney of the transbordador, which was recto y
well cared for, edged with large engraved stones. En unos
cien metros, approximately, led to the edge of the river, from where
It had a large Madeira landing stage. A great transborder
It was landed on its side. Los bolardos blancos cerca del
the edges of the water shine in the light of the lighthouses
high posts. Among them, the darkness of the fields calls to you
the silks; but the water they kept clear was dark, with only one
a few undulating curls like steam between the juncos upon arrival.
There seems to be less news on the other side.

Merry I lead you to the platform for a pass until the transboarder, y
the same ones followed it. Merry entonces alejó slowly with one
wide door. The Brandywine flowed slowly and even before them.
On the other side, the orilla was empined, and a
the sinuous path ascended from the highest roller.
There they titilaban the farolas. After all, the Buck hill rose; and from there, across the street
scattered clouds of snow, shining many red winds, yellows
y rojas. They were the twenty of Brandy Hall, the old one
hogar de los Brandybuck.

Has been a long time, Gorhendad Oldbuck, head of the
Oldbuck family, one of the most ancient of Marish or, for that matter, of the Comarca,
had crossed the river, which was the original limit of
the earth hacia este. Built (and excavated) Brandy Hall,
It changed its name to Brandybuck and was established there
convert into a duel of what was practically a child
independent country. His family grew and grew, and after his days


 


continuous


Growing up, as long as Brandy Hall occupied it all
lower hill and there were three large main doors, many side doors
and the elder of twenty-five years. Los Brandigamo y sus
Numerous employees begin to excavate, and it takes longer
build, for all sides. This was the origin of Buckland, one
franja densely populated between the river and [place name], a
grouping in the orillas and areas beyond Brandy Hall.

The people of Marish were friendly to the Bucks-
de las Tierras Altas, and the authority of the Maestro del Salón (como
head of the Brandigamo family) was still recognised
for the greats between Stock and Rushey. But the mayoría
of the people of the ancient Comarca considered to the Gamos as
peculiar, medium extraneous to say so. Anyway, de hecho
They weren't very different from the other hobbits
de los Cuatro Cuarteles. Except in one point: the tasters
the boats, and some of them would be lost.

On earth it was originally unprotected from this; but
on this side they built a set: the High Heno. Habia
It was planted by many generations ago, and now it was grown
tall, you can constantly watch it. If extended from now on
el Puente Brandigamo, in a large hole that is alejaba del
river, as long as Haysend (whence the Withywindle flowed from it
Bosque hacia el Brandigamo): more than twenty thousand peaks
pointed. But, above all, it wasn't complete protection.
El Bosque was reached for the silk in many places. Los
The inhabitants of Los Gamos kept the doors sealed with their eyes closed, something that
it was also usual in the Comarca.

The transom moved slowly through the water. There
coast of los Gamos is approaching. Sam was the only member of the
group that had not crossed the river before. Tuvo one
Extra sensation while the slow and gurgling arroyo unfolds: on Antigua
life was atrás in the darkness, the dark adventure for the past. If
I scraped my head and, for a moment, fleetingly thought that
Señor Frodo could now continue living peacefully in Bolsón Cerrado.

The four hobbits descended from the transbordador. Merry was amazed at him


y    

Pippin will take you to the place on the way,
when Sam was looking at the other side, how to ship
from the Comarca) I said in a hoarse whisper:

See you again, Señor Frodo! Do you want anything?

At the other end of the scenario, lower the left lamps, just as soon as you can
distinguish a figure: it looked like a dark and dark abandoned man
. But as they looked at it, it seemed to move and balance
side to side, how to search in the soil. Luego was arrested, oh
if he agazapó, he turns to the twilight further away from the lighthouses.

What in the Shire is that? exclaimed Merry.

Something that is following us, said Frodo. But don't ask
any more now! Let's get away at once! They hurried up the
path to the top of the bank, but when they looked back the
far shore was shrouded in mist, and nothing could be seen.

Thank goodness you don't keep any boats on the west-
bank! said Frodo. Can horses cross the river?

They can go ten miles north to Brandywine Bridge - or
they might swim, answered Merry. Though I never heard
of any horse swimming the Brandywine. But what have
horses to do with it?

I'll tell you later. Let's get indoors and then we can talk.

All right! You and Pippin know your way; I know I'll just ride
on and tell Fatty Bolger that you are coming. We'll see about
supper and things.

We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot, said
Frodo; but we could do with another.

You shall have it! Give me that basket! said Merry, and
rode ahead into the darkness.

It was some distance from the Brandywine to Frodo's new
house at Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and Brandy
Hall on their left, and on the outskirts of Bucklebury struck
the main road of Buckland that runs south from the Bridge.
Half a mile northward along this they came to a lane opening
on their right. This they followed for a couple of miles as it
climbed up and down into the country.

At last they came to a narrow gate in a thick hedge. Nothing


  131

could be seen of the house in the dark: it stood back from
the lane in the middle of a wide circle of lawn surrounded by
a belt of low trees inside the outer hedge. Frodo had chosen
it, because it stood in an out-of-the-way corner of the
country, and there were no other dwellings close by. You
could get in and out without being noticed. It had been built
a long while before by the Brandybucks, for the use of guests,
or members of the family who wished to escape from the
crowded life of Brandy Hall for a time. It was an old
fashioned countrified house, as much like a hobbit-hole as
possible: it was long and low, with no upper storey; and it
He kept the turban, twenty red balls and a large red door.

As they pass through the green path from the door, there is no light.
if there was no light; the windows are dark and closed. Frodo
He called the door and Fatty Bolger opened it. A
friendly light went away. They entered quickly and entered
, with the light included, inside. They are in a large vestibule with
doors on both sides; in front of him, a passing moment passed
the center of the house.

—Good, what's your opinion? —Merry asked, suffering
por el pasadizo—. We know everything is possible in a short time for this
look at our home. After all, Fatty and we are together
ayer con la última carreta.

Frodo looked at his alrededor. Yes, it seemed like our house. Muchas de sus
cosas favoritas —o las de Bilbo (le recordaban
much to it in its new surroundings)—they are ordered in the most common form
possible as they have been in Bolsón Cerrado. It was a
pleasant, comfortable and welcoming place; and he found himself wondering
really come there to settle in a quiet retreat
. Many wrongs have been caused to your friends today
harassment; and he wondered again how to go to Darles
the news that you have to get them ready, right away
immediate. However, I would tend to do this the same night, before
that everyone was in the house.

¡It's delicious!, I say with energy. Just feel like me
he movido en absoluto.


132


 


Travelers put on their hats and put on their clothes
the soil. Merry I led them to the pasillo and opened one
door at the other end. The light of the fire rose and a mouthful of steam.

¡A bath!, cried Pippin. ¡Oh, blessed Meriadoc!

'What order shall we enter?' said Frodo. ¿El mayor primero o
the quickest first? You will be the last in any way, Master Peregrin.

Confide in me to arrange the best things that are!, I say Merry.
We can't start life in Crickhollow with a shower of water.
In this house there are three tinas and a whole lot of them
water hirviendo. Also have towels, esterillas and jabón. ¡Enter y
give up quickly!

for a late dinner. Fragments of rival songs came from
of the bathroom, mixed with the sound of chapoteos and revolutions
. Pippin's voice suddenly rose to the top
others, in one of Bilbo's favorite bathing songs.

¡Sing! Stop the bath at the end of the day
que limpia el barro!

A place is that which does not sing:

Oh! Hot water is a noble thing!

Oh! Sweet is the sound of the rain that falls,
and the arroyo that leaps from the hill to the plain;
but better than the rain or the waving arroyos
it is the hot water that humea and humea.

Oh! We can turn cold water when we need it
in a nice chair and we are happy with the truth;
but the beer is better, if we drink it,
and the hot water is poured over the blade.

Oh! The water that jumps high is beautiful
in a white stream below the sky; ¡
but never a source is so sweet
how to sail hot water with my pies!


 


133


There was a tremendous chapoteo, and a cry of ¡Vaya! de
Frodo. It seems that much of Pippin's bath was imitated
fuente y saltado alto.

Merry went to the door: ¿That's where the dinner and the dinner were
the garganta?, he asked. Frodo climbed up, drying his fur.

There is so much water in the air that I go there
I'm cooking to finish, he said.

¡Pau! I say Merry, looking inside. The surface of the stone was flooded
. You must dry everything beforehand
comer algo, Peregrin, I say. Give it a try, or we won't wait for you.

They dined in the kitchen, on a table looking for fire.
“I suppose you three won't ask again again?”, I say
Fredegar without much hope.

"Yes, we'll ask for it!" Pippin shouted. ¡

They are mine!, I say Frodo. I leave the Lord Maggot,
a queen among the great wives. Quita your coded hands
y te las serviré.

Hobbits have a passion for silks, including the rest
the most coded aficiones of the Great People. A hecho que
explains in part the large expeditions of the young Frodo to the renombrados
fields of Marish, and the wrath of Maggot, the herida.
hobbit standards. There are also many other things to follow
, and when they finished, even Fatty Bolger exhaled a sigh






 








Alivio, which is not a broma; and I'm not safe here, oh
They looked at it in silence and exchanged significant sights
.

“It'll be over in a minute,” Pippin whispered to Merry.
Merry asintió—.
expand, how to make a decision—. I can't hide it anymore.

—¡Good! —I say Frodo por fin, incorporating himself and enderezándose—
. I have something to contact you. But not himself
muy bien cómo empezar.


  —I believe

I could help you —I say Merry in your voice—, continuing
algo yo mismo.

—What do you want to decide? —I said Frodo, looking at him anxiously—.

Only this, I wonder Frodo: you are miserable porque
don't know how to ship it. Querías irte de la
Comarca, above all. But the pilgrim surprised you before him
I'm desperate, and now I'm making an immediate decision.
Y no quieres. We feel it a lot for you.

Frodo opened his mouth and closed it again. On mirada de
Surprised it was so comical that I found it. —¡Querido Frodo!
—I say Pippin—. Really believe that we all have dust
the eyes? He is not sufficiently guarded or intelligent
para eso! Obviously he was planing on the road
ship to all your favorite places throughout this year from April. Te hemos
I hear you constantly murmur: «I pray you will turn around
to look at this valley again", and things like that. ¡Y
Pretend that you got the money, y
sell your old Bolsón Cerrado to this Sacovilla-
Bolson! And all these intimate conversations with Gandalf. ¡

Heavens!, said Frodo. Creí haber sido
caring and intelligent. Not what Gandalf would say. This is it
toda la Comarca discussing my departure from entonces? ¡

Oh, no!, I say Merry. Don't worry about that! The secret
It won't last long, of course; but for now I believe that
only we know it, the conspiradores. After all, you must record
that we know you well and that we are close to each other. Normally we can
find out what you're thinking about. I also met Bilbo. TO
To tell the truth, I've been watching a lot of things
since it was. I thought I would go and look for it before,





 









I loved the brand, and then, ¡listo!, disappeared. Yo it was tan
current; But I can cross the silk and walk
for the internal field. I was looking down the road,
after the S.-Bs passed by, and gazed fondly at Bilbo


  137

when it suddenly reappears. I distinguished a golden sight when...
he looked at something in the pocket of his trousers.
But you can't trust that we have to face the problems alone and...»
 
After that, keep your eyes open. Indeed, I confess that...
expiado. But you have to admit that it was very intriguing, y
yo only was a teenager. I must be the only one in the region,
I tell you, Frodo, who has seen the secret book of old
. ¡

“Has read the book!” cried Frodo. ¡Cielos
! ¿Nada es seguro?

Don't be sure, I'll tell you, I say Merry. But only the he
I had a quick view, and it was difficult to achieve. Nunca
I dejó el libro por ahí. I wonder what happened to him. I would love to hear them
other view. Do you have it, Frodo?

No. It was not in Bolsón Cerrado. Debió de llevárselo.

Good, as I said, continued Merry, I looked at myself
until this spring, when things are serious. Entonces
let's form our conspiracy; and as we were also serious and
Let's be serious, let's not be unscrupulous. No heres
a hard red hue, and Gandalf is worse. But yes, yes
If you present to our investigator Jeff, I can introduce him to you
.

Where is this?, said Frodo, looking at his elder, as he hoped
a masked figure and the left salt shaker of an armoire. ¡

Adelante, Sam!, by Merry; y Sam rose with
la dear roja hasta las orejas. Here is our information collector
! And I received a lot, I assure you, before that
finally they atraparan him. After what, I have to decide, I seem to consider it
in conditional and second liberty.

'Sam!' cried Frodo, realizing that the shadow could not come.
more then, and completely unable to decide, he felt bored,
amused, amused or simply stupid.

¡Yes, señor!, said Sam. Discuss, señor! But
no quise to offend usted, Mr. Frodo, ni al Mr. Gandalf, para el
case. You have some common feelings, do you understand?; and when I told her what it was
only, I say no! Let someone who can trust you!

But it doesn't seem like he can trust anyone, I say Frodo.

Sam looked at him sadly. Everything depends on what


you want


 


, writes Merry. You can trust us so that we can accompany you
the good ones and the bad ones, until the end. You can confide in that
We will look at whatever secrets you have, more than you are looking for.
Sin decir palabra. We are your friends, Frodo. End:
ahí está. Let's know everything that Gandalf told you. Sabemos
much above the ring. We care a lot,
but let's move together; or we follow you like sabuesos.

—And after all, sir —añadió Sam—, you must follow the
council of the elves. Gildor said that we should follow him as the question asked
, y no puedes negarlo.

“I don't deny it,” Frodo said, aiming at Sam, que ahora
sonreía—. I don't deny it, but I'm never going to believe that duermes
, ronques or not. I'll give you a good patada para
to secure me.

They are a group of sinvergüenzas minds! —dijo, volviéndose hacia
the same—. But bentos sean! —rió, rising and shaking
the arms—. I laugh. Follow Gildor's advice. Yes the peligro
no it was so dark, there would be joy. Aun so, no puedo
avoid feeling happy; I am happier with what I have felt in a long time.
Había temedo esta noche. ¡

Good! That's up to you. Three cheers for Captain Frodo and
company! gritaron; and they danced to their elder. Merry
and Pippin started a song, which they apparently had
preparado para la ocasión.

This is according to the model of the song of the enos that began
Bilbo had a lot of time on his adventure, and he had the same melody:

Goodbye tenths to the house and the living room!

Even though the wind was shining and it was flowing,

we must leave before the love,
lejos, over forests and high mountains.

In Rivendel, where the Elves still live,
en claros below the nebulous hill,

across the páramos and our cabalgamos at the beginning,

and beyond that we cannot know.


 


139


With terrible enemies, take away our mine,

below the sky will be our light,

until finally we have passed our work,

our journey is here, our mission is ready.

We must leave! We must leave! ¡

Cabalgamos antes del amanecer!

¡Muy bien!, said Frodo. But in this case there are a lot
what to do before approaching us, low techo, al
menos esta noche.

Oh! ¡So yes there was poetry!, said Pippin. From the truthful words
partir antes del amanecer?

No, replied Frodo. I'm afraid to esos Jinetes Negros.
and I am sure that it is not safe to wait a long time in the same place, especially
the Bridge and the Camino del Este, look for the front lines, without doubt...
in a place where you know what iba is. Also Gildor.
I advised you not to wait. But I would really enjoy it
to Gandalf. I can see that even Gildor was disturbed when he came up
that Gandalf never appeared. In reality, it depends on
two things. How ready can the Jinetes go to Bucldebury?
How ready can we leave? It will require a lot
preparation.

The answer to the second question, I say Merry, is that
we could leave in an hour. I practically prepared everything
. They sat five times in a stable on the other side of the fields; las provisions
and the appliances are all packed, except for some extra ones
the food will pass away.

It seems like we have a very efficient conspiracy, I say
Frodo. But what do the Black Jinetes have? I'll be sure
esperar un día a Gandalf?

Everything depends on what the Jinetes create
If they'll meet you here, replied Merry. Podrían haber
I've brought you here, so you know, if you don't hold them
the Puerta Norte, where el Seto baja hasta la
orilla del river, just on this side of the bridge. Door guards no
they could pass by at night, although they could force entry.
Even from day to day they will try to keep it outside, I believe,


to the    

less time than they can send a message to the Maestro de
the Hall, you may not like the appearance of the Jinetes
and without doubt the Austrians. But, above all,
Los Gamos cannot resist an attack decided for a long time. Y eg
Possible that in the morning included a black jinete that will carry on horseback
and pray to Mr. Bolsón that he will stop. Ex
of public knowledge that returns to living in it
Crickhollow.

Frodo asked himself a thought. «He tomado una
decisión», I finally say. «I'm leaving tomorrow morning
amanezca. But I don't travel on the road: I would be sure to hope
here. If you look at the North Door, I'll come up
Los Gamos will be known immediately, instead of remaining secret
during various days, as may be. And what is most,
We don't know how much we have, but we have less
be watched, whether someone enters Los Gamos or not.
two, and possibly more. The only thing that can be done is to climb in
a completely unexpected direction.

But this can only mean entering it! I say
Fredegar horrified. You can't be thinking about doing this. Ex
as hairy as Jinetes Negros.

Not exactly, I say Merry. Suena muy desesperado, pero
I think Frodo is right. It is the only way to climb left
that we want immediately. With strength we can achieve one
ventaja considerable.

But it doesn't tend to be right in , object
Fredegar. Nadie holds her hands there. You will lose.
People don't go in there.

¡Oh, yes they do it! I say Merry. Los Brandigamos enter,
occasionally, when you have an attack. We have one
private entrance. Frodo came in once, a long time ago. I've been to all the different ones
times: generally during the day, usually when the trees are asleep
y bastante tranquilos.

¡Good, that's what creates the best! I say Fredegar. I keep them more
I tell you what you know: las


 


141

Histories in comparison are a waste; but I vote no cuenta,
I don't want to travel. Anyway, I'm very happy with that other person
if you are here, you can tell them to Gandalf what he has,
When it appears, I'm sure it will be ready.

At the expense of his love for Frodo, Gordo Bolger had no desire for
abandon the Comarca not to see what was more there. About family
he was from Easthorthing, from Budgeford in Bridgefields,
to be exact, but never crossed the Brandy Wine Bridge.
On tarea, following the original plans of the conspirators,
it was quedarse atrás and deal with curious people, and maintain
in the greatest possible time the appearance of Señor Bolsón again
lived in Crickhollow. Even if you have traveled I recommend a lifetime
idea of ​​the strange one that could result in this part. ¡

Excellent!, I tell Frodo to understand the plan.
On the contrary, we could not have missed a meal for Gandalf
. No whether these Jinetes know better or not,
Of course, but I'm not afraid to try to write a message,
to enter and register the house. But yes Fatty is
willing to defend the force, and I can be sure that Gandalf knows it...
the path we take, that's what decides me. Today I am at the beginning of the day
Old Forest.

Good, that's all —I say Pippin—. In general, I would prefer
our work at Fatty: wait here until now
lleguen los Jinetes Negros.

You hope to stay well inside the forest —I say Fredegar—.
You will want to return here with me before
mañana a esta hora.

No need to discuss anything more —I say Merry—.
We still need to order and give the last touches to the
equipment before the house. I'll call everyone before you
amanecer.

When he stopped by, Frodo couldn't sleep during it
a rat. They hurt the piernas. He was happy to talk about it
the mañana. Finally, I fell in a vague dream, in that
it seemed like looking at a dark man through a high wind


sea


 


of marred trees. Below, among the roots, if you leave
the sound of critters arrastrándose and husmeando. It was safe
they will oil it late or harden.

Entonces there is a scratch on the lejos. At first he thought
that was a strong wind that passed among the trees of the forest. Entonces
after there were no hojas, until the sound of the sea
a lo lejos; a sound that would never have a dull sound, anyway
a menu had disturbed their dreams. Suddenly he met
to the descubierto. Don't have any trees left over. It was in one
dark bread, and had an extra color to salt in the air.
As you look up, you pass before a high white tower,
solitary on a high ridge. A great desire invaded him to suffer
to the tower and towards the sea. He climbed the crest with difficulty
hacia the tower; but suddenly a light appeared in the sky, y
se oyó un trueno.


 6


 


he stood at the foot with a sail in one hand and striking
the door with the other. ¡Muy bien! ¿What happens?, said Frodo,
I was still shocked and disconcerted.

What's up? Merry shouted. It's time to get up. I'm here
four and medium and there is a lot of noise. Let's go! Sam ya está
preparing the dessert. Even Pippin has risen. Voy a ensillar los ponis
ya look for who will be the carrier. ¡Despierten a ese
Fatty's perezoso! At least it is rising and we are despida.

Shortly after the six, the five hobbits are listed to leave.
Fatty Bolger followed bostezando. Salieron secretly de la
house. Merry Iba delante, driving a loaded pony, and I went
a path that crossed an undergrowth beyond the
house and place crossed various fields. The hojas de los árboles
they shine and every time they goteaba; the hierba was
gray for the cold rock. Everything was in silence, and the noises were quiet
they seem to be looking for and clear: someone had been talking in a corral
looking for the door of a Lejana house.

In their coat they met the ponis: small, robust animals, from which
The hobbits are so fond of them, they are not very fast, but they are suitable for a long time
working day. Montaron, and ready they entered
in the darkness, which seemed to open before him with reticence
and wander pleasantly between them. Después de cabalgar during
an hour, slowly and in silence, they came across the Seto
who suddenly stood up in front of him. He was tall and was cubierto de
telarañas plateadas.

How do they go through this? asked Fredegar. ¡

Follow me! I say Merry, and I'll tell you. Giro a
the izquierda following the seto, and ready they tied it to a point from where
This was bent inwards, following the edge of a curve. If he had a court


144


 


at a certain distance from the silk, which would descend
suavemente hacia el soil. He was afraid of the thief
the sides, which were constantly rising, had to suddenly collapse
and they formed a tunnel that submerged deeply below the silk
desembocaba in the hondonada of the other side.

Here is Gordo Bolger. Goodbye, Frodo! I say.
Ojalá no fueras al bosque. I just hope that you will love it.

If you don't have anything to say about that..., I'll tend to
kindly, I say Frodo. Tell Gandalf to welcome him
Camino del Este: ready we will be on the road and we will go as quickly as
podamos. Goodbye! gritaron, and lowered the slope
and they disappeared from sight of Fredegar through the tunnel.

It was dark and humid. At the bottom, it was closed for one
door of gruesos barrotes de hierro. Merry bajó y abrió la
door, and when everyone crossed it, they pushed it
new. If you close it with a metal ring and the lock will click. The sound...
... was sinister.

¡Allí!, I say Merry. They have abandoned the region and are now there
outside, on the edge of...

“Are you sure of the stories about him?” asked Pippin.

"No, what stories tell you," Merry replied. Yes
You refer to old ghost stories that Fatty's little girls can only tell
, about duendes, aspects and things by style,
I'd say no. In any case, I don't believe it. But el
Forest is extraño. Everyone is much more alive in it,
more attentive to what happens, so as to decide it, that
in the Comarca. And the trees don't taste the extras. They observe you
. Normally if you comply with observarte, while
the day lasts, and they don't do much. Again and again
hostiles can leave for a day, take a break
grab with a large spool. But at night these things can be
of the most alarming people, or that's what they told me. Only him
I have been here once or twice after the year, and always look for silk. He thought
that all the trees whisper within each other, counting
news and plans in an incomprehensible language; y las


 


145


ramas are mechanically moved and moved to the wind. They say that
the trees die green and can be eaten by strangers
acorralarlos. After all, there was a lot of time at the Seto: wine
and they planted themselves just on the side, and they leaned over it.
But the hobbits brought and picked up hundreds of trees,
they took a great break in the forest and lived all over the country
in a large fringe to the east of the Seto. After that, the trees gave way
a large, bare space far from the interior of the house.

"Are only the trees that are hairy?" asked Pippin.








There will still be no signal on the road or the trees
they seem to block their path constantly. Pippin felt suddenly that
I could no longer bear it, and without prior warning I launched it
a cry. ¡Oye! ¡Hey!, he shouted. I don't want to do anything.
¡Déjenme pasar, por favor!

The others were discovered overwhelmed; but the grit stays the same as you want it
a heavy curtain. No answer, no reply, no matter what
Bosque seemed to be more barred and more vigilant
que antes. «

I won't shout, it will be you», I say Merry. «Hace
más daño que bien».

Frodo began to wonder if it was possible to meet a climber
and they had to be forced to enter
in this abominable forest. Merry looked at one side of you
otro, and I seem to be unsure of which way to go. Pippin
he noticed it. “They didn't take much time to lose,” I said. But it
This is the Merry moment. «

¡Vaya, vaya!», I say. «These trees are dying. Ahí está el
Claro de la Hoguera in front of us (or this experience), by the way
parece haberse alejado!»

. The light became clearer to the progressing meditation. De sudden,
they climbed from among the trees and met in a large one
circular space. There was a sky above them, blue and clear above
surprise, pues bajo el Techo del Bosque no habían
I can see the love in the darkness that dissipates.
However, the sun was not yet high enough to shine on it.


 


of course


, although the light is reflected in the corners of the trees. Las hojas
they were thicker and greener on the edges of the light,
riding it with a solid case. Don't grow any tree there,
only high grass and many tall plants: hemlocks and wild perejil
, branded talls, cypresses that are transformed into wild flowers,
and exuberant vegetables and cardoons. A gloomy place, though
It looked like an enchanting and happy garden after the closed forest.

The hobbits felt animated and looked forward to hope
the light of the day that shines in the sky. On the other side of the light
there was an opening in the wall of the trees, and a longer journey
at the. We could see him enter the forest, even in some places
and it arrives in the open, even when the trees are
alejaban. They follow submissively, but now Iban
much more quickly and with more heart; here are several
that the forest had given way and, after all, I had to let them pass
sin obstáculos.

But after one episode, the air began to turn hot and suffocating. Los
The trees turned to look on both sides, and you couldn't
see more later. Now, with more strength than ever, they will feel it again
hostility of the presionándolos forest. It was so silent
the sound of the helmets of his ponis, crujiendo over the hojas muertas y
Tropezando occasionally with hidden branches, it seemed like a dull coup  
their oils. Frodo tried to sing a song to cheer him up, though
Come on, I'm reduced to a murmur.

Oh! Wanderings in the dark land,
no despair! Because everyone is dark,
all the woods must end at the end,
y ver pasar el sol abierto:
the rising sun, the rising sun,
the end of the day or the beginning of the day.

For this or the west, all the forests must fall apart...

Fracasar —as soon as you pronounce the word, your voice fades into silence.
The air seemed heavy and the training of words was tiring.
Just beyond them, a large branch fell from a old tree that stood out


with    

shouted on the send. The trees seem to close
before them.

I don't like everything about finishing and breaking up - I say
Merry—. I shouldn't sing anymore now. We hope for what we are following
at the edge, and then we will give you the tour and we will offer you one
enthusiastic chorus!

He spoke happily, and he felt some great anxiety, no
he demonstrated it. The others did not respond. They were depressed.
A great weight was felt firmly in Frodo's heart, y
every step of the way that daba complained
I thought sometimes about enjoying the pleasure of the trees.
Indeed, he was at the point of holding himself and proposing return (yes
but it was possible), when the things made a new noise. The sendero
I decided to ascend and, for a while, I wanted to return. Los
The dark trees parted, and closer they could see the path that was advancing
cases in line recta. In front of him, but at a certain distance,
salt from the surrounding forest. The sendero seemed to be...

Now they were surprised again, enchanted with the
idea of ​​ascending a rat at the top of the techo del
Forest. The journey descended, and then began to ascend
again, finally taking them to the foot of the steep slope.
Then the trees left and were lost in the crowd. The forest rose
alrededor of the hill like an expensive cabellera that ended abruptly in a circle
alrededor of a swift crown.

The hobbits led their ponis to the finish line, giving turns and turns
hasta get to the top. There they detuvieron, aiming at
on alrededor. The air was bright and sunny, but misty; y
they could not be seen at a great distance. Look for there, the darkness
The case has disappeared; even here and there it extends in harmony  
of the forest, and above them, was a deep fold.
As they passed through the forest, the cloud rose like vapor
volutas de humo blanco.

“That's it,” I said Merry, signaling with my hand, “that's the line
of the Withywindle. Desciende de los Downs y fluye hacia el


 


south-west


por in the middle of the forest to join the
Brandywine, lower than Haysend. Let's not ask for ahí!
It is said that the Withywindle valley is the most external part of the
all the woods: the center of where all the rarity comes from,
so as to decirlo.

They looked in the direction that Merry signaled,
but they couldn't see much more than what was hidden above the deep and humid valley
; and then, the upper part of the forest disappeared
of the sight.

The sun at the top of the hot hill. Debian
ser alrededor de las once; but the otoñal mist still exists
it hindered her very much in other directions. Al
The West could not distinguish the line of the Seto
the valley of the Brandywine which extends farther. Hacia el norte, whence
they looked with more hope, they didn't see anything that could
they are the line of the great Camino del Este, where they head
. They are on an island in a sea of ​​trees, and there
horizonte estaba velado.

When you were sure, the ground would descend abruptly, as it were
trees, like the islands that actually are the slopes of a mountain
that emerges from deep waters. They felt in the green orilla y
they contemplated the forest that extended to their feet as they began
. As the sun rises and the middle ages pass,
visible to the light, right now, the green and gray lines of the Quebradas
which extend further there, to this side. Ex
it animated him enormously; it was pleasant to see something more
the limits of the forest, even if they had no intention of going there
you could avoid it: the Quebradas de los Túmulos had one
reputation as sinister in the hobbits legend as his own Bosque.

Finally they decided to continue. The sendero
who had lifted them to the hill reappeared there
northern side; but they didn't follow it much when they said it
what he was constantly turning was the right side. Ready comenzó
to descend quickly and assume that in reality it should
head towards the Withywindle valley: never go to the Withywindle valley


.


 


direction you want to return. After a short discussion, we decide
abandon this english soul and head north;
yes, although they can't see it from the top of the hill,
the path had to be there, and it couldn't be at many thousands
of distance. También hacia el norte, y la izquierda del sendero, el terra
seemed more with and open, ascending the stairs
where the trees were rarer, and the pine trees and fir trees replaced them
robles, fresnos and other extraños and anonymous árboles del
bosque más denso.

At the beginning, the election seemed certain: they advanced
good speed, no matter what happens once you see the sun
in an open light, they seemed inexplicably to have turned
hacia este. But after a while, the trees began to grow again,
just from where from the distance they have seemed rarest
y less enredados. Entonces, unexpectedly, were discovered profound folds in the soil
, like the surcos of great gigantic tracks or
Even if you have thick and dirty paths, leave time to be abandoned and obstructed by them
zarzas. These only cross just on the marching line,
and they could only cross trepando hacia below and hacia afuera,
what was problematic and difficult with his ponis. Fall
shrub and evil root, which for some reason is not
enderezaba; and you know that there will be a certain distance from the bottom
before being able to find a fireplace near the other orilla. Every day
as they tremble, the trees seem more profound and dark; y
Always leaving and arriving, it was very difficult to meet a
fireplace, and they are obliged to go to the back and to the bottom.

After one or two hours I lost all clarity of direction
, although they knew very well that there had been a time that they had missed
de ir hacia el norte. They were directing, y
simply follow a chosen word for them: hacia este y
the top, has the heart of the forest and not outside of it.

Late was declining when treparon y
they tropezaron in a red more even and profound than what they were
hubieran found hasta entonces. It was so hard and unkempt that it turned out


 


impossible
without leaving the horses and the equipment.

It was impossible to go up there again, neither forward nor backward.
All that could be done was to follow the fold down. El
usually it turned bland and, in some places, swampy; aparecieron manantiales en
the orillas, and soon they meet following an arroyo
who ran and stuttered across a dirty lecho. Entances el
it began to descend quickly, and the arroyo, making it strong
and rugged, it flowed and jumped quickly from under me. Estaban en
a deep, dimly illuminated ravine, arched by trees very close to the top of it.

After traveling during a trecho off the arroyo,
suddenly rose from the penumbra. As if through a door,
they saw the light of the sun before us. When you close the opening,
they discovered that they had been beaten by one
Held on a high and steep bench, in case a cantilever. His pies had one
large space for grass and juncos; and in the distance it could be
view another counter with similar cases. A late hour
of the late sun it extended warm and sleepy over the dark earth
enter ellos. In the middle of this snake there was a dangerously dark stream
brown water, edged with centenary sauces, arched
by sauces, blocked by sauces dropped and salted from
miles of hojas marked. The air was dense
, revoloteando amarillas desde las ramas; pues una
warm and gentle breeze soars sweetly in the valley, and... ¡

Good, now at least I have an idea of ​​where we are!,
I say Merry. We come cases in the opposite direction
what we expect. This is the Withywindle River! Follow
exploring.

He rose into the light of the sun and disappeared into it
tall grass. At the end of the meeting I returned and informed him that
there must be sufficient firm ground between the foot of the acantilado and the
river; in some of us, the hierarchical signature descended as far as the orilla.
More than that, I say, it seems like I have something like this
I sent that serpentine through this orilla of the river. Let's turn around
to the izquierda and we follow him, I'm sure we'll get there going up to the
lado este del bosque.

I'll have to decide! —I say Pippin—. Let's say it, if the journey continues


here


 


and let us not lift ourselves to a quagmire and leave us there.
Do you think you hit the fireplace and why? I'm sure that it is
seemed to be stirring among the ramas. He raised his heavy gaze.
it was not for our benefit. I'm struggling to suspect a lot of this.
The forest and everything that there is in it, and I work to create it all
stories that rodean him. You have an idea of ​​how much
debemos ir hacia el este?

—No —I say Merry—, I'm not keeping it. I have no idea what that is
distance from the Withywindle we meet, no one else could
come here with enough frequency to open a path. But
don't let me know if I'm going to get sick again.

Without having another option, they climbed in line, and Merry
I took them to the journey they had discovered. Por todas partes, los
the bushes and the grasses were leafy and tall, in some places very close to them
cabezas; but once I encountered it, the path was easy to follow, you know
it twisted and snaked, hitting the ground more firmly than ever before
the ciénagas and the charcoes. Here and there he passed through many other riachuelos,
going through the ravines, take the Withywindle from there
the upper reaches of the forest, and in these places there were trunks of trees
evil haces carefully disposed.

The hobbits started to feel a lot of heat. Había ejércitos de
all the flies like zumbando alrededor de sus oídos, y el
Only late were they quemaba on the espalda. Por fin llegaron suddenly
to a faint shadow; large gray ramas extend across the
fireplace. Every step forward he becomes more reticent than the previous one.
their piernas, and gently letting the air over their heads
y ojos.

Frodo felt that his barb was falling and his head was falling. Just front
At the end, Pippin has moved forward on his rods. Frodo if I deduced. No sirve de
nothing, I'll tell Merry. I can't take a step further
descansar. I have to take a siesta. Keep the sauces fresh. Fewer flies!

Frodo didn't like them like this song. Let's go!, he shouted.
We can't take a siesta every day.
We must first go up to the forest. But the rest of us are too tired to worry about. Arrived at ellos,
Sam bostezaba and parpadeaba stupidly.

Suddenly, Frodo himself felt that the dream was overtaking him.


 


There


cabeza le daba vueltas. Now it seemed that there was barely a sound in the air.
The flies have become tired of swimming. Just a suave ruido, cases
inaudible, a soft voice like a half-whispered song,
and I'm leaning over the huge, sweet and sweet sauce.
Huge bunch, their extended branches are raised as they are
Extending your arms with many wide hands, up
the naked and twisted trunk was torn into wide fissures that crujian débly
with the ramas movement. Las hojas revoloteando contra el
the bright sky illuminated it, and it exploded, wondering whence it fell
on the grass.

Merry and Pippin arrastraron hacia adelante and tumbaron
de espaldas to the trunk of the sauce. Let's go
great greetings are drunk in par to be received while the tree is swinging
y crujía. Miraron hacia arrives at the gray and yellow holidays,
moving softly against the light, and singing. Cerraron los
Ojos, y entonces les seemes que cas podían oír palabras,
fresh words, which say something about the water and the sound. If
they entered the hechizo and pressed deeply to the foot
some gran sauce gris.

Frodo remained intent on playing against the dream
I sold him; Then, with an effort, I can use pie
again. I felt an imperious desire for fresh water. Esperame
, Sam, tartamudeó. I want to wash my feet for a minute.

In the middle of the day, he approached the edge of the river
, he mounted a horcajadas on one of these and chapoteó with the hot pies in the cool
brown water; and then I suddenly slept with her
espalda contra el árbol.

Sam felt it, scraped his head and tightened it like one
cave. I was worried. Late was cayendo, y
I thought this sudden drowsiness was strange. Hay more
apart from this sun and warm air, I whispered for so much.
I don't like this huge fruit. No confidence in it. ¡Escúchalo
sing about the song now! This won't do anything!


154


 


If I use pie and I'll shake to see that
he had left the ponies. I found out that the two were confused
enough to send; and just got caught
and they had to ride the others when they were there
dos ruidos; one strong and the other soft but very clear. A
it was the chapoteo of something weighed falling into the water; El
another was a noise like the sound of a lock when a door
if it closes quickly and without making noise.

Corrió de vuelta a la orilla. Frodo was in the water looking for.
Stop the edge, and a large branch of the tree seemed to be above it,  
sujetándolo, but he could not resist. Sam gripped himself
grabbing him by the chaqueta, and I arrested him from the bottom of the raíz; y
then, with difficulty, the jaló hasta the orilla. Cases al
Instantly he was desperated, tossed and fretted.

¿Sabes, Sam?, I say at the end, ¡el árbol bestial
I blushed! He heard it. The big raíz simply disappeared
me volcó!

I suppose you were dreaming, Señor Frodo, I say Sam.
You shouldn't feel like you're in a place so you keep it sweet.

'What about them?' asked Frodo. I wonder about this class
de sueños estarán teniendo.

They were on the other side of the tree, and there they were
Sam understood the click he heard. Pippin habia
disappeared. The smile from which it was tended was sealed
, so that not a single problem was seen. Merry was
atrapado
: another grieta would have looked at the redhead of her belt; sus piernas
they were outside, but the rest of it was inside a dark opening,
The edges of the edges are grasped like pliers.
Then they frantically tried to open their mouths
of the smile that contained little Merry. It was completely useless.

"That's such a horrible thing that happened!" cried Frodo savingly. ¿Por qué
wines in this terrible forest? Keep everyone on the tour
en Crickhollow! Pateó el árbol with all your strengths, without worrying
for your own pies. A barely perceptible fear occurred
the trunk and undergone the branches; las hojas crujieron y
they whispered, but now with a sound of weak and sad laughter.


  155

I suppose we don't have a hacha among our team, sir
Frodo, Sam asked.

Take a small hat to cut the wood, I say
Frodo. This wouldn't take much. ¡

Wait a minute! Sam shouted, struck by an idea suggested by him
the leña. Let's do something with fire!

Podríamos, I say Frodo doubtful. We can log
asar alive in Pippin por inside.

We can try to heal or wait for this tree to start,
I say Sam proudly. If you don't wear it, it'll kill you anyway
keep that roerlo. He ran across the ponies and quickly returned
con dos yesqueros y un hacha.

Quickly collect dry grass, hojas and trozos of...
courtesy; and there was a mountain of rotary branches and pickled poles.
These amontonaron against the trunk on the other side of the...
prisoner's tree. As ready as Sam set off a chispa
in the yesca, this ignited the dry grass y
a ráfaga of calls and humo was raised. Las ramitas crujieron. Little ones without fire
they cut the dry and rayed bark of the ancient tree and
the chamuscaron. A fear occurred throughout the sauce. Las
hojas seemed to whisper above their heads with a sound of pain
y rabia. Merry shouted with strength, and from there
bottom of the tree oyeron to Pippin give a shout ahogado.

¡Apágalo! ¡Apágalo!, Merry shouted. I'll plaster it
dos si no lo haces! ¡He says it!

¿Quién? 'What?' cried Frodo, running towards the other man
lado del árbol.

¡Apágalo! ¡Apágalo!, Merry pleaded. The ramas of
sauce camenzaron to swingarse violently. If there was a noise like the de
other reddish trees, as they will now stand on a stone
in the quiet lethargy of the river valley and waves are formed.




 
























 




A old worn sombrero with a high crown and a wide blue plume
at the sight of a man, or so many. In any case, it was too big
and weighed for a hobbit, although not high enough for one of them
Large, although there is enough noise for one, tropezando
with large yellow flowers on its pierced trees, and running
between the grass and the juncos like a holiday that requires drinking. Llevaba
an abrigo azure and a large chestnut beard; His eyes were blue
and bright, and on the beak it was red like a mature manzana, but wrinkled
in those wrinkles of laughter. In his hand he held it,
on a large hoja like in a bandana, a small mountain of white snow. ¡

Socorro!, shouted Frodo and Sam as they ran to him
las manos extendidas.

High! High! 'Quiet!' the old man shouted, rising
a hand, and they took it with them, how they received it
coup. Now, my little ones, let's go, resolando
like a fuelle? What happens here? ¿Saben
who knows? I'm Tom Bombadil. Tell me what happens to you!
Tom holds the prize. Don't remove my flowers!

My friends are caught in the sauce, cried Frodo
without alienation.

“My love Merry is being greeted with a smile,” Sam shouted.

“What?” shouted Tom Bombadil, jumping into the air. Old
Sauce? Nothing for what this is, huh? Eso ready if
will settle. I know the melody for it. ¡Viejo Sauce gris! The
I will freeze the médula if not if it wears well. I'll trudge them
the roots with a song. I will sing her a melody and fly hojas and ramas
. ¡Viejo Sauce!

Leaving his books with care over the grass, he ran to them
tree. There I see Merry's feet still looking forward; the rest
you had 100 more. Tom tightened his mouth
to the grieta and began to sing in low voice.
I couldn't hear the words, but evidently Merry was excited.
His piernas empezaron a temblar. Tom jumped to the rope
a branch that I picked, hit the side of the sauce with it. ¡Déjalos
to climb
again, Old Sauce!, I say. That's it
thinking? You shouldn't be discouraged. Come earth! Dig
sujetó entonces the pies de Merry and the sacó de la
I'm sorry that it suddenly sank.
If there was a cruel desgarrador and the other's grief was revealed.
If they are difficult to follow the path and they are very
cansados. Their piers seem to be full. Extraños furtivos ruidos corían
between shrubs and juncos on both sides; y yes
look at the pale sky, see outside in the light
bare faces and skins that are drawn against it
twilight, and they gaze with lasciviousness from the high orilla y
the linderos of the forest. They were forced to hear all this paisaje
it was unreal, and they were tropezando in a
Ominous dream that did not lead him to despair.
Just when they felt that their feet were loving, the step had to be stopped,
they noticed that the soil ascended smoothly. The water filled
to murmurar. In the darkness they captured the white light
of the foam, from which the river flowed through a short waterfall. Entonces, de sudden,
the trees ended and the darkness followed.
They climbed out of the forest and encountered a wide extension
of the grass that extended before them. The river, now small and
speed, it descended happily to its location, shining here
and there in the light of the stars, which shine on you
in heaven.




 

















 







The grass below her feet was threadbare and short, as is the case
they will be cut or shaved. The trees of the forest that extend between them
They are stored and arranged like a silk. The journey was visible now
ante ellos, well looked after and edged with stone. Serpentaba
hasta the top of a grassy mountain, now gray below the pale
starry night; and there, a lot of them, in one
The brightest lights of a house come out on the steepest slope.
The path descended again, and then began to ascend, passing through a wide and plain slope
from grass, let the light shine. De sudden, un amplio rayo amarillo
he brooded brilliantly from a door that opened. There it was
the house of Tom Bombadil ante ellos, arriba, abajo, bajo la colina.
Behind her, an empinado loma de terra was extended gray and naked, and


more


 


alá, the dark silhouettes of the Quebradas de los Túmulos are
lost in the oriental night.

Everyone should be aware of the future, hobbits and ponies. Ya
if they have vanished the heart of the song and all of them. ¡Eh! ¡
Come, happy muñeca! I unrolled the song to greet them.

¡Hey! ¡Fri derry sweet! ¡Saltad, my hearts!

¡Hobbits! ¡Ponis todos! We enjoy the fiestas.

Now the diversion begins! Let's sing together!

Entonces another clear voice, so young and so old as
spring, like the cry of a happy water that flows there
night from a bright morning on the hills, cayó como
plata para recibirlos:

Now the song begins! Let's sing together

above the sun, the stars, the moon and the clouds, the rain and the cloudy weather,

the light in the tree that brota, the rock in the pluma, the

I come on the open hill, the bells on the breeze,

the dogs close to the still shade, the books in the water: ¡

El viejo Tom Bombadil y la Hija del Río!

And with this song, the hobbits disappeared into the umbral,
y una luz dorada los rodeaba.


 7


 


The four hobbits crossed the large umbral stone and
they sat quietly, parpadeando. They live in a large and small house, full of
the light of the lamps that connect the lights of the techo; Y
over the dark, clean mesa de Madeira there were many veils, high
and amarillas, who burn with strength.

On one side, on the other side of the room, in front of it
outside door, a woman was sitting. On Largo Cabello Rubio, I waved over...
men outside; on the dress it was green, green like young juncos,
with reflections plated like rocks; and his belt was gold, molded
like a string of water lilies, adorned with the pale blue eyes of the name Olvides
. To your pies, in large containers of
green and brown barro, float without white ones, in the same way
it seemed to be surrounded in the middle of a room. ¡

Pasen, queridos huéspedes!, dijo, y al blalar, supieron
that it was Clara's voice that they wanted to sing. They advanced
In a few shy moments they moved into the habitation and began to make one
profound reverence, feeling extraneously surprised and surprised, like people,
upon calling at the door of a cabaña to ask for a passage of water, they
I am waiting for a young and beautiful elf queen dressed in
fresh flowers. But before they could say anything, he jumped nimbly
through the top of the clouds and I ran back to them;
and while I was running, on my dress I whispered softly like the wind in her
orillas floridas de un río.

¡Vengan, queridos!, I say, I return the hand to Frodo. I repeat
Slowly, he walked towards him and, looking for the door, he told her
he spreads it, with his white arms extended. ¡Cerremos
the night!, I say. Because I still have my heart, I'll quiz you about the darkness
, of the shadows of the trees, of the deep waters and of the untamed things. No more
nada! Because this night you are at the bottom of Tom Bombadil's tech.   


162


 


Los hobbits the miraron with asombro; and she looked at him
each one of them and I smiled. ¡Beautiful lady Baya de Oro!, said Frodo
finally, feeling my heart I am moved by a joy that no longer exists
understood. If you ask yourself from the feet as in olden times you would have wondered what was enchanted by them
beautiful elven voices; but the boy who was now stuck above it
was different: less sharp and elevated was the deleite, but more profound
and they seek the mortal heart; marvelous and, without embargo, no extraño. ¡
Beautiful lady Baya de Oro!, repitió. Now the joy that is
hide in the songs that we know are obvious to me.

¡Oh, slim as a vara de sauce! Oh, more clear than the clear water!

¡Oh, now come to the living being! ¡Hermosa hija del río!

¡Oh, spring and true, and now, spring again!

¡Oh, I come to the waterfall, and the laughter of the children!

Suddenly I found out and was shocked, absorbed by the surprise
let us decide these things. Baya de Oro pear
river.
 
Welcome!, I say. I haven't heard of these people from the region.
They were so sweets de la tongue. But I know you were a friend of the elves;
the light in your eyes and the timbre in your voice say it. This is
It's a happy reunion! Siéntate now and wait for the love of
the house! It won't be late. I'm looking after you
bestias ured.

The hobbits felt happily on low saddles with young asientos,
while Baya de Oro was afanaba on the table; and your eyes
the siguieron, pues the slender grace of his movements
bring you a peaceful delight. Somewhere outside the house
llegaba the sound of a song. Once again when they captaban,
between many derry dol y merry dol and a ring a ding
dillo las palabras repetidas:

The old Tom Bombadil is very happy;

bright blue on the chaqueta es, and its botas are amarillas.

¡Beautiful lady!, I say Frodo again after a crime. Dime, yes me
I wonder if it doesn't seem stupid, who is Tom Bombadil?


  163

This is the Bay of Gold, holding its rapid movements and

Frodo looked at her inquisitively. This is how you saw it
, I told her in response to her gaze. This is the love of the
bosque, el agua y la colina.

Does all this foreign land belong to you? ¡

In no way!, she replied, and her smile vanished. Ex
if it would be a burden, I'll add it to you, as usual
yes misma. The trees, the grasses and all the things that grow
they live in the earth if they belong to each other. Tom Bombadil
It's the love. Nadie saw jamás al viejo Tom walking by
the forest, crossing the water, jumping on the tops of the lower hills
the light and the shadow. No, it doesn't hold me. Tom Bombadil is my love.

A door opened and Tom Bombadil entered. Ya
I didn't have a sombrero and my thick brown hair was crowned with it
otoñales hojas. He returned and, looking for Baya de Oro, took away her hand. ¡

Here is my beautiful lady! I say, paying homage to the hobbits. ¡
Here is my Baya de Oro all dressed in plain green with flowers
on your belt! Is the table served? Veo crema amarilla y
panal, y pan blanco, y mantequilla; Leche, queso,
green grasses and recogidas madura bays. Is this enough? ¿
Está lista la cena?

Yes, I say Baya de Oro; But don't you ask the guests?

Tom applauded and shouted: «Tom, Tom! You are invited
they are forgotten and in some cases they have forgotten it! Come, my joys
friends, and Tom will refresh you! ¡Limpiarán
their wet hands and they will wash their unwashed faces; desháganse de sus
capas embarradas y unsereden sus cabellos!».

They opened the door, and closed it for a short while
step and double a tight curve. They will go to a lower home
with inclined techo (an ático, apparently, built in the
extreme north of the house). Their walls were made of clean stone, however
They are cubiertas in their mayoría with green leaves and flowers
amarilla curtains. The floor was wrapped and covered
fresh green juncos. You will have four mullidos, each with one
Apiladas white mantas, stretched on the ground to one side. Against the
on the other side there was a large bench full of also barrows


,    

and now there are brown jars filled with water,
some frías, otras humeantes. Había suaves verdes zapatillas
dispuestas junto a cada cama.

On the table, on each side, while at each extreme they feel
Baya de Oro y el Amo. It was a large and happy meal. Anyway
the hobbits comer, as only the hobbits hambrientos can comer, no fault at all
. The drink in his cuencos parecía
clear water and chilled water, but it was tied to the heart like wine and
les daba voz. The guests were told what was unexpected
They sang happily, as it was easier and more natural
to speak.

Finally, Tom and Baya de Oro rose and welcomed the table
quickly. If they ordered the guests to remain seated in silence and they
Comfortable in seats, each with a ladder for their folded pies. Habia
a fire in the wide chimenea before him, that dared
with a sweet aroma, like madera de manzano. When
todo estuvo en orden, se
they turned off all the lights in the house, except one lamp and a couple of veils at each extreme
of the repise of the chimenea. The Baya de Oro is discovered and discovered beforehand
ellos, holding a sail, and I wanted them good
noches y un sueño profundo.

—Tranquilos ahora —dijo—, ¡hasta la morning! Don't pay attention
to the nocturnal noises! Because here nothing passes through the door and the window
except the light of the moon and the stars and the wind from the top of the hill.
Good nights! Salió de la habitación con un destello y
a whisper. The sound of his steps was like a falling arroyo
I gently lay this down on fresh stones in the quiet of the night.

Tom heard a conversation with him in silence, every time one of them
He was trying to gather his courage to do one of the many things
I wonder what you've thought about doing at dinner. The dream accumulated in it
your parpados. Finally, Frodo said:

Did you call me, Maestro, or was it just a coincidence that it happened
te trajo en ese momento?

Tom moved like a gentle man from a placental dream.
¿Eh, what? I say el. Are you calling now? No, not you


  hey

: I was busy singing. Only the randomness brings me to mind, yes
that can be called randomness. It wasn't my plan, no matter how you were
hoping. Here's all the great news
we were wandering. We assume that we will soon bring them to you
water: all the paths take them there, in Withywindle. El viejo
hombre gris del sauce, es a powerful singer; It's difficult for the little guy
anxious to escape from his cunning labyrinths. But Tom had a recap
there, who was not at risk of obstructing. Tom listened as he dreamed
he will sell him again; but he continued in a soft singing voice:

Had a trip there: remember nothing,
green hojas and white nenufares to please my beautiful lady,
the last ones before the end of the year to protect them from the winter,
so that your beautiful pies can flourish until the snow clears.

Every year, at the end of the summer, I go to look for her,
in a still place, deep and clear, far below Withywindle;
there they are born first in spring and there they demolish at the end.

Now that you have a lot of time, you will meet at the Hija del Rio,
the young and beautiful Baya de Oro, sent among the juncos.

Sweet was on singing entonces, ¡y on heart latía with strength!

I opened my eyes and looked at them with a sudden glare
blue:

And so you wine well, because now you don't turn
to submerge myself in the waters of the forest,
not during the next year. Shortly after
the house of Old Sauce before spring,
no longer than the happy spring, when the Hija del Río
swim on the trail of children to bathe in the water.
 
He returned to watch in silence; but Frodo can't help but wonder one thing.
ask more: the one who most wishes they will respond to you.
Cuéntanos, I love, I dijo, over the Hombre Sauce. ¿Qué es
? I never heard of it before.

¡No, no hagas! they said Merry and Pippin together, feeling it
sudden derechos. Oh no! Don't wait until morning! ¡


Exo


 


es! I say the old man. Now is the moment
descansar. Some things are bad to know when the world is there
shadows. Please wait until the light of the morning, let go of your pillow! ¡
Don't pay attention to the night noises! ¡No themes to sauce gris! Y with this bottom
the lamp and I tied it, and grabbing a sail in it
each hand I drive them out of the house.

His colchones and pillows were as soft as the plumón, and there
mantas were made of white wool. Only if they are close
in the deepest chambers and they were covered with the light mantas when
they slept.

I leave the young moon going up; low on faint light
arched like a large door. It seemed to Frodo that they were elevating him
, and when I passed by, the rocky wall was a circle
of hills, and that inside it there was a tear, and in the middle of it
The landscape raised a pinnacle of stone, like an enormous tower, but it didn't have much
by hand. On top was the figure of a man. The moon, al
go up, it seems to hang for a moment above his head and
shine on his white hair while the wind shook him. Desde la
dark cloud below llegó the cry of ferocious voices and the sound
of many lobes. De sudden, a shadow, like the shape of
large wings, passed across the moon. The figure rose
arms and a light shone on the stick he held. A
the powerful eagle descended and took it away. The voices
they groaned and the lobes aullabaned. Hubo a ruido como un
loudly I come flying, and in it the sound of the helmets is heard,
galloping, galloping, galloping from el Este. ¡Jinetes Negros!
thought Frodo as he lost himself, with the sound of the helmets
still resonating in your mind. If you asked, it would happen again
to have the courage to abandon the safety of these stone walls. Permanecio
inmóvil, escuchando; but now everything was in silence, y
Finally he turned around and slept again or sumió in some
otro sueño olvidado.
and he found himself looking at a gray hue with
 
On the side, Pippin was playing peacefully; but a change...
He stopped his dreams and turned around and went away. De sudden,


  desperate

, or I think I'll be discouraged, and I'll still be there
obscuring the sound that disturbed him: «Tip-tap,
chirrido», the noise was like ramas al wind,
dedos de ramitas scratching the wall and the wind: crujido, crujido, crujido.
If you asked for sauces, look for the house;
and suddenly I had the terrible sensation of not being
in a common house, even inside the sauce, cooking
that horrible dry and cruel voice that was once again heard. If
he incorporated and felt that his sweet pillows were giving way to his hands, and he flew away
to accostar aliviado. She seemed to hear the echo of one of the words
in his words: «¡No themes! ¡Tranquilo hasta la mañana!».

Peaceful sound: the water ran smoothly and the rest extended,
extending irresistible throughout the house hasta to form a
still dark and without shadows. He was pounding the walls and was slow, though
surely. «¡Me ahogaré!», he thought. You will meet on the fireplace
hacia inside, y entonces me ahogaré. I felt that I was tending to one
bland and viscous quagmire, and jumping, I put it on my feet on the esquina de
a cold and hard loss. Recorded facts where it was
and he approached again. If you want to hear or record something:
Nothing passes through doors or windows except the moonlight
the light of the stars and the wind of the top of the hill. A small bite of sweet air
he moved the curtain. He breathed deeply and slept again.

For what could be recorded, Sam lasted all night
in deep satisfaction, if the trunks are happy.

If they dwindled, the four once in a while, in the morning light. Tom
he moved around the house, waving like an outsider. When
they moved, applauded and shouted: ¡Hey! ¡
Come happy sweet! ¡Derry sweet! My hearts! Apartó las
amarilla curtains, and the hobbits see that they have been covered
the windows, at each end of the habitation, looking at this
the other to the west.

They were renovated. Frodo ran to the oriental wind,
rock cubierta. Casi esperaba ver césped asta las paredes,


grass


 


Salpicado de huellas de pezuñas. In reality, on view this was
hidden by a high list of postal judges; but arrive and read
further on, the gray top of the hill rose against it
amanecer. It was a pale morning: in the east, among large clouds
as lines of red-colored wool on the edges, they extend
deepest amarillos. The sky announced rain; but the
the light fades quickly and the red flowers of the leaves
Judías began to shine against the green and dark hojas.

Pippin looked at the western wind with a load
de niebla. The forest was hidden below the darkness. It was like that
look from the top at a tilted cloud screen. Alli,
pain and pain: the Withywindle valley. El
I ran Colina down to the street and disappeared between the
white shades. Look for a flower garden and a garden
I'm recorded with a red plate, and more, there
gray grass cut, strong on the cheeks of the rock. Don't see any sauce
.

Good days, friends! —Tom shouted, opening the door
de par en par la ventana oriental. A fresh air entered; oil to the rain
. The sun will not look very hoy, full. Heh
I was walking, jumping on the tops of the hills, from there
I soaked the gray in love, smelling the wind and the weather, with the low mojada hierba
the pies, the rainy sky above. Desperté in Baya de Oro singing
bajo la ventana; but nothing left to the hobbits in the first hour
of the morning. At night, the little ones disappear into the darkness
duermen after turning on the light. ¡Tong a ding say it! ¡Despierten now, mis
happy friends! Oblivious to the nocturnal noises! ¡Tong a ding say it
of! ¡Derry del, mis amigos! If they come ready, they will meet you
the dinner at the table. If they come late, they will tend to have more grass
agua de lluvia!

Don't make a wrong decision - and that's not how Tom's amusement sounds much
serious—that the hobbits arrived promptly and left the table late and
only when it was filled with water was enough. No
Tom ni Baya de Oro were there. If you hate Tom all the time
the house, traqueteando in the kitchen, subiendo and bajando las
steps, and singing here and there. The habitación daba


  to the

West, above the valley rolled into darkness, and the wind was
open. The water dripped from the alero de paja.
Before they finish desayunar, the clouds are united by
As they learned, they began to understand their lives...
a continuous techo and a gray rain and a soft flow
firmly down. Once the curtain has been removed, the forest has been completely removed
veiled.

As they gazed at the wind, they said softly
how the rain of heaven flows, the clear
voz de Baya de Oro singing about them. Podían oír
few words, but it seemed clear that the song was one
rain song, as sweet as the rains on the dry hills, which tells the story
from a river from the manantial in the highlands until the deep sea
abajo. Los hobbits escucharon con deleite; and Frodo was happy
to take them back from leaving. The idea of ​​irse had settled
Now that no more Iran has passed this day.

The upper wind was absent in the West
The deepest clouds and the clouds broke down to cover the clouds covered above the naked heads of
las Colinas. No one could see any redeemer of the house except one
agua cayendo. Frodo looked for the open door and looked
the white and limestone path converts into a small river of light and disappears
burbujeando hacia el valley. Tom Bombadil came
trotting through the back of the house, waving his arms as if he were
protect yourself from the rain; y, de hecho, cuando cruzó
the umbral of a jump seemed completely with him, except for the botas.
He left her and looked at her in the back of the chimenea. Luego if
I felt bigger in the silla and called to the hobbits so that they could reunite
on nearby.

Today is the day of washing Baya de Oro, I say, and on
cleaning of the ear. Demasiado húmedo para los hobbits; ¡que descansen
while they can! It's a good day for many words, for prayers
and answers, so that Tom will fill the charla.

He told me many extraordinary stories, many times
cases like you talk I advise myself, sometimes wonderfully
suddenly with a brilliant blue eye below his deep eyes. At menudo


,    

his voice was converted into a song, and he rose from it
silla y bailaba. It contains stories of trees and flowers,
of the behavior of the trees and of the extrañas critters of the forest,
over things bad and good, friendly and
hostile, cruel and kind, and secretive
ocultos bajo las zarzas.

The forest, apart from such mismo, was truly felt
outside where everyone felt at home.
The Old Sauce entered and came up constantly in his conversation, y
Frodo now learned enough to be content, even more than that
enough, it may not have been a comfortable tradition. Tom's words stripped bare
the heart of the trees and their thoughts, which in the meantime were
dark and strange, and they are filled with hatred for the things that wander freely
por la tierra, royendo, mordiendo, rompiendo, desgarrando, quemando:
destroyers and usurpers. Not if you llamaba them    
for that matter, it may have been really old, a survivor of much more
that the hills, the fathers of the fathers of the trees, recording
times in which they were seniors. Los incountables años
they were filled with pride, hardened wisdom and malice. But
nadie was more hairy than the Gran Sauce: her heart
It was podrido, but on the strength it was green; y he was cunning,
and a master of the winds, and his song and his thoughts run through
the woods in Ambas Orillas del Río. On gray breathing and sitting
extra power of the land and extended as far as the branches
in the soil, and invisible dedos dedos de ramas en el aire, hasta tener
low on domain to cases all the trees of the Forest from the
Seto hasta las Colinas.

Suddenly, Tom's conversation left the woods and he was skipping away
the young arroyo, over the burbujeantes cascadas, over the guijarros and
broken rocks, and among small flowers in the thick grass and
grietas humedas, wandering to the end of the Colinas. Oyeron hablar
of the Great Tumules, and of the green mountains, and of the
stone rings on the hills and in the hollows between the hills. Las ovejas
balaban en rebaños. Green walls and white walls are raised.
Había fortalezas en las alturas. Reyes de small rhinestones


  luchaban

joints, and the young Sun shone like fire above him
red metal of his new and coded swords. Hubo victoria y
derrota; and towers cayeron, fortresses archierons and llamas
if they raised themselves to the sky. The gold settled on the coffins
the dead kings and queens; the cubrían mountains, y las
stone doors are closed; and the grass grew in all parts. The ovejas walked
a rat biting the grass, but ready the hills quedaron vacías;
los huecos con una clínica de anillos en los dedos fríos, y
. A shadow emerged from dark and dark places, and...
The hues are removed from the mountains. Los Tumularios walked with
bring the little ones. I was here before the Reyes and the...
Gold coins in the wind. Stone rings sonreían from the earth
like rotund dientes in the moonlight.

The hobbits are extreme. Even in the region we heard the rumor of it
the Tumularios de las Quebradas de los Túmulos, more at the Bosque
. But it wasn't something any hobbit would enjoy
escuchar, ni siquiera junto a acogedora chimenea lejana. These are four
they suddenly recorded the joy of this house
I lower the same slope of those fearful hills. Perdieron el
hilo of their relative and they removed themselves restlessly, looking at each other
other.

When they turned to pick up their words, they discovered that
now he has entered extrañas regions closer to his memory and
of his deserted thought, in times in which the world was
more extensive and the seas flow directly across the Western Coast; y
Tom followed singing, coming and going, under the ancient light of the stars,
when only the fathers of the Elves were despiertos. Entonces, de suddene, se
I figured out, and you'll see how you'll find out when you're wondering
I sleep. The hobbits remained immobile before them, enchanted; y
it seems like yes, below the hechizo of your words, the wind will blow
peaceful, and the clouds are dry, and the day is clear
retreated, and the dark darkness linked to the east and the west, y
all the sky is filled with the light of white stars. Frodo could not decide

it has been late morning or late for a day or many
días. No sentia
hambre ni sancio, solo estaba alleno de asombro. The stars shine
through the wind and the silence of the skies seemed


to gnaw it


 


. Habló por fin, movido por el ambra y un
I suddenly silence this silence:

Are you here, Master? he asked.

¿Eh, what?, I say Tom incorporating himself, with his eyes shining in
the penumbra. Do you still know my name? This is the only one
reply. Tell me, where are you, alone, with the same name?
But you are young and I am old. The mayor, that's what I know.
Remember my words, my friends: Tom was here before the river
and of the trees; Tom remembers the first day of rain and the first day
bellota. Opened paths before the Great People and away from them
tumbas y los Tumularios. When the Elves passed
hacia este, Tom was here, before the seas began to clear. El
they knew the darkness below the stars when they were fearless, before that
el Señor Oscuro viniera del Exterior.

A shadow seemed to pass by the wind, and the hobbits
they gazed anxiously through the crystals. When they fly again,
a sail, protecting the blade from the current of air with the hand;
shell.

The rain has ended, I say; and new running waters
This is below, below the stars. Branches and happy ones now! ¡

"Y comamos y bebamos!" shouted Tom. The large pieces
dan sed. Listen to a lot of work in the morning, in the morning, in the middle of the day
y noche! I say this, I jumped from my seat and from
a leap took a summer sail off the chimenea and ignited it
the llama that supported Baya de Oro; luego danced to the rededor de la
mesa. Suddenly, he jumped through the door and disappeared
.

Returns quickly, taking a large and charged band. Entonces
Tom and Baya de Oro pushed the table; and the hobbits remain sent, medium
marvelous and middle course: so beautiful was the grace of
Bay of Gold and many joys and outside Tom's cabriolas. Without embargo, de
in some ways they seem to have only one dance, sin
extort each other mutually, inside and outside the habitation, and the rededor of
the mesa; and with great speed, the food, the containers and the lights
they were placed in order. The bright tablas with white veils and


  yellows
. Tom gave a reverence to his guests. Dinner is on the list, I say
Baya de Oro; and now the hobbits saw that he was dressed in full
of plata with a white belt, and his zapatos were like
malla de pescado. But Tom was all clear blue, as blue as he was
nameolvides washed by the rain, and kept green media.
It was a better inclusive dinner than the previous one. The hobbits, bajo
the boy from Tom's words can be lost if he loses a piece or a lot,
but when the meal was before us, it seemed that at least a week had passed
after they were comfortable. They didn't sing or talk much
during a meeting, they were concentrated on their assumptions. But after one
time, their hearts and spirits began to rise, and their voices
they resonated with joy and laughter.
Afterwards, Baya de Oro sang many songs,
songs that began happily on the hills and descended sweetly...



Silence; and in the silences, there are charms in his minds, y  
wider waters than any one would ever know, and looking into them
the sky below sees them, and the stars as joyas in them
depths. Once again, she wished you good nights

to his families, and who know much of the history
and the accounts of the Comarca, including the most recently recorded days
among our hobbits. Don't surprise me;
but it is not the secret that should have been recently discovered
in large part to the Granjero Maggot, to whom it seems to consider one
more important person than what they imagined. «Hay
low earth his old pies and arches in his dedos; sabiduria en
your hues, and both eyes are open,” Tom said. También was
It was obvious that Tom was playing with the Elves, and quite a lot
which, in some way, brought you news from Gildor
sobre la huida de Frodo.

After all, Tom knew a lot, and so on
The questions were so cunning that Frodo met them by looking at them more.
Bilbo and his own hopes and fears of what had told him before


,


 


including Gandalf. Tom took off his head, y
a sparkle shone in their eyes at the sound of the Jinetes. ¡

Show me the precious Ring!, I suddenly die in the middle
of the history. Y Frodo, para su asombro, sacó
the chain of his ball, unbrochó the Ring and if
I sent it to Tom immediately.

It seemed to grow to rest for an instant above all
moraine hand. Suddenly, he took it to his eye
rió. For an instant, the hobbits saw a vision, in a comical way
and alarming, of his brilliant blue eye shining across a circle
dorado. Entonces Tom uses the ring at the tip of the top
I gave it away and replaced it with the light of the sail. For a moment,
The Hobbits didn't notice anything extra. Luego quedaron
boquiabiertos. Tom hasn't disappeared!

Tom comes back again, and then he turns the ring in the air
, and this disappeared with a dream. Frodo shouted, y Tom
he tilted his face and handed it back with a smile.

Frodo looked at it attentively, with a certain defiance (como quien
he lent her a baratija to a malabarista). It was el mismo Anillo, or
I had the same look and I had the same weight: that could be the ring I had
But something urged him to make sure. Quizás estaba
hoping for an opportunity, when the conversation ends.
and Tom was telling an absurd story about his people
peculiar customs; entonces if I use the ring.

Merry if I went back to say something, I was surprised
and I had an exclamation. Frodo was enchanted (en
certain way): it was on its own ring, without doubt, so Merry could hold the sight
lost in your saddle and, obviously, you couldn't see it. He rose
and if he carefully left the fire there
exterior door.

¡Eh!, shouted Tom, looking at him with one
penetrating gaze into his brilliant eyes. ¡Eh! Come on, Frodo! ¿
Where is it? The old Tom Bombadil
I'm not that blind either. Get the gold ring! Your hand is most beautiful


  since

el. ¡Vuelve! Stop playing and listen to
I'm lauding! Let's talk about it more and think about it in the morning.
Tom must learn the correct path and avoid getting your feet
desvíen.

Frodo laughed (trying to feel complacent) and, quitting it
Anillo, I wanted to hear it again. Tom les dijo que
I would believe that the sun would shine, as it would
a happy morning and leaving would be good news. But they are harian
bien en empezar temprano; pues el tempo en esa region era
something about what no one wanted Tom to be safe for a long time, y
Sometimes it changed more quickly than it took to change
chaqueta. «I'm not an expert in meteorology», I say; «it's nothing
ande sobre dos piernas».

Following this advice, they decided to head directly to the north
at home, on the western and lower slopes of the Downs:
so they could hope to meet the Camino del Este in a day
travel and avoid the graves. I say that no one will ever miss me
, who take care of their own assumptions.

If they are kept, look for green grass. Not if you use methane
Old stones, with chilly ghosts, no eyes in their homes, unless
Sean fierce and valiant, with unquenchable hearts! He said it again
once again; and I advised them that they will pass wide through the mounds of the
on the western side they are looking for someone. Luego les enseñó
a rhyme to sing, if it's bad luck to fall into someone...









 










They were ready to take on the last slope and waited without fear.
Junto a ella. They gave her a reverence, but with a gesture of her arm, she indicated to her
to return, to reach the bottom of the green...
I asked them to look at their elder; and they looked from the top of the hill.
Tierras below the morning. Now it was as clear and visible as
they were veiled and misty when they met on the mountain
of the forest, which now seemed to rise pale and green
among the dark trees of the West. In that direction, the earth
it rose on wooded crests, greens, amarillas, reds below the sun,
moreover, the Brandivino valley is hidden. Al
south, along the line of the Withywindle, there was a
I see them like a pale crystal from which the Brandivino river flows
a great meander in the low and flowing lands, disappearing of the
knowledge of the hobbits. Hacia el norte, más a la de las menguantes
lomas, the earth extended into plains and gray elevations,
green and pale colored earth, as long as it disappears in one
monotonous and dark distance. Hacia este, the Quebradas de los Mounds are raised,
crest tras crest, in the morning, and disappeared from
the view in a supposition: it was no more than a supposition of blue and
a remote white desert that merged with the edge of the sky,
but the words, through the memory and old stories, of the
altas y lontanas montañas.

They breathed deeply and felt that it was a leap
There are so many brand names that will be brought to you and that you would like to know.
Many cobards run to one side through the wrinkled ones
the edges of the lomas are on the Camino, when they should be
jumping, as vigorously as Tom, over the steps of the hills
directly hacia las Montañas.

Baya de Oro has captured and recorded its sights and
thoughts. «Corran now, queridos huéspedes!», I say. «¡Y maintain firmes en
on purpose! Hacia el norte con el wind en el ojo izquierdo y una
Blessings in your steps! ¡Dense prisa while the sun shines!».
And I say to Frodo: «Adiós, amigo elf, it was a
encuentro alegre!».

But Frodo never found words for responders. Hizo a profound reverence,
He mounted on his horse and, followed by his friends, trotted slowly


por


 


the gentle slope across the hill. Tom Bombadil's house
, the valley and the forest were lost from sight. The air flew away
warmer between the green walls of the rock and the rock, y,
flower illuminated by the sun against the sky: it stood on its feet, observing.
In the hondonada, they came to Baya de Oro, now small and slender like a
tree, with extended hands hacia ellos. Mientras
he looked at her, launched a clear call and, raising his hand,
god the turn and disappeared down the hill.

On the path he snaked across the bottom of the hill, riding
the green slopes of another steep hill
deeper and wider valley, and above the slopes of other hills, descending through
its wide branches, and suffering again by its soft blades, suffering to
new peaks and lowering to new valleys. No trees
no water visible: it was a region of hierba y
short and loose grass, silent except for the whisper of the air above them
sweethearts and lonely souls graced by strangers. To think about it
they advanced, the sun ascended and warmed. Every day
who suffered a bruise, the breeze seemed to subside.
When they saw the region hacia el est, el
The wood was apparently humid, as the rain fell again
to hum between the trees, the roots and the moho. A shadow
if now looked above the limit of the sight, a dark mist above the which
the upper sky seemed like a blue, hot and heavy gorra.

Alrededor from the middle of the day took it to a hill where the top was too
and flattened, like a shallow platter with a
hemmed green borders. The air did not flow inside, and the sky seemed to be seeking
of their heads. They went through her and looked at the north. Entonces
if they rejoiced; It may seem obvious that
I have brought you more of what I hoped for. Certainly, the distances
if they still have a grumpy and engañous taste, though
Don't worry about the fact that the hills are sticking to their end.
A wide valley extended below it, winding its way to the north, until now
attach to an opening between the loaded blades. More then,
apparently you don't have hills. Hacia el norte vislumbraron débile


 


a


wide dark line. «This is a hill of trees», said Merry, «
and this must mark the chimney." Away from it, and during many leagues
To the east of the bridge, trees grow. Some say that
they were planted in the olden days.

Late, like us who this morning, we will be abandoned
the Downs before the sun rises and we will follow trotting in search of it
of a place to camp. But while he was talking, he raised his head  
look at this and the violet that on this side the hills are
I saw and looked down on him; all those colinas estaban
crowned by green mountains, and some of them rose
vertical stones, which are pointed, arrive like sharpened stones in green tips.

This sight was disturbing; so they separated from it
paisaje and descendieron to the hueco circle. En medium
if only one stone was raised, it would lower the sun
, this time no shadow project. It was shapeless
y, sin embargo, significant: como un hito, un dedo protector, o
More information. But now they had darkness, and the sun
yet he was in the intrepid medium; so that they supported the expansion against
this side of the stone. It's as fresh as the sun
there was no power to heat it; but at this moment it seemed pleasant.
There they fed and had a drink, and enjoyed a baby food
in the open air as delicious as anything you could desire; pues la comida
it came from down the hill. Tom had made them fit
enough for a good night's sleep. Sus ponis, sin carga,
vagaban por la hierba.

Climbing over the hills, starting to satiate, the warm sun
and the aroma is stirred, tumbled for a long time, extracting
the piernas and gazing at the sky through the top of your nostrils: this is it
what are these, questions, sufficient to explain what happened. Sea como
fuere: they suddenly and inconveniently lost their knowledge
of a dream that never had the intention of returning. There
The vertical stone was frozen and projected a wide and pale shadow that extended
hacia este sobre ellos. The sun, of a pale and sharp amarillo,
it shone through the darkness just on the top of the west wall
hueco in what yacían; north, above and beyond, beyond the wall


of 180


 


, the niebla was espesa, fría y blanca. El aire was silent,
heavy and cold. Your ponies are pinned
con las cabezas gachas.

The hobbits were forced to jump, alarmed, and ran away
the niebla. Included while miraban consternados hacia las






hills that are located, the north door of the Quebradas de los Túmulos. They can pass by

Let's go! ¡Síganme! —gritó por encima del hombro
and he was ready to advance. But his hope was soon transformed into disappointment.
disoriented and alarmed. The dark things were darkened even more, but if
ecogieron; and suddenly I leave, rising up aweing before it
they tilted one hacia lightly towards the other like the pilares of
a door without a head, two huge vertical stones. No recordaba
have seen some of them in the valley when
I looked from the hill to the morning. Have passed
in these cases without giving a clue, and just to the
do it, the darkness seemed to envelop it. Let's face it
y resopló, y el se cayó. When he looked at her, he found himself
only: the others have not followed it.

¡Sam!, he shouted. ¡Pippin! ¡Merry! Let's go! So no
me sigues?

No reply. The mied took off, and I ran, passing by
the stones, shouting like a loco: ¡Sam! ¡Sam! ¡Merry! ¡Pippin! El
imagine if he escaped into the darkness and disappeared. A lo lejos,
or so, I would cry out: ¡Hoy! ¡Frodo! ¡
Hoy! Here you are, right now, right where you are, while you meet below them
large stones, gazing and struggling to penetrate the twilight. He threw it
in the direction of the called one and he found himself being beaten
choline.

As he played, he turned to calling, and continued calling
every time with more frenzy; but no response during one
time, and then it seemed débil, lejana and muy por encima de
el. ¡Frodo! ¡Hola!, llegaron las débiles voices de la nebla; y
I heard a cry that sounded like "I'm going to die, I'm going to die!" I repeat many times, ending
with a final "¡Socorro!" which was satisfied with a large moan suddenly interrupted
. He advanced on the trompicones with as much speed as possible
hacia los gritos; but the light has been satisfied, and there


night


 


if he had guessed above it, so that it was impossible to be sure of any direction. It seems to be suffering
and undergoing
constantly .
Only the change in level of the soil at your feet
he pointed to her as he finally reached the top of a ridge or hill. Estaba
cansado, sweating and, without embargo, healed. It was completely dark. "¿
Where are you?" he shouted sadly.
No reply. If he asked himself. De sudden, if
God knows that there is a lot of chill and that it gets there
he was forced to overcome a freezing wind. If there was a change
de time. The night passed on its side en jirones.



y jirones. On alien humeaba, and the darkness was  
less seeking and dense. I looked up and went away with surprise
such that small stars appear high between them
clouds and darkness that are closing in. The wind began to sound over it
hierba.

Suddenly, I thought I was crying out loud
if he directed hacia él; and as it progresses, the darkness is
he lay down and parted, revealing the starry sky. A
mirada showed her that now miraba hacia el sur y
he encountered it at the top of a red hill, which he must have climbed from there
the north. From this comes a short wind. TO
On the right side you will read against the stars of the west
dark and black shape. There a large mound arose. ¿

Where are you? I shouted again, furious and tired again.

Here!, I say a deep and sweet voice, which seems to rise
of the earth. You are waiting!

¡No!, said Frodo; but no huyó. Sus rodillas yielded
and I fell to the ground. Don't worry about anything, don't worry
no sound. Templando, he raised his sight, at one time
tall and dark figure like a shadow against the stars. If you tilted over it. Creyo
see two eyes, very fresh even illuminated by one
soft light that seemed to come from a remote distance. Entonces,
a stronger and stronger pressure that the hierro would grasp. El
Contact me coldly and no more records.


  183

When I turned back, for a moment I couldn't
record nothing more than a feeling of terror. Entonces, de suddene, supo
who was a prisoner, captured without remedy; it was in one
mound. A burial mound had seized it, and probably
You were under the terrible hechizos of the graves above
the ones who said the whispered words. He did not attempt to move, as long as he remained tense as he was
if he met: de espaldas sobre una piedra fría con las
manos en el pecho.

However, on my part it was so large that it seemed to form part of it
while you were thinking about Bilbo Bolsón and his stories, about him
joint carriages for the routes of the Comarca and charlando
of paths and adventures. I have a half of heart
hide (deeply, it is certain) in the heart of the
hobbit more greedy and timid, hoping for the last and most desperate...
Peligro to make it grow. Frodo no era ni muy gordo ni muy
shy; of course, even though he didn't know it, Bilbo (y
Gandalf considered him the best hobbit in the region. Creyo
have arrived at the end of your adventure, a
final terrible, but the idea endured. If you heard it
rigid, as if waiting for a last impulse; I didn't feel as flaccid as one
defenseless grip.

As he stood there, reflecting and recovering, he noticed
suddenly the darkness slowly gave way:
a pale green light grew on his redhead. Not at first
I told her where to find her, look for the light
it seemed to rise from the same, from the soil to
on the side, and neither was connected to the techo nor to the wall. If he turned, y
there, in the shining cold, off to Sam's side, Pippin
y Merry. They are tumbados de espaldas, con el rostrum
pale as death; dressed in white. To su alrededor yacían
many treasures, treasures of gold, even if they appear in this light
crisp and desagradable. Bring diademas,
gold cadenas at the red of the belt, and on the dedos, numerous
rings. The swords were close to his ribs and the shields were close to his feet.
But above his three hearts there was a large naked sword.


184    

Suddenly he started a song: a chilly murmur that he suffered and bajaba.
The voice seemed lejana and immeasurably lugubrious, a
sometimes high in the air and weak, sometimes like a moaning low
from the ground. Of the informant current
Sad but horrible sounds, sometimes when words are formed
: lugubrious, harsh, broken, despised and miserable words.
The night stopped against the morning of the one who was there
afflicted, and the cold cursed the heat that
I was anxious. Frodo was safe until the médula. After a trial, the
the song flew clearer, and with fear in the heart therefore
which had been converted into a conspiracy:

Frios sean the hands, the heart and the hues,


to never lose yourself again on a piece of stone,

never, until the Sun settles and the Moon dies.

In the black wind the stars will die,
and above the gold will remain here,
wait until the dark lord rises in his hand
over the dead sea and the marked earth.

Now remove a crud and a scrape from your head.
Putting himself on his arm, I looked and went away
faint light that is found in a type of passage that, trans
ellos, doblaba a esquina. At the top is the esquina, a wide arm
Tantaaba, walking over the dedos, hacia Sam, que yacía
try harder, and get the handle of the sword that was above it.

At first, Frodo felt how the enchantment had converted him
piedra. Entonces, the idea of ​​escaping struck her
. If you asked if you would place the ring, yes it
The mound will be removed less and you can meet someone
salida. He imagined himself running free through the grass, complaining
the loss of Merry, Sam and Pippin, but they are free and alive
mismo. Gandalf admitted that he didn't have it
podido hacer nada más.

But the courage that had been lost in it was now
no longer strong: you can't leave your friends so easily. He wavered


 


,


I searched for tints in my bag, and then I turned to play with my advice
; and when he did it, the arm was tightly closed. Suddenly, the resolution
I endured it and took on a short sword that I had
on the side, and leaning forward, he leaned over his bodies
companions. With the strength that quedaba, he cut it
arm that was struggling for the muñeca, and the hand was broken; but en
at the same moment the sword is stuck until it is full. Hubo
a cry and the light disappeared. In the darkness there was one
grunting.

Frodo came forward over Merry, and Merry's beak felt cold.
Of sudden, of turning back to his mind, of which he had disappeared
with the light of the night, he brought the memory of the light
house at the foot of the hill, and Tom singing. Recordó
the rhyme that Tom taught her. With one
desesperate voice came on: ¡Ho! ¡Tom Bombadil! y with ese
name on voice seems like fortalecerse: had one
full and alive sound, and the dark room sounded like a drum
a trumpet.


Joining the water, the forest and the hill, joining the canal and the sauce,

upon reaching the fire, the sun and the moon, look now and the eyes! ¡

Come, Tom Bombadil, you are looking for our need!
 
If there was a sudden and profound silence, in which Frodo could...
Escucha la corazón latir. For a long and slow moment, oh boy
with clarity, but in the light, as one descends through the...
Behind the rough walls, a voice responded singing:

The old Tom Bombadil is very happy,

bright blue on the chaqueta es, and its botas are amarillas.

Nadie brought it up again, for Tom, he is the one I love:

His songs are louder, and his songs are quicker.

Hubo a strong extrusion, as of the stones rolling y
cayendo, and suddenly a light entered, a real light, the
pure light of the day. A low opening like a door appears at the end of the door


chamber


 


, more than Frodo's feet; and there was Tom's head
(sombrero, pluma and everything) set against the light of the sun
that rose red behind it. The light falls on the ground and above
the faces of the three hobbits who came to Frodo.
They didn't film, but the enfeebled color had abandoned them. Now it seems
estar profundamente dormidos.

Tom stopped, left his sombrero and entered the dark room
cámara, singing:

¡Sal, viejo Wight! We disappear in the light of the sun!

Arrástrate like the black frost, like the winds that come,

leave the dry lands beyond the mountains! ¡

Don't go back again! Let your grave be empty!

Lost and forgotten, more dark than darkness,

where the doors remain permanently closed, until the world is repaired.

Before these words there is a grit and part of the extreme interior
the room was rumbled with a loud bang. It was a long time ago
chill that settled at an incalculable distance; y
tras eso, silencio.

¡Ven, amigo Frodo!, said Tom. ¡Salgamos a
the clean hierba! You must help me load them.

Juntos sacaron a Merry, Pippin y Sam. When
Frodo climbed the mound for the last time, he thought he was a bastard
de land caída. Tom went back in, and he looked at one
sound of many blows and attacks. When he went up,
there was a large load of treasures on his arms: objects of
gold, plata, cobre and bronce; many notes, cadenas y
adorned enjoyed. Subió to the green mound y
put them all together, below the sun.

There he was, with the sombrero in his hand and the wind in him  
the hair, and I saw it under the three hobbits, who have
it expands, over the grass of the western side of the
monículo. Raising my hand behind me, I say with a clear voice and...
an imposing voice:


 


¡


Despierten, mis alegres muchachos! Despierten y excúchenme calle!

¡Calienten now your hearts and extremities! The cold stone has fallen; there

Puerta Oscura if kept open; the dead hand is broken. ¡

The night below the night is quiet, and the door is open!

For Frodo's great joy, the hobbits were filmed, they were drawn to him
arms, they rubbed their eyes and suddenly they stood up. Miraron
to his elder with his shadow, first to Frodo, and then to Tom,
of the feet, enormous as my life, on the top of the mound above them; y luego
to you together with your white, crowned and dark haired ones
with pale gold, and clinking with baratijas.

"What demons?" Merry began, touching him
golden circle that had slipped over one eye. Entonces if
I found out, and a shadow was on its beak, and I would look for it
ojos. “Clearly I remember it!”, I say. Los hombres de Carn
Dum our attacks at night, and we were derrotados. ¡Ah! There
lance in my heart! I'll grab the pecho. No! ¡No!, I say
opening the eyes. What do I say? I was dreaming
. Where are you from, Frodo?

I thought I was lost, I say Frodo; but I don't want to
talk about it. Let's think about what we have now! ¡Sigamos
! ¿

Are you dressed like this, sir?, I say Sam. Where is it from me
ropa? He pulled on the diadem, belt and rings on the grass and
I looked at Alredador with helplessness, as one would hope to meet his head,
chaqueta, trousers and other hobbit socks pulled on someone
lugar a mano.

Don't meet your new clothes, Tom says, slowly
from a leap of the mountain and I return while bailaba alrededor
de ellos in the light of the sun. I had to think that nothing
they lost their hearts while they looked at it and saw it
brillo alegre en sus ojos.

Perplejos and medium fun. Why not?

But Tom denied it with his head, saying: «They have met
new, out of the depths. The stuff is a little lost
they escape from ahogarse. ¡Alégrense, my happy friends,


y
say that the warm light of the sun makes your heart and your extremes hot! Quitense
these fries! They run naked through the grass while Tom goes up
de caza!»


 



He jumped down the hill, singing and calling.
Frodo, looking at him from the moment he arrives, sets off running towards the south
through the green hill between the hill and the next, without leaving
de silbar y gritar:

«¡Eh! ¡Ahora! Let's go, now! Where do you wander from? ¿

Arrive, below, look for or leave, here, there or there?

Orejas Puntiagudas, Nariz Sabia, Cola Suelta y Patán,

White Calcetines, I am very small, and the old Ternero Gordo."

So he sang, running quickly, throwing his sombrero and catching it
, as long as this was hidden by a fold of the ground; but during a
ratted on «¡Eh, ahora! ¡Hoy, ahora!» flew around floating with the wind,
who had turned to the south.

The air was flying very warm again. Los hobbits corrieron
a rat for the grass, while it counts. Luego if
they tumbled in the sun with the deleite of the people they had sido
transported suddenly from the harsh winter to a pleasant climate, or from
people who, through a large illness and on the road, pass away for a day
and discover that they are unexpectedly good and that the day turns to be
lleno de promesas.

For when Tom returned, they felt stronger
(and hambrientos). Reapareció, first the sombrero, by the top of the
Colina, and away from it came in an obedient row six ponis:
five of them and one more. The last one was, without a doubt, the old Gordo
Ternero: he was bigger, stronger, more handsome (and older) than
its own ponis. Merry, to whom the others belong,
Of course they didn't have these names, but they responded
to the new names that Tom had given her for the rest of
your lives. Tom called him one by one and treparon
through the top they formed a line. Entonces Tom hizo a reverencia a los
hobbits.


  189

(in a certain way) that you, wandering hobbits, hold, more
they enter directly; Y you run to save yourself, run
by the good fireplace. You must forgive everyone; pues aunque sus
hearts are fieles, no fueron created for the minedo to the Tumularios
. Mira, here they come again, taking everyone
sus cargas!

Merry, Sam and Pippin met with
clothes of repuesto de sus mochilas; and I'm ready to feel the heat demasiado, pues
they were forced to put on tighter and tighter clothes.
What they have learned for the winter season. ¿
Here they have a good game for Tom and his wife! ¡Qué bonito!»
 
Where is this other old animal, this Ternero Gordo?
Where does it come from? asked Frodo.

It's mine, I say Tom. My friend of four potatoes; anyway
rare vez I mount it, ya menudo vaga lejos, free for them
leaders. When you meet me, you get to know each other
to me Lumpkin; I oiled it for the night
they delivered quickly to your destination. He thought that he would search for them and with him
I'll tell you all about it. But now, I'm happy
Lumpkin, the old Tom goes to cabalgar. ¡Oye! It comes contiguous
, only to walk in the fireplace; so a question is needed. Porque
It's not easy to talk to hobbits who are together, when you're above
you own piernas trying to trotar joint to ellos.

The hobbits were very happy to see this and gave thanks to Tom
many times; but they returned and I said they were so difficult
to get lost that no longer will you feel happy
they were seen safely on the other side of the frontiers of their country. I keep things
that I do, I say: I create myself and I sing, I charla y
I walked, and I observed the field. Tom can't be
always look for open doors and crujidos of sauces. Tom holds on
home in mind, and Baya de Oro hopes for it.

Todavía was quite hardened to the sun, among the new
and last month, the hobbits concentrated on the meal. On
The last meal had the bag next to the monolith of the day
anterior. Desayunaron con lo que les quedaba de las


190    

Tom's provisions, intended for dinner, and with Tom
had been traído. No it was a copious meal (considering a
the hobbits and the surroundings), but they are much better
. As they started, Tom went to the mountain
he put aside what shined above the grass. I ordered him that
they will ask all the books of the one who will meet him, he will have beasts, Elves and men, and
all bonded creatures; the piece of the mountain may then break
and it would be scattered, and no Tumulario would be jammed. Eligio
of the montón a broche with blue stones engastated,
of multiple fabrics, such as linen flowers or blue mariposas.
He contemplated it extensively, as one would lose experience of it when he was reading it
the head and finally saying: «

Which takes a long time to shine on this man. Baya de Oro
I'll clear it now, so we won't forget it!» .

To prevent one of the hobbits from falling, he chose a large dagger,
with a hoja and sharp shape, a marvelous workmanship, damask
with snake shapes in red and gold. Brillaron al
Sacarlas of their black cows, strong of a
extraño metal, light and strong, and with many etched fire stones.
Ya sea for some virtue in these valleys or for them
hey who was on the hill, the hojas seem intact
over time, without oxide, sharpened, shining in the sun.

The old cuchillos are as wide as swords for the people of the hobbits,
I say. It's good to have sharpened hojas, if the people of the Comarca go to
walking, in the east, in the sun, leaves the darkness and the danger. Luego
I say that these hojas were strong for many years ago
for Western men: they were enemies of the Dark Lord,
but they were killed by the evil king of Carn Dum en la
Land of Angmar.

A little while ago, Tom murmured, but still
some wander, forgotten souls who walk in solitude
, protecting from evil things to people who are descuidada.

The hobbits do not read their words, but within the words
you saw a vision like a great extension of past years
of them, like a vast cloud, shadowed above what they walked


  191

figures of men, tall and severe with shining swords, and finally
I brought someone with a star in the front. Once the vision faded, y
They are spinning in the world illuminated by the sun. It was time to start again.
If they prepared, packed their bags and packed their ponies.
Your new weapons are attached to your lower body belts
These items will be of any use. Luchar never happened before
to none of them like one of the adventures in which he lives
los llevaría.

From the end they left. Condujeron a sus ponis colina abajo;
and then, as they mounted, they quickly trotted down the valley. Miraron
reach and see the top of the old mountain on the hill,
and from there the light of the sun rose above the gold like one
llama amarilla. Luego doubled a rellano of the Quebradas and disappeared
of the sight.

Although Frodo looked at his elder, I didn't go anywhere.
the earth extended before us. It was a happy journey with
raster of the large stones that rise like a door, and in a short time...
They took the north brecha and crossed it at full speed, with
Jinetes Negros suddenly invaded them. Desde que...
Tom Bombadil trots happily towards the ellos, or away from the ellos,
to the people of Gordito Ternero, who could move much more quickly than the one above
corpulent prometía. Tom sang most of the time, but it was mainly
They will ask you, or quiz you on an extraneous and unknown language for them
hobbits, an ancient language where words were mainly
de asombro y deleite.

They advanced with step by step, but soon they saw him
Camino was bigger than what they had imagined. Included left
no, the dream of the middle day has prevented them
Take it until after the previous day. There
the dark line they saw was not a hill of trees, but a hill of shrubs
that grow at the edge of a deep dike with a wall left behind
other side. Tom said that once he was at the front
a king, but it took a long time. Parecía recordar
Somewhat sad in comparison, and I can't say much about that.

They lowered and climbed the dique, crossing a gap
on the wall, and then Tom turned towards the north, they may have been there


directing    

lightly to the west. The ground was despoiled
and they shouted enough, and they quickened their pace, but the sun
you asked yourself when you finally saw a hilera of
taller trees closer, and higher than they have returned to
Camino after many unexpected adventures. Galoparon bajo la
shadow of the trees. They stand on the top of a sloping slope,
and the Camino, now dark at night, snaked
bajo ellos. At this point there were cases from the South to the
Now, the right side will descend quickly and there will be a wide one
hondonada. It was filled with message boards and showed many signs from the recent one
torrential rain; It had plenty of water and lots of water.

They walked over to the side and looked at one side of the other. No
there was nothing true. ¡Good, so we're here again!, I say
Frodo. I suppose we won't have lost more than two days with me
attack by the forest! But let's take a look at the sea
useful; you may have strayed from the path.

The others looked at him. The shadow of the honey
he had entered the forest. They have mainly thought about it
to the fireplace; only now, when yacía bajo sus pies,
They recovered the criminal who pursued them, and it was
It's very probable that they will burn them in it
mismo Camino. They looked anxiously at the rising sun,
but the Camino was brown and deserted. «

¿Creen?” asked Pippin waveringly, “¿creen que nos
perseguirán esta noche?» .

«No, I hope not this night», replied Tom Bombadil; «no
quizás al dia siguiente». But don't confine my assumption; because I can't
ensure it. In this case, my knowledge is failing. Tom no es
señor de Jinetes de la Tierra Negra, much more above
country.

However, the hobbits would like to accompany him.
I think he knew how to deal with black men,
if someone knew it. Ready if you enter it
completely unfamiliar lands for them, and most of all, except for the vaguest letters and letters of the Comarca, and in the twilight
what
he had,
añoraban el hogar. A deep sadness and a feeling
to lose the embargoes. If they asked in silence, react to it
final dispatch, and only slowly did they learn what Tom was
I'll send them away and say that they'll feel good
and that will take place until the end of the year.
Tom will give you good advice until the end of the day (after
, I will accompany you and guide you on your own page): four
Bree-hill, with doors that face the west. There they will meet one
It is the worthy guardian. There you can spend the night, y
after the morning he will open up on his fireplace. ¡Sean
valiant, but cautious! Maintain happiness and humor at the same time
of his luck!
They asked her that she would be at least as long as she was at the lodge
drinking bottle once more with ellos; but the river was denied,
saying: «
Tom's country ends here: no crossing the front.
Tom keeps his house in mind, ¡y Baya de Oro expects it!».
Entonces if God the turn, if he quit the sombrero, he jumped to
Lumpkin's men and cabalgó on the shore and went singing on the
darkness.
The hobbits suffered and observed him until he was lost
by sight.
—Lamento despedirme by Maestro Bombadil —dijo Sam—.
I deny that it will make me happy to see this Poni Pisador of what he said. I hope...


 










 
It's a warning, no doubt. I think we can read them.
Sigan adelante and no one sees anything better than anything else. But no
On those days, no other man has been stable there for a long time.
It will be like El Dragón Verde at home. This class of
fólicos son esos en Bree?

Hay hobbits en Bree, dijo Merry, así como
Great People. I'll wait to decide that hogareño will be enough. El Poni is a good one
posted according to all information. My people go riding there every time.

It may be all that we might desire, I say Frodo; but it's outside of
the Region of all ways. They are not as old as they are


house


 


! Please remember all of you who are named
Bolsón NO need to be mentioned. Soy el Sr. Bajocolina, yes es que
hay que dar algún nombre.

Now they mounted their ponies and rode silently to each other
the night. The darkness descended rapidly as they walked
Slowly this lowers and this arrives again, until finally the lights come on
sizzling at a certain distance.

Ante ellos the hill of Bree rose, blocking the fireplace, a dark mass
against the cloudy stars; and on the western side there is a lot of growth
aldea. There they were surprised, just wanting to meet someone
fire and a door between us and the night.


 Bree


 


she was the main lady of the Tierra de Bree, a little one
inhabited region, like an island in the lands vacated by elders. Ademas de
Bree, she was Staddle on the other side of the hill,
Combe in a deep valley a little further to the east, and Archet,
a small region of domesticated fields and woods
of only a few thousand too.

Bree's men were brown-haired, even and sufficient
low, leisure and independent: they do not belong to nadie
more than to the same ones; but they were more friendly and familiar with
the hobbits, enans, elves and other inhabitants of the world
that they rode away from what was (or is) habitual among the Big People. Next
their relatives were the original inhabitants
descendants of the first men who wandered there
West of the Middle World. Little did they overlive the turbulences of it
the Old Days; But when the Reyes regresaron por el
Great Sea, they met the Hombres de Bree again there, y
they were also at the moment, when the memory of the ancient Reyes was
desvanecido entre la hierba.
Tierras salvajes más alá de Bree had mysterious wanderers.

to the west, or less than any other region of the Comarca. But in el...
The inhabitants of Bree call them Montañeros and ignore them
on origin. They were taller and darker than the men of
Quick and thought that they would pose extraños poderes of sight
I hear, and I understand the idioms of the beasts
y las aves. They wander at will to hacia el sur y hacia este,
including hasta las Montañas Nubladas; but now they were
few and rare times he saw it. When they appear, they move
read news and read extrañas forgotten stories that were published with


enthusiasm    

; but the inhabitants of Bree do not have friends
of them.

He also has many hobbit families in the Land of Bree;
and they affirmed that it was the oldest hobbit admiration of the
world, founded much before including
that the Brandevino was bred and the Comarca was colonized. Vivian mainly
in Staddle, although he had some in his own Bree, especially
on the highest slopes of the hill, above the men's houses.
The Big People and the Little People (how they are called together)
they maintain a friendly relationship, taking care of their own associates
way, but both, with reason, if considered
a peculiar (but excellent) necessary accessory.

The people of Bree, Grande y Pequeña, no viajaba





more in the village, and in times past, "Hombres and other folics
de Bree" was also a saying in the East, coming from those days, when
they were watching
news from the North, the South and the East in the lodge, and when the hobbits of the Region
only Ir more to menudo to escucharlas. But the Tierras del Norte
they have been desolate for a long time, and the Camino del Norte now rarely
if it was used: it was covered with grass, and the people of Bree called it
Green Chimney.
Without embargo, the Bree Posada followed there, and the Posadero
he was an important person. At home it was a place to stay
the curious, the curious and the curious among the great inhabitants
and little ones, of the four towns; and a refuge for the Montaraces y
other wanderers, and for travelers (in most of them) who
they also travel along the Camino del Este, hacia and from the mountains.
It was dark and shining white stars when Frodo and

 
Their companions arrived at the crossroads of the Via Verde and
if they went to the village. They went to the Puerta Oeste and met
if he tries; but in the door of the cabin that was further away, there was a
heard man. He jumped, grabbed an internal light
I looked at him on the top of the door, surprised.

“What do they want and where do they come from?”, he asked
with brusquedad.


198    

We headed to the lodge —Frodo replied—. Viajamos
Hacia este and we can't follow this night.

¡Hobbits! Four hobbits! Y, además, fuera de la Comarca
, as they say - I'll say the door in your voice, how to talk I recommend
mismo. I looked at them carefully with my eyes dark for an instant, and then
slowly opened the door and let them pass.

Let's not go to the people of the Comarca riding along the Camino de noche - he continued
, to take a moment near the door—. Forgive me
I'm wondering what hires they'll take them to this day
Bree. How do you call, if you allow me to ask?

—Our names and our assumptions are our thing, and this
It doesn't seem like a good place to talk about them - I say Frodo, without tasting them
the sight of the man nor the tone of his voice—.

These assumptions are the right thing, without doubt —I say to the man—; but
It's my assumption that I'll ask you again.

We are hobbits of Los Gamos, and we like it
just with the travellers, or they were wearing it.

—De acuerdo, de acuerdo! —I say the man—. No quise to offend him. But
quizá discover that more people than old Harry in the door
you will have questions. There are people outside for ahí. Yes
They go to El Poni, they will discover that they are not the only ones there.

I wished them good nights, and didn't say anything more; but
Frodo could see the light of the lantern that the man followed
observing them with curiosity. He was happy to hear the metallic sound of the door behind him
between them, while cabalgaban hacia adelante. He wondered why it was
man was so suspicious, and some people were wondering
for news from a group of hobbits. Could you be like Gandalf?
Quizzes will take place while they are demoraban in the forest
y las Colinas. But there was something in sight and there
voice of the porter that disturbed him.

The man stood looking at the hobbits for a moment, and then
returned to his home. En cuanto se god la vuelta, un
a dark figure quickly appeared at the door and disappeared inside
the shadows of the street of the village


  .
 
The hobbits underwent a gentle slope, passing just a few moments
the houses are laid out, and they are located in front of the lodge. The houses
they seemed large and extrañas. Sam contemplated the posada de
three steps and many winds, and I felt a great deal.
You had imagined meeting giants taller than the trees
other creatures will land even more, at any time
from on travel; but at this moment, the first vision of the men and their high homes seemed to her
sufficient, including
longed for, for the dark end of a longing day. If he imagined
black horses nestled in the shadows of the patio of the lodge,
and Black Jinetes asomándose por las obscures superior ventanas. «

I'm sure we're not going to spend the night here, in truth,
señor?” he exclaimed. «Yes there are hobbits here, ¿
so we don't look for anyone who is willing to help us
? Sería más acogedor.

What's wrong with the lodge?”. —I say Frodo. Tom Bombadil
I recommend it. I suppose there is enough comfort inside.

Even from the outside, the lodge seemed like a pleasant home
familiar eyes. He had a facade that faced the fireplace and two wings
which extend further over partially closed terrain on the lower slopes of
the hill, so that on the left side the winds of the second floor were standing
at ground level. It had a wide arch that led to a
patio between the two wings, ya la izquierda, bajo el
arch, had a large door which was accessed via large stairs.
The door was open and the light emanated from it. Over el
the bow had a lamp, and I had to take a large bed with it
: a white and gorgeously encrusted pose on your leftover patas. Over there
door was painted in white letters: el poni brincando, de
Barliman Butterbur. Much of the lower vents are shown
luces tras gruesas cortinas.

While they were wondering outside in the darkness, someone else came
to sing a happy song inside, and many happy voices joined together
en voz high to the choir. Escucharon este sonodo alentador
for a moment and then his ponis appeared. The song ended
and I'm full of laughter and applause.

They took the bow from their lower ponies and left them
on the patio, under the stairs. Frodo advanced


two hundred meters


 


y choca cases with a short and gordo, bald man
y with the dear roja. Take a white and salty piece of paper
everyone started through one door and entered through another, with one
bandaja llena de jarras llenas.

—¿Podemos? —empezó Frodo—. ¡

Middle minute, please! —gritó el hombre por encima del
man, and disappeared into a sea of ​​voices and a cloud of
hum. In an instant he went back up, cleaning his hands
el delantal.

—¡Good nights, I love! —I say, agachándose—. ¿Qué
is it necessary?

Camas para four and establo para five ponies, if possible
. Are you señor Mantecona?

As it is! I love Barliman. ¡Barliman Mantecona a
on service! Are you tired of the region, huh? —dijo, y de
suddenly he raised his hand to his front, as he intended
record algo—. ¡Hobbits! —gritó—. ¿A qué
do you remember this? Can I ask your names, ladies?

—Señores Tuk y Brandigamo —dijo Frodo—; and this example
Sam Gamgee. I love Underhill.






 






Apparently capable of a long conversation, no matter what
the habitation. He had a little bright fire burning in the chimenea,
and in front of it there were some low and comfortable seats.
Has a red table, ya covered with a white cloak,
and above it there was a large bell. But Nob, the hobbit servant,
He entered unexpectedly long before they thought about calling. Trajo
veils and a band full of platos.

—¿Would you like something to drink, love? —asked—.
And I see the dormitories, while they are
are you preparing dinner?

They are washed in the middle of good jars
of the head when Señor Mantecona and Nob returned to enter. En a
open and close the eyes, the table was quiet. Había sopa caliente, flames,
a blackberry tart, fresh bread, mantequilla lonch and medium
this cured: good simple food, as good as the region could offer,


202


 


and hogareña sufficiently to unravel Sam's last questions
(I am much encouraged by the excellence of the wine).

The landlady was queried for a while and the place was prepared
to dejarlas. No one would like to join
to the company after dinner, dijo, de pie
in the door. Sometimes they prefer to go to their house. Aún so
to the company; We will be delighted to give you a welcome, yes
so I desire it. We do not recibimos Forasteros —viajeros de
the Comarca, I will say, with pardon—a menudo; y nos
Enjoy listening to some news, or any story or song you have
in mind. But come here! ¡Touch the bell if it rings
something!

So fresh and animated they felt at the end
dinner (one of three hours continues,
without interruptions from unnecessary characters) that Frodo, Pippin and
Sam decided to join the company. Merry tell you who would be
demasiado loaded. I will feel here peacefully towards the fire, y
quizás salga more late to breathe a little. Take care of things
, and don't forget that you are supposed to escape from it
secret, and which is still on the real path and not much more
the Comarca!

¡De acuerdo!, said Pippin. ¡Cuidado! Don't bother me, y
Don't forget that it's safer to be inside!

The company was in the large common room of the lodge.
The meeting was large and varied, as Frodo discovered
when their eyes were accustomed to the light. This came mainly from
a chimenea of ​​lighted wood, you can place the three lamps that are connected to the lamps
they were small and they were medium in humidity. Barliman Mantecona estaba
de foot searches for fire, talking with a pair of enanos and one
or two extra-looking men. On the counters there were various
folic: hombres de Bree, a group of local hobbits (sentados
charlando), some more and more
vague figures that are difficult to distinguish in the shadows and the rincones.

When the hobbits of the Comarca entered, a choir was heard
welcome to the inhabitants of Bree. Los forasteros, especially
those who have undergone the Camino Verde, they admired


  with

curiosity. The owner presented it to the guests there
people of Bree so quickly that, even though they learned many names,
Rarely are they safe for someone who belongs to them. Los hombres
de Bree parecían tener todos
sufficient botanical names (and for the people of the region sufficient extraños), such as Rushlight, Goatleaf, Heathertoes
, Appledore, Thistlewool y Ferny (unmentioned
Mantecona). Some hobbits have similar names.  
Artemisas, for example, seem numerous. But the mayoría...
Tenían natural names, like Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes,
Sandheaver and Tunnelly, many of which are used there
Comarca. Había varios Underhills de Staddle, y como
I couldn't imagine sharing a name without being parientes,
They returned to Frodo in his hearts as a first time spent.

Bree's hobbits were, in fact, friendly and inquisitive, and Frodo quickly discovered that
tendría que dar
some explanation of what I was doing. Explain what it was
interested in history and geography (before this very hub
meneos of head, although none of these are spoken
used a lot in Bree dialect). I said I was thinking about it
write a book (before this hubo a silent dream), y
that he and his friends wanted to copy the information above
the hobbits who live outside the Comarca, especially in the eastern lands
.
Before this, he installed a choir of voices. Yes Frodo really hubiera
I wanted to write a book and I would have many notes, I would have it.
And for a little while, they gave you a complete list of
names, working for the Old Barliman, here
you can read more to get more information. But after a while, like Frodo
no God signals to write a book at this moment, los
hobbits turned to their questions about what happened there
Comarca. Frodo was not very communicative and ready
he found himself alone in a ring, listening and looking
to his neighbor.
Los Hombres and los Enanos talk mainly about
success stories and news from a guy who was wanting to be loved
familiar. I had problems in the South, and quite a few
that the men who have joined the Camino Verde are there
movement, searching for lands where they can encounter something peaceful. The people of Bree were understanding, but clearly not
estaba    
muy dispuesta
to accommodate a large number of extras on your small land. A
of the travelers, a bizarre and feo-looking guy, predecía
that every day more people would travel to the north
a near future. If there is no space for them, they will find it
por si mismos. I want to live, just like everyone else.





I say in a loud voice. Local inhabitants do not seem complacent with
the perspective.
a nadie por qué prisa. But there is no way to count it.
 
The hobbits didn't pay much attention to all of this, ya que...
At this moment the hobbits didn't seem to worry. The Great People
it would be difficult to beg for accommodation from hobbit teachers. Estaban
most interested in Sam and Pippin, here they are now hearing
at home and chat happily about the events there
Comarca. Pippin caused a lot of laughter with a story
of the derrumbe of the techo of the Agujero de la Ciudad en Michel
Delving: Will Whitfoot, el Alcalde, y el hobbit más gordo de
Westfarthing, had entered the room and went up
like a bola de masa enharinada. But if there are any questions asked
which worried Frodo a little. One of the Breelandeses
, who seemed to have been in the region several times,
I wanted to know where the Underhills live and with them
estaban emparentados.

Suddenly, Frodo noticed that a man was sickened by the weather and external appearance
, left in the shadows looking for the wall, also
carefully read the character of the hobbits. He had a tall jar
tallada. Their piernas are pulled in front of them, showing
a high butt of flexible leather that feels good, but they are old
much used and now they are cubiertas de barro. A
cape missing for travel, of thick dark green cloth, wrapped it,
If you weighed the heat of the habitation, you took a cap off that
they cut the beak; but the shine of his eyes faded
while watching the hobbits.

"Where is this?" asked Frodo, when I had the opportunity to whisper to her.
to Señor Mantecona. I don't think it was presented?


  ¿

Here, I say the rest in a whisper of response, leaving
an eye without turning my head. Not exactly. Ex
one of the wanderers, the Montañeros we call. Rare vez
habla: no need to tell a rare story when it happens
. It disappears during a month, or a year, and then returns
to appear. It came and rose enough to finish the spring;
but I haven't seen him here lately.
I don't even know what his real name is, but that's why they knew him as Trancos. Go
a light walk over his large patas; however it cannot be distinguished
por el Este and el Oeste, as tenths in Bree, referring to the Montaraces
and the people of the Comarca, with pardon. It's curious that
ask for him. But at this moment they called Mr. Mantecona.
that they looked for more, and in the last comment that came
sin explicación.

Frodo discovered that Trancos marveled at him, as he did
I've heard or understood everything I said. Ensegueda, with
a gesture of the hand and a tilt of the head invited Frodo to look
and feel yourself on the side. When he looked for himself, Frodo saw himself behind the hood,
leaving to the descubierto an expensive dark cabellera with gray mechones, and it
a pale and severe beak, a pair of penetrating gray eyes.

«I call you Trancos», I say in my voice. "Me
I am very happy to meet you, I love... Bajocolina, if old Mantecona has been confirmed with
your name."

“Yes,” Frodo said stiffly. It didn't feel comfortable at all
below the penetrating gaze of those eyes.

«Good, I love Bajocolina», I say Trancos, «yes I was you,
It would prevent your young friends from talking too much." «Beber
It's not the Comarca. There are rare people here." Anyway I say it
as no debería, you can think, added with an ironic smile,
to the truth the view of Frodo. Y úlatemente habido
We traveled even further by Bree, he continued, observing
Frodo's beak.

Frodo gave her the miracle, but I didn't say anything; y Trancos
no god no other signal. On attention it seemed to suddenly happen
Pippin. To alarm him, Frodo realizes how ridiculous he is


young


 


Tuk, animated by his exit with the gordo mayor of
Michel Delving was now giving a comical speech
Bilbo's expedition party. You were doing an imitation
of the Discourse and he was looking for the shadowy one
Disappearance.

Frodo was annoying. It was a fairly harmless amount for the mayor
de los hobbits locales, sin duda: solo una historia divertida sobre esa
more fun people at the Rio; but some (the old one
Mantecona, for example) know one thing or two, and probably have
The loud noises lasted a long time over Bilbo's disappearance. Les traeria
Remember the name of Bolsón, above all yes
In short, you have some insights into this name.

Frodo removed himself, without knowing what to do. It was evident that Pippin
I enjoyed a lot of the attention I received
if he had forgotten all about the danger that ran. Frodo saw a sudden
I'm afraid that, in my current state of mind, I could even mention the "¡  
Anillo; and this could be disastrous.

It will be better to do it faster!" Trancos whispered to her
oído.

Frodo jumped, stood on a table and began to talk.
Pippin's public attention was disturbed. Some
hobbits looked at Frodo, laughed and applauded, thinking
that Señor Underhill had taken back as much brain as he did
it suited her.

Suddenly, Frodo felt very stupid and met (as
it was customary when he gave a speech) toqueteando the things of
on bolsillo. Sit the ring on its chain and, of a sufficiently inexplicable shape,
The desire to pose and disappear invaded him
of the stupid situation. It seemed to her, in some ways, as it were
the suggestion is to make wine from other people, from someone else or from someone else,
and prevent any damage from escaping or happening. In any case
case, no he breathed anything into her. He pronounced unas
Adequate words, as I have said in the Region: «We are all muy
Thank you for the kindness of your reception, and I loved it
to hope that my short visit helps to renew the old laces of friends within the


  Region

y Bree». Y entonces dudó
y tosió.

Everyone in the house admires it. «¡A song!»,
shouted one of the hobbits. «A song! ¡A song!», everyone shouted
more. «Let's go, I love, sing something like that
no hayamos oído antes!».

For a moment, Frodo wondered. Entonces, desperado,
I started a ridiculous song for Bilbo
I had enjoyed them enough (and after all, it was quite proud, perhaps the same person had invented the letter
). It was above a lodge; and probably for this reason
come to Frodo's mind at this moment. Here it is complete.
Now, by general rule, only if you remember a few words.

There's a place, a happy place and a old place
bajo una vieja colina gris,

and there they elaborate such a dark mystery
that the most beautiful man of the moon was born
one night to drink hasta saciarse.

El mozo de cuadra has a gato achispado

who plays a five-string violin;

and from the bottom it moves on the arch,

now chilling high, now ronroneando low,
ahora aserrando en el medio.

The landowner has a perrito
to which the bromas enchant them;

When there is good spirit among the guests,

It sharpens the oído before all the bromas
y se ríe hasta ahogarse.

They also keep a cornuda vaca
as proud as any queen;

But the music turns the head like the back,

And it makes her shake her hair
y bailar sobre el verde.


208


 


¡Y ay! ¡las hileras de platos de plata
and the sheep of plata cucharas!

For the domingo* there is a special par,

Y estos pulen con esmero
los sábados por la tarde.

The Man of the Moon was drinking deeply,
and the cat began to cry;

A table and a table dance on the table,

The holiday in the garden was drunk locally,
and the perrito pursued him.

The Man of the Moon went to another jar,
and then I rolled the bottom of my saddle;

And there I slept and slept with my head,

Wait for the pale stars to shine in the sky,
and the lover was in the air.

Entonces el mozo de cuadra I tell you about your gato achispado:

 The white horses of the Moon,

Relinchan and click their plate brakes;

But I love it if it goes somewhere,
y pronto saldrá el sol!

As the cat on his violin played hey-diddle-diddle,
a jig that would desperate the dead:

I'll chill, tighten and speed up the melody,
while the landowner sacudia to the Man of the Moon: ¡

 Son más de las tres!, dijo.

Rodaron al Hombre slowly arrives
y lo metieron en la Luna,

while their horses gallop away,

and the vaca took him toasting like a deer,
and a while ago I went through running with the cuchara.





  209

Now more quickly the violin is deedle-dum-diddle;
the dog began to roar,

the vaca and the horses should be removed from their heads;

all the guests left their rooms
y bailaron en el suelo. ¡

With a ping and a pong, the violin keys will be broken!
The cow jumped over the moon,

and the perrito returned to the truth so much diversion,

and I ran up the Saturday platoon
with the cuchara de plata del domingo.

The red moon rolled away from the hill
while the sun was rising the head.

She could barely believe what her eyes called;

you can, even if it was daytime, for your surprise,
todos volvieron a la cama.

I received a loud and prolonged applause. Frodo was happy
voz, and the song enchanted you. "Where is the old Cebada?",
gritaron. Debería oír esto. Bob should teach his cat
to touch the violin, and then we dance. Pidieron more
They looked and started shouting: "Once again, I love you! Let's go
! ¡Otra vez!" .

I knew Frodo was drinking another cup, and then he started again
song, while many are united; now the melody was
well known, and they were quick to learn the words.
Now it was Frodo's turn to feel complacent advice. Brinco
for the table; and when I returned to
caer, ¡zas!, in a bandja full of jars,
he tossed and broke the table with a ¡coup!, ¡
y a coup! The public opened their mouths
I laughed and was taken with me in a sepulchral silence; pues the singer


, the elves (and the hobbits) always refer to the Sun like Ella.


210


 


disappeared. Simply disappeared, as it was crossed
el suelo sin dejar rastro!

The hobbits of the place were quedaron atónitos, and where they were pusieron
from the foot of a leap and shouted calling to Barliman. Everyone was apart
of Pippin and Sam, they met alone
in a ring, looking at them with the gift and wondering from the distance.
It was clear that many still considered him comrades
of a magician traveling with farms and
unknown purposes. But there was an inhabitant of Bree, of the third moraine, who
He looked at them with a complicit and half-joking expression
which inconvenienced him. Followed up
through the door, I followed the sureño bizco: los
I was whispering a lot during the conversation
night.

Frodo felt like a fool. Without knowing what more to do, he escaped
below the mesas until the dark rincón reaches Trancos, who will remain
immovable, without giving signals of your thoughts. Frodo was reassured
against the wall and left the ring.
I couldn't explain how I read it. You could only guess what it was
I had been manipulating my bag while I was singing, and that
in some way they slipped when extending the hand with
A tug to save your fall. For a moment he wondered about the ring
and what would be revealed. Are we all conspiring?
Anillo himself didn't have a bad time; so often he tried to reveal it
in response to some desire the order that was perished in it
the habitation. She didn't like the look of the men who had climbed up
.

¿Y bien?, I say Trancos to the reaparecer. ¿Por qué hiciste
eso? Please remember what your friends might have to say! ¡Metiste
the pat! Or should I decide with the answer?

No se a que te refieres, I say Frodo, annoying y
alarmed.

Ah, yes you know it, Trancos replied; but it will be better than we hope for
when the trees calm down. Entonces, please, señor
Bolsón, I would enjoy talking peacefully with you. ¿

What is it about? asked Frodo, ignoring the sudden use of su
own name.



 




















 


For a long time no one was more than Trancos, who felt, inadvertent, towards
the wall.

Most likely, at home I will return to being full of many
future nights, until the present mystery is over
I discuss it thoroughly. Now what have you been doing, Señor Underhill?,
he asked. Helping my customers and destroying them
vasijas con tus acrobacias!

I complain a lot about having caused problems —I say Frodo—.
It was totally inadvertent, if I'm sure. A
unfortunate accident.

¡De acuerdo, Sr. Underhill! But we're going to have fun
more piruetas, or conjurors, or what is, will be better
who warned people with anticipation, and warned me. So let's unpack a little
no matter what was common; it's extraño, yes
entiende me; and we don't like it suddenly.

No need to do anything, Sr. Butterbur,
if I promise. And now I think I'm going to come over. Saldremos
they temper. You will be sure that our ponis
estén listos a las ocho? ¡

Much love! But before that, I would love to talk with him
usted in private, Sr. Underhill. Acabo
to record something I have to tell you. I hope not
it makes him sick. When you finish with a couple of things, I'm back
a tu habitación, si quieres.

¡Claro!, said Frodo; but her heart was praised. If he asked
how many private conversations would tend to come closer, ¿
 in
on contra? I started to suspect that even
el rostro gordo del viejo Mantecona ocultaba obscures designs.




 


Frodo, Pippin and Sam returned to the hall.
No light. Merry wasn't there, and there was fire
paid. It wasn't until the braises were alive
and they picked up a few woods that they had discovered
that Trancos had come with them. ¡Allí estaba,
I felt calmly in a saddle at the door!

¡Hola!, I say Pippin. What are you and what do you want?

I call you Trancos, responded; and you can do that anyway
If you forgot it, your friend promises to have a quiet chat
with me.

Say that I could do something that will benefit me, ¿


What do you want to decide? asked Frodo sharply.

Don't alarm me! I only want to decide this: I'll tell you what
I will give you good advice, but you will need one
reward.

'What will it be, please?' said Frodo. Sospechaba
Now that he had encountered a sin, and he thought,
inconvenienced, who had only lost a little money
. All of this would hardly satisfy a little guy, and he couldn't
prescindir de nada.

—No more than you can allow yourself —Trancos replied with one
slow smile, as Frodo's thoughts are understood. Only this: must
Keep me close until you want to leave.

¡Oh, clearly! —replied Frodo, surprised, but not muy
aliviado—. Even if another companion asked, they would not enter
you have to know much more about this
ti y tus asuntos.


—Excellent


 


! —exclaimed Trancos, crossing his legs and reclining
comfortably—. You seem to be remembering the feeling
, and this is all good. Has sido demasiado
unshielded until now. ¡Muy bien! I'll tell you what it is
I give you the reward. You can give it to me with gusto when
me hayas escuchado. ¡

Continue entonces! —I say Frodo—. ¿Qué sabes?

Demasiado; demasiadas obscure things —I say Trancos with gravedad.

But as far as you are concerned... If he got up, he was there

the door, he opened it quickly and looked outside. Luego looked for it
I've found a lot of safe and cautious things, and I can normally avoid them
what me vean, si quiero. Now, let's get rid of the silk.
silently and began to listen. —I keep oídos finos —he continued—.
By lowering my voice, and yet I cannot disappear, he...
I don't even enjoy mysterious vagabundos like me. Frodo
Waiting on the Camino to the West of Bree, when four hobbits came up
de las Tierras Bajas. I don't need to repeat everything I told you
see Bombadil ni entre ellos; but one thing interested me.
«Please remember», I said one of them, «that the name Bolsón should not be mentioned
. I'm Señor Underhill, yes that is
give some name". That interested me so much that I followed him here. «
He has a good reason to leave his name; but yes it is like this,
I recommend them to those friends who are most looked after." «

I don't know who can be interested in keeping my name for nadie in Bree",
I said Frodo emphatically, «and I'm not sure why you're interested
to you." «May señor Trancos have a good reason to atone and
escuchar to hide; but if so, I advise you to explain it." «   

¡Bien respondido!», I say Trancos riendo. «But the explanation
It's simple: I'm looking for a hobbit called Frodo Bolsón. Query
meet him quickly. I understood what I was saving
from the Comarca, good, a secret that worried me
friends».

—¡Don't misinterpret me! —gritted, as Frodo stood up
Asiento and Sam jumped up with the fruity dinner. Cuidaré más
of the secret you keep. You have to be looked after! —if he inclined
hacia delante y los miró—. ¡Vigilen cada shadow! —I say
en voz baja—. Black men have passed by Bree. El


 


Monday


, one went by the Camino Verde, they say; y
another appeared later, suffering from the Camino Verde from the
sur.

Here's a silence. Finally, Frodo spoke with Pippin
Sam: —You should have it figured out in the form in question
we greeted the porter —I say—. And the land seems to have oído
algo. Why did we push ourselves to join the company? ¿Y
Why do we demons behave so foolishly? Let's talk about it
calm down here inside.

—Habría sido mejor —dijo Trancos—. Les habria
prevented from entering the common room, they were left behind; but
I don't have to enter the land to see him or take someone away
mensaje.

Do you think it's...? —comenzó Frodo.

No, I don't think old Mantecona is bad. Just that
I looked at it with extrañeza. Good, I have a pretty good look,
No?, I say Trancos with a sound and an extra expression.
I shine in your eyes. But I hope we know each other
better. When we meet him, I hope he explains to me what happened
at the end of your song. For this little disguise... ¡

It was a pure accident! interrupted Frodo.

I'm wondering, I say Trancos. Damn, entonces. It's an accident
I know your position is dangerous.

These jinetes persecute me; but now, in any case,
it seems that they have lost me and have lost me.

Volveran. And they come more. Hay others. I know
on number. I know these Jinetes. Hizo a pause, y su mirada
it was cold and hard. There are some people in Bree here
no one can confide, he continued. Bill Helecho, for example.
It has a bad reputation in the Bree region, and people from outside visit it
about home. You must have seen it among the company:
a moreno and joker type. It was a lot of looking for one of them
foreigners from the south, and they left just after


you


 


"accident". Not all those who are sure have good intentions; Y
as for Helecho, I will sell any thing to any one; or haria
travesuras por diversión.

¿Who will sell Helecho, and who has to see my accident
with él?, said Frodo, but decided not to listen
las indirectas de Trancos.

Your news, above all, replied Trancos. A report
Your story would be very interesting for sure
people. After that, you don't need to say them truthfully
name. It seems very probable to me that they will enter
before that deadline this night. Is this enough? You can do what you want
he rewards me with: take me back as guide or not. But I can
I decide that I know all the lands within the Comarca and there
Mountain Clouds, I've been running through them for many years.
I'm the mayor of what I look like. It might be useful. Tendras
that abandon the open fireplace after this night; because of the jinetes
They will monitor it day and night. You can escape from Bree and who you are
allow you to advance while the Sun is high; but no anger
lejos. They will attack you in nature, in some dark place
donde no hay ayuda. Do you want to find out? ¡Son
terribles!

The hobbits looked at him and saw him with surprise
the beak was weakened by the pain and the hands were opened
arms of the saddle. The habitation was very quiet and silent, and the
the light seemed to have dimmed. During a period of time I will remain with you
the closed eyes, as you walk in a quiet or silent recovery
sounds in the night sleep. ¡

Here!, he exclaimed at the end of a moment, crossing his hand to «




 









I hear some damage, I feel a lot." But one thing is important
another, and another this week has refreshed my memory, as
says el dicho; and I hope it won't be too late. Verán, pidieron me
who searches for hobbits from the Comarca, y
in particular to one called Bolsón.


218


 


'Why do I see this friend?' asked Frodo.

¡Ah! You know better, I say the land with knowledge of the cause. No
you will delate; but they told me that this Bolsón would be called
Bajocolina, and give me a description
that you care quite well, if you allow me to say so. ¡

En efecto! ¡Hagámoslo entonces!, said Frodo, interrupting imprudently
.

A corpulent man with red cheeks, I say Señor Mantecona
solemnly. Pippin returned among the people, but Sam seemed indignant. Ex
it won't help you much; les pasa a la mayoría de los hobbits, Cebada, he tells me
, continued Señor Mantecona with a look at Pippin. But
This is higher than some and more filthy than the majority, and it holds one
hendidura en la barbilla: a cheerful guy with bright eyes. I tell you what
You excuse me, but I say it, no yo. ¿

I say it? 'What was that?' asked Frodo eagerly.

¡Ah! It was Gandalf, you know what I want.
They say he's a magician, but he's a good friend of mine, whether he wants it or not.
But now I'm not sure what you'll say to me, yes
I wanted to see it: convert my entire brain into amazement or myself into a block of Madeira,
it wouldn't surprise me. It's a little rushed. Anyway, what can't be done
unshacer.

Good, ¿qué has hecho?, said Frodo, impatiently
with the slow unraveling of the thoughts of Mantecona. ¿

Where was it?, I asked the owner, taking a break and shaking them
dedos. ¡Ah, yes! The old Gandalf. Three months ago he entered
in my home without calling. Cebada, he says, me voy.
by the morning. Do you have more for me? You just have to do it,
and I tell myself that some black men are standing in the door wondering to bring...
decide it, say. I have time, I say it, and I don't have time.
but I want to have a meal in the Comarca. Please keep someone close to you
send and to whom confíes to go? I can meet someone, say, morning,
sometimes, or just yesterday. Hazlo mañana, says, y luego
give me a card.

Sacking a card from your wallet and reading it
direction slowly and proudly (valued on reputation as
hombre de letras):


 


219


SR. FRODO BOLSITAS, BOLSITAS, HOBBITON
in the COmarca.

'A card for me from Gandalf!' shouted Frodo.

¡Ah!, I say to Mr. Mantecona. Entonces tu verdadero nombre es
Bolsón?

It is, I say Frodo, and it will be better than me with this card
please tell me immediately why you never sent it. This is what you wine
to decide, I suppose, although it took a long time
en llegar al punto.

Little Sr. Mantecona seemed worried. Tienes razón, I love,
I say, and I kindly forgive you. And I have a mortal pain
When Gandalf says, some problem arises. But no
looked at him pointedly. He looked at it. Luego no encounter
to a nadie willing to travel to the Comarca on the following day, not on the following day,
and none of mine were available; y entonces, one thing
further on, I let go of my head. I am a busy man. Haré
what you can do to fix the things, and if you have any help that
you can offer, just have to decide.

Placing the card on one side, he promised Gandalf nothing less.
Cebada, he tells me, this friend of mine from the Comarca, can
who comes here shortly, is the other. If it has
call Bajocolina. ¡Cuidado! But I don't have to do that
questions. Yes, I'm not with you, you may have problems with me
need help. Haz what you can do for yourself, and you'll appreciate it,
he says. And here you are, and the problems don't seem to be easy,
as it seems.

What do you want to decide? —asked Frodo—.

These black men —I say the land by speaking my voice—.
They go to Bolsón, and have good intentions, soy entonces
a hobbit. It was Monday, and all the people were chilled
y los gansos chillaban. Disturbing, the call. Nob, wine
a hobbit called Bolsón. Nob kept the hair bristled. Les dije
to the blacks who are fueran and I'll look at the door in their nostrils.
But they told me that they have been fulfilling the same question throughout the entire journey
Archet. Y ese Ranger, Trancos, I'm afraid you've been wondering


220


 


















 





but help me. This is a comment from Señor Bolsón
It was this night in Bree. Including our Nob has been making some conjectures
with a slow head; and there are others in a short time more quickly
that is to capture things.

Good, we can only hope that the Jinetes will not return again,
said Frodo.

I hope that no, in fact, I say Mantecona. But with or without
ghosts, they will not enter the door so easily. Don't worry
hasta la mañana. Nob won't say anything. No black man will pass by
my doors while inside can keep me en pie. Mi people and yo will assemble
guard this night; but it will be better if you fight us a little, if you can.

In any case, we must call to the lover, I say Frodo. Debemos
go up as early as possible. Desayuno to the six and media, please.

¡Bien! I'll load the orders, I'll tell you about the place. Good nights,
Señor Bolsón... Underhill, I must say! Good nights... ¡
My God! Where is your señor Brandigamo?

No, I say Frodo with sudden anxiety. If they have
forgot about Merry and was working late. I fear myself
that has gone up. I ask someone to take off the air a little.

Good, we need to look after you and not make any misunderstandings: this group
you could be on holiday! I say Mantecona. I have to go back and close
the doors quickly, but I will make sure that your friend needs to enter when
llegue. It will be better than sending Nob to get it. Good nights at
everything! Finally, Señor Mantecona went up, with another
doubtful look at Trancos and a cabeza movement. Sus pasos
if they alejaron por el pasillo. ¿

Y bien?, I say Trancos. Are you going to open this paper?
Frodo looked carefully at the saddle before breaking it. Parecía
ser, without doubt, of Gandalf. Inside, written with the magician's strong but elegant letra
, here is the following message:


222


 


EL PONI PILADOR, BREE. Average day of the year, Year of the Region,
1418.

Dear Frodo:

They brought me some bad news. I need to get back to you immediately. I just had to wait  
better than abandoning Bolsón Cerrado ready and climbing from the Comarca before the end.
hasta julio until later. Returns as soon as possible; and I will follow you
I find out what you like. Let me take a message here, yes...
You can meet with a friend of mine on the fireplace: a handsome, dark-haired man,
high, to which some call Trancos. Know our office and we will help you;



















 







I love you too. But I guess I expect him to judge me
.

A sudden breath brought Gandalf's card. But beautiful
it's as good as tenths in the Comarca; and I had to decide that
all of us will seem much after the passing of the days tumbados en silks
y zanjas.

If you need more than a few days, or weeks, or years of
wander through nature so that you seem to be in Trancos,
responded. And they would die first, unless they were there
a more resistant pasta than the others.

Pippin calmed down; but Sam didn't like it and follow it
aiming at Trancos with recelo. How do we know that you were the Trancos
What does Gandalf have?, he asked. Never mind
Gandalf waits for this card to come up. Podrías ser un
I'm sorry to lie, for what I can see, trying to keep us close


.


 


You can have dinner with the green man Trancos and have them quit
ropa. What does it take to decide this?

You were a corpulent guy, Trancos replied; but me
I'm afraid I have the only answer for you, Sam Gamgee, that's it. Yes hubiera
matado al verdadero Trancos, podría matarte. Y
I've got you covered with so much charla. It was for him
Ring, I could keep it, ¡ahora!

If I can use pie and it seems to grow suddenly. En sus
a light shone on our eyes, penetrating and authoritative. Looking back
on my head, I place my hand in the grip of a sword that
hide it from its side. Not if they tried to move. Sam
I remained there with my mouth open, looking at it astonished.

But I'm the truthful Trancos, fortunately, I say, marveling at them
with the beak softened by a sudden smile. Soy
Aragorn, son of Arathorn; And whether by life or death I can save you
, the haré.

There was a long silence. Finally, Frodo hails with hesitation
. I thought I was a friend before I opened the card,
I say, or at least deseaba serlo. I've been waiting for it;  
various times this night, but never the form in which the servants of
the Enemigo would have it, or I imagine. I believe one of his spies
... good, it would look more just and feel more vile, if you mean it to me.

Not all that is golden light, not all that wander are lost. ¿

If they refer to you the verses?, asked Frodo.
No one can understand what this is about. But how do you suppose
which are on the Gandalf card, have you ever seen it?

I didn't know, I replied. But I am Aragorn, y
these verses come with this name. Sacó on sword, y
I saw that the house was actually broken a foot down from it
empunadura. Is it a little good, Sam?, Trancos said. But if
look for the moment when you will be strengthened again.

Sam no dijo nada.

Good, I say Trancos, with Sam's permission we will give it by decision.
Trancos
it will be your guide. And now I think it's time
so that you go to your room and forget what you can. Mañana tendremos
a difficult fireplace. Even if we allow you to go up to Bree
without obstacles, we can hardly wait until we are deprived of food.
But I will try to lose myself as soon as possible. I know a
by the salt ways of Bree, apart from the main fireplace. Yes
free logs of the persecution, I will head to the Top of the Winds. ¿
Cima de los Vientos?, I say Sam. What is this?
It is a hill, just to the north of the Camino, approximately to the middle of the Camino
from here to Rivendel. It offers a wide view to our alrededor;
and from there we will look for the opportunity to look at our elder. Gandalf
if he will direct you to this point we will follow. Después de la Cima de los Vientos,
Our journey will become more difficult and we will tend to
choose among various pilgrims. ¿
When he saw Gandalf for the last time, asked Frodo. ¿Sabes
Where are you or what are you doing?
Trancos seemed serious. No, I say. Come to the west
with él en spring. At the same time I watched the front lines
of the Comarca in the last few years, when he was busy with other things.
Rarely is the dejaba without supervision. We finally come to you for the first time in May:
in the Vado de Sarn, river below the Brandivino. Tell me what's up
Assuming neighbors had a good idea and were leaving
Hacia Rivendel the last week of September. Like sand
that was on your side, I was traveling up
I've been worried since I first met him.


 







 
note. This turned out badly; It may be obvious that some news arrived...
He, and I wasn't trying to help him.
they are stronger; I will not openly attack a house from which

mismo. When you return, many days ago, you are ill
news. He echoed the voice of Gandalf
he disappeared and was seen by the jinetes. It was el






 










corazón, dijo; but it was silly.

No, I say Merry. Neither valiant nor stupid, I believe.
You can just avoid it. Apparently it attracted me in some way.
At the end, I was, and suddenly those voices reached the silk. A


 


murmured


; and the other one whispers, or silbaba.
Don't hesitate to hear a word about what they say. Don't worry about me
more, because it is necessary to temble for all parts. Then I felt terrified
, and I was on my way home, and I was about to go up and run home,
when I have wine it leaves me and you... I fall.

I'll meet you, sir, ask me in Nob. Señor Mantecona sent me
with an internal one. I went to Westgate, and there I went
hacia Southgate. Just looking for Bill Helecho's house he created
see something on the fireplace. I couldn't imagine it, though
It seemed to me how two men leaned over something,
raising it. Of a cry, but when I went to the place
there was no sign of them, only Mr. Brandigamo arrived at the table
fireplace. I seem to be asleep. «I thought what had happened to me
water», I say to myself when I sacudí it.
It was very rare, and when he was desperate, he stood up and ran
turn here like a girl. «

I'm afraid it's true", I say Merry, but no, no
qué dije. «It's a horrible thing, I don't remember it. I desmoroné.
No sé qué me pasó.

“Yes,” Trancos said. «El Aliento Negro». Los Jinetes debieron
to leave your horses outside and return to there
Puerta Sur en secreto. You will know all the news, please
they visited Bill Helecho; and it's probably safe
he was also a spy. Someone could pass this night, before that
salgamos de Bree.

What will happen? —dijo Merry—. Will you hang up the lodge?

—No, I think no —say Trancos—. Not everyone is here.
Yes, in any case, it is not your style. In darkness and sunshine
there are lights and many people; no longer are you desperate
, while all the large leagues of Eriador are still there.
en sus garras. Llevarán a estos disgraciados algunún
evil work: Helecho, some of the extraños and, sometimes,
also at the doorman. Hablaron con Harry en la Puerta Oeste el
Mondays. He was observing. It was pale and scary
when they left him.


228


 


It seems that we have enemies on all sides, I say, Frodo. ¿Qué
shall we do it? ¡

They are here and they don't go to their homes! I'll make sure of that
they have discovered what they are. The hobbits' homes are kept
fans who give to the north and are looking for the ground. We will stay all
join us and we will close this window and the door. But first
Nob y yo I will be ready to buy your equipment.

While they were not there, Frodo gave Merry a quick conversation
everything that happened after dinner. Merry todavía estaba leyendo
and reflecting on the map of Gandalf when Trancos and Nob
they regressed.

Good, love, I say Nob, I received the clothes y
I can put a pillow in the middle of each room. —Y he hecho una
good imitation of your head with a brown wool coat, sir
Bag—. Underhill, señor —añadió with a smile.

Pippin rió—. ¡Muy realista! —dijo—. But that's it
Will it pass when they have discovered the defeat?

—We'll see you —I say Trancos—. Let's hope to maintain strength
hasta la mañana.

—Good nights —I said Nob, and he was there to do it
part in the surveillance of the doors.

Place your bags and trenches on the floor of the living room. Empujaron
a silla baja against the door and closed the vent.
Frodo, wondering, saw that the night continued despondently. There
Hoz* swung brilliantly over the Bree-hill men.
Entonces closed and closed the internal contraventanas and corridors
the curtains. Trancos ignited the fire and settled
todas las velas.

The hobbits tumbled over their mantas with their pies
hacia la chimenea; but Trancos made himself comfortable in the saddle
against the door. Charlaron a rat, pues Merry aún tenía
varias preguntas que hacer.

He jumped over the moon! —Rió Merry entre dientes mientras se evolvía
en su manta—. How ridiculous on your part, Frodo! But ojalá


... * The name of the hobbits for the Arado or the Osa Mayor.


  229
 
I was there to see it. Bree's dreams will be...
cursing him for decades.

Here I hope, I say Trancos. Then everyone looked in silence, and one




 









 





¡No, no, no! I was wondering. ¡No, yo no! I'm not keeping it!
Balbuceaba. Until he realized that he had enemies
in Los Gamos, some extraña invasion of... Y
No more time wasted.

I kill! Fire! Enemies!

Los Brandigamos tocaban the Cuerno de los Gamos,
which hasn't been played in years since
They brought the white lobes in the cruel winter, when the brandy wine
it froze.


Despierten! Despierten!

Here you will find the cuernos in response. It alarms her if
extendía.

Las figuras negras huyeron de la casa. One of them was dead
a hobbit head on the staircase as he ran. En el sendero
if they heard the sound of the helmets, and, setting out to gallop, they alejaron pounding
in the darkness. For all Crickhollow is there
sound of hearts, voices that cry and running feet.
But the Black Jinetes cabalgaban like a sale hacia la Puerta Norte. ¡Que
if they march the little ones! Sauron took care of them later.
For as long as they do, they keep going: they know that
the house was vacant and the Ring had disappeared. Derrotaron
to the guards of the door and disappeared from the Comarca.


232    

Early in the night, Frodo despaired of a deep, sudden dream,
as some sound or presence was disturbed. Here's what
Some were alert in their seat: their eyes were shining there
light of fire, which was waited for and burned
with force; but no movement signal.

Frodo promptly went back to sleep; but their dreams come alive
disturbed again by the sound of the wind and the helmets at the gallop. El
I would seem to go to the heir of the house and take care of it;
I've read it now, a heart that sounded saving. Abrió los
Watch and watch a rooster crow vigorously on the patio of the lodge. Trancos
I ran the curtains and passed the contraventanas with a
extruding. The first gray light of the day entered the room and a
cold air entered through the open wind.
I have followed the advice: I have forced the windows.
 
As Strider defeated everyone, I led them to...
Its dormitories. At the end, they were happy
And they swayed, and the curtains waved; las camas
They are revueltas, y los mohadones, crotados y arrojados sobre

ellas. Trancos immediately went to the manor house. El pobre Sr.
Mantecona seemed sleepy and tired. Only have it tied
the eyes throughout the night (or so I say), but there was no sound or sound. ¡

Nothing has ever happened to me like this!, I shouted,
raising your hands in horror. They are unable to sleep on their own
camas, y good almohadones ruined and everything! Come on, let's go
?

Dark times, I say Trancos. But now you can stop
calm down when you are free of us. We will follow
. Don't worry about the dessert: a drink and a bite of pie
it will tend to be enough. We will pack them in one minute.

Mr. Mantecona was eager to make sure that his children would be safe
Lists you will find something to come from. But very soon it returned
consternado. The kids have disappeared! The doors of the establishments are clear
open during the night, and have disappeared: not alone
Merry's ponies, as well as all the other horses and beasts of the place.

Frodo was destroyed by the news. How can I hope
llegar to Rivendel a pie, pursued by mounted enemies?
We could soon leave for the Moon. Trancos remained in silence


 


rat
, aiming at the hobbits, how you weigh it up
fuerza y ​​​​coraje.
The ponis did not help us to escape from the jinetes, I told them
fine, thoughtful, how to figure out what Frodo had in mind.
Let's not drink much more space at the foot, not by the paths
I think I'm going back. In every way, I have to walk. I'm there
comfort and provisions that worry me. We can't count on achieving
nothing to come between here and Rivendel, except what we wanted
; and we must lift enough from above, because
we may return or be obliged to give a rodeo, we will desviándonos much of the
direct fireplace. How many people are willing to load it?
espaldas?
As necessary, I say Pippin with my heart melted,
but trying to demonstrate that it was stronger than what it seemed (or
sentía).
I can get enough for two, I say Sam satisfying.
"Can't you do anything, Señor Mantecona?" asked Frodo.






Can't we get a par de ponis in the community, or would we want one?

I dudo —I say the place with sadness—. Los dos or tres
Mounting poles that have been in Bree are on my patio
y ya no quedan. As for other animals, horses or ponies
I shoot what the sea is, there are a lot of them in Bree y
they won't stay at the wind. But do what you can. Meet Bob
and I will send it as soon as possible.

—Yes —I say Trancos to regañadientes—, mejor que lo hagas. Me
I fear that we will tend to try to achieve at least one place. But so
if they have all the hope of climbing, they will harden and escape from it without making a mess!
We may well have a trumpet sound to announce our match.
Without doubt, it formed part of your plan.

—Have a little comfort —I say Merry—, and more
that a little comfort, I hope: we can desayunar while we hope,
and let us enjoy it. Let's go look for Nob!


234


 


At the final stage there are more than three hours of retreat. Bob
he returned with the shape of what could not be done
get no horse, no money for love or money from the neighbor, except one:
Bill Ferny had one he could possibly sell.
It's a small, half-dead creature, Bob; but you won't forget it
she for less than the triple of her value, coming as she is placed, no
I met Bill Ferny.

¿Bill Ferny?, said Frodo. Isn't there any trick? No
the beast would fly running with it with all our things, or it would help to gather us
, or something like that?

I wonder, I say Trancos. But I can't imagine any animal
running home with him, once he ran away. I imagine that this is alone
a last minute idea from the lovely Maestro Ferny: just a way to increase
sus jaws of the assumption. The main danger is that
little beast probably was at the doors of death. But no
seems to have another option. Are you looking for a change?

Bill Ferny's price was two price tags; And that was it,
Indeed, at least three times the value of placing in these places. Result
I will be a hushed, depleted and deanimated animal; but
It didn't seem like he would be dying again. El Sr. Mantecona paid for it  
compensation for lost animals. He was an honest man.
y, next if decía, it was rico en Bree; but thirty
The price of the price was a hard blow for him, and it was done by Bill...







The hobbits, who invented a story that would last many years without accidents,
included from Combe and Archet, they can be pinned on the fireplace
to go to the viajeros. The same people at the lodge were there
las puertas or asomados a las ventanas.

Some have changed their opinion and have decided to leave
Short by the main fireplace. Any intent to cross the field
Immediately only the things would emerge: the number of the inhabitants
I will follow you to see what they plot
avoid them entering without permission.

They missed Nob and Bob and the señor
Mantecona with many thanks. «I hope we wanted to see it


some


 


day, when everyone was happy again", said Frodo. «
Nothing would please me more than asking me in your house in peace
a rat».

If they are excited, anxious and disheartened, I go down there
sight of the multitude. Not all the faces were friendly, not all of them
words that are gritty. But Trancos seemed to be revered
for the majority of the inhabitants of Bree, and those who observed it
callaban and if alejaban. He walked with it
Frodo; next came Merry and Pippin; and finally, Sam
driving to the place, which took everything away
equipment that could be given to you; but you like it
Less abatido, how the change of fortune approaches.
Sam munched thoughtfully. Keep a full bag
from her: a gift from Nob and Bob. Manzanas para
walk and a pipe to feel, I say. But I think I would hear less
both ready.

The hobbits did not hide the curious heads that
if they sit by the doors or sit by the top of the walls and look for it
on a step by step basis. But when you look for the bottom door, Frodo
I go to a dark house and hidden behind a thick silk: the last house
of the pueblo. In one of the twenty years I saw one
cetrine beak with astute and rasgados eyes; but disappeared instantly.

So that's where he hides and I'm sure!, he thought. If
parece más a un duende.

At the top of the silk, another man looked at it fijamente with descaro. Tapeworm
the dear encogida in a mueca de desprecio. Smoke a short, black pipe. Al
look, if the mouth bag is empty.
 
friends at the end? Strider stopped, but didn't respond.

Good days, my little friends! I say to the others. I suppose
who know with whom they have joined. ¡Ese
es Strider el Empalador! Although I hear other names no
lots of goodies. Keep this night! Come on, Sammie, don't go
mistreating my poor people! Bah! Executed again.

Sam turned quickly. Y ú, Ferny, dijo, quita tu
be dear to the eye, or you will be disappointed. With a sudden movement,


 


quick


like a rayo, a manzana got out of hand and hit Bill de lleno
in the nariz. If it was too late, and the curses came out
remove the silk. Despair of a good beef, I say Sam with weight
, y siguió adelante.

Por fin dejaron atrás el pueblo. Listening to children
and remember that you followed him if you succeeded and returned
in the Southern Door. After cruzarla, they continued
el Camino during several kilometres. This turned to the izquierda, returning
on rumbo este al rodear the slopes of the Colina Bree, y luego
He began to quickly descend through the wooded area. TO
on izquierda, you can see some of the hobbit houses and teachers
de Staddle en las suaves laderas sureste de la hilla;
below, in a deep hollow to the north of the Camino, they rise
swirls of humor that indicate where Combe came from; Archet
It was hidden among the trees.

After the Camino descends a trecho, dejando
atrás the tall and brown Colina Bree, they joined a
I would send them as far as they went to the north. «This is where
let's clear up and let's put ourselves in the closet», Trancos said.

“I hope it's not an attack,” said Pippin. «Our last attack
a través del bosque casi termina en desastre».

«Ah, but don't let me down with you», he replied
Trancos. Short, short or wide, no fallan. Echo a
view on both sides of the fireplace. No need to be seen; and I lead
quickly crosses the wooded valley.

On plan, until you can understand without knowing
on the land, it was the first Archet hacia, but where...
it was to cross it for this and then continue straight on
who further deviates from the surface to avoid them
Marismas de Midgewater. But, above all, they tend to cross
The seas yes, and the description that Strider hizo de ellas,
no eran alentadoras.

However, for a long time, walking was not despicable.
Of course, don't worry about the disturbing things happening there


night


 


anterior, they have enjoyed this part of the journey
more than anything else hasta entonces. The sun shone brightly
but not too hot. The forests of the valley are also leafy
full of color, and they seem calm and healthy. Strider
I guided him with confidence among the numerous senders who were cruising,
however, abandoning their heart, they will soon hear it
perdidos. There was a wandering rumble with many curves and
dobleces, to dissuade any persecution.

Bill Ferny observed where we left the fireplace,
I'm sure, I say; however I don't believe that it is
my siga. He knows the terrain here well, but he knows it
who is no rival to me in a forest. That's what you can say in words
to the others what worries me. I don't think there are many people.
It is believed that we headed to Archet, much better.

Ya sea for the ability of Trancos or for any other reason,
no life, no eyes, no sound of ningon, no one is alive
every day: no bipeds, except pajaros; ni quadrupeds,
except for one zorro and four ardillas. The next day, they started
to navigate with rumbo firme hacia este; and everything went on calmly
en paz. On the third day of Bree, salieron de
Chetwood. The ground had been steadily descending from where it was
they deviated from the chimney, and now they entered a wide and narrow one
extension of the terrain, much more difficult to repeat. Estaban
much further than the limits of Bree, in one
deserted without sending, and looking for the Marismas of Midgewater.

The soil turned humidly, and in some places it became swampy, and
here and there they encountered charcas and widened extensions of
juncos and dogs filled with the trio of hidden children.
You are advised to choose with care on the fireplace to keep yourself safe
and in the correct word. At first they advanced well enough,
amidst the changing quagmires. The flies began to torment him.
peligrosos. The swamps were disconcerting and shocking.
and if it did not have a permanent mark, there was no need for the Montaraces
they met, and the air was filled with clouds of small mosquitoes that were
they are subjected to manga and trousers as long as they are fur.


  ¡

I'm coming alive! cried Pippin. Mosquito water! ¡Hay
más mosquitos que agua!

"What do they live when they can't become hobbits?" he asked.
Sam, rascándose el cuello.

It was a miserable day in this country
lonely and despicable country. On the campsite he was humid, cold and uncomfortable
; and the insects that bite don't want to sleep.
There were also abominable creatures walking around the juncos and
mates who, by the sound they made, were evil relatives of the
cricket. He had thousands of them, and they chilled for everyone
lados, neek-breek, breek-neek, without cesar during the whole night, hasta que
the hobbits were frenéticos cases.

The following day, the heart, was little better, and the night
cases equal to inconvenience. Even the Neekerbreekers (com
the calls Sam) are quedado atrás, the mosquitoes follow you chasing them
.

While Frodo was gone, confused but unable to close his eyes, I looked at her
that in the light there was a light in the eastern sky: he rose
and I paid for it many times. No it was el amanecer, pues
aún faltaban algunas horas.

"What is this light?" he asked Trancos, who had risen and
standing still, looking at night.

No, Trancos replied. There are only a few things to distinguish it
. It's like a lightning that jumps from the tops of the hills.

Frodo returned to tumbarse, but during a good time
towards the white destellos, and against the tall and dark figure of
Quiet, de pious, silent and vigilant. Finally, I paid in one
sueño intranquilo.

They have not advanced much to the fifth day when they left behind
last charcos and junks scattered by the seas
. The earth that they held before them began to rise again.
Once you read this, you can now see a line
colinas. The highest one was at the back of the line and... «

This is the Top of the Winds,” Trancos said. El Camino Viejo, que


we    

left behind, runs to the top
it doesn't pass much less on its basis. We can go to the middle of the day.
Now, let's go straight there. I suppose it will be
mejor que lo hagamos.
 
What do you want to decide?” asked Frodo.

Here I say: when we go there, we are not sure when we will meet
. Está cerca del Camino.

But surely we hope to meet Gandalf there, don't we?

Yes; but hope is débil. You come from here,
It may not happen through Bree, and so it may not be possible to separate it
hacemos. And in all ways, except in particular cases
joints, we will lose; It won't be safe for you
Don't wait for us for a long time. If the Jinetes do not listen to us
In the desert, it is probable that they head towards the Cima de los Vientos
. It offers a wide view of Alrededor. De hecho, hay
many animals and animals in this country that could come to us every time
we are here, from the top of this hill. Not all of them are mine
Fair, and there are others who are more evil than ours.

The hobbits look forward to the distant hills. Sam
I looked at the pale sky, fearing hawks or eagles
revolting over them with bright and hostile eyes. ¡
It makes me feel uncomfortable and alone, Trancos! —dijo—.

What advice do we give? —asked Frodo—.

I think — I responded slowly, as if I hadn't heard much
I'm sure—, I think the best is the most straight
possible hacia este from here, hacia the line of hills, don't hacia the
Cima de los Vientos. There we can meet a path that I know runs to
sus pies; we will climb to the top of the winds from the north
of less open form. Let's see what we'll see.

Every day they walked with difficulty, as long as they did
brought the cold and the late weather. The earth became dryer and more arid;
but the clouds and vapors appeared among them in the sea. Unos
how many melancholic people cry and moan, until the end
the red sun slowly melted into the shadows of the west; luego, one
looked vacía across the happy winds of Bolsón Cerrado, to the lejos.


 


241


At the end of the day they went to an arroyo that was pleasant








of the view, both of the tops of the hills and of the llanuras, para
pass through clearer and more open ground. To both
there were piles of large rocks and scratched stones on both sides
which hide cases from travelers like a silk.

«I wonder why this was sent and why», I say Merry
while they walk along one of these avenues, whence the stones
They were unusually large and were placed at once. «I'm not sure what I like
: it holds... good, even better the appearance of a mound." «¿Hay some
mound on the top of the winds?”

. "No. There is no mound at the top of the Winds, no
these hills,” replied Trancos. «Los Hombres del Oeste no
they lived here; even in their last few days they defended the hills
during a time against the evil that came from Angmar. Este
They were built to serve the soldiers off the murals. But a lot
Previously, on the first days of the Northern Kingdom, they built one
great watchtower at the top of the winds, Amon Sul la llamaban.
It was set on fire and destroyed, and now nothing except it
a broken ring, like a Tuscan crown at the top of the old hill. Without embargo,
once she was tall and beautiful. It says that Elendil is there
hoping for the joy of Gil-galad from the West, in them
days of the Última Alianza».

The hobbits looked at Trancos. He seems to be a scholar
in ancient traditions, as in natural customs. ¿Quién was
Gil-galad? asked Merry; but Trancos didn't respond, y
I was lost in my thoughts. De suddene, a serious voice
murmured:


Gil-galad was an elf king.

The harpists sing about it sadly:
the last king was beautiful and free
entre las Montañas y el Mar.

On the sword it was broad, on the lance sharp,
on brilliant yellow he saw the lejos;
the innumerable stars of the celestial field
if reflected in its silver escudo.


 


But


there is a lot of time that has been going around,
and nadie can decide where she dies;
you can find yourself in the darkness on your star
in Mordor, where the shadows are.

They walked around shadowed, because the voice was Sam's.

Don't hold me back!, I say Merry.

That's all he said, Sam was shocked. I learned it
of Señor Bilbo when he was very much. Solía ​​​​contarme historias
as it is, knowing that I always enjoyed hearing about it
great scholar Señor Bilbo. I wrote it
poetry. I wrote down what I wanted to say.

No, he made it up, Trancos says. It is part of the poem.
which is called The Caída de Gil-galad, which is in an ancient one  
ancient language. Bilbo had to translate it. Never gets over it.

Much more, I say Sam, all over Mordor.
Don't learn this part, I'm sorry. ¡Nunca thought
that I would like to go through this path! ¡

Go to Mordor!, Pippin shouted. I hope that I don't follow
here!

¡No pronunciations of this name so high!, I say Trancos.

It was half a day when they looked for it
extreme end of the path, and they see before us, in the pale clear light
of the October sun, a greenish gray terraplén that suffered like a
bridge to the north side of the hill. They decided
headed to the top immediately, while the daylight was full.
It was not possible to hide it, and it could only be done
hope that no enemy or spy will observe them. Not if
see no movement on the hill. If Gandalf was on some side,
no había rastro de él.

On the western flank of the Cima de los Vientos they encountered one
protected hondonada, in which bottom there was a dog in the shape of a cuenco
with the left sides of the grass. Allí dejaron a Sam y Pippin con el
ask, your mochilas and equipaje. The other three continued.
After half an hour of laborious ascent, Trancos reached the top


of


 


choline; Frodo and Merry followed him, without leaving him.
The last slope was steep and rocky.

At the top they encountered, as Trancos had said, a wide ring of
ancient mampostería, now desmoronándose or cubierta of millenary grass
. Pero en el centro se había
I picked up a mountain of rotary stones. They are ennegrecidas like by fire. A su alrededor, la
The tree was quenched until the roots and all inside the ring, the grass
It was chamuscada and branded, as the calls hubieran barrido la
top of the hill; but there was no sign that no one was alive.

From foot to the edge of the circle in ruins, they saw a
on alrededor a wide perspective, on the largest part of the land
empty and monotonous, except for some woods
to the south, more to the point of those divided here and there
the Camino Viejo, which ran like a belt, going up to the west
and winding your way up and down, you have to disappear through a crest of
dark earth to the east. Not if anything moved. Following
With the look, they see the mountains on this line: the
We are not here, and now we must take care of ourselves.
the most sought-after hills were brown and gray; instead of them if they get up
Higher shapes of gray color, and once again, they had taller ones
white pics that shine within the clouds.

¡Good, here we are!, I say Merry. ¡Y
if you are very sad and unattractive! No water, no refuge. Y ni
Gandalf's raster. But I don't blame him for not expecting, yes
es que alguna vez vino aquí.

I wonder, I say Trancos, aiming at my thoughtful alrededor. Included
if you were brought a day or two more from us in Bree, you might have
linked here first. It can be connected very quickly when the need arises.
Suddenly, he grabbed and looked at the stone at the top of the mountain
mound; it was plainer than the others and whiter, as it were
hubiera escape from the fire. I received it and examined it, giving it turns
between the two. This was handled recently, I say.
What are your opinions on these brands?

On the lower part, Frodo leaves some trees: I*- III
It seems like we have a goal, a point and three more goals,
I said.

—The path of the izquierda could be a rune G with delgadas


 


245


ramas —dijo Trancos—. It might be a signal dejada from Gandalf,
However, one cannot be safe. The arañazos are well, y
certainly seems recent. But the brands could mean something
very different, and don't have anything to see with us. Los explorers usan
runes, and they come here often.

What could it mean, including if Gandalf left him?
—asked Merry.

—I would say —Trancos replied— that they represent G3,
and they were a sign that Gandalf was here on the 3rd of October:
It's decided, three days ago. I would also demonstrate what I had
first and the pilgrim was looking for what he didn't have in his time
I don't want to write anything more broadly or clearly. If so,
debemos ser cautelosos.

—Ojalá we can be sure that these brands mean the
what does it mean —I say Frodo—. It would be a great pleasure to be

here, and I was in pilgrimage. It has abrasadoras llamas
here; And now I'm reminded of the light that we saw three nights in it
eastern sky. I guess that was it
attacked at the top of this hill, but not with this result.
And we headed to Rivendel as we could. ¿

How far away is Rivendel? asked Merry, aiming at his alrededor with his hand.
The world seemed to be saved and even from the top of the winds.

Not if the Camino has sometimes been thought of in thousands
more at the Desamparada Posada, a day of travel in the summer of Bree,
Trancos replied. Some say it's so lejos, and others say the opposite
. It's an extra fireplace, and people are happy to go to it
at the end of your journey, whether the time is long or short. But himself
how long would I go back to sleep, with good time
and without bad luck: two days from now until I go
Bruinen, where the Camino crosses the Waters that rise
de Rivendel. Let's take at least a trip of five days for now
, because I don't think we can use the Camino. ¡

Quince días! I say Frodo. Many things can happen at this time.

Puede ser, dijo Trancos.


246    

They remained silent at the top of the hill, look up
upper border In this lonely place, Frodo understood fully for the first time
on the hogar's leg and the pilgrim who ran. I wondered bitterly that
Luckily he was left in the quiet and beloved Comarca.
Miró went down, to the hateful path that led back to the west, to
on hogar. Suddenly, God knows what two black points are
they moved slowly from there, towards the west; and when turning to look,
I see that three others are eager to meet this one
with ellos. He shouted and clung to Trancos' arm.

“Look,” I say, signaling that I'm down.

Immediately, Trancos settled on the ground beyond the
circle in ruins, pulling Frodo so that he will reach him. Merry if echoed
on his side.

«What happens?», he whispered. «

No, but I'm afraid of the worst," Trancos replied.

Slowly, they arrastraron again until the edge of the circle, y
I didn't shine, may the clear morning be gone, y
to the question that began to arise. Everyone can see the black spots,
but neither Frodo nor Merry can distinguish their forms with
certainty; Without embargo, here are the words below,
the Jinetes Negros reunited on the fireplace, at the foot of the road
choline.

“Yes,” I say Trancos, looking forward to seeing no doubts. «¡
El enemigo está aquí!» .

They flew at the beginning and left for the north side.
From the hill to meet your companions.
 
Sam and Peregrin have not been safe. They have explored
The small canada and the surrounding walls. No many more met
a clear water manual on the side, and look for it
huellas no more than one or two days. In your own home
they encountered recent reports of a fire and other signals of a
opened camp. There are some rock rocks on the edge of the canada
more look for it on the hill. Besides, Sam met a little mountain
de leña carefully apilada.


 


«


I wonder if the old Gandalf was here,” I told Pippin.
«I'm wondering who has this question here, it seems like he had the intention of wanting to return»
.

Trancos were very interested in these discussions. «Ojalá hubiera
I hope and explore the terrain I love",
I say, running to the manual to examine the hues. «

It's just what I fear", I say to the return. «Sam
and Pippin have planted the soft soil, and the brands are still there
confused or confused. The explorers have been here lately. They are ellos
quienes dejaron la leña». But there are also variations
More recent hues that were never made by the Montaraces. At least one game was gone
Hey, it's only a day or two, for a few heavy weights. At least one.
Now I can't be sure, but I think there are a lot of them
pies with botas. I took a break and wondered anxiously.

Each of the hobbits is in my mind a vision of them
Jinetes con capas y botas. If the jinetes ya have found the valley,
as long as before Trancos los llevara to another place, better. Sam
he observed the wave with great aversion, now that he had heard it
news of his enemies on the Camino, just a thousand miles away.

with impatience. If it's late, and I don't like this agujero:
me encoge el corazón.

Yes, we certainly need to decide what to do immediately,
Trancos replied, aiming to arrive and considering the time
the climate. Good, Sam, I'm finally saying, I just like this
place; but I don't know where better than that
we can take it before the night. At least we are out of sight
at the moment, and if we moved, it would seem much more probable
that we will see the spies. The only thing we could do would be to deceive us
hacia the north on this side of the hill line, whence...
The terrain is practically the same as here. The fireplace is
supervised, but we tend to see if we try to take it back.
Cúbrete with the exploration to the south. To the north of
Camino, even beyond the hills, the ground is dry and they cry during
kilómetros.

Can you see the Jinetes? asked Merry. Quiero decir, apparently
who only use the nose instead of the eyes,


oiling


 


For us, it is that saying is the correct word, at least to the point
light of the day. But we still tumble when we see them
abajo; and now let's talk about what we will see if we move.

I was sent away at the top of the hill, Trancos replied. Estaba
very anxious to meet some signal from Gandalf; but it was a
mistake that three of us suffered and we kept waiting for a long time. Porque
black horses can be seen, and men can use them
other creatures like spies, like we discover in Bree. Ellos mismos
Not like the world of light like us, but our silhouettes project
shadows in his minds, which only the middle sun destroys;
and in the darkness therefore many signals and forms
we hide: things are more fearful. Y'all
now I can hear the blood of the living evenings, longing for her and hating her
. You also hear, as well as sight and smell. Podemos
feel on presence; It disturbed our heart in so much
let's get here, before seeing them; ellos sienten el nuestro con mayor
intensity. Next —añadió, and your voice is reduced to a whisper—, the
Ring attracts them.

There's no escapatoria entonces? —said Frodo, aiming at Alrededor with fury—.
If I move, they will see me and they will pursue me! If I ask you, I will attract you
hacia mí!

Trancos I put my hand in the man. —Aún hay esperanza —dijo—
. Don't be alone. Let's take this prepared wood
for the fire as signal. There is little refuge or defense here, however
the fire will serve for both. Sauron can use fire for his evil ends, as
with all these things, but these Jinetes do not love him and fear others
they empuñan. Fire is our friend in the desert.

—Sometimes —murmured Sam. It is also the best way to decide
"Here we are" that happens to me, shout in the bar.

Below, in the lower rincón and looking at the canada,  
they lit a fire and prepared the meal. The shadows of the atardecer
I started to love and I started to get cold. De sudden, sintieron
a great hambre, they can't have anything to eat after the rest.
rapid; but they didn't dare to prepare more than a frugal dinner.
The lands that extended before them were vacant, except for animals and animals,
hostile places, abandoned by all the races of the world.


 


249


Explorers often passed by the hills, but they were few
and they were not detained. Other vagabundos were rare and bad:
the trolls may walk frequently from the northern valleys
de las Montañas Nubladas. Only on the Camino if
they meet travellers, the majority of the old men, welcomed by
your own assumptions, without help and with a few words to help
los extraños. «

I don't know how our happiness can last," Frodo said. «
We have been sufficiently cared for in the last few days, and this
dinner is not a party; but we consume more than we should, yes
even if we ask for two weeks, we ask ourselves more." «

Hay comida en la natura”, I say Trancos; bayas, roots y
hierbas; and I have certain ability as a cazador when I need it. No deben
fear dying in the shadows before the winter arrives." But collect y
The convenient bag is a large and long piece, and we need to give it to you first. That's it
wear their belts and look forward with hope to the mesas of the
house of Elrond!

The chill increased at night. Asomados al
edges of the valley, they could not see anything more than a gray earth
which quickly vanished into the shadows. The sky was there
despejato again and slowly filled up with bright stars. Frodo
and your companions took care of the fire, envueltos en
a single head, and they felt a little apart, smoking thoughtfully
on a pipe.

At the caer the night and the light of the fire began to shine
with strength, he began to tell his stories to dissuade him
I'm sorry. I knew many stories and legends from the past
Elves and men, and the good and bad actions of them
Old Days. They wondered how many years they were going and where they would end up
Learn all this wisdom.

«Háblanos de Gil-galad», dijo Merry de suddene, al
held at the end of a story about the elfish kings. ¿Sabes
Any more of this old song than the one you blasted?
 
—Yes, yes —Trancos replied—. Frodo also, because...
We are looking for. Merry and Pippin looked at Frodo, who
miraba fijamente el fuego.


250


 


“Only the little that Gandalf told me,” said Frodo
slowly-. Gil-galad was the last of the great elf kings
the Tierra Media. Gil-galad means Light of Estrella in its language. With
Elendil, the friend of the elves, was in the land of...

-No! —Interrupted Trancos—. I don't believe that
You have to tell this story now that the servants of the enemy are looking for.
We go to the house of Elrond, we can see it
allí, contada completa.

—Entonces cuéntanos otra history of the old times —Sam pleaded—;
a story about the elves before the end of time. I would be delighted
know more about the elves; the darkness seems painful
.

—Tell me the story of Tinúviel —dijo Trancos—, briefly,
It may be a long story whose ending is unknown; y
Ya nadie, except Elrond, remembers it as it is
he continued in the anti-güedad. It's a beautiful story, yet sad, like everyone else
tales of the Middle East, and so you can cheer up your heart. I watch
I'll silence a moment, and then I'll come on
sing suavemente, instead of talking:

The hojas were wide, the grass was green,

the tall and beautiful hemlock umbels,

and in the light there was a light
of titillating stars in the shade.

Tinúviel bailaba allí
to the sound of an invisible flute,

and the light of the stars shone on her hair

y en su vestimenta.

There I took Beren from the mountain frías,

and I wander around the holidays,

and from where the river of Elfos ran
caminó solo y afligido.

I looked at the hemlock trees
and off I go with golden flowers
sobre su manto y sus mangas,

and on his hair like a shadow following him.


 


251


The enchantment cured your canned pies
​​who were condemned to wander along the hills;
and he opened, strong and fast,

and he clung to the brilliant rays of the moon.
Through the woods of the Hogar de los Elfos,
she hummed with a light and dancing step,

and I left him alone, wandering aún,
listening in the silent forest.

Now let's stop the leaking rumor
of light feet like hojas de tilo,
temblorosa en hidden secrets.

O music that sounded on the earth,


Now mark the hemlock gavillas,

Y one by one with sucking sound
Caían whispers the hojas de haya
In the flickering winter forest.

He always looked for it, wandering around

Wherever the holidays of the years were densely scattered.
In the moonlight and the starlight
En cielos helados temblando.

Su manto brillaba en la luna,

Like on the top of a high and gentle hill
She danced, her pies extended
A stormy night.

When the winter passed, she returned,

And the sudden spring released his song,
Like the native London, and the rainy day,

Y agua derretida burbujeando.

Vio las élficas brotar flowers
A sus pies, y sanó de nuevo
Anhelaba joined her dancing and singing
Sobre la hierba sin disturbar.


252


 


It was new, but it came quickly.

Tiniwiel! Tiniwiel!

He called her by his elven name;

Y allí se detuvo a escuchar.

One moment if I deduce, y un hechizo
Su voz la overcogió: Beren llegó,

And the perdition lies above Tiniwiel

That on your arms there was shine.

Mientras Beren la miraba a los ojos
Inside the shadows of your hair,

The stormy light shines from the skies
Off to the reflection, brilliant.

Tiniwiel the beautiful elf,

Inmortal damsel with elven wisdom,

The redhead projected his dark hair
Your arms like shiny plata.

Wide was the path that destiny took him,

Over the mountainous, crisp and gray foothills,

Through hierrol halls and dark doors.

And forests of beautiful nights without morning.

Los Mares Dividers separate them,

And yet until they met once more,

Y hace a lot of time failed
In the woods singing without sadness.

Trancos sighed and took a break before returning to talk. Esa ex
a song, I say, in the way that is called ann-thennath
among the Elves, but it is difficult to translate to us
Common language, and this is no more than a Tuscan echo of her. Tell the history of
between Beren, son of Barahir, and Lúthien Timiviel. Beren
he was a mortal man, but Lúthien was hija de Thingol,
a king of elves in the Tierra Media when the world was...
Joven; and she was the loveliest girl who ever existed. En  
among all the people of this world. Like the stars above the...
the brumas of the northern lands are reflected on hermosura, and on


 


rostrum


a light shone. On every day, the Great Enemies,
that Sauron of Mordor was no longer a servant, he lived in it
Angband, in the North, and the Elves of the West, to return
in the Middle Tierra, they went to war to recover them
Silmarils that have stuffed; and the fathers of the men helped
to the Elfos. But the enemy rose victorious and Barahir was born
dead, and Beren, escaping from a great pilgrim, crossed them
Montañas del Terror y llegó al Reino culto de Thingol, en
the Neldoreth forest. Then I go to Lúthien singing y
dancing in a clear joint at the enchanted river Esgalduin; y
it is called Tinúviel, which means Ruiseñor in the language
from antaño. The clouds are very heavy afterward, and they are exhausted
separated for a long time. Tinúviel rescued Beren from the mazmorras de
Sauron, and now they overcame great dangers,
derribando included in the Gran Enemigo de su throne y tomando
of the crown of the hierro one of the three Silmarils, the most brilliant of
all the joys, so that Lúthien would offer his life as a dowry to Thingol, on
father. However, at the end, Beren was asked for the Lobo that went up
of the doors of Angband, and walled in the arms of
Tinúviel. But she chose mortality and to die among the others in the world
to be able to follow him; and they sing that they met again
more until the Seas Separated, and after a short time, they walked
It takes a long time, even beyond the borders of this world. Yes,
Lúthien Tinúviel, the only one of the elven lineage, has died
and they have abandoned the world, and they have lost others
amaban. But she descended among the men in the lineage of the ancient elders.
. Those of us still live
Lúthien was the forerunner, and it is said that on line
it won't crash. Elrond de Rivendel is from this line. Pues de Beren
y Lúthien was born Dior, the heir of Thingol; y de él, Elwing
la Blanca, with whoever happened to be Eärendil, who would zarpó
de las brumas del mundo hacia los mares del cielo con el
Silmaril in front. Y de Eärendil vinieron los Reyes de
Númenor, it is said, Occidentalesse.
 
As they spoke, they observed their anxiety outside.
beak, dimly illuminated by the red glow of wood fire. Your eyes


they shone


 


, and her voice was rich and deep. Sobre él había un
black and starry sky. Suddenly, a pale light appeared above it
crown of the Top of the Winds behind it. The crescent moon
slowly ascended the hill that took them, y
the stars above the top of the hill disappeared.

The story ended. The hobbits were filmed and drawn.
¡Miren!, I say Merry. The moon is rising: it must be haciéndose
late.

The others raised their sight. Included while they do it, see it
the top of the hill is small and dark against the sky
of the rising of the moon. Sometimes it was just a big stone or
a salient rock highlighted by the pale light.

Sam and Merry stood up and ran away from the fire.
Frodo and Pippin remained silent. Trancos observed
carefully the moonlight on the hill. Everything seems calm
and silent, but Frodo felt a cold terror as he clutched his heart,
now that Trancos ya no blaba. Search more
of the fire. At this moment, Sam returned running from
edge of the valley.

I don't know what it is, I say, but suddenly I felt sick.
I would not dare to climb up this valley for money; I heard something
he was subjected to the iron with great care. ¿

Have you seen anything? asked Frodo, taking a leap.

No, sir. Don't see anything, but you shouldn't look at me.

Hacia el est, whence the moonlight fell over the plains
more than in the shadow of the tops of the hills, he thought that there were two
or tres formas negras. They seem to move here. ¡

Manténganse seeks fire, with dear hacia afuera!, gritó
Trancos. Prepare some of the larger posts!

During a period of time they remained silent, silent and alert,
Stand at the fire of wood, let one look closely at it
shadows that rodeaban them. No worries at all. No hubo
I hear no movement at night. Frodo moved, hearing
who had to break the silence: he was anxious to shout.

¡Silencio!, Trancos whispered. What is this?, jadeó Pippin al
same time.


 


255

 
On the edge of the small canada, on the side opposite to it
colina, sintieron, more than ever, a shadow elevate, a shadow or
more than one. They forced their sight, and the shadows
it seems to grow. Pronto no pudo haber ninguna duda: tres o cuatro
tall and black figures standing on their feet on the floor, marveling at them
. So many black men were like that
black agujeros in the deep shadow behind them. Frodo creyo
I heard a whisper like a poisonous alien and I heard it
soft and penetrating chill. Once the forms advanced slowly.

The terror took away from Pippin and Merry, and they disappeared
to the ground. Sam took Frodo's side. Frodo
He was no less terrified than his companions; temblaba
as one would experience a terrible cold, but the terror was absorbed by one
sudden attempt to put the ring on. The desire to do it
I'll be free from it, and I can't think about anything else.
I did not forget the Cairn, nor Gandalf's mensaje;
but something seemed to force him to ignore
all the adverts, and you will also give in. Not with the esperanza de
escape, not to do anything, not good or bad: simply felt
which must take the ring back and place it on the chest.
No podía blar. He felt that Sam admired him, how to overcome it
what I love was in a big clear, but I couldn't
turn hacia él. I looked for the eyes and forced a rat;
but the resistance became unbearable, and finally, slowly, it ended
the chain and unslipped the ring onto the index finger above
left hand.

Immediately, although everything remained the same,
borroso and dark, the forms became terribly clear. Pudo
see below about black sales. Habia five
tall figures: two pies on the edge of the valley, three moving forward.
In his pale faces, penetrating and disheartened eyes burned; bajo
his mantles had large gray tunics; over their gray hairs,
plata yellows; in his hands demacradas, maple swords.
Their eyes rested on it and passed through it, while they fell
hacia el. Desperate, desenvainó on own sword, y
it seemed to her that the red was shining, as if it were a tea.
Dos de las figuras se detuvieron. The third one was taller than the others:


256


 


His hair was broad and brilliant, and a crown shone on his body.
In one hand he supported a broad sword, and in the other a cuchillo;
if they have ido and don't go back to attack. But there is no sensation.
Both the cuchillo and the hand that held it shone with a pale shine.
light He jumped forward and leaned over Frodo.

At this moment Frodo stood close to him
I'm happy to shout in a loud voice: 'Oh Elbereth! ¡
Gilthoniel! At the same time he hit the pies of his enemy.
A sharp cry sounded at night; and I felt a pain like a dart
de hielo envenenado pierce su hombro izquierdo. Including while you desmayaba
, I caught, as if through a dark cloud, a view of Trancos
leaping out of the darkness with a foliage calling in it
each hand. With one last effort, Frodo, leaving his sword,
unslipped the ring from its side and reached for the right hand
con fuerza sobre él.


 12


 


When Frodo turned back, he was still grasping the ring
desperadamente. It was close to the fire, which was now piled up
tall and burned brilliantly. His three companions were inclined
sobre él.

What happened? “Where is the pale king?” he asked
salvajemente.

I was happy to hear from the responder
a rat; I don't understand your question. Finally,
Sam deduced that they hadn't seen anything more than the wanderers
shadows that are looked for. De sudden, para su
horror, Sam discovered that his love had disappeared; y en ese
moment, a black shadow passed running towards him, and he fell. Oyo
Frodo's voice, but it seemed to come from a great...
They didn't see anything more, until they tropezaron with the body
of Frodo, who lay like a dead man, mouth down in the grass with him
on the sword below. Trancos I ordered them to remove it
and they put it in search of fire, and then disappeared. That was it
hace ya un buen rato.

Sam was clearly struggling to have new doubts over him
Trancos; but while talking, regressing, appearing
suddenly from among the shadows. If they jumped, and Sam disappeared
on the sword and I found it next to Frodo; but Trancos arrodilló
rápidamente a su lado.

I'm not a Black Jinete, Sam, I say suavely, I'm not married
with ellos. I've been trying to figure out something about it
movements; but I didn't meet anything. No entiendo por qué
estaban tan cerca.

When he learned what Frodo wanted to count, he learned about it


... 258


 

 
, I shook my head and sighed. Luego ordered to
Pippin and Merry who heat as much water as they can
their little tethers and who will wash the wound with her. ¡Maintain el
fire and heat in Frodo!, I say. Luego if
He got up, flew and called to Sam. I create that
now making things better, I say them in my voice.
It seems that there were only five enemies. So what
they are not all here, not themselves; but I don't think they expect to meet
resistance. They retired for the moment. But no
muy lejos, me fear. We'll fly again at night, if we can't
escape. They only hope, because they believe above
This purpose is complete and the ring cannot fly
much more read. I fear, Sam, that I believe that I love you
a mortal herd who will give it to her at will. We'll see you again
!

Sam was saddened by tears. Don't despair! —dijo Trancos—.
You must confide in me now. You Frodo is made of a more resistant paste than that
he had imagined, although Gandalf insinuated that it might turn out to be so.
He has not died, and I believe that the evil power of it will resist
help and it will cure him. Keep it well while you are here! If
he was about to disappear again in the darkness.

Frodo slept, although his pain was




 






now I'm gone and just looking for the places where they are dark-haired,
but over a wound like this, its healing power can be
small.

I washed the leaves in the water and washed them
Frodo's man. The scent of the vapor was refreshing, y
Those who were there realized that their minds were calmed down and calmed down.
The grass also you can certainly be able to over the grass, like Frodo
I felt that the pain and also the feeling of cold lessened on me
coast; but life did not return to my arm, and I cannot
stand up or use your hand. He complained bitterly about stupidity
and he reflected on the weakness of his will; because now
therefore when he put the ring on he did not obey him
own desire, up to the imperious desire of his enemies.

 
If
I wondered if I would be mutilated for life and how


 


they will forget to continue on their journey. He felt exhausted
débil to keep himself en pie.

They discussed precisely this question.
They decided to quickly abandon the Summit of the Winds as soon as possible. —I believe —I say Trancos— that the enemy
lleva días
keeping watch over this place. If Gandalf came here,
I was forced to get on the horse and there will be no recovery.
In any case, we would go through a great journey here in the evening, from the
ataque of years, and we will hardly meet a dangerous mayor
dondequiera que vayamos.
As long as they loved, they prepared
They are packed quickly and compactly. Frodo found it impossible to walk, as it were
they divided the majority of their equipment between the four
and they suffered it at the poni. On the last few days, the
little beast had marvelously improved; ya look more good
and strong, and had to show affection for him
new loves, especially for Sam. The draft of Bill Helecho was due
be very hard so that the journey for nature seems
much better than my previous life.
Partieron hacia el sur. This would mean
cross the Camino, but it was the quickest way to get to someone
more wooded area. You need fuel; Pues Trancos dijo que
Frodo must keep himself safe, throughout the night, while the fire
there would be protection for everyone. También was on plan
hacia este, and on the sixth day they tied themselves to the top of one
wooded hills. A lo lejos, bajo ellos, podían ver el Camino
which extended along the slopes of the hills; ya on derecha, a
the gray river shone palely low with the faint light of the sun. A lo lejos, vislumbraron
another river in a foothill valley, medium envuelto en
niebla.
«I fear that we must return to the Camino for a while»,
I say Trancos. «We were brought to the Río Pozo Hoar, que
los Elfos llaman Mitheithel. Flow from the shores of Etten,
the hills of the trolls to the north of Rivendel, and are joined to Aguafuerte
262
in the south. Some call it Inundación Gris for this reason. Ex
a great flow of water before reaching the sea. There is no way to cross it anymore
beyond its sources in the Páramos de Etten, except for the last
Puente por el que cruza el Camino».
“What is this other river that we see next?”, he asked
Merry.
This is Water, the Bruinen de Rivendel, responded.





 











 




Trancos. The burgundy path has many hills
kilometres, from the bridge until Bruinen goes. But
I didn't even think about how we would cross this water. ¡A river a la
vez! Tendremos mucha suerte yes no
we meet with the Último Puente.

On the following day, they temper for the morning, bajaron again
fireplace edges. Sam and Trancos advanced, however
they did not encounter travel rails or jinetes. Allí, bajo la
shadow of the hills, it was a little dull. Trancos calculated
that had fallen for two days and had been drunk every day
the huellas. No one has ever passed from one place to another, for that reason
alcanzaba a ver.

If they rushed at all speed,
and after one or two thousand, you will see the last point closer, to the
foot of a short and steep foot. Temieron ver
Black figures hoping there, but they don't see anything. Trancos los hizo
took refuge in a matorral on the side of the fireplace, while he advanced
to explore.

At the first rate, it returned to the beginning. No real list of the
I'm an enemy —I say—, and I wonder a lot about this
means ex. But I encountered something very strange.

I'll meet him in the middle of the bridge —I say—.
It's a drink, an elven stone. No if it was placed there or it was paid
by chance; but it gives me hope.
I will take it back as a sign that we can cross the bridge; but more to the point
I didn't have to follow the Camino without a clearer sign.


 


263


Followed by the fireplace. Cross the Healthy Bridge and
save us, without any sound except the water crashing against us
three great arches. A thousand more links to one stretch
barrow that headed north across the earth's shoes
the izquierda del Camino. Here Trancos left, and was ready
they were lost in a landscape shaded by dark trees that snaked between them
the slopes of the gloomy hills.

The hobbits were happy to be away in the desolate lands
the peligroso Camino; but this new country seems so
crests, visible ancient stone walls and
pleasant and hospitable. A thought as the hills advance
To their alrededor they are constantly raised. Here and there, above the hills,
the ruins of the towers have a sinister appearance. Frodo, que
no walking, all the time to look ahead and think. Recordó
Bilbo's story about his travels and his pleasantries
towers on the hills north of the Camino, in the country search
of the Trolls forest, where he had to take his first serious adventure
. Frodo assumes that they are now in the same place
region and I wondered if by chance I would look for it
of the place.

“Who lives in this country?” he asked. This is what I built
torres? Is this country of trolls? ¡

No!, I say Trancos. Trolls are not built. Nadie lives in this place
tierra. The men lived here, hace siglos; but no one is asking this question.
If they converted in a bad village, as the legends tell, because they cayeron
under the shadow of Angmar. But all were destroyed there
war that led to the Northern Kingdom to its end. But it has
It's been so long that the hills have forgotten him, even one
the shadow still extends over the earth.

Where you learned these things, once the earth is empty
Are you forgetful? asked Peregrin. The pájaros and the bestias no
cuentan cuentos de esa clase.

Elendil's herders don't forget all the past things, I say
Stider; and many more things that I can count are remembered
in Rivendel.

“Have you been to the Rivendel?”, Frodo said.

Yes, I say Trancos. I lived there once, and I still returned


when    

puedo. Here is my heart; but I don't want to feel like it
peace, I was not in the beautiful house of Elrond.

The hills now began to close in on them. El Camino detrás
I followed the Bruinen river down the road, but both were still there now
hidden from sight. The travelers took to a wide valley;
extreme, profoundly dark, dark and silent. Árboles with
The old roots and the retorcidas hang over the hooks and are set apart in
laderas ascendentes de pinar.

The hobbits were very successful. They advanced slowly, pues
they must open step by step through a land without paths,
obstructed by fallen trees and fallen rocks. Mientras pudieron,
they avoided climbing for Frodo and because,
Indeed, it was difficult to find a climb in the extreme valleys.
They take two days in this country when the weather is over
if he returned home. The wind began to rise with strength from the west.
and look at the water of the distant seas over the dark heads of them
the hills in a fine torrential downpour. At the same time, everyone is
empapados, and on camp it was sad, you can't do it anymore
no fuego para encender. On the following day, the hills rose even higher
filled before them, and they were obliged to turn away to the north
de su curso. Trancos seemed to be anxious
: they were sometimes ten days from the Top of the Winds, y
your provisions comenzaban to escasear. Siguió
loviendo.

That night they camped on a wooden platform with a rocky wall
beyond that, in which there was a shallow hole, a mere excavation
in the acantilado. Frodo was worried. The cold and the humidity have that
on herida the pain more than ever, and the pain and the sensation of
mortal frío they stopped all the dream. He asked himself giving turns and turns
and listening to the silent noises of the night with me: I come to them
the cries of the rock, the water dripping, the crujido, the sudden
fall from a loose stone. We felt that there were black shadows
they advanced to asphyxiate him; but when incorporated, nothing happens
more than the sword of Trancos, wrapped up and smoking on a pipe.
A dream in the one who walked over the grass of his garden in the



The region, however, seemed faint and diffused, less clear than the higher ones
black shadows that rise above the silk.

In the morning, when I got tired of it, I discovered that the rain had stopped.
The clouds follow thick, but they are disappearing, y
within the appliances there are French blue tiles. The wind turned to change direction
. They don't have old salt. Immediately after the cold
and desalentador desayuno, Trancos marched alone, telling them to him
those who will remain at the end of the acantilado continue
regressed. Iba to suffer, you can stand, to observe
the land.

When he returned, he did not appear to be calming. «Hemos llegado
I'm looking forward to the north", I say, "and we must find the way of it
return to the south. Let's follow this way,
we will go to the Ettendales, far north of Rivendel."  
This is the land of trolls, and I know little about it. Let's go...
Let's find our way and take us to Rivendel
from the north; but it will take a long time, because it won't happen
, and the meal wouldn't last. Thus, of another form,
we must meet the Vado de Bruinen.

They spent the rest of the day trepando por
rocky terrain. They met one step between two hills
I led them to a valley that extended to the safest direction
deseaban tomar; but hacia the end of the day,
a crest of high ground turned to block the chimney; on dark edges
against the sky it was seen in many naked places like people
of a single edge sierra. You should choose to get back
escalate it.

They decided to take the quick action, but it turned out badly
difficult. In a short time, Frodo was forced to dismantle it
advance on foot with difficulty. Nowadays, they almost despair of being subjected to it
on poni, or even to meet a fireplace,
with the cargoes that Iban. The light in any case has been extinguished, y
they were all exhausted, when they finally tied them to the top.
They had to go down a long hill between the highest points,
and the ground suddenly descended again, a short distance away
. Frodo settled on the ground and left


temblando


 


. On my left arm I have been alive, y
I felt how a healthy dog ​​would pinch my side and my body. The trees and rocks
that gnawed at him seemed somber and faint. «

We can't continue further," Merry told Trancos. "Me
I'm afraid this has become too much for Frodo. This is terrible
anxious for him. What do we have? I think you can
cure it in Rivendel, do we sometimes go there?

We'll see you again,” Trancos replied. «No more
what can be done in the desert; y es mainly por
on herida that I am so eager to follow soon. But I'm aware of that
we can't go any further this night.

What happens to me when I love you?” asked Sam
voz baja, aiming supplicantly at Trancos. Her wound was small
and that's it. Don't see anything more than a little
marca blanca en su hombro.

Frodo was killed by the weapons of the Enemigo
—I say Trancos—, and there is some poison or pain in this action
It's more to my ability to expel. But don't lose hope.
Sam!,
 
The night was cold at the top. I lit a small flame.
below the bare roots of a old pine tree, which were clinging above
a not very deep well: it seems like some of you will find a stone outside
from there. They felt curly. The wind was clean
across the street, and you will see the tops of the lowest trees
groan and sigh. Frodo slept half a day, imagining
that infinite dark wings fly above it, y
that in them there are cabalgang pursuers who search for him everywhere
hondonadas de las colinas.

The hand is brilliant and beautiful; the air was clear,
and the light is pale and clear in a sky soaked in rain. Sus corazones
they came alive, but they knew that the sun would heat up
Extremely stiff and frizzy. As he loved, Trancos raised himself to Merry
and I was contemplating the landscape from above
east of the pass. The sun rose and shone
with strength when I returned with more comforting news.
Now more or less in the correct direction. Yes


 


continued


, going down the highest slope of the ridge, they tended
las montañas a su izquierda. A little more forward, Trancos
I wasn't at the edge of the river and I was looking for more water in the lake
.

“We must turn to the fireplace,” I said. «No we can
hope to meet a journey across these hills. Sea what sea the peligro que pueda
acechar, the path is our only way to get on the road."

As soon as they finished business, they were forced to move on again. Bajaron
slowly across the slope above the ridge; but the fireplace was
much easier than what they hoped for, because the slope was very steep
less pronounced on this side, and in a short time Frodo may
turn to cabalgar. Bill Helecho's little boy was playing a game
unexplored talent to choose the path and to avoid them
Get as many jumps as possible. The soul of the group
it began to come alive. Even Frodo felt better with the morning light, but
vez when a cloud seemed to obscure her vision, and if
passed the hands by the eyes.

Pippin stays a little behind the others. Suddenly, he turned around
and I shouted: «Have a fireplace here!», I shouted.

When they got to their side, they saw that
no doubt: there was clearly the beginning of a journey.
Subia with many curves from the bottom wood and
furthermore, one on each side of Frodo's hill, perhaps the path was...
He disappeared at the top of the hill. In some places, it was now faint
and it was covered with evil, or blocked by fallen stones and trees; but
at some point there seemed to be a lot of transit. It was a sendero
he with strong arms and heavy feet. Here and there, old trees
they had tall or derribados, and large hendidas rocks or
apartadas para abrirse paso.

Siguieron el sendero during a rato, pues ofrecía
the easiest form to base, but they advance with caution, and up
anxiety increased as one entered the dark forest, and it
I'll send you more calls and also. De suddenly, going up from a
belt of fir trees, descended abruptly down a slope and turned abruptly
to the left to double the back of a rocky slope on the hill.


To the


 


llegar to the esquina, they looked at their alrededor and came
that the message would be talked about by a young girl, the beloved of a man
bottom acantilado with trees. There was a door on the stone wall
entreabierta, torcida, over a great deal.

Everything is left in front of the door. Había una cueva o
The rocky room is gone, but in the dimness of the interior it is not
see nothing. Trancos, Sam y Merry, empujando con todas sus
fuerzas, lograron open the door a little more, and then
they entered. No fueron muy lejos, pues en el
I used to have a lot of old hues, and looking for the entrance, nothing more was seen
that a great tinajas vacías y
ollas rotas.

“I'm sure this is a troll's mother, yes any more than one!”, I say
Pippin. Let's get rid of you and let's go! Now let's know
Here we open the path, and it will be better that we go quickly.

No need, I create, I say Trancos, going up.
She's certainly a mother of trolls, but she seems to have been abandoned for a long time.
I don't think we should keep myself. But let's go with caution,
y ya veremos.

The journey continued from the door and turned
From the back to the right side of the space, he would descend for a fee
wooded meadow. Pippin, who didn't want to demonstrate them to Trancos que
Once I was finished, I followed Merry closely. Sam y Trancos se
They will open enough so that four or five hobbits will walk one to the other's side.
But they didn't know much when Pippin came running.
furthermore, followed by Merry. Both seem terrified.

¡Hay trolls!, jadeó Pippin. Below, in a clear of
woods, no much less. Los vimos a través de los
tree trunks. They are very great!

Let's go again, say Trancos, cogiendo
a pole. Frodo didn't say anything, but Sam seemed accustomed.

The sun was high and shone through it
medium branches stripped of the trees, illuminating the light with
brilliant manchas de light. They suddenly disappeared on the edge
and they looked through the trunks of the trees, containing their breathing.


  269

There are the trolls: three big trolls. One was surrounded,
and the others looked at him fijamente.

Trancos advanced despondently. ¡Levántate, vieja piedra!,
I said, and I broke the stick on the surrounded troll.

Nothing happened. I have a jadeo de asombro
. We are forgetting our family history! These should be
the three others who were captured by Gandalf, peeling










 








in a cave on the hills where he lived alone,


Tom appeared with his large buttons.

I tell you Troll: Please, what is this?

Because the spindle of my Tim appears,

How it should be pulled in a cement plant. ¡

Cement plant! ¡Cement plant! Troll!

Tim disappeared so many years ago,

And I thought he was in a cement plant.

I much, I say Troll, this color robé.

But what are the colors that come in a dream?

You were dead like a plomo trozo,

Antes de que encontrara su espinilla.

¡Hueso de hojalata! ¡Hueso delgado!

You can ignore a part for a little old trol,

Because no espinilla is needed.

I say Tom: I don't see anyone like you
Without permission from Axin I should go free
With the espinilla or the espinilla de los parientes de my father; ¡

So I entered the old game! ¡

Rover! ¡Trover!

Even if he is dead, it belongs to him; ¡

así que dame el hueso viejo!


 


271


For a couple of files, says the Troll, and I sleep,

I'll come to you too and I'll roll the espinillas.

A little fresh meat will taste good!

Come and test the people now.

Here! Look!

This is made of red hues and old pieces;

I'm ready to eat next time.   

But just when I thought about dinner I was caught,

he met with those whose hands could not hold anything.

Before being able to import her, Tom slipped away
And I'll give you the opportunity to teach them.

¡Adviértele! ¡Maldito sea!

A coup with a blow in the east, Tom thought,

This would be the way to teach them.

But harder than the stone is the meat and the hue
Of a trol that is only heard on the hills.

This is how to place your bump on the mountain slope,

Because the asiento of a troll doesn't feel it.

Peel it! Cure it!

The old trol rió, when I heard Tom groan,

And I suppose your feet can hear it.

Tom's pierna is a game, since he got home,

And on foot without a bota it is always the same;

But the troll doesn't care, and it's all there
With the hue that left his dueño.

Doner! Boner!

The old asiento del troll continues to be the same,

And the color that left his dueño!

Good, this is a warning for all of us! —if Merry came back—. Here
well you used a pole and not your hand, Trancos! ¿

Where do you know this, Sam? —asked Pippin—.
I never heard these words.

Sam murmured something inaudible. —Es de su propia


head    

, so supuesto —I say Frodo—. I'm learning a lot about Sam
Gamgee on this trip. Primero was a conspirator, now
a joke. You will end up becoming a magician... or a warrior!

—I hope not —I say Sam—. I just want to know!

Late they continued through the forest.
They will probably follow the same path as Gandalf, Bilbo and
The wines have been used many years ago. After a few thousand,
they tied themselves to the top of a high terraplén above the Camino. En
at this point, the Camino has stopped atrás el Pozo Hoar en su
end of the valley, and now he clung to the foot of the hills,
undulating and snaking he made this between the woods and
Brezo cubiertas laderas, hacia el Vado y las Montañas. No much more
from the orilla, Trancos signaled a stone in the grass. En
she, Tuscan short and now very eroded, will still be seen
runes pineapple and secret brands. "

¡Ahí!", I said Merry. This must be the stone I marked
the place where the trolls' gold was hidden. How much do you want?
Do I wonder about Bilbo's part, Frodo?
the penumbra, on the head, brightened and shone, as if it were a seed.
 
Frodo looked at the stone and wondered that Bilbo...
I don't go home, no more hairy treasure, no less easy to lose
. No one at all, I say. Bilbo gave it all away.
I told myself that I didn't feel that it was really his, because he came from thieves.

The Camino remained calm under the large shadows of the night
. There are no signs from other travellers.
As you don't want another possible fireplace,
they descended by the side and, turning to the side, they flew so quickly
as pudieron. Hello, a piece of the hills blocked the light
only if it was done quickly. A refreshing wind
from the mountains that were long enough to receive them.

They are trying to find a place outside the Camino,
where they can camp to spend the night, when they look at one
I asked them to give me the money: el
helmet scratches behind them. Miraron hacia atrás, pero no pudieron
... As quickly as they can, they fly from the trilled chimney


 


y


they suffered the dense harm of rocks and ropes
of the upper ladders, until they are attached to a small parcel of
thick hazelnuts. Al asomarse entre los
shrubs, pudieron towards the Camino, light and gray in there
melancholy light, to a new meter behind them. The sound of the helmets was harsh
. Quick iban, with a light clip-ti-ti-ti.
Entonces, dévolently, as the breeze lifts it,
they seemed to hear a faint tinkle, like the tint of small bells.

¡This doesn't sound like the horse of a Black Jinete!, I say
Frodo, listening carefully. The same hobbits coincided with hope
that's not the case, but everyone remains suspicious.
They feared they would be persecuted for as long as anyone would
His shoulders seemed hominous and hostile. But Trancos se
tilt forward, close to the ground, with one hand in there
ear and an expression of happiness on the beak.

The light faded and the trees on the shrubs whispered softly.
The bells jingled more brightly and searched, y
the rapid trout were fished out. Suddenly, it appeared
a white horse, shining in the shadows, running fast. De
here, adorned with gems like living stars. The head of the jinete rendaaba
between it, and on the cap there was another one; on cabello dorado...
Flowing, shining, at the wind of its speed. To Frodo the
it seemed that a white light was shining through the figure
the dress of the jinete, as worn under a fine veil.

Trancos climbed out of the hide and ran to it
Camino, shouting across the breeze; but included before
whether it's a movie or a llamara, you'll find out about the horse
, looking at the depth from which they meet.
When he got to Trancos, he got off and ran to it
shouting: «¡Ai na vedui Dunadan! ¡Mae govannen!». On discussion
and your clear and resonant voice does not leave aside the doubts: the jinete
belonging to the elven community. Not another inhabitant of the same world
I had very pleasant voices to listen to. But it seems to have a note of
I take my name on my call, and I'll see that I'm talking to her now
with speed and urgency in Trancos.

Ready Trancos les hizo una seña, y los hobbits abandonaron los



shrubs and they are covered by the Camino. —Este es Glorfindel,
who lives in the house of Elrond —dijo Trancos—.

Greetings, and well met at the end! —I say the elf señor to Frodo—. Me
they sent from the Rivendel to buy cards. We fear that the couriers will arrive
peligro en el camino. ¿

Did Gandalf come to Rivendel? —exclaimed Frodo
with joy—.

No. He didn't have it when he left; but that was it
It's a new day — replied Glorfindel —. Elrond received news that
they worried him. Some of my relatives, traveling across the earth
more at the Baranduin*, they learned that something was going badly
sent mensajes as ready as can be. I told them
They were new, and they were extravagated, bringing a great deal
load without guide, then Gandalf has not returned.
There are a few, including in Rivendel, that can openly go against
los Nueve; but to those he had, Elrond sent him to the north, west
y sur. It was believed that you might want to go astray
avoid persecution and get lost in the desert.

I had to go back to the Camino, and go to the Bridge
de Mitheithel, and there's a signal there, even if it's days.
Three of Sauron's servants are at the bridge, however  
they retreated and pursued them to the west. Also read
also in other dos, but if they went away to the top. Desde entonces
I'm looking for you. Two days ago I met him, y
I followed him to the Bridge; y now marqué from where you descended
of the hills again. But Fri! No hay time
for more news. If you're here, we owe it to you to take care of the danger
Fireplace and irnos. They left us five times, and when they met
your path on the Camino will be among us like it
I come. And not everyone. Where can the other four be,
no the self. I'm afraid we might encounter what the Vado is
en nuestra contra.

As Glorfindel spoke, the shadows of late deepened
. Frodo felt that a great shock was overcoming him. Desde que
the sun began to shine, the darkness before his eyes would darken,


El río Brandivino.


 


275


and we felt that a shadow was interposed between us and us
faces of your friends. Now the pain assailed him, and he felt cold.
He swayed, clinging to Sam's arm.

You can't continue riding after the first moment. Need to scan.

Glorhndel grabbed Frodo when he exploded in the soil, and
putting him gently on his arms, he looked at him gravely
anxiety.

Trancos told her briefly about the ataque at his lower camp
the Top of the Winds, and of the mortal cuchillo. Sacó la empuñadura,
what he looked at, and he fed it to the elf. Glorfindel
if I was too tired to take it, I looked at it carefully.

There are some bad things written in this place, I say; anyway
sometimes your eyes can't see them. Look at it, Aragorn, until we get there
to the house of Elrond! But keep it safe and keep it at least
possible! ¡Ay! the wounds of this weapon are more near me
habilidad para curarlas. Haré what you can, though
Now I'm there for you even more than you continue without scanning.

He examined the wound in Frodo's man with him
now, and on the rostrum I take it more seriously, as I have learned
it will disturb him. But Frodo felt that the frost was diminishing on his side
arm; A light heat leaves the man next to you
hand, and the pain went away. The twilight of late seemed
clear up to your alredador, like a cloud if quickly dispersed.
He returned to his friends' faces with greater clarity, and one
new hope and strength to return. «

Ride on my horse», I say Glorfindel. «Yo acortaré...»
The stribos have the flaps of the riding saddle, and you must hear so many signatures
as you can. But don't worry about it: I won't let go of my horse
Please don't forget the orders you're taking. Over time it's light
suave; and if the pilgrim is too close, he will lift you up
with a speed that could not defeat the black arrows of the enemy
igualar.

¡No, he won't have it!, said Frodo. No I will mount it myself
they take to Rivendel or to any other place, leaving to measure
amigos atrás en peligro.

Glorfindel sonrió. I think a lot, I say what you are


276


 


friends will love each other if you don't love them. There
the persecution will follow you and we will be left in peace, I believe. Eres
you, Frodo, and the one who takes away what we put in everyone
dangerous.

To this Frodo did not answer, and was persuaded to go
with a large part of the cargas of the others, in the way that now
they march more lightly and for a while at a good pace; But in Los
hobbits began to follow the rapid and incantable speeds
elf's pies. I drive them through the darkness,
and further down the deep cloudy night. No había ni
stars in the moon. I didn't allow them
detenerse asta el gris amanecer. Para entonces, Pippin, Merry and Sam were cases
slept on their sleeping stones; and even Trancos parecía
cansado, for the sake of his men. Frodo felt himself in the sumido horse
in a dark dream.

They tumbled on the breeze, a few meters away
of the fireplace, and they lasted instantly.
Only once did they close their eyes when Glorfindel, who
if he could veil himself while they slept, he would be desperate. El
only you had entered the morning, and the clouds
and the night fogs have disappeared. ¡

Beban esto!, les dijo Glorfindel, serving each one
a little liquor from the stem of the heart with crusts of wood. Era
transparent like manual water and no taste,
neither fresh nor hot in the mouth; but strength and vigor
they seem to flow through all my friends to drink it. (Habían comido  
After that, I took the hard bread and the dry fruit (that was
all the things I asked for seemed to please me in the hambre
better than many good tastings in the Comarca.
 
They had missed it for less than five hours when they returned
el Camino. Glorfindel would reward him, and alone
Allowed two short parades during the March of the day. In this way
They ran in twenty thousand cases before the end of the year, and they brought them
at a point where the Camino turned to the back and descended
at the bottom of the valley, now directly hacia los Bruinen.


 


Until
now there are no signs of persecution that the
hobbits can see each other; but in the meantime Glorfindel was detained
and listen for a moment, if you think back, and an expression of
anxiety nublaba on rostrum. One or two times I brought them to Trancos
en la lengua élfica.
that the hobbits could not follow this night. They were
everything less about your pies and piernas. Frodo's pain had been overcome,
and during the day the things of your elder disappear in the shadows of
a ghostly gris. God welcome the night's sleep, because
Therefore the world seemed less pale and vacant.
The hobbits were still forgotten when they left again the first hour
of the next morning. They also take a lot of kilometers to travel
Hasta el I go, and they advance together with their best
rhythm. «
Our pilgrim will be mayor just before reaching the river,” I say
Glorfindel; «Please tell me that the persecution is yours
passed quickly, and another stranger could join right away
I go".
The Camino continued descending at a constant pace, y
in some of us there was abundant grass on both sides, because of which
hobbits walk when they can eat their canned pies. Al
late they went to a place where the Camino was located
suddenly I lower the dark shadow of the tall pine trees, and then
he entered into a deep claw with stipples and humid legs
red stone. If they hear echoes while they advance they quickly; y
there seemed to be the sound of many steps that followed his songs.
Suddenly, as if passing through a door of light, the Camino began to climb again
from the end of the tunnel to the descubierto. Allí, al
at the foot of a pronounced slope, there was a wide one before it
a thousand planes, and even more to the Go of Rivendel.






On one side there was a steep brown slab, surmounted by a sinuous path;
and behind her, the high mountains rise, the man moves
man, little by little, let the sky disappear.


278


 


There was also an echo like the footsteps that followed them in the light
trans ellos; an impetuous roar, as a wind rises and rises
above the pine branches. In an instant,
Glorfmdel turned and listened, and then he launched forward with
a loud cry.

¡Corran!, he shouted. ¡Corran! The enemy is above us!

The white horse jumped forward. Los hobbits bajaron corriendo
the ladera. Glorfmdel and Trancos los siguieron en retaguardia.
As soon as they ran the middle of the plain, when suddenly they stopped
a ruido de caballos at the gallop. Go up the door, between the trees, y
luego otro; luego dos más.

¡Cabalga! ¡Cabalga!, Glorfmdel shouted to Frodo.

This is not immediate obedience, it may be an extra reticence that will arise
de él. Holding the horse at a pace, he turned and looked
hacia atrás. The Jinetes seem to have been heard on their large frames as they were
beautiful statues on a hill, dark and solid, while everyone else
the woods and the land of his father were disappearing like the clouds. De
suddenly up in your heart that
They were silently ordering her to wait. Indeed, immediately, the heart and the hatred dwindled in it.
On my hand I took the bridle and grabbed the grip of his sword, and
with a red destello he undid her.

¡Cabalga! ¡Cabalga!, Glorfmdel shouted, y luego, alto y
clear, he called the horse in the elven language: now lim, now to
lim, Asfaloth!

Immediately, the white horse jumped and ran like him
I come off the last turn of the Camino. At the same time, los
black horses jumped down hill in his persecution, and of
the Jinetes brought a terrible cry, as Frodo had heard while learning
de horror los groves en la jana Cuaderna Oriental. Fue
responded; and for the consternation of Frodo and his friends,
of the trees and rocks in the izquierda, other four Jinetes
they came running. Two cabalgaron hacia Frodo; dos galoparon locally
hacia el I go to cut off her hair. She liked it
they run like the wind and they happen every time as large and dark as a thought
their carreras converge with the suya.


 


279


Frodo looked at her for a moment.
You couldn't see your friends. Those who followed him were
Asking further: no one can compete in speed with the large speeds.
for the white elf horse of Glorfindel. I turned to look forward
, and hope vanished. Apparently there is no possibility of transport
I go before the others who have tended one cut it off
emboscada. Now I can see it with clarity: apparently
have left the capuchas and the black capas, and dressed
white and gray tunics. Take the swords bare on them
pale hands; yelmos en sus cabezas. Your fresh eyes shine,
and they called him with mournful voices.

On sword. Ningún grito salió de él. I'll look for the eyes and I'll hold on
to the bells of the harness, which resound saves and strikes. An alien of
mortal frost crossed him like a lance, like with a last chorro, like a destello
of white fire, the elf horse, speed as it turns to the wings, passed
just delante del rostro del Jinete que iba delante.

Frodo looked at the water bottle. Espumaba a sus pies.
The rapid movement and the oil were felt when the horse left the river
and suffered with difficulty on the pedestrian path. He was undergoing the empinada
orilla. Había cruzado el Vado.

But the pursuers follow him in search. At the top of the
ribera, the horse took off and turned, relinching ferociously.
Había Nueve Jinetes at the edge of the water, y
Frodo's soul was overcome by the mirth of his raised beaks.
Don't know anything that could stop them from cruising
with the same ease that it is; and I felt it was useless
try to escape through the wide and uncertain path that I'm going to
edge of Rivendel, if the Jinetes cruzaban. In any case
case, she felt that she needed to be detained urgently. I hate it
I started to get excited about it, but I didn't want to stop
to deny oneself.

Suddenly, the Jinete who had previously exposed his horse. Este
I found myself in the water and got angry. With great effort, Frodo
he bribed and flattered his sword. "Return!" he shouted. «Return to the Tierra de
Mordor

y
no me sigas más!”. Your voice is weak and strident in your voice
own oils. The Jinetes disappeared, but Frodo did not hold the power
de Bombadil. His enemies recovered from him with one
harsh and exhaling laughter. ¡Regresen! ¡Regresen!, gritaron. TO
Mordor los llevaremos! ¡




 



¡Regresen!, susurró.

¡El Ring! ¡El Anillo!, they shouted with deadly voices; And
immediately on leader azuzó to his horse hacia el
water, followed by searching for other dos.

¡Por Elbereth y Lúthien la Hermosa!, I say Frodo with a last
exertion, raising your sword, I won't hold the ring
ni a mí!

Once the leader, who had crossed the path of the journey, rose up
agonized over his stribos and raised his hand. Frodo
if there was a pang of pain. She felt that the language was stuck in her mouth
and the heart held her with strength. On the sword it broke and fell
first of the black horses who in some cases had a foot in there
orilla.

At this moment there was a rugido and an estruendo: a ruido
of strong waters that break down many stones. Vaguely, Frodo vio como el
the river grew lower, and the width of its course descended one
cabballería emplemada de las. It seemed to Frodo that they called white calls
titilaban on their crests, and cases creyó ver entre
the white water over the white horses with
foamy horsehair. The three Jinetes that are still encountered in the middle of the
I go quedaron abrumados: disappeared, sepultados suddenly
below the furious foam. Those who were behind were relegated
consternados.

With his last debilitated feelings, Frodo looked gritty, and it seemed to her
see, more to the Jinetes who waver there
orilla, a brilliant figure of white light; and through it they run small
shadowy shapes that shake calls, that shine red in the gray clouds
que caía sobre el mundo.

The black horses were drawn, and jumping
aterrorizados, arrastraron to their jinetes hacia the impetuous current.
His brave souls were buried in the roar of the river


 


28l


while they arrastraba. Entonces Frodo felt that it happened, y
the wrinkle and the confusion seemed to rise and soften it
joined with his enemies. No more, no more.


BOOK DOS


 THE





Frodo despaired and found himself close to his bed. At first he thought
who had slept until late, after a long and unpleasant sleep
that still wandered around the edge of his memory. Or so it used to be
Are you sick? But the technology had an extraneous aspect; it was plano and tenia
dark dark vigas riché talladas. If I asked for a more detailed description
the rays of sun on the wall and listening to the sound
of a waterfall.

Where is this and what time is it? I say in a loud voice to
techo.

In the house of Elrond, and they are the tenth of the morning
, I say a voice. It's the morning of the October vein
, si quieres saberlo.

'Gandalf!' Frodo shouted, incorporating himself. There was the old magician,
seated on a saddle next to the open wind.

Also, after all the absurd things that have happened to you since
of the house.

Frodo returned to come near. If you felt comfortable and peaceful
to discuss, and in any case I wouldn't think it would be safe to do so
better than a discussion. It was completely empty now, y el
the memory of his travels returned: the disaster
atajo; el accidente en El
Poni Pisador; and take care to place the ring in the valley
below the Cima de los Vientos. I thought about all these things
and tried to record the message in vain
in Rivendel, if there was a long silence, I only spoke for the sweethearts
mouthfuls of Gandalf's pipe, which exhaled rings of white hum
the window.

'Where is Sam?' asked Frodo broadly. ¿Y están
bien los demás?


286


 


Yes, everyone is safe and sound, replied Gandalf. Sam
I'm here until I send him to get away,
hace como media hora.

“What happened to me?” said Frodo. All several
so confused, in some way; and it still seems so.

Yes, he would. Being forced to fall, I responded
Gandalf. The bride was coming to you at the end. A little
more hours and you have been more at the mercy of our help. But
I have some strength, I wonder hobbit! As you demonstrated
in the mound. This was the first question: quiz it
most dangerous moment of all. Ojalá hubieras podido resistir
en la Cima de los Vientos.

It seems like you know a lot, I say Frodo. No les he
I talked to the others above the Cairn. At the beginning
it was so horrible, and now there are many other things in it
think. How do you know?
 
I've said a lot in my dreams, Frodo, I say Gandalf.
With care, and it didn't cost me anymore you mind
y you memory. Don't worry! Anyway to say "absurd"
, it wasn't my intention. I have a good opinion of you and others.
It is no small thing to have so many hours, and to have overcome so much
peligros, aún carrying the ring.

We never have it without Trancos, I say Frodo.
But we need it. I don't know what to do without you.

He brought me back, I said Gandalf, and this happened in our case
ruined. Yes, without embargo, I'm not sure: I could have been better this way. ¡

Please tell me what happened! ¡

See you all the time! If you assume that you shouldn't say anything or worry about it
for nothing today, for the orders of Elrond.

But telling me would prevent me from thinking and reflecting, that is
I am equal to betting men, I say Frodo. I'm completely empty now, and recovered
so many things that need explanation. ¿Por qué
did you retract? Deberías decirme eso al menos.

Ready to see everything you want to know, I say Gandalf.
We will provide you with advice as ready as you can recover. Por
At the moment I'll just say that I'm cautious.

You?, cried Frodo.





287


Yes, yo, Gandalf el Gris, I say to the magician solemnly.
There are many farms in the world, for good or for bad.
Some are bigger than me. Against others I am not yet
medium. But now he's looking for me. El señor Morgul y sus
Jinetes Negros han aparecido. He's preparing for war!

Do you know about the Jinetes, before you knew them?

Yes, I knew them. After all, you will hear from him once;
pues los Jinetes Negros son los Spectros del Anillo, los New Sirvientes
of the Señor de los Anillos. But I don't know what they have
resurgido, or have water contigo immediately. Tuve
news from them only after leaving in June; but this history must be hoped for. For the moment,
Aragorn
nos ha salvado del desastre .
Yes, I say Frodo, it was Trancos who saved us. Without embargo,
at first I kept her at bay. Sam never trusts everything in him, I create,
at least no more than we know in Glorfindel.
Gandalf smiled. I heard it all about Sam, I say.
Ya no tiene dudas.
I'm happy, I say Frodo. Because I think it's very cute
Trancos. Good, cute is not the correct word. It's clear, it's sweet
I remember you a lot. I didn't know that the Grandes
Personajes were like this. I thought, well, that they were simply great,


 
; although it is extraño and sombre sometimes. De hecho, el...
y más bien estúpidos: lovable and estúpidos como Mantecona; or stupid
y evil as Bill Helecho. But we don't know much about it
about the men of the region, except the questions of Bree.

Barliman is stupid, I say Gandalf. It's enough to know about it
own land. Think less than what you say, and it's slower; without embargo,
you can see through a wall of thieves at a time (as they say in Bree).
But they quedan little in the Tierra Media as Aragorn hijo de
Arathorn. The breed of ultramarine fish is the case
to the end. It may be that this Ring War is on
last adventure.

In truth, I'd like to say that Trancos is one of the towns of
the ancient Reyes?, I say Frodo with asombro. I thought everyone had it
disappeared for a long time. He thought he was just a Montaraz.


¡


 


Only a Montaraz!, Gandalf shouted. I wonder about Frodo, eso es
precisely what the Montaraces are: the last vestige in the North of the
gran pueblo, los Hombres del Oeste. They helped me
antes; and I need help in the next few days; pues
We are connected to Rivendel, but the ring has not yet been abandoned.

I suppose not, I say Frodo. But until now I have only one thought
I had time to go here; and I hope not to have more
lejos. It is very pleasant to simply scan. I kept it for a month
exile and adventure, and I discover that everything has happened
I need it.   

I looked in silence and closed my eyes. After a rat,
I turned to talking. I'm calculating, I say, and I can't lift it
the total hasta the veinticuatro de october. Deberia ser
the twenty-one. We must be connected to I'm going to see you
veinte.

You have written and calculated more than what is convenient for you,
I say Gandalf. How do the body and the man feel now?

No, replied Frodo. I don't feel anything at all:
Which is a better thing, but —hizo an effort— I can
move your arm a little again. Yes, you're moving back to life. —No hace
frío —añadió, touching the left hand with the backside—.

¡Bien! —I say Gandalf—. If it is healing quickly. Ready and ready
good. Elrond has looked after you: he has looked after you throughout
days, from the moment they brought you. ¿
Good, four nights and three days, to be exact. Los elves

¿Días?, said Frodo.

You traje del I go the night of the veinte, y
oh this is where you lost your account. We were terribly anxious,
runs mensajes. Elrond is a master of healing, but weapons are
little hope; you may suspect that some fragment of the story was also being queried
the house in the herida cerrada. But I can't meet him
hasta anoche. Entonces Elrond extrajo a distillate. Estaba deeply
enterrada y se hundía.

Frodo was forced to record the cruel cuchillo de
I have the tooth that disappeared in the hands of Trancos. Not you





alarms


!, I say Gandalf. Ya no está. If he has derretido.
And it seems that the hobbits disappear with much regret. I know a
strong warriors of the Pueblo Grande who lived quickly
sold by this rod, which you raised during ten years
días.

¿What do I have here?, asked Frodo. ¿Qué
intentaban hacer los Jinetes?

They attempted to pierce the heart with a Morgul cuchillo who
it remains in the wound. If they know you're done, you'll be happy
back as they are, only that I send them more débil and bajo
. You have converted into a spectrum below the domain
of the Dark Señor; and you must have been tormented by it
try to keep on Anillo, if you have the greatest torment possible
that will be stuffed and see it in your hand. ¡

Thanks to God who doesn't tell me the horrible peligro!, I say
Frodo débly. He had a mortal honey, for supuesto; but yes, yes
more satisfactorily, no one was afraid of me, no one wanted to move me. It's a
milagro que haya escapado!

Yes, fortune or destiny have helped you, I say Gandalf, but no
talk about the heart. Because your heart was not touched, y
only you man was passed away; and that was why you resisted
until the end. But it was a terribly just victory, after all
decide it. Stay in serious danger while lifting the ring, because
entonces you are the media in the spectral world, y
you might have captured it. Podías verlos, y ellos podían
green.

The self, I say Frodo. They were terrible to contemplate! But...
why are we all shy about our horses?

Because they are real caballos; same as black tunics.
Real tunics that appear to give shape to anything  
cuando tratan con los vivos!

First of all, why do these black horses tolerate such jinetes? All
most animals are terrified when they are approached, including this one
Glorhndel elf horse. The perros aúllan and the gansos gritan

Because these caballos are born and cry for the service of
Dark Lord in Mordor. Not all your goodies and pleasures


290    

they are spectros! There are ogres and troles, there are huargos and
hombres lobe; and he has room and still has many men,
warriors and kings, who walk alive below the Sun, and without embargo they are
bajo on domain. Your number grows daily.

What happens with Rivendel and the Elves? Are you safe from Rivendel?

Yes, now, until everything is conquered. Los Elfos pueden
fear the Dark Lord, and you can leave before him, but never
They will no longer ask for it nor will they serve it. Here it is
Rivendel also lives some of its main enemies: the wise elves, señores
of the Eldar farther from the lighter seas. Don't worry
at the Spectros del Ring, people who have lived in it
Reino Bendecido live often in both worlds, and against the Visible
and the Invisible have great power.

He created a white figure that shone and didn't shine
he paid like the others. Was this Glorfindel entonces?

Yes, you saw it for a moment as it was before
lado: one of the powerful Firstborns. He is a señor elf de
a house of princes. Indeed, there is power in Rivendel para
resist the power of Mordor, for a time; and in other places
other farms will also die. They also have the power of another type
in the Comarca. But all these ready places will be converted into island
Asediadas, siguen siguen como van. El Señor Oscuro
You're unpacking all of your power.

Aun so —I said, rising suddenly and rising there
barbilla, while your beard is erizaba like erizado alambre—,
we must maintain our courage. Hello you pondrás bien, yes no
te hablo hasta la muerte. Estás en Rivendel y
You don't need to worry about anything right now.

—I have no valor to follow you —says Frodo—, however
I'm not worried at this moment. Only ladies news from my friends.
And I remember the end of the story on the way, while I'm going forward.
I think I'll sleep again; but I couldn't stop.
Please wait until you have finished the story.

Gandalf moved on the saddle to the side of the cama and got a good...










the others were stuck in the water by their horses and
abrumados.

"Is this the end of the Black Jinetes?" asked Frodo.

and without them they are lisiados. But the Ring Spectros


292    

They cannot be destroyed so easily. Without embargo, no hay
nothing more than to fear them now. Tus amigos
they crossed after the flood passed and they met you
mouth lower at the top of the ribera, with a wheeled sword
debajo. The horse was guarded on all sides. Estabas
pale and cold, and they feared that they would be dead, oh
algo peor. The people of Elrond received them, slowly hatching them
Rivendel.

“What caused the flood?” asked Frodo.

Elrond ordered it, Gandalf replied. The river of
This valley is low on power, and it will grow furious when
There is a great need to block the vehicle. As ready as the captain of
the ring ghosts entered the water, the flood stopped.
If you allow me to say it, also a few of your own touches: you can
I don't know what it is, but some of them adopted the form
large white caballos with brilliant white jinetes; y había
lots of rocks rolling and rolling. I'm afraid for a moment
that hubiéramos desatiado un wrath demasiado feroz, y que la inundación
he will uncheck himself and he will arrest everyone. Hay a great
vigor in the waters that under the snows of the mountains
Montañas Nubladas.

Yes, everything comes to me now, I say Frodo: the terrible one
rough. I thought I was loving myself, with my friends and
enemies and everything. But now we are safe!

Gandalf looked quickly at Frodo, but he had closed his eyes.
Yes, everyone is safe now. Ready habrá
banquet and joy to celebrate the victory in el Vado
de Bruinen, and all will be there in places of honor. ¡

Gorgeous! —I say Frodo—. It is marvelous that Elrond,
Glorfindel and so important señores, without mentioning Trancos,
if you take so much annoyance and show me so much kindness.

—Good, there are many reasons for it —I say
Gandalf smiling—. I am a good reason. El Anillo is another:
You are the ring bearer. Yeres el heredero de Bilbo, el
que lo encuentra.

Dear Bilbo! —I say Frodo asleep—. I wonder where it will be.
Ojalá estuviera aquí y pudiera oírlo todo. He has them



hecho reír. The vaca jumped over the moon! ¡Y el
poor trolls! And with this I slept deeply.

Frodo was now safe in the Last House Accomodated to the east of the
Mar. This house was, as Bilbo had been informed for a long time, one
perfect house, as much as you enjoy it as you sleep, count the stories
or sing, or simply feel and think, or something pleasant
mix everything. The mere fact of being there cured the dog
, el miedo y la tristeza.

At the end of the day, Frodo turned to discover and discover
that you didn't need to avoid sleep, as long as you could
ganas to eat and drink, and probably to sing
read more stories. He got up from his bed and discovered himself
that on your arm was as useful as ever
. You will find prepared ones, take clean sheets of green cloth
they felt amazed. When you looked at it in one place, you were surprised
a much closer reflection of the same thing that was recorded:
it seemed notable to Bilbo's young sobrino who
I just walked with my boyfriend through the county; but the eyes
they looked thoughtfully.

Yes, you have seen one or two things since the last time you saw them
at the end, I tell you to reflect. But now,
a happy meeting! I extended my arms and silbó una
melody.

At this moment they called at the door
Sam came in. He ran to Frodo and took away his broken, numb hand
and timidly. I stroked it gently and then it stopped
if God turns it quickly.

“Hello, Sam!” said Frodo.

It's hot!, said Sam. If you speak to yourself, Señor Frodo. There
I felt a lot of noise during the late nights. But glory and trumpets
! —gritó, turning again with bright eyes and
dancing on the dance floor—. ¡Qué bien verlo de pie ya usted mismo
again, sir! Gandalf noticed that wine was coming to him...
Listo para bajar, y thought it was bromeaba.

—This is the list —I say Frodo—. Let's go look for the rest of the
group!


294


 


This is very peculiar. There always is more to discover, y
Nadie knows who will meet you on the esquina road. ¡Y elfos, señor! ¡
Elfos here and elfs there! Some like lungs, terribles and
splendid; and others as happy as children. And the music is
the songs... it's not that I have a long time and no soul to stop
learn a lot from what we are wearing. But I'm knowing
some of the local customs.

—What has been done, Sam, said Frodo,
tomándolo del brazo—. But this night you will be happy and you will learn everything
que que eras. Let's go, guide me to the tables!

Sam drove it for various steps, under a lot of stairs
and went up to a garden high above the steep bank of the river.
He met his friends sitting on a porch near the coast
house that looked like this. The shadows have fallen in the valley,
but there will still be light in the dears of the mountains, there
arrives. The air was warm. The sound of
Running and cayendo water was strong, and the late was impregnated with a faint aroma
to trees and flowers, as the truth will continue
los jardines de Elrond.

¡Hurra!, shouted Pippin, taking a leap. Here is our noble
first! Abran pass to Frodo, Lord of the Ring!

¡Silencio!, I say Gandalf from the shadows at the bottom of the
portico. Bad things don't come to this valley; but aun
so let's not name it. El Señor del Anillo no es
Frodo, until the love of the Dark Tower of Mordor, here
power extends to the world again. We have heard
in a fortress. Outside is dark.

Gandalf was saying many happy things like this,
I say Pippin. I think I need to keep myself in order. But it seems like it
It's impossible, in any way, to feel melancholic or depressed in this
place If you can sing, you will find the right song for it
occasion.

—I have the strength to sing —Rió Frodo—. Anyway now
I care more about food and drink.
—Eso

ready if it will cure —dijo Pippin—. It has been demonstrated
You have a habitual habit at Levantarte just in time to come.







More than a treat! “A party!”, Merry said. As ready as they come  
Gandalf informed you that you have recovered, the preparations...
empezó. Only had to finish cleaning when they were out
summoned to the salon by the repique of many bells.

The living room of Elrond's house was full of people: Elfos, please








it seemed, and the thoughts and the knowledge were in their sight.
On the front, on the head it was covered with a gorro de
encaje de plata entretejido with small gems, of a brilliant white; but on suave
gray clothing does not have any adornment except a belt of hojas labradas en
silver.

So it was like Frodo went to that where few mortals had
seen aún; Arwen, hija of Elrond, to whom it was said that
Lúthien's seed had returned to the earth; y if
called Undomiel, because she was the late star of her village.
He spent a long time in the country of his mother's relatives, in Lórien
farther from the mountains, and recently returned to Rivendel
to his father's house. But their brothers, Elladan y
Elrohir, traveller; Pues cabalgaban a menudo lejos
con los Montaraces del Norte, sin olvidar jamás
the torment of his mother in the healing of the orcs.

Frodo jamás había visto
I never imagined so much beauty in a living man; y if I surprised y
I came to the realization that there was a stranger in Elrond's table between all
to those tall and handsome people. Even though he had a suitable seat
and it was lifted on various cushions, it felt very small and
somewhere else; but this sensation passed quickly. The party
it was cheerful and comfortable, everything that could be desired in the hambre. Paso
a report before you will want to look at your alrededor or even
if you want to have your neighbors.

First he went to his friends. Sam had to know what they were
They allowed you to wait for your love, but they told you that this is it
He was once an honorary guest. Frodo could see it now,
heard with Pippin and Merry at the top of one of them
the auxiliary mesas look for the estrado. Don't see any trace of it
Trancos.

Upon reaching Frodo, right behind him, he felt an important aspect
, richly dressed. His beard, very large and forked, was





white


, cases as white as the canvas white as the snow of your ropes.
He took off a platinum belt and the redhead attached a chain to his neck.
Plate and diamonds. Frodo had to come to look at him.
 
«Welcome and welcome!», I said to the old man, turning to him.
Then he rose from his seat and received a reverence. «Glóin
to your service», I say, and I offer an even more profound reverence.

«Frodo Bolsón at your service and your family», I say
Frodo correctly, standing up surprised and spreading his cojines. «¿
I am certain that you are Glóin, one of them
doce companions of the great Thorin Escudo de Roble?

«Muy bien», the boy replied, recognizing him
comforts and kindly helping Frodo to go away. «
And don't worry, you can tell me who you are
relative and adopted successor of our friend Bilbo el
reshadowed. Let me congratulate you on your recovery. «

Thank you very much,” Frodo said. «

I hope you've had a very strange adventure,” I say
Glóin. «I wonder a lot about bringing four hobbits on such a long journey
. Nothing the same happened after Bilbo wine
with us." But sometimes you shouldn't investigate too much, that's it
Elrond and Gandalf don't seem willing to talk about this.

I think we won't talk about it, at least not all of us, I say Frodo
kindly. I suppose I included the assumption in Elrond's house
del Ring was not for casual conversation; and in any case you would like it
forget your problems for a while. But I keep the same thing
curiosity, añadió, to know what leads to such an important thing
many lejos de la Montaña Lonely.

Gloin looked at it. If you haven't heard it, I think so
we will soon talk about it all. Master Elrond will summon us
to all within a little, I believe, and we will all know a lot of things.
But there is much more that matters.

During the rest of the meal, they talked together, though
Frodo learned more about what he said; because of the news from the Comarca,
apart from the Ring, there are several small ones, left and right
important, while Gloin wanted a lot to count on the contributions in the
northern regions of the Tierras Salvajes. Frodo entered that Grimbeorn el
Old man, son of Beorn, was now the master of many robust men,


298    

ya on earth between the Montañas and the Black Forest
neither ogre nor lobe should fly to the air.

Here, I say Glóin, if not by the Beornings,
El paso del Valle a Rivendel habría sido  
impossible for much time. They are brave men who keep the High open...
add a lot of time with a head movement; and like the Beorns of the past,
Don't let them have too many cute ones. Aun so, they are galls, and so
that's a lot these days. There are so many friendly men nowhere
with us like the Hombres del Valle. They are good folics, the Bardos.
El nieto de Bard el Arquero los gobierna, Brand hijo
de Bain hijo de Bard. He is a powerful king, and his king now
it extends much to the south and east of Esgaroth.

'What is the matter with your own people?' asked Frodo.

There is much that matters, good and bad, I say Gloin; but e.g
mostly good: until now we are fortunate, anyway
Let's not escape the shadow of these times. You really deseas
knowing about us, I will give you news with gusto. But keep me when you can't!
They say
that the wines have a lot of air when they have their work done.
And with this, Gloin embarked on a long journey
hazañas del reino de los Enanos. I was delighted to have it
I met a very courteous eye; Frodo can't show any dog ​​signs
I didn't intend to change the theme, however
in reality ready if lost among the extra names of
people and places who have never heard of it before.
However, she was interested in knowing that Dain would follow him as he was younger
the Mountain, and which was now old (had full of people
five years), venerable and fabulously rich. De
the ten companions who have overlived the Battle of the Five
Soldiers, you are followed by: Dwalin, Gloin, Dori, Nori,
Bifur, Bofur and Bombur. Bombur was now as good as it was
I couldn't move from my seat to my seat on the table,
and six young teenagers were needed to remove it.
"What is the state of Balin, Ori y Óin?", he asked
Frodo.
A shadow passed across Gloin's beak. We don't know,
he responded
. It is largely for Balin that I come
I ask for advice to the inhabitants of Rivendel. But this night
we have trouble with the most pleasant things!
Glóin begins to talk about the work of his village, counting them
to Frodo about his great labors in the Valley and at the foot of the Mountain
. Hemos hecho bien, dijo. But in the metal shop...










 
We cannot rival our fathers, many of our secrets have been lost. We fabricate
mallas or swords that match those that were made before...
The old times. Let's go to the canals of the Valley, Frodo,
and the fuentes and the estanques! Read more
fireplaces blocked by many colours! ¡Y los salons y las
cavernous streets on the lower ground with tall arches like trees; y las
terraces and towers on the mountain slopes! Real truths
que no hemos estado ociosos.

I'll see you again, once I can, I'll tell you Frodo. Here
I was surprised that Bilbo had seen all the changes there
Desolación de Smaug!

Glóin looked at Frodo and smiled. Querías mucho a
Bilbo, ¿verdad?, preguntó.

Yes, replied Frodo. I'd rather see it than everyone else
torres y palacios del mundo.

Finally, the party reached its end. Elrond and Arwen rose
and they went back to the hall, and the company followed them
en order. The doors opened from side to side and crossed
a large floor and other doors, and they brought them
to another salon. It doesn't have much, but a brilliant fire
I dared to climb a lot between the tall columns
ambos lados.

Frodo met while walking with Gandalf. «Este es el
Salon del Fuego», said the magician. «Here are many songs
And what are you waiting for? However, except on public holidays,
It's usually empty and quiet, and people come here
search for peace and reflection. There's always a fire here, everything
the year, but there is little other light."


300    

When Elrond entered and went to the room prepared for him
There, the elfin troubadours began to play sweet music. Slowly, el
the hall was filled, and Frodo contemplated with delight the numerous
ruby reds that have been reunited; the golden light of the fire jugaba
above them and shining in their hair. De sudden,
Don't look at the other end of the fire, I leave a small dark figure
Seated on a table with the shoulder resting on a column. Junto
to him, in the ground, he had a cup and a little bread.
Frodo wondered if he would be sick (since some people were sick in
Rivendel) and could not attend the party. On
capa obscures the cubría el rostrum.

Elrond approached and came to the silent figure.






















 





 
Good, I'd like to see it for a moment, Bilbo said.

When he saw it, Frodo discovered that he was sleeping while he was sleeping
The ring has now been tied around the neck with a new, light but light string
fierce. Slowly he knew it. Bilbo extended his hand. But
Frodo quickly withdrew the ring. To save your anguish and fear,
I discovered that you didn't look at Bilbo; a
the shadow seems to have fallen between them, you travel
she met her looking at a small wrinkled creature with a
our beard and our hands are so sweaty. I feel like hitting him
.

The music and the songs seemed to waver to his father, and
if I hid the silence. Bilbo quickly looked at Frodo's beak and passed
the hand for the eyes. Ahora entiendo, dijo. Watch it
! I feel: I feel that you have to bear this burden;
I feel it all the time. Do the adventures never end?
I suppose not. There will always be someone else who continues the story.
Good, it can't be avoided. I pray you will try something else
finish my book. But let's not worry about that now, let's keep it
real news! Check it out for me all about the Region!

Frodo hid the Ring and the shadow passed without leaving
just a peak of recovery. The light and music of Rivendel





303


I rodeaban him again. Bilbo smiled and laughed happily.
Every piece of news from the region that Frodo could tell,
Helped and corrected every time Sam was born
most interested in you, from the size of the smallest tree until now
the travesuras of the smallest child in Hobbiton. Estaban tan
absorbed in the intakes of the Four Cuarteles that no
they noticed the arrival of a man dressed in a dark green cloth. For many
Minutes he looked at them with a smile.

Suddenly, Bilbo looked up. ¡Ah, ahí estás por fin, Dunadan
!, he shouted.

¡Trancos!, said Frodo. It seems like it has a lot of names.

Good, Trancos is someone I didn't know,
I say Bilbo. Why do you call him like this?

They call me like this in Bree, I say Trancos riendo, and like this
that's how they introduced him to me.

"Why do you call him Dunadan?" asked Frodo.
 
But he thought that he was enough elven at least to know...
For lessons! He turned around Trancos. Where has it been,
my friend? Why aren't you at the banquet? Lady Arwen was there
there.

Trancos looked at Bilbo with gravedad. The self, I say.
But in the meantime I have to leave the joy to one side. Elladan and Elrohir han
return of the Earth Salvajes until they hope, and get news
you would like to learn immediately.

Good, dear friend, I say Bilbo, now that you have heard of us
news, can you spare me a moment? I need your help
urgent thing. Elrond says this song must be mine
finished before the end of the night, and I'm stuck. Let's go
to a rincón to clean it!

Trancos sonrió. Let's go, let's go!, I say. ¡Déjame oírla!

Frodo was only asked for a moment, maybe Sam was asked
I sleep. He was alone and felt quite unfamiliar, no matter what
On Alrededor the people of Rivendel were reunited. But what they are looking for
of remaining in silence, attentive to the music of the voices and the


304    

instruments, and they paid no attention to any more. Frodo
comenzó a escuchar.

At the beginning, the beauty of the melody and the music
words explained in elvish languages, however they are intended
shortly, they cautioned him as ready as he came to pay attention to her
. In some cases it seems that the words still form, y
visions of the earth and brilliant things that never had
imagined if they abrieron before it; and the hall lit by fire was converted
in a golden cloud above seas of foam that breathed in them
márgens of the world. Luego, the enchantment returned every time
more dreamlike, as long as I felt that an interminable river
gold and growing plate flowed over it, numerous in number
so that his master was understood; if converted into part of
the throbbing air that gnawed at him, and he engulfed him and hooked him
. Quickly it dropped to a bright weight in depth
reino de sueño.

There he wandered for a long time in a dream of music that he was convinced of
in running water, and then, suddenly, in a voice. Parecía
be the voice of Bilbo singing verses. Débiles at the beginning,
more clearly, the words.

Eärendil was a mariner
que se detuvo en Arvernien;

















 



the amarillo gold and the joys disappear.

Where the twilight extends over the rollers.
Of Valinor, and Eldamar
contemplated more beyond the seas.

A vagabond escaped at night
to a white refuge; llegó to the end,
at the Hogar de los Elfos, green and beautiful,
whence the air was penetrating, whence, pale as crystal
below the Ilmarin Hill,
a destello in an escarpated valley
reflect
the towers of Tirion illuminated by lighthouses on Lake Sombrío.
There I found out, huyendo of the vagabundeo,
y le enseñaron melodías,
and ancient sabios counted marvelous wonders,
y le trajeron arpas de oro.
They saw him in the white elf,
and you two lights preceded him,
while traveling through the Calaciriano
he directed the hidden and desolate lands.
Llegó a los salones eternos
whence, shining, caen los incountables años,
and queen until the end of the Anciano king
in Ilmarin, in the Montaña shoe;
and unheard words were pronounced in the words
307
hombres y élficos;
more visions were shown to the world
prohibited for those who die.
Then they built a new ship
de mithril y cristal élfico,
with a brilliant proa; without oar
in the sail, he supported a silver post:
the Silmaril, like a lantern,
and the standard, shining with a living llama, was placed
for Elbereth's own
, quien llegó
y le hizo alas inmortales,
and I impose on her an eternal destiny:
navigate the skies without orillas and carry
between the Sun and the light of the Moon.
From the high hills of Evereven,
whence caen suavemente fuentes plateadas,
they trajeron on his wings, a wandering light,
further away from the imposing Muralla de la Montaña.
From the end of the world, once again,
y anheló de nuevo encontrar
on hogar a lo lejos, traveling among shadows,
and daring like an island star
high up, above the mist, I took it,
a llama lejana ante el Sol,
a marvel before the amanecer
from where the waters of Norland run gray.
Y sobre la Tierra Media pasó
y oyó por fin el llanto
of the women and the elves
on ancient days, in ancient years.
But a great sentence weighed on it,
a mission that would never be forgotten.

















 

 
on the coasts search where mortals live;
always a herald
I say Bilbo. It is not that the hobbits would like it
to lift up the bright light,
el Flammifer de Westernesse.

The song ended. Frodo opened his eyes and I saw them
Bilbo was heard on his taburete in a circle of eyes, that
sonreían y aplaudían.

Now it will be better if we hold it again, I'll say an elf.

Bilbo stood up and gave a reverence. Talk to me, Lindir, say it.
But it would be hard to repeat it all the time.

No wonder asked for you, the elves will respond. Sabes
you can never recite your own verses. But
We really can't respond to your question just once!

¡Qué!, Bilbo shouted. You can't decide which parts were mine
y cuáles de los dúnadan?

It is not easy for us to distinguish between two
mortales, dijo el elfo.

Tonterías, Lindir, resopló Bilbo. If you can't distinguish
Between a man and a hobbit, your juice is poorer than that
imagineba. They are as different as guisantes and manzanas.

Sometimes. —Para las ovejas, no doubt, the other ovejas seem different
—rió Lindir—. O for the shepherds. But mortals are not safe
our studio. We have other hires.

—No discutiré contigo —said Bilbo—. I keep hearing after
lots of music and singing. I tell you that I ask you, if you want
.

He rose and approached Frodo. —Good, if acabó
—I say it in voice below—. He got better than what he hoped for. Not me
I usually ask for a second audience. That's what you think
?

—I don't want to try to adivinar —I said Frodo sonriendo—.

—No hace falata —Dijo Bilbo—. After all, everything happened
my. Except that Aragorn insisted that he ask for one
green stone. Apparently I think it's important. No se por qué.
For the first time, it was obvious that I thought that the whole issue was for the first time





of


I understand, and I say that the task of composing verses will be fulfilled
above Eärendil in the house of Elrond, it was mine. I suppose
que tenía razón.

"No, I don't," Frodo said. It seemed to me that it got stuck in some way,
and it seemed like a continuation of something I was dreaming about...
hasta casi el final.

It's difficult to stay empty here, as long as you're used to it,
the elven appetite for music, poetry and stories. Apparently...
I enjoy it as much as the meal, or more. Everything will last
much time. It seems to you that we are escabullimos para
charlar a little more en voz baja? ¿

Can we?, said Frodo.

Por supuesto. This is a party, not a shop. Ve y
Come when you ask, always don't hear anything.

If they rose, they retreated silently to the shadows and
they headed to the doors. Dejaron to Sam atrás, deeply slept todavía with
a smile in the beak. To weigh your delete for Bilbo's company,
Frodo felt a shock of apprehension as he entered the Hall
Fire. Included in cruising the umbral, a single one
Voz Clara got up in a song.

To Elbereth Gilthoniel,
silivren penna miriel
0 menel aglar elenath!

Na-chaered palan-diriel
0 galadhremmin ennorath,

Fanuilos, the Linnathon
nef aear, si nef aearon!

Frodo stood there for a moment and looked at her again. Elrond was there
on the saddle and the fire gave them in the beak like the light of the veranda above
the trees. Look for who was sent by Lady Arwen. Para su suprise,
Frodo knew that Aragorn was standing next to her; on dark head was echada


hacia


 


furthermore, it seemed like being dressed in an elfin malla, and a
estrella shined in her pecho. They spoke jointly, and suddenly,
It seemed to Frodo that Arwen would fly away,
and the light of your eyes shines above you
le atravesó el corazón.

If I stood still, enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the
The elvish song sounds like joyful words and fusion melody.
It's a song for Elbereth, I say Bilbo. Cantarán esa, y
other songs from Reino Bendecido, many times this night. Let's go
!

I take Frodo back to his small home. Daba a
the gardens and looked to the south, across the ravine
Bruinen. There they remained, feeling a moment, looking towards it
fan the bright stars above the forest shoe,
and talking in your voice. Don't say more about the little news
the Lejana Region, not of the dark shadows and the peligros que
they acechaban the world, of the Elves, of the stars, of the trees, of the
sweet fall of the brilliant year in the woods.

They finally called at the door. —Disculpe
—I said Sam, putting my head down—, but I was wondering
si querría algo.

—Yes with pardon, Sam Gamgee —Bilbo replied—. I suppose
I want to decide that it's time that my love goes to my house.

—Good, sir, I understand that my morning has a council, and
It's the first time today.

—Muy bien, Sam —rió Bilbo—. You can widen y
tell Gandalf that he is in the house. —Good nights, Frodo. ¡
My God, it's so good for me to turn to the truth!
After all, there are no people like the hobbits for a good chat. I'm doing this
many times and I started wondering if I would live to see you
chapters of our history. —¡Good nights! I'll take a walk, I create,
and gaze at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. ¡Que duerma bien!


 2


 


On the following day, Frodo became more desperate, feeling renewed and well. Fireplace
through the terraces over the flowing Río Bruinen
and I observed how the pale and cool sun rose above the sunny mountains
and it shone obliquely across the fine black plateau; el
rocío shone on the yellow flowers, and the
redes de gasa centelleaban en cada shrub. Sam walked to
on the side, without deciding anything, just smelling the air and looking again and again
when with a shadow the great heights
of Este. The snow was white on its peaks.

On a hill tall on the stone next to a corner of the path
they met with Gandalf and Bilbo, immersed in a conversation. ¡Hola! ¡Buenos
días!, I say Bilbo. Do you listen to the great advice?

This is a list for everyone, replied Frodo. But above
I would all enjoy walking today and exploring the valley. Me
I would love to enter those pinares upon arrival. Señaló
a lo lejos, en ladera de Rivendel, hacia el norte.

Quiz you have a later opportunity, I say Gandalf. But
we can't even make planes. There's a lot to think about and decide today.

Suddenly, while they're talking, it's a clear and unique bell. «
It is the alarm bell for the Council of Elrond,” he shouted
Gandalf. «¡Vengan! Se les necesita a ustedes ya Bilbo».

The tortuous path back to the house; through them, without invitation y
forgotten for the moment, Sam finds out.

Gandalf led him to the portico where Frodo met him
amigos la tarde anterior. The light of the clear
morning of otoño shone now in the valley. El ruido de
the burbujeante waters were subjected to the foamy lecho of the river. Los pajaros
they sing and a saludable peace reinaba in the earth. For Frodo,


on    

hairy noise and the noises of the growing darkness
In the world outside there seem only to be the records of one
turbulent sueño; but the rostros that turned to receive them
when they entered they were serious.

Elrond was there, and several others were heard in silence
to su alrededor. Frodo goes to Glorfindel y Gloin; and in a rincón,
Only Trancos were sent, dressed in new clothes with their old clothes worn by the traveler
. Elrond took Frodo to his side
he introduced him to the company, saying:

Here, my friends, is the hobbit, Frodo hijo de Drogo. Pocos
They have been brought here along with a stranger or with a carriage
more urgent.

The words were signaled and named to those who Frodo
I didn't know before. There was a younger man on the side of Gloin:
on hijo Gimli. Junto a Glorfindel había varios otros
councilors of the house of Elrond, of whom Erestor was el
jefe; and with him was Galdor, an elf from the Puertos Grises
which was brought on a journey by Círdan the Carpintero de Barcos.
He also has an extra elf dressed in green and brown,
Legolas, a steward of his father, Thranduil, the King of
the Elfos of the Black Forest of the North. I felt a little apart
he was a tall man with a handsome and noble beak, dark hair and
gray eyes, proud and severe gaze.

I dress with a cape and buttons as for a horseback ride
; and of course, although their clothes were bright, and above
The head was covered in hair, they were missing on long journeys.
He had a platinum collar where he was
encrusted by a single white stone; Their hair was cut off by their men. En un tahalí
there was a large heart rowed with the plate that was now unslipped above
sus rodillas. I looked at Frodo and Bilbo with sudden asombro.

I ask you for advice. I asked her that she was present, she can come up here
preguntas serán respondidas.

It is not necessary that everything that is said and debated in the Council...
Now it will count. Much has been said about the considerations in the world outside,


 


313

 
in the South and in the vast lands to the east of
Montañas. Frodo ya must have seen a lot
noises over these things; but Glóin's story was new to him, and when he
when he said it, he listened carefully. Apparently, in the middle of the
shine of his works, the hearts of the Enanos
de la Montaña Solitaria were troubled.

It's been many years, I say Glóin, what a shadow of
inquietud cayó sobre our pueblo. Where it came from, not at first
therefore. He was forced to whisper words in secret: if
I said that we are stuck in an extreme place, and that we are more
Riqueza and splendor would meet in a wider world. Some
hablaron de Moria: the mighty works of our fathers who
in our language it is called Khazad-dum; and they declared
that now to the end we hold the power and the ability to return.

Glóin sighed. ¡Moria! ¡Moria! ¡Maravilla del
Nordic world! Let's dig deep there, and let's drill it
I am indescribable. Its vast mansions have been permanently vacant for a long time since then
Huyeron the sons of Durin. But now let's turn to talking about it with hope,
come again with fear; You can't wait to cross the doors
of Khazad-dum in many lives of kings, except Thror, y
that's the danger. Finally, without embargo, Balin heard the whispers
and I decided to leave; and yet Dain did not allow it to be good
, I took advice from Ori, Óin ya many of our men,
y se marcharon al sur.

This happened three years ago. During a time we all
news, which seems good: messages inform you of what you have
I entered Moria and a great work began there. Luego reinó
the silence, and from that moment on, nothing from Moria has been satisfied.

For example, about a year ago, I brought a meal to Dain, but no
de Moria, sino de Mordor: un jinete en la noche, que
He called Dain to his door. El Señor Sauron el Grande, según
I say, desire our friend. I would give rings for her,
Sauron knows —I say—, that he knew one of these
en algún momento.

Before this, we feel very worried and do not respond.


314


 


And then he lowered his voice, and he had it
smoothed you will be able to reach the stage. —Like a small window of yours
friend —Sauron pide this —I say—: that no more  
to this thief — such was his word — and you will consiguire him, of good gana or of good gana.
a small ring, the smallest of the rings, which I once stole. No more than that
a nimiedad that Sauron imagines, and one take from your good will.
Find it, and three rings that Enanos' father placed in the past
You will be returned, and the king of Moria will be
everything for always. Only news about the thief, yes
lives and where it is, and will receive a great reward y
a long-lasting friend of the Señor. If you deny it, these things will not appear
tan bien. ¿Te niegas? —Al

Here I am, on alien things I rose like the silbido of serpents, and all those who
They were there if they were extreme, but I said: "No, I don't say yes."
No. I must consider this message and what it means low
his beautiful mantle.

  “Piénsalo bien, pero no demasiado,” I say.

  “My reflex time is mine,” I replied
Dain.

  “Por now”, I say, and cabalgó hacia the darkness.

Our jefes felt a great burden from that
night. We don't need the waiter's harsh voice to advertise us
of which his words involve amusement and engaño; let us know
he doesn't have the power he returned to Mordor
changed, and what has always left us behind. Two times
the mensage has returned without reply. The third and last
then, as he says, he will be ready, before that deadline
anus.

And so, Dain finally sent me to tell Bilbo about it
the Enemigo seeks it, and to know, if it is possible, for that reason
I want this ring, the smallest of the rings. We also ask for advice
of Elrond. Because the Shadow grows and grows. Let's find out
who also brought mensajeros to the Rey Brand, yes
the war is raging on its eastern fronts. If we don't respond,
The Enemigo can incite the men of his government to attack the Rey Brand,
y también a Dain.


 


315


Has hecho well in coming, I say Elrond. Hoy escucharás
everything you need to understand the purposes
of the Enemigo. There's nothing you can do, save
resistir, with hope or without it. But you're not alone.
You will learn that your problem is only part of the problem of...
All the western world. ¡El Ring! Here we are with him
Ring, the smallest of the rings, the nimiedad that Sauron imagines? Ex  
It is the destiny we must decree.

this is the purpose of those who have been called here. Llamados,
I say, even though I don't call them, outsiders of
tierras lejanas. They have come and are here,
just in time, by chance it seems. Without embargo, it's not like that.
Believe more well that it is ordered than ours, those who are heard,
and more, we must seek advice for the pilgrim of the
world.

Now, for that matter, we will openly explain what they have
Stay hidden from everyone, except for a little while, until this day. Y primero, para
that everyone understands what the pilgrim is,
The History of the Ring will count from the beginning until the present. Y yo
I will start this story, even if others will finish it.

Entonces all heard while Elrond, with his clear voice, hablaba de
Sauron and the Rings of Power, and his strength in it
Second day of the world, hace mucho tiempo.
Some people there knew part of its history, but none knew it completely, and many
miradas se volvieron hacia Elrond with fear and asombro while the contact above
the elfin herders of the region and their friends with Moria,
and his longing for acquaintance, with that Sauron
they must have been caught. Because at that time it wasn't a bad thing, y'all
they received help and turned powerfully into craftsmanship, while they learned it
all their secrets, I traced them and forged them secretly
the Mountain of Fire and the only ring to be on my love. But
Celebrimbor knew him and hid the Three Who
have created; and after war, the earth was devastated
and the door of Moria was sealed.

Luego, over the next few years, looked at it
Anillo; but as this story is related in another part, as it is


Elrond


 


I molded it in my books of wisdom, not if
read here. Because it is a long story, full of great and terrible people,
and although Elrond spoke briefly, the sun ascended into the sky,
and the morning was disappearing before Caesar.

Habló of Númenor, of his glory and his death, and of his return
of the Reyes of the Men in the Middle Tierra from the depths of the
Sea of ​​Return, lured on the side of the storm. Entonces Elendil el Alto
and his mighty sons, Isildur and Anarion, were converted into great lords;
y establecieron el Reino del Norte in Arnor, y el
King of the South in Gondor, over the desembocaduras of the Anduin. But Sauron
of Mordor attacked them, and hicieron the Last Alianza of
Elves and men, and the hues of Gil-galad and Elendil are
reunieron en Arnor.

Entonces Elrond I thought for a moment and sighed. Recuerdo
behold the splendor of its standards, I say. I'll record it
the glory of the Old Days and the hues of Beleriand,
Many great princes and captains were reunited. Y without embargo,
not so much, not so beautiful, as when Thangorodrim was destroyed,
and the Elves considered that the evil had ended forever, and it was not
yes.

¿Recuerdas?, said Frodo, expressing his thoughts in a loud voice
en su asombro. But he thought, I was going to hear about Elrond
if he wanted to, he thought that Gil-galad's caída had happened
hace mucho tiempo.

Thus it was, in effect, Elrond replied gravely. But me
memory comes back even to the Old Days. Eärendil fue
my father, who was born in Gondolin before his family; Y mi
mother was Elwing, hija de Dior, hijo de Lúthien de
Doriath. I have seen three eras in the West of the world, y
many derrotas, and many unsuccessful victories.

I was the herald of Gil-galad and marched with his army.
He was in the Batalla de Dagorlad before the Puerta Negra de
Mordor, whence we dominate: pues la Lanza de Gil-galad
y la Espada de Elendil, Aeglos y Narsil, nadie pudo
resist. Contemplé the last fight in the ranks of Orodruin,
whence Gil-galad died, and Elendil fell, and Narsil was quebró
bajo él; but his own Sauron was derided, and Isildur


  317

He cut off the ring from her hand with the fragment of the embossed finger
his father's sword, and he took it as his own.

Before this, the outsider, Boromir, burst in. That's how it was
he passed them to the Ring!, he shouted. Sometimes a story like this was told
In the South, you have forgotten for a long time. I don't want to talk about it
Great Ring of the one we don't remember; but let's create that
the world disappeared in the ruin of its first king. ¡Isildur
I took it back! These are news, in truth!
 
¡Ay!, yes, I say Elrond. Isildur took it away as he shouldn't.
Debería haber sido arrojado al fuego de Orodruin, search
where did it come from? But few noticed that Isildur was there.
Only he remained with his father in this last mortal matter; y
Once in Gil-galad, only Círdan and we are de pious. But Isildur doesn't
escuchó nuestro consejo.

  «I will take this as gold for my father and me
hermano», I say; and for that matter, whether we want to or not, we
came back like a treasure. But ready he was drawn by him and he was killed
; and therefore the Perdicion of Isildur is called to them in the North. Without embargo,
death was once better than any other thing that could have happened to it
.

Only in the North will these news be delivered, and only to one
little. It's not a matter of getting rid of it,
Boromir. Of the ruins of the Campos Gladios, whence
therefore Isildur, only three men returned through the mountains
after a long journey. One of them was Ohtar, the escudero de
Isildur, who carried the fragments of Elendil's sword; y if
I brought him to Valandil, the heir of Isildur, who was alone
a little boy, if he was asked here in Rivendel. But Narsil was quebrada
and the light is extinguished, and it has not yet been forsaken
again.

Is it a fruitless call to the victory of the Last Alliance? No
of all, but no logró on end. Sauron was diminished
, but not destroyed. On Anillo he lost, but he didn't deshizo.
The Dark Tower was destroyed, but its cimientos were not destroyed
removals; because they fueron hechos with the power of the Ring,
and while this remains, it will last. Many Elves and many
Powerful men, and many of his friends, have persecuted in it


318    

y Elendil didn't exist. Never again will you have one
league like Elfos y Hombres; because men multiply and multiply
Firstborns are menguan, and the two families are distanced. Y
since this day the race of Númenor has decayed, y
the duration of your years has shortened.

In the North, after the war and the slaughter of them
Campos Gladios, the Hombres de Occidentalesse were disminuidos, y su
the city of Annuminas near Lake Evendim is ruined; y
the heirs of Valandil moulted and lived in Fornost, in there
high quebradas del Norte, and now it is also desolate. Los hombres la llaman el
Dique de los Muertos, y men pisarla. Because el
In the South, the king of Gondor will last for a long time; y para
de Arnor menguó, and his enemies devoured her, and his
The señorío passed, leaving only green hills in there
colinas cubiertas de hierba.

His splendor grew for a while, recording the power in a certain way
of Númenor, before his fall. High towers built for the people, y
fortified ports, and ports for many boats; y la
the winged crown of the Kings of the Men was venerated by many people
languas. The main city was Osgiliath, the Ciudadela de las Estrellas,
where the river flows in the center. Y Minas
It was built, the Torre de la Luna Naciente, above that
man from the Montañas de la Sombra; y to the west, to los
pies de las Montañas Blancas, Minas Anor, the Tower
of the Western Sun. There, in the courts of the King, there grew up a
White arbol, from the seed of this arbol that Isildur took
across the deep waters, and the seed of this tree came from before
from Eressëa, and before that, from the Far West
the day before the days when the world was young.

But with the pace of the fast years of the Middle Tierra, el
Meneldil's line, Anarion's son, disappeared, the tree was marred
and the blood of the Númenóreanos was mixed with it
of lower men. Entonces the guard over the murals of Mordor
I lasted, and the dark evenings returned in secrecy to Gorgoroth. Y en a
time the malignant ones arose, which returned to Minas Ithil y
they settled in her, converting her into a place of terror; y now


 


if


llama Minas Morgul, the Torre de la Hechicería. Entonces Minas
Anor received the new name of Minas Tirith, the Tower of the Guard;
Between both places it was deserted and shadows passed through its ruins.

As it has been through many human lives. But the Señores de
Minas Tirith still shines, desafiando our enemies, protecting them
paso del Río desde Argonath hasta el Mar. Y ahora la
part of the story that I will tell is linked to this end. Porque en los
days of Isildur, the Ruling Ring disappeared from all knowledge,
and the Three were freed from their dominion. But now, it
this last day, I run wildly once more, you can help our sadness,
the only one has been met. Others will talk about your hallazgo, you can
in there you have a small piece of paper.

Calló, but at the moment Boromir is puso de pie, tall and proud,
before ellos. «Permíteme, Master Elrond», I said, first.
To decide more about Gondor, I come in truth from the land of Gondor  
I'm coming. And it would be good that everyone would overcome what happens.
. Little by little, I think, we know our habits, and for that long
They suspect little of the cruelty that we are going to break at the end.

They do not create anyone in the land of Gondor
if he has lost the blood of Númenor, not that all his pride and dignity have been forgotten. Por
our valor, the saving people of the East are still contained, y
the terror of the Morgul remains in raya; and only so if
they maintain peace and freedom in the lands that we are walking among ourselves, bastion of the
West. But if they conquer the steps of the Rio, ¿
qué ocurriría entonces?

Without embargo, now, sometimes, no more. El
Enemigo Sin Nombre has returned. The humor rises once again
the Orodruin that we call Mount of Destiny. The power of the
Tierra Negra grows and we are severely besieged. When the Enemigo
returned, our country was expelled from Italy, our beautiful dominion to the east
del Rio, although we maintain a point of support there and the strength of
the weapons. But this same year, in June,
we witnessed a sudden war from Mordor and we were barred.
We outnumbered them, perhaps Mordor was associated with them
Orientales and the cruel Haradrim; but it didn't happen


320


 


men who were derrotados. He had that power there
no habíamos sentido antes.

Some say that he saw himself as a big black guy
, a dark shadow under the moon. Wherever it came, a
horse and a old man and a man. Just a rest of us
it was kept en pièce amidst the ruins of Osgiliath.

I was in the company that defended the bridge until it was destroyed
trans nosotros. Only four of us save ourselves by going: me
hermano, yo y otros dos. But let's follow playing,
checking all the western orillas of the Anduin; and people are refugee
among us we always see our name: many
praise, but little help. Only from Rohan to a man
it will come to us when we call it.

At this time I am coming on mission
to Elrond, traveling through many dangerous places: I have traveled a hundred days
Alone. But I don't look for allies in the war.
It is said that the power of Elrond resides in wisdom, not in weapons. I come to
I ask you to untangle the hard words. Porque en el
In anticipation of the sudden assault, I was left with a dream  
untroubled; and next, a similar sound attacked them frequently.
new, and on one occasion, new, new.

In this dream, I thought the eastern sky was dark
which had a growing truth, but in the west
a faint light persisted, and from there a voice, remote but clear,
que gritaba:


«Take the sword that broke:

en Imladris mora;

se tomarán decisión
stronger than the hechizos of Morgul.

A signal will appear
of what Perdicion is seeking,

may the Perdicion of Isildur desperá,

and the Median will rise».


 


321


Of these words, we understand little, and we talk with them
our father, Denethor, Lord of Minas Tirith, wise in tradition
of Gondor. Only this I say: that Imladris was old
the name among the Elves of a valley near the north, whence
Elrond the Half-Elf lived there, the greatest of the masters of tradition. Por lo
so much so, my dear, coming to terms with our need, it was
anxious to await the dream and seek Imladris; but like el
there was a lot of doubts and worries, the initiative was back
. My father refused to give me permission for a long time
I wandered along forgotten paths, seeking the house of Elrond,
of which many had heard, but few knew where it was.

to you, I say Aragorn, poniéndose de pie. Arrojó on sword above
the table that was before Elrond, and the holiday departed in two










 





more to our hope; if this could really be reversed
duda estaba en sus ojos.

Frodo felt that Bilbo was moving impatiently to his side. Evidently
It was annoying for my friend. Poniéndose de pie de suddene,
installed:

No todo lo que es oro brilla,

not all those who wander are lost;

the one who is strong is not branded,

Deep roots are not disturbed by the escarcha.

A fire will be lost from the cenizas,

a light will flicker from the shadows;

Renovated will be the sword that is broken:

The crown will return to the king.

Quizás no muy good, but with wheat; more if needed
that is the word of Elrond. It was worth a trip
Hundred days for the day, better clean it. If
he felt with a buffoon.

—Lo inventé yo mismo —he whispered to Frodo— para los


 


323


Dúnadan, it takes a long time, when I say yes
same for the first time. Cases would seem that my adventures never ended yet
that I can go with when I'm walking on the day.

Aragorn smiled at her; where he flew to Boromir.
—Por mi parte, pardon tuda —I say—. Little me
I look at the figures of Elendil and Isildur, esculpidas
in his majesty in the halls of Denethor. I don't know more than it
inherited Isildur, not his own Isildur. I have a hard life
wide; and the bonds that exist between here and Gondor are
a small part of my travel history. I crossed a lot
mountains and many rivers, and many hills, included
in the small towns of Rhun and Flarad, where the stars are
extrañas.

But my hogar, as I have it, is in the North. So here
the herders of Valandil have always lived in a broad, uninterrupted line
from father to son during many generations. Our days have passed
darkness and we menwad; but the Espada always has it
passed to a new guardian. I will tell you this, Boromir,
before finishing. We are solitary men, rescue explorers, hunters
, but always passionate about the servants of the Enemigo; pues se
They are found in many places, not just in Mordor.

Yes Gondor, Boromir, has a firm tower, our hearts
desempeñado otro paper. There are many bad things for you
hard walls and bright swords cannot be held. ¿Sabes little,
he says? The North had little known that it was not por
nosotros. My heart was destroyed. But when things get dark
they come from the hills without hogar or they arrastran from the woods alone,
huyen de us. Which paths will there be someone to take, that's it
safety must be in quiet lands, or in the workplaces
simple men at night, if the Dúnedain sleep or if they all sleep
to the tomb?

And, without embargo, we have less appreciation than you. Los viajeros
we look at us with the fruitful dinner, and our compatriots call us with contempt. «Trancos» soy
for a greedy man who lives on a day of marching enemies
they will cheer up the heart or ruin their little people
No, I was incessantly supervised. Without embargo, we won't ask for it any other way.


324   

If simple people are free from worries and fears, they will be simple,
with the Ring since the day it passed into its custody.
and we must be secret to keep it that way. Esa sat there
tarea of ​​my relatives, while the years have expanded and the
hierba ha crecido.

But now the world is changing more and more.
Leave a new hour. The Perdición de Isildur ha sido encontrada. The battle is looking for. The Espada
you will be strengthened again. Iré in Minas Tirith.

The Perdición de Isildur ha sido concontrada, dices, dijo Boromir. Heh
saw a brilliant ring in the Halfling's hand; but Isildur pereció
before this era of the world began, they say. ¿How
Do the Sabios know that this ring is theirs? How he passed by
years to be brought here by such an extra mensajero?

Eso se dirá, dijo Elrond.

"But no, I'll tell you, Master!" Bilbo shouted. El Sol
You are waking up to the middle of the day, and you feel the need for something else
me fortalezca.

I don't know you, I say Elrond sonriendo. But I have it
now. ¡Fri! Cuéntanos tu history. And if it hasn't been shaped yet
your history in verse, you can count it with simple words. How much
more briefly, before you will feel renewed.

Much love, I say Bilbo. Haré what I want. But I'll count now
the true story, and some people here have heard me tell it
another thing —I looked back at Glóin—, I asked you
I forget her and forgive me. You just want to claim the treasure
like me on those days, and free myself from the name of
thief who called me first. But let's take a look at the things...

For some, Bilbo's story was completely new, and they heard it
with asombro while the old hobbit, in reality nothing
Disgusted, I talked about an adventure with Gollum all over again
lujo detalles. No omition, not just one enigma. También habría
I count on the match and on the disappearance of the
Comarca, if hubieran permitted; but Elrond raised his hand.

I say well, my friend, I say, but it's enough for now
. For the moment it is enough to know that the Ring has passed
to Frodo, your heredero. ¡Que hable now!


 


325


Once upon a time, with fewer fingers than Bilbo, Frodo counted everything...
Every step of your journey from Hobbiton until I leave
Bruinen was questioned and considered, and that's all
I can record how the Black Papers were examined.
Por fin volvió a sentarse.

No it's bad, I tell you Bilbo. Habrías hecho una
good story if not you will be interrupted. Intent
Let's take a few notes, but we'll try to review them all
every day, I want to write it down. ¡Hay
Full chapters of things before you get here!

Yes, it was a long enough story, replied Frodo. But the
history todavía no me seems complete. I still want to know
a lot, especially about Gandalf.

Galdor de los Puertos, who had been feeling the search, asked him.
Hablas por mí also, gritó, y volviéndose hacia Elrond,
I say: Los Sabios can have good reasons to believe that
the treasure of the midfielder is actually the Great Ring of the wide debate,
because it seems unlikely that people know less. But...
Can't we pick up our heads? And I also wanted to ask about this. ¿Qué hay
of Saruman? He is an expert in the tradition of rings, however
no one is among us. What is your advice, you know
que hemos oído?

—The questions you have, Galdor, are filled
—I say Elrond—. Don't let it go up, and it will be
respond. But it is Gandalf's way to decide these things,
and in all this assumption he was the jefe.

—Some, Galdor —I say Gandalf—, will think about the news from
Glóin and the persecution of Frodo are sufficient cause for that





 





They have not studied this assumption with seriousness. Cayó en el Anduin el Grande
; and for a long time, while Sauron slept, he was arrested
river below until the sea. It will remain there until the end.   

Gandalf looked in silence, looking towards the sun from the portico, towards the
lejanas cumbres de las Nubladas Montañas, en cuyas grandes rays
if the wanderer of the world had been hidden for a long time. He sighed.


 


«


Ahí estaba yo en fata», I say. «Me dejaron arrullar las palabras
de Saruman el Sabio; but you should have found the truth
before that, our pilgrim would now be younger." «

We are all in the same state", I said Elrond, "and we will not be your vigilance,
the darkness, sometimes, would be over us." But
continue!

From the beginning, my heart was wondering, against all reasons.
, who knew it", I said to Gandalf, "and wanted to know how
I brought this thing to Gollum and how long had he put it there." Así que
He watched it, assuming that it would soon weld
of his darkness in search of his treasure. Wine, though
he escaped and was not encountered. Y entonces, ¡ay!, dejé el asunto
in peace, observing and hoping only, as we are with much frequency.

The time passed with many worries, until my doubters became discouraged
again in a sudden breath. Where did the hobbit's ring come from?
So, if I was certain, I had to do it with him? Ex
what I have to decide. But I still don't have to worry about my fear,
knowing the danger of an inopportune whisper, one goes astray.
In all large wars with the Dark Tower, the tradition always has
sido nuestro mayor enemigo.

This was ten years ago. Ready to tell me what
Spies of all kinds, including beasts and pájaros, are reunited
alrededor of the Comarca, and I grew up. Ask for help
the Dúnedain, and their vigilance was redundant; y abri
I hearted Aragorn, Isildur's heir.

And I —I say Aragorn— advise us that we want to
Gollum, although he seemed to be late. And as it seemed appropriate
that Isildur's heir will strive to repair Isildur's guilt,
accompanied Gandalf on the large and useless bush.

Entonces Gandalf told how they had explored
the murals of Mordor at full extent. There we run noises above him, and we assume
who lived there for a long time, on the dark hills; but not at all
We met him, and in the end we lost hope. And then, in my desperation, I turned
to think about a problem that could be done
Gollum's hallazgo is unnecessary. Your ring could be said to be the only one. El
I remember the words of the Council and bring them to mind: words of


Saruman


 


, which entonces had not been discovered. Now let's go with clarity
en mi corazón.

  “El Nueve, el Siete y el Tres”, I say, “they will take each one
on gema. Not like the One. It was redondo y
without adorning us, like one of the younger rings; but on creator
I told you that sometimes the experts could see and read it”.

I didn't know what those brands were. ¿Quién lo
would you know now? The creator. ¿Y Saruman? But, for a very long time
With this thought, he abandoned the persecution and passed quickly.
If you are familiar, you must have a source. What hand saves Sauron?
Why do I replace this before I lose it? Only the hand of Isildur.

In Gondor. In the past, the members of my order have
well received there, but Saruman above all. At menudo
he had been sent for a long time by the Lords of the City.
El Señor Denethor showed me less welcome before,
Your favorites allowed me to search among your desired ones
pergaminos y libros.

  «It is only possible to search for, as it says, registers of
the ancient days and the beginnings of the city, continue reading!”, I say. «Porque
For me it was less dark than what was to come, and that is it
I'm worried. But unless he has more skill, including Saruman,
Those who have studied here for a long time, will not encounter anything that is not sea
well known to me, that I am the master of the science of this city."

So I say Denethor. Y, without embargo, among your treasures there are many
little records, including the masters of science, can be read now, you can
their writings and languages ​​have become obscure to the rear men. Y
Boromir, yet again in Minas Tirith, without reading, I suppose,
except Saruman and since the kings shattered, a parchment
that his own Isildur hizo. Pues Isildur no se marchó
directly from the war in Mordor, as some have reported.

In Gondor, it is said that he was the first in Minas Anor and lived there
time with his sobrino Meneldil, instruyéndolo, antes de
give her the government of the Reino del Sur. En esa
era planted at the last return of the Árbol Blanco in
memoria de su hermano.

But in this era I also had this parchment, I said Gandalf;


 


329


and this is not remembered in Gondor, apparently. Pues
This parchment was drawn above the Ring, and Isildur wrote it as follows:

El Gran Anillo will become a relic of the
Reino del Norte; but if the records of it in Gondor are separated,
where the heirs of Elendil also reside, so that they do not follow the day that
the memory of these great rewards disappears.

And after these words, Isildur described the ring as
met.

It was hot when I took it the first time, hot like a glede, and I kept it
quemada hand, so that I think that some time wanted to be
free from pain. Without embargo, even as I write, if it is chilled, y
It seems obvious, but don't step on your beauty or on it
And we hope that no one else will pronounce it here.
form. I wrote it there, which at the beginning was like...
As clear as a red llama, it disappears and now it can only be done
leer. It is written in the elven writing of the region, so to speak
in Mordor there are no letters for such a useful work; but
I don't know the language. I consider it a language of la
Tierra Negra, pues es tosca y burda. No, it doesn't say that badly
; but I'm taking a copy here so it doesn't disappear
without remedio. The ring will be less hot
the hand of Sauron, which was black and, without embargo, burned like fire,
and thus Gil-galad was destroyed; and you'll find out if the gold is there
Once it warms up, the writing will be renewed. But por
I'm leaving, don't worry about harming this work: all the works of
Sauron, the only hermosa. It's precious to me, no matter what I buy it
with great pain.

When she said these words, I was finished. Because the
traced writing was, in effect, like Isildur supuso, in the language
of Mordor and the servants of the Tower. That's what I said
It was known to you. Because the day in which Sauron was seen for the first time with the One, Celebrimbor, creator of the Three,
the
recognized, and from now on I can pronounce these words, and
so their evil intentions were revealed.
330
If yes, that's not enough, Galdor, it's the other one
331
prueba de la que hablé. In this same ring that you have seen up here, rounded and adorned,
aún se pueden leer
the letters that Isildur informed, if one holds the strength of the will to stop
put the golden thing in the fire once. Eso he hecho, y
esto he leído:
Ash nazg diirhatuliik, ash nazg gimbatul, ash nazg
thrakatuluk agh burzum-ishi krimpatul.   
The change to the magician's voice was shocking. De
suddenly it flew back, painful, powerful, as hard as a stone. A shadow seemed to pass above the high sun, and the portico
it got dark
for a moment. Everyone was scared and the Elves were scared
los oídos.
Never before once have you been afraid to pronounce these words
language in Imladris, Gandalf el Gris, I say Elrond, while there
the shadow passed and the company wanted to breathe.
replied Gandalf. Without embargo, no more forgiveness,
Master Elrond. Because you have this language, don't wait for it




 







 








In every corner of the West, everyone must doubt that this is
it is in reality what the Sabios have declared: the treasure of
Enemigo, fully loaded on malicia; and in the grand residence
part of its ancient strength. From the Black Years they come from
words that the Herreros of Eregion oyeron, and supieron that
habían sido traicionados:

A Ring to govern everyone, A Ring to meet them, A Ring
to take them all away and in the darkness let them down.

Sepan also, my friends, who learn more about
Gollum. If he resisted talking about his story, it wasn't clear, though
it is indudable that he was in Mordor, and there
They caught her in everything she knew. So, the Enemigo knows
now that the only one has been met, who spent a lot of time in the Comarca; y
as their sirvientes have followed cases hasta our door, ready


sabrá


 


, you can know, even when you hear, that
lo tenemos aquí.

Everyone watched in silence until Boromir finished. ¿He says that
Is he an insignificant man, this Gollum? Insignificant, but great
travesuras. What happened to him? You condemned him to this fate
?

He is in prison, but no worse, I say Aragorn. Habia
very dirty. No doubt that he was tormented,
and the honey to Sauron darkens his heart. Aun así, me
I am happy that I was safe from the protection of the Elfos vigilantes of the
Bosque Negro. It is large on Malicia and gives her strength
increible in some so flavourful and branded. It couldn't cause it
much damage is free. I don't doubt that
she was allowed to ascend from Mordor with some bad mission.

¡Ay! ¡Ay!, cried Legolas, and in his beautiful elven beak he reflected
a great anguish. The news sent to me will be helpful
ser peasants. They are not good, but only here I learn
what may appear to this company. Sméagol, que
now if he calls Gollum, he has escaped.

'Escaped?' Aragorn shouted. These are bad news, in truth. Me
I fear that we will all complain bitterly about it. How was the village of Thranduil
defrauded his trust?
I received help from others, and it separated us more from our actions.
 
—Not for lack of vigilance —I say Legolas—, until…
Quizzes for excess bondage. And we fear that the prisoner
It's more than what we wanted. Let us watch over this creature day and night,
at the instancias of Gandalf, although we could do it.
But Gandalf told us that we still hope for a cure, and we don't
I have the courage to always keep it in the earth's mazmorras,
where he would turn to his old and dark thoughts.

Fuiste menos tierno migo, dijo Gloin with a destello en sus
eyes, while you are left wondering what you have learned from your encarcelamiento
the depths of the royal elf salons.

¡Ahora ven!, I say Gandalf. Please don't interrupt me, please
good Gloin. If it was a regrettable disappointment, hace time
furnished. Yes all the burdens that exist between Elfos and


  Enanos

they have been planted here, we can easily abandon them
this Council.

Gloin rose and gave a reverence, and Legolas continued. On days
in good time let us go to Gollum through the forest; Habia
a tall tree, solitary and haunted by others, to whom they
tasted trepar. At the end of the day we left him to suffer
taller branches as long as the wind felt; but we pusimos a guard to
foot of the tree. One day he denied himself to pay attention to them
guards who do not want to be subjected to it: they have learned it
trick of grasping the branches with the feet and with the
manos; so they felt right at the tree until well into the night.

It was the same night in Verano, without the moon or the stars
, that the orcs attacked us desprevenidos. Los ahuyentamos
after a while; they were many and ferocious, but they came
on the other side of the mountains and they are not accustomed to the forests.
When the battle was over, we discovered that Gollum had disappeared
and that their guards have died or have become prisoners. Things seemed obvious to us
that the attack had to be done to redeem it, and that it is
I knew it before hand. How if we plan, we can't tell; but
Gollum is cunning, and the enemy's spies are many. Las
dark creatures that were expelled in the year of the Dragon's hunt
they have returned to the highest number, and the Black Forest has returned to being one
malignant place, except where our king is kept.

No hemos logrado recover to Gollum. Let's follow on track
among many Orcs, and he entered deeply into...
Bosque, yendo hacia el sur. But ready if we escaped, y
no we are afraid to continue the work; we can look forward to Dol
Guldur, and what follows is a very dangerous place; Let's not go by now.   

—Good, good, if you have an idea —said Gandalf—. We don't have time to spare
get him again. You must do what you want. But
you can also unseat a paper that neither Sauron nor Sauron foresaw.

Now I will respond to other questions from Galdor. ¿Qué hay de
Saruman? What advice do you give us in this need?
I must read this complete story, only Elrond has discovered it all, and
in short; but there will be a relationship with everything we need to resolve. Eg el
Last chapter of the History of the Ring, as far as it came from.


334


 


In the June finals I was in the Comarca, but under a cloud of anxiety
He invaded me, and he made the southern frontiers of the country
small earth; may present some strange, some hidden
for me, but I was looking for it. There they brought me messages that
They talk to me about the war and the derrota in Gondor, and when they talk about it
the Black Shadow, an escalofrío took my heart away. But I didn't meet anything
except for a few fugitives from the South; without embargo, I think so
I then travel east and north along the Camino Verde; y
No sooner than Bree met me with a traveler sitting on a terrace
coming to the fireplace with his horse and pasta on his side. Era
Radagast the Leopard, who once lived in Rhosgobel,
search the limits of the Black Forest. It's my order, though
I haven't seen it in many years.

"Gandalf!" he shouted. "You were looking. But I'm a
extraño por here. Everything you knew was what you could meet
in a saved region with the Tuscan name of the Comarca".

  “Your information was correct,” he said. But no
Tell me so if you meet with some of the inhabitants. This is looking for
of the frontiers of the Comarca. What do you want?
me? It must be urgent. Never again would you travel, unless you did
You will be obliged by a great necessity.

—I have an urgent delivery —I say—. I have bad news.
—He looked at his father, as the silks could wear him—.
Nazgûl —susurró—. Los Nueve have returned to the load. Han
they cross the river secretly and head towards the west.
They have adopted the appearance of black jinetes.
 
—Supe entonces what was feared without knowing it.

  «The Enemigo must have some great necessity or purpose»,
said Radagast; «but
I can't figure out what it is that brings him to look at these distant and desolate places."

  «What do you want to decide?», he asked.

  «They told me that where they go, the Jinetes ask for
news from a country called Comarca".

  «The Comarca», he said; but I was encouraged by my heart. Porque including los Sabios
You might be afraid to rush to the new ones when you return
I lower the hand of his feroz jefe. A great king and hechicero


  335

he was in the old days, and now there is a deadly curse. «¿Quién
I'll tell you and who will I send you?" he asked.

  "Saruman el Blanco," Radagast replied. «Y me pidió
whoever says you feel the need, he will help you; but you must
seek help immediately, or it will be too late."

Y ese mensaje me god esperanza. Porque Saruman el
White is the largest in my order. Radagast is, above all, one
great connoisseur of grasses and animals, and aves are especially
sus amigas. But Saruman has studied the arts of the world for a long time










 


artesanía. You can't attach it to her unless you pass the circuit

... One late, go to the door, like a large arch
the rocky wall; and it was carefully guarded. But the guardians
They were waiting for me at the door and they told me that
Saruman expected me. Cabalgué below the arch, and the door
if I searched silently between me, and suddenly I felt mine, anyway
no sabía por qué.

But you can reach the foot of Orthanc and go to the stairway
Saruman; and there he received me and led me up high
cámara. He took a ring on the side.

  "As you have come, Gandalf," I say gravely to myself; but
in your eyes there seemed to be a white light, like one
the laughter would envelop the heart.

  «Yes, I'm coming». Say: «I come to your help,
Saruman el Blanco." And this title seemed enraging.

«De truth, Gandalf el Gris!», he joked. «¿
Ayuda? A few times we heard that Gandalf el Gris hunted
help, someone so astute and wise, wandering through there
tierras and taking care of everything,
whether it belongs to her or not."

I looked at him and asked him. «Pero si no me engaño»,
surging. Against him, the old allies and politicians will not serve us at all in this moment.”
—tell me—, now if you are watching what the union will require
de todas nuestras fuerzas.

  —It may be so —I say—, but the idea is late
llegar to you. For as long as I have wondered, I have hidden it
to me, the jefe of the Council, an assumption of the major importance?
What brings you now from where you hide in the county? —Los


 


Nine
  they went —he replied—. Han
crossed the Rio. Here I say Radagast.
  —¡Radagast el Pardo! —rió Saruman, y
I don't hide my contempt—. ¡Radagast el Domador de Pájaros! ¡Radagast
the Simple! ¡Radagast el Loco! Without embargo, all the right genius
to clear the paper you signed. Because he's coming, yes
that was the entire purpose of my mensaje. And here I will ask you,
Gandalf el Gris, and you will forget your journeys. Because I am Saruman
el Sabio, Saruman el Hacedor de Anillos, Saruman de Muchos Colores!
Miré entonces y vi que sus ropas, che parecían
white, they weren't, as long as they were tejidas with all the colors, and it was decided
"¡Blanco!", he joked. "It serves as a starting point.
The white canvas can be dyed. The blank page can be written; y
the white light can break."
  "In this case it's not white," he said. "Y quien
breaks something to discover what it is, has abandoned the path of the
wisdom".
  "No need to talk to me like one of those necios que tomas
for friends", I say. "I didn't take you here for that
Instruct me, until I can give you an option."
He spoke into words and started to declaim, as he did
he was slandering a widely shared discourse. Los Días Antiguos han
passed. Intermediate days are passing. Los Días Jóvenes están
starting. The time of the Elves has ended, but our time is over
search: the world of men, who we must govern. But we must
have power, power to order all the things to our will, for this good
that only the Sabios can see.
  «Look, Gandalf, my dear friend and helper!», I say,
looking and talking now with a softer voice. «Say nosotros,
because we can be, if you are one of me. A new power is it
everything. No such hope in the Elves nor in the dying Númenor. Summer
es, entonces, an election before you, before us. We can join together
338















 


Ese Poder. Seria sabio, Gandalf. There is hope for this
fireplace. On victoria you are looking for; and you will have a rich reward for it
quienes helped him. A thought that the Power grows, its aliases tested
they will also grow; y los Sabios, como tu y yo, con
Paciencia, we can finally direct your cauces, control it. Podemos
wait for the right moment, we can look at our thoughts in our hearts,
deploring sometimes the bad things done on the road, but condemning it
supreme and supreme purpose: Knowledge, Government, Order; everything
that now we are struggling in vain to lose,
obstructed in the place of help by our weak or destitute friends.
No matter what you have, no need, no real change in it
our designs, only in our medium ones.

  —Saruman —say—, I hear discussions of this kind,
Mordor, to engage the ignorant. I can't believe that
I have brought myself here only to get my eyes.

I looked at myself and took a moment to reflect.
«Good, I see that this is a good path
It suits you», I say. «Todavía, no? ¿No yes if you can
meet in a better way?”.

If I hold it and use it with a large hand on my arm. «¿Y por qué
no, Gandalf?" he whispered. «Por qué no? El Anillo Gobernante?
If we can control it, the power will pass to us.
In truth, why do you get here. Because I have a lot
Watch out for me, and I think you know where
If you now enter this purchased item. Isn't it like this? ¿Or why the new piden
the Comarca, and what matters to you there?”. To the decir
this, a lujuria that I cannot hide suddenly shone on top
eyes.

«Saruman», I said, apart from him, «only one
you can handle the Único one by one, and you will know it well,
so that it doesn't bother you to decide that...". But I won't give it to you, ni
I'll let you know, now that I know you
mind. Eras jefe del Consejo, pero
until you have removed your mask. Good, the options are, as it seems, sometimes
Sauron or my friend. I will not accept any of the dos. Please keep others que
ofrecer?


 


—339


Now he was fresh and hairy—. Yes —I say—. No hope
who will show wisdom, will not seek your own benefit; but
I give you the opportunity to help me voluntarily, and so I'm afraid
lots of problems and pain. The third option is obvious
aquí, hasta el final". "

  ¿Hasta qué final?"

  "Please tell me where you can meet at the Único.
You can find the way to persuade yourself. Or wait until you find it
weigh, and the Ruler takes time to dedicate himself to the simplest tasks:
devise, let's say, an adequate reward for obstruction and insolence
of Gandalf the Grey".

  "It may not be one of the simplest assumptions",
say. It came back to me, because my lips were empty, and it was
he knew it.

They lifted me up and left me alone at the top of it
Orthanc, in the place where Saruman was alone
observe the stars. Don't go down unless you go down the stairs.
I look at it and see it, once it was green
and beautiful, now she was full of strength and strength. Lobos y
orcs alojaban in Isengard, pues Saruman was gathering a
great army for his count, rivaling Sauron and not
to your service todavía. There was a dark humor in all his works
envolved the Orthanc blades. I only found it
an island among the clouds; no tenía escapatoria, y
my days were bitter. A little cold, I just stopped
space to pass from one side to the other, longing for it
Llegada de los Jinetes al Norte.

I was sure that the new ones had gotten up, except for
the words of Saruman, which could be lied to. Much before leaving
in Isengard, he heard unmistakable news along the way
. The fear of my friends there
Comarca always invaded me; but there was also some hope. He hoped that Frodo would find this place
check immediately, as I install my card, and which will now be linked to
Sell ​​it before the mortal persecution begins. And I feared so much
how my hope turned out to be unfounded. Because my hope was founded in a man


fat


 


deBrce; and I'm sorry if it was founded there
cunning of Sauron. But the good men who sell beer keep a lot of llamadas
que responder; and the power of Sauron is less than the mine
. But in the Isengard circle, trapped and alone,
It wasn't easy to think that all the riders are ahead of everyone
Huido or caído flaquearían en la lejana Comarca.

¡Te vi!, cried Frodo. Caminabas from one side to
other. The moon shone on your hair.

Gandalf found himself shadowed and looked at him. He was alone
a dream, I said Frodo, but it suddenly returned to me.
I forgot it completely. Llegó hace algún time; after that
Comarca, I think.

It's late to come, I say Gandalf, as true.
I was in a very difficult situation. And those who know me will be clear
Rarely have I been faced with such necessity and I can't stand it
such a misfortune. Gandalf el Gris caught like a fly in there
beautiful canvas of an araña! Without embargo, including the most useful pieces you can
dejar un hilo débil.

At first I feared, as Saruman had doubtless pretended, that Rada...
if you are mistaken in your voice or in your sight in our place. Yes the hubiera hecho,
I'll never have to go to Isengard, or I'll have to
with greater caution. So Saruman advised him and hid him
on your mind and engañó on your mensajero. In any case, it would have been
it is useless to try to convince the honest Radagast
so that you can eat. I looked forward to good faith and so on
it suited me.

This was the ruin of Saruman's plot. Porque Radagast
she didn't know why she didn't do what I asked her to do; y cabalgo
hacia el Bosque Negro, where he had many old friends.
And the Águilas de las Montañas ran all over the country, and
There were many things: the reunion of the bodies and the concentration
of orcs; Ya los New Jinetes going from one side to the other for them
tierras; and here are some news about Gollum's blood. Y
They sent me a message to get this news to me.

So it was that, at the decline of the evening, he stayed one night
of the moon, and Gwaihir, the Lord of the Wind, the fastest of the Greats


 


Águilas


, he unexpectedly traveled to Orthanc; and he met me
de pie en la top. Entonces le hablé y me llevó
, before Saruman said this. It was left of Isengard
when the lobos and the orcs climbed out of the door to pursue me.

  "Where can you get me?" he asked Gwaihir.

  “A lot of words,” he replied, “but not beyond the borders of the country
tierra. They sent me to get news, no cargo".

  "Now I need a shortcut on earth", I say, "and an incredibly quick shortcut, you can never do it
before
I had so much need to be prepared."

  “Entonces te llevaré a Edoras, dande el Señor de Rohan
if you sit in their salons", I say; "because you're not very happy". And me
happy, you can go to the Marca de los Jinetes de Rohan
They inhabit the Rohirrim, the Lords of the Caballos, and they have no caballos as they are
crían in this great valley between the Cloudy Mountains and the
Blancas.

  “Do you think you can still trust the Men of Rohan?”,
I asked them in Gwaihir, may the tradition of Saruman have quenched me
faith.

  “They pay a tribute in caballos,” he replied, “and they send
many every year in Mordor, or so they say; but still no
under the yugo. But yes Saruman has turned evil, as he says,
entonces on destiny cannot be discouraged much”.

I left in the land of Rohan before the love; Yes now
I've enlarged the message to me. The rest must be more
brief. En Rohan met the evil ya in action: the minds of
Saruman; and the king of the earth did not listen to me
advertisements. He ordered me to take a horse back and take him; y electí
I like it a lot, but not much about it. Tomé el mejor caballo
on earth, and I have never seen anyone like it.

Entonces must be a noble beast, I say Aragorn; y
I am more distressed by the many pieces of news that might seem worse
knowing that Sauron brings such tribute. No, it wasn't like that
Last time you were on this earth.

Not now, I swear, I say Boromir. That's a lie
comes from the Enemigo. I know the Hombres de Rohan, loyal y


brave


 


, our aliases, who also live in the lands where we live
hace mucho tiempo.

The shadow of Mordor extends over the broken lands, I replied
Aragorn. Saruman has lost her. Rohan is besieged. ¿Quién
Do you know what you will meet there some time ago?

At least not this —I say Boromir—, who will buy it
lives with caballos. They love their caballos more than their relatives.
And no doubt, look at the horses from the Marca del Jinete
they come from the fields of the North, the fields of the shade, y
his race, like the one of our loves, descends from the books.
Días de antaño.
I've seen a slow fire." Don't expect less, and when
 
Of course! —I say Gandalf—. Y have one between them.
who could have been born in the hands of the world. Los
New horses cannot compete with him; incansable, fast as el
I come. Sombragris called him. De día, su pelaje
shines like the plata; y de noche, like a shadow, y
goes invisible. These pisadas are ligeras! Never before
A man had it mounted, but I took it and tamed it, and so on
I quickly got up and went to the county when Frodo was there
en las Quebradas de los Túmulos, aunque departed from Rohan alone
when he left Hobbiton.

But my heart grew in me while I was in trouble. Every time it was connected to the north,
Here's the news from the Jinetes, and no matter how hard the day
every day, they are always close to me. Habían divide sus
lands near the Camino Verde, and some invaded the region from there
words of old Gamyi. Lots of words and a few pieces of wheat.
I wanted to decide on the shortcomings of the new ones
dueños de Bolsón Cerrado.

  “I can't stand the changes”, I say, “no to my dad,
y menos aún los exchanges a peor." "Changes a
peor”, he repeated many times.

  “Perhaps it's a bad word,” he told her, “and I hope not
Long live to see it.” But in the middle of your charla, deduce from that
Frodo has been out of Hobbiton for less than a week, and that is
The black guy had to go to the hill very late. Entonces


 


343


He continued chattering with medo. I went to Los Gamos and met him in the tree,
as active as a hormiguero who removed them with a pole. Llegué
to the house of Crickhollow, and it was broken
y vacía; but in the umbral there was a head that had
Frodo's side. Then, for a moment, hope abandoned me, and no
I hope to receive the news, or I may be consoled; but
he followed the rastro de los Jinetes. It was difficult to follow, you know
I passed through many fireplaces, and it was lost. But it seemed like it to me
that one or two have hooked up with Bree; and where I was,
you can think about how to decide them at the lodge.

  “Lo llaman petasita,” he thought. « Si esta demora
It was her fault, she would lose all the mantequilla she had inside. Asare..." Al
Ver my dear, I broke down and started to retreat into it
act.

"What's the hicist?" cried Frodo in alarm. Fue
really very friendly with us and all the things we can do.

Gandalf laughed. ¡No tengas miedo!, I say. No bite
y thief very little. I was so happy with the news
My God, when I stopped crying, I hugged him
in the old days. How it happened I couldn't even imagine,
but above that we were in Bree the previous night and that
I've had you this morning with Trancos.

  “¡Trancos!”, shouted, shouted with joy.

"Yes, señor, I fear that yes, señor", I said Mantecona, confusing him
demás con el. They behaved in a very different way all the time
they were here: volunteers, they could decide. "

  Come on! ¡Senseless! "Three times I dignified and loved Barliman!" —he said.





 






He came here to end up a wide and hard path, suffering through the Pozo Hoar
and crossing the borders of Etten, and going from the north.
Late in this case, five days after the top of the winds, you can't wait any longer
cabalgar between the rocks of the Páramos of the Trolls, and Sombragris
he left. Send it back with your love; but
a great friend was born among us, and if I need it, he will take care of me


 


called


. But so it was that he arrived at Rivendel only two days
before the Ring, and you had heard the news about his stranger
, the result will be certain.

Y with this, Frodo, finish my story. Que Elrond
and others forgive the extension. But
nothing like this could have happened: that Gandalf would miss the above quote and not
viniera cuando prometió.
I think it was necessary to tell the Ring Holder a very extra success.

Good, the History is told from beginning to end. Here we are all
, and here is the ring. But still not us
for our purpose. What do we have with him?

Here's a silence. Finally, Elrond returned to talk.

—These are bad news about Saruman —I say—, yes
Let's trust him and listen to all our advice. It's peligroso
study carefully the arts of the Enemigo, for good or for harm.
But these misfortunes and traiciones, unfortunately, have happened to you before. De
; and it seems to me that I'm not alone yet
the stories we learned today, Frodo was...
Much stranger to me. I know very few hobbits, except Bilbo,
singular as I believed it. The world has changed a lot
since the last time you are on the western paths.

We know the Tumularios by many names; y del
Bosque Viejo has contained many stories: everything that happens now
it is only a fragment of its septentrional marcha. Hubo a time in que una
ardilla podía ir de árbol en árbol from what is now the Comarca
Hasta las Tierras Dundas to the west of Isengard. Travel once through these lands,
and I knew a lot of things that were safe and extravagant. But
there was a lot that had forgotten the woods and the hills, and even then it was as old as they were
old. Ese no entonces su nombre. We called him Iarwain Ben-adar, the mayor and father's father. But
otros pueblos le han dado
many other names from these words: Forn por los Enanos, Orald
for the Men of the North, and other names more. It's one
extraña creature, but sometimes we should have him summoned to us
Council.
No coming, I say Gandalf.
346
We can't follow up by sending messages and getting them
Ayuda?, asked Erestor. It seems like it has power included above
el Anillo.
No, I should not say so, I say Gandalf. Let's say more carefully
The ring has no power over it. It's my love. But
you cannot alter the ring itself, nor break its power over others.
And now you are retired to a small land, within the limits
that has stabilized, although anyone can see it, hoping to ask questions
a change of days, and they will not disappear.
But within these limits nothing seems to constrain him,
I say Erestor. I would not take the ring back and look at it there,
para siempre inoffensive?
No, I say Gandalf, no good luck. We can do it, we'll go back there
free people of the world will beg for it, but they will not understand
the necessity. And if they give you the ring, ready
I'll forget it, or most likely I'll throw it out. Such things do not hold
It influences your mind. There would be a very insecure guard; y
that's just a sufficient answer.
But in any case, I say Glorfindel, send her the ring
only postpone the day of the illness. This is it.
We can't take it off now, until we know it, until the brand of...





 






whoever espies. And even if we pudiéramos, tarde or temprano el Señor del
heart tells me that Sauron will hope that we return to the western path.
The rings will be discovered in the background and placed next to them.
power hacia él. You might be disappointed
only for Bombadil? I don't create it. I believe that at the end, everything else is conquered
, Bombadil will come, the Last as the First was; y entonces
will sell the night.

There is little of Iarwain save the name, I say Galdor; but
Glorfindel, I create, holds reason. The power to desatiate our Enemigo is not there
in it, unless such power existed in the same earth. Y no embargo vemos
that Sauron can torture and destroy even the smallest hills.
What can we do, here in Imladris, or
strength, let us have strength here to resist the enemy,
Sauron's dream at the end, when all of him was lost?

I have no strength, I say Elrond; ellos shortly.

However, if the ring cannot be removed forever


  there

strength, I say Glorfindel, only we ask two things for
attempt: send it to the other side of the sea, or destroy it.

«But Gandalf has revealed to us that we cannot destroy it
with none of the craftsmen who placed us here», I said Elrond. «Y quienes
Those who live near the sea will not accept it: for good
para mal, pertenece a la Tierra Media; we correspond to us, who also live here,
ocuparnos de él.

Entonces», I say Glorfindel, «arrojémoslo a las profundidades y
we realized the minds of Saruman." Now it's obvious
who, including in the Council, his pies ya go for a
winding chimney. I knew that the ring wasn't lost forever, but I wondered
that we would believe it this way; you can try to code it for the same reason. Sin embargo, a menudo
The truth is hidden in lies: you will be safe in the sea.

No to salvo para siempre», I said to Gandalf. «Hay a lot of things
in the deep waters; and the seas and the lands can change. Y
It doesn't correspond to us here to think only at one time, not at one time
how many lives of men, not in a past era of the world. Debemos
seek a definitive end to this amusement, although we do not hope to create it
».

And we won't meet him on the sea paths - I say
Galdor—. If he returns to Jarwain if he considers himself a dangerous demasiado,
therefore the seashore is now plagued by dangerous graves. Me
fireplace, when it enters what happens. Ready you will know. Los
New people have been disassembled, yes, but this is only a breath.
Before entering new and faster speeds. Only the menguante power
de Gondor now intervenes between him and a march with strength
off the coast there is the North; y he connects, attacking
the White Towers and the Ports, now and then the Elves could
Don't have any escape from the shadows as wide as they are
the Tierra Media.

—It will be a long time coming back —I say Boromir—.
Gondor mengua, dices. But Gondor maintains itself, and includes it
at the end of his strength he continues to be very strong

—dijo Galdor—. And you can find other paths to Gondor
no proteja.


—Then


 


—dijo Erestor—, only hay dos campinos, como
Glorhndel declared to you: hide the ring forever or shake it. But both are outside our power. —¿Quién
nos
descifrará este enigma?
—Nadie can do it here —I said Elrond gravely—. At least nadie
You can predict what will happen if we go down this path
aquel. But now it seems clear to me what the path is
we must go back. The path to the west seems the easiest. For a long time,
should be avoided. You will be monitored. Demasiadas los Elfos veces
they've heard from there. Now, in this last case, we must take a difficult path,
an unexpected fireplace. Ahí resides our hope, yes it is that hope exists. Walk
hacia el peligro, hacia Mordor. We must send the Ring to Fire.
The silence returned again. Frodo, included in that beautiful house, contemplating
a valley illuminated by the sun, filled with the sound of crystalline waters,
there was a deadly darkness in his heart. Boromir moved, and Frodo
I admired it. Tocaba on big horn and fruncía el ceño.
Finally, he spoke.
Don't worry about everything, I say. Saruman is a traitor,
but aren't you a little lacking in wisdom? So what are you talking about?
always hidden and destroyed? So let's not think about that
the Great Ring has tied our hands to serve us there
time of need? Blandiéndolo, los Señores Libres de los Libres
you can definitely derrotar the enemy. This is what I fear most,
I think.
The Men of Gondor are brave and will return
; but they can be damaged. Valor is the first
you hold the power that says. Remove it and move on
the victory!
—Ay, no —I said Elrond—. We cannot use the Ruler Ring.



 
strength, and then a weapon. That the ring is your weapon.
 
That's why we know it very well. Belongs to Sauron, fue
created only by it, and it is completely malignant. Come on,
Boromir, it is a great dream to be able to continue at will, except
those who have given you great power of their own. But para
ellos entraña un peligro aún mayor. The mere desire
corrupts the heart. Think of Saruman. Yes some of the Sabios


 


349


and another Dark Lord appeared. Y esa es otra
reason why the Ring must be destroyed: while it is in
In the world, it will be a journey even for the Sabios. Because nothing e.g
bad in the beginning. Ni siquiera Sauron was. I'm afraid to return
the ring to hide it. Don't take the ring back to flatter him.

Yo tampoco, dijo Gandalf.

Boromir looked at him with doubt, but tilted his head.
That's how it is, I say. Entonces in Gondor we must confide in them
weapons we keep. Y al menos, mientras los Sabios
keep this ring, we will follow it. Quizás la Espada
Wheel can hold the tide, yes the hand that
the empuña has inherited not only a relic, but also the tents of the
Reyes de los Hombres.

¿Quién sabe?, said Aragorn. But some of us give the pond to the prueba
.

Let's not forget this day, I say Boromir. Porque
no more help, we need it. We will console you
knowing that others also played with all the mediums up
availability.

Entonces, tranquilícense, dijo Elrond. Because there are others
farms and kingdoms that are unknown, and they are hidden
for ustedes. The Anduin el Grande rivere por many orillas, antes de
llegar to Argonath and the Puertas de Gondor.

Anyway, it could be good for everyone, I say Gloin el Enano, yes everyone
These forces come together and the farms of each one come together
they will be used in alliance. You can have other rings, less expensive ones,
which we can use in our need. You are lost to us, yes
Balin did not meet Thror's ring, which was the last;
nothing was known from the moment Thror perished in Moria.
That being said, I can now reveal that
Balin went there with the hope of meeting this ring.

Balin will not meet any ring in Moria, I say Gandalf. Thror
the path of desperation. Of the silence, I'll say, yes the broad wisdom...
If I give it to Thrain, on hijo, but no Thrain to Thorin. If so
they arrebataron with torment in Thrain en las mazmorras de Dol
Guldur. Read it late.


¡


 


Ah, ay!, shouted Gloin. When we will see our day
coming? But they still ask for the Tres. ¿Qué de los Tres
Señores Elfos los conserves? Without embargo, they were also created by them
Dark Lord hace a lot of time. Are they safe? Veo Señores Elfos here. ¿
Won't they say it?

Los Elfos no respondieron. Don't forget me,
Gloin?, said Elrond. The Three were not created by Sauron,
I didn't touch them. But they are not allowed
hablar. Only at this hour of doubt can I decide now.
They are not safe. But they were not created as weapons
war or conquest: ese no es su poder. Quienes
los crearon no deseaban fuerza no dominion no
Accumulated considerations, without understanding, creation and healing, to preserve
all the unstained things. These things
the Elves of the Middle Tierra have gnawed them in certain medicine, even with pain. But all
the one who has forced those who ask for the Three will be converted
in his perdition, and his minds and hearts will be revealed
to Sauron the Único is recovered. Better series
that the Three never exist again. This is on purpose.

But what would happen immediately was the Ruling Ring
destroyed, as advice?, asked Gloin.

"No, we know it for sure," Elrond replied sadly. Some
They hope that the Three Rings, that Sauron has never touched,
Sean frees himself, and that his rulers can heal wounds
of the world that has forged him. But sometimes when the only one
have disappeared, the Three Fracasen, and many beautiful things have disappeared
y caigan in the shadows. That's what I believe.

However, all Elves are willing to accept this opportunity, I say
Glorfindel, if with her you can conquer the power of Sauron and
always fear the fear of your dominion.

So let's move on to the destruction of the ring once again
—I say Erestor—, and without embargo let's not look further. That's the strength we have
to encounter the Fire in what was created? Eso ex
de Elrond, did not forbid me.

Desperation or care? —I say Gandalf—. It's not desperation, because


 


351


Desperation is only for those who come to the end of all doubts.
Nosotros no. It is wise to recognize the need, when
if they have weighed all the same paths, it still seems like a mess
hide the eyes of the enemy before! Because it is very wise, y
therefore juzga all the hearts. In your heart no
the idea will enter that someone will take it back, nor that, holding the ring, we can
attempt to destroy it. If we look for this, we will leave it outside
game.

At least for a time, I say Elrond. The path must be followed,
but it will be very hard. And neither strength nor wisdom
we will take you there. This task can be attempted by you
débiles with as much hope as for the fighters. Without embargo, as is the menu
course of those who move the streets of the world:
the small hands are done because they must be done well, while the eyes of the great ones
están en otra parte.

¡Muy bien, muy bien, Master Elrond!, I say Bilbo suddenly.
Don't say more! It is quite clear what you are reporting.
Bilbo, the stupid hobbit, took this assumption, and it is worth more to Bilbo
finish it, or the same thing. I was very comfortable here, and I followed
with my book. If you want to know, I'm just writing one
final. I thought about it: and I lived happily
to always wait until the end of your days. It's a good ending, y
It hasn't been used before. Ahora tendré
how to change it: it doesn't seem to be possible; and in all ways,
evidently I will tend to have more varied chapters if I live
to write them. It is widespread harassment. ¿Cuándo debería
to start?

Boromir looked surprised at Bilbo, but the laughter stopped
on their lips the truth that all of them gaze at the sky
hobbit with grave disdain. Only Glóin sonrió, but on sonrisa
came from old records.

«Por supuesto, mi querido Bilbo», I said Gandalf. «Yes really hubieras
Once you have taken this assumption, you will hope that you will finish it. But ya


sabes


 


very good to start is longed for
and let's not doubt that in broma we're doing one
valid offer. But one that surpasses your strengths, Bilbo. You cannot accept
whatever, and that in the big hazañas only a small paper the men would desempeñan it.
Any hero. No need to tilt! Although the wording was intentional,
this thing is back. He passed. If necessary, I advise you
, I have to decide that your paper has finished, unless it is one
registrar. Finish your book and leave the ending unchanged!
There is still hope for you. But prepare to write a sequence, when

Bilbo rió. Never before had I seen it
pleasant advice, I say. As all your desagradable advice has
I'm good, I wonder if this isn't bad. Anyway, I suppose not
I ask myself no strength to lie with the Ring.
He grew up, but he didn't. But tell me: what you want to decide
with them?

The mensagers who are sent with the ring.

¡Exactly! ¿Y quiénes son? That seems like it to me
This Council has to decide, and everything that has to decide.
The elves can only thrive with the word, and the elfs endure a great
cansancio; but I'm just a old hobbit, and I'm not alone
of the Middle Ages. Can't we think about some names now? ¿Or postpone it
hasta después de la cena?

Nadie responded. I am the bell of the Middle Ages. Nadie hablo todavía.
Frodo looked at all the beaks, but no one had the chance to do so
el. All the Council was heard with the lower eyes, as well as deeply
thoughts. A great fear will arise from him, as he will find himself waiting for him
pronunciation of some destiny that he had foreseen for a long time
I hoped in vain that, after all, it would never be pronounced. A
even the abrumador descansar and remains calmly by Bilbo's side
I sell it all on my heart. Por fin, with esfuerzo, habló,
and I marveled at the sight of your own words, as you wish
estuviera using su vocecita.

Tomaré el Ring, I say, although I don't know it
fireplace.


 


353


Elrond raised his eyes and looked at him, and Frodo heard
that the heart was overcome by the sudden sharpness of the sight. Yes he
I fully understand everything I hear, I say, I believe that
this tarea has been assigned to you, Frodo; and if you don't find it
the way, nadie will meet her. This is the time of the people of the Comarca,
when they rise from their quiet fields to protect the towers
and the councils of the Greats. Here all Sabios could have it
expected? O, if they are wise, why hope...
Do you know what time it is?

But it's a heavy load. So much weight that anyone could bear it.
I will say that your election is the correct one; and even all the powerful
dear old elves, Hador, Húrin, Túrin and the
Beren himself will be reunited, you should be here
ellos.

But I won't send it alone, love? —gritó
Sam, unable to contain himself anymore, and jumping
of the ring from which he had been heard peacefully in it
soil—.

No, of course not! —I said Elrond, turning back to him with a smile—.
Al menos irás con él. In cases where it is impossible to separate
of him, including when he is summoned to a secret council
y tú no.

Sam heard himself, sounding and whispering. —What's good about us
hemos metido, señor Frodo! —I say, leading the
head.


 3


 


Later this day, the hobbits celebrated their reunion in the
Bilbo's habitation. Merry and Pippin were indignant at it
understand what Sam has been brought to the Council and has been
Frodo's elegido compañero.

—It's the most unfair —says Pippin—. Instead of hearing it
and encadenarlo, ¡Elrond va y
lo recompensa por su descaro!

¡Rewards! —I say Frodo—. I cannot imagine a more severe punishment
. Don't be thinking about what it says: ¿condemned
to undertake this journey without hope, a reward? Ayer
I dreamed that I was there and that I could forget about it here, a
wide range, quizás para always.

—No me extraña —I say Merry—, and ojalá pudieras. But
We're envious of Sam, not of you. If this happens, it will be
a punishment for any of us who have ever been here, including it
Resell. We walked along a wide path next to us
passed by difficult moments. We hope to continue ahead.

That's what I wanted to say —I say Pippin—. The hobbits must be
we will remain united, and we will have it. Iré, unless I fall in love
. There must be intelligent people in the group.

I'm sure you won't be chosen, Peregrin Tuk!
—said Gandalf, looking into the wind, which he was looking for
of the soil—. But everyone is worrying unnecessarily
. You still haven't decided anything. ¡

No decision! —exclaimed Pippin—. Entonces, ¿qué hacían
? Estuvieron encerrados during hours.

Once you have a revelation. Including the old Gandalf. I believe that
news from Legolas about Gollum pilloried him,
aunque la pasó por alto.


 


355


You were wrong, I say Gandalf. Don't pay attention.
Ya had to tell me Gwaihir. If you want to know,
the only ones who really opened our eyes, as you said, were you and Frodo;
and I was the only one who wasn't surprised.

Good, in the end, I say Bilbo, I didn't decide anything further
elect to poor Frodo and Sam. I fear all the time
llegara a eso si dejaban en paz. But if you want my opinion,
Elrond will send you to a good number when you receive the information
. Have you started yet, Gandalf?

Yes, I say the magician. Some explorers
you have been sent. Mañana irán más. Elrond is sending elves,
and if they will come into contact with the Montaraces, and will quiz them
the people of Thranduil in the Black Forest. Y Aragorn if he has ide with
the children of Elrond. We will tend to visit the red carpet during
many words before doing anything. As you live,
Frodo! You probably need enough time here.

¡Ah!, I say Sam sadly. We will find out what is sufficient for this
llegue el invierno.

It can't be avoided, Bilbo says. In part it's your fault,
Frodo, much of me: insist on waiting for my satisfaction. A
curious way to honor it, I can't help but think about it. It's not the day that
you must have the right to leave the S.-Bs in Bolsón Cerrado. But
as it is: you can't wait for spring; y no puedes irte hasta que
lleguen los informes.

When the winter fills with nitrogen
and the stones are eaten at night,
when the rest are black and the trees are naked,

It's an evil we expect in Nature.

But I fear that this will be your weakness.

I fear that yes, I say Gandalf. We can't leave until we get there
lo de los Jinetes.

—I thought everyone was destroyed in the flood —I said Merry—.

—It is not possible to destroy the Spectros of the Ring like this —I say Gandalf—.
The power of my love resides in them, and they maintain firms or caen
bajo on hand. We hope that everyone has been disassembled and unmasked,


356


 


and so if they have become less hairy for a time; but we must take care of it.
problemas, Frodo—. No, you can't do anything else to help.
you; but I'll whisper this to you. Someone else said that
intelligence will be needed at the party. Tenía razón.

So great was Frodo's deletion with this announcement
Gandalf left the father of the wind, whence he had been sent,
he put away his sombrero and gave me a reverence. Just say I think I'm going.
No questions with anything else. In this assumption, Elrond will tend
much to say, and your friend the Caminante. What I remember,
I want to see Elrond. I owe you. ¿

How long do you think you will be here?, I tell you Frodo
Bilbo cuando Gandalf se fue.

Oh, no it is. I can't count the days in Rivendel, I say
Bilbo. But enough, I think. We can have a lot
good conversations. This is how you help me with my book and let us learn
the next? Have you thought about an ending?

Yes, various, and all are dark and despicable, I say Frodo.

¡Oh, that won't help!, said Bilbo. Los libros deberían tener buenos
finals. This is why they are stable
Will they live happily ever after?

—Genial, sometimes it's linked to this —I said Frodo—.

¡Ah! —I say Sam—. Where is Iran? That's what I do
asked a lot.   

During a night, the hobbits kept talking and thinking about it
past journeys and among the pilgrims who looked at them; but that was it
the virtue of the land of Rivendel that ready me all and
Anxiety left them in their minds. The future, good or bad,
I didn't forget until I had to have an influence on it
present. Health and hope are strong in us, and so on
They were happy with every good day they enjoyed, enjoying it
each song, each word and each song.

As the days pass, every morning I love you brilliantly
and beautiful, and sometimes late I followed her fresh and anxious. But
the tone faded quickly; slowly, the golden light faded to the pale surface


 


,


and the rezagadas hojas fall from the bare trees. A
the cold wind started to cover up from the mountains Clouds hacia el
summer. The Moon of the Cazador grew in the night sky
I welcomed all the younger stars. But below, in the South, a star






 



if I am obliged to return as I can to my love in Mordor,
empty and shapeless.

If so, some time will pass before they can start,
before you can follow our track. And if we keep ourselves looked after,
it will be difficult to meet him. But we must not discourage ourselves more.

Elrond called to the hobbits. Miró gravely
to Frodo. He got the hour, I say. If the Ring has to leave
, he must leave promptly. But those who go with it should not count
with which your mission is aided by war or force. Must pass
to the dominion of the Enemigo lejos de toda ayuda. ¿Aún maintains
Do you say, Frodo, that you will be the ring-bearer?

Yes, I say Frodo. Iré with Sam.

I can't help you much, I don't need advice,
I say Elrond. I can take very little of your journey; y how
If he loses you will not care, he won't. La Sombra has it
I have now racked the pies from the mountains, and they are included
to the limits of the Gray Flood; and all the shadows are below
dark for me. You will encounter many enemies, some open and others
disfrazados; and you can meet friends on your path when
unless you ask for it. Send messages as soon as possible
to think, to those I know in the world too; but
the lands have seen so many hairs now that some can go outside
or don't connect as quickly as you.

And I chose companions to go together, so many
as ellos quieran or fortune permits it. The number must be small, that's it
your hope is in speed and secret. You will get a hueste de Elfos with
armor of the Old Days, will serve little, except to desperate
the power of Mordor.


 


359


The Ring Company will be New; y los Nueve
Walkers will approach the New Jinetes who are evil.
Close to you and your servant, Gandalf will come; because this
it will be a big deal, even at the end of your work.

For the rest, they will represent the other Free People of the
World: Elfos, Enanos y Hombres. Legolas will be with
los Elfos; y Gimli, hijo de Glóin, with the Enanos. Están
willing to travel at least a few steps in the mountains, y
in Arathorn, you can find the Ring of Isildur to look for.

¡Trancos!, exclaimed Frodo.

Yes, I say with a smile. I'll give you permission once more to be
your companion, Frodo.

I told you that wines, I say Frodo, only yo,












and in this case an emblem of you are among the stars
the crescent Moon and the radiant Sun, and the red of her was
He swords it when he recomposes; the light of the sun
red shone on her, and the light of the moon shone brightly, y
the wire was hard and sharp. Y Aragorn give her a new name
and I called her Andúril, Llama of the West.

Aragorn and Gandalf walk together or feel like talking
on the path and of the pilgrims who would meet; y reflexionaban
about the historical and figurative maps and the books of wisdom that you have in them
the house of Elrond. Sometimes Frodo was with him; but
I was satisfied with following the guide, and everything went by
the time I had with Bilbo.

In the last few days, the hobbits reunited at night
the Sala del Fuego, and there, among many related things, you can count
with all the details of the story of Beren and Lúthien and the obtention of the
Great Joya; but during the day, while Merry and Pippin go away
so alas, Frodo and Sam meet Bilbo
in your small habitation. Entonces Bilbo read passages from
on book (which seems very incomplete), or fragments of
His verses, or tomeba notes of Frodo's adventures.

On the last morning, Frodo was alone with Bilbo,


  y

the old hobbit has a lot of trouble in his room
caja de madeira. He took off the tape and slipped back inside. «

Here you have your sword», I say. «Pero estaba rota, ¿sabes?
I can't wait to look at it, but I forget to wonder about the men
they can fix it. I don't have time now. So I thought that sometimes you
I would enjoy having this, ¿sabes?”.

Sack of the caja a small sword on a street and raída
vaina de cuero. I undid it, and up
The clean and well-kept house shone suddenly, crisply and brilliantly. «Este
"It's Sting", I said, and the club was exhausted
a viga de madeira. «Cógela, si quieres. I guess I won't need it anymore"
.

Frodo accepted it gratefully. «¡

And this too!», I said Bilbo, packing a package that...
Plenty of weight for the size. Desenrolló varios
Fold the fabric away and remove a small waistband. Era...
dense fabric of many rings, as flexible cases as linen, as cold as
the sky is harder than the maple. It shone like the light of the moon
It was tachonaded with white gems. With it he had a pearl belt and

It's a good thing, really?, said Bilbo, moving it aside
light Y 'useful. It's my strength that makes me god Thorin.
Michel Delving recovered it before leaving
I packed it with my equipment. Traje all the memories of my travels
conmigo, excepto el Anillo. But don't expect it
use it, and I don't need it now, except to look at it once in a while.
You only feel the weight when you put it on you.

I'd be a worm... good, I don't think I'd be happy with him,
said Frodo.

Just what I say to myself, I say Bilbo. But don't worry about it
the appearance. You can use it underneath your clothes outside. Let's go!
You must share this secret with me. Don't tell anyone more!
But I would feel even happier if I got over it now. Me
I imagine that he would have to turn around as long as his cuchillos
Jinetes Negros, finished in voz baja.

Muy bien, I take it off, I say Frodo. Bilbo if I use it
and I fastened the Diente on the brilliant belt; and then Frodo


362


 


if I use it on my old trousers, tunic and
Chaqueta missed by the climate.

It seems like a simple hobbit, I say Bilbo. But there's more
It reminds you of what appears on the surface. Good luck
! If God turned and looked at the wind, treating
de tararear una melodía.

I can't appreciate how much I deserved, Bilbo, for this and for all
tus pasadas bondades, dijo Frodo.

Don't do it!, I say the old hobbit, turning around and giving her a palmada
en la espalda. ¡Ay!, he shouted. I've been waiting for you now
abofetearte! But alas: the hobbits must remain united, y
especially the Bolsón. All the shortest changes are what you care about the best
possible and get all the news you can,
and all the old songs and words that you find. Haré everything possible
to finish my book before returning. I would like to write it
second book, if they save me. He stopped and went back there
window, singing softly.

I feel like I'm full and full
en todo lo que he visto.





 















—Sometimes —I say Boromir—. But I've always wondered what my heart feels like
when we leave, and after that we walk there
shadows, don't be sold like a thief in the night.

Only Gimli, the eldest, visibly wore a short shirt
maple rings, so the maple rings don't worry about the loads; and it was removed from its belt
un hacha de hoja ancha. Legolas held a bow and a carcase, and it
on his belt is a large white cuchillo. The hobbits most young ones take them
swords that have returned from the mound; but Frodo
only went back to Diente; and on the shoulder, as Bilbo desired, he remained
occult. Gandalf stood on the stick, but he stood there
elven sword Glamdring, Orcrist's companion who now exists
above Thorin's skin below the Lonely Mountain.

All are well provided by Elrond with tight and comfortable clothes,
and they had chaquetas and scalps scratched from the skin. Comedy
Clothes, clothes and other necessities are packed in one
say, no less than the little beast they have traíd
de Bree.

The estate in Rivendel has undergone a marvelous change
in it: lucia lustrous and seemed to have the vigor of youth.
It was Sam who insisted on electing him, declaring that
Bill (as he called him) would complain if he didn't come.

In this case you can talk, I say, and you can talk
if it happened much more time. He directed me a sight as direct as possible
Mr. Pippin could express it: «If you leave me alone,
Sam, I'll follow you alone." So Bill is like a beast
of charge, but he was the only member of the Company who
no parecía deprimido.

If they were sent into the great hall towards the fire,
and now they only hope for Gandalf, who
he didn't even have to leave the house. A piece of fire came from
the open doors, and the soft lights shine in many
ventanas. Bilbo, curled in a head
, remained silent in the umbral
joined Frodo. Aragorn remained sent with the gacha head above them
rodillas; only Elrond knew what this hour meant to him.
They were seen as gray figures in the darkness,
with the melancholic gaze in the twilight whence the river roared petrified
abajo; His desire for adventure was at the lowest point.


 




 
Sam was standing on the pie right at the table, eating the food, y
 
, Bill, many, I said: «No need to trade with
nosotros. You can enjoy it here and have the best experience ever before
llegara la hierba nueva». Bill took the cola and didn't say anything.

Sam echoed the bike to the men and replied
mentally with anxiety everything I looked at
, wondering if you have forgotten something: on mayor
darling, your cooking utensils; and the cajita de sal que
always lifted and refreshed whenever possible; a good provision
de hierba per pipa (although not enough, I assure you); pedernal
y yesca; woolen media; linen; various small items pertaining to
I love that Frodo forgot and Sam watched
to save them triumphantly when they are needed.
Las revisó todas.

«¡Cuerda!», he murmured. «¡Nada de cuerda!». And just you too
you said: «Sam, what's the matter with you? You will need it
, si no la teners». Good, I'll need it. I can't get it now.

At this time, Elrond went up with Gandalf
called the company. «This is my last word», I say
en voz baja. «The ring holder leaves on the bus
of the Mount of Destiny. Only if you praise them: no
close the ring, don't ask anyone who serves the enemy,
don't forget that anyone manipulates it, except my friends
Company and the Council, and only in case of extreme necessity.
They accompany him as free companions, to help him
on fireplace. Podéis quedaros, regresar o desviaros por
other paths, as long as the sun allows it. The more advanced, the more
it will be difficult to withdraw; without embargo, no if you impose no oath or obligation
to go further than what you ask for. Because I didn't know it yet
strength of your hearts, and you cannot prevent one from falling
puede encontrar en el camino.

«Infiel es quien si despide when el chimney gets dark»,
said Gimli.


366


 


Sometimes, I say Elrond, but I cannot walk there
darkness who has not seen the night.

Without embargo, an oath can strengthen a dark heart, I say
Gimli.

Now with good heart! Goodbye, and the blessing of the Elves
And the men and all the free people will accompany you. That the stars shine,







 




continue from new, always as much looking for the sur as pudieron
to meet.

At first, it seemed to the hobbits that, no matter how they walked
and they tropezaban hasta cansarse, they advance stealthily
as caracoles without carrying anywhere. Every day the earth
it was more or less the same as the previous day. Without embargo,
the mountains should be looked at every time. Al sur de Rivendel se
they raise each other more and bend towards the west; y at the foot
the main cordillera extended a much longer distance each time
desolate hills and deep valleys filled with turbulent waters. The senderos were
escasos and tortuosos, ya menudo llevaban them only at the edge of
some abrupt falls or rough swamps.

They take two weeks off the road when the time is right
changed. The wind suddenly began and then it became happy
the south. The clouds that flowed rapidly rose and drifted away,
and the sun rose, pale and brilliant. Llegó a
I will love it crisply and clearly at the end of a large and swinging nocturnal march. Los
travelers went to a small bay surrounded by ancient acebos,
The gray and green trunks appear to have been built
with the same stone of the Colinas. Your dark days shine brightly
their bayas shine red in the light of the rising sun.

At the bottom, on the top, Frodo can see the high cloudy silhouettes
mountains that now seem to interpose themselves on the path that
the Compañía was killed. At the end of this high mountain range three people rise
picos; the highest and they seek if it stood like a diente covered in snow;


on


 


great northern fall, naked, was largely there
the shadow, but from which the light of the sun fell obliquely above it, shone
red.

Gandalf was at Frodo's side and looked down at him
hand. «Hemos hecho bien», I say. «We were brought to you
fronteras of the country that the men call Flollin; many elves live
here on the happiest days, when Eregion was called. Cuarenta y
five leguas in line straight we run, anyway
our pies have walked many thousands more." The earth and it
The climate will be more templados now, but we will ask more questions
dangerous.

Frodo, holding his cap behind him and waiting for the light of the morning...

But the mountains are beyond us, I say Pippin. Debimos
have fun this summer during the night.

No, I say Gandalf. But if you see it further, with clarity.
light Above these peaks the cordillera turns towards the south.
There are many maps in the house of Elrond, but I suppose that
You never thought about looking at it, right?

Yes, sometimes I did, I say Pippin, but no
the memories. Frodo has better hair for this type of thing.

I don't need a map, I say Gimli, who I was connected with
Legolas and I looked at him with an extra light
in your deep eyes. Here is the land where our fathers worked
antaño, and we forged the image of these mountains
in many works of metal and stone, and in many
songs and songs. If you are high in our sweet ones: Baraz, Zirak,
Shathur.

Just once before I saw them
the life is deserted, but I know you and I know your names, so why should you find it
Khazad-dum, the Cave of Enanos, which is now called it
Pozo Negro, Moria in the elven language. Allá se yergue Barazinbar,
the Red Heart, the cruel Caradhras; and most of all it is Plateado
y Cloudy: Celebdil el Blanco y Fanuidhol el
Gris, to whom we call Zirakzigil and Bundushathur.

There the Cloudy Mountains divide, and between them


 


369


arms extend into the valley of deep shadows that we cannot forget
: Azanulbizar, el Valle del Arroyo Sombrío, que los Elfos laman
Nanduhirion.

It is the Arroyo Valley that we direct, I say Gandalf.
We now go to the street called Puerta del Cuerno Rojo, lower
the other side of Caradhras, we will descend by it
Escalera del Arroyo Sombrío al profundo valley de los Enanos. There you find it
Lake Espejo, where the Rio Plateado in its source is born
manantiales helados.

Dark are the waters of Kheled-zaram, I say Gimli, and frías
they are the sources of Kibil-nala. My heart melts at the thought
que pronto podré verlas.

¡Quo tegas joy al verlas, mi enano!, I say
Gandalf. But hagas what hagas, at least we can't quedarnos
in this valley. We must go down the river Plateado hacia los
secret woods, and as long as the Gran Río, and then...

Hizo a break.

Yes, what's next?, asked Merry.
 
Until the end of the journey, at the end, I say Gandalf. Nosotros...
We can't look at much. Thank you for the first stage
we have finished without problems. I believe we will forget ourselves here, not only today, until...
This night also. There is a healthy air in Hollin. Mucho
it is bad to go to a place before completely forgetting the Elves,
they sometimes lived there.

—It is certain —said Legolas—. But the Elves of this land were
of an extra breed for us, the wild folic, and the trees and
the hierba ya no los recuerdan. Only go to las piedras
complain about them: profoundly we excavated, beautifully we forged, high
we built; but if they have ide. If they have ide. It takes a long time to search for them
the Ports.

This morning ignited a hoguera in a deep hondonada envuelta en
large shrubs of vinegar, and on dinner-desayuno were more cheerful
that never happens after they leave. No if they were worried about it
Afterwards, you can hope to stay the whole night
sleep, and don't think about going back there
late the next day. Only Aragorn was silent and restless.


370    

After an appointment, he left the company and headed to the
crest; there he stood on his feet in the shade of a tree, gazing
Face the sun and the west, with your head tilted as you will go
escuchando. Luego returned to the edge of the valley and observed
a los demás reír y hablar.

'What's the matter, Trancos?' Merry shouted. ¿Qué
buscas? Are there any fewer easter winds?

No, absolutely, I replied. But I echo less something. Heh
I stayed in the village of Hollín during many stations.
No one lives here now, but many other creatures live here at all times,
especially aves. Without embargo, now everything is in silence, except for you. Puedo
feel it. There's no sound in kilometers around the corner, and your voices
it seems to have an echo in the soil. No entiendo.

Gandalf looked up with sudden interest. But what does it mean?
what's the reason?, he asked. There is something more surprising
to the truth of four hobbits, so as not to mention the rest of us,
Why do you often see or look at people?

I hope that's what it is, replied Aragorn. But I have a feeling of
vigilance and memories that have never been felt here before.

If you bring a ranger, it is best to pay attention to her,  
above all it is Aragorn. We must stop talking.
in a loud voice, shy away in silence and keep your guard.

If you give the tocaba to Sam for the first guard, but...
Aragorn joined El. They lasted longer. Entonces the silence
I grew up as soon as Sam heard it.
The breathing of the sleepers was clearly noticeable. El silbido de la cola del poni y los
Occasional movements of his pies are converted into loud sounds. Sam
Once the crucible of your joints has moved. A sepulchral silence
He gnawed at it, and above all there was a clear blue sky, while he was there
only ascended through the summer. Allá en el sur
there appeared a dark mancha, which grew and disappeared from the north like the hum in it
wind.

What is this, Trancos? No, it's like a cloud, Sam whispered to her
to Aragorn. No reply, miraba
straight to the sky; but in a short time Sam can see me as well


 


the


that was hard to come by. Bandadas de pájaros, flying at great speed,
they fly in circles, traveling all over the earth as they do
buscaran algo; y se
acercaban cada vez más.

¡Túmbate y quieto! —said Aragorn, pulling Sam hacia
the shadow of a vinegar; everyone can have a regime of pajaros
I suddenly separated from the main group and came, flying
bottom, direct hacia la crest. Sam thought they were a species
of a big sized head. When passing over their heads, in one
such a dense multitude that the shadow followed him darkly over it
Sorry, if you heard a rough thank you.

No sooner had they disappeared into the distance, to the north
to the west, and the sky turned to be despejado that Aragorn rose. Entonces
he leapt up and went to desperate Gandalf.

—Regiments of black horses are flying over the whole earth
entre las Montañas y el Deluvio Gris —dijo—, y
they passed through Hollin. They are not natives of here; son
crebain de Fangorn y las Tierras Dunas. No se qué
traman: sometimes there is a bigger problem in the south
of what they are huyendo; but I believe that I am atoning.

—Yet in this case it is also the Puerta del Cuerno Rojo —says Gandalf—.
And how can we pass by ahí until we see them, no me
I imagine it. But we will think about it when necessary. En cuanto a
let's move into the darkness, I'm afraid we'll be right.
 
Naturally, our energy produced little humour, and we consumed little.
—Antes de que llegara el crebain —dijo Aragorn—. I have to pay for it
y no volver a encenderlo.
 
—Yes, yes, it's not a nuisance or a nuisance! —I say Pippin—.
The news: there is no fire and the new movement for the night, they have
die as ready as a waiter at the caer late. ¡Todo
because of a gang of horses! Hope with illusion
good food this night: hot food.

—Good, you can continue hoping —I say Gandalf—.


Can


 


many unexpected holidays await you. TO
I would enjoy a pipe to smoke comfortably and keep
the hottest pies. However, we are sure of one thing: it will happen
more heat to the thought that we advance has the south.

—Demasiado heat, no me extrañaría —Sam murmured to Frodo—.
But I'm busy thinking that this is the time we need
Montaña Ardiente and we see the end of the Camino, so to speak.
At first he thought that this Red Heart, or what it is called
, I could say it, until Gimli tells me about it. A
The most sensational enano language! The maps didn't say anything to Sam
, and all the distances in these foreign lands seem so vast
which was completely out of his possession.

All this day the company remains hidden. Los
dark pájaros pass by again and again; but considering that the rising sun
if it turns red, the top disappears. Already, the Company
I left, and turning now towards the east, I began to rumble
to Caradhras, who to the lejos aún shone débly red with
the last light of the vanished Sun. One by one, the white stars
they thought that the sky would disappear.

Driven by Aragorn, they found a good path. TO
Frodo seemed to her to be the remains of an old fireplace that once stood
well done too, from Hollín to the mountain pass.
A pale light in which the shadows of the stones were black. Muchas
They seem to have been washed by hand, even now

it was the hour before the first love, y
the moon was low. Frodo looked up at the sky. De sudden
I saw or heard a shadow passing over the high stars, as one might
Instantly they will disappear and then they will return to shine. If extreme.

Have you seen anything else?, he whispered to Gandalf,
que estaba justo delante.

No, but he felt it, it was what happened, he replied. Puede ser.
Nothing, just a thin cloud.

If he moved quickly into the air, Aragorn muttered, and not with
the wind.


 


373


Don't worry any more than this night. Next morning
Handle included, brighter than before. But the air was cold sometimes;
in the wind you were turning back to the summer. During dos
more nights marcharon, suffering constantly but every time
more space to think that on the serpentine path there were the hills, and the
mountains rise, fall again and search. On the third morning,
Caradhras rose before him, a mighty peak, crowned with
snow as flat, but with naked shoes and shoes, of a red color as you
they will run out of blood.

It had a black appearance in the sky, and the sun was pale.
The wind has now turned to the north. Gandalf
I smelled the air and looked at it again.

The winter deepens beyond us, I tell you in your voice, behold Aragorn.
The northern hills are whiter than before; the snow
cubre sus hombros. This night we will stay there
fireplace hacia la Puerta del Cuerno Rojo. Well let's go back
seen by observers on this extreme journey, and assailed by some
sore; but the climate can result in a more mortal enemy than
any other. What are your thoughts now, Aragorn?

Frodo heard these words and understood that
Gandalf and Aragorn continue an argument they have had
I started much earlier. I listened anxiously.

I don't think our course is good from beginning to end,
As well as you know, Gandalf, Aragorn replied. Y los peligros
known and unknown will increase as we advance. But we must continue
; and you don't need to delay the mountain pace
Gap de Rohan. Don't worry about this journey from your news
Saruman. You know where the seamen are now coming from?
Señores de los Caballos? ¡

Who knows, in truth!, I say Gandalf. But there are others
fireplace, and not by the path of Caradhras: the dark and secret path
del que hemos hablado.

But we didn't want to talk about it! Todavia no. No dagas nada a
to them, I'll tell you, don't wait until it's clear that there's no one else
fireplace.

We must decide before to follow forward, replied Gandalf.


374


 


Let's think about the matter, while we are
Let them descan and duermen, I say Aragorn.

At the caer la late, while the other ones finish
desayunar, Gandalf and Aragorn separated jointly and
recorrido, they quedaron looking at Caradhras. Their sides are now dark and
overshadowed them, and on top they were wrapped in a gray cloud. Frodo watched him,
wondering why the debate would start again. When
they returned to the Company, Gandalf habló, and above
who had decided to face the bad weather and the
high pace. He felt relieved. I couldn't tell what the other one was
dark and secret path, but the only mention of it is the sound
train to consternación Aragorn, and Frodo was happy to know that they would hide him
abandoned. «

For the signs that we have seen lately", I say to Gandalf, "I fear
that the Puerta del Cuerno Rojo was guarded; and I also wonder
of the bad weather we are having. May it snow
. We must go at all speed. Aun so,
we will take more than two steps to the top
of the day. It will darken this night. We must leave
en cuanto puedan prepararse.

I'll give you advice, if you'll allow me», I said Boromir. Naci
in the shadow of the White Mountains and itself
some travel in the mountains. We will meet you
glacial ice, or even peor, before descending to the other side. De
We will need to keep nothing as secret as we will freeze it.
When we go up from here, where we also find some trees and
shrubs, each one should bring up a tree of wood, as large as
can.

And Bill could grab a little more, really, much?, I say
Sam. I looked at it sadly.

—No, unless it is an election between fire and death.

The Company started again, at a good pace at first; but
Once the fireplace was ready, it was steep and difficult. The tortuous and ascending path had disappeared in some cases
for complete
en muchos tramos
and it was blocked by numerous fallen stones. The night passed
deadly dark under large clouds. An icy wind blew in
las rocas. In the middle of the hill the slopes of the slopes have to be ascended
great mountains. The last path was snake now under a shoe
looked at the side of the table, on the sides of the shadows
Caradhras rose invisible in the penumbra; a la derecha
there was an abyss of darkness from which the earth suddenly fell into one


 



 Caradhras; a la derecha
, a deep ravine.

They went through a difficult pronunciation on the slope and stopped for a moment.
moment at the top. Frodo heard a sweet voice in his beloved. Extendio
the arm and violet the tenuous white clouds of snow posing
in his manga.

They continued. But in a short time the snow fell quickly,
training the air all the time and fumbling in Frodo's eyes. The dark ones
surrounded silhouettes of Gandalf and Aragorn just one or two steps away
apenas se podían ver.

I don't like this at all, I'll just say the same. The snow is
I'm having a nice morning, but I enjoy being in the room while I'm there
. Look, these people were in Hobbiton! People could
receive it well now. Except at the high points of the
North penny, a strong caída was rare in the Comarca, and was considered
an enjoyable event and an opportunity to have fun. Ningún hobbit alive
(except Bilbo) could record the Terrible Winter of 1311, when
the white lobos invaded the Comarca on the Helado Brandivino.

Gandalf if I deduced. The snow was heavy on capucha and men;
I brought them until the tobillos a las botas.

—This is what I fear —I say—. What he says now,
Aragorn?

—I also feared him —replied Aragorn—, but less than
other things. —He knew the snow, even rare sometimes
with such strength to the south, except at the top of the mountains—. But
not even we are tied up high; we are still very low, where we send us
I want to stay outdoors all winter.

—I wonder if this is a craft from the enemy —I say
Boromir—. They say in my land that you can govern the storms
in the Mountains of the Shadow that rise on the fronteras of
Mordor
. It has extra farms and many aliases.
—Your arm has widened a lot —I said Gimli—, you can
attract the snow from the North to disturb us here, to trescientas
leguas de distancia.
—His arm has widened —I said Gandalf—.
While they were detained, the wind was loved and there
nieve disminuyó hasta casi cesar. They continued walking
. But they haven't run more than a furlong when
the storm subsided with new fury. The wind silbaba y
the snow was transformed into a clear wind. Ready, including in Boromir
She found it difficult to follow closely. The hobbits, double cases,
You couldn't advance much further if the snow continued. Frodo...




 



 
they advanced laboriously behind the highest elevations, but it was evident that...
I felt my feet like I felt them. Pippin followed him, trundling along. Including Gimli,
as corpulent as any old man, refunfuñaba mientras
caminaba con dificultad.

The company was suddenly told how they were connected to a company
I read without speaking. Oyeron
Ruidos espeluznantes in the darkness that rode. It can only be one
touch of the wind in the cracks and ravines of the rocky wall,
but the children were bitter and heartfelt and saved laughter
. The stones fell to the edge of the mountain slope, silbando
over their heads or straining on the path they held close to them.
Once in a while there is a deaf extrusion, like a great one
hoarse that rolled from hidden heights.

We can't do more this night, I say Boromir. That's it
llamen viento quienes quieran; there are terrible voices in the air; y
estas piedras nos apuntan.

Yes, I call it I come, I say Aragorn. But that's not it
so what you say is false. Hay a lot
evil and hostile things in the world that are not very nice to us
who go to two pillars, and without embargo they are not allied with Sauron,
as long as they have their own purposes. Some have been in this world
más tiempo que él.

Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had a bad reputation, I say
Gimli, many years ago, when the rumor of Sauron no longer existed
oído en estas tierras.


  377

It doesn't matter where the enemy is, if we can't say anything about it
ataque, dijo Gandalf.

“But what can we do?” cried Pippin sadly. If
apoyaba en Merry y Frodo, y temblaba.

O we detenemos from where we are, or we retreat, I say Gandalf.
No need to follow anything. Only a little further arrives, if I don't remember,
This sends salt of the acantilado and releases into a wide and not very deep depression
at the foot of a wide and hard slope. There we must not take refuge
of the snow, not of the stones, not of anything more.

“You don't need to turn around while the storm is raging,” I said
Aragorn—. We did not go anywhere in the moment we were offering
more refuge than this precipice lower than the one we encounter.

¡Refugio! —murmured Sam—. If this is a refuge, there is a wall
y sin techo hacen una casa.

The company is looking for the most
Possible of the acantilado. This wonder has the surface, and seeks the bottom if
it tilted a little, so that they hoped they would toast them
certain protection from the north and south winds
stones that fall. But wind guzzlers ride them all
here, and the snow fell in more dense clouds.

If they curled with their sword against the wall. Bill, el
say, if I asked patiently but sat down in front of the hobbits,
and protected him a little; but in a short time, the snow falls
I took them to the top of the corvejones and followed them. Yes
No more big companions, the hobbits are ready and ready.
completely entered.

A deep dream came from Frodo; I felt like I was hungry
quickly into a warm, misty dream. I thought it was a fire
warmed the edges of the pies, and from the shadows to the other side of the
I heard Bilbo's voice. «I don't create much
in your diary», I say. Snow storms and the snow shower: ¡
there is no need to return to inform you about this!

But I wanted to get out of bed and sleep, Bilbo, replied Frodo with
effort, when he felt sad, and turned back painfully
to the desperar. Boromir had lifted him off the ground
from a snowy nest.


378


 


This will be the death of the midfielders, Gandalf, I say
Boromir. It's useless to feel here until the snow is in our hearts
cabezas. We must do something to save ourselves.

Dales esto, I say Gandalf, looking for his mochila y
in us. It's very valuable. Es miruvor, el licor de Imladris.
Elrond I give it to me at the despedirnos. ¡Pasalo!

Tan ready as Frodo hubo drink a little of
warm and fragrant liquor, felt a new strength in the heart, and the
weighed sleepily abandon my friends. They were also revived and
they encountered new hope and vigor. But the snow didn't give up. If
We attacked our elder with more strength than ever, and the wind overcame
con más fuerza.

"What are the opinions of the fire?" asked Boromir suddenly. There
election seems imminent now between fire and death, Gandalf.
Without doubt we will be hidden from sight of hostiles when
the snow in our house, but it won't help us.

—You can have a blast, you can —replied Gandalf—. Yes
If you have observers who can endure this storm, you will be able to do so
vernos, con fuego o sin él.

But still they have drawn wood and sticks through it
consejo de Boromir, encender
a llama that is held in the middle of the wind will be rammed or caught
In human fuel it surpassed the ability of an elf or even a dwarf. Finally, at regañadientes, Gandalf himself intervenes
. I took a line and replaced it high for a moment, y
luego, with an order: ¡Naur an edraith ammen!,
he clubbed the tip of his stick in the center. De immediate, a great
chorro of green llamas and blues rose, and madeira
se encendió y chisporroteó.

If there is anyone who sees me, before I have revealed myself to you,
I say. I wrote that Gandalf is here in the world that everyone can
read from the Rivendel until the deserts of the Anduin.

But the company doesn't care about any observers
the miradas hostiles. Your hearts are adjusted to the light of the day
fuego. The wood burned happily; and anyway to your alrededor
the snow silbaba and charcos de aguanieve arrastraban bajo sus pies,
they warmed their hands with joy in the fire. There they were


 


,


agachados en circulo alrededor de las pequeñas
dancing and waving llamas. A red light illuminated our anxious and anxious faces;
at night it was like a black wall.

But the Madera burned quickly and the snow followed, falling.

The fire burned slowly and the last haz of the wood was echoed.

The night is dark, I say Aragorn. El amanecer no está
away.

If anyone who loves can pierce these clouds, I say Gimli.

Boromir went up from the circle and looked at it
darkness. The snow is lessening, I say, and the wind
es más tranquilo.

Frodo gazed with wonder at the words that followed falling out of the darkness
to reveal themselves white for a moment in the light of
dying fuego; but for a long time I may not see any sign of disminuyeran
. Suddenly, while the dream began to take hold of itself
It's the new one, if God knows what the wind has brought and
the items become larger and smaller each time. Muy slowly, una
the faint light began to grow. Finally, the snow stopped completely.

When the light became more intense, he showed a silent silence
World. Below the refuge has white clothes, cúpulas and
detailed information below the paths they have taken
if it were lost completely; but the heights are hidden from view
great clouds still filled with the pleasant snow.

Gimli raised his sight and lowered his head. «Caradhras no
we have forgiven,” I say. «Aún we will throw more snow yes
let's continue. As much as we get back and lower, better."

Everyone was tired of it, but it was difficult to withdraw now.
It might turn out to be impossible. Just one step away from the dinners
from above, the snow fell to many feet of high ground, higher than the heads of the hobbits; in some places
the wind
He had it collected and piled up in large sheep against the acantilado.
«Yes Gandalf was among us with a shining llama,
I could find a path for you", said Legolas. The storm
It didn't worry him much, and only the company retained him
happy. «
If the Elves can fly over the mountains, they can draw the Sun
380    
to save us", replied Gandalf. But I need something else
work. I can't get snow.
—Good —I say Boromir—, when the heads are lost, the bodies should be well
serve, like tenths in my country. The strongest should be
look for a chimney. Look! Even now everything is covered in snow, our fireplace, al
ascend, he turned to the rededor of this fish from below.
It was where the snow hit Pesarnos. Yes we can
Getting to this point would once again be easier.
I guess it's no more than a furlong. ¡
Let's start a journey until now, you and me! —I say Aragorn.
Aragorn was the highest in the Company, but Boromir, a little
less tall, he was more even and corpulent. He opened it
marched, and Aragorn followed him. If they alejaron slowly, y
ready if they tried hard. In some places the snow was tied to the pecho,
ya menudo Boromir seemed to be able to dig or excavate
with his big arms where he walked.
Legolas watched him with a smile in his eyes
lips, and then they turned again. The strongest must be
choose a nutria to nadar, and to run freely above
la hierba y las hojas, or above the snow: an elf.
I say this, he jumped nimbly, and Frodo says what God knows.








 
look for the way, you say? But I say: what a labrador are, but...»

As before, even though it had been known for a long time, the
Elfo no tuviera botas, sino zapatos ligeros, as always,
and your pies barely fade in the snow.

¡Adiós!, I say to Gandalf. Go look for the Sun! Entonces,
speeding like a runner on the signature sand, he went up disparately and quickly
I reached out to those men who were struggling, with a wave of my hand I rebased them
, and he was lost in the distance, disappearing there
rocky curve.

The rest of us were eager to see what happened
Boromir and Aragorn returned to the black bikes there
blancura. Finally, they also disappeared from sight. The time
if hizo interminable. The clouds lowered, and now a few more
they never volvían to caer en rizos.

I spent an hour, although it seemed much larger,


 


y


entonces por fin vieron return to Legolas. At the same time
time, Boromir and Aragorn reaparecieron tras curve, muy
behind them, and they suffered the iron harshly.

—Good —gritted Legolas while he was running—, I didn't take him
Sol. Walk through the blue fields of the South, and a little
crown of snow on this mountain of Cuerno Rojo does not disturb it
absolute. But I brought a ray of hope for people
they are condemned to go to pieces. There's a huge wind
just on the other side of the curve, and on our Strong Men
cases that were buried. Desesperaban, until he returns and the gods
that the wind was little more than a wall. And on the other side,
just a white manta to cool the feet of a hobbit.

—Ah, that's how I said —gruñó Gimli—. No it wasn't
a crazy blizzard. It is the evil will of Caradhras. No love to the Elfos
not to the Enanos, and this wind was placed to prevent us from sleeping.

—But, please, you Caradhras have forgotten what you hold
neighboring men —I say Boromir, who was worried at this moment—.
And worthy men also, if you allow me to say so; even less strong men
with palas you will have better service. Aun so, hemos
open a path across the wind; and for all the presents,
who cannot run as freely as elves, may be welcomed. ¿
 
But how do we go to bajar, even if we have cut...?
Through the wind?, said Pippin, explaining everyone's thoughts
hobbits.

¡Ten esperanza!, I say Boromir. I'm forgotten, but I still care
Aún quedan fuerzas, y Aragorn también. We will take care of the little ones
. The others without doubt will arrange them to go back on the journey
that nos queda. Come on, Master Peregrin! Empezaré contigo.

Rise to the hobbit. Agárrate a mi espalda! Needed size
arms, I say, and I advance to great claws. Aragorn and Merry came
detrás. Pippin was amazed at his strength when he walked
that ya had strengthened without making any more great repairs
extremes. Included now, loaded as it was, packed up
path for people to follow it, separating the snow
on foot.

Finally they joined the great wind. If extended above


the


 


I would travel from the mountain like a sudden and abrupt wall, and on the crest,
stringed as it was thickened with spoons, if raised more than the double of the
Boromir height; but in the middle there was
Opened a step that was subjected and lowered like a bridge. On the other side,
Merry and Pippin heard each other, and they hoped with them
Legolas who brings the rest of the Company.

At the end of a crime, Boromir returned with Sam. Detrás, en
at the end but the trilled one sent, Gandalf came, wailing
to Bill with Gimli encaramado entre el equipaje. Finally, I came
Aragorn with Frodo. Crossaron el sendero; but
only Frodo touched the ground, with a profundo
while extruding, there is a cascade of stones and nothing slips.
The foam cases left to the company, agazapada
against the acantilado, and when the air cleared, they saw that «¡

Enough, enough!' shouted Gimli. «We moved so quickly
how we can!”. And, in effect, with this last coup, the malice of the
mountain seems agotarse, as Caradhras is convinced
that the invaders had been destroyed and could not be reached
regress. The pleasantness of the snow was dispelled; the clouds began to disappear
y la luz se hizo más amplia.

As Legolas had been informed, they discovered that the snow was coming
every less profound to the meditation that they descended, in the way that included them
hobbits can walk with difficulty. Pronto all volvieron to star
on the platform flat at the beginning of the empinada sidera where they have
I heard the first moments of snow the previous night.

Your morning was very advanced. From the top place...
Miraron hacia el est, over the lower lands. A lo lejos,
in the laberintic field that extended to the foot of the mountain,
the dog was raised from where they had started climbing the step.

Frodo's piernas hurt her. Keep your hands and feet cool;
and the head gave her turns to think in the broad and painful way
Marcha cuesta abajo. Motas negras flotaban ante sus ojos. If
I rubbed them, but the black bikes remained. A lo lejos,
I'm behind it, but still a lot at the top of the lower hills, dark spots
volaban en círculos. ¡

Once again the players!, I say Aragorn, signaling that he is below.


 


383


This cannot be avoided, says Gandalf. Ya
if they are good or bad, or they don't have anything to see with us, we must
start immediately. ¡Ni quiera de rodillas de Caradhras
esperaremos otra noche!

A cold wind passes through them, while they dawn
it extends to the Puerta del Cuerno Rojo y bajaban
the slope to trompicones. Caradhras have derrotado.


 4


 


It was night, and the gray light faded quickly
when they left to spend the night. Estaban muy cansados. Las
The mountains were veiled by a deepest twilight, and the wind was
frio. Gandalf offered each one a more delicious drink
miruvor de Rivendel. When he picked up something, he called
a council. «

So, we can't continue this night", I say. « Descansaremos
here a rato». «

Where are we going?” asked Frodo. «

We still keep our journey and our mission for the future",
replied Gandalf. «We no longer have the option to continue
return to Rivendel».

Pippin's beak lit up visibly before the mere mention of it
returned to Rivendel; Merry and Sam looked up in anticipation. But
Aragorn and Boromir gave no signal to him. Frodo seemed worried. «

Ojalá estuviera allí», I say. «But how can I get back
without shame, unless there is another way
ya estemos derrotados?».

Tienes reason, Frodo —dijo Gandalf—: return and admit
the derrota and face a derrota even worse. We return now,
and in a short and bitter period, it will be destroyed.
the ring must remain there: we will not be able to stabilize it
was again. Entonces, late or soon, Rivendel will be besieged,
the Enemigo is above them. When you reached the north, Boromir,
The Ghosts of the Ring are mortal enemies, but they are only shadows
of the power and the terror that posed it
Anillo Gobernante will want to be in the hands of his love.

—Etonces we must continue, yes there is a way —I say Frodo with a
I sigh. Sam found himself saddened again—.

There is a way we can try —I say Gandalf—. Desde el


 


principle


, when I first considered this trip
, I thought we had to try it. But it's not a pleasant fireplace, y
not if you mentioned it before the Company. Aragorn stood
on the contrary, as long as at least it is hubier
I tried walking over the mountains.

—It is a fireplace because the Puerta del Cuerno Rojo, therefore it must
I'm really wicked —I say Merry—. But it will be better than what we like
and we have to know the worst immediately.

—The path that leads to the Minas de Moria —I say
Gandalf. Only Gimli raised his head; a fiery flame
it shone in his eyes. In all of them terror invaded the mencionar
this name. Included for the hobbits was a vague legend
fear.

The path can lead to Moria, but how can we hope that
Are you coming to Moria?, Aragorn said somberly.

It's a bad name, I say Boromir. Soon I'll see it
need to go there. If we can't cross the mountains, let's go
hacia el sur, hasta llegar a la Brecha de Rohan,
who followed me on my journey here. Or we can cross
el Isen hacia Langstrand y Lebennin, y so llegar a
Gondor from the regions seeks the sea.

Things have changed since you came to the north, Boromir,
replied Gandalf. Don't see what I told you
Saruman? With this I can take care of my own tasks before everything
term. But the Ring must not be found in Isengard, for example
possible to avoid it. The Brecha de Rohan is closed
for us while we travel with the Carrier.

As far as the widest fireplace is concerned: we cannot allow ourselves to waste time. Podríamos
spend a year in semi-travel, and we will travel
many deserted lands and without port. Without embargo,
they will not be safe. Los ojos vigilantes, as much of Saruman as
This is an assumption of little importance for it: on the mind.
In the eyes of the enemy, he was just an extravagant wanderer who
dedicated to the ring hunt. But now it's back
as a member of the Compañía del Anillo, and I run dangerously


while


 


stay with us. El peligro will increase with
every step we advance takes to the lower depths and the desolate sky.

From our open intent to conquer the mountain pass,
I fear that our situation has become more desperate. Veo little hopes now,
yes no we lose ready sight for a time and cubrimos
our track. For that matter, I advise you that we don't go anywhere else
of the mountains and the rodeos, up to and including. If yes,
in any case, the path that the Enemy will hope for less
tomemos.

We don't know what you're hoping for, I say Boromir. You can ask
vigilant to all the paths, probables and improbables. In this case, enter Moria
would have to fall on a ramp, just better than calling
the doors of the beautiful Dark Tower. The name of Moria is
Negro.

Words about what you don't know in comparison
Death with the fortress of Sauron —Gandalf replied—.
Only those of you who were in the mazmorras of the
Dark Lord, and only in his age most ancient and least in Dol Guldur.
Quienes cross the doors of Barad-dür no regresan. But
we will not guide you to Moria if there is no hope for you
nosotros, es certain. But the majority of Orcos de las Montañas Nubladas
they were scattered or destroyed in the battle of the five armies. Las
The Águilas inform that the Orcs are reuniting again from the beginning; but
I have hope that Moria will be free.

There is also the possibility of having Enanos there, and of that
In some deep room of his fathers is Balin, son of Fundin
. Sea as sea, so you have to follow the path that
la necesidad exige! ¡

I'll go back to the next path, Gandalf! —I say Gimli—. Iré
to the halls of Durin, what we are looking at there
, please enter the doors that are closed.

Goodbye, Gimli! —I say Gandalf—. Me animas. Buscaremos
join the hidden doors. And we will cross them.
In the ruins of the Enanos, the head of an Enano will be less easy
to confuse whether it is Elfos, Hombres or Hobbits. Without embargo, it won't be...
—The first time I was in Moria. Busqué allí time


  387 ¡
 
, a Thrain, hijo de Thror, tras su pérdida. Pasé por there,
and he rose alive!

—I also passed once by the door of the dark arroyo —I said Aragorn in your voice—;
but even if I wanted to go up, the memory is very bad.
—I don't want to enter Moria once again.

—Y I don't want to go in just once —I said Pippin—.

—Yo now —murmuró Sam—. —¡Por

I guess not! —I say Gandalf—. What are you looking for? But he asks for it
ex: Where will I follow you if I go there?

“Yo lo haré,” Gimli said enthusiastically.

—Yo lo haré —I said Aragorn with thoughtfulness—. Follow me example cases
stop the disaster in the snow, and don't have to say a word of retort. Follow
Your example now, this is the last notice no
os conmueve. It's not in the ring, it's not in us, what I'm thinking about
ahora, sino en ti, Gandalf. I say to you: yes we are there
ports of Moria, guarded!

—No iré —I say Boromir—; no less than the vote of
all the companies are against me. What Legolas and I say
small people? You will surely hear the voice of the Ring Bearer
?

—No quiero ir a Moria —said Legolas.

Los hobbits no dijeron nada. Sam looked at Frodo. For the end,
Frodo hablo. —No quiero ir —I say—, but now I'll be happy
a vote hasta that we have consulted with the almohada. Gandalf will get votes
with greater ease in the morning light than in this dark place.

Before these words, all are summarized in your thoughts. Oyeron el
I wind my way between the rocks and the trees, and the trees
and groans rodear them in the empty spaces of it
night.

Suddenly, Aragorn took a leap. —How is the wind coming!
—gritó—. Aulla with lobe voices. ¡Los huargos han
Led to the west of the mountains!

Can we wait until the next morning? —I say Gandalf—. It's how
say. The house is finished! Even if we live to see the love, here


will querrá


 


now travel at night with the saved lobos
transfer your trail?

How far away is Moria? asked Boromir.

There is a door on the south side of Caradhras, at a corner
mills in a straight line, and you will find yourself at the center of the lobe,
Gandalf replied gravely.

Let's start in as much love as possible, if we can.
—I say Boromir—. The lobe of an eye is worse than the ogre
that one fears.

Of course! —said Aragorn, drawing down his sword.
But where the warg comes from, he also blinds the orc.

Ojalá hubiera followed the advice of Elrond —murmuró Pippin a
Sam—. No need for anything after all. I don't have enough of it
raza de Bandobras el Bramador en mí: estos aullidos me hielan
the blood. I don't remember having heard so much I've never heard of.

I have the heart in my feet, Señor Pippin —I say Sam—.
But we haven't been there yet, and there are sturdy people here
with nosotros. Is it true that the old Gandalf is missing, apuesto
what is not the exit of a lobe.

To defend themselves during the night, the Company conceded at the end
top of the small low hill that they took refuge in. Estaba
crowned by a group of old and twisted trees, the red of
these were extended by an interrupted cycle of running parts. In the middle of
This, having lit a fire, may have no hope of the darkness and
the silence will prevent the house's judges from discovering on the tape
.

Alredador of the fire they felt, and those who were not on guard
they slept restlessly. El pobre poni Bill temblaba y sudaba
where it came from. El aullido de los lobos ahora
I rode them completely, sometimes I look for them more often. En
a hue in the circle could see a large dark shape of lobe
held, mirandolos. An extreme dream escaped
él, as if you were a captain summoning your team to the
assault.


 


389


Gandalf rose and advanced with great claws, holding on to his stick
en high. ¡Escucha, Sabueso de Sauron!, shouted. Gandalf is here.
¡Huye, you are worthy of your repugnant skin! I'll wrinkle you after the cola hasta
el hocico, you enter this circle.

The lobe grunted and jumped with a big bang
jump. Now I hear a sharp metallic sound. Legolas had
disparate on arch. Hubo an expanded grit, y la
Saltarina form cayó al suelo; The elven flecha
he had crossed her throat. The vigilant eyes were suddenly extinguished.
Gandalf and Aragorn advanced at great speeds, but the hill was still
deserted; the hands of the house must have been humid. A su alrededor, la
the darkness was silent, and no cry came in the suspiring wind.
 
The night was dark, and the moon was shining in the west...
Atardecer, shining fleetingly through the clouds that are abrían. De
suddenly, Frodo was desperate for a sudden leap. Without prior notice, a storm of
Ferocious warriors and rescuers were stationed throughout the camp. A big one
these wargos have been reunited in silence and now the attacks
por todos lados a la vez.

¡Arrojen leña al fuego!, shouted Gandalf to the hobbits. ¡Desenvainen
their swords and they put their swords with their swords!

I lower the vibrant light, while the fresh wood burns, Frodo
I see many gray forms rising above the circle of stones. More
and more follow them. Aragorn crossed the garganta of a huge leader
with a stocada; with a great roar,
Boromir cut off her head. Junto a ellos, Gimli
leave the pie with its sturdy, open piernas, flattening the grain. El
arco de Legolas sang.

In the flickering light of the fire, Gandalf seemed to suddenly grow:
if he rose, a large, bewitching figure like the monument of
some ancient king of stone erected on a hill. Inclinándose like one
cloud, raised a burning branch and headed towards the center of the
lobos. These were relegated before the election. Arrojo
the tea ringing high above. It shined with a sudden white shine, as it were






 












where the mountain slopes fall abruptly into the shadows above
pies. At the bottom, a line of hairy acantilados could be vaguely distinguished,
and in the middle of them, higher than the rest, a large gray mural.
When we leave the paso, the guide goes to the top, and doesn't turn back
at our point of play, as some of you have noticed. Menos
but that's it, we can now ask ourselves several kilometers to travel,
y hay que darse prisa. Come on!

—No one can wait —I said Boromir gravely—: that
Gandalf finds out what he is looking for, or what to bring to the hook
we will meet the lost doors forever. All the options seem bad, y
ask for traps between the lobes and the wall, the most probable. ¡
Adelante!

—Gimli now walked to the magician's side, so anxious was he
to bring to Moria. Juntos drove to the tour company
in the mountains. The only chimney that once led to Moria
the west talked along the course of an arroyo, the Shannon,
who was born at the foot of the acantilados seeks the place from where the doors  
if they lift the doors. But either Gandalf was away, or the earth...
they have changed in the last few years; because I didn't encounter the arroyo
where I hoped to meet him, only a few thousand to the south
on the starting point.

The morning was giving way to the day, and the Company followed
wandering and trepando through an arid land of
red stones. In no part could they see a piece of clear water
no sound from her. Everything was desolate and dry. Your hearts were hundieron.
There was no one alive, and there was not a single pájaro in the sky; but
what the night would bring, if it atrapabas him in this lost earth,
she didn't care to think about any of them.

Suddenly, Gimli, who had followed closely, called to him
. Stand on a hill and point to the back.
Upon opening, you will see a deep and wide canal from below
. It was empty and silent, and barely a kilo of water
it flowed between the brown and red colored stones of its lecho;


392


 


but on the side they look for there was a path, very round
adopted from an old road.

¡Ah! ¡Here is the end!, said Gandalf. Here is where
ran the arroyo: Sirannon, el Arroyo de la Puerta, solían lamarlo.
But I can't imagine why he passed them to the water; antes
it was fast and rough. Let's go! Debemos darnos prisa. We are late.

The Company kept the painful and painful feet; but they walked
with tenacity for the bumpy and sinuous path during many miles.
The sun changed medium and began to head towards the west. Trans
a short parade and a quick lunch relaunched the march. Ante ellos,
the mountains were full of dinner, but on the way they talked about a deep depression
and only they could see the highest and highest sides
picos más al este.

Finally, they tied to a pronounced curve. Here, the fireplace,
who had been veering from the surface to the edge of the river
canal and a pronunciation caída de tierra a la izquierda, giró y
I turned to head east. When the esquina is doubled, they come forward
ellos a low hooked, of five high brazas, with a
quebrada and toothy top. Above it was a water that was flowing, across a wide one
so it seems that it has been excavated by a waterfall that
Antaño had been strong and caudalous.

“Yes, they have changed things!”, I said to Gandalf. But ahí están las Cataratas  
the place is unmistakable. Only queda de la Escalera.
. If I don't remember badly, on one side of the staircase there will be tall stairs on it
the rock, but the main chimney snaked away and left it
it underwent various curves until the ground reached the top.
Only have a shallow valley further away from the cataracts
the Walls of Moria, and the Sirannon flowed through them
with the fireplace on the side. Let's see how these things are
now!

They encountered the stone stairs without difficulty, and Gimli
he quickly underwent it, followed by Gandalf and Frodo.
When they reached the top they realized that they couldn't follow up there, y
the reason behind the Arroyo de la Puerta was revealed
if it is dry. Beyond them, the rising sun fell
393
the fresh western sky with a brilliant gold. Ante ellos
there was a dark and tranquil lake. Neither the sky nor the case reflects
on a dark surface. The Shannon was retaken and
have trained all the valley. More than the ominosa water they were
the finals and intransitables. No crack at the door or entrance, no crack
Here are the Walls of Moria, I say Gandalf, signaling
on the other side of the water. And there was the door once again
, the Puerta Élfica at the end of the Camino de Hollín por
where we come from. But this fireplace is blocked.
I suppose that people from the company will want to go to these gloomy waters at
end of the day. It has an unhealthy appearance.
We must find a way to ride the northern limit, I say Gimli.
The first thing the Company must do is to suffer from it
I sent them main and where we took them. Included yes
no lake, we can't put our foot down on this ladder.
But in any case, we cannot lift the little beast there
Minas, I say Gandalf. The path down the mountains is
dark, and there are many extreme and challenging ones
no one can stop, even if we can.
¡Pobre Bill!, said Frodo. I didn't think about it. ¡Y
poor Sam! I wonder what he will say.
I feel it, I say Gandalf. El pobre Bill sido un
I was a useful companion, and I had to leave him drifting now.
You travel more freely and you don't travel with any animal, much less
This is what Sam appreciates, he will be there. Temi
all the time we are obliged to follow this path.
The day was drawing to a close and the young stars were shining.


 










in the sky high above the door of the sun, when the Company, with  
as much speed as I can, I took the steps and took off
the orilla of the lake. Even so, don't keep more of it
two or three stages at the highest point. How much should it extend
let the surface no longer see the fainting light; but up
the far north was no more than half a thousand miles from where
they are, and between the foothill crests that roam the valley


394    

and the edge of the water had an edge of open ground. If
They took the next step, so they could still ask one or two thousand to go before the
you can attach it to the point on the right side
hacia where Gandalf headed; and then I also wanted to enter the doors.

When they went to the northernmost rincón of the lake
and tired, it extended like a viscous arm around you
surrounding hills. Gimli advanced unchanged, and discovered that
the water was not very deep, no more than the tobillos on the edge.
After walking in a row, walking with a guard,
below, the small pieces of male wood have slippery and greasy stones,
y el paso was traicionero. Frodo was extremely disgusted
to the rozar the dark water and suck with his pies.

While Sam, the last of the company, led Bill to do it
with me from the other side, I heard a sweet sound: a syllable,
followed by a plop, as a piece suddenly disturbed the quiet surface
of the water. As they turned quickly, they saw waves, with black edges
of shadows in the fainting light: large rings are sanchaban
move out from a point to the lake. Hubo a
loud noise, and quiet silence. The twilight deepened, and they
the last few stars of the case were veiled by the clouds.

Gandalf now advanced at a great pace, and the others
they followed it as quickly as they could. Llegaron a la franja de
tierra firme entre el lago y los acantilados: esta estrecha, a menudo
of just a few yards too, and it was full of rocks
and fallen stones; but they encountered a fireplace, tied to the acantilado and
keep the water dark as much as possible. One thousand
to the south, following the orilla, they toparon with acebos.
Tocones and dead branches can be found in shallow waters,
rests that seem like old brunettes or a silk that once...
bordeaban the fireplace across the flooded valley. But search more
Sam protested. It would take no less than an idiot to convert it.
accompanied if they rise, even stronger and more alive, the tallest, largest trees
that anything I knew that Frodo had ever seen or imagined.
Its large branches extend from the wall until the water. Below the imposing acantilados
, seen from the top of the stairs,
several simple shrubs; but now they rise, rigid, dark and silent, projecting deeply
  shadows
nocturnas
to your pies, trained like pilares de centinela at the end of
fireplace.
¡Good, here we are finally!, said Gandalf. Here
the Camino Élfico from Hollin ended. The acebo was the symbol of the people of
this land, and they planted it here to mark the end of it
drawn with the Señores de Moria. They were
happier people of different races, including Enanos and Elfos.
It was not the fault of the Enanos who loved her
it will vanish, Gimli said.
I don't think it was the fault of the Elves, I say
Legolas.
I love both, I say Gandalf; and no hemitiré
a juicio now. But I love you, Legolas and Gimli, who al
less sean friends and help me. I need both. Las
the doors are closed and hidden, and when we meet,
mejor. ¡Se acerca la noche!
Turning around to the others, I say: «When I look, I can
prepare to enter Minas? Because here I fear that we must
we despatched our good cargo beast. Well dejar
on the one hand most of the things we get through bad weather:
we don't need to be inside, we don't wait when we pass by
and we will continue our journey to the South. In exchange, one falls
of us must take back a part of what lifted the poni, especially
the food and the smells of water.
But you can't leave the little Bill abandoned in this place
Abandoned place, Señor Gandalf! » shouted Sam, annoyed and distressed. «
I won't accept it, period. After having come so many years ago
!
I feel it, Sam,” the magician said. But when the door
if you open, I don't think you can grab your Bill inside,
in the great darkness of Moria. Tendrás que electir entre
Bill and I love you.
I will follow Mr. Frodo to the healing of a dragon, if I will heal him,
loosen up with all these parts of the rededor.
396
I hope he is not an idiot, I say Gandalf. It was tense















 


Hold your hand over the top of your neck and let it go down. Ve
with guard and guide words, I say. Eres
a sand beast and has learned a lot in Rivendel. Direct
to places where you can encounter grass and so you will take it in time
a la casa de Elrond, oa donde quieras ir.

¡Allí, Sam! There will be many possibilities to escape
de lobos and return home like us.

Sam remained horribly at the post and did not respond.
Bill, who seemed to understand well what was happening, got angry
pack them with the towel and lay them on the ground. The same ones were classified
the merchandise, forming a pile with everything that can be left behind
y dividieron el resto.

When they finished, they turned to look at Gandalf.
Parecía no haber hecho nada. Estaba de pie entre
the two trees, looking at the thin wall of the acantilado, as you can
fuera to pierce it with the eyes. Gimli walked
, hitting the stone here and there with his hacha. Legolas
if it is opened against the rock, how to excuchara.

—Good, here we are and all the list —I say Merry—; but where does it come from?
Are you at the doors? No real picture of her.

—The pineapple doors are not there to be seen when they are closed —I say
Gimli—. They are invisible, and their own creators cannot be encountered
don't open it if you forget the secret.

—But this door was not intended to be a secret known only to others
los Enanos —said Gandalf, suddenly returning to life and wandering—
. Unless things change completely, eyes know
where you can find the signals.

I walked to the wall. Just enters the shadow
of the trees had a clear space, and above it I passed
the hands from one side to the other, murmuring words in your voice. Luego
he took a step back.

—¡Miren! —dijo—. Can you see something now?

The moon shone above the dear gray of the rock; but
no one can see anything more during a crime. Entonces, slowly, on the surface


 


397


, why did the magician's hands pass,
tenuous lines appeared, like the end of the plate glass that ran along the stone. Entonces,  
In the beginning there were no more pale and delicate hills, so thin
they only shone sporadically whence the Moon illuminated them, but little by little they became even more sharp and sharp, until
I can divine
his design .
 
At the top, as tall as Gandalf could climb, there was an arch
letters written in elvish characters. Debajo, even los
hilos are located in some borroso or rotous places, if possible
towards the outline of a yunque and a hammer rowed by a crown
with you are stars. Once again, these trees will have two trees, each one
in the center of the door a single star with many lights. ¡


And there is the tree of the High Elves! I say Legolas.

And the Star of the House of Fëanor, by Gandalf. Están
blessed in Italy who only reflects the light of the stars and
the light of the moon, and wait until the next person pronounces words
now forgotten things happen a lot in the Middle Tierra. A lot of time has passed since I learned it
, and I thought deeply about being able to bring them to me
mind.

What does the writing say? asked Frodo, who was negotiating
to decipher the inscription on the arch. I thought I knew them
Elvish letters, but I can't read them.

—The words are in the elven language of the west
Tierra Media en los Días Antiguos —answered Gandalf—. But no
I say nothing is important for us. They only say: «Las Puertas de
Durin, Señor de Moria. Habla, amigo, come in." Y debajo, en
a small and tenuous letter, is written: «Yo, Narvi, las hice». Celehrimhor de
Hollin dibujó estos signos.

—What does «habla, amigo, y entra» mean? —asked
Merry.

—That's enough clarity —I said Gimli—. If you were a friend,
of the sign and the doors will open and you can
enter.

—Yes —I say Gandalf—, these doors are probably governed by
words. Some pineapple doors only open at special moments, or


398


 


r


t


This is written in the following pages
the «way» of Beleriand: «Crecimiento Durin, Señor de Moria
». pedo meUonamiuno/Jm uarvi haineaw
ant: Cetebvimboro Greyon teithontri thiw nin.


 


399


for particular persons; and some have locks and leaves that
they are also necessary when you know all the necessary times and words.
These doors do not hold keys. In the time of Durin they were not
secrets. Only to be at the drinks and those who were there. But
They are closed, whichever goes beyond the initial wording
decide it and move on. At the least this is recorded, isn't it this way, Gimli?
 
—Yes —I say the story—. But you don't know what the word was.
recordó. Narrate your art and all your relatives have
desaparecido de la tierra.

But don't you know the word, Gandalf? asked Boromir
surprised.

No! said the magician.

Gandalf well, remained in silence and impassible.

Entonces, ¿de qué servía traernos a este maldito














open? The acantilado rose at night, the innumerable stars

Once again Gandalf faced the wall, raising his arms
he shouted in tones of order and growing anger. ¡Edro, edro!
he shouted, and hit the rock with his stick. Abre, abre!
he shouted, and followed it with the same order in all
the languages ​​that have been spoken some of the time in the West
the Tierra Media. The light rolled on the stick to the ground and was felt
en silencio.

At this moment, from above, the wind comes to me
Oídos atentos el aullido de los lobos. Bill, the poni, if surprised me, y
Sam ran to her side and whispered softly to her. «

¡No more than escape!”, I said Boromir. «It seems like that
we will also need to remove the lobes from them. How I hate it
this charco asqueroso!”. If you agree, you'll get a big stone
la arrojó al agua oscura.

The stone disappeared with a gentle blow; but in this same moment


 


if


hey a silbido and a burbuja. Large wavy rings were formed
on the surface closest to where the stone fell, y
If the movieron slowly removes the foot of the acantilado. «

"Why are you here, Boromir?" said Frodo. «Yo
I also hate this place and I cherish it. No sé de qué: no de
the lobes, not of the darkness between the doors, up to more.
I keep some energy. Don't disturb it! ¡

Let us escape!”, said Merry. «

“Why doesn't Gandalf do anything quickly?”, said Pippin.

Gandalf no les hizo caso. He felt it with his head
gacha, it was for desperation or for anguish.
He once again saw the longing of the lobes. Las waves en el
the water grew and reached; some of you lamían
the orilla.

With a quickness that surprised everyone, the magician jumped.
If I use pie. If it's true! ¡I'll keep it!, he shouted. ¡Claro,
clear! Absurdly simple, like the majority of certain things when you see them
the answer.
They are delivered just in time. Sam and Frodo were only one step away.
 
I picked up the stick, stood in front of the rock and said in a...
Voz clara: ¡Mellon!

The star shone briefly and began to settle. Entonces, silently,
if he outlined a great door, anyway
before there was neither a grieta nor a junta. Slowly, it divided into half and opened
move away centimeter by centimeter, until both doors are placed against the
empinada cuesta; but even more on the lower stairs, there is darkness
it was deeper than the night. The company waited looking with a shadow.

I was mistaken after all, I said Gandalf, and Gimli too. Merry,
precisely, it was in the good fireplace. The initial wording was
inscribed in the arch all the time! The translation would be correct
haber sido: Say "Amigo" and enter. Only you can pronounce it
elphic word to friend and the doors are opened. Quite simple.
A simple question for an erudite master of tradition on these suspicious days.
Those were happier times. Now let's go!

I advanced with large teeth and placed the foot lower on the ladder.
But at this moment various things happened. Frodo cried


what    

I grab it by the tobillo and climb with a grit. Bill,
the poni, relinchó de miedo, turned over his heels and made him run
by the edge of the lake, entering the darkness. Sam jumped across
He, and at the sight of Frodo's cry, returned running, crying
and backbiting. The others took the turn and saw the waters of the
the lake hivering, as a multitude of snakes were emerging
desde el extremo sur.

A large and sinuous tentacle had emerged from the water;
It was a pale green, bright and humid. On extreme, with dedos
, he grabbed Frodo's foot and grabbed him in the water.
Sam, from rodillas, attacked him with a cuchillo.

The arm only went to Frodo, and Sam pulled it apart, shouting
pidiendo ayuda. Other veins arms salieron undulating. El
dark water hived and had an expansive water. ¡

At the entrance! Take the stairs! ¡Quick!, shouted Gandalf
taking a leap backwards. I found the horror that seemed to me
haberlos dejado a todos menos a Sam en el suelo, y
los condujo hacia adelante.

They were subjected to one of the ladders and Gandalf was forced to undergo them when they
Many adorable tentacles are twisted by the orilla and tocaron end
the wall of the acantilado and the doors. One snaked around.
umbral, shining in the light of the stars. Gandalf turned around
if I deduce. We were considering how the glass would close the umbral, shining in the light of the stars. Gandalf turned and saw it. It was considered that the word would close the umbral, if it would happen
from the doors to both sides and, with a terrible force,
let me turn. With an extreme echo, the coup occurred
and if all the light was lost. A loud sound and a loud bang came
deafly across the stone weighing.

Sam, clinging to Frodo's arm, exploded on a black staircase
darkness. ¡Pobre Bill! I say with a heartfelt voice. ¡Pobre
Bill! Lobos y serpientes! But the snakes were lost for him.
Please choose, Señor Frodo. I wanted to be with you.

Oyeron to Gandalf bajar los escalones y couppear
the doors with their sticks. There's a temblor on the stone
The steps are broken, but the doors are not open.


 


¡


Go, go! I say the magician. The passage is blocked
among us, and only have a salida: to the other
side of the mountains. I'm afraid, for the noises
, who have piled up the rocks and trudged the trees and they have rolled them across
of the door. I feel it; the trees were beautiful and beautiful
I remain for a long time.

I felt that something horrible was happening at that moment
when I touched the water, I say Frodo. That was it
, o había muchos?

No, replied Gandalf; but all the arms are there
guided for the same purpose. Algo if he has arrastrado, or has sido
expelled from the dark waters below the mountains. Hay
what is more ancient and repugnant than the Orcs in the depths of the world
world. I didn't express in a loud voice my thoughts about that, it was that
he who lived on the lake was the first to take over Frodo's
toda la Compañía.

Boromir murmured in voice low, but the echo of the stone
I amplified the sound until I converted it into a hoarse whisper that everyone could hear: ¡
To the depths of the world! Let's go again
against my will. Where will we now find ourselves in this mortal darkness?

—Yo —I say Gandalf—, and Gimli will walk with me. Next
my stick!

As the magician passed the great stairs, he rose
on the stick, and from its tip emanated a faint shine. The wide staircase was in good condition and without damage.
They told
two big steps, even and not very deep; and at the top...
He encountered an arched passage with flat ground that led to it
darkness.

¡Rellano, we don't meet comedors!, I say Frodo.
Suddenly, I felt a lot of heat.

The proposal was well received by everyone; and they felt it
the upper stairs, red figures in the penumbra. Después de comer
, Gandalf les god to each one a third rowan of the miruvor de
Rivendel.


404


 


I'm afraid it won't last much longer, I say; but
I think we need it after the horror of the door. And at least that
Let's keep a lot of heart, we'll need everything that comes before the truth
other side! Also cooked with water! There are a lot of them
arroyos and pozos in the Minas, but not well
touch each other. We may not have the opportunity to train our mothers and
Botellas until we go to the Valle del Arroyo Tenebroso. ¿

How long will we take this? asked Frodo.

I can't say it, replied Gandalf. It depends on a lot
probabilities. But yes, without contratiempos nor extravíos
, three haremos or four marches, I suppose. No you can
have less than four thousand miles from the West Door to the East Door
straight line, and the fireplace can be very sinuous.

After a short rest, they cleaned up the fireplace. All
They were anxious to finish their journey as quickly as possible
they were willing, to weigh the dog, to continue marching during
varies hours. Gandalf walked to the front as before. En su
left hand supported on shiny stick, which light barely
the ground was illuminated before his feet; on the right side it was supported
sword Glamdring. Once again Gimli came, with his eyes shining
in the faint light while he turned his head from one side to the other.
Afterwards Frodo walked along the road, and he had forgotten it
short sword, Aguijón. Ningún destello came from the hojas de Aguijón or de
Glamdring; And this was a habit, let's go to work
of the elfin herdsmen of the Old Days, these swords shine with
once the light shines, some ogre will look for it. Beyond Frodo
iba Sam, and among Legolas, the young hobbits
y Boromir. In the darkness of the rearguard, dark and silent, he walked
Aragorn.

The passage took one how many times and then it started
arrived at the path where they resonaban their steps. Allí
descender. Low in constant form during a long period before
shine again. The air turned hot and suffocating, however
There are a lot of these. In the pale sea of ​​the
wizard's staff, Frodo saw stairs and arches, and others


 


405


passages and tunnels, which go downhill, or descend abruptly,
or if they shine in absolute darkness on both sides. It was disconcerting
more to the hope of recording.

Gimli helped Gandalf very little, except with his unquerable courage.
At least I wasn't, like the majority of the demás, worried about
the mere darkness in itself. Once the magician consulted it
at the points where the choice of the fireplace was doubtful; but it always was
Gandalf here held the last word. Las Minas de Moria
they were vaster and more intricate than Gimli's imagination,
the boy of Gloin, however, was a dwarf of the mountain race. Para
Gandalf, the young men have recovered from a long journey
There wasn't much help to you, but even in the darkness you weigh everyone
the fireplace retrievals, sand behind them, y
he did not waver while he was on a journey that would lead him to
on goal.

¡No themes!, I say Aragorn. Here's a longer pause
de lo habitual, y Gandalf y Gimli whisper;
The rest of us are pining away, waiting anxiously. No
themes! I've been with him on many trips, yet never
in one so dark; y en Rivendel se cuentan
There are bigger scenes than anyone else I've seen. Not if it goes abroad
, if you have any path to encounter. We drove here until now
Our dear ones, but we will love you again, that's it
these. It's more safe to find the fireplace at home on a blind night
than the cats of Queen Beruthiel.

It was a blessing for the company to have such a guide.
Do not hold fuel in the fire extinguishing media; En la
desperately driving through the doors, many things have been asked
atrás. But without light, ready to have sufrido un
desaster. Not only did you have many paths to choose, except that
also there were in many places sharp and painful, and dark places that
once in a while when they are just touching their feet. El
It was also more than two meters tall and it was wide.
Before Pippin could gather enough courage to jump the terrible one


abyss    

. The sound of the agitated water was left behind
very low, as a great mill wheel would turn there
profundidades.

¡Cuerda!, murmured Sam. ¡Sabía que la querría si no la tuviera!

A thought that these pilgrims happen more frequently, on the brand
if it is slower. You seem to have been walking
, walking, without cesar hacia las raíces de las montañas. They are more
that can be said, and without embargo, I don't seem to be comfortable with the idea
to be held in any place. Frodo's soul has been elevated for a while now
of his escape, and after coming and taking a trago of liquor; but
now a profound restlessness, convirtiéndo en medo, invaded him
again. Even though he was cared for in the Rivendel del
Cuchillo's coup, this terrible wound was ineffective. Sus
they were more keen and more aware of the things that were not
if they could ver. There was a change signal that I promptly noticed
who could see more in the darkness than any of his companions
, except quizás Gandalf. And it was, in any case, it
ring bearer: hold the ring against the chest,
Sometimes it seemed like an immense burden. He felt the certainty
of evil through delante and of evil following it; but I don't say anything. Apretó
with greater strength he held his sword and continued tenaciously.

The company detrás de élába blabarare vez, y solo en
whispered whispers. There is no sound except the one above
own pies: the deaf muñón de las botas de enano de Gimli; the weighed ones
pisadas de Boromir; the light walk of Legolas; el suave, only
audible golpeteo de los pies de los hobbits; and in the rear, slow and firm steps
de Aragorn with his large claw. When they were detained
For a moment, I didn't see anything at all, unless it was occasionally
a débil goteo de agua invisible. Without embargo,
Frodo began to see, or imagine that he was, something
more: like the sound of barefoot feet. It never happened
They're strong enough and they're not looking for them sufficiently so that they can be safe from harm.
; but once it started, it was not held by the company
followed in motion. But it wasn't an echo, because when they were detained...
He continued walking for a while, alone, and then he waited in silence.


 


407

 
when Gandalf came upon his first serious obstacle. Ante el
There was a wide dark arc that opened at three steps: everyone led to it
the same general management, hacia este; but the passage of the izquierda
descended, while the one on the right ascended, and the
the middle path seemed to continue, smooth and clear, but very
estrecho.

I don't remember anything from this place!, I say Gandalf, from the foot
, unsure, I lower the bow. Levantó on stick with the
Hope to find some brand or inscription that can help you
to elect; but I don't go for anything because of the style. I'm tired
I can't decide, I say, holding my head. Y I suppose
that all of you are as cansados ​​as you are, or more cansados. It will be better than that
we hold ourselves here for what we asked for at night. You know what I want!
Inside here it is always dark; but outside the moon late cabalga
leave the west and the middle night has passed. ¡

Poor Bill!, I say Sam. I wonder where it will be. I hope that
These lobes don't have to be taken up yet.   

At the corner of the great arch they encountered a stone door: it was
medium size, but can be opened easily, with a smooth push.
Most likely there will be a large chamber hollowed out in the rock.

Don't worry! "Don't worry!" shouted Gandalf, while Merry and Pippin
they advance, happy to find a place where they can escape
with at least a feeling of greater refuge than in the open passage. ¡
Don't worry! You still don't know what's inside. I'm the first one.

He entered with caution, and the others followed him. ¡Allí!,
I say, pointing to the center of the ground with my stick.
Before your pies you will see a great agujero rounded like the mouth
a well. Rotating and oxidized pieces are left on the edge and are stuck
hacia el pozo negro. Search for fragments of stone. «

Some of you might have fallen and some would be wondering
when I'm going to hit the bottom", I told her Aragorn
Merry. «The guide goes first while you have one».

This seems to be like a guard room, that's it
watch over the three steps, I say Gimli. This was painful
clearly a well for use by the guards, covered with a stone plug.


408    

But the tape is broken and we all have to keep watch in the darkness.
the camera, as much as possible of the agujero in the ground, I say.

They are unrolling their malteado mantas and camas against their walls
I stopped at the edge and looked at the top. A cold air seemed like a coup
on the beak, rising from the invisible depths. Movido for a
sudden impulse, he grabbed a loose stone and took it off. Sintió que
on my heart there were many times before some sound was heard. Entonces
very low, as the thick stone fell into deep waters in some
cavernous place, a dull noise was heard, very distant, but magnificent
y repetido en el pozo hueco.

"What is this?" Gandalf shouted. We felt relieved when Pippin
he confessed what he had; but I was bored, y Pippin
I can see my eyes shine. ¡Tonto de Tuk!, gruñó.
This is a serious trip, not a hobbit party. Lanzate
Next time, it won't be more annoying
. Now call!

Don't listen for more than several minutes; but I'm sorry
Vineron de las profundidades débiles coups: tom-tap, tap-tom.
They detuvieron, and when the echoes apagaron, if
repitieron: tap-tam, tom-tap, tap-tap, tom. Sonaban
disturbingly like signals of some type; but after a rat, los
coups apagaron and no more oyeron.

It was the sound of a hammer, or I never heard it
one, said Gimli.

Yes, I say Gandalf, and I don't like it. You may not care
nothing to see with Peregrin's stupid stone; but probably
something has been touched and it has become better
let it go in silence. Please don't go back to doing anything on earth! Let's hope we can
solve the problems a little. You, Pippin, puedes
go to the first guard, as a reward, gruñó, while it revolves
in a manta ray.

Pippin felt miserably at the door in total darkness; but
he followed by giving turns, fearing that someone would ignore him
salt shaker arrastrándose del pozo. Desire to be able to cubrir
the agujero, although he was alone with a manta, but he didn't even manage to move or
look for himself, even though Gandalf seemed to be asleep. En


 


reality


, Gandalf was deserted, although he was still and in silence.
I summarized my thoughts, trying to record each detail
on previous journey to Minas, and considering with anxiety
which would be disastrous. After an hour, he stood up and looked around
Pippin.
 
—See a rincón and duerme, muchacho —I say in one tone
amiable tone—. I suppose you'll want to sleep. I can't look at my eyes,
so that I am better burdened with vigilance.

—That's what I think — he murmured, feeling himself
arrived at the door—. I need humo! No, I tried it from now on
the morning before the snowstorm.

The last time I saw Pippin, at the caerle el sueño, was a
I wear the shadow of the old magician curled in the soil, protecting
a brilliant dipstick with its bare hands between the rods. El
From there, for an instant, he showed his sharp nose and mouth
humo.

It was Gandalf who made all the despers. Habia
I was kept vigil only for six hours, and I was tired
forget about them. —And last night I made a decision
—dijo—. I don't enjoy the sensation of the middle fireplace; y not me
enjoy the smell of the izquierda fireplace: let the air be close
ahí abajo, o no soy guide. Tomaré el pasaje de la recha.
It is now time for us to ascend again.

During the dark hours, without counting the short paragraphs, siguieron
marching; and they didn't meet the peligro, they didn't say anything,
nothing could be seen except for the faint shimmer of the magician's light,
who is left like a will-o'-the-wisp in front of him. El pasadizo
who had chosen ascended sinuously. Hasta dande
Afterwards, it formed large ascending curves, which made you think that it ascended
if he is taller and taller. You don't have any openings
other galleries or tunnels on no side, and the ground was
nivelado y signatures, sin hoyos ni grietas. Evidently, habían
I encountered what was once an important path; and they advanced
quicker than on the first run.

In this way, a fifth of thousands advanced, pondered on it


410    

in a straight line is this, although in reality you should have walked
twenty thousand or more. At the thought that the path ascended,
Frodo's soul improved a little; but some of them felt oppressed, and some of them
oía, o creía oír, lejos, detrás de la Compañía
and more than the noise and the blow of his feet, one
step that followed and that it wasn't an echo.

Without leaving, everyone thinks in a place where
They can sleep, when suddenly the walls behind and away are opened  
. Apparently they have crossed the bow.
I walk into a black and empty space. A big one
current of warm air passes between them, and before them
darken the cold daba in the beak. They learned and learned
anxiously.

Gandalf seemed complacent. Choose the correct path, I say.
We finally get to the habitable areas, and I suppose
We are not left on this side. But we are at the top
, much higher than the Door of the Arroyo Tenebroso, except for me
equivocal. For the sensation of air, we must be in one
room expands. Now I risk having a little real light.

He stood up on the stick, and for a brief moment there was a shine
like the star of a lamp. Great shadows surgieron and huyeron,
and for a second you will see a vast techo muy for the top of your heads
supported by many powerful piles tall on the stone. Ante ellos
both sides were extended by a huge empty room; sus paredes negras,
clean and smooth like crystal, they shine and shine.
See three more entrances, black and dark arches: one just
delante de ellos, hacia este, y otro a each side. Entonces the light
he paid off.

—That's all I'll venture to do now — I say
Gandalf—. Only have big winds in there
slope of the mountain and wells that lead to the light in the upper part
of the Minas. I believe that we are happy, but outside it is
from night to night, and we can't know it until today. Yes, that's it
In fact, today we'll see if we want to remember the morning
. But for as long as we do, better no more advances. Descansemos


  ,

yes we can. These things have been done well now, and there
mayor part of the dark fireplace has passed. But we still haven't finished
, and there is a large trench to the doors you open at
world.

The Company passed that night in the large cavernous hall,
wrapped in a rinse to protect yourself from the flow of air:
seemed to have a constant intake of fresh air through the
space, huge and immense, and they felt oppressed by it
soledadity and the immensity of the halls of the dolvens and
the stairs and steps that branch out without caesar. The most beautiful imaginations that...
the noises, interminably dark, which jamás had suggested to the hobbits,
do not completely ignore the green terror and shadow of Moria.

You would have to have a large crowd of wines there.
once again, I say Sam; Each one of the most occupied ones
tejones during five years to do all this, and most of them
harsh rasp also! Where did I get it all? ¿
Why don't they live in these dark torments?

These are not tormentors, I say Gimli. This is the great king
and the city of the Caverna del Enano. Y'all ago it wasn't dark,
until full of light and splendor, as someone remembers in our hearts
songs.

He rose and, from his feet in the darkness, began to sing with
deep voice, while the echoes are lost in the music.

The world was young, the green mountains,

no one was missing on the Moon,

no words were placed in the arroyo or the stone
when Durin deserted and walked alone.

I named the hills and canadas in one name;

well babies still not tested;

if I inclined and looked at Mirrormere,

and a crown of stars appears to me,

like gems on a silver hill,

sobre la sombra de su cabeza.


412


 


The world was beautiful, the high mountains,

On old days before the fall
Of mighty kings in Nargothrond
And Gondolin, who now more to God
the Western Seas have made a mistake:

The world was beautiful on the days of Durin.

A king was on a tall throne
In stone salons with many pilars
With golden techo and flat floor,

And runes of power in the door.

The light of the sun and the stars and the moon
In brilliant tall crystal lamps
Without being attenuated by the clouds or shadows of the night
There she always shone beautifully and brilliantly.

There the hammer struck everyone,

Then he sent the chickling, and the buril wrote;

There the heat was forged, and the grip was tightened;
The excavator outside, the dawn built.

Here berilo, pearl and pale opal,

Y metal forged like the husk of peces,

Broquel and armor, hacha and sword.

And brilliant lanzas are stored in treasures.

Incansable entonces were the people of Durin;

Below the mountains, the expert music:

The harpists sang, the juglares sang:









 












 ¡Mithril! All the world deseaba. I could be beaten like the body,
it was like the common plate, but the beauty of mithril
and clean as the glass; and the Enanos could do it one
metal, light and with a harder edge than tempered maple. On beauty


414


 


no if deslustraba no apagaba. Elfos love him entrañablely, y
among the many uses that gave them ithildin, estrellaluna, que
seen in the doors. Bilbo held a string of mithril rings
that Thorin gave her. I wonder what he's like. I suppose
which also accumulates dust in the house of Michel Delving Mathom
.

'What?' shouted Gimli, startled by his silence. ¿A corselete
de plata de Moria? It was a real gift!

Yes, I say Gandalf. No one can say it, but it was worth it
greater than the value of the entire Comarca and everything that it has in it.   

Frodo didn't say anything, but he put his hand down on his tunic
and touched the rings on his waist. He felt astonished at the
to think that he had been walking with the price of it
Lower county on chaqueta. Did Bilbo know how? Don't worry
that Bilbo knew it very well. It was, in fact, a real gift. But
Now your thoughts are haunted by the dark mines,
to Rivendel, to Bilbo and Bolsón Cerrado on the days that Bilbo
it was still there. He longs to star again with all his heart
there, and on those days, trimming the bush or entertaining
to the animals, and no one can hear anything from Moria, no
of mithril, not of the Ring.

A profound silence reigned. One by one, the rest of them lasted. Frodo
He was on guard. How was an alien who would enter
invisible doors from deep places, the honey invaded him. Tenía las
fresh hands and humid forehead. Escucho. Toda on
mind you dedicated yourself to learning nothing more during two slow seconds
horas; but no sound, no imaginary echo
of a pisada.

On guard he was at the point of finishing, when, at the lejos, from where he was supposed to
that the western arch rose, I created it
two pale points of light, such as bright eyes. He jumped.
On the head asyntió. You have to ask me if I slept at the
stand up and rub my eyes, and stand on my feet, looking intently at them
the darkness, as long as Legolas removed it.


 


415


When he approached, however, he quickly died
it seemed to her that the dream continued: oh, whispers and away
The two pale points of light are approached slowly. He was desperate.
they tropezaron with objects that were in the shadow of the door, in their shapes...
and I discovered that the others talked about it in their search for it, and
that a faint light fell above the beak. At the top, above the...
From the eastern arch, across a well, look for the tejado, if you can see a large
and pale shine; and on the other side of the hall, across the north arch,
a light also shone softly and distantly.

Frodo was incorporated. Good days!, says Gandalf. Por
until he came back to love. Tenía razón, ¿sabes? We are at the top of the
this side of Moria. Before the end of the day, we must meet
las Grandes Puertas y ver las waters de Lago Espejo en
el Valle del Arroyo Tenebroso before us.

I'll be happy, I say Gimli. I visited Moria, y
It's very big, but it's dark and landscaping; y
we are not met by my relatives. I know Balin
I'm coming here sometime.

After desayunar, Gandalf decided to continue forward
followed. We've forgotten, but we'll look better outside
, I say. I believe that none of us will ever pass by
otra noche en Moria. ¡

In no way!, I say Boromir. Where will we go next?
¿Por aquel arco oriental?

Quizás, dijo Gandalf. But not exactly
where are we? Unless we were completely out of the way, I assume we are there
arrive to the north of the Grandes Puertas; and it may not be
It's easy to find the correct path for bajar. The eastern arch
probably this is the path we need to take; but
Before we decide, we must look at our elder. Vayamos
have this light in the north door. If we can meet one
ventana, we would help, but I fear that only the light will enter
por profundos pozos.

Following the example, the company passed below the item
northern arch. They met in a large space. In the midst of their progress,
the    
the shine was more intense, and the more it came from
from a door to its backside. It was tall and flat,
and the stone door was still above his goznes, closed
. Plus there was a large square room. It was dimly lit,
but in your eyes, after a long time in the darkness, they seemed
dazzlingly brilliant, and they dazzled upon entering.
His feet raised a head of dust in the ground, y
at first they couldn't distinguish anything. The room was illuminated for a while
large well at the top of the eastern wall; if inclined hacia arrive.



 
y, muy por encima, se podía
towards a little square of blue sky. The light from the well fell directly onto a table in it
center of the habitation: a single oblong block, of one dos pies
from above, above which there was a great sheen of white stone.

It looks like a grave, Frodo murmured, and he leaned forward
with a curious sense of apprehension, to look at it further.
Gandalf quickly rushed to his side. En la losa had runes
deeply grasped:


khm


 


417


These are the Runes of Daeron, as they were used in ancient times
Moria, I say Gandalf. Here it is written in the languages ​​of men
y los Enanos:


BALIN HIJO DE FUNDIN
SEÑOR DE MORIA.

Once he's dead, I say Frodo. Fear that it was so. Gimli
if you echo the capucha above the beak.


 5





The Ring Company remained silent at the end of the day
Balin. Frodo thought to Bilbo and his wide companion
the year, and Balin's visit to the Comarca took a long time. En aquella
dust camera in the mountains, apparently
a thousand years had passed and I was on the other side of the world.

Finally, if they became discouraged, they raised their sight and began to search
That's what told you about Balin's fate
I'll show you what your people are like. Have another
smaller door on the other side of the room, below the well. Junto a
both doors can be seen that there are many hues
, and between the swords and wheels,
shields and yellow hearts. Some swords remain
torcidas: cimitarras orcas con hojas ennegrecidas.

There were many words tall in the rock of the walls, y
in them one encounters large chests of Madeira with forros de hierro. Everyone has
rolled and soaked sides; but at the end of the day
, pinched and partially quenched, and it was so missed with
... Gandalf raised him with care, but the hojas
they got angry and broke when they placed it on the surface. He studied it
during a rati sin decir palabra. Frodo and Gimli, de
walk to your side, let's see, while we spend the holidays with care,
which are written by many different hands, with runes,
both Moria and Valle, and elvish in some cases.
-There
 
Finally, Gandalf looked up. It seems to be a register of...
fortune of the people of Balin —I say—. I suppose I went with it
on llegada al Valle de Dimrill hace casi treinta años: las
The pages appear to have numbers indicating the years back up
llegada. The upper page is marked one at a time, so that at least two are divided


 from
the beginning. Listen to this!
  Let us expel the orcs from the great door and let us guard... I believe;
the following wording is furry and worn: probably habitación... matamos
a lot below the brilliant... I create... sun in the valley. Floi murió de
a flecha. Mató great. Luego has a borrón followed by
Floi below the grass looking for the Espejo lagoon. I cannot read the following lines
. Luego comes: «Hemos tomado la sala vigésimo primera
of the extreme north to die there." Hey... I can't read that.
If he mentions anything. Entonces Balin has established his seat in the Chamber of Deputies
Mazarbul
, the Chamber of Records —dijo Gimli—. I guess that's it
donde nos encontramos ahora.
—Good, I can't read more for a long time —I say Gandalf—,
except for the word «oro», and «Hacha de Dunn» and something similar to «yelmo».
Entonces Balin is now señor de Moria. This seems like the end of a chapter.
After one of the stars, the beginning of another letter, and now we meet
authentic plate, and later the word «well forged», and then something similar to «¡
I've got it!», mithril, and the last two lines: «En search of the
superior armories of Third Profundo, something similar to ir hacia el oeste», a borrón, hasta
the Hollin Gate.
Gandalf took a break and left a house. —Hay
Various pages of the same type, written in sufficient time
muy dañadas —dijo—; but I can't save much from this
perspective. Now you have to do some things now, because
they are busy counting five, the fifth year of the colony,
I suppose. We love you! No, you are left without short and missing pieces;
here is something: a great and bold letter with elvish writing.
This must be the letter of Ori - said Gimli, looking at the top of the book
magician's arm—. Write well and quickly, I'll tell you
used the elfish characters.
—I'm afraid I'd have bad news to write with a good letter—I said
Gandalf—. The first clear word is worth it, but the rest of it
towards you pierde, unless you finish in the end. Yes, it must be yestre.






 
follow for the day, being the December of November Balin, lord of Moria,


420.   
 
cay in the Arroyo Tenebroso Valley. He was alone looking at the Mirador del Espejo; a
Ogre disparaged her from the left side of a stone; Let's fight the ogre, but much more
... they suffered from this moment by the Veta Plateada. The rest of the page
It's so furry that I can barely read anything, but I believe it
read: «We closed the doors, and then we can keep them
for a long time, yes...» and sometimes horrible and sufrir. ¡Pobre Balin!
He seems to have kept the title he adopted for less than five years
years. I wonder what will happen next; but no hay
time to decipher the latest pages. Here is the last page of
todas. I paused and sighed.

“It's a somber reading,” I say. «I fear that at the end it was cruel.
¡Escuchen! We can't go up. We can't go up. They went back
the bridge and the second room. Frar, Loni and Nali went there."
There are four tan lines that only I can read: «
It was five days ago." The last lines run far behind the wall
de la Puerta Oeste. The Vigilante in the Water returned to Oin. We can't
go up. Tie the end, and there are drums, drums in the depths. Me
I wonder what this means. The latest writing is in one
Garabato de letras élficas: comen. There's nothing more.
Gandalf paused and thought in silence.

A sudden fear and horror of the camera fell above it
Company. We can't go up, Gimli murmured. It was a blessing
for us that he was tired a little and that the Vigilante
I was sleeping in the extreme south.

Gandalf raised his head and looked at his elder. Parecen
have one last stand at all the doors, I say; But here
retomen Moria! He was valiant but senseless. He didn't remember the moment.
Here you must sit in your fathers' salons. We will be here
book, the Book of Mazarbul, and we will examine it with more detention later.
It will be better if you look at it, Gimli, and if you take it from Dain yes
You have the opportunity. It will interest you, though
It will hurt her deeply. Let's go! The morning is passing.

Where do we go from here? asked Boromir.

Returning to the salon, replied Gandalf. But our visit to this
habitación no sido en vain. Now we know where we are.


EL PUENTE DE ICHAZAD-DUM


421
opening the door and pressing on the stick. Allí


It must be, as Gimli says, the Chamber of Mazarbul; y el
The room must be the first in the far north. For that long, let's deberíamos
go up through the eastern arch of the living room, turn to the back
y to the south, y lower. El Vigésimo Primer Salón debería
being in the seventh level, it is said, you are at the top of the level of the
Doors. Let's go! Go to the salon!

Only Gandalf had to say these words when he heard them
a great noise: a rolling sound that seemed to come from the depths
very deep and tremble in the stone to his pies. Saltaron
leave the alarmed door. Maldición, maldición!, went back to rodar,
how would one enormous hand convert the same caverns of Moria into one
vast drum. Let me hear a resonant estellate: a great sound
in the living room, and more often if you listen to your hearts in response and harsh grit
. I felt a sound surprise of many pies.

Come!, Legolas cried.

No podemos salir, dijo Gimli.

¡Atrapados!, shouted Gandalf. Why did I forget? Here we are,
caught, same as before. But I wasn't here before. Veremos
what...

¡Do it, fatality!, resounded the drum and the walls thundered. ¡

Close the doors and corners! Aragorn shouted. Y
Don't give up on your bike while you can: you can keep the opportunity
de abrirnos paso.

¡No!, said Gandalf. We must not stop ourselves. ¡Keep it there
door of this entreabierta! We will wait until we have the opportunity.

If there is another harsh touch of the heart and sharp grits. If you are
step by step. There was a tinkle and a bang when
the Company desenvainó sus swords. Glamdring shone with one
pale light, and Sting shone on the edges. Boromir apoyó el
man against the western door.

He jumped to Boromir's side and went back for a while
he was tall.

¿Here comes here to harass the rest of Balin, Señor de
Moria?, gritó en voz alta.

If you heard a snort of laughter, like the caída de


422


 


stones in a well; In the midst of the clamor, a deep voice was raised
on hand. Evil, boom, evil!, the drums resounded in the depths.

With a quick movement, Gandalf followed the narrative...
a bright light illuminated the room and the doorway.
exterior. For an instant, the magician looked outside. Las flechas silbaron
and they jumped on the floor as they took a leap backwards.

There are ogres, many, I say. Y some
they are great and evil: black Uruks of Mordor. De moment
if they ask for more, but there is more there. A
great trol of the caves, I believe, or more than one. No hay esperanza
de escapar por ahí.

And no hope at all, even if they enter through the other door,
said Boromir.

Todavía no se oye ningún rumido afuera, dijo Aragorn, que
There was a pie right next to the door and you were listening. The passage of
This side descends directly from a staircase: clearly it does not lead
of going to the salon. But there's no need to run blindly
here with the persecution behind. We cannot block the door.
Don't hold the door, the lock is rotated and you open it inside.
First we must do something to delay the enemy. ¡Haremos
who fear the Chamber of Mazarbul! I say with gravedad,
feeling the edge of your sword, Anduril.

If you put heavy weights on the floor. Boromir was taken aback
against the door and pushed it inside; I then pointed it out with
hojas de espada rotas y astillas de madeira. The Company
he retreated to the other side of the room. But they still don't care
opportunity of life. I heard a coup in the door that hit me
temblar; and then it began to open slowly, making it move backwards
the cuñas. An enormous arm and man, with dark skin
green scraps, they were stuffed across the gap every time. Luego,
a large, flat foot and without two he was forced to pass by. Hubo
un silencio sepulcral afuera.

podria; but on the sword it resounded, it returned to one side and fell on it
temblorous hand. The house was sweet.


 423

Suddenly, and to his own surprise, Frodo felt a fiery anger
burn in your heart. The Comarca! —gritó, y jumping
upon arriving in Boromir, he joined and appointed himself with Aguijón el
horrible pie. If I heard a longing, and the foot would be healed again,
cases arrancándole Aguijón del brazo a Frodo. Gotas negras
gotaron de la hoja y humearon en el soil. Boromir
he swung against the door and hit it.
 
¡One for the County!, Aragorn shouted. The hobbit's bite is...!
¡Profound! Have a good sword, Frodo, hijo de Drogo!

If you have an exercise in the door, follow the exercise afterwards
extruding. Aries and hammers strike her. If quebró
and it wobbled again, and the opening suddenly tightened.
The arrows entered softly, but hit the north wall
stay on the ground without suffering damage. There was a twist of the heart and an avalanche
of the feet, and the ogres, one after another, jumped to the room.

The company could not count how many there were. There
refreshes the flesh, but the orcs are consternated by their ferocity
of the defense. Legolas disappeared to two of the garganta. Gimli
cut off the other piercings that were hard on top
Balin's tomb. Boromir and Aragorn killed many. When trece
they have fallen, the rest have shouted, leaving the defenders
everyone, except Sam, who had a snark in his hairy heart.
A quick attachment saved it; and he had ridden his ogre: one
strong sword with the sword of the Cairn. A bold fire
in his brown eyes that had him demoted to Ted Sandyman
to have seen it.

¡Now is the moment!, shouted Gandalf. Come on, before that
regrese el troll!

But just when they retire, before Pippin and Merry
hubieran led to the stairway exterior, a huge jefe ogre, cases
from the heights of a man, dressed in a black sweater from the head to the feet, he jumped to
the room; Beyond that, your followers will gather in the door
. On the rostrum even and plano he was moreno, his eyes were like braises
and his language was red; coaxed a great lance. With a
blow of his enormous shield of skin, turned the sword of Boromir and
I pushed it back, roasting it on the ground. Zambulléndose
I attack Aragorn's blow with the speed of a serpent that attacks,


cargo    

against the company and attack with your lance directly
to Frodo. He struck the coup on the right side, and Frodo
it was thrown against the wall and then moved. Sam, with a cry,
he attacked the rod of the lance, and it broke. But just when the ogre
I curled my face and flattened my cimitarra, Andúril
he looked over yelmo. I have a thing like a llama y
Evil, evil!, the drums resounded in the depths. The great voice...
the boy stood on pedazos. The ogre fell with the hendida head. On
The followers huyeron hooting, while Boromir and Aragorn are abalancing above
ellos.

Salieron rodando de nuevo.

¡Ahora!, shouted Gandalf. This is the last opportunity! ¡Corran
!

Aragorn welcomed Frodo from where he came to the wall
he headed to the stairs, pushing Merry and Pippin off the stairs.
The same ones followed it; but Gimli is the one who will be arrested
Legolas: to weigh the pilgrim, he remained right at Balin's tomb with
the cabeza gacha. Boromir closed the eastern door, bowing
above his goznes: he had large rings of hierro on both sides, but
no se podía cerrar.

I'm happy, yes Frodo. I can walk. ¡Bájame!

Aragorn cases him the deja caer of the asombro. ¡Creí
he was dead!, he shouted. ¡

Not todavia!, I say Gandalf. But there's no time to worry. ¡
All, lower the stairs! Wait for one minute
below, but if I'm not ready, sigan! Vayan
quick and easy paths that take you to the back and down. ¡

We cannot leave them alone to hold the door!, I say Aragorn. ¡

Hagan what I say!, I say Gandalf with pride. Las swords ya no
sirven aquí. ¡Váyanse!

The passage was not illuminated by any light and was completely dark. Bajaron
there was a large stretch of stairs and there they looked
hacia atrás; but they couldn't see anything, except for a lot of them
faint glow of the magician's staff. Apparently it would be all the same
of the guard at the door of the door. Frodo breathed with difficulty


 y

observe the stairs in darkness. Frodo creyo
now the voice of Gandalf arrives, murmuring words
that descended through the inclined tejado with a whispering echo.
I can't hear what he said. The walls seem to be temblar.
Again and again, the drums pulsate and resonate:
fatality, fatality.

Suddenly, at the top of the stairs, I got a punch
white light. Luego, a deaf extrusion and a deaf coup. Los
the drums rose with fury: ¡bum, bum, bum!, y
luego cesaron. Gandalf went down the stairs and down the stairs
in the middle of the company.

Go, go! ¡Se acabó!, I told the magician, poniéndose de
pie with difficulty. I know everything I can do. But I met the horma of my zapato.
recover—. But don't ask me here! Next
! You'll want to ignore the light at one time: that's enough
conmocionado. Next! Next! Where are you, Gimli? ¡Adelante!
¡Conmigo! ¡Manténganse cerca, todos ustedes! They followed it
to trompicones,

wondering what happened. Evil, evil!, the drums resounded again: now they sound
They were happy and happy, but they followed them. No if you don't hear anything
another sound of persecution, no pisadas, no voice.
Gandalf didn't turn, neither to the back nor to the left, so the passage would appear
go in the direction you want. Once again
when a section of stairs descended, five or more, to one
lower level. At this moment he was on mayor peligro; pues en la
no darkness can come to light, as long as they encounter it
they put their feet in the vacío. Gandalf touched the ground
con su bastón como un ciego.
At the end of an hour they have run a thousand, or quiz a
a little more, and many steps of the ladders have been lowered. Followed
without any sound of persecution. Casi empezaron a tener esperanza
to escape. At the foot of the seventh section,
Gandalf se detuvo.
¡Hace heat!, jadeó. Let's have it down to the least
at the level of the Doors now. Hello I think we need to take a ride
to    
the question that we take to this day. I hope that none of them are there. Estoy
much cansado. I must scan here for a moment, including all the orcs
which sometimes we were haunted by.
Gimli took him off his arm and helped him feel inside
Do you encounter the person who plays the drums?
No, yes, replied Gandalf. But
suddenly he met me face to face with something I hadn't seen before. Tea
pareces a Bilbo, dijo Gandalf. Hay more
I'll tell you what it seems like, as I say, it's been a long time. Frodo
I wondered if the commentary meant more than what it said.
They continued talking. At the little rate, Gimli habló. Tapeworm
penetrating eyes in the darkness. I believe, I say, that you have one
adelante light. But it's not daytime. It's red. What can it be? ¡
Ghash!, murmured Gandalf. I wonder if this was what you were looking for
decide: ¿what are the lower levels in llamas? Anyway, we can only do it
continue forward.
Ready the light is unmistakable and I can see it later
the step they took fast. Now they can go up the road: in front of them,
the chimney descended rapidly, and a little more slowly...


















 
. It shone and shone on the walls, at the bottom.
He has a small bow; the growing light entered through it. El
aire se volvió muy caluroso.

When they tied the bow because Gandalf passed by, they made the signs
for those who hope. While remaining just on the other side of the opening, you will see
on its beak illuminated by a red glow. He quickly retreated.

There's some new trouble here, I say, our idea
welcome, without doubt. But now it's where we are: hemos
linked to the Profundo Primer, the level immediately drops below
Doors. This is the Second Hall of Old Moria; y las Puertas
I'm looking for: more to the Far East, to the izquierda, to no more
of a quarter of a thousand. Crossing the bridge, they also took a step up,
they went down the road too, through the Primer Salón, away! But they come
y miren!

Miraron hacia afuera. Before him there was another cavernous hall.
He was taller and much wider than the ones they had
I sleep. Estaban seeks its extreme oriental; let the west extend


428    

leave the darkness. In the center there was a double line of imposing buildings
pilares. They are tall as trunks of imposing trees
ramas supported the techo with a branched tracery of stone.
Their trunks were smooth and black, but they had a red shine
it reflected darkly on its sides. Just on the other side of the ground, look for it
the feet of the enormous pilars had opened a great shape.
From she rose a fierce red light, and often when the calls lamían
the edge and they are wrapped around the bases of the columns. Volutas
dark humus oscillates in the hot air.

We hubiéramos come via the main path from them
upper halls, we have brought you here, I say Gandalf.
Let us hope that the fire is now between us and the persecution. Let's go!
No hay tiempo que perder.

Included in the words, once again the redoble of the drum of persecution:
Perdición, perdición, perdición! More than the shadows on it
at the western end of the room there were grits and heart touches. ¡Perdición, perdición!
The pilares seemed to tremble and the llamas vibrated.

Now for the last journey!, said Gandalf. If the sun shines
outside, we can still escape. Come to me!
 
He went around the corner and ran across the thin floor of the living room.
The distance was greater than what seemed. While they run,
I know the rhythm and the echo of many forgotten steps.
If I heard a sharp cry: they have seen it. If you see a tintineo y
a choque de maple. A flecha whispered above Frodo's head.

Boromir rió. Don't expect this, I say. El
fuego los aislado. We are on the wrong side! ¡

Miren hacia adelante!, shouted Gandalf. The Puente is looking for. Ex
peligroso y estrecho.

Suddenly, Frodo leaves before a black abyss. At the end
of the floor, the ground disappeared and fell to an unknown depth.
From the outside door you can only connect by a small plug
stone, without edge or barandilla, who saved the abyss with just one
curved resort of quince metros. It was an antigua defensa de los
Enanos against any enemy who can capture the Primer Salón
and exterior passes. Only you can cross it
India row. At the edge, Gandalf was found and the others arrived
en grupo detrás.


 ¡429

Open the fireplace, Gimli!, I say. Pippin and Merry to be continued. ¡
Sigan rectos y suban la escalara más a la puerta!

Las flechas cayeron entre ellos. A coup on Frodo and he jumped
hacia atrás. Another crossed Gandalf's sombrero and stood there like a
pluma negra. Frodo looked at what happened. More to the violet fire
an enjambre of black figures: there seemed to be hundreds of orcs.
Blandian lanzas and cimitarras that shine red as
the blood and the light of the fire. Perdición, perdición!, resonaban the drums,
every time more strongly, perdicion, perdicion.

Legolas turned around and put a flecha on his back, anyway
it was a wide shot for a small bow. Tensó, but on hand cayó,
and the honey. Apparecieron dos grandes troles; carry large items
stone and stones are rolled so that you can walk over them
fuego. But it was not the troles who had terrorized the elf.
The ranks of the orcs were opened, and were alejaron,
how do the same ones see me. Something was hard to come by
beyond them. No one could see what it was: it was like one
great shadow, in the middle of which rose a dark figure,
quizá con forma humana, aún mayor; and a power and a terror
they seem to be in her and before her.
 
I went to the edge of the fire and the light faded as it did...
A cloud was leaning over her. Then, with a knife, he jumped to the top of it
figure. The calls wrinkled to greet her and rodearon her.
el; and a black man broke down in the air. On waving melena
if ignited and called to him. In his right hand he had a sword
like a stinging tongue of fire; in the izquierda he sustained a lot of battles
correas.

 ¡Ay! ¡Ay!, yes Legolas. ¡A Balrog! A Balrog has arrived!

Gimli looked at him with very open eyes. ¡La Perdición de Durin!, gritó, y
leaving the hacha, he covered the darling.

A Balrog, murmured Gandalf. Now I'm hearing it.
Titubeó and if placed heavily on the stick. This is bad luck!
Y ya estoy cansado.

The dark figure, rebosante de fuego, ran to him.
The orcs shouted and tossed over the stone passages. Entonces


430


 


Boromir raised his horn and fell. Strong, the disappointment resonated
and I longed, like the grit of many sweet little girls
cavernous techo. For a moment, the orcs acobardaron and the
it looks fiery if I deduce. Once the echoes arose as suddenly as a llama
retaliated by a dark wind, and the enemy advanced again. ¡

Cross the bridge!, Gandalf shouted, recovering his strength.
¡Huid! This is an enemy that is closest to every one of you. Debo defender el
extreme fireplace. ¡Huid! Aragorn and Boromir did not obey the order,
but if they kept firms, one on the side of the other, behind Gandalf
other end of the bridge. They can be found just there
at the end of the walk they turned, unable to leave the door
leader to confront only the enemy.

The Balrog went to the bridge. Gandalf asked himself de pie en la
other hand; in my other hand, Glamdring shone, fresh and white.
The enemy was discovered again, in front of him, and the shadow that gnawed at him
It is extended as two huge wings. I raised the ladder, and left
correas chirriaron and crujieron. The fuego rose from his nasal passages. But
Gandalf kept his signatures.

I can't stop, I say. Los ogres se detuvieron y
reintroduced a sepulchral silence. I am a servant of the Secret Fire, bearer of it
llama de Anor. You can't stop. The dark fuego no
I will serve you, llama of Udun. Return to the Shadow! No puedes
pass.

The Balrog didn't respond. The fire inside me seemed to be extinguished,
but the darkness grew. He slowly advanced forward
powerful, and suddenly he rose to a great height, y
Their wings extend from wall to wall; but Gandalf followed  
, shining in the penumbra; seemed small,
completely alone: ​​gray and covered, like a previously branded tree
of the stall of a storm.

From among the shadows, a red sword jumped shrillly.

Glamdring shone white in response.

There was a resounding chock and a punch of white fire. El
Balrog retreated, and his sword flew into broken fragments.
The magician moved on the bridge, retreated a step and a half
luego se quedó quieto.


EL PUENTE DE ICHAZAD-DUM


431


¡No puedes pasar!, dijo.

With one leap, the Balrog jumped from one spot over the bridge. On
látigo giró y silbó. ¡

You can't be alone! Aragorn shouted suddenly and ran
go back to the bridge. ¡Elendil!, he shouted. I'm next door,
Gandalf!

¡Gondor!, shouted Boromir and jumped across.

At this moment, Gandalf stood on his stick and, shouting loudly,
he hit the point that was holding him back. The stick broke
if he took it out of his hand. A curtain of white llamas rose up
. The bridge was quenched. Just at the feet of the Balrog they broke,
and the stone above the one that was raised was stretched against the abyss, while
the rest remained immovable, shaking like a hoarse tongue
proyectada hacia el vacío.

With a terrible cry, the Balrog moved forward, and his shadow
, fed by the sword, and the runners, fed and enrobed by the magician's redhead,
they grasped the stone in vain, sliding down the abyss. ¡Huyan,
senseless!, shouted, and disappeared.

The calls disappeared and became completely dark. The Company
she was paralyzed, horrified, staring intently at the well. Just when Aragorn
and Boromir returned as they ran, the rest of the bridge was filled
and he derrumbo. With a cry, Aragorn defeated him.

Come! ¡Los guiaré now!, he shouted. We must obey you
última orden. ¡Síganme!

They subjected the large ladders that were across the door to the trumpets,
Aragorn at the front, Boromir aside. At the top there was a width
resonating passage. Por allí huyeron. Frodo looked at Sam
I loved it, and then I discovered that it was the same
I loved it while I was running. Evil, evil, evil! Los tambores resonaban
sad, sad and slow now; ¡maldición!

Siguieron running. The light shines greater before us; grandes rayos
Atravesaron el techo. Faster delivery. They entered a room  
illuminated by the light of the day that entered through its high winds in the summer.
the cruzaron. Across their huge rotary doors,


y    

suddenly, before them, the Great Doors opened, an arch
de luz resplandeciente.

There was a guard of orcs agazapada in the shadows beyond
the large posts that rise on both sides, but the doors
they were destroyed and damaged. Aragorn derribed
to the captain who intervened on his path, and the rest were terrified
por su ira. The Company will support them without having done so
case. They ran up the doors and took a leap
the enormous and degraded stairs, the umbral of Moria.

So, finally, they left the sky below without hope
they felt the wind in the dear.

Don't forget until they were outside the corner of the arches of the
murals. El Valle del Arroyo Tenebroso extended to its elder. The shadow of them
Mountain clouds extended above it, but it had a golden light
over the earth. It was just one hour after the middle of the day.
The sun shone; the clouds were white and high.

Miraron hacia atras. Obscuro bostezaba el arch de las Puertas
under the shadow of the mountain. Débiles y muy por debajo de la terra
roll away the slow drum blows: perdicion. A fine column of black humor extended
. Nothing more will happen; el valley to his alrededor was
tierra. Perdición, perdición. The tambor coups vanished.


 6


 


¡Ay! I'm afraid we won't be able to wait any longer, I say Aragorn. Miro
climb the mountains and rise on the sword. Goodbye
, Gandalf!, shouted. Don't say it: if you go there
ports of Moria, kept guarded? ¡Ay, tell the truth! This is hope
tenemos sin vosotros?

If the company is back. We must ignore hope,
I say. At least we can still be seen. ¡Ciñámonos
and we won't let us go anymore! ¡Friday! We have a very large fireplace
que hacer.

They rose and looked at their elder. Hacia el norte, el valley ascended
there is a canada of shadows between the big arms of the las
mountains, above the things that shine three white pics:
Celebdil, Fanuidhol, Caradhras, las Montañas de Moria. En
the head of the canada, a stream flowed like a white stream above
an interminable staircase of short waterfalls, and a cloud of foam floating in it
the air at the foot of the mountains.
 
«Allá está la Escalera del Arroyo Tenebroso», I say Aragorn, signaling the
Cataratas. If luck is more benign, we have brought it
by the deep path that ascends towards the stream.

O Caradhras, less cruel, dijo Gimli. ¡Allí está,
sleeping in the sun! He shook his fist
snowy peak more lejano and god the turn.

In the east, the extended arm of the mountains led to
a sudden ending, and even then the earth will be divided,
extensas and vagas. To the south, the Cloudy Mountains are lost
interminably long asta whence the view. Less than a thousand distance away,
and a little further down, they can also rise to the top of the
on the western side of the valley there was a lake. It was wide and oval,
with the shape of a large point of the lance that entered deeply into it
northern canada; but at the very end there was more behind the shadows below the sky illuminated by it


sol


 


. However, their waters were dark: a deep blue like that
the darkened sky of the tartard seen from a house lit by a lamp. On surface it was quiet and
imperturbable. A gentle lawn extended to his elder, inclined towards everyone
lados hasta su borde naked and uninterrumpido. ¡

There lies Lake Espejo, the deep Kheled-zaram!, I say
Gimli with sadness. I remember what I said: "I'm happy."

The Company descended along the path that came from the Doors.
It was bumpy and bumpy, and turned into a sinuous path between
breezes and bruises that abrade between the pleasant stones. But
It was also possible to see that, for a long time, a large paved fireplace
He ascended from the lower lands to the King of Enanos. En
some places had ruins of stone upon the journey, y
green hills crowned by slender trees or fir trees
who breathed in the wind. A curve makes the driver joint there
meadow of Lago Espejo, and there, no lejos of the chimney,
a single rotary column rose to the top. "

"This is Durin's Stone!" shouted Gimli. "I can't pass without
take a moment to contemplate the wonder of the valley! ¡

Dense prisa entonces!”, I said Aragorn, looking at him
Doors. El Sol is tempered. The Orcos sometimes don't go up
until after the end of the day, but we must be left before the end of the day.
The Moon is almost gone, and tonight it will be dark.
 
Come with me, Frodo!, shouted the elf, jumping from
the fireplace. I don't want you to go to Kheledzaram
. I went running down the wide green slope. Frodo followed him.
Slowly, drawn by the calm blue waters to weigh the pain and
the sancio, Sam grabbed himself for the rest.

Having reached the monolith, Gimli found it and saw himself arriving. Estaba
aggravated and spoiled by the climate, and the tenuous runes on it
the costs were indecipherable. «This pilar marks the place from which
Durin looked at Lake Espejo for the first time,” I said to him. «¡Miremos
we'll see you once, before we're back!» .

They leaned over the dark water. At the beginning no pudieron ver


 


nothing


. Luego, slowly, came out the shapes of the las
the surrounding mountains reflected in a deep blue, and the peaks were
as the white llama punishes them; more everyone had one
space of heaven. There, as joyas hundreds in the depths, they shine
bright stars, although the light of the sun shone in the sky. De sus propias
Inclined figures cannot be seen in any shade. «

¡Oh, Kheled-zaram, beautiful and wonderful!», said Gimli. «Alli»
, they made the turn and made sure to return to the prado hacia
the fireplace.

«What will I see?». —I told Sam Pippin, but Sam was disappointed
absorbed in your thoughts for responders.

The path turned upwards and descended rapidly,
rising between the arms of the valley. A little more
at the bottom of the lake, they went to a deep well of crystal clear water
, of which a riachuelo caía over an edge of stone and ran,
brilliant and gurgling, through a rough canal.

—Here is the manantial of which the Veta Plateada was born —I say
Gimli—. No babies! It's safe.

Ready to be placed in a caudal stream and take water
many other mountain arroyos —dijo Aragorn—. Our fireplace
it bordea during many millas. Because I brought them up
path that Gandalf chose, and I first hope to connect to it
forest where the Veta Plateada descends into the Gran Río, allá
lejos. Miraron explains whence the sign, and before them
they could go towards the arroyo descending down the valley,
and then running to the lower lands, hasta
get lost in a golden fog.

Here are the woods of Lothlórien! —I say Legolas—. Esa ex
the most beautiful of all the moradas of my country. No hay
wait until spring arrives and the new greenery opens, and then the foliage is lit.
trees like the ones on this earth. Porque en otoño sus hojas...
No money, but convert into gold. Don't wait for spring to arrive and the sky is here
cubierto de amarillae flowers; and the soil of the golden sea forest, y
Dorado is the techo, and his piles are thin, can be the cut of
the trees are lisa and grey. So they say in our songs in the Black Forest


436.    

My heart would be happy if you found the tree below
It was a forest, and it was spring!

My heart will be happy, even in winter, I say Aragorn.
But it's many thousand miles away. ¡Apresuremonos!

For a while, Frodo and Sam kept following the rhythm of the song
the others; but Aragorn led him at great speed,
and at the top of a rat they quedaron atrás. They don't have anything
from the morning they temper. Sam's legacy burned like fire, y
I felt my head light. At the weight of the bright sun, the wind seemed so
it felt more painful every step of the way and when you were in the air.

Finally, Legolas turned, and to see him again much later,
he told them to Aragorn. They were dejected, and Aragorn ran.

Let me hear it, Frodo! —gritó, full of worry—. Han
We have passed so many things today and we have so much need to understand, that he
forgot that it was hurt; and Sam also. Deberias
haber hablado. No we have nothing to eat, as we should,
although all the orcs of Moria persecute us. Let's go! A
A little further on there is a place where we can scan a report.
There I have what I can bring you. Come on, Boromir!
Los llevaremos.

A little later they went to another arroyo that lowered
of the west and one of its rich waters with
las del impetuous Silverlode. Juntos fell down a waterfall
of green and foamy stone hasta a cañada. TO
on Alrededor there were fir trees, low trees and curved trees, and his ladders were filled
and there are cubiertas deer tongues and myrtle bay shrubs.
At the bottom there was a space where you could find it
arroyo flowed ruidly over brilliant guijarros. There they descansaron.
They were cases three hours after the middle of the day, y
only if they have left a few thousand doors. El sol ya se
ponía.

While Gimli and the two younger hobbits had a blast with
Matorrales and fir wood, and sacaban water, Aragorn attended to Sam.
y Frodo. Sam's legacy was not deep, but it was true,


  y

Aragorn's beak was serious as he examined it. After a ¡
sweet heart, but at some point the rings have crossed it.
moment, he raised his sight with light.

¡Good luck, Sam!, I say. Many have received something worse
This is how I pay to kill my first orc. The court
You are not welcomed, as the inheritances of the orc threads usually are.
It should heal well when it is healed. Báñalo cuando Gimli
haya calentado agua.

Opened the bag and packed some branded items.
He is dry, and part of his virtue has disappeared, I say,
but here I keep some hojas of atlas that I received
look for the Top of the Winds. Machaca una in el agua, lava
I inherited it and I'll sell it to you. Now it's your turn,
Frodo!,

I agree. You just need some food and a little rest.

¡No!, said Aragorn. Let us see a view and see what
they have you the hammer and the yunque. Todavía me marvello
that I am alive. With care, he gave them to Frodo
there was a chaqueta and the tunic was torn, and only a dull cry of darkness.
Luego rió. The side of the plated malla shone before it
eyes like the light above a waving sea. With care, he quit
and I raised it, and the gems shone like stars, y
the sound of the rings as they stirred was like the tintino of the rain in a
charco.

¡Miren, amigos!, he shouted. Here they have a good hobbit skin
to envolve an elf prince! If you know the hobbits
they keep their hair like this, all the cazadores of the Cabalgarian Middle Tierra
to the Comarca.

And all the stripes of all the bullshitters of the world would appear
in vain, I say Gimli, looking at the waist with a somber. It's one
mithril malla shell. ¡Mithril! I've never seen one before
so beautiful. Is this the maid of the girl who had Gandalf? Entonces the
he underestimated. But it was a nice gift!

I asked myself what happened to you and Bilbo, so much
joins in your small habitation, I say Merry. Welcome to the old hobbit!
I love him more than ever. I hope we have the opportunity to contact him
!   


438


 


Frodo had a dark and ennegrecid death in him
right side and chest. The bottom of the waist should have a soft shirt that
if he hung in the flesh. The frozen side of Frodo was also marked and mangled
where they threw it against the wall. Mientras los más
preparing the meal, Aragorn washed the wounds with water.
and the athelas was soaked. The penetrating fragrance llenó la
canada, and all those who leaned over the humid water felt
refreshed and fortified. Hello Frodo felt the pain
He abandoned it and his breathing came out, even though it was stiff and painful
to the touch during many days. Aragorn ató uns suave almohadillas
de tela a su costado.

«The breast is marvelously light», I say. «Póntela de nuevo,
you can bear it. I'm happy to know what you have
such a hassle. Don't let it go to one side, don't leave it alone, except luck
takes you to a safe place for a while; and this is rare
It will happen while you are busy."

After leaving, the company prepared to leave.
They released the fire and hid the whole thing. Luego, going up
from the canada, they returned the fireplace. They don't have it
very easy when the sun passes through the great and western heights
the shadows slid down the slopes of the mountains. The twilight of the cubría
the pies and the nebla rose in the hondonadas. Allá, al est, la
the light of the atardecer extended brightly over the dark lands of the plain
and the distant forest. Sam and Frodo, feeling each other again now
descansados, pudieron advance at a good pace, and with one
short parade, Aragorn drove to the Company during three cases
horas más.

It was dark. Había caído la noche. You have a lot
bright stars, but the moaning moon won't be true until late.
Gimli and Frodo iban in the rear, walking silently and en
silence, listen to any sound on the fireplace. Finally,
Gimli broke the silence. «

There is no sound except the wind,” I say. «No hay trasgos
search, my dears are from Madeira." Let's wait for them
Orcs are contented with expulsarnos de Moria. And sometimes


 


ese


it was all on purpose, and they didn't care anything more than the truth
with nosotros, with el Anillo. Even the orcs may pursue their enemies
during many leagues in the land, there is a fallen captain
that it may come.

Frodo didn't respond. I aimed at Sting, and the sword
it was worn out. Without embargo, I had something to eat, or I thought I had something to eat. Tan
ready as the shadows cayeron over the eyes and the fireplace...
Besides it was dark, I had once again heard the rapid strike of the pies.  
Even now I hate it. He turned quickly. Habia dos
little pieces of light removed, or for a moment I created it
see them, but then they went to one side and disappeared.

¿Qué es?, dijo el enano.

No, replied Frodo. I created another step,
and I created a light, like eyes. I thought so a lot
Sometimes, since we entered Moria for the first time.

Gimli was discovered and agreed upon. Nope, nothing
more than the nocturnal word of plants and stones, I say. ¡Fri! ¡Apresuremonos
! They are out of sight.

The nocturnal wind came coldly through the valley to receive it.
Before him a wide gray shade rose, and I saw one
interminable whisper of hojas like us in the breeze.

¡Lothlórien!, shouted Legolas. ¡Lothlórien! We are linked to
the trees of the Bosque Dorado. ¡Ay, it's winter!

At night, the trees stand tall before them, arched
over the fireplace and the arroyo that suddenly ran down
ramas extendidas. In the faint light of the stars, their talls
they were gray, and their hojas temblorosas, a matiz de oro barbecho.

¡Lothlórien!, said Aragorn. I'm happy to see you again
I come to the trees! We are still a little more than five years away
of the doors, but we cannot go further. Esperemos
that the virtue of the Elves protects us this night of the pilgrim
que nos acecha.

Yes, the Elves still live here in the world that is dark,
said Gimli.

It's so much that no one of my lovers has ever traveled here,
of returning to the land from where we wander is so simple, I say


Legolas


 


, but we hope that Lorien is no longer desired,
you may have a secret power here that alleviates the pain of the
tierra. However, it is rare to see its inhabitants, sometimes
now they live in the depths of the woods and hills of the northern front
.

—In effect, in the depths of the forest they live —I say Aragorn, y
he sighed as if a recovery would desperate him—. We owe it to you
ours is this night. We will advance a trecho, as long as we have them
Our rodeen trees, and then we will deviate from the
we'll go and look for a place where we can't wait.

God a step forward; but Boromir remained undecided
I didn't follow it. —¿No other fireplace? —asked.
 
“What other fireplace would you most desire?” asked Aragorn.

A chimney was ringing, although it led across a set of swords,
I say Boromir. By extraneous senders this company has been led,
and no more bad luck. Against my will we are low
the shadows of Moria, for our loss. And now we must enter it
Bosque Dorado, says. But we have this hairy earth
I hear about Gondor, and it is said that few people go up
they come in once; and of those little ones no one escaped unharmed.

No dam unharmed, but it is said without changes, once in a while
tell the truth, tell Aragorn. But tradition fades away
Gondor, Boromir, is in the city of those who once were wise
now they have bad news from Lothlórien. Créeme lo que quieras,











el sonido del agua.

he will sing you a song by the lady Nimrodel, who brought up the same thing
I remember that the arroyo to which I live takes a long time. It's one
beautiful song in our language of the woods; but that's how it is said
the Habla Oestron, like some people in Rivendel, sing it now. With one
sweet voice that was only heard among the whispers of the holidays
sobre ellos, comenzó:


442


 


An elven maiden had in the antigüedad,

A brilliant star of the day:

On his white mantle he was ribbed with gold,
Sus zapatos de gris plata.

A star was seen in her eyes,

Una luz había en su cabello

Like the sun above the golden branches
En Lórien la hermosa.

His hair was wide, his men were white,
Y ella era hermosa y libre;

Y en el viento iba tan ligera
Como una hoja de tilo.

Junto a las cataratas de Nimrodel,

Joined by clear and fresh waters,

On voice like plate that cae Cayó
En el estanque brillante.

Now it's time to decide,

In the light of the sun or in the shade;

Because the loss of the past was Nimrodel
Y en las montañas errado.

El barco elfo en puerto gris
Below the wind of the mountain

I will experience it for many days
Along the roaring sea.

A nighttime wind in the North
se levantó, y gritó fuerte,

and put the boat from the elphic beaches
across the tide that flowed.


 


443


When the lover was weak, the earth was lost,

the mountains are very gray

more than the agitated waves that launch
their columnas de rocío cegador.
 
Amroth, they contemplated the orilla that vanished,
now lower to the oil,

and they were sorry for the boat inside that
lo llevó lejos de Nimrodel.

There was once an elf king,

a master of trees and canadas,

when doradas were the ramas in spring
in beautiful Lothlórien.

From the rudder to the sea I will see him leap,

like a flecha from the corner,

and submerged in the depths of the water,

como un maullido en el ala.

The wind was on its own wire,

the espuma a su alrededor shined;

to the lejos they became strong and beautiful
cabalgar como un cisne.

But from the west he didn't get any news,

y en la costa más cercana

de Amroth para siempre.

Legolas' voice faltered and his song ceased. No way
sing more, I say. This is only a part, because he
I forgot a lot. It is large and sad, because it feels like sadness
llegó a Lothlórien, Lorien de la Flor, cuando los
Enanos experienced the pain in the mountains.

—Pero los Enanos no hicieron el mal —dijo Gimli—.

I don't say it; Without embargo, I was wrong - Legolas replied sadly -. Entonces


,


 


many of the Elves of the Nimrodel lineage abandoned their hogares
and they marched, and she lost many years, in the South, in the steps
de las Montañas Blancas; and I didn't go to the boat whence
Amroth, his lover, hoped for her. But in spring, when the
I come above you in the new holidays, the echo of your voice can still be heard
come to the cataracts that lift their name. And when the wind blows over
of the South, the voice of Amroth sube of the sea; pues
Nimrodel dessemboca en Veta Plateada, que los Elfos laman Celebrante, y
Celebrant in Anduin el Grande, y Anduin desemboca en la
Bahía de Belfalas, where the Elfos de Lorien appeared. But
ni Nimrodel ni Amroth regresaron jamás.

It is said that he sent to build a house in the ramas of a man
tree that grew seeks cataracts; Porque esa era la customre de los
Elves of Lorien, dwell in the trees, and wonder at the sea.
That's why they were called Galadhrim, the Tree Village.
In the depths of its forest, the trees are enormous. The people of
the woods were not excavated in the earth like the Enanos, ni...
built several stone places before the shadow road.

And even in these last few days, dying in the trees could...
“It's more safe than ever to feel in the land,” said Gimli. Miro
on the other side of the arroyo, there is the path that leads back to it
Valle del Arroyo Tenebroso, where the dark branches are located.

Your words are good advice, Gimli —said Aragorn—.
We can't build a house, but this night we will have them like them
Galadhrim and we will seek refuge in the branches of the trees, if we can. Let us go
sent here closer to the path more time than it was prudent.

The Company deviated from the route and entered
in the shade of the deepest forest. In the west, out in the open
of Nimrodel, they encountered a group of trees, some of them
they searched over the arroyo. His large gray trunks were de
a considerable sum, but on the height it was incalculable.

—Subiré —dijo Legolas—. I feel like I'm at home among the trees,
of foliage or foliage, although these trees are of an unknown species to me
, except for your name in a song. If they call Mellyrn, y son
those who give the amarilla flower, but I never suffer


 


to


a. See now what form they have and how they grow.

Sea as sea, I say Pippin, will be
Wonderful trees can be offered to anyone at night, except to guests. ¡
I can't sleep in one place!

Let's get a hoyo on the earth, I say Legolas, yes this is more
of your kind. But it must be done quickly and thoroughly
you want to hide from the orcs. He jumped nimbly from the
I will attach it to a branch that has grown from the trunk much later
top of his head. But just when it swung for a moment, one
It suddenly stopped from the shadows of the trees above it.

 ¡Daro!, I said with an authoritative tone, and Legolas returned to the caer
on the ground, surprised and amazed. It is tightened against the trunk
of the tree.

Quiet!, he whispered to the others. Don't move
habléis!

If you heard a gentle laugh over your heads, y
Then another voice from Clara is written in elvish language. Frodo
just understand what is said, look at the language
they are used even among forests on the east of the mountains
it was distinguished from the west. Legolas looked up and responded
en el mismo idioma.* ¿

"What are they saying?" asked Merry.

I'm an elf, I say Sam. No eyes on your voices?

—Yes, I am an elf —I say Legolas—; and they say he breathes
so strong that they could disappear in the darkness. Sam
he quickly covered his mouth with his hand. But they also say that
no need to fear. There is time for us to know
. Oyeron I go to the other side of Nimrodel y
they knew that he was one of his relatives from the north, so what
don't stop us from cruising; and then come on
who keep news about you and our travels.
To the same ones who wait a little and who watch… —Un








elf of our family, we are willing to be your friends, like Elrond,
our earth. But you must stay here this night. ¿How many more?


 


—Ocho


—I say Legolas—. Yo, four hobbits and two men,
One of them, Aragorn, is an elf friend of the village
Westernesse.

—The name of Aragorn, hijo of Arathorn, is known in Lorien
—I say Haldir—, and enjoy the favor of the Lady. —Todo
well, entonces. But until now you've just finished it.

The eighth is an enan —I say Legolas—.

¡An enan! —dijo Haldir—. This isn't good. No tender heart
Tratos with Enanos from the Dark Days.
No if you are allowed to enter our country. I can't stop walking.

—But he is from the Solitary Mountain, one of the loyal ones
Dain's village and Elrond's friend —I say Frodo—. El own Elrond
I chose him to be one of our companions, and he did
valiente y fiel.

The Elves spoke in their voice and questioned them
to Legolas in his own language. —Muy bien —I say Haldir finally—.
We will have it, although we don't like it. Yes Aragorn
and Legolas protects him and responds to him, he will pass
; but he must cross Lothlórien with the sold eyes.

But now we don't have to discuss more. You should not be a fool
quedarse in the ground. We were watching over him
rivers from which we saw a large troop of orcs heading north
hacia Moria, by the slopes of the mountains,
many days ago. The lobes grow within the limits of the forest. Yes
of the truth comes from Moria, the peligro is not lejos.
Before long you have to leave.
 
The four hobbits will suffer here and will come with us.
Let us not fear! Have another talan in it
tree on the side. Demás must take refuge there. You, Legolas, debes
we respond to them. ¡Llámanos si ocurre algo! ¡Y keep watch
a ese enano!

Legolas below followed up the ladder to receive
Haldir's menu; and shortly after, Merry and Pippin
subieron to the high flet. They were without alienation and parecían
bastante asustados.

¡Listo!, I say Merry jadeando. We recognize you


448


 


mantas, además de las nuestras. Trancos hid the rest of
our equipment in a dense mountain of trees.

In the midst of the trees in winter, although this night the wind above
sur; but we keep it tasty and tasty so that we can tell you that it will please you
of the night chill, and we keep our skin and heads above us.

The hobbits accepted this second (and much better) dinner
with a lot of taste. Entonces se abrigaron, no solo
with the hair caps of the elves, even with their own mantas
, and they tried to sleep. But, cansados ​​​​as estaban, only to
Sam found it easy. A los hobbits no les listan las alturas y
no duermen arrive, no one will be left when they have stairs. El
Flet no les gustaba nada como dormitorio. Don't worry,
ni siquiera barandilla; only on one side there was a
braided boy, who could move and hide in different places
según el viento.

Pippin continued speaking a story. «I hope so, yes I will duermo
en este pajarero, no me caiga», I said. «

Once I fight", I say Sam, "I will continue sleeping,
I care or not." And as much as I can, before I'll ask
dormido, ¿me entiendes?».

Frodo remained deserted for a while, gazing at the stars
that shine through the pale techo of temblorosas hojas. Sam
he sniffed on his side long before closing his eyes.
I could vaguely see the gray silhouettes of the elves sitting still,
with the arms of the redhead of the rods, talking in whispers. El
others had to keep an eye on one of them
lower ramas. Finally, rolled by the wind in the upper branches, y
and the sweet murmur of Nimrodel's cataracts below, Frodo fell.
Immediately afterward, Haldir arrived quickly.
I lasted with the song of Legolas resonating in my mind.

Late at night he was exhausted. The other hobbits were asleep.
The elves have no idea. The moon in the form of hoz shone dimly
entre las hojas. The wind was quiet. A short distance away
a harsh laugh and the bites of many pies in the ground
. Hubo a sound of metal. The sounds were fueron
Paying slowly and they seemed to head towards the south, towards the forest.


 


449


A head suddenly appeared on the fly's handler.
Frodo was alarmed and realized that he was an elf with a gray cap.
Miró hacia los hobbits.

What is it?, said Frodo.

¡Yrch!, I said the elf in a sibilant whisper, and I turned to
Turn the coiled ladder off.

¡Orcos!, said Frodo. What are you doing? But the elf was there
ide.

There are no more sounds. Including the holidays being in silence,
and the same cataracts seem to be in silence. Frodo felt and feared
en sus abrigos. I appreciated that they didn't worry
caught on the ground; But I felt that the trees offered little protection, except for concealment.
Se decía que
the orcs were as keen as sabuesos among a rastro, but they could also tremble. Saco
to Aguijón: he rose and shone like a blue llama; y luego
it settled slowly and it settled. To weigh the disappearance of above
sword, the feeling of impending danger did not abandon Frodo,
until he was stronger. If he rose, if he stopped until the opening
and I looked down. It was safe to know what happened next
Secure movements at the foot of the tree, very low.
They weren't Elfos; Maybe the people of the forest moved in silence
. I found out a débil sound like
a sense of smell; and something seemed to be plowing through the court
of the trunk. Miró is below, in the darkness, containing the
respiration.
Everything trepaba slowly, and on aliento it would rise
like a sweet silb through the opened people. Entonces, acercándose
to the trunk, Frodo vio dos ojos pálidos. If they detuvieron
and they looked to arrive without stepping on it. Suddenly they made the turn
and a shadowy figure slid down the trunk of the tree
disappeared
entre las ramas. There is something in this tree that
I never saw it before, I say. No it was a mineral. Huyo.



As ready as you touch the trunk of the tree. Apparently cautious y
keep certain ability with the trees, or you might have thought that
era uno de ustedes, hobbits.


450


 


Don't forget, you can't try to provoke me to anger: we can't
arriesgarnos to a fight. A strong Orcos company has passed. Cruzaron
the Nimrodel —¡malditos sean his asquerosos pies in his limpias waters!
— and they continued along the old path towards the river. Parecieron
percibir some color and recorded the terrain
during a meeting, look for a place where they will escape. Los tres,
with false voices, we guide them to the forest.

Orophin has quickly returned to our early days
warn our people. None of the Orcs will ever return
Lórien. And there are many hidden Elves there
fronta north before going next night. But you have to go back to the fireplace
have the upper tan ready as a complete lover.

The day was pale from the summer. As soon as the light grew, it was filtered
through the hojas amarillas del mallorn, ya
los hobbits les pareció que
the warm sun shone on a cool morning in Verano. A pale blue sky arose between the foliage.
Looking through an opening on the south side of the flet,
Frodo travels all the Plateau Vetón valley, extending like a sea
gold en barbecho meciéndose suavemente with brisa.

The morning was still young and fresh when the company
He left again, now driven by Haldir and his brother Rumil. ¡
Goodbye, sweet Nimrodel! cried Legolas. Frodo looked at what happened
and I saw a bit of white foam between the gray trunks of the trees.
Goodbye!, I say. It seemed to her that it would never happen again
to oír a water running so beautiful, melting to always sus
innumerable notes in an infinite and changing music.

They returned to the journey that was still burgundy
orilla west of the Vetón Plateado, and for some time they followed it
hacia el su. Había huellas de ogres en la terra.
But Haldir quickly left the trees and found them there
orilla del río bajo su sombra.

There is one of my friends on the other side of the arroyo, there
although you won't see it. God a grito como el
If you hear the dull sibilo of a pájaro, and within a span of young trees
an elf appeared, dressed in grey, but with the hood worn behind him; on


 


hair


it shone like the low gold of the morning sun. Haldir, hably, launched
above the arroyo a roll of gray cuerda, the trapó y
At the end of a tree looking for the made.

«Celebrant ya es un caudaloso rio here, como ves», I say
Haldir, «it runs fast and deep, and it is very cold.
We don't move it to the north unless necessary. But in these cases,










 




no more tratos with ningún sirviente del Enemigo. No
you, not Legolas, not any other of my companions. «

No doubt about you», I say Haldir. «Sin embargo, esta es nuestra law.
I am not the love of the law and I cannot ignore it. I contributed
mucho a que pusieras un pie sobre Celebrant».   

Gimli was obstinate. Separate the pies with signature
I put my hand on the mango on its hacha. Iré free
—I say—, I will return and seek my land, where it comes from
You know that I cum with my mouth, even if I only look there
desert.

—No one can return —I say Haldir with severity—. Now what has it
If you have so many lejos, you must compare before the Lord and you
Lady. You will play, to retain or to allow art,
how they quieran. You cannot go back to cross the rivers, or anything else
I have hundreds of secrets that you cannot pass by. Tea
matarían antes de verlos.

Gimli sacó on hacha of the belt. Haldir and his companion
tensaron on their arches. —¡A plague for the Enanos and their rigid cervices!
—said Legolas—.

¡Fri! —I say Aragorn—. We still have to lead this company,
you must do what I order you. It's hard for Enano to be like this
reported. We will bring all the sold eyes, including Legolas. It will be
the best, even though the journey will be slow and boring.

Gimli suddenly returned. A happy trope of necios we will see
! We will guide Haldir to everyone with a watch, like many
blind mendigos with only one perro? But I will be content with Legolas
share my ceguera.


  453

I'm an elf and I'm a stranger here — Legolas said, enfureciéndose
a su vez—.

Now we shout: «A plague on the necks of the elves!».
—I say Aragorn—. But the company will still treat you the same. Come on,
véndanos los ojos, Haldir!

I will claim full compensation for every fall and blow to the foot
no good guides —I say Gimli while eating a meal—.
sobre sus ojos.

Don't forget anything else, I say Haldir. You will guide me well,
and the fireplaces are smooth and straight.

¡Ay to the care of these days!, I say Legolas. Here they are all
enemies of the only enemy, and without embargo I must walk blindly, while
the sun shines cheerfully in the low forest above the golden trees.

It may seem like nonsense, I say Haldir. After all, nothing if
shows more clearly the power of the Dark Lord than in it
distance that divides everyone who opposes it. Without embargo,
we encounter so little faith and confidence now in the world beyond
Lothlórien, unless sometimes in Rivendel, which we did not find
to put our earth in our country by our own trust. We now live on an island
in the middle of many hairs, and our hands are more close to it
keep the bow above the harp.

We defended the rivers for a long time, but they are not a safe guard
; because the Shadow has arrested our father in the north. Some
They plan to leave, but for this it seems too late. Las
mountains in the west are turning malignant; In the east, the lands
they are desolated and filled with creatures of Sauron; and if it's noisy
that we cannot pass safely across the Rohan,
and the deserts of the Gran Río are watched by the Enemigo.
Even if we can go to the Orillas del Mar, ya
Let's not find refuge there. If they say that they still ask
refuges of the High Elves, but they are much to the north and the west,
further afield than the Middle Kingdom. But where do you come from,
although the Señor and the Señora separate it, I don't.

Let us at least guess what we have seen, I say
Merry. There are elfish refuges in the west of my land, the Comarca,
where hobbits live.

How happy are the hobbits to live in search of the orillas


of the


 


mar!, I say Haldir. There is a lot that nadie from my country
he saw it, but we still record it in our songs. Háblame de estos
refugios mientras caminamos.   

No way, I say Merry. I never saw him.
I never get off my earth. Y si hubiera sabido
as the world outside was, I don't think it was ugly
I have the courage to abandon it. ¿

Ni quiera para ver la belle Lothlórien?, I say Haldir. The world
it is certainly full of hair, and there are many dark places in it;
but in any case there is a lot of beauty, and everywhere in the earth there is love
If you mix it with the pain now, you'll find out if it's more intense.

Some of us sing that the shadow is quiet
that the world that we rode in turned to be like in the past, oh
which, in the best of cases, results in a truce, in which they can move on to
Sea without obstacles and abandon the Middle Tierra forever. ¡Ay de
Lothlórien, I love who I am! It would be a miserable life in a land where
no mallorns will grow. But you have mallorns más alá del
Gran Mar, nadie said nada al respecto.

As they talked like this, the company slowly moved on
paths of the forest, led by Haldir, while the other Elfo walked
detrás. They felt the low soil on their smooth feet
bland, and after a crime they walked with greater freedom, without fear
to wait for yourself in Caerse. Deprived of his sight, Frodo felt himself up
Oído and other feelings are cherished. Podía oler los árboles
y la hierba pisoteada. Here are some different notes
in the whisper of the hojas, the murmur of the river
to your back and the soft and clear voices of the players in the upper part
of the sky. Sit the sun in the beak and the hands at the
cruzar un claro.

As the other orilla of the Veta Plateada pisó, one
an extraneous sensation invaded him, and it deepened
enter the Naith: it seemed to her that it had
crossing a bridge of time has a ring of them
Ancient days, and now I walked through a world that never existed. En
Rivendel had recovered some old things; en Lórien, las


 


455


ancient things still live in the world of the eve.
Then if he had seen and heard the pain, if he had known the pain; los Elfos
they fear and lose confidence in the outside world; lobos aullaban
in the woods of the woods, but in the land of Lórien not a shadow extends
.

Every day the company continued marching, until they heard it
llegada of the coolness of the late and I heard the whisper of the nocturnal wind
entre las hojas. Entonces descansaron and endured without fear
in the soil, their guides cannot allow it.
If their eyes were desatiated and they could not suffer. By the morning,
they continued walking from the start. In the middle of the day...
If they deduced, and Frodo knew that they had disappeared below
the radiant sun. Suddenly, I heard the sound of many voices
to his neighbor.

A tone of Elfos was heard silently: if
Secure the northern fronts to protect yourself from anything
ataque de Moria; and we will tell you some news, some of which
Haldir informed. The melancholy orcs have been attacked and attacked
all destroyed cases; the rest had to hide from the west, from the mountains, and they were being pursued.
También se había visto
an extraña creature, running with his body and his hands
seeks the ground, like a beast, but without the shape of a beast. Habia
I eluded capture, and they didn't shoot them, without knowing
whether it was good or bad, and whether it had vanished
Filón Plateado hacia el sur.
«Además», I said Haldir, «bring me a mensaje from the Señor
and the Lady of the Galadhrim. Everyone can walk freely, included
el enano Gimli. It seems that the Señora knows this and that
I am each member of your company. Quizás hayan llegado nuevos mensajes
de Rivendel».
First he quit selling his eyes to Gimli. ¡
Sorry!, I say, expressing profound reverence. Miranos now with
Hello friends! Look and be happy, this is the first year you've ever contemplated
the trees of the Naith of Lorien since Durin's Day!
When his eyes disappeared, Frodo looked up
and I knew the alien. They were standing in an open space.
456
A large mountain rose up on the street, covered in a meadow
grass as green as spring on old days. Above, how
a double crown, two circles of trees grow: the exteriors hold the bark
of a white snow, and they didn't have hojas, but they were beautiful up there
well-formed skin; the interiors were great mallornes
height, always dressed in pale gold. Up high, between the branches
an imposing tree that stood in the center of everything shone
a white fleet. At the feet of the trees, and by all the elder of the greenery
blades, the grass was tachonaded with small golden flowers
with star shape. Entre ellos, cabeceando sobre delgados tallos,
like a cloud in the rich tone of the grass. The sky was
blue for all parts, and the late sun shone on the hill and projected
large green shadows below the trees.







 

 
there were other flowers, white and pale green: they shine.
 
Mirad! You were sent to Cerin Amroth, by Haldir. Porque
here is the mountain of Amroth, where on the happiest days it grew high
incomcesible grass: the amarillo elanor and the pale niphredil. Here
we will ask for a debt and we will travel to the city of Galadhrim
to anochecer.

The same ones left standing above the fragrant grass,
but Frodo remained for a while absorbed in the darkness. She liked it
who had crossed a high wind that he gave to someone
world disappeared. A light illuminated it, for what language it was
no name. Everything I saw took shape, but the shapes
They seemed to immediately be well defined, as they were conceived
and talk about discovering the eyes, as old as they are
they will last forever. I don't see more colors than I do
They knew, gold, white, blue and green, but they were fresh
and conmovedores, as you are at this moment
He was right for the first time and he gave new and wonderful names.
Here, in winter, no heart could complain about the winter or the spring. Ninguna
lack, illness or deformity were seen at all
that will grow on earth. There was no land in Lorien
lack.


 


457


I turned and saw that Sam was standing on his feet next to him,
looking at his father with a perplexed expression and rubbing him
eyes as if you were not sure of being desolate. «It's a
sunny and bright day, yes», I say. «Think about the elves
they were all moon and stars; but this is the most elfin one
what do you want to know? I feel like you'll find yourself inside a song, yes
me entiendes».

Haldir I looked at it, and I seemed to capture it
I mean as much in thought as in words. Sonrio. «Sientes el
power of the Lady of the Galadhrim,” I say. "Tea
Would you like to be with Cerin Amroth?”.

They followed it while they were walking with a light step
grass cutter blades. Even walking and breathing, ya on alrededor
the hojas and flowers are shaken with the same fresh wind
The rostrum abanicaba her, Frodo felt that he was in an eternal earth that
No one has disappeared, no one has changed, no one has fallen into the shadows. When if
I left and returned to the outside world, Frodo,
the wanderer from the Comarca followed walking over the grass.  
between Elanor and Niphredil in the beautiful Lothlórien.

They entered the circle of white trees. Al hacerlo, el
Wind of the South passed over Cerin Amroth and sighed within her
ramas. Frodo sat quietly, looking at the sea below him.
playas arrasadas a lot of time, y
the grace of the marine aves whose breed had persecuted the earth.

Haldir continued on the path and now underwent the high flight.
As Frodo prepared to follow him, he placed his hand on it
The wheel reaches the stairway: never before has it been so sudden
and deeply aware of the sensation and texture of the skin of a tree
and of the life that harbored. I felt a delight in Madeira and above
tacto, neither as a forester nor as a carpintero; it was el
delete the same live fruit.

When he finally reached the elevated platform, Haldir
he took her hand away and turned it to the south. Look here
first!, he said.

Frodo looked at me and away, at a certain distance, a hill with many
imposing trees, or a city of green towers:
I couldn't decide what it was. From her, it seemed, came the power and the light


what


 


they dominate the entire earth. De suddenly anheló
fly like a pájaro to fly in the green city. Entonces miró hacia este
and I travel across the land of Lorien extending beyond the pale
resplendor of the Anduin, the Gran Río. He raised his view to the other side
of the river and all the light was absorbed, and returned to
world he knew. Beyond the river, the land seems flat
and vacía, shapeless and vague, until the lejos arose again
like a wall, dark and gloomy. The sun that fell above Lothlórien
I had no power to illuminate the shadow of that distant hill.

There is the fortress of the Black Forest of the South, I say
Haldir. It is covered in a dark fir forest, where the trees grow
within yes and their branches can grow and be cut. En
Dol Guldur rises in the middle of a rocky hill, from where for a long time
the hidden enemy is all about morada. We fear that now it is
Newly lived, and with power you are once again mayor. A black cloud yace
I recently repaired it. In this high place you can see the dos
farms that are opposed to each other; and always luchan  
now in thought, but while the light is so my heart
Of the darkness, its own secret has never been discovered. No
todavia. He turned and went quickly, and they followed him.

At the foot of the hill, Frodo met Aragorn, immobile and
silent as a tree; but in his hand he had a small golden flower
elanor, and a light shone in her eyes. It was packaged in one
beautiful recuerdo: and when I looked at it, Frodo supo que
see the things as they once were in this same place. Porque
the years sombreros have disappeared from Aragorn's beak, and
apparently dressed in white, a tall and handsome young gentleman; y
He spoke words in elven language to someone like Frodo
no podía ver. ¡Arwen vanimelda, namarie!, I say, and where
he breathed deeply, and rising from his thoughts, he looked at himself
a Frodo y sonrió.

Here is the heart of the king of the elves on earth —I say—, and here
my heart always remains, unless there is a greater light beyond the darkness
paths that we must also travel, you and me. Come with me! And I'm going back there
 hand
de Frodo, abandoned the hill of Cerin
Amroth and never again flew like a living man.
The sun was placed between the mountains and the shadows
they delved into the forest when they continued up the path.
Their senderos entered the area whence
ya had anochecido. The night I fell below the trees while walking
, and the elves woke up on their plate lamps.
Suddenly, they went up again to the descubierto and met again
under a pale evening sky salted by some
temporary stars. There was ample space between the trees in front of them, which extended
in a large circle and it curved on both sides. More allá
there was a deep loss in the sweet shade, but the grass on it
the edges were green, as they would once again shine in the sun
what if I had it. On the other side there was a lot of rising
high a green wall that rodea a green hill, full of
tallest mallorquines that anyone would ever see until now
tierra. On high ground it was incalculable, but it was wrong
in the twilight like living towers. In its branches of multiple snows
and among their hojas in constant movement, innumerable lights...




 



Bright, green, gold and plated. Haldir flew away
hacia la Compañía.
 
The Lady of Lorien. But we cannot enter here, because of the doors
they don't look to the north. We must rodear el sur.
The journey is not short, but the city is immense.

It had a fireplace paved with white stone that ran through it
exterior borders of the foso. Por él advanceron hacia el oeste, con
the city ascending like a green cloud to its height;
think that the night was deeper, more lights emerged, as long as it goes on
the hill seemed to shine with stars. They finally got to a white bridge


,    

and as they crossed it they encountered the great doors of the city:
they look towards the south, located between the extremes of the wall
that here was superposed, and they were tall and strong, and adorned
con numerosas lámparas.

Haldir called and hailed, and the doors opened silently
; but Frodo did not violate the guards' register. Los viajeros
they entered, and the doors were closed between them. If they encounter it
a deep path between the ends of the wall, and crossing it quickly
they entered the City of Los Árboles. No later
Ver a nadie ni oír pasos en los senderos; But he had it
many voices, on his father and on the air. A lo lejos,
at the top of the hill, they could hear the sound of a song that fell from there
as high as a gentle rain above the holidays.

They traveled many paths and took many stairs,
until they reach the high places and come before them, in the middle
from a large bush, a resplendent source. It was illuminated by plate lamps
that plucked the branches of the trees, and fell into a hole
de plata, from which a white arroyo was derived. En el
on the upper side of the bush rose the most imposing of all the trees; on
large worn trunk shone like gray silk, and it rose,
until the first branches arrive, they open their enormous extremities
low clouds of hojas. Now she had a hip
white stairway, your feet are felt by three Elves. If
they took a leap to look for the travelers, and Frodo went away
they were tall and dressed in gray, and their men
hang large white capes.

“Where Celeborn and Galadriel live,” said Flaldir. Ex on
I want to learn and have fun with him.

One of the elf guardians made a clear note in a small way...
heart, and I received the answer three times after I arrived. Yo lo haré,  
first,” I said Haldir. «Que Frodo comes soon and with him».
Legolas. The same can be followed as desired. It's a large one
Now for people who aren't accustomed to these ladders, however
you can scan along the fireplace.

As he slowly passed, Frodo passed through many flets: some
to one side, others to others, and some of the elders of the trunk


  of the

tree, so that the ladder passed through it. To a large extent
height above the ground led to a large talan, like the
cubierta of a large boat. Above, a house was built, as big as it was
cases were served as a men's salon above
tierra. He entered beyond Haldir and discovered that he was in one
oval-shaped chamber, in the middle of which the trunk grows
of the great mallorn, which was now stretched out on the cup, and without embargo
It formed a pillar that widens the circumference.

The room was filled with soft light; their parents were
green and plated and on gold techo. Many Elves have been heard
there. On two sillas below the trunk of the tree,
below the dose of a living branch, they were left, one by the other, Celeborn and
Galadriel. If you need some pie to greet your guests, over there
custom of the elves, including those who were considered
powerful cores. They were very tall, and the Lady was no less tall than him
Señor; they were serious and charming. They are dressed
completely de blanco; and the Lady's hair was an intense gold,
and Señor Celeborn's hair was flat and wide
brilliant; but there was no trace of the food in them, unless it was there
the depths of your eyes; they were as keen as lanzas in the light of the sun
stars, and without profound embargo, the wells of profound memory.

Haldir took Frodo before him, and the Lord received him
in your own language. The Lady Galadriel didn't say a word, though
he looked at it widely at the darling.

Siéntate ahora junto a mi silla, Frodo de la Comarca!, I say Celeborn
. When everyone is connected, we will talk together.

I greeted each of my companions courteously by name
upon entering. Welcome, Aragorn, hi Arathorn!, I say.
They have passed thirty and eight years since I saw you,











and when our humidity seemed unsalvageable, we were saved
cayó.


Entonces Aragorn related everything that happened in the...
step of Caradhras, and on the days that followed; y hablo
and she smiled. «No if turben sus corazones», I say.

 
  463

Habló de Balin and his book, and the game in the room
of Mazarbul, and of the fire, and of the narrow bridge, and of the
Legend of Terror. It seems like a pain from the Old World
As I have never seen before, I say Aragorn.
It was once a shadow and a llama, fierce and terrible.

He was a Balrog of Morgoth, dijo Legolas; of all the weights of the elves,
the most deadly, except for the one who sits in the Dark Tower.

So, look at the point that blinds us
I dream the darkest, there is the Perdition of Durin, I say Gimli in your voice,
and the terror was reflected in his eyes.

¡Ay!, I say Celeborn. For a long time we were afraid of being low
Caradhras slept in terror. But it was clear that the Enanos
If they had once again experienced this evil in Moria, they would have forbidden you
pass the northern borders, to tell you everything that is next to you
. And if it was possible, it would be said at the end
Gandalf cayó de la sabiduría la locura, cayó incessarimente en las
redes de Moria.

It would be a reckless decision - I say
Galadriel with gravedad—. Ninguna de las hazañas de
Gandalf in life was unnecessary. Quienes lo siguieron descanocían su mind
and you cannot talk about it completely. But sea as sea
with the guide, the followers are innocent. Don't stop
of the welcome you gave her at Enano. Our hubiera community was exiled
much time and lejos of Lothlórien, ¿quién de los Galadhrim, included
Celebrated el Sabio, he would look for and not ask
contemplate on ancient hogar, even if it was soon converted into morada
of dragons?

Dark are the waters of Kheled-zaram, frías las
sources from Kibil-nala, and beautiful were the rooms of multiple pilars of
Khazad-dum on the Old Days, before the fall of mighty lungs
I lower the stone. I looked at Gimli, who was still there, heartfelt
y sad, y sonrió. Y el Enano, behind the names
pronounced in his ancient language, he raised his sight and looked at it in his eyes;
of an enemy, and I see love and understanding in him. The asombro
if he discussed it on his rostrum, and then he rang in response.

He stood up torpidly and hid a reverence like a fool, saying: «Sin embargo,


this    






noche will sleep in peace." They sighed and suddenly realized


  cansados

, how people have been questioned widely

¡Váyanse ya! —dijo Celeborn—. They are longed for and worth it
the workmanship. Even if we are not interested in searching,
they must take refuge in this city until they recover
if they feel better. Now we'll descan, and we won't talk about it
futuro camino por un tiempo.

This night, the Company lasted in the land, for a long time
satisfaction of the hobbits. Los Elfos les prepared a
They rolled between the trees, looked for the source, and placed them there
mullidos lechos; luego, uttering words of peace with hermosas
elven voices, the dejaron. During a rato, los viajeros hablaron de
on the front night in the corners of the trees, of your day
y del Señor y la Señora; you can't even see them
mirar más atrás.

—What are you talking about, Sam? —asked Pippin—. Ready you
derrumbaste. Anyone would have thought that they would have regrets
. I hope it wasn't anything because it was a wicked conspiracy
to rob me of one of my mantas.

“He never thought of that,” Sam replied heartily
de bromas. If you want to know, I heard how you didn't know anything
yes, I didn't like it. It seems like looking inside me
and wonder what the opportunity would be for me
fly back home, to the Comarca, to a small and good wisher with... with
un trocito de jardín propio.

That's curious, I say Merry. This is exactly what I felt
; just that, just that... good, I don't think I'll say anything more,
ended with desgana.

Everyone, apparently, has run the same route: every one has felt that
if it was offered to you to choose among a full shade of honey that
if you had it and something you wanted with all your strengths:
He kept it clear in his mind, and to achieve it he only had to stray from it
fireplace and dejar the Busqueda and the war against Sauron a
others.

And I also like it, I say Gimli, who chose me
It will remain secret and only I will know it.


466


 


To me it seemed supremely extraño, I say Boromir.
Sometimes it was just a prune, and she thought about our nuestros
think about yourself well; But in some cases I will say  
let me know that we were trying and offering what she wanted.
. But what she believed the Lady had offered her,
Boromir didn't say it.
 
And as for Frodo, no habló, even Boromir
I pressed him with prayers. She supported you for a long time in your sight,
Portador del Anillo, dijo.

Yes, I say Frodo; but what seems to come to mind immediately
lo mantendré ahí.

Good, take care of you! I say Boromir. No, this is very safe
This Elven Lady and her purposes.

Don't worry about Lady Galadriel! I said to Aragorn sternly.
No sabes lo que dices.
There is no harm in her or in this earth, unless a man brings him here. ¡Entonces que tenga
guarded! But this night I will sleep without sleep for the first time
since then Rivendel. So you can sleep soundly and forget yourself for a while
I'm sorry! I'm buried in my body and heart. If you're gone
caer en su lecho y cayó de immediate en a largo
dream.

They were ready to pick up the same thing, and there was no sound or sound
disturbed on sueño. When they discover it, they discover what it is
the light of the day illuminated with clarity the grass in front of the pabellón, and
the source subia y bajaba, shining in the sun.

Permanent a few days in Lothlórien, following record aban
. During all the time they lived there,
the sun shone with clarity, except for a soft rain that often fell when
and it is dispelled, leaving everything fresh and clean. El aire
it was fresh and sweet, like the beginning of spring, but they felt a
on Alrededor the profound and thoughtful quietude of the winter. Les parecía
who have little more than coming, drinking, walking and walking
between the trees; y that was enough.

They haven't come to see the Lord or the Lady, and they just have to


 


spoken


With the elves, you may know little
they would like to use the oestron language. Haldir left him behind
and returned to the North, from where
great vigilance was maintained from that moment on
The company has reported the news from Moria. Legolas spent a lot of time between them
Galadhrim, and after the first night I didn't sleep with

Gandalf, and everything that ever happened to one had tasted and seen him
if it's obvious. A medicine that heals wounds
and the physical torment, the pain of loss was agrated.
In the menu there are elfin voices looking for them singing, and they know that
they are singing songs of lament for their sake, because...
captured the name among the sweet and sad words that could never be heard
understand.

Mithrandir, Mithrandir sing the Elfos, ¡Oh Peregrino Gris! Porque
so she was delighted to call him. But Legolas was with the Company
, I didn't interpret the songs, saying that
I didn't have the ability, and because of the pain I was still missing
look for, an assumption for tears and also no for songs.

It was Frodo who first learned something about his pain
faltering words. Rarely did he feel impelled to write songs or rhymes;
included in Rivendel was played and not sung the same,
although my memory was filled with many other things
they have heard before that. But now, while I was walking towards the source
in Lorien and I heard the voices of the Elves from my alrededor, above
the thought took shape in a song that seemed beautiful to her; without embargo,
when he tried to repeat it to Sam only fragments,
Desvanecidos como un puñado de hojas marchetas.

When late in the Comarca it was gray,
if they oyeron their steps on the Hill;
Antes del amanecer partió
on a long journey without saying a word.


468


 


De las Tierras Salvajes a la costa occidental,
from the northern desert to the southern hill,
through healing dragons, hidden doors
and dark woods, he walked at will.

With enanos and hobbits, elfs and men,
with mortals and inmortals,
with pájaros in ramas and beasts in healing,
read in your own secret languages.

A mortal sword, a healing hand,
a shoulder that is doubled low on load;
a trumpet voice, a fiery tea,
a pilgrim wandered along the fireplace.

A lord of wisdom was seated on a throne,
quick in anger, ready to reír;
an old man with a dirty sombrero
which rested on a thorny stick.

Se paró solo en el puente
y Fuego y Sombra desafiaron him;
on a stick it broke against the stone,
en Khazad-dum died on sabiduría.

“But it will be the next time to win Señor Bilbo!”, I say Sam.

No, I fear not, I say Frodo. But this is the best
puedo hacer hasta ahora.

—Good, Señor Frodo, you are willing to try it, I hope that I do
dam above our artificial fuegos —dijo Sam—. Algo asi come
this:


«Los mejores cohetes jamás vistas».
they are installed in blue and green stars,
after the trueno
golden rains fall like a flood of flowers.


  469

However this does not les hace justicia por asomo.

No, I'll give it to you, Sam. Or quizás Bilbo.
But... good, I can't say more about it. I can't stand the idea
to give her the news.

Late, Frodo and Sam pass by together
the cool twilight. Both felt restless again.
Suddenly, the shadow of the expedition fell on Frodo: he knew it in some way
that the moment to abandon Lothlórien was very difficult.

“What thoughts do the elves have now, Sam?” I said. Te hice
the same thing asks for a vez antes; it seems like it happened a lot
time; but he has seen more of them since then.

¡Yes!, I say Sam. And I suppose there are elves
elf. All are enough elves, but not all are the same.
Now well, these people are not vagabundos or people without hogar, and they seem a little
we are looking for more: they seem to belong to this place, including more
than the Etobbitas of the Comarca. If they created the earth,
or the earth created them, it's difficult to decide, if you understand me
. Here you have a wonderful tranquility. It doesn't seem to be
ocurriendo nada, y nadie seems to querer what ocurra. Yes hay
magic, it is in the deepest, where I cannot lay my hands on it
encima, por así decirlo.

If you see and feel in all parts, I say Frodo.

Good, I say Sam, I don't want anyone manipulating it. Nada
of artificial fires like the ones that little Gandalf used to show. Me extraña que
We haven't seen any of the Señor or Señora all these days.
Now I imagine that I could do amazing things, yes
he will propose it. I would be delighted by some elven magic, sir
Frodo!

The artificial fuegos of Gandalf, but their cejas pobladas, on
irascible temperament and voice...

At this point I longed for a little bit of the magic that is felt in them
Ancient things, but I never hear about a better country than this. Ex
how to stay at home and on holidays at the same time, yes me
entiendes. No quiero irme. In all ways, this is it


...


 

 
feeling that we care to follow closely, it will be better than...
Get over it!

 It is the work that never gets done and the one that takes the longest to finish.
I see myself only saying: «I don't think these people
it can do much more for us, with magic or without it. This is when we leave
this earth when we leave Gandalf, full.

I'm afraid it's very certain, Sam," said Frodo. «But I hope
much earlier than we wanted to see the Lady
of the Elves».

During the conversation, see how you would like to hear the answer
your words, to Lady Galadriel acercándose. Tall, white
and rubia, walked under the trees. No, he spoke loudly,
pero les hizo señas.

He left and the driver went to the southern roads
of the hill of Caras Galadhon, and crossing a high
Green silk will be placed in a closed garden.
No trees grew there, and they extended to the sky. The evening light had come
salted and shone with white fire above them
forests of the west. Following a large section of stairs, the Lady entered it
deep green hill, from where it ran murmuring the plateau arroyo
which was flowing from the source of the hill. Al
bottom, on a low pedestal tall like a branched tree,
he had a flat short, even and not very deep, and close to her
a silver jar.

With water from the arroyo, Galadriel filled the long haul
the edge and rose above her, and when the water calmed down,
hablo. “Here is the land of Galadriel,” I say. «
I have brought them here so that they can look at them, so please."
.

The air was very quiet, the house was dark, and the elf
on the side it was tall and pale. «What we'll look for
and what shall we see?” asked Frodo, full of darkness. «

Many things I can order at the time I reveal them;
On the menu are more extrañas and proofs than what we desire
contemplate. What will happen is that the item works freely


 


,


I can't decide. Because it shows what was, what
what are and what could be. But no one can decide what is the best thing
you. Did they want to see?

Frodo did not respond. «

¿Y ustedes?”. —dijo, volviéndose hacia Sam—. Because this is what you...
fond of calling magic, I create; no matter what...
clearly what I want to say; and we seem to use the same word
for the words of the Enemigo. But this, if you want, it's there
Galadriel's magic. Don't say you want to see it
elven magic?

Yes, I say Sam, trembling a little between my heart and curiosity
. Here's a look, Señora, you are happy.

And it wouldn't matter to me to have a look at what I'm passing through the house,
I told them apart from Frodo. It seems like a terribly long time
that's what I was. But there, the most probable is that only you see there
stars, or something you won't understand.

Most likely, I said the Lady with a gentle laugh. But Fri,
look and see what you can. ¡No touches el
water!

Sam stood at the foot of the pedestal and tilted
above the palangana. The water seemed hard and dark. The stars if
reflejaban en ella.

Only hay stars, as I thought, I say. Luego god a
Grito ahogado, porque las stars apagaron. As if a dark veil were hidden
removed, the glass turned gray and clear. Brillaba
the sun and the branches of the trees are moved and shaken
with the wind. But before that Sam can decide
that was what I saw, the light disappeared; y entonces creyó
towards Frodo, with his pale beak, deeply asleep for a long time
dark acantilado. Entonces the seems to be similar to the same one
I passed darkly and underwent an interminable stairway of darkness.
Suddenly, if God knows what I'm looking for urgently,
but I didn't know what it was. Like a dream, the vision
he changed and retreated, and turned towards the trees. But this is it
it followed as follows: they must not mecían with the wind, until they fall,
if they strive against the soil. ¡


472


 


! —Sam shouted in an indignant voice. Ahí está ese Ted
Sandyman talando árboles as no one should. No
they should be like this: it is the avenue closest to the Molino which is shaded
at the fireplace in Bywater. Ojalá pudiera alcanzar Ted, ¡y habría derribado!
But

Sam knows that the Viejo Molino has disappeared, y
where previously a large red thieving building was being built
. Many people worked tirelessly.
Look for a high red chimenea. A black humus seemed to cloud the surface of the
Mirror.
 
There's something diabolical in the county," I said. Elrond
Know what was carried in our hands when I sent this
back to Señor Merry. Suddenly, Sam gave a shout and took a leap. «
I can't stop here," I say furiously. «I keep myself at home. Han
excavated Bagshot Row, and ahí está la pobre Viejo
Driving down the hill with his things on a cart. I want to tell you
house!

You can't be alone at home», said the Lady. «No questions
irte without you I love before looking at it
el Spejo, and so you know that bad things could be
happening in the Comarca. Recuerda que el Spejo shows
many things, and not all of them happened again. Some never
They leave you, unless those who contemplate the visions pass away
de on chimney to avoid it. El Espejo is as dangerous as it gets
guía de hechos».

Sam felt himself in the ground and covered his head with his hands. «Ojalá
I'm not coming here anymore, and I don't want to see you anymore
magic», I said and looked in silence. At the end of a moment, I turned to talking with her
mellow voice, as one plays against tears. No, I'm going home for him
wide fireplace with el señor Frodo, or not, I say. But I hope
go back some day. If what I saw is certain,
alguien se va a enfadar!

'Are you looking now, Frodo?' said the lady Galadriel.
Don't ask for elven magic and you will conform.

"Do you tell me what I'm looking for?" asked Frodo.

No, she said. I advise you neither one nor the other.


 


473


No I advise you. You can learn something, yes
your adventures, no one will ever take you here. ¡Haz lo que
quieras!

Miraré, I said Frodo, and I underwent the pedestal
and he leaned over the dark water. Follow the sign and clear it
I go to a crepuscular land. The mountains grow dark in the distance
against a pale sky. A large gray fireplace was lost from sight.
In the light, a figure came slowly down the fireplace, débil y
small at the beginning, but making a bigger and clearer thought that you are looking for.
Suddenly, Frodo realizes that he told Gandalf.
Casi pronounced the name of the magician, and then he went  
that the figure was not dressed in grey, but in white, in white...
which shone dimly in the twilight; and in his hand he had a
white stick. The head was so inclined that it could not see the beak.
and ready the figure turned in a curve of the
fireplace and disappeared from the view of the Espejo. The question invaded
Frodo's mind: this was a vision of Gandalf in one of his
many solitary journeys hace much time, or was it Saruman?

The vision now changed. Short and small but very vivid,
He saw Bilbo as he walked restlessly through his house.
The table was full of unsorted papers; the rain struck
the windows.

Then I took a break, and after that
followed many quick scenes that Frodo in some way after they were part of a large
history in which you have seen wrapped up. The cloud was dispelled
and I saw a sight that I had never seen before, but that I recognised
immediately: the sea. Cayó the darkness. The sea rose and roared in one
great storm. Entonces vio contra el Sol, hundiéndose red blood
in a mountain of clouds, the black silhouette of a tall boat with
the wheeled sails that were tightened from the west. There is also a river here
through a populous city. I have a white fortress with you
torres. And once again a black sailing boat, but there it was
from morning to morning, and the water waved with light, and a standart
with the emblem of a white tree shining in the sun. If he raised a humareda,


how


 


of fire and battle, and again the sun is used in one
little boat that disappeared, shining with lights. If he vanished,
and Frodo sighed and prepared to have fun.

But suddenly the Espejo was completely darkened, as dark as it was
if there was an open eye in the world of sight, and Frodo looked at it
to the vacío. Only one appeared in the black depths
I'm growing slowly, just train all the time. Tan
terrible was that Frodo was left paralyzed, unable to cry out
to separate the view. The eye was edged with fire, but it was
vidrioso, yellow like a cat, attentive and attentive, and the
black girl let her pupil open in a well, a wind in the air.

Once the eye began to wander, looking for another side;
and Frodo supo with certainty and horror that enters there
many things I was looking for, that was one. But also
I knew I couldn't see it; not at all, unless you want it.
Ex. The ring that was attached to the heart of the heart expanded
and suddenly I'm back again, and here! if he welcomed: one
I weighed, more heavily than a large stone, and on the head it was hit.
Hacia abajo. El Spejo seemed to warm up and
Volutes of vapor rise from the water. If you slide it forward. ¡

Don't touch the water!, I say the Lady Galadriel to you.
The vision faded, and Frodo discovered what he was looking at
the starry fries that sparkle in the plata dish. Retroceded
temblando y miró a la Dama.

Yes, that was the last one you saw, I say; because
I also keep it in mind. Don't worry! But don't worry about that alone
singing between the trees, he didn't sing with the final flechas
of the elfish arches, this land of Lothlórien is maintained y
defiende de su Enemigo. I tell you, Frodo, including that
while I tell you, so I go to the Dark Lord and get to know him
mind, everyone who thinks about it in what respects the Elves. Y el
I always look for worms in my thoughts. But the door follows
closed!

He raised his white arms and extended his hands
Hacia el Este in a gesture of return and denial. Eärendil,
the Vespertina Star, the most beloved of the Elves, shone with clarity
at the top. It was so brilliant that the figure of the elf lady was projected


 


a


faint shadow on the ground. Their rays are reflected in a ring of
bright light, and a white stone in the light was as bright as it is
Estrella Vespertina quickly descended to rest in her hand. Frodo contemplated
the ring with asombro; because suddenly it seemed to her that
understand.










 



And now until the end of the season. Give me the ring freely!
In the place of the Dark Lord there will be a Queen. ¡Y
no dark evening, nor beautiful and terrible as the Mañana
y la Noche! Beautiful as the Sea, the Sun and the Snow
in the Mountain! ¡Terrible as the Tormenta and the Relampago
! More powerful than the cimientos of the earth! ¡Todos
me amarán y desesperarán!

He raised his hand and the ring he was lifting
there arose a great light that illuminated only her and I decided everything
leave it in the dark. If he stood before Frodo, now with an incommensurable height
and an indescriptible, terrible beauty
venerable. Then I took my hand, and the light disappeared:
a slender elf, dressed in simple white, with a sweet voice
it was sweet and sad.

—Paso la prueba —I say—. Disminuiré mi poder e iré al
Oeste, and I will follow being Galadriel.

They remained silent for a long time. Finally, the Lady
I turned to talking. —¡Regresemos! —dijo—. Morning for morning
we must leave, let us be our chosen one and our destiny
está en marcha.

—I wanted to ask something before Irnos —I said Frodo—, algo
that now I asked Gandalf in Rivendel. —If you allow me
take the single ring: so I can't see everyone else again
and know the thoughts of the people who care about them?

—No lo habéis intentado —I say—. Solo os habéis puesto
the ring in the right place three times from where you placed it
. Don't try to do it! They would destroy. Don't tell me Gandalf


 


III


that the rings will be able to follow the measure
of each poseedor? Before you can use this necessary power
Let us turn much harder and learn your will to do so
dominate over others. Aun so, like Ring Holder and like
who took it in the dark and saw it hidden,
with more clarity than many consider wise. Views
the eye of the person placed the present and the new. ¿Y
no views, can you recognize the ring in my heart? ¿Views
Ring me?, she asked, turning to Sam.

No, Señora, I'll reply. To tell the truth, I was wondering
de qué hablabas. There is a star across you
dedos. But if you excuse me, I believe that I am
I love tenia razón. Ojalá tomaras on Anillo. Arreglarías las cosas
. Avoidances that desenterraran to Tío y
they set him adrift. Harías that some idiot will pay for his dirty work.

I would have it, I said. This is how it became. But
no more, ah, ¡ay! Let's not talk more about it. ¡
Let’s go!


 8


 


That night, the Company was summoned again
Celeborn's room, and there the Señor and the Señora
los recibieron con amiables palabras. Finally, Celeborn habló de su
match.

Now is the moment, I say, that people want to continue...
for a while. But anyone can be sure whether they are waiting or going.
the Búsqueda must endurecer its hearts to abandon this land.
If you don't want to move forward, you can ask yourself here,
if they ale a lot of water, there are places where they will be obligated.
Paz. Because we are tied to the edge of the abyss. Here, quienes
The dream can hope for the hour until now
the paths of the world open up again or we call them to you
Lorien's last necessity. Then you can return to your land
or go off to hogar de los que caen en battle.

Here's a silence. Everyone decides to follow ahead, I say
Galadriel looked at the eyes.

As for me, I say Boromir, I'm walking home and I'm happy
no hacia atrás.

It's true, I say Celeborn, but this company will continue
with ustedes in Minas Tirith? Aún

no we decide our rumble, I say Aragorn. More to the de
Lothlórien, not what Gandalf wanted to do.
Of course, I don't think there was a clear purpose in the tuviera.

Sometimes not, I say Celeborn, but when I abandon this land,
You won't be able to forget the Gran Río. Like some of you
well know, you cannot be cruzado by traveling with equipment
between Lorien and Gondor, safe on board. They are not
Osgiliath bridges destroyed and all the desembarcaderos occupied
ahora por el Enemigo?

Where will we travel? The path to Minas Tirith
it's on this side, to the west; but the right side of the fireplace


  479

Búsqueda is to the east of the river, in the darkest orilla. -Yes

if you follow my advice, it will be the western orilla, y
on the way to Minas Tirith —Boromir replied—. But I don't know
the leader of the Company. They didn't say anything, y
Aragorn seemed dubious and worried.

—I see that no one knows what to do —says Celeborn—.
It doesn't correspond to me choosing you; but I'll help you do that
pueda. There are some of you who know how to handle bottles:
Legolas, who knows the rapid Rio del Bosque; y Boromir
of Gondor; y Aragorn el viajero.

It's a hobbit! —exclaimed Merry—. Let's not consider everything
the bottles as rescue horses. My people live in Orillas del
Brandywine.

—It's good —I say Celeborn—. Entonces les proportionate
botes a su Compañía. They must be small and light, yes
they cannot be transported, they will travel to the rapids of Sarn Gebir,
and sometimes at the end at the great cataracts of Rauros, whence the river...
truena from Nen Hithoel; y hay other hairy people.
The boats can make your journey less heavy for a while. Without embargo,
I won't give you advice: at the end you must leave them
to ellos and to the river, and turn to the west, or to the east.

Aragorn liked Celeborn many times. The gift of the boats
It comforted him a lot, all the time
I don't tend to decide on rum during some days. The same ones too
seem more hopeful. Whoever was looking at them, apparently
better float on the even tide of the Anduin to brake it
that it is difficult to advance and the sword is surrounded. Only Sam dudaba
: in all ways, I always thought that the boats were as bad as the lifeboats,
O people, and not all the pilgrims to those who have overlived
They made them think better about themselves.

Everything will be prepared for you and you will wait in the port
before midday, I said Celeborn. Send
to my people in the morning to help you prepare for the trip.
Now let's hope for a good night and a peaceful sleep. ¡

Good nights, friends! —I say Galadriel—. ¡Duerman en paz!


480    

Don't worry if you're thinking about it
this night's fireplace. Quiz the senders which one will come back each time
you are drawn before your pies, even if you don't see them. ¡
Buenas noches!

The Company was dismissed and returned to its original level
pabellón. Legolas will accompany you, this will be the last time
night in Lothlórien, weigh the words of Galadriel,
deseaban deliberar juntos.

For a long time we debated what should be done
what would be the best way to try to accomplish your goal
with el Anillo; but they were not tied to a decision. It was evident that
the mayor wanted to be the first in Minas Tirith and escaped,
at least for a time, of the terror of the Enemy. Habrian
I was willing to follow a leader across the river
enter the shadow of Mordor; but Frodo didn't say it right, y
Aragorn seguía dividido.

On his own plan, while Gandalf remained with him, he had
I went with Boromir and, with his sword, helped to free Gandalf's descendants.
Gondor. Because I thought what the dream message was
, without doubt, yes to this you refieres. Hojas y ramas, agua.
a call that had finally taken place at the moment when he heard it
de Elendil must present himself and fight with Sauron for him
domain. But in Moria, Gandalf's carga arrived
above it; and I knew I couldn't abandon the ring
Yes Frodo finally denied himself to Boromir. Y, without embargo, that's it
May any member of the Company help Frodo, save
walk blindly with him in the darkness? «

Go to Minas Tirith, only if necessary, you can
deber», I say Boromir; and then I silently watched a story,
sent with the mirada fija en Frodo, how will he intend
read the thoughts of the midfielder. Finally, I returned to talking, in my voice,
as one would debate consigo mismo. «You just want to destroy
el Anillo», I say, «the war and the weapons soon came to pass;
and the Men of Minas Tirith cannot help." But he deseas
Destroy the Dark Señor's armored farm, therefore it is a secret
enter without force into its dominions; and a care to waste it.
There was a sudden pause, as it was clear what it was about


 


481 thousand


of distance, I want to decide, finished. It's an election between a defender
stand strong and walk openly on the arms of death. Al
menos, así es como lo veo.

Frodo captured something new and strange










Boromir's company, the team they have betrayed. To prevent one from falling, they have been proportioned
a capucha and a capa, hechas de cuerdo a su tamaño, de la
Light but warm seat cloth that the Galadhrim wear. Era
It's difficult to decide what color they were: gray with the tone of the
low twilight the trees seem to be; y sin embargo, yes if
they moved or placed themselves under another light, they were as green as they were
hojas in the shade, or browns like fields in the barbeque at night,
twilight surface like the water below the stars. Each head was sujeta
to the cuello with a broche like a green hoja veteada de plata. ¿

Are these magical caps? asked Pippin, marveling at them
with asombro.

No one wants to decide with this, I replied
leader of the Elves. They are beautiful taken, and the canvas is
good, you can come to this country. They are elven tunics
and stone: they hold the tone and beauty of all these things
below the twilight of Lorien that we love; we can put it there
Let's think about everything we love and convert it into everything we do. Without embargo, I am
Take them, no armor, and they will not convert into flechas or swords.
But they will be useful to you: they are easy to carry
Abrigan or refresh as needed. And I'll be with you
great help to keep yourself free from hostile sights,
I know the chimneys between the stones or between the trees. ¡
In truth, enjoy the favor of the Lady! Pues ella misma y
your doncellas tejieron this canvas; and never before we dress
extraños with the clothes of our own people.

After desayuno, the company despidió del
césped junto a la fuente. Keep the heart weighed down; it was a place


 


beautiful


, and it had been converted into its home, anyway
You can't count the days and nights that have passed
there. While they contemplate the white water for a moment
in the light of the sun, Haldir looked upon himself as he walked above it
green hierba del claro. Frodo greeted him cheerfully.

Now I'm sent to be your new guide. It is in the Valley of the Dark Agujero
hubieran thought about going back to the north to their hogares,
they couldn't go there. But they come!
On the road now he heads to Hacia El Sur.

As they walk through Caras Galadhon, the green paths
deserted estabans; but within the trees, above them, there are many voices
murmuring and singing. Ellos mesmos advance in silence.
Finally, Haldir led me to the southern slopes of the hill,
and they again went to the large door adorned with lights and
to the white bridge; and so they went up and abandoned the city
of the Elves. They left the paved fireplace
and they returned to a path that entered a dense area of ​​mallornes
, and they continued, meandering through undulating forests
The bright shade always keeps them below, on top and on the side
, hacia las orillas del Río.

I ran about ten thousand times and it was an average day
when they llegaron to a high green wall. As I pass by one
opening, they suddenly emerged from among the trees. Ante ellos,  
there was a large crest of brilliant grass, covered with a brilliant gold.
that one shone in the sun. The grass is extended in an extended language
between brilliant márgenes: to the back and to the west, the Silverlode
Resplendent fluid; to the izquierda and to the east, the Gran Río undulated
its also waters, deep and dark. In the wildest orillas, los
the woods also extend as far as the surface from which the view can be seen
, but all the orillas were desolated and naked. Ningún mallorn raises
their golden branches further afield in the Land of Lorien.

On the shore of the Veta Plateada, at a certain distance from
the confluence of the arroyos had a hythe of stones
and white madeira. Many boats and boats have docked here.


484    

Some were painted in bright colors and shined with silver, gold
and green, but the majority were white or gray.
If they have prepared three small gray bottles for travellers, and in
The Elves watched their belongings. They also added rolls
de cuerda, tres por bote. Parecían delgados, pero fuertes,
soft to the touch, with a gray tone like elfish caps.

"What are these?" asked Sam, supporting someone who was above him.
the grass.

Let's go left without a watch! And one who is wide, strong and
light. So they are. It can be helpful in many needs. ¡

Don't make it wrong to tell me!, I say Sam. Comes left
no one was worried about this. But I was wondering
where are they, knowing something about cording:
es de familia, como dirías.

I'm Hithlain, I say the elf, but I don't say anything
time now to educate yourself in the art of manufacturing. Yes hubiéramos
knowing that this craftsmanship enchanted you, we can learn more
much. But now, ¡ay!, less than a few days
returns here, you must be happy with our gift. ¡Que
te sea útil! ¡

Fri!, I say Haldir. All this list for you. Enter them
botes! But be careful at first! ¡

Pay attention to your words!, tell the other elves. These bottles are
ligerous, and they are astute and different from other bots
folic. No if they are hundirán, the cargues as quieras; but I am
caprichosos if they handle badly. It would be prudent to be careful about your customs
to enter and go up, here where there is a
place to leave, before leaving the river below.
otro; and on the third floor there were Legolas and Gimli, who they had
 
The Company was organized in this way: Aragorn, Frodo,
y Sam were in a boat; Boromir, Merry and Pippin
Now if you have good friends. In this last bottle, the majority of the merchandise
and the balls are estibados. The boats are moved and directed
with short mango remos with
also shovel in the shape of hoja. When everything was listed, Aragorn led me to a tribune by him.


 


river


Silverlode. The current was fast and they moved forward
slowly. Sam felt himself on the proa, clutching his ribs, and looked
hacia atrás with nostalgia hacia la orilla. The light of the sun shining on it
the water cleared them. As we pass further by the green field
of the river, the trees extend as far as the river's edge. Here
and then, the golden ones are mecían and float on the wave
current. The air was very bright and calm, and it was clear
silence, except for the loud and distant song of the Londons.

Proudly río lower, hacia ellos, vieron un cisne
bottom on curved butt. On top it shone like burnt gold,
and his eyes shine like azabache on amarilla stones; its huge
the white wings are medium-rise. A music descends from the river to what it is
rough; and suddenly they realized that it was a boat,
strong and tall with elven ability in the seed of a pájaro.
The elves dressed in white directed it with black remos. En
middle of the boat was sent by Celeborn, and beyond it was
Galadriel, tall and white; a circle of golden flowers was there
on his hair, and in his hand he held a harp, and he sang. Sad
and sweet was the sound of his voice in the fresh and clear air:

Sing of hojas, of hojas of gold, and hojas of gold
they will grow:

Sing of the wind, a wind wine and sopló en las ramas.

More to the Sim, more to the Moon, the foam was in the Sea,

And now at Ilmarin beach there grew a golden tree.

Below the stars of Evereve in Eldamar shone,

En Eldamar arrived at the walls of Elven Tirion.

There, for a long time, the golden hojas have grown above them
años ramificados.

Right here, further away from the sea dividers, come to them
lágrimas élficas.

¡Oh, Lorien! Bind the winter, the day naked and without hours;

the holidays fall into the stream, the river disappears.

¡Oh, Lorien! For as long as I have lived on this Costa Acá,

and in a marked crown I entrenched the elanor gold.


486


 


But now we will sing about boats, because the boat will come to us
me,

What boat would I take to return across a vast sea?

Aragorn found out about the boat while the Barco-Cisne was approaching.
The Lady finished with song and greetings. Here we come
to despatch us for the last time, I say, ya bring them
blessings of our earth.

Even if they are our huéspedes, I say Celeborn,
They haven't met with us yet, and we invite them, for the time being, to a
despatched party, here, among the waters that will lift them
lejos de Lórien.

El Cisne passed slowly towards the hythe, and they took the turn
to his bottles and followed him. Here, at the end of Egladil,
above the green grass, the despedida festival was celebrated; but Frodo
I leave and drink shortly, paying attention only to the beauty of the Lady and
to his hidden power. Ya le parecía, like men
of later days come often to the Elves: present and, without embargo
, remote, a living vision of what you have long missed
atrás por las currents del tempo.

After eating and drinking, sitting on the grass,
Celeborn les habló de nuevo de su viaje y, levantando la
hand, signaled hacia the sur, hacia the woods that extend further to the Lengua. «

Upon descending the river —dijo—, they will discover what they are
Trees will be cut and tied to an arid land. Allí
the river flows through foothill valleys between high cliffs, until finally,
tras many leagues, links to the upper island of Tindrock,
that we call Tol Brandir. All'extiende sus arms above the las
escarpadas orillas de la isla y cae entonces, con gran estruendo y
hum, above the cataracts of Rauros, hacia el Nindalf,
The Wetwang, as it is called in your language. It's an expansion
region of perezosos swamps from where the current is tortuous
y divides a lot. Here the entry wash flows for many
desembocaduras from the Bosque de Fangorn, to the west. Search for this
arroyo, at this edge of the Gran Río, is Rohan. On the other side,


 


487,


they find the desolate hills of Emyn Muil. Las  
above this, they can rise above the Deaths.
Marismas del Viento y las Tierras de Nadie hasta Cirith Gorgor y las
Black Doors of Mordor.

Boromir, and whoever accompanied him in search of Minas Tirith,
They will have a good time leaving the Gran Rio by first Rauros and cruising
Enter the dish before arriving at the sea. Without embargo, no deberían
reassemble the current one, don't risk getting back into it
Bosque de Fangorn. This is an extra land, and now it is little
conocida. But Boromir and Aragorn doubtless do not need this
advertencia.

After all, we have heard of Fangorn in Minas Tirith, I say
Boromir. But what I hear seems to me more
part of the old stories, as we count our friends. Todo lo que
if it comes to the north of Rohan it is now so many moments for us that the imagination can
wander freely through there. The ancient Fangorn was on the frontiers of
our king; but now many of the lives of men have passed since what was ours

he was in Rohan, but never
I crossed it in the north. When they sent me as a mensajero,
passed through the Brecha through the slopes of the Montañas Blancas
and crucé el Isen y el Inundado Gris hacia las
Tierras del Norte. A long and enjoyable journey.
I calculated four words, and it took me many months; you can lose me
horse in Tharbad, crossing the Greyflood river. Después de ese
travel, and the journey I travel with this company,
I don't think much about meeting a climb across Rohan,
and also from Fangorn, if necessary.

—Etonces I don't need to decide more —dijo Celeborn—. But no
despises the wisdom that has brought us for years; pues
what happens is what old people look at in their memory
things that were necessary for wise men in the past.

—Entonces Galadriel rose from the grass, and took a cup of it
one of his damsels, he filled her with white hidromiel and he died her
in Celeborn.


—Now


 


It's time to drink the cup of the shipment —I say—. ¡
Bebe, Lord of the Galadhrim! Y que no se
enter your heart, even the night goes to the middle of the day, and you
se acerca nuestra tarde.

I get the cup from each member of the Company and
I think they'll drink and miss it. But when they drink it,
I ordered them to return to feel themselves on the grass, and the syllables were  
dispusieron sillas for her and for Celeborn. Her ladies remained in silence.
at your disposal, and a time observed to your guests. Finally, I went back to talking
.

Let us drink the cup of the shipment, I say, y...
The shadows are interposed between us. But before you go, I'm leaving
I embark on the obsequios of the Lord and the Lady of the Galadhrim
We offer you in memory of Lothlórien. Luego called to
each one in turn. «

Here is Celeborn and Galadriel's homage to the leader
you Compañía», I told Aragorn, and he entreated her one
Vaina hecha a medida para su espada. It was stored
of a border of flowers and hojas forged in plata y
gold, and in it they are engraved, in elven runes formed by many gems,
the name Andúril and the line of the sword. «

The day that comes from this cow doesn't exist
it will fail if it will not break, it will not be left in the derrota", I say. «But ¿hay something
What more do you want me to ship? Because of the darkness
it will flow between us, and we may not want to meet,
unless it's very light, by a return journey."

Y Aragorn replied: «Señora, know all my desires
and for a long time I have looked at the only treasure I seek." Without embargo,
it's not your turn to give it to me, no matter what; y solo a través de
the darkness will achieve it.

So, now and then your soul is relieved —I say Galadriel—, you can
I look after myself so that I will take care of it for you
for this earth. He then raised a large stone from his gift
of a light green, stuck in a plate pin are with
the image of an eagle with its wings unfolded; and to support her,
the gem shone like the sun, shining through the trees
in spring. This stone is given to my hija Celebrian, and she is there


 


suya


; and now it binds you as a symbol of hope. ¡En
this hour, accept the name that was preached to you, Elessar,
the Piedra Élfica de la Casa de Elendil!

Entonces Aragorn took the stone and took the broche in it
the fish, and those who saw it marveled at it; pues no habían
I noticed before how tall and majestic he was, and I liked him
that many years of work have been lost to their men.
For the things you have given me, I appreciate you —I say—,  
oh Señora de Lorien, de quien surgieron Celebrian y
Arwen Estrella de la Tarde. What more can I praise?

The Lady tilted her head and flew back to Boromir
, and I give her a gold belt; ya Merry y
Pippin gives small platinum belts, each with a broche is
like a golden flower. I give Legolas a bow like him
that the Galadhrim use, more broad and robust than the Bosque
Black, ensartado with an elf fur coat. With el iba
un carcaj de flechas. «

For you, little gardener and lover of trees», I told Sam, «
I only have a small gift." I put a cajita in your hand with it
the tapa. «Here is the G de Galadriel», I say; «but it can also be done
meaning garden in your language." En esta cajita hay






 






words for me in our first meeting. «Yet once you return to the earth,
It will be a relic of my home and a promise of good will
between the mountain and the forest hasta el end
los días».

Entonces the Lady deshizo one of her large trenzas, short
three golden hairs and I put them in Gimli's hand. «Estas
say Iran with the gift,” I said. No prediction, okay
all prediction is now in vain: on one side there is darkness, and
for the other only hope. But if hope doesn't fail, entonces
I tell you, Gimli hijo de Glóin, that your hands will be safe
of gold, and without embargo, gold will not hold dominion over you.

And you, Ring Bearer, say, turn to Frodo. I'm coming
to you last, who were not the last in my thoughts. Para ti he
I prepare this. He raised a small piece of crystal: it shone


 


491


when he moved it, the rays of white light touched his hand.
In this bush, I say, the light of Eärendil's star reflects,
placed between the waters of my source. It will shine more
when the night you rodee. There is a light for you
dark places, when all the other lights fade away. ¡Recuerda a Galadriel y
on Espejo!

Frodo removed the bush and, for an instant, while it shone within
ellos, the new way of pie like a queen, great y
beautiful, but you're not terrible. I received a reverence, but I didn't meet him
words.

The Lady rose up, and Celeborn led them on the tour
hythe. An amarillo medium extended over the green earth of the language,
and the water was shining with plata. Finally, everything was on the list.
The Company occupied its locations in the bottles as before. Llorando.
Despedida, los Elfos de Lorien, con grandes pértigas grises, los lanzaron
to the current, and the waving waters
they arrastraron slowly. The travelers remained immobile, without moving
hablar. In the green madeja, look for the tip of the
Lengua, the Lady Galadriel remained alone and silent. Al
passing by her, they turned and their eyes observed her
alejarse slowly. Because I thought so: Lorien
if you slide it back, like a shiny boat with poles
Enchanted trees, browsing through forgotten orillas, while you encounter them

the streams of the Gran Río, and their boats turned and started
to navigate to El Sur. Hello, the white figure of the Lady has flown
small and distant. It shone like a wind of crystal on one
Colina lejana below the rising sun, or like a remote lake seen from one
mountain: a crystal fallen in the gift of the earth. Entonces
It seemed to Frodo that he was raising his arms in a final expedition,
y, lejano but penetrating, with the wind in favor, llegó el
sound of your voice singing. Español But now she sang in ancient times
language of the Elves of the Ultramarine, and it is not understood
the words: the music was beautiful, but not
consoled him.


492


 


Without embargo, as is usual with the elf words, they will remain grabadas in
on memory, and many years later I played the best
I can say: the language was the one from the elvish song and I spoke
of things little known in the Middle Tierra.

To the! laurie lantar lassi surinen,
yeni unotime ve ramar aldaron!

Yeni ve linte yuldar avanier
my oromardi lisse-miruvoreva
Andurie pella, Vardo tellumar
nil luini yassen tintilar i eleni
omaryo airetdri-lirinen.

Si man iyulma nin enquantuva?

An si Tintalle Varda Oiolosseo
ve fanyar maryat Elentdri ortane,
ar ilye tier undulave lumbule;
ar sindanoriello caita mornie
i falmalinnar imbe met, ar hisie
untupa Calaciryo miri oiale.

Si vanwa na, Romello vanwa, Valimar!

¡Namari! Nai hiruvalye Valimar.

Nai elye hiruva. ¡Namari!

¡Ah! How gold brings the holidays to the wind, long years
as innumerable as the wings of the trees! The years have passed quickly.
rowans of sweet honey in the high halls further to the west,
below the blue blocks of Varda where the stars tie together.
In the song of your voice, holy and majestic. ¿Quién
Will he fill my cup? Porque ahora la Iluminadora, Varda, la Reina
of the Stars, from Mount Siempreblanco he raised his hands
like clouds, and all the paths have merged in the shadow; y
from a gray country the darkness lies above the foamy trees.
Now the loss, the loss for the Este is Valimar! Goodbye!


 


493


Goodbye! Varda is the name of this Lady to these Elves
in these lands of exile I call Elbereth.

Suddenly, the river drew a line, and the orillas
they rose on both sides, and the light of Lorien was hidden. TO
this beautiful land Frodo never returns.

Los viajeros volvieron entonces sus rostros hacia el viaje; el
Sun was before us, and our eyes were clear, everyone could be
tears of tears. Gimli cried openly.

I last saw what was most beautiful, I tell you
to Legolas, on compañero. From now on I won't call you
beautiful at all, unless it's a gift. He raised his hand to Pecho.

Tell me, Legolas, why do you come to this shop? ¡Little
I knew where the mayor peligro was! Elrond habló con razón,
saying that we cannot predict what we might encounter in it
our fireplace. The torment in the darkness was the pilgrim who feared,
y no me detuvo. But he didn't have to come to drink
I know the danger of light and happiness. Now he recibido mi
even if it happened on this occasion, even if it was this night
directed to the Dark Lord. ¡Ay de Gimli, hijo de Gloin!

¡No!, I say Legolas. Hello to all of us! And all those who walk
for the world in these past days. Because this is the thing: meeting
and lose, as it seems to those whose body is in there
current. But I consider you well, Gimli, hijo de Gloin:
Sufres you lose by your own will, and you can
have chosen something else. But you haven't abandoned your companions
, and the least reward that tends to be is that it
Lothlórien's record will always remain clear and unstained
in your heart, and it will not fade nor will you want to eat.
 
«Quizás», I say Gimli; «I appreciate your words. Of course."
Palabras, without doubt; without embargo, everything is cool. El recuerdo no es
what the heart desires. This is just a question, of course.
Kheled-zaram. Or so says the heart of Gimli el Enano. Los elves
you can see things another way. Indeed, I long for them
memory is closer to the world of the day before than to a dream.
No así para los enanos.


494


 


But we have no more problems with this. Stay with the boat! It is desired
quick. I don't want to leave it in cold water. Tomó
an oar and he headed towards the western shore, following
Aragorn's boat, which you were taken away from
average current.

Thus the Company continued on a long path, surmounting the flanks and
turbulent waters, always have the surface. Acechaban desnudos forests
to both orillas, and they could not see them
ties that extend across them. The breeze amainó and the river flowed
without a sound. No song of the pájaro broke the silence. The sun
he flew misty to the middle as the day advanced, as long as he shone in a pale sky
like a tall white pearl. The light vanished in the west, and the night disappeared
llegó temprano, followed by a gray night and without stars. Hasta well entrance
the darkness and the quiet of the hours, they followed floating, guiding their low boats
the shadows that are hidden above the forests of the west. Large trees
they pass like ghosts, looking at their twisting branches
through the clouds hasta el agua. It was dark and cold.
Frodo heard and listened to the terrible murmur and whirlpool of the river
as it stirs between the branches of the trees and the floating madera seeks the orilla,
until his head rests and falls into a peaceful dream.


 9


 


Frodo was defeated by Sam. If you find a tendon, fine
abrigado, low tall gray hair trees in a quiet rincón del
forest in the western orilla of the Gran Río, Anduin.
He slept all night, and the gray of the morning was
faint between the naked branches. Gimli was busy with a little boy
fire seeks.

They left again before the day dawned. It's not that
The mayor of the company is anxious to know what the south is: they are
happy with that decision, which must take longer to come
to go to Rauros and the Isla Tindrock, where it will be
some days away; and they realized that the river would lift them more
they left to drift with the current to their antojo, administering
own rhythm, without having any desire to be aware of the pilgrims who
More than that, what was the rumble that will come to the end. Aragorn
the climate became warmer and more cheerful, as long as the winter stopped.
on force against the coming dog. But I insisted on that
at least they must go up every day and follow them as they travel.

Without embargo, no sign of any of the enemies this day
the next. The gray and dull hours passed without accidents. To think about it
As the third day of your journey progressed, the lands slowly changed:
the trees became clear and then completely disappeared. En la
oriental orilla on its izquierda there are large shapeless sides that extend
hacia the sky; browns and marks are visible,
as the fire passed over her, without leaving any brizna de
living green: a hostile desert without a tree or a tree
solid stone to remove the vacuum. They were brought to you
Lands that extend, vast and desolate, within it
Bosque Negro del Sur and the hills of Emyn Muil. What a plague


496


 


either war or evil deed of the enemy has taken over the whole region,
no one could Aragorn decide.

To the west and above, the land was also devoid of trees, but
it was liana, and in many green places with wide llanuras de
hierba. On this side of the river there are large forests
juncos, so tall that they impede all sight of the west, while there
small boats pass by whispering off their undulating orillas.
Their shades and branded plumes are doubled and shaken inside
air fresh and light, silbando suave and sadly. Here and there, across the openings,
Frodo could suddenly glimpse the waving meadows,
and much more there, hills at the back, and more, in it
edge of sight, a dark line, where they march
southernmost rows of the Cloudy Mountains.

There are no signs of evenings alive in motion, except for passengers. De
There were a lot of these: little ones had whispered and cried between them
juncos, but they are rarely seen. One or two times travellers
I looked at the aleteo and the moan from the wings of the cisnes, and at the sight he came to light
a great phalanx surfacing the sky.

¡Cisnes!, I say Sam. It's very great too!

Yes, I say Aragorn, and they are cisnes negros.

How vast, empty and sad are you in this country!
I say Frodo. Always imagine it while traveling to the south
.

Aragorn. Today is winter and we are clear of the sea. Here...
The world is cold until the sudden spring, and we can still
keep snow again. A lo lejos, en la Bahía de Belfalas, hacia
from where the Anduin runs, it is warm and cheerful, sometimes, or it would be
don't be by the Enemigo. But here we are no longer in sixty words,
I suppose, on the south side of the Cuarenta Sur, in your Comarca, hundreds
of thousands more. I'm looking now at the south
across the northern plains of the Marca del Jinete, Rohan, the land of
the Señores de los Caballos. Inside we will shortly arrive to unpack the
Limlight that comes from Fangorn to join the Gran
Rio. This is the northern limit of Rohan; and all the years ago
which extends between the Limlight and the White Mountains pertaining to it


 


to


los Rohirrim. It is a fertile and pleasant land, and its grass
no rival; but on these days in Aciagos people don't live together
río ni cabalga a menudo hasta sus orillas. El Anduin is also, but the orcs
you can shoot your rifles at a great distance across the stream; and lately, if
he says, if they are afraid to cross the water and attack the rivers
y sementales de Rohan.

Sam looked at each other with disquiet. The trees have them
I look at hostiles before, how secrets and secrets are housed
peligros acechantes; now it seemed that the trees would still be there.
I felt that the company was left naked, in large numbers
open boats in the middle of the unprotected lands, and in a river that was
the frontier of war.

On the next day or two, as you progress, constantly lift yourself up
Hacia el Sur, this feeling of insecurity has grown throughout the company
. For a whole day they returned to us and were reassured
hacia adelante. The orillas were removed. Ready the river is washed away
if you are lower; large pedestrian beaches extend to the east, y
it had weight banks in the water, for that reason
If a careful navigation is required. The Tierras Pardas are raised in desolate woods, above
the colors flowed in the cold air of the East. On the other side, los
prados have been converted into undulating hills of dried grass between one
land of swamps and matas. Frodo was exhausted by thinking about the prados
and the sources, the clear sun and the soft rains of Lothlórien.
Just talked about it and didn't laugh at any of the bottles.
Each member of the Company was employed with their own employees.
Thoughts.
 
The heart of Legolas was below the stars of one
A true night in some light in the north among the haymakers;
Gimli played with the gold in his mind, wondering if he did
It would be suitable to be forged in the Lady's gift box.
Merry and Pippin, in the middle boat, felt uncomfortable, yes
Boromir, seated in the proa, murmured for so much, sometimes biting the birds,
as restlessness or doubt will consume it, time and time again
grabbing an oar and lifting the boat he searches for Aragorn.
Once Pippin, standing at the bow looking ahead, caught one
I shine extraño in my eyes looking forward, looking at Frodo.
It took time for him to decide that, although the boats would not be as much


dangerous


 


como le habían hecho creer,
they were much more uncomfortable than what I had imagined
. He felt oppressed and miserable without doing anything
more than contemplating the winter lands that are drying up and the gray waters
on both sides. Don't worry when using the remotes
they confided one to Sam.

At the same time as the fourth day, I marveled
step on top of the inclined heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the
boats that followed him; He was sleepy and looked at the camp and there
sensation of the earth below the pies. Suddenly, something happened
attention: at first I looked at it with indifference, then I incorporated it and
if he rubbed his eyes; but when you turn to look, you don't
he saw it.

That night they camped on a small island looking for it
orilla oeste. Sam returned to Frodo in his hands. «Tuve a
I'll ask you one or two hours before we left you, Lord Frodo."
I say. «The quiz was not a dream. In all ways, he was extraño."

«Good, what happened?», Frodo said, knowing that Sam
no one would be reassured until he was counting on his story, it was the one who was born. «
I didn't see anything and I didn't think anything that would make me wonder after that
salimos de Lothlórien.

He was not so gracious, Señor Frodo. He was extraño. All
well, if it wasn't a dream. It's worth more." Fue
so: There is a trunk with eyes!

The trunk is fine, I say Frodo. There are a lot of them
río. ¡Pero omite los ojos!

Eso no lo haré, dijo Sam. "They were the eyes that let me hear
, so I can decide it. I guess you thought it was a floating trunk...
Pay attention. Entries look like the trunk
we were slowly rising. And that was extraño, so I can tell, that's it
we all float together on the road. Just think about it
eyes: dos dots pale, brilliant, over a piece in it
extreme search of the trunk. More than that, it wasn't a log, it could be tenía
rowing boats, cases like those of a cisne, only they seem bigger
and they hunched in and out of the water.


 


499


It was when I incorporated myself and rubbed my eyes, with intention
to shout, we followed after I had quitted it
dream of the head. Because of that, it was the one who was looking for
quickly and looked for beyond Gimli. But no yes
These two lamps made me move and look, oh yes
he recovered the feeling. When I turned to look, ya
it wasn't there. Sin embargo, creo que vislumbré, con el rabillo del
Oh, as I used to say, something dark that disappeared below
the shadow of the orilla. Without embargo, no more eyes.

I say to myself: «Soñando tra vez, Sam Gamgee», I say;
and don't say anything more at this moment. But I was thinking about things,
and now I'm not so sure. That's his opinion, sir
Frodo?

There would be nothing more with it than a log, the twilight and
I dream in your eyes, Sam, I say Frodo, this was the first time
that these eyes see. But it doesn't. Los vi allá
to the north before we went to Lorien. And there is an extraña
Creature with eyes undergoing the flight at night. Haldir
also the way. You remember the information of the Elves that
were they among the gang of orcs?

Ah, say Sam, yes; and I also remember more. Not me
enjoy my thoughts; But thinking about one thing or another, y
in the stories of Señor Bilbo and all of it, I think I could put a name to it
criatura, to the eye of good cubero. A despicable name. ¿Gollum, quizá?

Yes, that's what I fear at some time, I say Frodo.
From night to day. I guess I was looking at it
Moria and then we followed the track; but we hoped that ours
estancia in Lórien will divert him again. There
miserable creature must have been hidden in the woods, by chance,

We will keep ourselves alert, or we will hear from our loved ones.
like one of these nights, sometimes we become confused and feel something.
But let's try to do it more quickly. Tú acuéstate.
Y'all told me about that. There is no need to worry.
Trancos or the last night. I will keep watch. I can sleep
However, we are no longer equipped in one bottle, as I said
.


500    

Maybe, I say Frodo, and I could say "team with eyes".
Vigilarás; but you only promise to let me know halfway down the road
Hacia la morning, if nothing happens before.

At the dead hour, Frodo rose from a deep and dark dream to
meet Sam sacudiéndolo. It's a pain to lose yourself, he whispered
Sam, but that's what you said. There is nothing that matters, or not
much. I created a soft chapoteo and a
olfateo, hace a rat; but there are a lot of extra sounds
junto a un río por la noche.

He approached, and Frodo incorporated himself, curled up in his mantas
and I spoke against the dream. The minutes and hours passed slowly, y
nothing happened. Frodo was giving in to the temptation
to approach again when a dark shape, barely visible, floated
look for one of the landed boats. A large white hand if
I could vaguely distinguish when climbing disparately and grasping the edge; dos
pale eyes, like lamparas, shine brightly when looking inside, and
Then they stood up and looked at Frodo in their eyes.
They were no more than a couple of meters away, and Frodo watched them
sweet silbido of contained breathing. He stood up, sacking Sting de
on the ground, and looked at the eyes. Immediately, the light comes on
apago. Hubo otro silbido y un chapoteo, y la obscura
shape of the trunk if alejó río lower, losing it at night. Aragorn
if removed in dreams, if God turned and incorporated. "

¿What's happening?", he whispered, taking a leap and trying to
Frodo. "You heard something while you were asleep. That's why you heard it
the sword?"

, replied Frodo. "Or al menos, I suppose.

" ¡Ah!, I say Aragorn. "So that we know our little jumper
?", he asked. We followed Moria and hasta
Nimrodel. From the moment we submitted to the bottles, they were tumbled
once or twice a night; but it's more cunning than a zorro and so many
I wander like a piece. He hoped that the river journey would win him,
but he is a very astute sailor.
send your hand to the unfortunate. We can do it.

Now, I'll watch what I asked for at night. I want this


 


501


sea ​​useful. But if I can't, we'll try to lose it.
It's very dangerous. Leaving aside the nocturnal asesino por su
Your own story, you can ask any enemy you are looking for with us
trail.

The night passed until Gollum returned to show one
shadow. After this, the Company remains alert,
but they no longer saw Gollum while the journey lasted. Yes
When he followed him, he was very cautious and astute. TO
Aragorn's instancias, they remained during long battles, and there
orillas passed quickly. But there was little of the country, anyway
They traveled mainly at night and at night, avoiding the day
and hiding as much as the earth would allow. In this way, the time
I passed without accidents until the seventh day.

The weather continued gray and cloudy, with the wind of the
summer, but at night, the sky of the west is
despejó y
Charcoals of faint light, amarillos and pale green, below the gray orillas of clouds. Allí
if the white cortege of the new moon was seen shining in us
remote lakes. Sam contemplated it and ate the dinner.

The next day, the landscape on both sides began to change
quickly. The orillas began to elevate the pedregosas. Ready
they crossed rocky and mountainous terrain, and in ambas orillas
had to be filled with blades buried by deep thorns and
ends, between zarzas and enredaderas. Tras ellos get up
low and desmoronados acantilados, and chimeneas of eroded gray stone,
darkened by the door; and more, if high crests rise
crowned with nitrogenous fir trees by the wind. If they look for a
the gray mountainous region of Emyn Muil, the southern border
de las Tierras Salvajes.

There were a lot of things in the acantilados and las
rock chimeneas, and throughout the day, bands of pájaros were in the air.
Aragorn watched the books thoughtfully, wondering
if Gollum had been making some disguise and had heard the news of it
on travel it was extending into the desert. More late, when I leave




 








they had entered the stream like a crest of dientes,
the boats are all pinned.


 


503


The Quickest Nights! But no one can live in Sarn Gebir,
the little wheel of the water disminuyó, and the shadow of the summer
de día ni de noche.

¡Atrás, atrás!, shouted Aragorn. ¡Turn! Turn if you can! Hundió
the oar in the water, trying to sujetar the boat y
make it turn.

This is away from me, I tell Frodo. No sand
we have brought us so many lejos: the Anduin river is faster than it
I thought. Sarn Gebir ya debe estar cerca.

With great effort they will detuvieron the boats and
let them turn slowly; but at the beginning only pudieron
advance a little against the current, and sometimes fall
they look further to the oriental orilla. Ahora, dark y
little man, if he got up at night. ¡

Everyone, row!, shouted Boromir. ¡Rema! Oh no
they will arrastrarán a los bajíos. As I spoke, Frodo heard
that the quilla rested against the stone.

At this moment I heard a tintino of bow strings: various
Fleches silbaron above them, and some cayeron between them. A
Hirió to Frodo between the men, who would swing forward
with a shout, just the oar; but the flecha may still be there,
he frustrates his secret heart. Other crosses
the capucha de Aragorn; and a third time I kept signatures on the edge of the
next time, he seeks Merry's hand. Sam creyó vislumbrar
black figures running from one side to the other across the widths
banks of guijarros that extend down the eastern orilla. Parecian
muy cerca.

  —¡Yrch! —I say Legolas, speaking in his own language—.

¡Orcos! —gritted Gimli—. ¡

Look at what is the work of Gollum! —I told Sam to Frodo—. Y
a good place to choose, además. The river seems to be decided by us
en sus brazos!

Everyone leaned forward, pulling the oars; including Sam
if it agarró. At every moment they hope to feel the bite of
the flechas of black plumes. Much silbaron above their heads or impactaron in the water


search    

; but no more impactful. It was dark, though
no dark wonder for the nocturnal eyes of the Orcs, ya la
light of the stars must have offered to their cunning enemies algo
of Madeira gray of the ships forged by the elves who broke the magic of
los arqueros de Mordor.

It was difficult to be sure that they were actually going to be moving around; but little by little
the orilla disappeared at night. Por fin, asta dande podían
Juzgar, they have once again arrived at the middle of the arroyo and
They have to move their boats back a little to the top
salient rocks. Luego, giving half a turn, they pulsed with each other
fuerzas hacia la orilla oeste. I lower the shadow of
the shrubs that were growing above the water were removed and recovered
the alien.

Legolas left the oar and took away the bow
I had traveled from Lórien. Luego jumped to tierra y
took a few steps by the orilla. Tensing the bow y
placing a flecha, he turned, looking across the river, over the top of the river, over
the darkness. On the other side of the water there are sharp grits, but
no se veía nada.

Frodo looked up at the elf who was rising above him, while
I went out at night, looking for a blank when I disappeared. On cabeza
It was dark, crowned with strings of white stars that shone in it
negros charcos del cielo. But now, rising and sailing
From the top, the great clouds advance, sending darkness
listen to the star fields. A sudden fear arose from there
Company.

Elbereth Gilthonieir sighed Legolas as he looked forward to arriving. Justo
when he did, a dark shape, like a cloud and yet not a cloud,
it can move much more quickly, the blackness of the blood will flow
the Company headed over and blocked the whole thing
light at your pace. Ready to look like a big one
winged creature, blacker than the depths of the night. Fierce voices arose
to greet her from the other side of the water. Frodo heard a sudden escalophrying
who ran through it and oppressed her heart; had a chill


  mortal

, like the memory of a life story, in your man.
If you hang up, how to hide yourself.

Suddenly, the great bow of Lorien sang. Striking I am there
Flecha of the elven heart. Frodo looked up. Cases for more
él, the winged shape turns sharply. If you saw a great surprise
at the door of the air, disappearing into the penumbra
of the oriental orilla. The sky turned clear again. Hubo
darkness, and quiet place. Ni flecha ni grito volvieron a llegar
del este esa noche.

At the edge of a rato, Aragorn led the boats to the river.
looking for water, and among them a rocky barrier was raised.
tientas porilla during a trecho, asta que...
They encountered a small, shallow bay. A few low trees grow there.
And let's know how those things were, Frodo said. In this case
Here the Company decided to ask itself and hope for love:
it was useless to try to advance at night.
Don't camp or set off the fire, as long as they remain locked in the boats, landed
muy juntos. ¡

Alabado sea Galadriel's bow and her hand and eye
Legolas!, I said to Gimli, as he chewed a piece of meat. ¡Ese
it was a mighty shot in the darkness, my friend!

But who can decide where God is?, says Legolas.

No way, I say Gimli. But I am happy with that shade
no if it comes. I didn't like anything. I recorded it late
the shadow of Moria, the shadow of the Balrog, ended
in a whisper.

It wasn't a Balrog, Frodo said, he was still fighting for it
I'm sorry that he invaded him. It was even colder. I create
yes... I took a pause and looked at the silence.

What are your opinions? —asked Boromir enthusiastically, leaning away
on the boat, how will you try to see Frodo's beak.

I think... —No, I won't say it —Frodo replied—. Sea lo
who once, on the fall, has consternated with our enemies.

—That seems so —said Aragorn—. Without embargo, we don't know where it is, what things
, I don't want to continue. This night we must all stay without sleeping! There
darkness    
nos oculta ahora. Pero ¿
Who knows what the day will show us? Keep your weapons on
hand!
Sam followed straight ahead, hitting the thrust of his sword as you can count
with the dedos, and looking at the sky. —Es muy extraño
—murmuró—. The Moon is the same in the Region and in it
las Tierras Salvajes, o debería serlo. But it's outside of your journey,
or am I misunderstanding in my calculations. Record, sir
Frodo, who the moon was talking while we were on the plane, on the top of it
tree: in a full moon week, I calculate. We left for a week
on the way again, when a new moon appeared as fine as it was
a short story, as we never have permanent hubs in it
Pozo Elfico. I remember three nights there with certainty, and me
it seems to record more variations, but I swear that
It wasn't even a whole month. Anyone would think that time
no contaba allí!
Tierra, sometimes, we are in a time that in other places you have passed
. It wasn't like this, I think, until Filo Plateado took us back to Anduin.






that we return to the time that flows across mortal lands
hasta el Gran Mar. I don't remember any moon, ni
new and old, in Dear Galadhon: only stars of the night and only
of the day.

Legolas moved in his boat. No, time does not hold jamás,
dijo; but the change and the growth are not
the same in all things and places. For the Elves the world moves, and it moves a lot
fast and very slow. Quickly, because the same things change
a little, and all the time: it's a pain for them. Slow, please
there is no need to count the years that pass, not for the same reason.
The stations that pass are no more than the waves that are always repeated in the wide
y wide corridor. Without embargo, under the sun all things should be enjoyed al
final.

But the exhaustion is slow in Lorien, I say Frodo. El poder
the Lady is in it. Ricas are the hours, however short they seem
, en Caras Galadhon, whence Galadriel empuña el
elven ring.


 


507


And so no one should be told outside Lórien, no one should
to me —I say Aragorn—. No more troubles than that! But that's how it is, Sam:
on this earth you lost your account. All the time flowed quickly
for us, as for the Elves. The moon has passed, and one
new moon grows and appears in the world outside, while we hold ourselves
there. And by the night a new moon began to appear. The winter
cases has ended. The flowing time brings a spring of little hope.

The night passed in silence. Don't let anyone else call you
side of the water. Travellers, pinned in their boats, heard it
climate change. The air flew warm and very quiet
below the large humid clouds that have been tied floating from the
on and the gentle seas. The roar of the river above
the rocks of the rapids seemed to be made more fiercely and searched for.










Go to the high island, but no further there. There you will return to me
Hogar, only if you help me I don't need anyone's reward
company.

The day was loving and the darkness had dissipated a little.
If he decides that Aragorn and Legolas must advance immediately
off the coast, while the others remain on the side of the coast
quieter waters beyond the rapids.
botes. Aragorn hoped to meet some way that they could...
—The boats

of the Elves they are not hundirían, sometimes —I say—, however
This does not mean that we will cross Sarn Gebir
with life. No one has ever seen it. The Men of Gondor did not build a fireplace
In this region, there is no need to worry in its days of glory
on the back he took the Anduin further to the Emyn Muil;
but there is a transport path to some place on the western coast,
you can meet him. Everyone can't have anything wrong; pues
only use light boats to travel from the Tierras Salvajes hasta Osgiliath, y
the hicieron has been around for one year, when the Orcs of Mordor came out
to multiply.


 


—Rare


vez in my life I got on a Northern boat, y
the Orcs sailed along the east coast —I say Boromir—. We move forward
, the weight will increase with each thousand, even if you are near a fireplace.

The pilgrim acecha on every path hacia el sur —he replied
Aragorn—. We wait every day. Yes no regresamos en ese
time, we will know that the disease has nitrated us. Entonces
they will have to look for a new leader and follow him as best they can.

With great weight, Frodo leaves for Aragorn y
Legolas will suffer the escalade and disappear into the darkness; but
your fears turned out to be unfounded. Only have passed two or three hours
, and it was only half a day, when the shadows
de los exploradores reaparecieron. «

Everything is fine,” I said to Aragorn as he descended the ravine. «
There is a path that leads to a good pier which is also there
transitable. The distance is not great: the speed limit
It's only half a thousand for us, and they hold a little more than one
thousand of wide. Not much further, the arroyo will turn clear
and calm again, although he runs quickly. Our task is more difficult








we were brought safely and soundly to the southern embarcadero.

We gently lower ourselves to the shallow orilla of a small hole.» Parecía
have been dug into the river orilla, not by hand, until by it
water that descended on the reels from the Sarn Gebir against a small pillar of
hoarse who entered the arroyo. More allá, la
orilla suddenly got up until a gray acantilado, and there was no more
paso para los peatones.

The short time has passed, and a pale and cloudy sky...
The same thing happened. They were seated right next to the water
the confused and rusty noise of the rapid eyes in the darkness;
they were filled with sleep, and their hearts were filled with so many shades
como el día que agonizaba.

Good, here we are, and here we must spend another night,
I say Boromir. We need to sleep, and even if Aragorn is here
cross the doors of Argonath at night, we are all longed for
cansados, excepto, sin duda, our robust enano.


 


511


Gimli did not respond: he was absent while he was sent.

Let us discuss everything we can do now, I say Aragorn.
Today we must travel another day. Except for that
climate changes once more and our emotions, we will tend to
good opportunity to escape bulls, without being seen by any eye in the
orilla este. But this night you must keep an eye on every turn:
three hours of descanso and one of guard.

I didn't worry about anything except for a short night
an hour before the amanecer. As ready as fully loved,
partieron. The news was dispelling. If they keep it, look for it more
possible on the western side, and could go towards the borrosas
silhouettes of the low angled ones that rise each time higher, the faces are shaded with
his pies in the rushing river. In the middle of the morning, the clouds
they dispersed and began to love with strength. Cubrieron
its bottles with the stones to avoid that
they unraveled and continued to drift; little could it be seen before
Alrededor through the gray curtains that fall.

The rain, without embargo, did not last long. Slowly, the sky
it cleared up, and suddenly the clouds broke away, and so on
The deshilachados flecos extendieron río arrive hacia el norte. There
the cloud and the fog have disappeared. Before the trips were extended
Grietas also and stretches, some derribados árboles. The canal itself
it stretches and the river, more quickly. Now they move forward at full speed
with little hope of holding or turning, regardless of what they encounter
more forward. Above him there was a path of pale blue sky,
to his father the dark and sombre River, and before him
, blacks, blocking the path of the sun, the hills of Emyn Muil, in which
no se veía ninguna abertura.

Frodo, looking forward, goes to the lejos dos grandes rocks
they look like: they look like big pináculos or pilares de piedra
. Highs, shoes and amenazantes, they raise one above the other.
Orilla del Rio. A narrow opening appears between them.  
and the river stopped the boats there.

—Contemplate the Argonath, the Pillars of the Reyes! —gritó
Aragorn—. Ready to pass by. ¡Keep the boats online,


512    

and as much separation as possible! Keep the center of the river!

As Frodo was led to his door, the great pilares stood up
how to receive it. Gigantes le parecieron, vasts
gray figures, silent but pleasant. Entonces vio que,
in effect, they were formed and modeled: the craftsmanship and the power of the past
they have been fortified, and yet preserved, through the sun
and the rains of forgotten years, the imposing seedlings in which
they were tall. Above large pedals founded in them
the deep waters are guided by the large reyes of the stone: even with
Cloudy eyes and fruitful cejas, fruncían el ceño hacia el Norte. There
left hand of each one was raised with the palm outwards in a gesture of
warning; in each hand there was a hacha; above each head
he had a desmoronados helmet and crown.
They also flaunt great power and majesty, the silent guardians of a
the king disappeared for a long time. Fear and admiration took over from Frodo, he was encouraged
, looking up and down the view from the boat
if it was hard. Including Boromir tilted his head while the boats passed by zumba
, fragile and fleeting like hojitas, below
shadow imperceedera of the centinelas of Númenor. So they entered it
dark abyss of the Gates.

The expanded foams are lifted on both sides
Lados hasta alturas insospechadas. The pale sky extended to him. The black waters roar and,
At the top of his wheels, Sam, at the front, whispered and moaned: «
Here's where! This place is so horrible! Déjenme salir




 








and I kept the guard there. But it is said that not a man's step
of the night it will be over them. Oigo the interminable voice
de Rauros llamando.

La Compañía descansó un ratato, derivando hacia el sur en
the current that flowed through the center of the lake. Comieron
some and some time you can row
they were ready to continue on the path. The slopes of the hills of the west quedaron
in the shadows, and the Sun returned red and red. Here y
there was a misty star. The three picos are raised ante
ellos, darkening in the twilight. Rauros roared with a great

 
514   

Voz. I would drink over the water when I was there
travelers left until the shadow of the hills.

The tenth day of travel has ended. Dejaron
beyond the Earth Salvajes. They cannot follow forward without having to choose
between the east and the west. The last stage of the
Búsqueda les esperaba.


 Aragorn


 


I lead them to the right side of the river. Allí, en
on the western side, in the shade of Tol Brandir, a
green meadow descended to the water from the feet of Amon Hen.
From there, the first soft edges of the hill, cubiertas of trees, are raised,
and the trees extend towards the west along the curves of the orillas
of the lake. A small manual plugged in the mutters and fed them
hierba.

"We will look forward to this night," Aragorn said. «This is the Prado
of Parth Galen: a beautiful place on the ancient days of Verano. Esperemos
that no one has ever been wrong."

Amarraron their boats in the green orillas and next to
she loved it. Montaron guard, but no guard
ni oyeron to his enemies. Yes Gollum had plane
follow him, he remains invisible and without sight. Without embargo,
as the night progressed, Aragorn became restless, giving turns to menudo en
on sueño and dessando. From the drug he rose and fled
hacia Frodo, a quien le tocaba vigilar.

'Por qué despiertas?' asked Frodo. It's not your turn to be vigilant.

No, replied Aragorn; but a shadow and a
amenaza have been growing in my dream. It would be good to have fun
your sword.

¿So what?, said Frodo. Are you looking for enemies?

We see what Aguijón can show, replied Aragorn.

Frodo stole the elven sword of his devil. For your consternation
, the edges shone softly at night. ¡Orcos!, I say.
Don't search much, and without any doubt search, apparently.

I feared him, I said Aragorn. But sometimes it doesn't exist
on this side of the Rio. Sting's light is dim, y
I'll only find out about the secrets of Mordor while wandering there
leaders of Amon Lhaw. I never heard of hours


5i6


 


en Amon Hen. However, you know what can happen in these
August days, now that Minas Tirith does not protect you
passages of the Anduin. But we must proceed with caution.

The day passed with fire and humour. Below, in this, if
there were black streaks of clouds like the humus of a great fire.
The rising sun lit up from below with calls
a rojo turbio; but soon he ascended to the top of her to a broken sky. There
The summit of Tol Brandir was crowned with gold. Frodo looked at me
hacia este and contemplated the high island. Sus laderas are lifted
abruptly over the flowing water. Muy por encima de los altos acantilados
have filled the sides above the three trees, one
trans otro; and above her, again, dear grays rise
of inaccessible rock, crowned by a large stone needle. Many people fly around in circles around their elder, but no
if you see
ningún otro ser vivo .
When they finished business, Aragorn rejoined the Company
. Since I have seen the day, I say: the day of
the election that we have so much postponed. This will be now
of our company, who has traveled so many in the camera? ¿
Let us travel to the west with Boromir and go to the wars of Gondor, o
let's go to this place the Miedo and the Shadow? ¿Or we will break ours
would we move and move from one side to the other as each Elija does?
Let's say what we've done, it must be ready. We cannot quedarnos
here a lot of time. The enemy is in the eastern orilla, we know it; but I'm afraid
that the orcs are on this side of the water.
There was a long silence in which nothing had moved.
Bien, Frodo, I say Aragorn to the end. I'm afraid of the burden
bring it over you. You are the Carrier designated by the Council
. Only you can choose your own fireplace. In this assumption
I cannot advise you. I am not Gandalf, and yet I have tried
put me on my side, no matter what design or hope I had
it will be here now the election will follow being in your hands. Tal
it's your destiny.
Frodo did not respond immediately. Luego spoke slowly. If
you have to give it up, but I can't elect. The charge e.g
  pesada
. Give me an hour more and talk. ¡Déjame
to be alone!
Aragorn looked at him with amiable sympathy. —Muy bien, Frodo,
hijo de Drogo —dijo—. Tendrás un hora y estarás
Alone. We will ask for a quote here. But no worries
ni te desvíes.









Frodo remained there for a moment with the gacha head. Sam, que
having been observing his love with great concern, he went there
he thought and muttered: «It's as obvious as a pick, but it doesn't matter what
Sam Gamyi is ready to talk now."

In pursuit, Frodo rose and flew; y Sam away
which, while the others were contained and not
They looked at him faithfully, Boromir's eyes followed Frodo carefully until he was
I lost sight of the trees at the foot of Amon Hen.

Wandering at the beginning through the woods, Frodo discovered that
His pies were removed from the sides of the hill.
I went on a journey, the ruins of an ancient fireplace.
There are tall stone ladders on the embanked ones, but now they are
agrietadas and desgastadas, hendidas por las raíces de los árboles. During
I suffered a crime, regardless of where I was from, until now
I went to a grassy place. Alrededor crecían serbales, y en
medium had an even and flat stone. The small meadow of the highlands is
it opened in the summer and was now illuminated by the light of the morning sun.
Frodo saw it and saw the river, much for it,
hacia Tol Brandir and the pájaros that fly in circles in the great abyss of air
which separated him from the virgin island. The voice of Rauros
it was a powerful, rugged mezclado with a deep and throbbing extrusion.

He felt it on the stone and held the barbilla with it
hands, looking at this, but coming little with the eyes. All
what happened from the time Bilbo left the county
on your mind, and record and reflect on everything
what could be recorded of Gandalf's words. El tempo transcurría,
and continued without further search for an election.

Suddenly, without knowing your thoughts: an extra sensation
I invaded him: something was left of him, one
mirada hostil observed it. He took a leap and turned around; but the only one is


vio


 


, as if by surprise, he was in Boromir, and on the rostrum he was sleeping
y amable.

Fear for you, Frodo —I say, acercándose—. Yes
Aragorn keeps reason and the orcs are still looking, so none of us will die
wander alone, less than nadie: so much depends on you.
And my heart is also weighed down. I can ask myself now and talk about it
Rate, who met you? He would console me. Where?
So much so, that every discussion becomes a continuous debate.
But dos juntos quizá encuentren la sapiduría.

You are lovely, replied Frodo. But I don't believe that
Ningún discursi me ailude. Because what I have to do, but I keep it
I'm sorry to do it, Boromir: I'm sorry.

Boromir looked in silence. Rauros roared without cesar. El
I come and murmur in the branches of the trees. Frodo was extreme.

Suddenly, Boromir looked up and felt himself on his side. This is safe
de que no sufres necessarily?, I say. I want help.
I need advice in your difficult decision. Will you not accept mine?

I believe that you will give me advice,
Boromir, I say Frodo. And I would seem to know if it wasn't
for the attention of my heart.

¿Advertencia? ¿Advertencia contra qué?, I said Boromir abruptly.

Against demora. Against the fireplace it seems easier. Contra el
I go back to the load that is imposed on me. Contra... bueno, yes
it is necessary to decide it, against the faith in the strength and truth of men.

However, this strength has protected you for a long time, please, in you
small country, although you don't know it.

I have no doubt of the value of your people. But the world is
changing. The murals of Minas Tirith may be fierce, however
not enough. If they fail, what will happen next?

Let's fight with valor. However, there is no hope of that
no fallen.

No hope while the Ring lasts, I say Frodo.

¡Ah! ¡The Ring!, I say Boromir, with bright eyes. ¡El Ring! ¿
It is not an alien destiny that we suffer so much
Do you doubt something so small? So small! Y
I saw him only for an instant in Elrond's house. ¿No podría
to see it again?


  519

the extraño shined in the eyes of Boromir, but on his beak he followed being lovable
y amistoso. It's better that it remains hidden, I replied.

As you wish. I don't care, I say Boromir. ¿Aun so, no puedo
would you like to talk about it? Because it seems like you always think only about your power
in the hands of the Enemigo: in his bad uses, not in his good.
The world is changing, he says. Minas Tirith will be there
Anillo persists. But why? Of course, if the ring is together with it
Enemigo. But why, will you spend time with us? ¿

Are you not in the Council?, replied Frodo. Porque...
We can't use it, and what we do with it turns out badly.

Boromir rose and walked impatiently. As follows
adelante, gritó. Gandalf, Elrond, all these people
I taught you how to decide this. For the same ones, you can keep it right. These elfs
, half-elves and wizards, sometimes sufrirían.
However, I wonder that they are wise and not simply shy. But
each one with its own species. Sincere men of heart, they will never leave
corrupt. Nosotros, los de Minas Tirith, hemos sido firmes during
long years ago. Let's not abandon our power
Señores magos, only strength to defend us, strength in one
just cause. ¡Y he here! in our necessity, randomness is present in the light
Anillo de Poder. It's a gift, I say; a gift for the enemies of Mordor.
It's a mistake not to use it, to use the power of the enemy against
el. The brave, the despised, only these will achieve victory
. What could there be a warrior at this moment, a great leader?
What could Aragorn do? Or if you deny it, why not
Boromir? The ring would give me power to send.
How I would expulse the hues of Mordor, and all men would
unirían a mi estandarte!

Boromir walked from one side to the other, speaking more and more loudly.
In some cases, Frodo may have forgotten about Charlie
it centered on walls and weapons, and on the gathering of men; y
trazaba planes for great alliances and glorious victories;
and he derived Mordor, and was converted into a powerful one
king, benevolent and wise. Suddenly I realized and acted
los brazos.





 


to do it. It's not like that. The only plan that is
our proposal is that a median between the blinds in Mordor and
We offer the enemy all the possibilities to recover it. ¡
Wow!

Are you sure you understand it, my friend? I say, turning suddenly
haha Frodo. Says what I have to say. If so,
the most daring must forgive you. —But it's not really good for you
juicio el que se rebela?

—No, I'm keeping minedo —Frodo said—. I simply keep my food. But I'm happy
I must say so openly. Now I keep my mind more relaxed.

—Do you want to come to Minas Tirith? —gritted Boromir. Sus
The eyes shone and the face showed anxiety.

—No me entiendes —says Frodo—.
 
But will you sell it at least for a while? —insisted Boromir—.
Mi ciudad no está lejos; y
Mordor is a little lighter there than here. We spent a lot of time in the desert,
and you need news about what the Enemigo does before
implement. —Ven comigo, Frodo —dijo—. You need to scan
before your adventure, you must go. —I put my hand on it
hombro of the hobbit amiably; but Frodo felt the hand
contained excitement element. He left quickly
and I looked with alarm at the tall man, like the double of him
taller than he is and much stronger than he is.

Why were you so unpleasant? —I say Boromir—. Soy a
loyal man, no thief, no tracker. I need you Anillo: eso
ya know it; but you tell me what I don't want
ask me. Will you stop me as soon as I can plan my plan? ¡
Préstame el Anillo! ¡

No! No! —cried Frodo—. The Council told me that
he will take it.

It is through our own heart that the enemy will destroy us, we will cry out
Boromir. How enraged me! ¡Tonto! ¡Stupid obstinate! Running
voluntarily kills himself and ruins our cause. If any mortal holds
behind the Ring, they are the men of Númenor, and no
the medians. It's not yours except for a random misfortune. Podria
have my heart. Debería ser mio. Give it to me!


  5 21

Frodo didn't answer until he was gone until the big day
Boromir calmly with the most suave voice. Why don't you shake it? So don't do it
yes quieres? You can say that I was strong and I took it back there
strength. Because I lacked strength for you, midfielder, gritó; y
suddenly he jumped onto the top of the stone and landed on top of Frodo. On
beautiful and pleasant beak changed horribly; a furious fuego
brillaba en sus ojos.

Frodo separated and returned to place the stone between them.
Only one thing could be done: templando, sacó
the ring on the chain and I can quickly put it on it
I guess, just when Boromir was dancing over him. El Hombre
jadeó, I looked at him overshadowed for an instant and the place ran clear
, searching here and there between the rocks and the trees.

“Miserable embattler!” he shouted. Please put your hands first!
You! Now understanding what you think. You will take the Ring to Sauron
and we will sell them all. Only you have hoped for your opportunity to leave us.
in the summer. ¡Maltitos sean ustedes and all the medianos to death and darkness
! Entonces, al tropezar con una piedra, cayó de bruces
and that's when I pulled my mouth down. For a while it remained as unmovable as it was
curse the hubiera deribado; luego, de sudden, lloró.

He stood up and passed his hand over his eyes, taking a look
the tears. What am I saying?, he shouted. ¿Qué he hecho? ¡
Frodo, Frodo!, he shouted. ¡Vuelve! A curse invaded me,
pero ha pasado. ¡Vuelve!

No reply. Frodo didn't want to listen to his grit.
I was there, jumping blind for the journey there
top of the hill. The terror and the pain saved him, coming to his mind
the fierce and eloquent beak of Boromir and his ardent eyes.

Ready he only climbed to the top of Amon Hen y
if I deduce, jadeando. I go as if through a cloud a large room
Flat circle, paved with powerful stones and driven by one
at least desmoronada; and in the middle, above four
tall piles, had a high asiento, which was accessed by a ladder of many
escalones. Suddenly he felt himself in the old town, feeling like a child


lost    

that hubiera trepado to the throne of the los
reyes de las montañas.

At first, I don't go much. It seems like being in a world of
nothing in the one who alone had shadows: the ring was above
a mesa, y sin embargo, remote. No sound, just
brilliant live images. The world seems to have been embarrassed and
asked in silence. It was heard in the Asiento de la Visión, in Amon
Hen, the Colina del Ojo de los Hombres de Númenor. Hacia este,
I saw the expansion of unexplored lands, llanuras without name and
unexplored forests. Hacia el Norte Miró, y el Gran
The river extended like a belt beneath it, and the cloudy mountains
they are as small and tough as rotund ones. Hacia el oeste miró
and I leave the large meals of Rohan; y Orthanc, el
pináculo de Isengard, like a black spike. Miró hacia el su
, and the lower part of the Gran Rio was curved like one
the one who broke down and fell over the cataracts of Rauros in one
foamy pozo; a sparkling iris arch jugaba with humus;  
Y vio Ethir Anduin, the mighty delta of the Río, y
myriads of marine ves spin like white dust in the sun,
and beneath it is a green and plateaux sea, undulating in it
líneas interminables.

But then it was wonderful to see war signals. Las
Montañas Nubladas extendían como hormigueros: los ores brotaban
of a thousand agujeros. Below the ramas of the Black Forest
a lucha to death is hovered between Elves, Men and ferocious beasts. There
earth of the Beórnidos ardía; a cloud covered Moria;
the humus rose on the frontiers of Lorien.

The jinetes gallop over the Rohan's grass; lobos
they went up to the farm of Isengard. From the ports of Harad
zarpaban war boats; and from there the men move
without cesar: espadachines, lanceros, arqueros a horse,
carriages of jefes and carriages loaded. All the power of
Dark Lord was on the move. Once upon a time, turning to the south, he contemplated
Minas Tirith. Lejana parecía, y beautiful: de white murals,
with many towers, proud and beautiful above the mountainous background; sus


  523

at least they shine with maple, and their towers shine with
numerous standards. Hope leapt to her heart. But against Minas
Tirith rose from another fortress, stronger and stronger.
Hacia there, hacia este, on mirada we felt attracted by the strength. Paso
Morgul and the Embrujadas Mountains, and I contemplated it
that fell below the Sun. The fire shone amidst the humour.
The Mount of Destiny burned, and a great hedor rose. Entonces,
finally, on the lookout it was placed in it: wall to wall, at least to the other
almena, negro, inconmensurably fierce, mountain of hierro,
maple gate, diamond tower, the street: Barad-dûr, the Fort
of Sauron. All hope abandoned him.

And suddenly I felt the eye. He had an eye there
Dark Tower that did not sleep. Know what he has
wicked on mirada. A fierce and anxious will was there. Salto
hacia él; cases like a dedo I felt it, searching for it.
Quickly I would take it, I would know exactly where
was. Amon Lhaw touched him. Miró in Tol Brandir
, who is covered with the asiento, agachándose, cubriéndose the
cabeza con su capucha gris.

If you shouted: ¡Jamás, ¡jas! Was it...? In truth,  
I'm coming, I'm coming to you?". No I suppose. Entonces, como un destello de
some other point of power comes to mind
thought: ¡Quítatelo! ¡Quítatelo! ¡Tonto, stop it! ¡Quítate el
Ring!

The two farms played in it. For a moment, perfectly...
swinging between his piercing tips, he was twisted and tormented
. Of sudden he was aware of so much again, Frodo,
ni la Voz ni el Ojo: free to choose, and with one
remaining moment to do it. He left the ring above
dedo. It was buried under the clear light of the sun before the high east.
A black shadow seemed to pass like an arm across the top of the body; failed to
Amon Hen and so much hacia the west, and he disappeared. Entonces all
the sky was clear and blue and the people sang on each tree.

Frodo uses pie. A big mess dominated him, however
His will was firm and his heart was lighter. If you have a high voice


524    

to this end. Here's what I need, I say. Esto al menos es
clear: the pain of the ring is working included in it
Company, and the Ring must be abandoned before it has more
daño. Iré alone. Some people cannot confide, and those in whom I can
trust me, I'm wondering what's needed for me: the old man Sam, Merry and
Pippin. Trancos también: su corazón anhela a Minas Tirith, y

He quickly went down the path and returned to the grass
whence Boromir met him. Entonces se detuvo, escuchando. Creyo
oír gritos and calls from the forest search
of the orilla.

You'll be looking for me, I say. I wonder how much time has passed
foreign state. Now, I'll say it. Dudo. ¿Qué
can I do it?, he murmured. I have to go back now or never go back.
Don't try another opportunity. I hate dejarlos, y así
without any explanation. But I'm sure they'll understand it.
Sam will have it. What more can I do?

Slowly I took the ring and used it more than once. Disappeared
and down the hill, less than a whisper of the
wind.

They remained for a long time along the river. Over a period of time
they were in silence, moving restlessly; But now
They were sitting around and talking. Once again
when they try to talk about other things, above
long journeys and many adventures; they questioned Aragorn
about the king of Gondor and about ancient history, y
for the rest of his great works that could still be done in this place
outside the country in front of Emyn Muil: the kings of stone and
the thrones of Lhaw and Hen, and the great staircase next to it
Caídas de Rauros. But your thoughts and words always evolve
to Frodo and Anillo. What would happen to Frodo
? ¿Por qué dudaba?

I'm debating which path is the most desperado, I think
—I say Aragorn—. Y with reason. Now I'm more desperate than ever
there's no way for the company to go to this place, that's it
Gollum nos ha rastreado


  525, and we must fear that the secret of our journeys
ya haya sido revealed. But Minas Tirith is no longer looking for fire
and the destruction of the cargo.
We can remain there for a while and oppose ourselves valiantly;
but Señor Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do it
that including Elrond I said was beyond his power: to maintain
the Carga en secreto or contains all the power of the Enemigo
when he comes to take her back. This path would elect what we wanted
in Frodo's place? No it is. Now, without doubt, let's leave
más a Gandalf.
Grave is our loss —I say Legolas—. Without embargo, we must
make a decision without help. So we can't decide
and so help Frodo? Let's go and vote again! Yo
votaría por Minas Tirith.
And I also say Gimli. We, above all, were alone
sent to help the Carrier on the path, so as not to go further than he wanted
deseábamos; and not one of us is under the oath of the order
look for the Mount of Destiny. Flard was my expedition from Lothlórien.
However, I have brought so many letters, and I say this: now that we are connected
at the last option, I am clear that I cannot leave Frodo. Elegiría
to Minas Tirith, but if you don't do it, entonces
I will follow him.
And I also went with him, I said Legolas. Series
an infidelity dispatched now.
Let's say, in truth, a treat for all of us, I say
Aragorn. But if he goes to this place, therefore not everyone has to go with him;
I don't think everyone should do it. This adventure is desperation: a lot
for one person as for three or two, or just one. Yes
Allow me to elect, I would mention to three companions
: Sam, I couldn't bear it any other way; y Gimli;
You are not willing to let go.





 
y yo mismo. Boromir will return to his city, whence above
Father and people need it; and with them they will deberían ir los demás
, or at least Meriadoc and Peregrin, if Legolas is...
¡

This won't do anything! —merry shouted—. We can't stop Frodo!
Pippin and I'm always here wherever I am, y
we'll do it again. But we don't know what that meant.
There are many different places, in the Comarca or in Rivendel. Series
a care and a cruelty left that Frodo was in Mordor. ¿Por qué
can't we hold it?
—We must detain him —said Pippin—. And that's what it is
worry, this is safe. You know that we won't access that
go east. And he doesn't like asking for them to anyone who accompanies him,
poor old man. Imagine it: only in Mordor!
Pippin was extreme. But the wicked and stupid hobbit would die
know that you don't have to wait for it. You should know that
we cannot detain him, we cannot dejaremos him.
I can't stand it at all because I love myself. Don't worry about this fireplace
tomar. Of course not! What is Minas Tirith like?
? “Where is this, Boromir?” asked Aragorn. ¿Has
Boromir? I thought for a second. Yes and no, I replied
slowly. Yes: I met him a little further up the hill and he was happy
with el. I told her that she was going to Minas Tirith and not elsewhere
summer. Me enfadé y me dejó. Disappeared. Never again
seeing that something like this will happen, no matter what I hear
in the words. You have to take the ring. You can't meet him
again. He thought it would turn contigo.
"Is that all you have to say?" said Aragorn, looking intently.
y no muy amiablemente a Boromir.
Yes, I replied. I won't say anything more.
“This is bad!” Sam shouted, taking a leap. No se qué
He has been working on this man. That's why Señor Frodo had it
? No need to have it all; Y si ha lo hecho, ¡quién
sabe qué habrá pasado!
But he didn't have it himself, I said Merry. Not when
the undesirable visitor had escaped, as Bilbo only did.
But where was it? “Where is this?” Pippin shouted. Lleva
siglos fuera. ¿
How long does it take for you to see Frodo, Boromir? he asked
Aragorn.
Average hour, quiz, answer. Or you could be one
528




 



























 

 
horas. I wandered around for some time. ¡No lo se! ¡
No it is! He covered his head with his hand and it felt comfortable
encorvado por el dolor.

“It's been a while since I disappeared!” Sam shouted. We must try
meet him immediately. Let's go! ¡

Wait a minute! Aragorn shouted. We must divide it
let's talk and organize ourselves... Here, a moment! ¡Espera!

No need for anything. No wonder. Sam habia
Salido running first. Merry and Pippin followed him
you are disappearing from the west between the trees towards the orilla,
shouting: «Frodo! ¡Frodo!» with his clear and sharp hobbit voices.
Legolas and Gimli ran. A sudden panic or a panic
I seem to have fallen for the company. «

We will all be scattered and lost", said Aragorn. «¡Boromir
! Don't forget what paper you have in this place,
but let's go now! See these two young hobbits and
to the least protected, even if you can't meet Frodo. Return
in this place you can find it, or any part of it. Regresaré
ready".

Aragorn quickly jumped and found Sam.
Just when I reached the small square between the tanks
, he followed him, suffering the hill laboriously, shouting and shouting: ¡Frodo! ¡

Come with me, Sam!, I say. Not one of us should be
Alone. Hay dreams for ahí. I present it. Voy a la
top, at the Asiento de Amon Hen, to see where you can see. ¡Y
aim! That's how my heart grew, Frodo was here.
Continue and keep your eyes open! I will speed up the journey.

Sam hizo the best that I can, but I can't follow the rhythm of Trancos
el Montaraz, and ready if he came again. I haven't been there for many years
Aragorn lost sight of himself. Sam found it and responded.
Suddenly I get a palmada on my head.

¡Eh, Sam Gamgee!, I say in a loud voice. Your piernas are exhausted
short ones, so use your head! Come on now! Boromir is not lying,
it's not its way; but we didn't count all of it. Algo
I asked Mr. Frodo a lot. If you appreciate it
hombros, de sudden. For as long as he decided: he started. ¿Adónde iba


  in 529

? To the east. Not without Sam? Yes, no siquiera sin sa Sam.
It's hard, cruel, tough.
 
Sam passed his hand over his eyes, drying it
Tears. ¡Tranquilo, Gamgee!, I say. Think, you can! No you can
cross rivers flying, don't jump waterfalls. It doesn't hold
team. So you have to turn to the bottles. Go back to the bottles!
Go back to the boats, Sam, like a ray!

Sam took the turn and went up disparate on the way. Cayó y
if the rods were short. He got up and followed, running. Llegó to the edge of
Parth Galen's grass came to the orilla, where the botes were
bags of water. No one had anything there. Parecía
have grits in the woods, but don't pay close attention to them.
If he looked at it for a moment, he stood still and froze. A barrel
it was only slipped through the orilla. With a shout, Sam
ran through the grass. The bottle was unslipped into the water.

Come on, Señor Frodo! "Let's go!" Sam shouted, and he blushed
from the orilla, clinging to the bottle that was alejaba. I got it wrong
by one metre. With a grit and a chapoteo cayó de bruces
in deep and fast waters. Gorgoteando se hundió, y el rio
I'll look over the rizada head.

An exclamation of consternación vino del botte vacío. A
the oar stopped and the boat turned. Frodo came just to
time to grab Sam by the hair while he was under, burbujeando y
forcejeando. My heart shone in my dark brown eyes. ¡

Arriba, Sam, muchacho!, I say Frodo. Now come back to me
hand!

¡Sálvame, Sr. Frodo!, jadeó Sam. I'm wondering. No way
towards your hand.

Here it is. ¡No me pellizques, muchacho! Don't be alone. Maintainer
a flote and don't twiddle, or you'll flip the bottle. ¡
Now, hold on to the rib and let me use the oar!

With a few brazadas, Frodo took the bottle off the road
orilla, and Sam can come up, mojado like an installment of water.
Frodo left the ring and returned to the bowl. ¡

Of all the annoying bad fingers, here's the guy, Sam!,
I said.

¡Oh, Mr. Frodo, this is tough!, I said Sam temblando. Eso ex


hard


 


, dealing with myself and everything else. If not, you were sure
, where are you now? ¡

Without danger

! ¡Sin peligro!, I say Sam. Are you alone and alone to help me?
I didn't bear it, it killed me.

It would be your death to come with me, Sam, I say
Frodo, and I couldn't stand him.

Not as sure as waiting for me again, I say Sam.

Pero voy a Mordor.

It's very good, Señor Frodo. Of course yes.
Y yo voy contigo.

—Ahora, Sam —says Frodo—, don't cheat me! The last ones
they will return at any time. If they pillan me here, tendré
that discuss and give explanations, and never will the value
not the opportunity to bajar. But I have to get back to you immediately. It's the only one
manner.

—Clearly yes —Sam replied—. But not only. Yo
I also go, or none of them will go away. First I have some tips on everyone
botes.

Frodo laughed. A sudden warmth and joy
it moved her heart. —¡Deja uno! —dijo—. We will need it. But
no one can come like this without your team, no comida, no nada. ¡

Wait a moment, I'm going to look for my things! —Sam shouted
with enthusiasm—. This is the whole list! I thought we should drink today. —Apilo
whence Frodo left him when the bottle fell
the belongings of your companions, I will take a manta of repuesto and something extra.






