
AN INSPIRATED PARTY
Nta nu pirtusu ntâ terra vivìa n'hobbit. It's not a bad thing, dirty, dirty, vagnatu,
bent of extremities of worms and of peeled n'oduri, and still missing of n'asciuttu, naked, of sand
pirtusu ca there was no one more pusàrisi or more manciari: it was nu pirtusu from the hobbit, and
chistu voli diri cunfortu.
Avìa na porta pirfettamenti tunna comu nu purtellu, pittata di virdi, cu na
yellow brass handle lustrous ntô menzu esattu. The door opens up to a lounge in the shape of a tub, like a tunnel: a very comfortable tunnel without smoke, where
paneled walls, and tiled floors and carpets, equipped with polishes
seats, and lots and lots of fins plus hats and coats, we liked the hobbit a lot
visitors. The tunnel twisted back and forth, nodded enough but not quite straight
ntô latu dâ cullina - La Cullina, like all the people, has many kilometers around it
called - and many niche ports and tunnels opened, before nu latu
and then above n'autru. The hobbit no longer goes above: reading rooms,
bathrooms, cellars, dispensers (a lot of chisti), wardrobes (they were entire
designated rooms and visited), cooks, dining rooms, all are above this place
floor, and indeed above this passage. The rooms are good and all above the latu a manual is missing (ca trasi), pirchì chisti erunu the only one with avìanu windows, windows tunni prufunni ca lookàvunu above lu sò garden and meadows beyond, sloping
down ô ciumi.
This hobbit was a very rich hobbit, and his name was Baggins.
Li Baggins lived near The Hill more than once.
minds, and the people would say they were very respectable, but they would not beat the majority
of those who were rich, but even picchì never had avìanu vintturi or the avìanu facttu
which thing is private: you can say who can Baggins say above which thing
dumanna without the trouble of farilu. This is a common story
Baggins appi n'avvintura e si truvàu a fari e diri cosi
unexpected completions. It is possible to ignore the neighbors, but the
you earned... well, you see, you ended up earning something.
La matri dû nostru hobbit: chi è n'hobbit? Supponi ca
li hobbit hannu bisognu di na certa discrizzioni oggi, picchì addivintaru rari e
shy of Granni Populu, as they call us. Sunnu (or èranu) a few people,
about half of our people, and not a lot of bearded dwarves. The hobbit hannu
bare beard. There is little or no magic above all of you, except those who are ordinary
tipu cutiddiànu ca helps them to escape tranquilities and speeds whenever
great stupid people like tia and mine vènunu sbagghiannu, fannu nu scrùsciu
as the eliphants can be heard just a few kilometers away. Sunnu prone to fat issiri n
lu stomacu; they are seen in lustrous culture (mainly green and yellow); nzajari
naked shoe, pirchì li sò pedi crisciunu soles naturali di peddi e spissi càvuri
I understood them as brown as the head's stuff (it's curly); hannu longu spertu
brown fingers, make us good-natured, and laugh prufunni and fruity
(especially after dinner, because they have two votes ô day when they can pigghiari).
Now you know enough more cuntinuaries. As she said, Chistu's mother
the hobbit - of Bilbo Baggins, that is - was the dazed Belladonna Pigghiata, a
say tri cool nutevuli dû Vecchiu Took, capu di l'hobbit ca
live by the other banna of the Water, lu ciumi nicu ca currìa ê pedi dâ Cullina. Iḍḍu
we say spissu (nta àutri famigghi) ca asai tempou fa unu di l'antinati Took
avissi pigghiatu na mugghieri fata. Era, di sicuru, assurdu, ma di sicuru
there was still something that wasn't quite like the hobbit, and that's it
mentri li membri dû clan Took annavanu a fari avvinturi. Iḍḍi
scumparìu discreetly, and the family kept silent; but he made it to the finish line
Those who take Took are not respectable like Baggins, but they are
without a doubt richer.
Non ca Belladonna Took appi mai avvinturi doppu ca addivintàu
Mrs. Bungo Baggins. Bungo, ca era lu patri di Bilbo, custruìu lu cchiù
lussuusu pirtusu hobbit pi iḍḍa (and in parts cchî so soḍḍi) ca avìa a èssiri
you reach over the Cullina or over the Cullina or across the Water, and
ddà ristaru nzinu â fini dî sò jorna. It is still probable that Bilbu,
sò figghiu unicu, puru si pareva e si cumpurtava giustamenti comu na secunna edizzioni
of my fathers solid and common, just a little strange thing I don't know how to make up
supra dû latu Took, four what was waiting for the possibility of coming
drill. The chance never came, 'til then Bilbo Baggins didn't cry, he didn't
about fifty years old, and lived ntô beḍḍu pirtusu of the hobbit custruiutu of
sò patri, ca t'appi appena discrivutu, nzinu a quannu nfatti avìa
apparently there was stability in an immobile manner.
More curious cases in the morning at a very long time are not silent anymore
munnu, when there was cchiù picca scrùsciu and cchiù virdi, and the hobbit wasranu
still nummarusi and prusperi, and Bilbo Baggins was â so door
after the ass fumannu a pipe of huge and long lignu about reached
almost nzinu ê woolen feet (brushed with care) - Gandalf arrives.
Gandalfu! If you saw sintutu sulu a quarter of chiddu who has situtu d'iddu,
and haiu sentitu sulu picca di tuttu chiḍḍu ca c'è di sentiri, tu fussi
priparatu pi qualigghiè tipu nutevuli story. Spuntaru cunti and vinturi
all the postu unni annava, in a more extraordinary way. Iḍḍu
Cullina had never been more centuries old, not than many years ago.
the old friend Pigghiatu died, in fact, and the hobbit almost disappeared
as it was. We had been there for a long time above the Cullina and across the water
supra li sò affari picchì èrunu tutti picciriḍḍi picciotti e picciotte hobbit.
Everyone who was like Bilbo didn't expect us to eat in the morning he was an old man.
nu pirsonàli. Avìa nu cappeddu àutu with blue tip, nu longu gray cape, na silver scarf above
whoever has a long beard clings to his waist, and is immense
niuri boots.
"Bonjornu!" said Bilbu, and lu vulìa diri. Lu suli appeared, and
the grass was very green. But Gandalf looked at it from all sides.
The Russian eyebrows can be very sharp from the edge of the cappeḍḍu ùmmiru.
"Soccu you say?" I said iḍḍu. «Have a good morning, oh
it means ca è nu bonu matina whether ca lu vogghiu or not; or whatever you feel
good this morning; or is it a morning that is more good?”
"Everyone is welcome," said Bilbo. "And on a very fine morning with a pipe
of tobacco out of ports, no matter the deal. If you have no tubu ntunnu to you, sit down
down and aviri nu filling meu! There's no rush, we'll have it all the day before
nuiautri!" Allura Bilbu sat on top and sat close to me, I'm carrying them, jammed them and blew
Fora nu beddu aneddu gray with smoke the air sailed without it
rumpinnusi and floatannu above La Cullina.
“Very lovely!” said Gandalf. “But I don't have time to tell you the tale of smoke anymore.”
this morning. Approximately four of one more cunnividiri n't clinging to the sugnu
organizers, and it is very difficult to find someone."
"Avissi to think carefully, nna chisti banni! Let's be calm people and we won't have any
usu pi l'avvinturi. So uncomfortable and disturbing! It makes you late
more lunch! I don't think about whoever I saw before," said our gentlemen Baggins,
and I put a few thumbs back on the parameters, and I blew another one even bigger ones
smokers. Then he took out the morning liters, and began to read,
pretend you don't care about the old man. Aìa dicesu ca iddu
It wasn't really my type and I wanted to leave. But the old man isn't cool
musioni. Arristau appuiàtu ô bastonu e taliava l'hobbit senza
I said whatever thing, until when Bilbo felt quite uncomfortable and even had a lot of worries.
"Bonjornu!" I said at the end. "We don't want to get involved here,
thank you! You can try it on the Cullina or across the water." By chistu iddu
meant that the conversation was over.
"More than enough used things. Good morning!" said Gandalf.
– «Now you want to tell me that you want to get rid of me, and that won't be good
until you didn't spit me."
– «No more, no more, dear Signuri! Let me see, I don't think I can get yours
name?"
“Yes, yes, dear sirs, and canusciu lu to names, sirs Bilbo Baggins.
And you know what my name is, so don't worry about who you belong to
iḍḍu. Sugnu Gandalf, and Gandalf fly straight to me! I should have had more clamps in Campari
pi fari bon matinatu di lu figghiu di Belladonna Took, comu si vinnissi
buttuni â porta!”
"Gandalf, Gandalf! Bonu graziusu di mia! Nun lu magu vagabbunnu ca
called Old Pigghiò nu paru of studs of diamonds màggici ca sissàvanu e
Have you ever been canceled until you were ordered? The guy can't say that
marvelous tales ntê festi, above the dragons and the foddi and the giants and the
redemption of principles and fortune deprived of cool men? Not Monday
man who makes fireworks with excellent details! he reminded me
ḍḍi! Old Took had them on the eve of menzu estivu. Limpiu! Iḍḍi
used to jiri comu granni lilies and dragons and laburnums of fire and
'hang yourself in the dark all day long!' Notarà già ca lu signor Baggins
It wasn't exactly as prusicu as we like Cridiri, but we really like it
ciuri. “Dear me!” he continued. “Not Gandalf who was resuscitable
so many calm little boys who go away Blu more crazy adventurers?
Quarsiasi cosa, di l'arrampicata supra l'àrburi â visita di l'elfi, o navigari ntê navi, navigari
to other rivers! Bless me, life was quite nter... That is, you
Sciarriàu evil them like this nna chisti parties na vote. Please excuse me, but Iu
he didn't know you were still in business."
"Unni àutru avissi a sissiri?" I said lu magu. “Tuttu lu stissu sugnu cuntentu
more truvariti recurdari four things of mine. Even if you don't care about me
kind fireworks, anyway, and this guy is not without hope. Some more yours
old man nannu Took, and more the amuri dâ povira Belladonna, iu
I'll tell you who you called."
“Please excuse me, I didn’t call you at all!”
– «Yes, you have it! Two votes now. Pirdunu my. Vi lu dugnu. Indeed vaju
I ended up killing you during this adventure. Very funny, my friend, very good
more useful, and very useful, if you never go there."
- "Excuse me! I don't want to hook you up, thank you. Not today. Good
morning! But please come for tea, when you like yourself! Picchi no dumani?
Come humanity! Ni vittimu!" ​​Cu chistu the hobbit vutau and broke out
inside my door I saw a thunderclap, and I closed it as soon as I dared, no more
bad manners. The magicians doppu all sunnu magicians.
“Whoever was there called tea!” I said between iddu stissu, while I was talking about java
â pantry. I had just had my breakfast, but I thought about a cake or two
and a biviri di quarchi cosa ci facìa bonu doppu la paura.
Gandalf ntô frattiempu was still outside the door, and
ridennu longu but calm down. After a little while he grabbed the spica
above lu sò pirsonàli graffiàu nu cartellu stranu ntâ beḍḍa porta virdi from the hobbit. Then yes, I didn't change when Bilbo was finished
I know the cake and cuminciannu in Pinzari ca s'avìa escaped from the adventure
very good.
The next day he left almost without seeing Gandalf. Not cool
remember they're very good like this, you don't put them on the menu unless you're engaged
Tablet: commu chista: Mercuridìa dû tea di Gandalf. Yesterday it was statu puru iddu
sorry to do something else.
Just before the hour of tea came n'aneddu tremendu ntâ entrance door
bell, and then he remembered! Si nni jìu and put the boilers on, and put them out
n'autra tazza e nu piattinu, e na turta o dui 'n supra, e currìu â porta.
"I'm so sorry you're waiting!" he was more direct, when we were vitti
who was no longer Gandalf. He was a man with a blue beard.
a golden belt, and very bright eyes on the dark hood. As soon as
the door opened, we pushed in, just as we expected.
Appiccàu lu captellu cu lu cappucciu ô pinnu cchiù vicinu, and “Dwalin ô to
sirbizziu!" dissi cu n'arcu vasciu.
"Bilbo Baggins ô to!" dissi l'hobbit, troppu surprisu pi dumannari nuḍḍu
dumanni pû mumentu. Quannu lu silenziu chi vinni appressu s'avìa addivintatu
sòmodu, he added: «I just know more about the tea; pray come and have
someone of mine.” A little stiff perhaps, but he wanted kind directions and who.
I'd do it, if you didn't invite me, I'd come and hang them, I know that's the way it is
room without a word of explanation?
Non avìanu statu a tavula pi tantu tempu, nfatti avìanu quasi arrivatu ô
third cake, quannu arriva n'autru sonu ancora cchiù forti ô campanu.
"Excuse me!" said the hobbit, and left for the door.
“Allura â fini arrivasti ccà!” Era chiḍḍu ca stare a
Gandalf is voting. But it wasn't Gandalf. Here there was a very old man above the scallu with a white beard and a scarlet hood; and puru iddu
he jumped in as soon as the door was open, as if he had been invited.
"We're already starting to get there," I said when we were there
of Dwalin's cappucciu virdi clung to. He stuck chiddu russu nearby, and
“Balin ô to sirvizziu!” I said câ manu supra lu pettu.
"Thanks!" Bilbo said anxiously. That wasn't the right thing to say,
but I'm starting to get there, I've lost a lot. We like the visitors,
but we like to be able to write them before we arrive, and first of all
I stood them. Avìa nu pinzeru horrible ca li turti putìanu essiri picca,
and then iddu... common guests: he knew his duties and would attack even if he was dulurusu
- putissi aviri a jiri senza.
“Trasi, and get some tea!” I'll arrive right after the pigghiatu nu
rispiru prufunnu.
«A beer is better for me, it's all the same to you, good for me
sir," I said Balin câ barba janca. "But I don't mind a cake, simenza cake, yes you have it."
"Assài!" Bilbu si truvàu a repùnniri, cu na sò surprisa; e iddu
he found himself just running away to the cellar to get a cup of beer, and
then to a pantry more pigghiari two beddi torti of simenza tunni ca avìa
cuciutu chiḍḍu pomeriggiu pû sò morsu doppu la cena.
Quannu turnò Balin e Dwalin parràvanu ô tavulu comu li vecchi
friends (in fact they were brothers). Bilbo stuck to him
beer and cake in front of iddi, when strong came another vote n'aneddu â bell,
and then n'autru aneddu.
"Gandalf is definitely voting," he thought as he snorted
passageu. But it wasn't so. There were two dwarves, all with blue hoods,
silver belts, and yellow barbels; and each of them brought a bag of instruments and
a sword. Saltaru, as soon as the door began to open, Bilbo was there
Surprisingly more difficulties.
“Who will pozzu headlights for you, dwarves?” I said iḍḍu.
“Kili ô to sirvizziu!” I said chiḍḍu. “And Fili!” I added the other; And
they both brushed off their blue hoods and bowed.
“To yours and to your family!” Bilbu replied, take note of these ways
this vote.
"Dwalin and Balin already here, understand," Kili said. “Unimuci ô
crowd!"
"Crowd!" thought Mr. Baggins. "I don't like the sound of someone. I like you
You have to push me for more minutes and enrich your mind and biviri." Avia
sulu appi nu sorsu, ntô singu, while the four dwarfs sat there ntunnu ô
table, and it spoke of mines and gold and prubblemi cu li foddi, and
the divinations of dragons, and many others like this that are not fictitious
I understand, and I don't want to, I'm too scared...
every time, ding-dong-a-ling-dang, the bell rang another time, as if there were four bad guys
The little hobbit was about to pull the handle.
“Qualchidunu â porta!” I said, flashing.
“Quarchi quattru, avissi a diri dû sonu,” said Fili. “Inoltri, vittimu
iḍḍi arrinu arrè a nuatri 'n luntanu.”
The hobbit sat down in the room and put his head in his hand,
and we wondered who had succeeded us, and who would succeed us, and
yes, everyone stopped more. Then the bell rang louder than ever.
never, and appi a curriri â door. It's not four after all, it's five.
You arrived in the room while you were in the hall. Avia
difficilmenti gira la manubbriu, prima ca s'attruvàssiru tutti dintra, s'incinàvanu e dicìanu “a
lu vostru sirvizziu” unu appressu a l'autru. Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin e Gloin èranu li sò
names; and soon two purple hoods, no gray hoods, no brown hoods, and no
The hoodie Jancu stuck to his pinni, and marched where I know them
wide hands 'nthread ntê belts of gold and silver more joined to the others. Already
he almost met a crowd. Quarchidunu called beer, and quarchdunu lu purteri,
and a little coffee, and all the more turti; so the hobbit was very tinutu
occupatu pi nu pocu di tempu.
A jug of coffee has just been put out of focus, the turti of simenza will be there
he disappeared, and the dwarfs were there accumulating with a round of burrati scones, when
came... no loud knocks. Nun è n'aneddu, ma nu surciu duru supra chiḍḍu from the hobbit
beautiful virdi door. Quarchi d'unu was banging with no bastonu!
Bilbu si precipisì ntô passaggiu, assài arraggiatu e completi scunvurgiutu
and escape, who was the mercuridi cchiù streusu ca mai
recurdatu. He opened the door with a roar, and everyone fell, one
above the other. Cchiù nani, quattru cchiù! And there was Gandalf
Arrè, appuiànnusi ô I'm bastonu and ridennu. I had a small dent above lu
porta bedda; avìa puru, a propositu, sfracicatu lu signu sigretu ca
I measured it the morning before.
"Watch out! Watch out!" I said iḍḍu. “It's not like you, Bilbu, keep it
friends ca aspittunu supra lu carpetu, and then open the common door nu pop-gun! Leave me alone
prisintari Bifur, Bofur, Bumbur and above all Thorin!”
“A lu to sirvizziu!” I said Bifur, Bofur and Bombur were standing in a row.
Then appiccàrunu two yellow caps and a light green one; and also a skyblue with a long silver tassel. Chist'ùrtimu belonged to Thorin, nu
nana enormous mpurtanti, nfatti nuddu autru ca lu granni Thorin
Oakenshield stissu, ca non era cuntentu di cadiri supra chiḍḍu di Bilbo
tappetu cu Bifur, Bofur and Bombur supra of iḍḍu. No more Bombur
he was very fat and plump. Thorin was very prickly and I said
nenti dû sirvizziu; but you can see Mr. Baggins, I said, he was sorry for so many
votes, ca â fini grugnìu “priga nun lu parrari”, and signed
he frowned.
“Now we're all here!” said Gandalf, marking the line of thirteen.
cappucci - li megghiu cappucci di festa smuntàbbili - e lu sò cappeddu 'mpiccatu supra lu
pinni. "A rather cheerful meeting! I hope something more goes on, more food and drinks later! Who's that? Tea! No thanks! A little Russian wine,
Think more of mine."
"And more mine," said Thorin.
“And raspberry jam and apple pie,” said Bifur.
“And the chopped torti and the furmagliu,” said Bofur.
“And the pork pie and the salad,” Bombur said.
"And cchiù turti, and beer, and coffee, if you don't mind," call him
other dwarves passed through the door.
“Put four eggs, there's nu bravu tipu!” Gandalf called him doppu, comu
the hobbit goes towards the dispensers. “And enough purtari fora lu friddu
gaddinu and pickles!”
“Pari ca sapi tantu di dintra li me lardi comu iu
mia stissu!" pinsò lu signuri Baggins, ca si sintìa positivamenti scantatu, e
he was starting to call if a more unfortunate adventure hadn't arrived
right in his house. When you have picked them all, throw them and plate them and
cuteḍḍi and furchetti and glasses and plates and spoons and so piled up above
big trays, let's go to fari sài caudu, and russu ntâ do it, and get ready.
“Cunfusticated and troubled these dwarves!” I said out loud. “Picchi no
vènunu e dùnanu na manu?” Eccu ccà stavanu Balin e Dwalin!
â kitchen door, and Fili and Kili surrender to iddi, and in front of iddu
putìa diri cuteddu ca avìanu banged the trays and nu paru di tavulini nichi
ntô salottu e misi tuttu di novu.
Gandalf s'assittàu â testa dû partitu cu l'ridici dwarves all ntunnu:
e Bilbu s'assittàu supra nu sgabellu vicinu ô focu, mordennu nu biscottu (l'appetitu
it was quite livatu), and about the same as whoever it was all more fittings
urdinariu e mancu n'avvintura. Li nani manciaru e manciaru, e
he talked and talked, and lu tempu passed. All'arfini spinceru arreri them seats,
and Bilbo makes fun of the plates and glasses.
“Suppose you all come to dinner?” I said in a very polite way
tones without pressure.
"Of course!" I said Torinu. "And then. Never again
business nzinu â fine, and before we had aviri na pike of music. Now more clarification!”
Then the twelve dwarves, not Thorin, were too many, and
arrive at parrari with Gandalf, jittaru 'n pedi and fìciru munzeddi everyone's cars
them like this. Off yes nni jeru, don't wait for the trays, balance the bottoms of
dishes, each with the buttiglia supra, with the hand, while the hobbit currìa
after Iḍḍi almost shrieked in fear: “more favors, be careful!” and “more favors,
don't worry about me! I managed to manage." But the dwarves started singing:
He steals glasses and he steals plates!
 Smooth out your little fingers and bend your little furries!
Eccu chiḍḍu ca Bilbo Baggins odi...
 Throw them away and burn the caps!
Tag lu pannu and kick lu grassu!
 Pour the milk onto the pantry floor!
Leave the bone on the carpet of the room!
 Spray wine on every door!
Unload the trays in the empty bowl;
 Sbattili cu nu palu ca batti;
And when they are finished, if someone is healthy,
 Send them down more roller-coaster corridors!
Eccu chiḍḍu ca odi Bilbo Baggins!
Allura, be careful! be careful with your dishes!
And naturally non fìciru nuḍḍa of these so tirribbili, and tuttu
it was cleaned and measured 'n safety common nu lampiuni, while the hobbit was
girannusi and girannusi ntô menzu dâ cuisine circannu di vìdiri who
stavanu facennu. Allura turnaru, e attruvaru Thorin cu li pedi supra
He smokes a pipe. It was blowing the smoke out of the granni and unni I told us to one of jiri, iḍḍu annava, up the fireplace, or stop
lu ruloggiu supra lu mantellu, or sutta lu tavulu, or giru and giru lu
sularu; but unni annava was not viloci enough more escapes than Gandalf.
Get out! mannau n'aneddu of smoke cchiù nicu dû so curtu straight clay tube
through each of Thorin's chiḍḍi. Then Gandalf's aneddu di fumu pointed to virdi
and turnari more spousarisi above the head of magu. Avìa na clouda d'iddi
above iddu already, and no dark lights make him start strange and
streguni. Bilbo arristau fermu e taliava - ci piacìunu l'aneddi di fumu - e poi
he was very proud of how proud he was yesterday morning
anecdotes of smoking ca avìa mannatu supra lu ventu supra the Cullina.
“Now listen to some music!” said Torinu. “Take out your instruments!”
Kili and Fili si nni jeru pighiari the bags and purtaru arrè the violins nichi; Dori,
Nori and Ori purtaru pierce the quark flutes banna inside the coats;
Bombur pruduciu nu tammuru dâ sala; Bifur and Bofur nisceru puru iddi, and
turnaru with the clarinets ca avìanu lassatu between the sticks.
Dwalin and Balin said: “Sorry, I left my porch!” “Purtari sulu
my cu tia!” I said Thorin Turnaru cu viola granni comu.
iḍḍi stissi, and with Thorin's harp wrapped nta nu pannu virdi. It was nu
beautiful golden harp, and when Thorin struck it the music began to fill up
in the end, he was careful and guided by Bilbo, who forgot everything else, and was swept away
luntanu nta terri scuri sutta luni strani, luntanu supra l'Acqua e assai luntanu
where I know pirtusu hobbit sutta La Cullina.
The dark light goes into the room where the window doesn't open until it opens
latu dâ Cullina; the lights were flashing - it was April - and again iḍḍi
we played, while Gandalf's beard melted against the wall.
The dark one all the room, and the focus is astute, and the admirer
furu pirduti, e ancora continuaru a jucari. E all'improvvisu prima unu e poi n'autru
begin to sing while sunàvanu, sing to gula prufunna dî ntô
posti prufunni dî sò casi antichi; e chistu è comu nu frammentu dû sò
song, it can be just like my song without my music.
Luntanu supra li muntagni brumusi friddi
In funni dungeons and old caves
You have to see it before a day's break
Pi circari l'oru ncantunatu pàlidu.
The dwarves of antiquity cast powerful spells,
Mentri li marteḍḍi cascavanu comu li campani ca sonanu
Nta lochi prufunni, unni durmunu them so dark,
Don't go up empty on the fallen ones.
Pi the ancient king and signuri elficu
Ci sunnu tanti na riserva d'oru lucenti
Furmàvanu and furmàvanu, and luci pigghiàvanu
Pile up no gems above the spathe.
Supra li collani d'argentu nfilavanu
Li stiddi 'n ciuri, supra curuni l'appicciaru
Lu focu dû dragu, 'n filu stortu
Ammiscaru the moonlight and suli.
Luntanu supra li muntagni brumusi friddi
In funni dungeons and old caves
We need to go, before the break of the jornu,
More revinnicari lu our oru scurdàtu of such a long time.
Goblets there sculpted from the most iddi stissi
And harps of gold; unni nuddu s'apprufunni
Ccà curcaru longu, and many na canzuna
It was sung without hints of men or elves.
The pines roared above the height,
Li venti gimìanu ntâ notti.
Lu focu was russu, flames spread;
L'àrburi comu li torci abbruciaru di luci.
Li Campani sunàvanu ntâ vadda
And watch men make them pale;
The ray dû dragu is cchiù accidental dû focu
Lower their towers and their fragile cases.
The mountain smoked on the moon;
Li nani, sintìru lu vagabbunnu dû destinu.
Flee from the room without falling
Up the feet, up the moon.
Luntanu supra li muntagni brumiusi tristi
To prufunni dungeons and dark caves
We need to go, before the break of the jornu,
Our harps and gold are more victorious than Iddu!
While they were singing the hobbit heard the amuri of beddi so handmade
and the more cunning and the more magic moved through iddu, no fieru and no gilusu
amuri, the desire of dwarf choirs. Then something of Tookish woke up
inside of them, and I would go and see the great mountains, and hear them
pines and waterfalls, and explores the caves, and carries a sword
ô postu di nu bastonu. He looked out the window. Li stiddi èranu
Fora nta nu celu dark above the arbuli. Pinzau is the jewels of dwarves
shiny ntê dark caves. Suddenly the lignu went beyond the water
he jumped up, probably with four corners of a cat, he was picking up a fire of a lignu, and he thought about
plunder the dragons when they install themselves, don't worry, Cullina and the addumannaru are all in flames.
Iḍḍu trimàu; and soon it was clear to Mr. Baggins of Bag-End,
Sutta-Collina, n'autra vota.
He got up three-year-old. Avaia menu of lying minds more press the lamp,
and those who are more fools will pretend, and then they will hide in the beer bars in the cellar, and they will not come out until all the dwarves are gone.
away. Provisions made the music and the song s'avìanu signed, and
He looked at everyone with his eyes shining darkly.
“Unni go?” said Thorin, cu nu tonu ca seemed mustrari ca
Iḍḍu stapled to both ends of the hobbit's minds.
“And a bunch of lights?” I said Bilbo sorry.
“We like you dark”, said all the dwarves. "Scuru pi the dark business! Ccà
sunnu tanti uri prima di l’alba.”
"Of course!" said Bilbu, and quickly sat down. We miss the stool
and if they had no mudguards, they slammed the poker and the shovel on top of the evictions.
"Shut up!" said Gandalf. “Lay back Thorin!” And so it is like Thorin
you started.
"Gandalf, dwarves and Signuri Baggins! We won't go home
of our friend and our friend's companion, the most excellent and audacious
hobbit, no one will ever fall for you! all praise to lu sò vinu e
ale!...” She signed herself more breathlessly and with more polite remarks than the hobbit, but
li cumplimenti foru assai pirduti pô poviru Bilbo Baggins, ca stava sciarriànnu
the more prudent you are, the more you are called audacious and worst of all comrades
conspiraturi, puru si non niscìu nuḍḍu scrùsciu, era accussì scantatu. Dunca Torin
he continued:
“We have heard more about our plans, our ways, our means, our policies and our devices.
We start early before taking a break during our long journeys, our journeys
of which some of us, or perhaps all of us (except our friend and
cunsigghieri, lu ngèniu magu Gandalf) putissi nun turnari mai cchiù. It's nu sulenni
mumentu. Our uggettu is, lu pigghiu, canusciutu to all of us. To you esteemed Mr.
Baggins, and maybe at one or two days dwarfs cchiù giuni (penzu ca
Avissi aviri reached more calls Kili and Fili, for example), the exact situation to
lu mumentu putissi richièdiri na brevi spiegazzioni..."
Chistu era lu stili di Thorin. Era nu nanu mpurtanti. Si fussi statu
pirmissu, prubbabbirmenti avìa continuatu accussì nzinu a quannu non niscìu
fiatu, without saying anything to nuddu, you can't get away with it already.
But it was rudely ntirruttu. He could Bilbo not lu putìa suppurtari cchiù. TO
he never had a turn, he began to cry and scream to come inside, and soon
he broke out like the friscuity of nu muturi ca nesci of nu tunnel. All there
the dwarves emerged, slammed on top of the table. Gandalf fici na blue lights above
la fini dû sò bastonu màggicu, e ntô sò focu d'artificiu lu poviru hobbit
you can see your knees above the carpet in focus, tremennu common jelly coffee was
mergers. Then he fell closer to the ground, and continued to call them “culpitu di
lightning, culpitu of lightning!” again and again and chistu fu all chiḍḍu ca iḍḍi;
putìa nesciri di iḍḍu pi tantu tempu. Allura lu pigghiaru and lu misiru fora di
the upper floor of the sofa has a lounge with a bivuta ô elbow, and iḍḍi annaru
ritornu ô sò affari buiu.
“Picciriḍḍu entusiasmu,” said Gandalf, while s'assittàru n'àutra votes. “You get it
funny, but it's a good day, a good day, proud common nu
dragu nta nu pizzicu.”
If you've ever seen a dragu nta nu pizzicu, you understand who he was
sulu n'exaggerations puètica applied to qualigghiè hobbit, puru ô ziu bisnannu of Old Took, Bullroarer, ca era accussì granni (pi n'hobbit) ca putìa cavari nu
cavaḍḍu. Carricau li fila dî foddi dû Munti Gram ntâ Battagghia di
the Virdi Fields, and banged the head of I'm King Golfimbul cu na
lignu club. He sailed a hundred meters above the air and skipped again
cunigghiu bucu, and then I won the battle and the golf game
nvintatu ntô stissu mumentu.
Ntô frattiempu, comunque, lu discinnenti cchiù gentili di Bullroarer era
restorannu ntô saluni. After a little and a bivuta you squeezed nirvusu
â porta dû salottu. Chistu è chiddu ca sintìu, Gloin parrannu:
"Umm!" (or four minutes of a sbuffa cchiù or menu accussì). “He will do it, you
staplers? It's all very good, more Gandalf speaks of this hobbit who is proud,
but no more screams, no more excitement
wake up Dragu and all his relatives, and kill a lot of us. Penzu approx
I'm so scared and so excited! In fact, if it had never been more
sign on the door, go to the safe place when you arrive at the wrong house.
As soon as I blinked at the little boy he huffed and puffed at him
mat, clear away my doubts. Equal cchiù nu mircanti ca nu latru!"
Then Mr. Baggins turned the handle and walked out. Lu latu Took avìa
won. Suddenly I felt like I was going to Jiri without reading and talking more than I thought.
trust me. More so as far as the guy is concerned, he skimmed himself without carpeting, almost as if he were true.
trust me. Lots of votes after Baggins's role, you pintàu of who's who's fics now,
and I said to iddu stissu: "Bilbu, you were a fool; you stood straight and
put your foot in this.»
“Sorry,” I said, “you sintìa li palori ca stavi dicennu.
Don't pretend to understand who you're talking to, or you'll finish it
a li latri, ma penzu ca haiu acridiri» (who is what he called
essennu supra la sò virtù) "ca tu pensi ca nun sugnu bonu. Ti mustru. Haju
no sign at my door, it was painted in a simana ago, and I'm safe
yes I won - the house was wrong. As soon as we get there, let's have some fun up there
lu scalu from the door, take away my doubts. But treat her like the right person. Tell me who
I'll fly, and I'll take it, yes I'll have to walk towards the East of
Livanti and cummattiri the worms sarvaggi nna the Urtimu Disertu. Na vote avìa nu ziu-greatgrandnu, Bullroarer Took, and..."
"Yes, yes, but it was a long time ago," said Gloin. «It was about Tia.
And I assure you that there is a sign above this door, who alone does not cummerciu,
or use it more often. Latru flights nu travagghiu bonu, very enthusiastic and
reach the Reward, so you read it usually. Yes, you could say Expert
Cacciaturi dû treasure ô postu di Latru if you like yourself. Forty minutes ago. It's all
lu stissu a nuiautri. Gandalf told us there were no specific people there
parti circannu nu travagghiu 'n una volta, e ca avìa organizzatu n'incontru ccà
stu mercuridìa ô tempu dû tea."
"Of course there's a sign," said Gandalf. "I put it there. Pick it up
achieved very well. You called me pi truvari lu fourteenthsmu omu pâ tò
Spidizzioni, and sigghiu lu Mr Baggins. Enough of someone saying that you're making a mistake
omu or the house is wrong, and you can sign up to thirteen and aviri all the evils
Luckily you like yourself, or go dig up the coals."
Iḍḍu fici n'occhiu accussì arraggiatu a Gloin ca lu nanu s'accuppiò ntâ so seggia;
and when Bilbu circau di grapiri la vucca pi fari na dumanna, si vutau e
he frowned and trimmed his Russian eyebrows, until Bilbo shut the fuck up
strittu cu nu Schizzo. “It's true,” said Gandalf. “We don't have anything more
discussions. I chose Mr. Baggins and whoever I had was enough more than anyone else
you. It is said that there is no latru, there is no latru, or it will be when the time comes
Here we go. There's a lot more of you than whoever you're thinking about, and a lot more business than you.
you have no idea of ​​iḍḍu stissu. Putissiru (maybe) all Campari thank me again. Now
Bilbo, little one, press the lamp, and let's make the lights above those!”
Supra lu tavulu â lights of a large lamp with a scattered Russian shadow
pezzu di pirgaminu chiuttostu comu na mappa.
"Chistu fu factu of Thror, to nannu, Thorin," I said iḍḍu rispunnennu
ê Dumanni enthusiast of dî. "Es nu chianu dâ Muntagna."
“Non vidu ca chistu ci aiuti sài,” said Thorin diluputu
doppu nu sguardu. “Mi ricuòrdu assai bonu la Muntagna e li terri circa
iḍḍu. And so unni is Mirkwood, and lu Brucu appiccicatu unni lu
great dragons bred.”
“C'è nu dragu signatu di russu ntâ Muntagna,” said Balin, “ma
it will be quite easy to truvàrilu without chiḍḍu, if you ever get there."
“C'è nu puntu ca nun l'hai nutatu,” I said lu magu, “and approx
It's the sigretu entrance. I saw chiḍḍa rune dû latu punenti, and the manu
indicannulu di l'autri runi? Chistu signa nu passaggiu ammucciatu versu lu
Sali cchiù vasci." (Look at the map ô Principiu di stu libbru, and you
I saw the runes.)
"Putissi sissiri statu sigretu na vote," said Thorin, "but as we know
is cchiù sigretu? The old Smaug lived long enough, now more truvari
fora qualegghiè cosa ca c’è di sapir supra chiḍḍi grutti.”
"You could... but you couldn't have used it for years and years."
"Whoa?"
"Picchì è troppu nicu. 'Cincu pedi àuta la porta e tri ponnu caminari
abreast 'dicinu the runes, but Smaug does not putìa strinciri nta nu pirtusu of those who grannizza, not
puru quannu era nu dragu giòvini, di sicuru non doppu aviri divurgatu tanti
dwarf gods and Dale men.”
“Mi pari nu pirtusu granni,” Bilbo squealed (he never went away
spirit of dragons and souls of hobbit holes). He was enthusiastic
and once again you didn't have to worry about keeping your mouth closed. He loved
mappi, and in the room there was a big Country Round girl hanging with everyone
I've had fun with them before being signed with russu nchiostru. “Comu putìa na porta accussì granni
Are we kept secrets from everyone else, apart from the dragu?” he called.
It was sulu nu picciriḍḍu hobbit because you don't have to remember.
"Nna many manors," said Gandalf. “But in what way was he
You can't be huddled together without jiri to vidiri. Of chiddu ca you say ntâ map
Imagine that there is a closed door that was made much more exactly
like the one from Muntagna. Who is the usual mètudu of dwarves, penzu
is it right, right?”
"Fair enough," said Thorin.
“Puru,” continued Gandalf, “don't forget to say there was a map
keys, na nica e curiusa keys. Here it is!” I said, and signed to Thorin nu
keys cu na vutti longa and wards cumplicati, made of silver. “Keep him safe!”
“Certu ca lu fazzu,” said Thorin, and he stared at the bottom of his head.
'mpiccatu 'ntornu ô coddu and put on your jacket. “Now they'll start to get started like this
spiranti. Sta nutizzia li cancia assái pû megghiu. Finu a ora nun avemu avutu
clear idea of ​​who it is. Pinzavamu di jiri ô Livanti, calm and attentive common nuiautri
putìa, nzinu ô Lagu Longu. Then I'll start the problems..."
"Long ago, we learned something about the strata of the East,"
interrupted Gandalf.
"Putissimu jiri di ddà supra 'ntornu ô ciumi Running," cuntinuò Thorin
do not pigghiannu nuḍḍu, "and there are ruins of Dale, the old city is gone
ddà, sutta l'ùmmira dâ Muntagna. But none of us liked the idea
dû Canceddu Frontals. The peaks go straight across the great cliff
lu Sud dâ Muntagna, and ddà nesci puru lu dragu, puru luntanu
spissu, a menu ca non canciau li sò abbitùdini."
“Chistu nun fussi bonu,” I said lu magu, “nun senza nu putenti
Warriors, pure n'Heroes. Circau of truvari unu; but the warriors are busy trying to cummattiri unu
neither will there be distant lands, nor will heroes be scarce in this vicinity, or
Simply put, it's not true. The swords on these parts are mostly blunt, and the axes
they used more the trees, and the common or cupirtini shields; and sunnu dragons them
còmudamenti luntanu (and quinni ligginnàriu). Here I settled down above
furtu, above all when the existence of a side door reminded me.
And here's our little one Bilbo Baggins, lu latru, lu scigghiutu and scigghiutu
latru. Allura ora vamu avanti e facìamu quarchi pruggettu."
“Allura goes well,” said Thorin, “supponiamu ca l'espertu dû latru ci duna
any ideas or suggestions.” Yes, I had a fake education in Bilbo.
"First I like you a lot more than this," I said, I'm sorry
all confused and a little tremulous inside, but up to now still Tookishly ditirminatu a
it goes on like this. “Vogghiu diri l'oru e lu dragu, e tu chistu, e
how you arrive, and where you belong, and go away and beyond."
“Bless me!” said Thorin, “have you no map? and have you not heard it?”
our song? and no more of all those who have more money?”
"All lu stissu, I liked you all chiaru and chiaru," I said obstinately,
mittennusi above lu sò way of cummerciu (usually reserved for people around
borrow the deaf ones), and make them better and more wise and prudent and
prudent and respectful, recommended by Gandalf. “I actually liked it
the more you risk them, you take them out of your pocket, the time is right and
remunerations, and go away" - where you want to say: "Who do you have to pick up
who's out? and live again?”
"Oh very well," said Thorin. "It was a long time ago that Thror was born."
our family was chased from the far north, and returned with all their
riches and their tools are not on the map of this mountain. Avìa statu scupertu
di lu me luntanu antinatu, Thrain lu Vecchiu, ma ora minavanu e tunnellavanu
and fìciru salts cchiù granni and laboratories cchiù granni, and sparti iu
believe that attruvaru na good parts of gold and puru na para of jewels.
However, I was very rich and famous, and I was born
Re sutta la Muntagna n'autra vota, e trattatu cu granni rivirenza dû
mortal men, who lived in the South, and were spattering the land from spade to spade
Ciumi Running up to valleys obscured by Muntagna. Iḍḍi
built the cheerful city of Dale ddòcu nta chiḍḍi tempi. Li re mannavanu pi
our blacksmiths, and they recumpenzanu puru them cchiù picca skilled cchiù riches. Li patri avìssiru
Prigamu of pigghiari I know them as cool as apprentices, and of pagarici beddu, above all
no supplies of tips, we never worry about crying or finding ourselves any longer.
Ntô cumplessu chiḍḍi foru boni jorna pi nuiautri, e li cchiù poviri di nuiautri avìanu li satis
spènniri and pèstari, eu tempu therebberu more lighthouses so beddi sulu can have fun
of those, no more words of jucaḍḍi cchiù marvelous and magical, the likes of
whoever doesn't meet anyone today. Dunca chidda about me nannu
I add them to them, bowed down with armor and jewels and tagghi and tiles, and lu jocu
Dale's miracle was the wonder of the north.
"Without a doubt it was chiddu ca purtau lu dragu. Li draghi arrubbanu l'oru
and jewels, you know, of men and elves and dwarves, unni ponnu
li truvari; e custodisciunu lu so saccheggiu finu a quannu campanu (ca è
practically more always, a menu ca non vennu ammazzati), and non godinu mai n'aneddu di ramu di
iḍḍu. Of course, you can't almost find a good job with no tintu, yes
they usually have good knowledge of current values; and no ponnu
do nothing more than this, but repair the loose ladder point right away
armor. There are many dragons in the North in the times, and the gold
probabilmenti stava addivintannu scarsu ddà supra, cu li nani ca vulavanu versu sud o
they were killed, and all the giniral waste and the destruction made them dragons
it goes from bad to worse. There were many special avid, strong and
evil worms called Smaug. Nu jornu vulau nta the air and arrived
south. The first time we heard it was no scrùsciu comu n'uraganu ca vinìa di
the north, and the pines of Muntagna ca strinciàvanu and they snatched away
twenty. Quarchi nanu cap pi casu era fora (iu fui unu more fortunate
- nu beḍḍu picciottu vinturiusu of those who times, who always wandered, and iḍḍu
my life will be sarbàu ḍḍu jornu)... well, di na good luntana vittimu lu dragu
settle down in our mountain with no beccu di ciamma. Then no more Pinnici
and when he arrived, everyone went to the fire. A ddu tempu tutti
the bells were singing in Dale and the warriors were arming themselves. The dwarves
scurrìu fora dû sò granni purtali; ma cera lu dragu ca l'aspittava.
Nuḍḍu ran away immediately. The clouds rose with steam and the fog fell above
Dale, and ntâ fog lu dragu I won above and destroyed the majority of
warriors, the usual scuntenta story, era sulu troppu cumuni nta chiḍḍi tempi.
Then he turned and crossed Canceddu di Fronti and chased everyone away
the climbs, and the avenues, and the tunnels, the alleys, the cellars, the buildings and the passages.
Afterwards, no one will stop us alive, and Iddu grabbed everyone there.
he's getting richer than anyone else. Probably, because this is the dragon's road, he's got it covered.
all above nta nu granni munzeddu luntanu inside, and we will read more. Doppu used a
crawl through granni canceddu and come at night to Dale, and clear away
people, especially the kids, the manciari, when Dale was ruined, and all of them
people dead or missing. Whoever happens now doesn't know for sure, but
Don't suppose ca nuddu campa cchiù vicinu â Muntagna ca ô bordu cchiù luntanu di
lu Lagu Longu ora-a-jorna.
“Li picca of nui ca we were outside we sat down and chiancìamu huddled up, and
Smaug ammaliatu; e ddà ci juncìu 'n manera inaspitatata me patri e
me nannu cu li barbi sung. Parìanu very sad but I said
molto picca. Quannu chiamai comu s'avìanu scappatu, mi dissiru di tèniri lu me
language, and I said can nu jornu ntô time just before knowing. Double who knows
yes nni jeru, and you had to earn a living better than putìamu above and
'n giù li terri, spissu affunnannu assai vasci comu lu firraru o macari
coal extraction. But never forget our treasure. And yes
now, when you start, you will have a little good and you won't be so bad
off" - ccà Thorin ci accareciò la vatina d'oru ntô coddu - "vulemmu ancora diri
piggiàrila arrè piggiàrila and purtari our evils at home in Smaug, yes putemu.
“Spissu called me the escape of me patri and me nannu.
Now you understand that you have a private side door that you can have
about. But it's like a map, and I liked it as I knew it
Gandalf took it, and since I was not defeated, he was right
redu."
"Non l'appi, mi lu dittiru," I said lu magu. “You
lu nannu Thror was killed, you recover, ntê mines of Moria of
Azog lu Goblinu."
"Curse us names, yes," said Thorin.
“And Thrain, to patri, si nni iu lu vintunu d'Aprili, nu
It was a hundred years ago Thursday, and you've never seen it before..."
"Veru, veru," said Thorin.
– «Beni, to patri mi desi chistu pi dariti; and yes jo l'haju scigghiutu lu me
At the right time and in the most appropriate manner, it is difficult to accuse me,
cunsidirannu lu prubblema ca appi pi truvariti. He didn't care about his parents
He was my name when I was given the card, and I never said he was there; hook
ntô cumplessu penzu ca mi avissi a èssiri ludatu e ringraziatu! Eccu," dissi iddu
cunsignannu the map to Thorin.
“You don't understand,” said Thorin, and Bilbo thought we liked it
diri lu stissu. The explanations do not seem to be explained.
“To nannu”, I said lu magu slowly and darkly, “I gave us the map
a sò figghiu pâ sicurizza prima di jiri ê minieri di Moria. To patri
I left further away, fortune câ map after he was killed to nannu;
and very enchanting of a very unpleasant kind, but you never do it
near Muntagna. How he arrived was not lu sacciu, but lu truvai nu
priggiuneru ntê carciri dû Nicrumanti.”
"Who were you doing?" called Thorin cu nu trimuri, and all
li nani trimàvanu.
"You're not sorry. You stayed there like this, as usual; and you didn't dye
it was piriculusu business. Puru iu, Gandalf, I ran away sulu. Circau of
I was supposed to go to my country, but it was too late. He was witless and wandering, and
you had lost almost everything except the map and the keys.”
“Avemu pagatu long time fa li foddi di Moria,” said Thorin; “needs
dari nu pinseri ô Nicrumanzu."
«Not absurd things! He is an enemy far beyond the limits of all there
nani misi nzèmmula, si putìanu sissiri curled up all n'autra vote of four
anguli dû munnu. The only thing that bothered my father was that he was so cool
read the map and use the keys. Lu dragu and the Muntagna sunnu cchiù di
you've done enough homework, granni pi tia!”
“Listen, listen!” said Bilbu, and damn it I said it out loud.
"Look who?" I said everyone suddenly turned towards iddu, and iddu was there
scantatu ca rispunnìu “Listen to who you are saying!”
“Who is chiḍḍu?” call me.
“Ben, avissi a diri ca avissi a jiri versu Est e dari n'guarda ntunnu.
After all there is the Lateral Gate, and the dragons have to endure certain vows, iu
suppose. If you put yourself on the scalu dâ door long enough, dare to pinch
of some thing. Oh well, you don't know, you think we're talking a lot
enough more nights, I'll see who you want to say. And I read it, and it was the first time
accusers, and who all? I'll give you good ass before jiri.”
"Before you go, suppose you want to go," said Thorin. "Do you not know?"
latru? And he is not seated on the ladder to carry the travagghiu, no more talk of pigghiari
inside the door? But I agree with you about the reading and the culazzioni. I like you, you're an egg
Lu me ham, when we start our journey: don't peel the fried ones, and lie
don't break them."
After everyone else you ordered the breakfast without missing anything
Please (which bothered Bilbo a lot), everyone should get up. The hobbit goes
more places to find, and all the more spare rooms and beds above
seats and sofas, before making them all angry and yes nni iu ô so picciriddu
I read very tired and didn't have the whole story. What a stupid thing to think about
he didn't worry about getting up early and cooking chiḍḍu of all the others
unfortunate asshole. Tookishness had been spit out, and now it wasn't there
I was sure he was going on a trip in the morning.
While he was curcatu ntô lettu, sintìa Thorin ca still buzzed among the stissu ntô
megghiu càmira di lettu near iddu:
Luntanu supra li muntagni brumusi friddi
In funni dungeons and old caves
We need to go, before the break of the jornu,
Pi truvari lu nostru oru scurdàtu di tantu tempu.
Bilbu si nni iu to durmiri cu ḍḍu nta l'aricchi, and I told us a lot
uncomfortable sleep. It was much later than the break of the day when he woke up
above.
MUTTUNI ARRUSTITTU
Bilbo jumped up and, having seen him, went into the dining room. Come on, no luck, but everyone signs them to a granny and in a hurry
culations. There was a scary mess in the room, and a lot of unwashed people
ntâ kitchen trays. Almost every pignata and padedda ca pussidìa seemed approx
used forums. The washing was like this, Bilbo was sad.
custrittu in cridiri ca the party the night before had not been the same party
sonni, comu avìa chiuttostu spiratu. Certu ca fu veru alliviatu doppu tuttu a
pinzari ca s'avìanu partitu tutti senza di iddu, e senza fari la fatica di arrisvìgghiari
lu supra ("but why don't we thank you" he thought); and maybe not in an iddu way
You can't avoid feeling like a diluputu pike. The feeling is lu surprinnìu.
“Not a fool, Bilbo Baggins!” I said to myself: “pinzannu a
dragons and all those who abuse strangers of their age!” Then she put herself in
aprons, fire addumari, vugghiuta water and lavatu. Allura appi nu beddu picciriddu
culazzioni not cooking before leaving the dining room. At du time
lu suli appeared; and the front door was open, causing sudden rushes into the cave
brisa. Bilbo started playing strong friscari and scurdari the night before.
Indeed he was just sitting there for a beautiful second time
dining room near the open window, when Gandalf comes in.
"Dear cumpagnu miu," I said iddu, "when do you want to come? Who
about n'izziu soon? - and there you are doing the ass, or whatever you want
call her, it's a no-brainer! I'll let you miss the mix, because you won't put it
Wait."
"Who's messaging?" said the poor signuri Baggins, all around.
“Great Eliphants!” said Gandalf, “no more than that
matina, you never spruvulatu lu captellu!”
«Who do you have? Aju had enough people who would do the washing
plus fourteen!”
“If you avìsti sprinkled the mantellu, avìssi found you chistu sulu
Sutta the scream", I said Gandalf, give Bilbo a note (written, obviously,
above my note paper).
Chistu è chiddu ca leggiu:
"Thorin e la Cumpagnìa ô Latru Bilbo salutunu! Pâ vostra ospitalità
our most sincere thanks, and for your offer of assistance prufissiunali lu nostru
grateful acceptance. Terms: 'n cuntanti â cunsignazzioni, nzinu ae nun supiriuri a unu
fourteen of total profits (if it exists); all of them are guaranteed trips
any eventuality; funeral expenses that have been paid by us or by our representatives, yes
the occasion arises and the thing is not organized differently.
“Pinsannu ca no disturbi lu to esteemu restosu, avemu
prucidìu 'n anticipu pi fari li priparazzioni richiede, e aspittarà lu vostru
pirsuna rispittata ntâ Locanda dû Dracu Virdi, Bywater, ê 11:00.
Trust me you'll be on time,
“ We have the unuri of ristari
 “ Lu vostru prufunnamenti
 "Thorin and Co."
"It'll only leave you ten minutes. You have to run," said Gandalf.
"But..." said Bilbo.
"There's no time," said the magus.
"But..." I said n'autra votes Bilbo.
"There's no time, no more who knows! Go!"
Until today Bilbu never remembered how he had
iddu stissu fora, without cappeddu, cane or deaf, or nothing
he usually squealed when he left; leave the sixth half-finished and fairly unwashed asshole, push the keys in Gandalf's hands,
and currennu cchiù speeds ca li sò pedi di pilu putìanu purtarlu ntâ lane, passannu
lu granni Mulinu, crossed the Water, and then forward more nu kilomitru or cchiù much.
He was very swollen when he got to Bywater on the spot.
eleven, and attruvau ca was vinutu without a pocket handkerchief!
"Well done!" I said Balin was at the door of the inn circannu
iḍḍu.
Just then everyone else arrives at the corner of the street
pajisi. I was there above you, and every place was shared with everyone
types of baggage, parcels, parcels and parafarnalia. There wasn't much
nu pony nicu, pari cap pi Bilbo.
"Come on, you two, and let's go!" I said Torinu.
“I'm very sorry,” said Bilbo, “but sugnu vinutu without lu cappeddu, and
I'll leave the handkerchief out of my pocket, and I won't be deaf. Iu
I didn't pick up the note until after 10.45, which is more precise.”
"No worries," I said Dwalin, "and don't worry! You don't have to
gistiri without pocket handkerchiefs, and so many others so good,
before arriving at the end of the journey. Pi quantu riguarda nu cappeddu, haiu nu cappucciu di riserva
and mantellu ntô bagàgliu.”
So we'll all start, we'll leave the inn for a fine
matina appena prima di maggiu, supra li poni pesanti; e Bilbo avìa nu cappucciu virdi scuru (un pocu macchiatu dû tempu) e nu mantellu virdi scuru 'n prestitu
of Dwalin. Èrunu troppu granni pi iḍḍu e iḍḍu pareva abbastanza còmicu.
Chiḍḍu ca sò patri Bungo avìa pinsatu di iḍḍu, I didn't dare pinsari. Suu
the only good thing was that you couldn't make a mistake with your baby, as long as he didn't have a beard.
They hadn't been able to ride horses for a long time, when Gandalf arrived in a long time
splèndidu above nu cavaddu jancu. You had many handkerchiefs out of your pocket,
and Bilbo's pipe and tabbaccu. Then after the party you'll see a lot more
cheerful, and singing songs or singing songs while walking forward all day long,
tranni ca osservamenti quannu si firmàru pi manciari. Chisti nun arrivaru propriu comu
spissu comu Bilbo li avissi piaciutu, ma comunqui accumincomincia a sintiri ca
the tie is not exactly dyed after all.
Nna l'inizziu avìanu passatu pi li terri di l'hobbit, n'ampia rispittàbbili
paisi abbitatu di gente dicenti, cu strati boni, n'albergu o dui, e ora
and then nu nanu or nu viddanu ca passed the business. Then I arrived at
lands and people spoke strangely, and sang songs that Bilbo had never heard
Before. Now avìanu annatu luntanu ntê Terri Solitari, unni nun cèranu
the people left, there are no inns and the strata are always worse. Not a long time ahead
sad hills, always rising as cars, dark as the trees. Supra quarchidunu of iddi
eranu vecchi casteddi cu n'aspettu mali, comu si fussiru stati custruiuti di cattivi
pirsuni. Everyone seemed sad, because the time of day of day had no pigghiatu nu
bad turn. Supratuttu avìa statu bonu comu maggiu pò èssiri, pò èssiri, puru ntô
cunti allegri, ma ora era friddu e vagnatu. Ntê Terri Solitari avìanu statu
forced to camp whenever we could, but at least it was dry.
“Pinzari ca soon it will be June!” Bilbo moaned as he squirted
I stopped at the driver on a very muddy track. It was doppu lu tempu dû tea; era
they ran away from Chioggia, and had been there all day long; the cappucciu was dripping ntô so
eyes, his mantle was covered in water; his ponies were tired and fell asleep
petri dishes; the other one is too much more angry than others. “And sugnu safe ca la chioggia s'ha pigghiatu
No dry clothes and no bags of tips," thought Bilbo. "Faistidi
Furtu and all who knows what you have to do! I'd like to come home to my bed
close ô focu, câ boiling ca as soon as it starts to sing!” It wasn't the last time
ca lu vulìa chiddu!
Even the dwarves continued to curl, without ever turning or pigghiari no cuntu of
the hobbit. Quarchi banna arrè the gray clouds lu suli avissi a sissiri partitu
down, pirchì began to turn dark headlights while scinnìanu nta na vaddi prufunna cu na
ciumi 'n funnu. Lu ventu got up, and the willows along the rivers bent and
he sighed. The more fortunately the road passed over ancient stone bridges, the further
ciumi, swollen with chioghi, scinnìa with cullini and
mountains in the north.
It was almost the night when we avìanu attravirsatu. Lu ventu rumpìu lu
gray clouds, and the moon wanders cumparìu above them close to them
flying rags. Allura signed and Thorin muttered the above
dinner, “and unni pigghiamu na pezza drier pi durmiri?” It didn't end then
nutaru ca Gandalf was missing? By now the whole road had arrived
as I say, no one ever said there was ever a fight or something to hold on to
cumpagnìa pi nu pocu di tempu. Avìa manciatu cchiù assài, parratu cchiù assài e ridìu cchiù assài.
But now there was simply nothing left!
"Propriu quannu nu magu fussi statu cchiù utili puru iḍḍu," gimiu Dori
and Nori (ca cunnividìa the points of view of the hobbit above the regular meals, abundance and
spissu).
Dicideru â fini ca avìanu a campori unni èranu.
A group of trees were transferred, and yet it was all about the safety of the
The next day the foliage of Fogghi broke out, and he, gocciu, gocciu, was even more annoying.
Even though the mischinu seemed to have lost focus. Li nani ponnu fari nu
focus almost unn'è-è of almost all of them like this, ventu or nuḍḍu ventu; but iddi
not lu putìanu fari chiḍḍa nights, missing Oin and Gloin, ca èrunu specialties
well done to this one.
Then one day he got scared of nothing and dawned. Trasiu nta
lu ciumi prima ca lu putìanu pigghiari; and before putirilu nesciri
still na vote, Fili and Kili foru almost exhausted, and all their luggage ca iddu
purtatu was lavatu of iḍḍu. Of course it was above all tip-tops, and so on
arristava assài picca pâ cena e menu pâ culazzioni.
There everyone sits dark and vagnati and mummuriàvanu, while Oin and Gloin
he continued to talk about addumari lu focu, and to argue about pi chistu. Bilbo was sad
reflect on the fact that you don't know all the turns above the cavaddi ntô suli di Maggiu, when
Balin, who was always on guard, said: "There are lights above
ḍḍà!" C'era na collina 'n pocu luntanu cu l'àrburi supra, assai spissa nta certi parti.
Out of the dark mass of the trees now putìanu see the lights that were shining, na
luci russa d'aspettu còmudu, comu putissi èssiri nu focu o di torci
sparkling.
Quannu l'avìanu taliatu pi nu pocu, accuminciaru a discutiri. Arcuni
I said “no” and for four of them I said “yeah”. Quarchi d'unu dissi ca putìanu sulu iri a vìdiri, and
everything was better than a pike dinner, menu, culazzioni and all the dirty clothes
the nights.
Others said: “These parts aren't too close, and they're too close.
muntagni. Travelers now rarely arrive on this route anymore. Li old maps nun sunnu
usu: there we can get worse and the road is without a guard. Iḍḍi
raramenti haiu mancu sentitu parrari dû re ccà, e li menu curiusi
yes you are while you go forward, the more you think it's likely you'll find it." Arcuni
I said, “Doppu all of us are fourteen.” Others said: “Unni is Gandalf
arrived?" This cummintazzioni was repeated by everyone. Allura began to chioviri.
spurcaru peggiu di mai, e Oin e Gloin accuminciaru a cummàttiri.
Chistu lu stabbilìu. “Doppu tuttu avemu nu latru cu nuatri”, I said; And
so I left, although I asked them (with all due and just prudence)
the directions of lights. Arrive at the hill and soon reach the lignu.
Up the hill si nni jeru; but there wasn't any right way to see it, anyway
putissi purtari a na casa oa na fattoria; e fari chiddu ca putìanu, fìciru n'accordu
of frischiu and scrusciu and strisciuni (and good parts of brontulari and
dratting), while attravirsàvanu the àrburi ntô dark.
Suddenly the Russian lights shone very brightly through the trunks of the trees
go far ahead.
“Now it's the turn of the day,” I said, damn Bilbo. «You don't have jiri
and you will discover everything above ḍḍa lights, and more who you serve, and if everything is more suitable
safe and clever," said Thorin to the hobbit. "Now run away, and come
come back soon, everything is fine. Yes no, it's a bit of a turn! Yes, not at all, he shouts
two common votes no gufu dû granaru and a common vote no crawling owls, and we will make chiddu ca facìamu
bit."
Off Bilbo appi a jiri, prima di putiri spiegari ca non putìa mancu urlari
na vote comu qualigghiè tipu di gufu cchiù ca vulari comu nu pipistreḍḍu. But in any case
the hobbits can move calmly ntô lignu, absolutely calm. Pigghianu the pride of
lu, and Bilbo had to sniffatu cchiù di na vote chiḍḍu ca called “tuttu chistu
racchetta nana», mentri caminavanu, puru si non supponi ca tu o iu
I had nothing to say about twenty nights, not all of them
the ride passed two feet away. As far as Bilbo is concerned, he walks first towards him
la luci russa, non supponi ca mancu na ronzula avissa sciugghiutu na barba a
iḍḍu. Allura, naturally, arrived suddenly at the focus, since it was focus, without
disturb nuddu. And chistu is chiḍḍu ca vitti.
Tri pirsòni assái granni assittati ntunnu a nu focu assái granni di fagghi.
Stannu toast the mutton meat above the long lignu spit and liccann the suppa
I knew them. There was n'oduri finu and dentatu. There was puru na vutti di
good drink by hand, and bivìanu by jugs. But iddi èranu
troll. Obviously the trolls. Puru Bilbo, nunustanti la sò vita rifuggiata, putìa vìdiri
ca: say greats, make us weeping with gods, and give it greatness, and give fuma of
I know jammi, no longer speak my language, it wasn't Salottu
fashion more, more.
“Mutonni yesterday, muttonni today, and blimey, yes not even
“I'll buy mutton meat tomorrow,” said one of the trolls.
"Never have any pieces of flashing man's meat had more than enough time," I said.
sicunnu. “Chiḍḍu ca sta pinzannu lu "Gugghiermu" pi purtarici nta chisti
leave, beat me, and the drink is short, who cares," I said iḍḍu
jogging on Gugghiermu's elbow, the jug was the tyrant.
Guggiermu suffocated. "Shut the fuck up!" I said as soon as I asked. “Yer
You can't expect people to stop here anymore, just to be around you and Bert. You have
et nu paisi e menzu tra yer, vistu ca scinnimu dû
mountains. How much more vulnerable? And the weather made the road,
quannu avìsti dittu "grazzi a Bill" pi nu beḍḍu pizzuddu di carni grassa dâ vaddi
comu chiḍḍu ca è chistu." He took a big muzzicuni of a jamma of a pècura ca arrustìa, and
he wiped his lips on his sleeve.
Yes, you are afraid that the trolls will cumpòrtanu accussì, puru chiḍḍi ca hannu sulu unu
test everyone. After that everyone heard Bilbo start to think clearly about what to do
na vote. Or go on rounds of tranquility and friendship, I know them as friends approx
c'èranu tri troll di grannizza assai a purtata di manu cu n'umore tintu, assái prubbabbili ca
pruva nana arrustita, o macari pony, pi nu canciamentu; o oppure avissi avutu a fari
no little good furtu viloci. Nu latru veru first class and ligginnàriu
at this point you'll get caught in the pockets of trolls, it's almost always
you're worth it, yes you can get there..., pinch the meat of the muttura stissa of stinks,
I grabbed the beer and left without having to worry about it. Others cchiù
pràticu ma cu menu orgògliu prufissiunali avissa forsi 'ncapu nu
daggers nta ognunu di iḍḍi before ossirvarlu. Allura la notti putìa
forums passed happily.
Bilbo knows this. I had read about something like this that no one had ever seen before
fact. He was very alarmed and disgusted; yes vulìa iddu stissu
a hundred miles away, and anyway... and anyway, four votes couldn't go straight
He returns to Thorin and Company with his hands empty. He stopped and hesitated.
the ummiri. Of the various pruciduri of furtu that avìa sentitu parrari
pigghiari li rates of trolls pariah lu cchiù difficult pike, quinni â fini sirriccio
I'm back in n'àrvuru as soon as I'm back in Gugghiermu.
Bert e Tom annaru â vutti. Gugghiermu stava bivennu n'àutra cosa.
Allura Bilbu took care of herself and put her hand on Gugghiermu's hair
huge pockets. There was a bag, big as a bag, like Bilbo's. "Ha!"
thought, warm your nose ô I'm new to work while you raised it with care, "who's new
sharpen your skills!"
Era! The bags of trolls were mischievous, and those who were not excited.
“Ere, tu sì?” he squeezed, comu lassava la tasca; e Gugghiermu vutau
he went around once and stuck Bilbo with his tail, before he could stop ducks
the àrvuru.
“Blimey, Bert, look who's coming!” said Guggiermu.
"Who is?" I dissiru l'autri ca vinìanu. «Lumme, si lu sacciu! Who sunnu
Yes?"
"Bilbo Baggins, nu sciarriu... n'hobbit," I said lu poviru Bilbo, tremennu tutu,
and we talked like we would do the rumpituri di owl before ca lu strinciàssiru.
"Nu cunigghiu?" I said, somewhat disconcerted. The trolls are slow until they are absorbed,
and putti suspicious of which new thing is the latest.
“Anyway, who's there for you to make a cunigghiu burrabbit in my pocket?” said
Gugghiermu.
"And you can cook them?" I said Tom.
"You can try," said Bert, pigghiannu nu spiedu.
“Don't do anything more than that,” I said Gugghiermu, who had already
I had a nice dinner, "not once was it peeled and boned."
“P'raps ci sunnu cchiù comu a iḍḍu ntunnu, e putemu fari nu
"cake," said Bert. "Here you are, there's someone else who's got this thing
chisti ccà li ligni, cunigghiu picciriddu," I said taliannu chiḍḍu from the hobbit
peddi pedi; and he stamped his feet more and he burst.
“Yes, so much,” said Bilbo, before deciding not to meet my friends.
go away. "Nuḍḍu, nuḍḍu," said subbitu doppu.
"Who are you flying?" I said Bert, you can hear it above, I'll understand
this vote.
"Chiḍḍu ca dicu," I said Bilbo anxiously. “And please don't cook for me, gentlemen!
Sugnu nu bonu cuocu iu stissu, and I cook better than how many I cook, yes I saw chiddu ca iu
it means. Ti fazzu cucinu beddu, pri tia na culazzioni pirfettamenti bedda,
yes sulu don't buy me any more dinners."
"Poviru lustru," said Guggiermu. You've already had a lot of dinner
comu putìa tèniri; avìa puru avutu assài birra. – «Poviru picciriddu! Lassatilu
go!"
"You don't say until you know who you want to say you fight them and no more," I said Bert. "IU
don't want me to tagghiari la gula nta lu sleepnu! Keep them in focus, nzinu a
speak!”
"I didn't know it," said Guggiermu. "I pressed him anyway."
“You are a fool, Gugghiermu,” said Bert, “as I said before
sira."
“And you are a snob!”
"And don't you piss this, Bill Huggins," you say Bert and put your
He punches Guggiermu's eye.
Then there was a splendid row. Bilbo had enough minds by then
Bert left him to fall further to the ground, more ruined by road from now on,
first of all they were common dogs, and they were called all types of
names pirfittamenti veri e applicabbili cu vuci assai forti. Prestu foru
they closed each other, and rolled almost without focus and kicked
battutu, while Tom gave them a nudge at all two of them with no more purtarili to them
their senses, and this one naturally makes them the craziest ever.
It would be the moment when Bilbo left. But I know I can't be small
The feet were very crushed by Bert's grandpa paw, and they didn't get to the bottom of it.
body, and the head was spinning; I'll take care of you first to worry a little,
as soon as you get out of the circus of lights and focus.
Just before the morning came Balin. The dwarfs avìanu sintutu
rumori di luntanu, e doppu aviri aspittatu pi quarchi tempu ca Bilbo arrivassi
stop, or more common screams no gufu, set off one by one more crawling towards
the lights cchiù tranquillomenti ca putìanu. As soon as Tom vitti trasiri Balin
the lights ca iḍḍu sayings n'urlu tirribbili. Troll them simply hate the very sight of
dwarfs (nun cotti). Bert and Bill firmàru subbitu di cummàttiri e “nu
saccu, Tom, hurry!” I said Before Balin, we were talking about unni 'n.
all this commotion Bilbo was, who knows who was going to kill himself, no one was over
the head, and it was down.
"There's still more to come," Tom said, "or you've made a mistake. Much
and no it is," I said. "No cunigghiu, but a lot of who's who
dwarfs. Here’s the shape!”
"I think you've reached it," I said Bert, "and it's better than no lights."
And that's what happened. Cu li sacchi 'n manu, ca usàvanu pi purtari
fora carne di mutoni e autri plundering, aspittavanu nta l'ùmmiri. Comu ogni nana
he bent down and looked at the focus, and the purged jugs, and the wrinkled ones
muntoni, surprise you, pop! there are no stinky bags on top of your head, and iddu
was down. Soon Dwalin was near Balin, and Fili and Kili were there, and Dori
and Nori and Ori all 'n munzeddu, and Oin and Gloin and Bifur and Bofur and
Bombur s'ammucciaru inconveniences close to focus.
"Chistu'll nzignarli," said Tom; pirchì Bifur and Bombur avìanu datu very much
woe, and cummattìu like crazy people, like dwarfs do when they accumulate.
Thorin arrivàu l'urtimu, e non fu pigghiatu 'n manera 'mpruvvisa. Arrivò aspittannu
mischinu, and I didn't need to see them jammi tell me I know friends who sprouted more bags
you say that they are not all good. Arristau pierces the ùmmira
four things long ago, and I said: "Who is all this trouble? Who knocked on it?"
lu me pòpulu supra?”
“Come on troll!” I said Bilbo back to n'àrvuru. Avìanu scurdatu of all
iḍḍu. “S'ammuccianu ntê knock cu li sacchi”, I said iḍḍu.
"Oh! Sunnu?" said Thorin, and iddu jumped forward ô focu, first
putìanu saltari supra di iḍḍu. Pigghiò nu ramu granni tuttu 'n focu a n'estrimità;
and Bert told us ḍḍa point the eye before putting us down. Where I put it
out of battle more than a little. Bilbo fics I know better. He grabbed Tom's range
- comu putìa, it was spissu common nu troncu d'àrvuru - but it was mannatu
girannu ntâ summità di quarchi bussu, quannu Tom scattò li scintilli nta
Thorin's face.
The Trolls
Tom put his teeth on his head and put some of those in front of him.
You howl, I can tell you. But just at the moment Gugghiermu arrived
he stopped and a saccupropriu popped up over Thorin's head and he was on his feet.
And then the battle ended. In a beautiful secret, everyone is there now: all tied to the rules
above 'n sacks, with three angry trolls (and two with burns and beaten
recurda) sit near iddi, discuss if the avissiru to rustiri
chianu-chianu, or tritàlli fina-fina and make them vugghiri, or sulu assittàlli unu a unu
and smashed them into jelly; and Bilbu supra nta nu bussu, I've seen them and I know them
peddi torn, she didn't dare move anymore fearful of what she heard.
It was just then that Gandalf turned. But nuddu lu vitti. Troll them
he had just said to roast the dwarves now and feed them later, it was
Bert's idea, and after many discussions, everyone agreed on it.
"Now you can't burn them well, you'll fly all night," I said in a whisper. Bertu
he pinzava ca era chiḍḍa di Guggiermu.
"Nun accuminciari n'àutra vota la discussione, Bill," said iḍḍu, "oppuru ci voli
all night long.»
"Who's arguing?" I said Gugghiermu, it was Pinzava, it was Bertu, it was off
parratu.
"You do," I said Bert.
“You are no liar”, I said Gugghiermu; and then the discussions began
of novu. Â fini dicideru di tritarli finamenti e di farili vugghiri. Dunca iḍḍi
appi na granni bathtub nìura, and tiràru pierce them cuteḍḍi.
"It's not good to make them vugghiri! We don't have any water, and it's a long way to go ô
goods and all," I said na vuci. Bert and William pinzàvanu ca era chiḍḍa di Tom.
"Shut up!" I said to him, "or we've never done it before. And putiti pigghiari lu
water you stissu, you say cchiù nenti."
"Shut up!" I said Tom, it was Guggiermu's voice.
"Who is arguing but you, I like you."
"You're a kid," Gugghiermu said.
"Booby you stissu!" said Tom.
And so the discussion began again, and continued even more heatedly than ever,
up to the edge we decide to sit on top of the bags one by one and squazzarunu them,
and you'll make them want to do it twice.
“Supra a cu s'assittamu prima?” I said la vuci.
"It's better to push up first on the hill," I said Bert, when the eye had already been
Thorin's damage. He thought Tom was talking.
“Nun parrari cu te stissu!” disi Tom. “Ma si voli sedettarisi supra l'urtimu
unu, sit above iddu. What is iḍḍu?”
"Who are those yellow socks," said Bert.
“Fools, who has gray socks,” I said quietly
By Gugghiermu.
"I'll make sure there were detective stories," I said Bert.
"It was yellow," I said Guggiermu.
"So who I said was grey?" I said Bertu.
"He never does. Tom told him."
"Chistu non lu facìa mai!" I said Tom. "It was you."
“Dui a unu, so shut the fuck up!” I said Bertu.
"Cu sta parrannu?" said Guggiermu.
“Now sign it!” said Tom and Bert nzèmmula. “The night is coming, and
dawn comes early. Continuamu cu chistu!”
“Alba is chasing you all, and Petra is there!” I said na vuci ca paria
By Guggiermu. But it wasn't so. It was precisely the one who moved when the lights arrived above him
hill, and there were nu putenti twitter ntê branches. Guggiermu will never speak
because she was transformed into a stone as she bowed; and Bert and Tom were pissed off
comu li petri while lu taliàvanu. And from now on we're nzinu to oji, all suli,
you can't lean on the menu when you access it; since you troll them, as you probably know, you must be
sutta terra prima di l'arba, oppuru si nni turnanu a la robba di li muntagni
sunnu facts of, and never move again. Here's who came next
Bert and Tom and Gugghiermu.
"Excellent!" said Gandalf, as he walked from back to n'àrvuru, and helped
Bilbo more scinniri than a stream of thorns. Allura Bilbu understood. Era
la vuci dû magu ca avìa tinutu troll them a sciarriari and a sciarriari, nzinu a quannu
I won the lights and finished them.
The next thing was to untie the sacks and let the dwarfs leave. Iḍḍi
eranu quasi suffucati, e assai arraggiati: nun s'avìanu divirtutu pi nenti
lying down ddà ascultannu li troll ca fannu pruggetti pi arrustirili e
squazzannuli and tritànnuli. Avìanu a sentiri lu cuntu di Bilbo di
whoever had won us two votes, before we had those who were happy.
"It's a stupid time to practice pizzicari and pigghiari tax them," I said
Bombur, “quannu chiḍḍu ca vulìamu era focu e manciari!”
“And whoever is the one who doesn't have the guy without a nu
fight, anyway," said Gandalf. "Anyway now you're pirdennu tempu.
Don't let yourself know, the trolls have aviri na grutta or nu pirtusu dig of four banna
close to ammucciarisi dû sulinta? We need to taliàrilu!”
Circaru e prestu attruvaru li signa dî stivali di petra dî troll
'through the trees. Siguìru the tracks up the hill, nzinu a
ammucciati di bussi arrivaru supra na granni porta di petra ca purtava a na grutta. But
they don't putìanu grapiri, but they all spincìanu while Gandalf was walking around
various enchantments.
"Sarìa bonu?" called Bilbo, quannu s'avìanu stancatu
and get angry. "I pulled it to the ground unni li troll cummattìanu." Iḍḍu
tinni na granni keys, yes without a doubt Gugghiermu had it stapled very nice
and sigretu. You must have fallen out of your pocket, much more luck, before ca iddu
fu trasfurmatu 'n petra.
“Will you not hit the ground first?” he cried. Gandalfu
I stuck it and left him with the keys. Then the Petra door melted and closed
with a great push, and everyone was drawn inside. There's a bone on the ground
and while there was little smell in the air; but there was a good amount of ammiscatu tippers
carelessly on the shelves and on the ground, among a line of sacking scattered,
of all the types of buttuni of ramu ê chini vases of equipped with gold ca stannu nta nu
each one. There are even many seen, 'hanged on the walls, too many more
troll, you are afraid that you belong to victims, and among them there is a
several swords of various brands, furmi and grannizzi. Two of them looked at us
In particulars, graces are soi beddi fogghi and soi manichi jewels.
Gandalf and Thorin pigghiaru unu di chisti; and Bilbo pigged nu cuteddu nta nu
sheath of peddi. Avissi fattu sulu nu cuteḍḍu tascabbili nicu pi nu troll, ma
it was good common a curved sword plus the hobbit.
“Chisti pàrinu boni lami”, dissi lu magu, disignànnuli â mità e
guardànnuli cu curiosità. “Non foru fatti di nuḍḍu troll, né di nuḍḍu
firraru ntra l'òmini nta chisti parti e jorna; but whenever you can read the runes
above iḍḍi, we know much more about iḍḍi.”
“We don't smell these horrible smells!” said Fili. So let's go ahead
vases of equipped, and manchari ca nun was tuccatu and ca seemed good more manciari, puru
nu barrels of beer that were still in the tank. A ddu tempu si sintìanu comu culazzioni,
and they are very hungry no vutaru lu nasu pi chiḍḍu ca avìanu pigghiatu
stay away from trolls. I know they are in very short supply. Now iddi
I had bread and furmagliu, and lots of beer and bacon plus toasts and embers
dû focu.
Doppu durmìru, pirchì la sò notti avìa statu disturbata; e lu fìciru
no cchiù nzinu ô afternoon. Allura purtaru I know them, and
purtau away the golden vases, and sippillìu very safe not far from
the track near ô ciumi, mittennucci na para di ncantìsimi supra, sulu ntô casu
avìanu mai la possibbilità di turnari e ricupirarili. Quannu fu
done, everyone muntaru n'other votes, and curreru n'autra votes ntô walk
towards the East.
“Unni annasti, si mi pozzu dumannari?” Thorin said to Gandalf as he stood there
he was riding 'nsemmula.
“Pi taliari ahead,” Iḍḍu said.
"And who told you to stop talking?" "Guardannu arrè,"
I said hello.
"Right!" I said Torinu; "But putissi èssiri cchiù chiaru?"
"I continued to spy on our street. Soon you will spot piriculusa and
difficult. Furthermore, he was anxious to strengthen our little scortu
dispositions. Non avìa annatu assài luntanu, comunque, quannu scuntrai nu paru di
my friends from Rivendell."
“Unni is chiḍḍu?” Bilbu called.
“Don't get upset!” said Gandalf. “You'll get there in a few days now,
let us be lucky, and we will discover everything. How was he saying scuntrai two of
Lu populu of Elrond. Stannu hurried more afraid of trolls. Era
who said to me that I thought I was crazy about muntagni
and you will settle for a long time: avìanu scantatu
tutti luntanu dû distrittu, e iḍḍi stranieri.
"Appi subbitu la sintimenta ca mi vulìanu turnari. Guardànnumi arrè
vitti nu focu di luntanu e ci fici. Allura ora lu sai. Si prego di èssiri
Be careful, vote it twice, or we'll never get anywhere!"
"Thanks!" said Torinu.
A SHORT REST
Non cantaru e mancu cuntàru stori ddu jornu, puru siddu lu tempu era
migghiuratu; neither lu jornu doppu, nor lu jornu doppu. Avìanu accuminciatu in sintiri approx
lu pirìculu non era luntanu di tutti dui li lati. S'accamparu sutta li stiddi, e
I dug out more birds than I had eaten; because there was plenty of grass there,
but there weren't many bags, just cu chiddu ca avìanu pigghiatu dû
troll. In the morning attravirsaru nu ciumi nta nu postu largu e funnu chinu di
noises of petri dishes and foam. The distant bank was steep and slippery. Quannu iddi
arrive at the summit, guide them to the top, visit the great mountains
avìanu marzotu very close to iḍḍi. Already parìanu sulu di nu jornu
easy trips to walk to someone nearby. It seems dark and sad, yes
there are spots of lights on the top of the brown sides, and stop them
points them to the peaks of lucid snow.
“Is whoḍḍa The Muntagna?” he called Bilbo in solemn voices, taliànnula
with the eyes of Tunne. He had never seen anything so big before.
“Of course not!” I said Balinu. “Chistu è sulu lu lu princìpiu dâ Nebbia
Muntagni, and avemu a passari, or supra, or sutta chiḍḍi
some votes, before you put them into Wilderland beyond. And it's a matter of
na strata puru di l'autru latu di iddi pâ Muntagna Solitaria nta l'Est
unni Smaug s'attrova supra lu nostru tisoriu."
"OR!" I said Bilbu, and just like that, you feel tired of never
ricurdò lu sintimentu prima. Stava pinzannu n'autra vota ô so còmudu
chair in front ô focu ntô so salottu prifiritu ntô so pirtusu hobbit, and of
lu cantu dû boiling. No more last votes!
Now Gandalf led the way. “We must not miss the way, or we will be
pirchì," said iḍḍu. "Avemu bisognu di manciari, pi na cosa, e ripusari 'n sicurizza raggiunevuli...
puru è assai nicissariu rivolgeri li Muntagni Brumi dô camminu giustu,
or maybe you're sorry, and you don't have to take turns and get started ô
start again (yes, never shifts).”
The dumannaru unni facìa, and iddu replied: “You yes
arrived at the limits of Sarvaggiu, like some of you putissiru sapirs. Huddled up
in front of nuatri there is the beautiful valley of Rivendell unni campa Elrond
nta the Last Home House. Mannai no mixaggiu of friends, and siamu
you waited."
These people seem to be beḍḍu and stealthirs, but they haven't arrived yet, and
It wasn't as easy as finding the Last Homely House west of here
Muntagni. Paria ca nun cèrunu àrburi e vaddi e cullini pi
you rummage the earth in front of iddi, sulu nu vastu penditi ca va slowly above and
nzinu to ncuntrari the feet of the nearby mountain, in a land wide of culuri of
moorland and grizzled rock, with patches and patches of virdi grass and
virdi muschiu ca mustra unni putissi èssiri l'acqua.
The morning passed, the afternoon arrived; but all the silent waste was there
nuddu signs of nudda dwellings. Stannu addivintannu anxiously, because now vidìanu
whoever the house putìa is huddled up almost like an is-is between iddi and lu
muntagni. Arriving at the top you'll find yourself, narrow with steep sides,
when improvisations were opened at their feet, and they were amazed to see them
àrburi sutta di iḍḍi e acqua currenti 'n funnu. There is ranu gulli approx
putìanu quasi saltari supra, ma assái prufunni cu cascati rintra. Ḍḍà
there were dark ravines that could neither be reached nor reached.
they were swamps, certain of virdi gods pleasant places of taliari, cu ciuri
crisciri lustrusu and àutu; but no pony walked from there with a brancu above me
I'll never come back again.
It was truly a very large land where there were mountains
never had I pinched it. Bilbo was amazed. The only path was
signati cu petri janchi, certi nichi, e àutri mità
cupertu di muschiu o di brughiera. Ntô cumplessu fu n'affari assái lentu
safe the track, even guided by Gandalf, who seemed to be able to get out of the way
about enough good.
His head and beard melted away again and again as he walked around him
petri, and siguìru lu I know capu, but they didn't seem any closer â for the purposes of
the research began to fail when the day began. Lu time dû tea was over more time, and
Even when it's time for dinner, I'll be there soon. C'èranu palummeddi ca fluttuàvanu
about, and the light became very dark, because the moon had not risen. by Bilbu
The pony began to skim over the roots and the petri. Arrivaru ô bordu di na
fallen to the ground with Gandalf's improvisations almost like a scippau
'n slope.
“Eccu â fini!” he called, and the other gathered together ntunnu a iddu and
he looked above the border. Vidìru na vaddi assái sutta. Putìanu sintiri lu
vuci di l'acqua Avanza nta nu lettu di petra 'n funnu; lu prufumu di l'arbuli era
nta the air; and there were lights on the other side of the water.
Bilbo never forgot about comu scippavanu and scippavanu ntô crepusculu
the steep zigzag path leads through the secret valley of Rivendell. The crisp air
cchiù caudu while you were abbascianu, and the smell of pine trees facìa
sleep, as if every now and then he nodded and almost fell, or
slam lu nasu ntô coddu dû pony. I know the spirits were getting up while they were scinnìanu
and down. The trees were removed from beech and oak, and there was a
common sensations at dusk. The ùrtimu virdi had almost faded away
the grass, quannu arrivaru â fini a na chianura aperta non luntanu supra lu
rivi dû turrenti.
"Hmmm! It smells of elves!" thought Bilbu, and looked up.
stiddi. Abbruciavanu lustrous and blue. Just then a burst arrived
canzuna comu la ridere ntra l'àrvuli:
Oh! Who are you doing,
And where are you going?
You ask them they need shoes!
You dark hairs!
 Oh! tra-la-la-lally
 ccà sutta ntâ vaddi!
Oh! Who are you around,
And what are you doing?
The facts stink,
Li bannocchi stannu cucinannu!
 Oh! tril-lil-lil-lolli
 the vaddi is happy,
 ha! ha!
O! Unni jeru
Cu li barbi tutti 'n giru?
No knowledge, no knowledge
Chiddu ca porta lu signuri Baggins
 And Balin and Dwalin
 down ntâ vaddi
 in June
 ha! ha!
Oh! You're tired,
Or are you vulannu?
Li tò poni si stannu sfuggennu!
The light dû jornu sta murennu!
Flying was madness,
Rest were cheerful
 And listen and listen
 Finu â fini dû scuru
 in our harmony
 ha! ha!
Accussì laughìanu e cantavanu nta l'àrburi; e abbastanza giu abbusi I
dare to think about it. We don't care; ridìanu sulu everyone
cchiù yes I said them accurately. Eranu elves, obviously. Prestu Bilbu
You can see them while the darkness darkens. He loved the elves, though
rarely scuntràu them; but iḍḍu had no little fear even of iḍḍi. Dwarves
you don't go well with the iḍḍi. Puru dwarves quite saying like Thorin and
I know that friends think they're silly (there's a very silly thing about pinzari), oh
you get annoyed with iḍḍi. He beats four elfs, mocks them and laughs at them, and
suprattuttu â sò barba.
“Well, well!” I said na vuci. "Look sulu! Bilbo the hobbit supra nu pony, lu me
dear! It's not funny!”
"Cchiù maravigghiusu maravigghiusu!"
Poi trasieru nna n'autra canzuna ridìcula comu chiḍḍa ca haiu
scrittu 'n cumpletu. Â fini unu, nu picciottu àutu, niscìu dû
àrburi and bowed to Gandalf and Thorin.
“Welcome come on!” I said iḍḍu.
"Thank you!" I said Thorin 'n pocu sgrigghiatu; but Gandalf was already gone
cavaddu e tra l'elfi, parrannu allegri cu iḍḍi.
“You are a little out of the way,” the elf said: “Zoè, yes, you are
They took the only path across the water and were home to others. Nuiautri
he will do you right, but it's better if you don't go on foot, unless you don't go up there
bridges. Go and stay a while and sing with our sisters, or go straight
above? Let's get ready for dinner," I said. "Smell the smell of lignu fires
pâ cucina.”
Tired as he was, Bilbo liked to stay a little longer. Elven song
there is nothing to miss, in June on all the stages, you don't care about such
cosi. Puru iddu avissa piaciutu aviri na para di palori privati ​​​​cu chisti
people who seem to be canùsciri know their names and all of them like that above iḍḍu, even if iḍḍu avìa
I've never seen them before. He was thinking about the upiniuni of this kind of adventure
they are ntirisant. The elves know a lot and the wonderful people know more, and they know
you happen among the people of the earth, viluci as you darken the water, or
faster.
But the dwarves were all more dinners as soon as possible right then, and
it didn't stay. Everyone annaru, I'll guide them, nzinu to quannu foru
purtatu a nu bonu percorsu e accussì â fini ô stissu bordu dû ciumi. Era
scurri viloci e rumorusi, comu fannu li turrenti di muntagna di na sirata d'istati,
How many times has he been above the sky all day long? There was sulu nu
You narrowed the bridges of Petra without parapets, you narrowed as many as you could put away goods
walkways ahead; and above who knows they moved forward, slowly and attentively, one by one, each
Guidannu lu sò pony pâ brida. The elves avìanu purtatu lanterni lustri ô
shore, and cantaru na canzuna allegra mentri la festa attravirsava.
“Don't dive your beard until it foams, fathers!” call me to Thorin, ca
he was almost bent over his hands and knees. “He's quite long without
drown it.”
“Mind Bilbo he doesn't tip all the turti!” call me. "It's too fat!
through the keyholes again!”
"Hush, hush! Good people! And goodnight!" said Gandalf, who won
urtimu. "There they go have rich people, and four elves have cheerful tongues. Good
nights!"
And so â we all ended up arriving at the Last House of Home, and attruvarunu I knew it
wide ports.
Now it's a strange thing, but so that it's good to have a good time
sunnu boni pi spinniri sunnu prestu cuntati, and not much more ascultari; while
so if they are uncomfortable, throbbing and even terrifying, they can be made
a good story, and lots of cuntari anyway. Ristaru very nta chiddu
good home, at least fourteen days, and it was difficult to leave. Bilbu
avissa statu cuntentu di signatori dadà more always and always, puru suppunennu nu disiu
l'avìa purtatu subbitu arrè ntô so pirtusu hobbit senza prubblemi. Ancora
there is a little bit of diri supra lu sò suggiornu.
The patron of the house was n'amicu elfu, one of those people who
The fathers saw no strange stories before the beginning of History, Monday
warriors of deep evils and of the elves and of the first men of the north. N
ddi jorna dâ nostra storia c'eranu ancora certain gente ca avìanu sia elfi ca
ancient heroes of the north, and Elrond was the patron of the house
lu sò capu.
It was nobles and bieddu who made us a noble elfu, strong common warriors,
wise common man no magu, vinirabbili common no king of dwarves, and kind common people
states. There are many stories, but this is Bilbo's story
great adventure is sula na picciridda, even if they are important, as you can see, yes
we never got to the end. My house was perfect, whether you liked the food,
o durmiri, o travagghiari, o cuntari storii, o cantari, o sulu èssiri assittatu e pinzari
megghiu, or a pleasant mix of all. These evils did not pass us by
vaḍḍi.
Avissi vugghiutu aviri time to meet just for the stories or one or two days
canzuni ca sintìanu nta dda home. All iddi, puru li poni, crisceru
refresh yourself and strengthen your legs every day. I've seen them for repairs as usual
I know how I feel them, I know their temperaments and I know their spirits. There are sacchi èranu chini
with lighter tips and provisions that are more purtarily but strong more purtarily above lu
mountain passes. I know the plans were improved so that they were better. Dunca lu
It arrived on the eve of mid-summer, and we had another day of the first ones
on the morning of menzu estivu.
Elrond canuscia tutti li runi di ogni tipu. Ddu jornu taliò lu
spadi ca avìanu purtatu dâ tana dî troll, and iddu said: “Chisti nun sunnu
troll lighthouses. Sunnu old swords, very old swords of the Auti Elfi dû
West, my relatives. Furu fatti a Gondolin pî guerri dî Goblin. Iḍḍi
avissi a sissiri vinutu of a treasure of dragu or of a plunder of goblins, pick them dragons and
I foddi destroyed those cities many centuries ago. Chistu, Torin, lu nomu dî runi
Orcristu, Goblin's snatchers ntâ ancient language of Gondolin; it was nu
famous blade. Chistu, Gandalf, was Glamdring, lu marteḍḍu nimicu ca lu king of
Na vote purtava lu gòndolinu. Keep them good!”
“Di unni li pigghiaru li troll, I wonder?” I said Thorin taliannu lu so
spada cu novu ntiressi.
“It couldn't be said,” said Elrond, “but it could be said that they were trolls from Avian territory
Looting others, or arriving above the remains of old kidnappings
some people don't have a lot of money. haiu sintutu ca sunnu still blinded us
treasures of antiquity from found among the deserted mining caves of Moria,
of war of dwarves and goblins.”
Thorin thought about these pallors. "Keep this sword in your sights," he said.
said. “Whoever quickly steals the foddi will not vote!”
“I don't think it's likely that you'll come home soon enough!”
said Elrondu. “But show me the map now!”
He pinched it and looked at it more often, and shook his head; because it doesn't do that
he approved the dwarves and he was more amurious than the gold, he hated dragons and
they are cruel wickedness, and they are saddened to remember the ruin of the city of
Dale and there are happy bells, and the streams burnt with lustrous peaks
Cùrriri. The moon shone in a wide silver crescent. Tinìu supra lu
map and the janca lights were shining on us. "Soccu è chistu?" I said iḍḍu. "Ḍḍà
there sunnu littri di luna ccà, vicinu ê runi chiani ca dicunu 'cincu pedi àuti lu
door and tri ponnu caminari 'nsemmula."
“Who sunnu li littri dâ luna?” called the hobbit, bowed with excitement. He loved
maps, as I told you before; and we like the runes and the littris and
cunning handwriting, although when I wrote Iḍḍu this was a little fine and
spider.
"The littri of moon on the littri of runes, but they cannot be seen," said Elrond,
"nun quannu li guarda dritti. Si ponnu vìdiri sulu quannu li
the moon lights stop at iḍḍi, and whoever it is is from cchiù, cu cchiù the fate is astute
you have to see the moon of the same shape and stay here every day when it's raining
wrote. The dwarves mmintaru them and will write them with silver fins, as in
Those friends can tell you. Who avissiru a sissiri states written above nu
on the eve of mid-summer there was a rising moon, a long time ago.”
“Chi dicunu?” chiamaru Gandalf e Thorin nzèmmula, 'n pocu arraggiati
perhaps even Elrond will discover who he is first, even if it's true
nun c'era statu na pussibbilitati prima, e nun n'avìa statu n'autra
until you know how good you are.
“Stay close to Gray Petra when the Tordu knocks,” Elrond read, “and
lu suli ca tramonta cu l'urtima luci dû jornu di Durinrà lucira supra lu pirtusu dâ keys.”
“Durinu, Durinu!” said Torinu. “He was the father of the father of two
cchiù elderly race of Dwarves, Barbalonghi, and lu me primu antinatu: sugnu lu sò
redu."
“So who is Durin's lu jornu?” called Elrondu.
“The first day of Capudannu of dwarves,” said Thorin, “is common to everyone
sapiri lu primu jornu di l'urtima luna di l'Autunnu supra lu limiti di l'Invernu.
We still call him Durin's Day on the last moon of Autumn and he is the sun
ntô celu nzèmmula. But this guy doesn't help us much, Timu, because our guy passes by
ability 'n chisti day more 'guesses when he arrives another vote at the right time.'
"Who arrests you," said Gandalf. "Is there any more writing?"
"Never have I seen this moon," said Elrond, and gave us the map.
to Turin; and then I slipped into the water and saw the elves dancing and
singari on the eve of menzu estivu.
The next morning was a beautiful and fresh morning of ordinary men
yes putìa sunnari: blue sky and never a cloud, and lu suli ca danced on lu
waterfall. Now yes nni jeru 'n cavaddu ntra the songs of farewell and good lust, cu
I know there are ready choirs with more excitement, and with a strata grayness
they have to follow them above the Munti Brumiusi nzinu â land of beyond.
UP THE CRADLE AND UP THE CRADLE
There are many layers ca purtàvanu supra nta chiḍḍi muntagni, and many steps
above iḍḍi. But the majority of strata were scams and scams and led by them
naked parts or evil ends; and the majority of passages have been plagued by evils
so and pirìculi tirribbili. The dwarves and the hobbit, help yourself
wise cunsigghi of Elrond and the grayness and the memory of Gandalf, pigghiaru lu
strata dritta ô passaggiu drittu.
Longhi jorna doppu ca avìanu scalatu fora dâ vaddi and lassatu the Urtimu
Homely House kilometers stopped, they were still acchianannu and acchianannu and acchianannu. Era
no hard walk and no piriculusu walk, no crooked road and no sulu and longu.
Now putìanu taliari arrè supra li terri ca avìanu lassatu, stesi arrè
I know them a lot. Luntanu, luntanu nta the West, some of them are so blue and
faint, Bilbo knows that there were places so safe and comfortable,
and I am a pirtusu hobbit. Iḍḍu trimàu. He was doing friddu amaru above,
and on the next day he crawled between the rocks. Massi, pure, certain votes will arrive
gallopannu 'n down above the sides of the mountains, relax the suli di menzujornu above lu
nivi, and passed between gods (which was fortunate), or above the head
(which was alarming). The nights are comfortable and cold, and he's fun
Don't dare to sing or sing too loudly, because the echoes are extraordinary, and they
The silence is pariah because we don't like it all, except for the water and the
the lamentu of ventu and the fissure of petra.
“The state is coming,” thought Bilbo, “and
we're having hay and picnics. Sarrannu a raccoggiri e
moru, prima ca accuminciamu mancu a scìnniri di l'autra parti a chistu
tassu." And the other pinzàvanu puru sad pinzers, puru yes
when avìanu said goodbye to Elrond ntâ grand spiranza of na menzastati
matina, avìanu parratu allegru dû passaggiu dî muntagni, e di
they rode fast through the lands beyond. Avìanu pinzatu di vèniri ô
door sigreta ntâ Lonely Mountain, perhaps who will be the next moon of
Autunnu... "and maybe it will be Durin's day" avìanu dittu. Sulu
Gandalf shook his head and said nothing. The dwarves never passed away
she spent many more years, but Gandalf had her, and knew how evil it was
lu pirìculu avìa crisciutu and prusperatu ntô Sarvaggiu, pick them dragons avìanu hunt you
men of the lands, and the foddi spread out in safety after the battle of
the Mines of Moria. Puru the good plans of magical wise men like Gandalf and
of good friends like Elrond some votes are wrong when one is free
vinturi piriculusi supra lu bordu dû sarvàggiu; and Gandalf was no wiser
basta magu pi canùscirilu.
He knew that something might happen that he didn't see, and he almost didn't dare
spiranza ca passassiru senza spaventusa avvintura supra chiddi granni auti
Muntagni with sulitary peaks and vaddi Huns did not guvirnava nuḍḍu king. Lu ficir
nun. Tuttu era bonu, nzinu a quannu nu jornu scuntraru na timpesta, cchiù di nu
timpesta, na truònu battle. You know how fantastic it is for real adults
the storm is a little deep down in the earth and in the valleys of peaks; above all to
times when two great times meet and clash. Cchiù tirribbili sunnu again
trona e lampu ntê muntagni di notti, quannu nàscinu li timpesti
of Livanti and West and they wage war. Lightning flashes over the peaks,
and the rocks trimànu, and the shattered granules scatter the air and go to belch and
tumbling nta every grunt and cavu; and the dark one is bent over
scrùsciu trabbuccanti and lights 'improvvisa.
Bilbo non avìa mai vistu o mmagginatu nenti di stu tipu. Eranu àuti
supra nta nu postu strittu, cu na tirribbili nta na vaddi dark nta nu latu di
iḍḍi. Ccà s'arrifuggiaru sutta na petra 'impiccata pâ notti, e
he was hiding under a cup and was cut off from his head and feet. When he was looking out
Among the flashes, the victim of the other's parts, go and see the giants of Petra
out, and they threw the petri at each other more than once, and caught them,
and he threw them into the dark and they got smashed in there
àrburi assái sutta, or scores 'n pieces nichi cu nu sbuffu. Then I won again twenty
and a chioggia, and the next day I slammed the chioggia and the grannizza nta every
directions, even if the superimposed rock was no longer itching. Prestu iḍḍi
they were bathing and the ponies were standing with their heads
down and the cudi between the jammi, and four of a man went to lamintari
cu fear. Putìanu heard the giants sneering and shouting at everyone
mountain slopes.
“These people are no longer servants!” I said Torinu. “Si nun ni scippamu, o
tired, or struck by lightning, ni pigghiamu four giants and
calciàu ô celu pi nu palluni."
Lu percorsu dâ muntagna
“Well, if you know something better, let's get to it!” said Gandalf,
who sintìa assai arraggiatu, e era luntanu di èssiri cuntentu dî giganti
iddu stissu.
The end of these discussions was ca mannaru Fili and Kili a circari na
megghiu refuge. They had very narrow eyes, and they were the lowest of wines
li nani di circa cint'anni di sòlitu avìanu sti tipi di travagghi (quannu
all putìanu vìdiri ca nun absolutely served Bilbo werewolves). There is
no ordinary words, you can find four things (or so I said Thorin a
the dwarfs). Surely you usually find something, so be careful, but
non è sempri propriu chiḍḍu ca stavi circannu. Dunca si dimustrò supra chistu
opportunities.
Soon Fili and Kili turnaru crocinnu, agghicannusi ê rocks ntô
ventu. “Attruvàmu na grutta secca”, dissiru, “nun luntanu dû prossimu
each; and you place them and put them all inside.”
"Did you explore it thoroughly?" I said lu magu, ca lu sapia
li grutti supra li muntagni erunu raramenti vacanti.
“Hee, hee!” I said, even if everyone knows not to putìanu èssiri
longu supra of chistu; avìanu turnatu too early. “It's not all so great, e.g
it doesn't go very far."
Chista, di sicuru, è la parti piriculusa dî grutti: nun si sapi comu
luntanu vannu arrè, certi voti, o unni nu passaggiu arrè pò purtari, o
who's waiting for you inside. But now you feed them with Fili and Kili pàrinu boni
enough. Then everyone got up and got ready to move. The wind howled
and he still roared, and had more farsirous business
and I know where to put them. It was not yet very far from jiri, and before much time iḍḍi
he arrived at a granny rock where he climbed the path. Yes, you don't want to stop, you
attruvau n'arcu vasciu ntô latu dâ muntagna. There was sulu postu pighiari
you put them through a narrow one, when they have been split and
bareback. As they passed over the arch, it was good to hear the next day
the Chioggia leaves everyone with us, and we feel more confident than the giants
and they are rocks. But lu magu didn't take risks. He lit up his wand, as usual
lu fici chiḍḍu jornu ntâ Bilbo's dining room seemed like a long time ago, yes you
recurdative..., and there are lights to explore the cave from one end to the other.
Parìa na grannizza abbastanza bona, ma non troppu granni e mistiriusa. Avìa nu
pavimentu asciuttu e quarchi angulu còmudu. A n'estrema c era postu pî
ask; and ddà stàvanu (putentimenti cuntenti dû canciamentu) to vapuri, and
scippannu ntê so sacchi dû nasu. Oin and Gloin vulìanu addumari nu focus ô
He brought more towels, but Gandalf didn't hear him. Accussi spread
out of those thus vained more earth, and no one is dry of bundles;
then we ficiru comudi li cuperti, nèsciru li tubbi and suffiàvanu
anecdotes of smoke, when Gandalf transformed different cultures and started dancing
above ô tettu more fun. Parràvanu and parràvanu, and they scurdavanu dû
storm, and parràru of those who each had to do what parts of tisoriu
(when the appiru, ca ô mumentu didn't seem so mpussìbbili); And
quinni si nni jeru pi durmiri unu a unu. And who was the last vote approx
they used poni, parcels, baggage, tools and parafarnalia ca iḍḍi
avìa purtatu cu iḍḍi.
It turned out to be a good thing from the nights that we had to have fun with Bilbo
cu iḍḍi, doppu tuttu. Picchì, 'n quarchi manera, non putìa jiri a durmiri pi tantu tempu
while; and when he was asleep, he had very ungraceful dreams. Sunnò ca nu
the fissure ntô muru supra lu funnu dâ grutta addivintau always cchiù granni, and it opens
always wide, and he was very scared but he couldn't call us or let him know
no autruca lies and tales. Allura sunnau ca lu pavimentu dâ grutta era
cedennu, and iḍḍu stole, accuminciannu a cadiri, down, goodness
sapi unni iri.
Then she woke up with horrible beginnings, and attracted those who shared her
sleep was true. In the fissure there was a graputu above the grutta function, and it was
già nu passaggiu largu. Era giustu 'n tempu pi vìdiri l'ùrtimi poni'
cudi scumparennu nta iḍḍu. Di sicuru iḍḍu detti n'urlu assai forti, comu n'urlu forti
comu pò dari n'hobbit, ca è surprinnenti pâ so grannizza.
Let's get rid of them, I'll eat them, I'll eat them, I'll wait for them ugly, so many
foddi, before saying stones and blocks. There were six of each
nanu, almenu, e dui puru pi Bilbo; e foru tutti acchiappati e
purtatu attraversu la fissura, prima di putiri diri tinder e silex. Ma no
Gandalfu. Bilbo's urlu was good. He was arrisbigghiatu
largu nta nu secunnu sfracicatu, and when the goblins arrived at pigghiàrilu, there was
nu lampu tirribbili comun nu lampu ntâ grutta, n'oduri comu la prùvuli di sparu, and
several of the caderu died.
The fissure closed with no snap, and Bilbo and the dwarves were above it
latu sbagghiatu of those! Unni was Gandalf? Who knows neither the gods nor the foddi
I had an idea, and I didn't wait to find out. He looked at Bilbo
and the dwarves and the fics in a hurry. It was prufunna, prufunna, scuru, comu
Sulu li foddi ca s'hannu pigghiatu a Campari ntô choirs of Muntagni can see
through. The passages there were cross and tangled in all directions, but
li foddi canuscìanu la strata, comu tu lufficiu postali cchiù vicinu;
and the strata sniffed and sniffed, and it was very horribly puffed. Lu
The goblins were very rough, and they pinched them without mercy, and they laughed and
ridìanu cu li sò vuci di petra orribbili; e Bilbo era cchiù scuntentu puru
whoever trolled him had pressed him the more you followed him. Vuliò n'àutra votes and
ancora na vota pû so beḍḍu pirtusu hobbit lustrusu. Nun pi l'urtima vota.
Now there was a flash of Russian lights ahead. I fed them
accuminciaru to sing, or croccari, keep the time câ flappa of pedi chiatti above lu
petra, e scuppiannu puru li sò priggiuneri.
Beat them by hand! Spizzari! crap!
Grab, grab! Pinch, pinch!
It's down in Goblin City
 You go, little one!
Scuntru, scuntru! Ruiners, scoundrels!
Marteddu and tongs! Buttu and gong! Lirrina, lirrina, luntanu
on earth!
 Oh, oh! My little boy!
Swish, slam! Whip crack!
Bang and bang! Scream and snort! Work, work! Don't dare escape,
Mentri li Goblin s'affaccianu, e li Goblin ridunu, Girunu e girunu luntanu
on earth
 Come on, my little one!
It looked really scary. The walls resounàvunu ô battetu, schifu! and he
crushers, crushers! and â ugly laughter dû I know, I have! little meu! Lu giniral them
the meaning of the song was too clear; no one will feed them anymore
whip and whipped them with a swish, smack!, and put them to curriri comu
fast like putìanu in front of iḍḍi; and cchiù di unu dî nani èranu
Already you'll be shaking and you'll be shaking like any other thing, when something happens again
big cave.
She was filled with nu granni fire russu ntô menzu, and torci 'ntornu ô
walls, and was bent over with foddi. Everyone laughed and stamped
I clap my hands when I'm a dwarf (cû poviru Bilbo supra lu spinu
and those close to you are whips) trasieru di cursa, while you feed them-cunnutturi
scream and scipparu whip them stop. You put them there already
s'accuppiatu nta n'àngulu; e c'eranu curcati tutti i borse e li pacchi
ruttu, and they are rummatu of foddi, and smell of foddi, and
goblin fingers, and goblin arguments.
Paru ca was the last vote to win the victory of excellent children
pony, cumprisi nu tipu jancu cheerful and resistant ca Elrond avìa pristatu
Gandalf, well, this quarry was not suitable for mountain paths. Pi
the goblins give away cavaddi and poni and idiots (and other very scary ones
cosi), e hannu sempri fami. Subito però li priggiuneri èranu
pinzannu sulu a iḍḍi stissi. I put them incatinaru and put my hands back there
spaddi and rocked them all in the first place, and dragged them far away
ends of the cave where little Bilbo pulled â ends of the line.
Ccà nta l'ùmmira supra na granni petra chiana s'assittava nu goblin tremendu cu
na granni head, and the armed foddi armed themselves
and the bent swords ca ùsanu. Now I feed them cruel sunnu, evils and evil choirs. They don't do it that badly, but they do it very expertly.
Ponnu lighthouses tunnels and mines like those dwarves, but more able dwarves,
When you catch them there's trouble, even if they're usually grainy and dirty.
Marteḍḍi, axes, swords, daggers, picculi, tweezers, and other instruments of
prisoners, they work very well, or they work like other Christians or they are pruggettu,
prisoners and slaves ca hannu a travagghiari nzinu a quannu mòrunu more lack of air and
lights. Nun è mprubbàbbili ca mmintaru arcuni dî chini ca hannu
of quannu turbau lu munnu, above all the ngèniusi instruments that kill the greatest
nùmmari di pirsuni a na voti, pi roti and muturi and explosions always
he used them, and also didn't bother with his own hands anymore
putissi helpers; but despite the times and the times, no savages have advanced
(what is it called) until now. Nun odiàvanu suprattuttu li nani, nun cchiù di
They hated everyone and everyone, and especially the elite
binistantial; nta certain banni the evil dwarves avìanu macari facttu allianzi cu
iḍḍi. But there were no special rancors against Thorin's people, more because of
the truth that you heard speak, but that you do not go away
stu cuntu; and in any case we don't care about goblin pigghianu, that's enough
fattu spertu e sigretu, e li priggiuneri non sunnu capaci di difènnir si stissi.
“Who owns these miserable pirsòni?” I said to Granni Goblin.
“Nani, e chistu!” I said unu di cunnutturi, tyrant Bilbo's basin
whoever falls forward 'n jinuocchi. “We attracted refugees from our fronts
Portico."
"Who are you flying?" I said, Great Goblin vutànnusi towards Thorin.
«Finu a nuddu bonu, garantisciu! Spiannu l'affari privati ​​​​dû me pòpulu,
Cridu! Thieves, don't be surprised to see me understand! Murderers and friends
of Elves, it's not probable! Come! Who do you have to say?"
“Thorin lu nanu ô to sirvizziu!” he replied: it was about education
nothing. "From there we had no idea and no idea of ​​what we suspected and imagined
everyone. We took refuge from a storm who seemed like a common crane and
nun usatu; nenti era cchiù luntanu dî nostri gocceri ca ncunvinienti
goblin 'n qualigghiè manner.” It was really enough!
"Um!" I said to Granni Goblin. – «You say so! Putissi dumannari chi jùsti
facennu supra li muntagni, e di unni vinevi, e
unni were you in jiri? In fact I would like to know everything about you. Nun
chi ti fanno sài bonu, Thorin Oakenshield, lu sacciu troppu
lu to populu already; but I had the virtue, or I'll prepare something
particularmenti inconvenience more!”
“We traveled more to visit our relatives, our nephews and nieces,
and first, second and third cousins, and the descendants of ours
nanni, ca càmpanu supra lu latu Est di chisti veramenti ospitali
mountains," said Thorin, "I don't know who will say all of them in one go."
mumentu, when clearly the exact virility will no longer do anything.
"Es nu liardu, o veramenti tremendu!" I said one of the cunnutturi. "A lot
of our people hit by flashes of lightning, no grutta, when we don't live
criaturi pi veniri sutta; and they die like petri. Puru iddu doesn't have it
spiegau chistu!” Allungau la spata ca avìa purtatu Thorin, la spata
whoever comes from Troll's den.
The Great Goblins called truly screamed with rays when they looked at him,
and they were all overwhelmed, they gnashed their teeth, they stole their shields and they printed themselves.
Canuscìanu subbitu la spada. Avìa ammazzatu cintinara di foddi ntô sò tempu,
quannu li beddi elfi di Gondolin li cacciavanu ntê cullini o facianu battagghia
in front there are walls. The avìanu called Orcristu, Goblin snatchers, but lu
I called them Sulu Biter. The hated and hated worse qualigghiè chiḍḍu ca
he purtava.
“Assassins and fellow elves!” Granni Goblin shouted. “Tagghiali!
Battilli! Bite them! Rinse them! Purtali away nta the dark holes bent over
snakes, and never let them go until they see the lights again!” She was so horny approx
he jumped from this postu and iḍḍu stissu rushed towards Thorin with an open vucca.
Own of those moments all the cave lights were astute, and the great ones
focu poof poof! nta na towers of burning blue smoke, nzinu ô
roof, scattered sparkles janchi piercing all among the goblins.
You scream and squeeze them, you crawl and shake them and shake them; you scream,
you roar and slur; scream and scream, ca siguìru èranu beyond
descriptions. Several cintinara of jatti and savaggi wolves were slowly roasted
viventi nzèmmula non l'avìssiru paragunatu. Li scintilli s'abbruciavanu
no holes, and he smoked now he fell from the roof he made
aria troppu spissa pi vìdiri puru l'occhi. Prestu stavanu cadennu supra
the one cu the other and s'arrutulanu 'n munzeddi more earth, bite and give kicks and
cummattennu comu si fussiru all crazy.
Di colpu na spada lampiò ntâ so luci. Bilbo lu vitti passari drittu attraversu
lu Granni Goblin while he was amazed at the moment of the sun. Iḍḍu
he fell dead, and the overmatched goblins ran away in front - the sword shouted ntô
dark.
The spathe turned away from its sheath. “Follow me quickly!” I said na vuci
proud and calm; and before Bilbo understood who had succeeded it was
trottannu n'autra vote, cchiù speedi ca putìa, â fini dâ linia, 'n down
Darker passages where the scream from the goblin hall is unraveling
back to iddu. He purged them in pale lights.
“Cchiù lestu, cchiù lestu!” I said la vuci. "Li torci prestu vènunu reaccused."
“Menzu minutu!” dissi Dori, ca era supra lu funnu vicinu a Bilbo, e nu
cumpagnu dicenti. Fici sciarriari l'hobbit supra li spaddi comu putìa
they had their hands tied, and then they all left in a rush, with no sparkles of bowls, and so many accidents, but they never had their hands fixed anymore
yes you stay cu. No more than that time you will sign, and then
avissi a sissiri status own ntô choirs of mountain.
Allura Gandalf raised his wand. Of course it was Gandalf; but just then
It's too busy, more than two men arrive. Livò stopped the spathe,
and in the other time it flashed darkly. Addumava cu na fury ca lu fics
glittering yes goblin èrunu 'ntornu; now he was lustrous as the most pleasant blue chick
the killing of the great nobles of Grutta. There's no problem with that
they tag the goblin basins and free all the common prisoners
cchiù prestu pussìbbili. Sta spada si chiamava Glamdring lu marteḍḍu nimicu, si
you reconsider. They called him sulu Battuturi, and they hated him much more.
Morsu, it's possible. Puru Orcristu avìa statu sarvatu; pi
Gandalf had it purtatu puru iḍḍu, arrancannulu di unu dî
I looked frightened. Gandalf thought most of it so; and even if you can't
fari tuttu, putìa fari assài pi l'amici nna n'àngulu strittu.
"Semu tutti ccà?" dissi iḍḍu, dannu arrè la spata a Thorin cu na
chicata. "Let me see: one... who is Thorin; two, three, four, five, six, seven,
ottu, novi, deci, eleven; unni sunnu Fili and Kili? Here they are! twelve,
thirteen... and here's Mr. Baggins: fourteen! Oh well, oh well! Maybe it's worse,
and then again a vote putissi is much better. Nisciunu ponies, and nisciunu manciari, and
He didn't know how to own himself, and hordes of goblins rushed forward as soon as they stopped!
Let’s go!”
Supra iḍḍi annaru. Gandalf had reached them: he began to feel full of food
and horrible Chianti very arè ntê passages ca avìanu passatu. Approx
I killed them faster than ever, and since Bilbo couldn't wait to see them again
tantu viloci, picchì li nani ponnu ruttari a nu ritmu tremendu, ti pozzu diri,
when they had the headlights, they would have to turn and put it on their back.
Still the foddi go faster than dwarfs, and these foddi canuscìanu the road
megghiu (avìanu fattu li strati iḍḍi stissi), e èranu pazzi arraggiati; adunca
who makes chiddu ca putìanu the dwarfs sintìanu you shout and the screams arrive
always close by. Soon putìanu sintiri puru lu slammingu dî pedi dî foddi,
many many pedi ca parevanu sulu ntunnu a l'urtimu àngulu. It flashes
you putìanu vìdiri the Russian torches stopped at the tunnel where they followed;
and they set off to weary deaths.
“Picchì, o pirchì lassai mai lu me pirtusu hobbit!” dissi lu pòviru signuri Baggins
sbattennu supra e sutta ntâ indietro di Bombur.
“Picchì, o pirchì purtai mai nu disgraziatu hobbit supra nu tisoriu
hunters!" I said lu poviru Bombur, he was fat, and he was wrong nzèmmula ô suduri
sgucciannusi dû nasu ntô caluri and ntô terruri.
A stu puntu Gandalf arristàu arrè, e Thorin cu iḍḍu. Turnaru nu
àngulu sharp. “Circa lu turnu!” I scream. “Pull your sword Thorin!”
Non c'era nenti àutru di fari; e li foddi non ci piacìanu. Iḍḍi
arriva currennu ntunnu ô cantu 'n chianu, e attruvau Goblin-cleaver, e
On Tuesday, no friddu was shining and his eyes were not astonished. Lu
who in front lassaru falls twists them and screams before he issiri
ammazzatu. Chiḍḍi arrè urlàru ancora cchiù assài, e saltàru arrè sbattennu
chiddi ca li currìanu appressu. “Biting and Beating!” screamru; And
soon everyone will be in confusion, and the majority will arrive
comu avìanu arrivatu.
Passò assài tempu prima ca nuḍḍu di iḍḍi osassi girari ḍḍu àngulu.
Allura li nani avìanu annatu n'autra vote, na strata longa, longa, ntô
dark tunnels of the kingdom of Foddi. Quannu li foddi scupriru chistu, iḍḍi
twist them off and tear off the soft shoes, and pierce them
I know the quickest curritura with the rich and the nichi eyes. Chisti curreru
Come on, as fast as the buzzers in the dark, and almost no more scrùsciu
who bats them.
Here, neither Bilbo, nor the dwarves, nor even Gandalf sintìanu
we vinìanu them. Not even I saw them. But let's see for sure
whoever runs silently stops, while Gandalf stood there giving me my wand
lights light up and help the dwarfs while they walk.
Quite suddenly Dori, now he stopped to purtava another time Bilbo, was
pigghiatu of arrè ntô dark. He screamed and fell; and the hobbit belched
of them spaddi ntô nìuru, hit the head ntâ hard rock, and
he didn't think about anything else.
INDIVINDI NÔ SCURO
When Bilbu opened his eyes, he became aware of it; because it was pure dark
comu cu iddi chiusi. Nuḍḍu c'era vicinu a iḍḍu. Immaggina sulu la sò paura!
I didn't hear anything, I didn't see anything, and I didn't hear anything except him
petra dû pavimentu.
Very slowly he stood up and looked out on all fours, nzinu a quannu tuccau lu
muru dû tunnel; but neither above nor above could he find anything:
nothing, no sign of foddi, no sign of dwarfs. My head was
swim, and Iḍḍu was the safest place to be safe without the Hun directions having been established
I fell as if I were falling. I crawled like a whore, and crawled
'nsemmula pi na good strata, nzinu a quannu suddenly I know the man scuntrò who's the parìa n'aneddu nicu
di mitaḍḍu friddu curcatu ntô pavimentu dû tunnel. It wasn't a turning point
carrera, but not lu canuscia. I put the aneddu in the bag almost without it
staplers; for sure it didn't seem like there was any particular moment. Iḍḍu
no more forward, but sit on top of the floor and if you want
until â complete misery, more time. Pinzau a iddu stissu
fry the bacon and the eggs, I don't know how to cook them at home, I'll wait for you
inside there was the ura pi quarci pastu or autru; but who sulu fics
the miserable ones.
You don't have to think about who will do it; nor putìa pinzari to those who had succidutu;
or as soon as you leave, you'll stop; oh pirchì, if you were there, lassatu arrè, lu
the foddi did not l'avìanu pigghiatu; or maybe you hit your head, it hurts a lot. Virtue
it was like you were curcatu tranquillu, out of sight and out of mind, not very dark
àngulu pi tantu tempu.
After a little while I heard my pipe. Nun was ruttu, and chistu was
something. Then I found my bag, and in it there was a bunch of tobacco,
and who was there something more? Then the parties were separated and nothing was left.
truvari qualchidunu, e chistu rumpiu completi li sò spiranzi. Propriu puru pi
iḍḍu, as he accepted when he turned to his senses. Goodness sapi chiḍḍu ca lu
matches were stolen and the smell of tobacco was a thing of the past
Fora dî dark holes nta chiḍḍu horrible posts. Still no mumentu can be heard a lot
smashed. But we slapped everyone in the face and we all heard each other again.
combinations the hand I won the supra lu propllu of this sword, lu daggers ca
You're trolls, and you were very sorry; nor any more fortune
I foddi lu nutaru, piccì lu purtava inside the mutanni.
Now he pulled him out. He was shining pale and dark before his eyes. “Quinni is new
puru the elven blade", pinzau iddu; "and the foddi are not very close, and also not
quite far away."
But in no way was it stolen. It was quite splendid purtari nu
blade made in Gondolin for the warriors of Foddi of whom many songs avìanu
cantatu; and yet Iddu had no doubt that such weapons would make great impressions
supra li goblin ca ci vinniru all'improvisu.
"Turna?" he thought. "It's not good, you're not! Are you going to go to the other side? Mpussìbbili! Are you going
after you? About the headlights thing! Vamu!” Allura straightened up, and trotted forward
cu la spatedda tinuta 'n facci e na manu sintennu lu muru,
and there are all the choruses of our banners and banners.
Now for sure Bilbo was nna chiḍḍu whose name is nu postu strittu. But you owe it to yourself
ricurda ca non era propriu accussì strittu pi iḍḍu comu avissa statu pi mia o
pi tia. Hobbits are not about ordinary people; and after that I know them all
them holes sunnu beddi cheerful and airy places currettamenti, quite different from chiḍḍi
foddi tunnel, still sunnu cchiu accustomed to nui tunnel lights,
and do not easily lose your sense of directions on earth, not every time
The texts were repudiated by those who had been beaten. Puru ponnu muvirisi much
tranquility, and easily accumulates, and recovers wonders from the fallen and the dead,
e hannu nu funnu di saggizza e ditti saggi ca l'omi hannu suprattuttu
never heard or scurdàtu so long ago.
I don't like Mr Baggins' posts, all of them
stissu. The tunnel seemed to have no end. Everyone knew it was there still
learn enough content and keep the same directions nunustanti nu
torsioni e na curva o dui. C'èranu passaggi ca purtàvanu ô latu ogni
now and then, as he knows the spark of my sword, or putìa sintiri cu
the manual above lu muru. Who they don't care about, except to pass by in more haste
fear of foddi or of such dark half-imagines that nobody knows. Above e
supra iddu 'nnàu, e giù e giù; e ancora nun sintìu nu sonu di nenti
tranni ca lu friscalettu occasionali di nu pipistreḍḍu vicinu a l'aricchi, ca lu scantava all'iniziu,
up to the point when he considered the farrisi fastiḍḍu too frequent. I don't know how long you'll hear
up above, they hated the future, they didn't dare to sign, up, up, until they got tired
so tired. Parìa ca the whole strata nzinu a dumani and above of iḍḍu nzinu ê jorna
much more.
Suddenly, without warning, you'll splash the water! Ugh! era
frozen friddu. Chistu lu pulled up strong and curtu. I didn't know what it was
it was on the swimming pool before walking, or the edge of nu ciumi on the land ca
I crossed the passage, or the border of nu prufunnu lagu suttaterràniu dark. Lu
the sword almost didn't shine anymore. He signed it, and you could hear it, when
listen loudly, drops-drops-drops-drops of invisible roofs in the water
sutta; but it didn't seem like any other kind of sound to us.
"Quinn is a swimming pool or a lake, and not a pool on earth," he thought.
As it is, Gghiè didn't dare go dark. Non putìa nutari; And
he pinched even those slimy ones, whose blind eyes were big and swollen,
the water gets dry. There are so many strange things that campanu nta the swimming pools and
lakes within the mountain choirs: piss of which the patri natanu, goodness
you only know how many years ago, and I've never seen it before, while I know
the eyes always crisceru cchiù granni and cchiù granni of pruvari to see ntô
nìuru; there are others so slimy with piss. Puru ntô
tunnels and caves have been made more precisely than before
so living on the run that they have been fortunate enough to escape from it
above is dark. For these grutti, puru iḍḍi, rialinu ô I know princes ô
centuries before goblin, ca li largàru sulu and li juncìru cu
passages, and the proprietary urigginals still sunnu give the odd angles, scippannu
and nose above.
Ccà sutta near the dark water long live the old Gollum, nu picciriddu viscosu
creature. I don't know about a certain wine, nor who it was.
it was Gollum, dark as dark as he was, except for his two big eyes and tunnes and pàliri ntâ
I knew how to make it lean. I had a nice passage, and I rowed calmly over it
lacu; pirchì lu lagu era, largu e prufunnu and friddu murtali. He rowed it cu
pedi granni ca s'appiccicàunu supra lu latu, but never make waves. Nun iḍḍu.
He was talking about clear eyes like a lamp more blind people, ca iḍḍu
he grabbed the long fingers as much as he did with pincers. I like the meat too.
Goblin pinsò bonu, quannu lu putìa pigghiari; but he never cared
he discovered it. Li strinciù sulu di arrè, si mai scinnìanu
sulu unn'è-è near the edge of the water, while Iḍḍu was wandering.
Rarely does he do it, sometimes he feels like he's doing something unpleasant to you
stava ammucciatu ddà sutta, sutta ê stissi radicachi dâ muntagna. Avìanu
veni supra lu lagu, quannu stavanu facennu li tunnel assai tempu fa, e iḍḍi
attruvàru ca nun putìanu iri cchiù avanti; cussì ddà la sò strata finiu nta dda dirizzioni,
and there was no mutivu pi jiri pi chiḍḍa strata, a menu ca lu Granni Goblin didn't eat
iḍḍi. Quarchi votes we like lu pisci dû lagu, and quarci votes
neither goblin nor pisci turnaru.
Indeed Gollum campava supra n'isula visciusa di roccia ntô menzu dû
lacu. He was staring at Bilbo now with his usual light eyes
telescopes. Bilbo didn't want to see him, but he wondered a lot
Bilbo, picchì putìa vìdiri ca nun era nuḍḍu goblin.
Gollum trasìu ntâ so varca e partìu di l'isula, mentri Bilbo era
sit on the edge completely flummoxed and at the end of the road and
I know them very well. Suddenly Gollum came and whispered and hissed:
“Bless us and sprinkle us, my precious ones! Suppose it's a party of scum;
almenu nu boccuni gustusu ci facia, Gollum!” E quannu dissi gollum iddu
fics no scrùsciu of horrible nghiuttiri ntâ gula. Accussì appi I know
names, puru si si chiama sempri "lu me priziosu".
The hobbit almost jumped out of his way when the sibbitu brought us
aricchi, e all'improvvisu vitti locchi pàliri ca ci spuntàvanu.
"What about you?" I said, throwing daggers in front of you.
"Who is iḍḍu, priziosu?" whispered Gollu (he always spoke to
iḍḍu stissu through the aviri never had n'àutru cu cui parrari). Chistu is chiddu ca avìa
veniri a scopriri, pirchì nta chistu mumentu nun avìa veru assai fami, sulu
curiusu; otherwise avissa pigghiatu prima e sussurratu doppu.
"I'm Mr. Bilbo Baggins. I'm sorry for the dwarves and I'm sorry for you
magu, and not sacciu unni sugnu; and I don't want to know, yes I do
you can escape."
“Chi c'havi ntê manu?” said Gollu, taliannu the spathe,
who we didn't like very much.
“A sword, a blade that leaves Gondolin!” “Sssss” said Gollu,
and he was quite polite. “Praps, are you here talking to me about something?
priziosu. We like the puzzle, we like the puzzles, right?" He was anxious to
cumpàriri amichèvuli, however more mumentu, and nzinu until when they didn't discover more
supra la spata e l'hobbit, si era propriu sulu pi daveru, si
era bonu pi manciari, e si Gollum avìa veru fami. Li enigmi èranu
all who can putìa pinsari. Dumannànnuli, and four people vote 'ndovinànnuli, avia
it was the only game that ever played with other funny creatures assisted
I know there are holes just now, some time ago, before I lost all my friends and
chase you, sulu, and crawled down, down, ntô scuru sutta lu
mountains.
“Va beni,” dissi Bilbo, ca era ansiusu di èssiri d'accordu, nzinu a quannu non lu scoprìu
cchiù supra la criatura, siddu was quite sulu, siddu was firoci
o fami, e si era n'amico di foddi.
“You ask first,” said iḍḍu, picchì nun avìa avutu tempu di pinzari a nu
riddle.
Allura Gollu sibbìu:
Chiddu ca havi radichi comu nuddu I saw,
It's older than the arvuli,
 Up, up go,
 And still you never grow?
"Easy!" said Bilbu. “Muntagna, you suppose.”
«S'induvina facili? Havi aviri na cuncurrenza cu nuiautri, priziosa mia!
Yes, dearest dumanna, and don't reply, we'll give you a tip, my dearest. It's called
we, and we don't come back, then let's face the problem, eh? Lu mustramu
the most nesciri street, yes!”
"Va bonu!" dissi Bilbu, nun osannu èssiri d'accordu, e quasi scuppiannu lu so
ciriveḍḍu pi pinzari a riddles ca putìanu sarvàrilu di essiri manciatu.
Janchi trenta cavaddi supra na cullina russa,
First bell,
 Then they stamped,
 Allura stannu fermi.
Era sulu chiḍḍu ca putìa pinsari di dumannari, l'idèa di manciari era chiuttostu supra
I'm lying. It was just a little old man, and Gollum could answer like this
goods like you.
“Chestnut trees, chestnut trees”, sibbìu. "Teeth! teeth! prizziu meu; but no one
havi sulu sei!” Allura dumannò ô sò secunnu:
Without vuci chianci,
He leaps without wings,
Bites without teeth,
Murmur without cow.
“Menzu mumentu!” - shouted Bilbu, who was still pinzannu sòmodu
above lu manciari. More fortunately I had heard about four things whoever I heard about
first, and the mind came to mind - the answer. “Twenty, twenty of
obviously," I said iḍḍu, and it was accussì cuntentu can ni fici unu sùbbutu.
"Who will make the creature crawl on earth," he thought:
No blue eyes or faces
I saw no eyes and let us see.
“Who eyes are like those eyes”
I said the first eye,
“But in the postu vasciu
Nun ntô postu àutu."
"Sh, ss, ss," said Gollum. You have been on earth for a long time,
and you were unaware of this kind of thing. But just when Bilbo was cuddling
hope that the misfortune was not capable of retaliating, Gollum purged
memories of centuries and centuries and centuries before, when I camped with them
nanna nta nu pirtusu nta na riva near nu ciumi, “Sss, sss, my precious one”, iddu
said. "Suli supra li daisies fly straight, he does."
But these types of puzzles of all day on earth are tired
more iddu. He'll remember them even when he was the littlest one
crafty and poor, and who's there for a long time. Who's the one who cares about fìciru
lu fami; so this time I tried four things that were a little more difficult and more difficult
unpleasant:
You can't see, you can't hear,
You can't feel, you can't feel.
It can be found from the hills above the hills,
 And you bend the empty holes.
You came first and you came after,
 End your life, kill your laughter.
Unfortunately, Gollum Bilbo had felt this way before; And
the answer was all ntunnu a iḍḍu. "Dark!" I said bluntly
scratch your head or mittennusi lu cappeddu di gocceru.
A chest without hinges, without keys, without a lid,
And yet inside you are huddled together trisoru d'oru,
he called pi pigghiari tempu, 'nzinu to those who don't pinsàu to a very tough one. Chistu iddu
pinsò na castagna terribbilmenti fàcili, puru si non l'avìa chiestu comu sòlitu
words. But it turned out to be a poor poser, more Gollum. He sighed between them, and
he still didn't come back; he whispered and sprayed.
After a while Bilbo looked puzzled. “Ben, who is it?” I said.
“The answer is not boiling ca vugghi, like pinzari dû
scrùsciu ca stai facennu.»
"Give us a pussy; let me give a pussy, my precious... ss... ss."
“Good,” said Bilbo after giving us a long chance, “and you
nzirtari?"
But suddenly Gollum remembered the latrunars of nests long ago, and
sit on the bank of ciumi nzignann â nanna, nzignann â sò
sleep more suckers... “Ovi!” sibbiu. “Up the egg!” Allura spied on us:
Vivu senza ciatu,
Friddu comu la morti;
Never seen, never had a bivennu,
Everything is mailed and never tinni.
I ḍḍu puru a sò vote pinsava ca chista was very easy, picchì iḍḍu
always stapled â answer. But he didn't remember anything
megghiu ô mumentu, it was so scantatu from the dumanna of the egg. All there
he was a poser who could do Bilbo, who never had anyone who would let him
water could help you. Imagine that you know the answer, obviously, or maybe
guess how easy you are to wink, see how you are sitting comfortably at home and
you don't have the pirìculu of handfuls you can no longer disturb the pinzers. Bilbu s'assittàu e
the gula was raised with a vote or two votes, but there was no response.
After a while Gollum started hissing with pleasure among the stissu: “It's beautiful,
lu me priziosu? Is it juicy? Is it gustusu and cruciusi?" He began to
look Bilbo out of the dark.
“Menzu mumentu,” said the trimannu hobbit. “I told you nu bonu longu
possibility just now."
“Avi a fari fretta, fretta!” dissi Gollum, accuminciannu a nesciri dû so
cross the bank to reach Bilbo. But when I started a long period of rites
the water, no piss jumped out of fear and fell on Bilbo's feet.
"Uh!" I said: "it's friddu e vignusu!" - and so I pinned. "Piss!
piss!" he shouted: “It's piss!”
Gollum fu assài diluputu; ma Bilbu dumannò n'autru enigma comu
as fast as they can be, take care of Gollum as soon as possible
pinchers.
Without jammi he was built above the jamma, the two jammi were pushed close above the three jammi, the four jammi pigghiaru
arcuni.
It wasn't exactly the right moment for this puzzle, but Bilbo was in a hurry.
Gollum put aviri four problems but more pincers, if you asked for it ô
another vote. As it was, pee parrari, "no-legs" was not so difficult,
e doppu chistu lu restu fu facili. “Pisci supra na tavula nica, omu a tavula assittatu
supra nu sgabellu, lu jattu havi l'ossi” ca naturalmenti is the answer, and Gollum
soon you said it. Allura pinzau ca had arrived lu mumentu of dumannari quarchs which is hard
and horrible. This is the one I said:
This thing eats everyone up like this:
Aceddi, beasts, àrburi, ciuri;
Rodi lu ferru, bite the steel;
Grinds hard stones and manciari;
Kill the king, ruin the city,
And beat the mountain car down.
Lu poviru Bilbu s'assittàu ntô scuru pinzannu all the horrible names of all them
giants and ogres who had never heard of cuntari ntê cunti, but no one from iḍḍi had it
do all these things like this. When I realized the answer was quite different
and he had to learn about it, but he didn't need to pinch us. He started yelling
scared, and whoever is tintu pinzari. Gollum began to nesciri dû so
crosses. He splashed the water and rowed to shore; Bilbu putìa vìdiri
li sò occhi ca vinìanu versu di iddu. La lingua ci parìa 'n vucca; iḍḍu
you want to shout: "Give me time! Give me time!" But that's all
niscìu cu nu shridu mpruvvisu fu:
"Tempu! Tempu!"
Bilbo was sarvatu by pure luck. Pi chiḍḍa, of course, was the answer.
Gollum was diluputu n'autra vote; and now he got angry,
and puru stancu dû jocu. I made her very hungry. He's voting
did not turn â cross. He couldn't get close to Bilbo. Approx
I rinnìu the very uncomfortable hobbit and scatter my minds.
"You have to do a dumanna, priziosu, iè, iè, iè. Sulu una
cchiù dumanna pi 'divinari, iè, iè,” said Gollum.
But Bilbo simpplicimenti non putìa pinsari a nuḍḍa dumanna cu chiḍḍa brutto vagnata
a fridda thing that sat near iḍḍu, and he dropped and he popped up. He scratched himself
iddu stissu, he pinched himself; I still can't think of anything.
"Dumannaci! Dumannaci!" I said Gollu.
Bilbu pinched himself and slapped himself; yes I squint I know little
spathe; sintìa puru ntâ pocket cu l'autra manu. Ccà attruvau lu
aneddu ca avìa pigghiatu ntô passau e ca s'avìa scurdatu.
“Who do you have in your pocket?” I said out loud. Parrava cu
I was there, but Gollum thought it was a riddle, and it was very strange.
"It's not fair! It's not fair!" sibbìu. “It's not fair, my dear, you're right, call us
who's in your taschi nichi?”
Bilbo saw who had already succidutu and never had anything better than Dumannari 'ncazzatu
â so dumanna: “Who do you have in your pocket?” I said louder.
"Sssss," sibbìu Gollu. “You had to give us three 'nduvini, my
priziosu, tri 'nduvinazzioni.”
"Well! Guess what!" said Bilbu.
“Hands!” said Gollu.
“You're wrong,” said Bilbo, realizing that his luck had come as soon as he pulled his hand.
“Guess another vote!”
"Sssss," I said Gollum cchiù siḍḍiatu di mai. He pinched everyone there
so ca tinìa ntê so taxis: piss bones, foddi teeth, dreamy glimpses, nu
no piece of bat's wing, no sharp petra sharpen the fangs, and others so scarce
Like this. Circàu di pinsari a chiḍḍu ca làutri genti tinìanu ntê taxi.
"Cuteḍḍu!" I said at the end.
"You're wrong!" said Bilbo, who had made a mistake a few times ago. "Last guess!"
Now Gollum was in a much worse state than when he had called Bilbo
the dumanna of the egg. It hissed and splashed and popped back and forth
and forward, and stomped his feet on the ground, and scowled and
sgrigghiatu; but in any case he did not dare to raise the last suspicion.
"Duni!" said Bilbu. “I'm waiting!” Circàu of bold parrari and
happy, but you can't feel any more confident as the game is about to end,
whether Gollum was pinching right or wrong.
“The time is over!” I said iḍḍu.
“Rope, or nothing!” Gollum shouted, that wasn't quite right...
travagghiari 'n du' 'nduvinazzioni â vota.
“Both of you are wrong,” cried Bilbu very relieved; and iddu immediately jumped
on my feet, I placed my back ô muru cchiù close, and extended my sword.
Let me know, for sure, that the puzzle of the enigma was sacred and immense
antiquity, and even the evil creatures were afraid of scammers when they were jucàvanu
to him. But he thought he couldn't trust this slimy thing more tenderly than a prumissa a
nu pizzicu. Quarsiasi scusa ci putissi fari nesciri fora. E doppu tuttu chistu
l'ùrtima dumanna nun era n'enigmàtica ginèrica secunnu li lìggi antichi.
But still Gollum did not attack him immediately. Let's see lu
Bilbo's sword 'n hand. You can stop, trimannu and whispernnu. Â Fini Bilbo
there was no more room to wait.
"Good?" I said iḍḍu. "And the tò prumissa? Vogghiu jiri. Havi
mustrami la strata.»
"Dicìamu accussì, priziosu? Mustra ô picciriḍḍu Baggins the most nesciri strata,
yes, yes. But who had the tax, eh? Don't be shy, precious, but
nothing. Oh no! Gollu!”
"You're not sorry," said Bilbo. "Na prumissa è na prumissa."
"Cruci is, dammit, precious," Gollum hissed. “But you want to wait for us, yes
you have to. Don't rush through the tunnels. You have to jiri to pigghiari quarchidunu
there like this first, that is, there like this more help us."
“Well, hurry up!” said Bilbo, relieved of the pinches that Gollum is going away.
Pensava ca stava sulu facennu na scusa e non vulìa turnari.
Who was Gollum about? Who what useful putìa teaniri fora
lu lagu scru? But iḍḍu sbanghiava. Gollum vulìa turnari. Era
get ready now and make me. And iddu was a miserable miserable creature, and
there was already a plain.
Nun luntanu c'era la sò isula, di cui Bilbu nun sapìa nenti, e ddà ntô
lu sò ammucciuni tinìa na para di disfortunati strani, e una assài bedda
something, very bedda, very marvelous. Avia n'aneddu, n'aneddu d'oru, nu
aneddu priziosu.
"Lu me rigalu di cumpliannu!" sussurrò tra iddu stissu, comu avìa fattu spissu
ntê jorna dark without ends. “Chissu è chiḍḍu ca vulìamu now, yes; lu vulìamu!”
Lu vulìa picchì was an aneddu of corruption, and let's steal two aneddu
above lu ditu, you were invisible; sulu ntâ china lights dû suli putìsti sissiri
seen, and then sulu dâ tò ùmmira, and chiḍḍu fussi tremutu and faded.
"Lu me rigalu di cumpliannu! Mi vinni lu me cumpliannu, priziosu." Adunca
s'avìa sempri dittu a iḍḍu stissu. Ma chi sapi comu Gollum arriva a chistu
present, centuries ago, old times when such anecdotes were still in freedom
munnu? Maybe even the Master could guvirnava them and he couldn't say anything.
Gollum chased him at the beginning, until he didn't get tired of it; and then lu tinni nta nu
saccu vicinu â sò peddi, nzinu a quannu lu galliò; e ora di sòlitu l'ammucciava nta na purtusa
ntâ rock of this island, and it became more and more so. And again
certain votes lu mittìa, quannu non putìa suppurtari di èssiri siparatu di nudda
cchiù longu, or quannu avìa assài, assài, make me hungry and tired of piss. Allura iddu avissi
strisciunu 'ntornu a passaggi scuro 'n circata di goblin ranni. Putissi puru
if we venture into places Huns addumanu twist them and make our eyes light up and
flashlights; as long as it was safe. Oh yeah, pretty sure. Nuddu lu vidìa, no
unu lu nutava, nzinu a quannu ci avìa li jita ntâ gula. Sulu pike
uri fa l'avìa purtatu, e pigghiau nu picciriddu goblin-imp. How he squeezed!
I still have two more rodents, but I want something softer.
"Pretty sure, eh," he whispered between the stissu. “I didn't see you, really, my friend
prizziusu? No. I never saw it, and I know the small sword will be useless,
yes indeed."
Who is the one who was there just in his little mind, while he was suddenly stealing from
Lu latu of Bilbo, and he stopped, so he crossed the road, and left in the dark. Bilbu
he pinched it when he heard the shock. He waited a little longer; no way
idea of ​​common finding the most nesciri sulu strata.
Suddenly I heard a shriek. There's no thrill in our backs. Gollu
she was enchanted and lamintannu dark, not too long ago
of chistu. She was not an island, she said ccà and ddà, circannu and
circannu 'n vanu.
"Unni is? Unni is?" Bilbo lu sintìu chianciri. “It's pirdutu, lu me
priziosu, pirdutu, pirdutu! Curse and crush us, lu me priziosu è pirdutu!”
“Who’s there?” called Bilbo. “Who did you catch?”
"I don't think so," Gollum shouted. – «It's no business, no, Golum! AND
pirdutu, gullu, gullu, gullu."
"Well, come on," cried Bilbo, "and I want to be Sissiri without fear. And I'll win."
I'm playing, and you're playing. Come on! Come and let me go, and then
go ahead cu lu to sguardu!” Absolutely miserable as Gollum, Bilbo, was
he didn't find much pity in their hearts, and he had the feeling that something
Gollum wanted to know that he could do something good. "Come!"
I scream.
“No, not yet, priziosu!” Gollu came back. “I had it in Circari, it is
pirdutu, Gollu."
"But you never pinzatu â me urtima dumanna, and you prumittìsti," I said
Bilbu.
"You never staple it!" I said Gollu. Allura suddenly came out of the dark one
loud sibbitu. "Who had the taxi? Tell us who you are. You have to say
first."
As far as Bilbo knows, there was no particular contact he didn't have to do anymore
you say. Gollum's mind had made no hypothesis as quickly as possible; naturally, more
Gollum had been pinning himself to this thing for many years, and was always afraid
of èssiri arrubbatu. But Bilbo was arraggiatu pû ritardu. Doppu tuttu, avìa
I won the match, enough justices, a nu rìsicu horrible ones. “I replied avìanu to èssiri
guessed non datu,” I said iḍḍu.
"But it wasn't a fair question," said Gollum. "You don't guess, Prizziusa,
No."
“Oh well, it's a question of human rights,” Bilbo replied, “well then
called unu first. Who do you have pirdutu? Tell me who!”
“Who had the taxi?” I heard them sibbillannu louder and
cchiù nicu, e mentri guarda versu iḍḍa, pi l'allarme Bilbo ora vitti dui picciriddi
points of light ca lu sguardàvanu. While lu suspettu criscìa ntâ Gollum's head, lu
the lights in my eyes burned my pale hair.
“Who did you think?” Bilbu insisted.
But now the light in Gollum's eyes had added a bright focus, and it was
arrivannu prestu cchiù vicinu. Gollum era n'autra vota ntâ so varca, remannu arrè
â dark shore; and such rays of loss and suspicion were there in both hearts
whoever has a sword will have the greatest terrors.
Bilbo could not understand what the unfortunate creature had done to him, but he
everything was over, and Gollum wanted to kill him anyway. As soon as
ntô tempu si vutau e currìu â blind arrè supra lu passau dark unni
You've arrived, you're close to the wall and you feel like your hand is missing.
“Who had the taxi?” loud sintìu lu sibbutu d'arreri,
and he sprayed while Gollum leapt across the bridge. “Who haiu, I wonder?” iḍḍu
I said to him, while he was anxious and stumbled. I put my left hand inside
I know my pocket. The anecdo was sung very coldly while he was stealing tranquility above lu sò spustamentu
the indicaturi.
Lu sibbitu era vicinu arrè a iḍḍu. Si vutau ora e vitti l'occhi di Gollum
comu virdi nichi lamps ca vennu supra lu penditi. Scared about curriri
cchiù fast, but suddenly they slammed their feet on the sciarra ntô pavimentu, and cadìu chianu
cu la saditta sutta di iddu.
Nta nu mumentu Gollum era supra di iḍḍu. Ma prima ca Bilbu putissi fari nenti,
recover lu fiatu, pigghiarisi, or wield the sword, pass by Gollum,
do not pigghiannucci care, ammaliannu and whisper while currìa.
Who could you mean? Gollum putìa vìdiri ntô buiu. Bilbo putìa vìdiri lu
lights of the eyes ca lucivanu pàlidu puru of arrè. Penusamenti straightened up, and
he sheathed the sword, which now shone in another place, then very much
with caution follow. Apparently there weren't any headlights. It wasn't good
he crawled back to Gollum's water. Maybe you would insure it,
Gollum was put to purtari in a way of running away without meaning.
"Curse them! Curse them! Curse them!" sibbìu Gollu. "Curse the Bagginses! It's
absent! Who had the taxi? Oh, pinzamu, pinzamu, lu me
prizziusu. Has truvatu, iè l'avi a truvari. Lu me rigalu di cumpliannu."
Bilbo got his riches. Â finally began to think about this. Iḍḍu
hurry up a little, get closer, get closer, who dared to go back to Gollum, who was still there
jennu soon, no taliannu arreri, but the head will turn from latu to latu, comu
Bilbo putìa vìdiri dû lignu lustru dî walls.
"Lu me rigalu di cumpliannu! Maldici! How did you have it before, my precious one? Iè,
enough. Quannu arrivamu pi sta strata l'urtima vota, quannu storciamu chiḍḍu giòvini scarsu
crawling. Here's who. Curse you! We'll steal from us, after all these people and
age! He's disappeared, Golum."
Di colpu Gollum s'assittàu e accimcomincia a chianciri, nu friscalettu e nu gurgugliu
they sound more horrible to listen to. Bilbo signed and flattened himself against him
tunnel-muru. Doppu nu pocu di tempu Gollum firmì di chianciri e accimcomincia a parrari. Iḍḍu
Let's start talking about what I'm talking about.
“Non è bonu turnari ddà pi circari, no. Nun ni ricurdamu tutti
Place them there for a visit. And you don't need it. Baggins didn't know it
pockets; The cheeky nasu found it, you say."
"Induvinamu, priziosu, sulu sognamu. Nun lu putemu sapiri finu a quannu nun attruvamu lu
ungainly creature and you squeeze it. But you don't know who you might feel
does it, does it? Keep it in your pocket. You don't know, and not a bit
vai luntanu. Si pirdìu iḍḍa stissa, the shameless thing. Nun sapi la strata pi nesciri.
Say like this."
– «I said yes, yes; but it's a trick. Don't say who knows what you're going for. It won't do
tell me who's in my pocket. You know. Sapìa na strata pi tràsiri, havi a
you'll know more about it, yes. Go â door of funnu. At the funnu door, that's it."
"So I'll give you the pigghiaru. Don't worry about it, dear."
– «Ssss, sss, gollu! Goblins! Iè, ma si havi lu prisenti, lu nostru
priziosu prisenti, allura li foddi l'avìssiru a pigghiari, gollum! La truvarannu, la truvarannu
find out who does it. We'll never be safer, ever, Gollum! One of
I foddi lu mettunu, and then I saw him. It will be dada
but not seen. Mancu our expert eyes lu notunu; and iddu come
scareusu and truccu and pigghia us, gollu, gollu!”
"So stop talking, please, and hurry up. If they have Baggins
annatu pi chiḍḍa strata, avemu a jiri prestu e vìdiri. Vai! Nun è luntanu ora. Faci prestu!”
One spring Gollum stood up and began to chatter at a grand pace.
Bilbo hurriedly approached us, still cautious, although now my main fear was whoever
you snatch up no other snag and fall with no scrùsciu. My head was in vortices
of spiranza and marvel. Parìa ca l'aneddu ca avìa era n'aneddu màggicu: iddu
You'll be invisible! You may have heard talk of this kind, certainly, in an old man
cunti; ma era difficili cridiri ca n'avìa truvatu unu, pi casu.
It was still there: Gollum with shining eyes had passed it, sulu nu
curtigghiu a nu latu.
Iḍḍi annaru, Gollum set out to spustarisi forward, sibbillannu and ammaliannu; Bilbu
Jiri stops slowly like a hobbit. Soon you will reach Hun places, anyway
Bilbo moved on to the strata 'n vasciu, the side passages opened, he took care of them and
ca. Gollum accuminciò subbitu a cuntarili.
"One to the left, yes. One to the starboard, yes. Two to the starboard, yes, yes. Two to the left, yes, yes."
And away and away.
Mentri lu cuntu criscìa rallantava, e accinciò a tremari e
chianciri; since it was there the water always stopped, and it was
pigghiari fear. Li goblin putìanu èssiri cinu, and iḍḍu avìa pirdutu l'aneḍḍu. Â fini iddu
signàru to open the vascia, by hand is missing while they are getting ready.
"Seven to starboard, yes. Six to left, yes!" whisper. "Chistu is. Chistu is lu
strata pâ door of funnu, yes. Eccu lu passau!”
Iḍḍu peeked and retreated. “But you're not here, you precious one, no
it wasn't. I feed them from the sutta. Very good. I could smell them. Sssss!”
«Who did we do? You curse them and crush them! We have to wait there,
Priziosu, wait a little while and I'll see.”
Then I arrived at a dead stop. Gollum avìa purtatu Bilbo â strata di nesciri
doppu tuttu, ma Bilbo non putìa trasiri! C'era Gollumu assittatu 'n giru
the opening was right, and the eyes shone coldly in the head, while it melted
from side to side between the jinuocchi.
Bilbo s'alluntanau dû muru cchiù tranquili di nu surci; but Gollu
he suddenly arriggidìu, and sniffed, and his eyes became virdi. He hissed softly
but threats. He couldn't see the hobbit, but now he was alarmed,
and other senses were sharpened: hearing
hello. Let's say that you'd have your own crouching down there with your scattered hands
the floor, and the head pierced, nasu almost â petra. Puru yes it was
Sulu don't admire the eyes, Bilbo can see or hear them
who was tinsu a common bowstring, curled closer to a spring.
Bilbo almost signed to breathe and si fici rìggidu iḍḍu stissu. Era
dispiratu. Avìa a nesciri, di stu buiu orribbili, mentri avìa
which is an arrested force. We need to cummattiri. You have to stab the cheeky thing, put your eyes on it
Come on, kill her. You want to kill him. No, not a good morning. Now he was invisible.
Gollu never had a spata. Gollum didn't threaten to kill him, either
pruvatu ancora. E era miserabili, sulu, pirdutu. Na cumprinsioni mpruvvisa, na
pity amistata cu l'urruri, s'avìa sciugghiutu ntô choruses of Bilbo: no gaze of infinite
jorna without signs without lights or spire of megghiu, hard petra, cold piss,
escapes and whispers. All these thoughts will pass without a flash of a second.
Iḍḍu trimàu. E poi all'improvisu nta n'autru lampu, comu si fussi alzatu di nu
new strength and resolutions, he jumped.
Nuḍḍu granni saltu pi n'omu, but nu saltu ntô buiu. Drittu supra chiḍḍu of Gollum
head jumped, seven feet forward and chopped the air; in fact, avìa iddu
canusciutu, we miss the sulu of smashing the skull above the arch vasciu dû
passage.
Gollum lunged forward, and snorted as the hobbit swooped up
there, but too late: the hands are snatched in the thin air, and Bilbo, falls just above
I know they have robust feet, yes nni jìru ntô new tunnel. You never want to see who again
Lu was making Gollu. There was no sibbitu and almost no curses
first, then he signed himself. All of them arrived n'urlu ca fics coagghiari lu sangu, chinu
with hatred and desperation. Gollum was defeated. He didn't dare go any further. Iḍḍu
avìa pirdutu: pirdutu was his prey, and pirdutu, puru, the only thing he had ever taken care of,
I'm pricey. Lu chianciri purtau lu choirs of Bilbu 'n vucca, but still iḍḍu tinìu
supra. Now faded like an eclipse, but threatened, the vuci arrived arrè:
"Thief, thief, thief! Baggins! We hate, we hate, we hate pi
never!"
Then there was no silence. But even those who seemed threatening to Bilbo. "Yes
I found them so close to me that it smelled," he thought, "then it will happen
I heard them, there were screams and there were curses. Be careful now, or this way he will punish you
so you get worse."
Lu passaggiu era vasciu e fattu approximativamenti. Nun fu troppu difficili pî
hobbit, until now, despite all the care, the poor pears appeared in another place,
several votes, supra petri grainy ntô pavimentu. “No more vasciu foddi, a
at least older adults", thought Bilbo, not even knowing about the grandparents,
the ogres of Muntagni, go ahead with great vilucity chinannusi vasci cu
the hands almost more earth.
Soon the passage that was about to begin, he approached another one, and
after that a little more steeply approached. Chistu slowed Bilbo. But â fini lu
pendita si firmaò, lu passaggiu girau n'angulu e s'appicciò n'autra vota, e
ddà, ntô funnu di na curta pendita, vitti, filternnu ntunnu a n'autra
àngulu: nu sguardu di luci. Nun luci russa, comu di focu o di lanterna, ma na pàlida
a type of port lights. Allura Bilbo started curriri.
Scuttling tantu veloci ca li jammi lu putìanu purtari, girau l'urtimu àngulu
and I suddenly came to own an open space, unni the lights, after all the chiddu
tempu ntô buiu, it seemed dazzling lustrusu. Actually it was on an escape from
lu suli trasi attraversu na porta, unni era lassata na granni porta, na porta di petra
stannu apretu.
Bilbo flashed his eyes, and then suddenly vitti li foddi: foddi 'n pienu
armor with swords pulled up just inside the door, and the taliàvanu
with big eyes, and such a passage that was waiting for us. Arouse forums,
attentu, prontu pi tuttu.
I saw him before I saw him. Yep, I saw him. Both approx
it was not accidental, or not the trick of the story before ca pigghiassi nu novu patruni, lu
non c'era supra lu ditu. Cu urla di piaciri li foddi ci s'affruntaru.
Nu duluri of fear and loss, like Gollum's misery, struck Bilbo,
and scurdannusi just to pull the spade and put your hands away.
And there was still the aneddu, ntâ tasca a manu manca, e ci sppava ntô ditu.
Li foddi si firmàru picca. Non putìanu vìdiri nuḍḍu segnu di iḍḍu. Avìa
scumparìu. Urlàru lu doppiu di prima, ma non accussì cuntenti.
"Unni is?" chiancìanu.
“Turna supra lu passau!” quarters of one shouted.
“Accussi!” quarters of one screamed. "Yes!" others scream. “Be careful ô
door," the captain shouted. He blew the frisbees, the armor cracked, the swords
strinciù, I foddi ammalidìru and giuràru and currìanu ddà and ddà, cadennu supra
the one with the other and s'arraggiari assài. There was a terrible url, of lighthouses, and
disturb.
Bilbo era assài spavintatu, ma avìa lu sensu di capiri
whoever was there succeeded and escaped further arè a na vutti granni ca tinìa lu biviri pi
guard them by goblins, and thus avoid the slain men,
calciatu a morti, o pigghiatu di sintimentu.
“I want to get to the door, I have to get to the door!” he continued to say.
iḍḍu stissu, ma fu assài tempu prima ca s'arriscìu a pruvari. Allura fu comu nu
orribbili jocu di buff di l'omu ciecu. Lu postu era chinu di foddi ca currìanu
around, and the hobbit poviru dodged this way and who, he was beaten
above a goblin who doesn't understand who is going to scuntratu,
yes you steal on all fours, you steal within the range of the captain as soon as you arrive
tempu, he got up, and currìu pâ porta.
It was still open, but a goblin almost pushed it open. Bilbu frowned
but he didn't move. He was going through the crack. Iḍḍu
strinciutu e strinciutu, e iddu s'attaccau! Era terrìbbili. Li sò buttuni avìanu pigghiatu
cugnatu above the edge of the door and the postu of the door. Come on out
in the open air: there's a little stairway around the corner, go away
ntra muntagni àuti; lu suli niscìu di arreri a na clouda and shone
shine outside the door, but not putìa siri.
Di colpu unu dî foddi dintra gridò: “C'è n'ùmmira vicinu ô
brings. Quarchi, what's the matter!”
Bilbo's choir jumped right out of it. I said a terrible thing. Buttons
He went in all directions. He had passed by, wearing a torn coat and a waistcoat,
they jumped up the steps like crap, while they were still shaking them
pigghiannu li know beddi buttuni di ramu ntâ door.
Di sicuru ca prestu scinniru doppu di iḍḍu, urlannu e urlannu, e
hunting among the arbuli. But we don't like him: he jams us
swings and the head dizzy. Non truvaru Bilbo cu l'aneddu,
scippannu dintra e nesciri di l'ùmmira di l'àrburi, currennu viloci e tranquilli, e
keep them out of the suli; accussì soon turnaru lamintannusi and ammaliannu a
guard the door. Bilbo ran away.
OUT OF THE PADELA NOT FOCU
Bilbo had run away, but he didn't know what he was. Avia
pirdìu cappucciu, mantellu, manciari, poni, I know them buttuni and I know them friends. He wandered ahead
and ahead, nzinu a quannu lu suli accimcomincia a affunnari versu punenti, arrè li muntagni. Iḍḍi
l'ùmmiri càdiru ntô camminu di Bilbo, e iḍḍu guarda arrè. Allura taliò
avanti e putìa vìdiri davanti a iddu sulu zuddi e pendini ca càdinu versu
Chiani and Chiani get together every now and then between the trees.
“Bonu celu!” - he exclaimed. "Even as you have reached the other
latu dî Munti Brumiusi, propriou nzinu ô limits of Earth Beyond! Huns
and How can Gandalf and the dwarves arrive? I hope so
bontà nun sunnu ancora ddà arrè ntô putiri dî goblin!”
Iḍḍu still wandered, fora dâ vaddi auta, above lu so bordu, and
down the slopes beyond; but all the time a very uncomfortable pincher
criscìa dintra di iḍḍu. Si dumannò si non avìa avìa a fari, ora ca avìa
the aneddu màggicu, pi jiri arrè nta the urribbili, tirribbili, gallirìi and circari
they are friends. I had just said that it was my duty, that I had a
turnàu arrè, e si sintìa assài disgrazziatu, quannu sintìu vuci.
He signed and listened. He didn't see the lines; so he squeezed himself.
avanti cu cura. Era supra nu percorsu di petra ca si scurrìa versu sutta cu nu
wall of rock manually missing; from the other side the earth was moving away and
cèrunu valli sutta lu liveddu dû overlapping paths of bussi and vasci
àrburi. Not one of these valleys sutta li bussi parravanu the people.
He approached even closer, and suddenly found himself peeking between two large spaces.
massi na testa cu nu cappucciu russu: it was Balin who made him look-out. Putia
they applauded and shouted with joy, but they didn't hear it. Let's still follow the aneddu
above, more afraid of meeting the four things you were deprived of and displeased with, and vitti
chi Balin lu stava taliannu drittu senza nutarilu.
“He'll surprise everyone,” he thought, as he crawled back inside
knock ô bordu dû vallu. Gandalf was discussing the dwarves. Iḍḍi
they were discussing everything that had happened to us in the tunnel, and
call us and discuss what we're going to do now. Li nani èranu
lamintavanu, and Gandalf was saying cennu ca nun putìanu cuntinuari cu
I'm traveling there Mr. Baggins with no hands, without
circannu of capiri one was alive or dead, and without circari of sarvàrilu.
"Doppu tu iḍḍu è l'amicu meu," I said lu magu, "and è non nu picciriḍḍu tintu. Iu
you feel responzàbbili pi ḍḍu. Best wishes you haven't seen it before."
Li nani vulìanu sapiri picchì l'avìanu mai purtatu, picchì
you can't stay attached to me, I know friends and come to you, and I'll tell you
lu magu had not scigghiutu quarchs of a cu cchiù sensu. "It was cool
probblemi rispettu a l'usu finu a ora," dissi unu. "Si ora avemu a turnari nta
chiḍḍi tunnels abbuminabbili more circàrilu, then sfracicàrilu, dicu iu."
Gandalf arrived arraggiatu: “I purtai, and did not carry so approx
nun sunnu di nuḍḍu usu. O you help me to circàrilu, o vaju and you up there
There's more to say about you than you can do better. Si putemu sulu truvari
he doesn't vote anymore, he thanks me before everything ends. Chiddu ca vulìsti
are you going to leave, Dori?”
“The avìssiru lassatu cadiri,” I said Dori, “si nu goblin avìssisu suddenly
I'll stop you from getting them dark, I'll steal your feet, and
I told you no kick on your back!”
“Allura, why don't you pigghiai n'àutra vote?”
“Bonu celu! Si pò dumannari! Foddi cummattinu e mòrdunu a lu scuru,
everyone falls on their bodies and snatches each other! You almost tagged
Glamdring's head slipped away from me, and Thorin was pugnannu me and
everywhere with the Orcristu. All of a sudden I told us one day we were blind
flashes, and I saw them foddi ca currìanu arrè screamnnu. You shouted 'follow
me all!" and everyone avìssiru to follow. Pinzavamu
tutti avìanu. Non c era tempu pi cuntari, comu sai beni, nzinu a quannu nun
I had crossed the guard of the canceddu, outside the door I could find it, and I had taken off from there. And here we go... without lu latru, cunfusticatu
iḍḍu!"
“E eccu lu latru!” I said Bilbo scinnennu ntô menzu di
there, and they steal the story.
Bless me, comu saltaru! Allura gridaru di maravigghia e
piaciri. Gandalf era maravigghiatu comu qualegghiè autru di iḍḍi, ma prubbabbirmenti cchiù
happy with all the others. He called Balinu and told us to zoccu
he thought of the man on guard who was leaving the walkways of the people right inside the village
without warning. It's a fact that Bilbo's reputation has grown considerably.
treated with dwarves after chistu. There was still doubt that it was true
nu latru of first classes, nunustanti li palori of Gandalf, don't doubt it cchiù.
Balin was the biggest scuncertatu of all; but everyone said she was very experienced
nu pocu di travagghiu.
Certain Bilbo was so fond of playing games that he could get there
go inside and don't say anything about the aneddu; and when there are dumannaru
common people, I said: “Oh, as soon as he crawled, you know, a lot of attention and
calm down."
“Ben, it's the first time that puru nu surciu si strinci cu cura
and calm down sutta lu nasu and was not sighted," I said Balin, "and iu
take off your hood." Chi fici iḍḍu.
"Balin ô to sirvizziu," dissi iḍḍu.
"Lu to sirvituri, signuri Baggins," said Bilbo.
Allura vulìanu sapiri all of them I know adventures after ca avìanu pirdutu
iḍḍu, e iḍḍu s'assittàu e ci dissi tuttu, tranni ca lu ritrovamentu
of the story ("not sulu ora" he thought). Èranu particularmenti ntirissati
ntâ cuncurrenza di l'enigma, e trimàu assài apprizzatu ô sò
Gollu's disclosures.
“E allura non mi vinni 'n menti n'àutra dumanna cu iḍḍu assittatu vicinu
"Mi," finished Bilbo; "so I said, 'Who's in your pocket?' And you don't need pincers
nta tri va. Then I said: "And what about the prumissa?" Show me the darkest route!"
But I won to kill myself, and I ran, and I fell, and I missed it
lu dark. Then I followed him, because he thought he could talk to me. Iḍḍu
he thought about the canuscìa towards the most necessary road, and so he made it. And then
he sat down at the entrance, and couldn't get through. Then I jumped on it
and ran away, and currìu nzinu â door.”
“And I looked at them?” call me. “Isn't there Ranu?”
"Oh yes! many; but I dodged them. I jeru 'into the door, ca
era sulu aperta na fissura, e pirdìu assài bottoni," dissi tristu taliannu
I saw them torn. "But they're all so good, and so on."
The nani lu taliaru cu nu respect quite new, when it appeared
supra schivari li guàrdii, saltari supra Gollum e strinciri attraversu, comu si
It wasn't very difficult or very alarming.
“Who did I tell you?” said Gandalf laughingly. “Signuri Baggins has you there
supra iḍḍu di quantu ti pensi." Iḍḍu gave Bilbo a strange look of sutta lu so
the Russian eyebrows, while I said chistu, and the hobbit dumanno was tweezed
la parti dâ sò storia ca avìa lassatu fora.
Then I went there, I know the lighthouses, no matter if Gandalf had explained it
everyone is dwarfs now, Bilbo hadn't heard of it. Vulia sapiri comu
lu magu s'avìa prisintatu n'autra vota, e unni avìanu arrivatu tutti ora.
Lu magu, pi diri la virità, nun si nni dispiciu mai spiegari la sò astuzia
cchiù di na vote, so now I said to Bilbo ca sia iḍḍu ca Elrond avìanu statu
We are well aware of the presence of evil foddi in those parts of the mountains.
But I know that the main ones have been canceled, no different passages above, one that is easier
travellers, so ca spissu pigghiàvunu li Christians ca s'attruvàvunu vicinu ê soi canceddi.
Clarifications the people avìanu renunziatu jiri pi chista strata, and the goblins avìanu aviri
opened lu sò new ngressu 'n capu lu passu ca li nani avìanu pigghiatu,
Enough compliments, since you've found yourself pretty sure by now.
“I want to see you if you don't find any giants or discreet menus more bluccarilu
still vote," said Gandalf, "or soon there will be no way to overcome the mountaineers
more than anything."
As soon as Gandalf heard Bilbo's howl, he understood who was coming
happened. Ntô lampu ca ammazzau li foddi ca l'avìanu pigghiatu iḍḍu
You had stolen from inside the fissure, just as you had stolen. Siguìu doppu lu
cunnutturi and priggiuneri own ô border of the granni room, and from there you sit
down and travagghiàu the best magic ca putìa ntâ lùmmiri.
"It was a very shameless affair," I said. “Touch and go!”
But, of course, Gandalf had made some special studies of enchantments as
focu e luci (puru l'hobbit nun s'avìa mai scurdàtu dî fochi d'artificiu màggicu a
Celebrate them on the eve of mid-summer in Old Took, as you remember). Lu restu tutti nuiautri
know, except that Gandalf knows everything above the door of funnu, like the goblins
call lu canceddu cchiù vasciu, unni Bilbo pirdìu li buttuni. How it actually is
it was canusciutu of anyone who can canusciutu this part of
mountaineers; but I want you to keep your head in the tunnel and drive
li nnâ dirizzioni giusta.
"Fìciru chiḍḍu canceled centuries ago," I said iḍḍu, "in parts more in a way of escape, yes
we didn't need anyone; in parts it was more common in the lands beyond, even in the United States
Come dark and do great damage. I'll always keep it safe
I'll never end up blocking him. It will be guarded by doublings after chistu”, iḍḍu
laughed.
Tutti l'àutri ridìanu puru iḍḍi. Doppu tuttu avìanu pirdutu n'affari bonu, ma iḍḍi
avìa ammazzatu lu Granni Goblin and many others beyond, and avìanu
everyone ran away, so we could say that we had the best until now.
But lu magu called them ê so sensi. "We need to go forward
na vote, now let's be ready for a little while," I said.
cintinara when the night comes; and already the ùmmiri is lengthening.
You can hear the smell of our warmest and freshest footsteps after we pass by. Nuiautri
you must be kilometers above before dusk. There will be a little moon, stay calm,
and who is furtunatu. We don't care much about the moon, but we do have a dune
pick more guiding lights.”
“Oh yes!” I said back to the other two from The Hobbit. "You
pirdiri track of time inside the goblin tunnels. Today is Thursday, and it was
Monday morning or Tuesday morning I smoke captured. Nui nni jemu
kilometers and kilometers, and walked straight into the mountains' choirs,
and now sunnu from the other side, na curta curta. But no more
puntu a cui ci avissa purtatu lu nostru passaggiu; semu troppu luntanu a lu Nord,
e aviri nu paisi streusu davanti. E siamu ancora abbastanza auti.
Let’s go ahead!”
“You're very hungry for us,” Bilbo moaned, suddenly realizing that
there were not a handful of nights before the last one. As soon as
pinza a chistu pi n'hobbit! Lu sò stòmacu si sintìa tuttu vacanti e scioltu e lu sò
They were all reeling, now the excitement was over.
“I can't help you,” said Gandalf, “but you don't like shifters and dumannari ô
goblin pi fariti turnari lu pony e lu bagàgliu."
“No thanks!” said Bilbu.
“Allura, you need to tighten your belts and walk, oh us
it will be made for dinner, and this will be much worse than any other aviri nuḍḍu
us ourselves.”
While annavanu Bilbu looked from side to side more truvari quarch thing of handfuls;
but there's still a moru 'n ciuri, and there certainly isn't any
walnuts, spinach berries. Mordìu nu little of surci, and bivìu
of nu rusceddu of muntagna ca crossed the path, and yes manciau tri sarvaggi
strawberries ca attruvau ntâ so riva, ma non era assai bona.
Continue on and on. Lu percorsu russu scumparìu. Li buschi, e
the long grass between the boulders, the patches of grass tagged with cunigghia,
the timu and the sage and the maiurana, and all the red gardens
scumpareru, and you will find the summit of a wide steep slope
fallen rocks, the remains of a landslide. When we begin to scìnniri chista,
rubbish and stones were crumbled from the feet; soon the bigger pieces of
la petra sciccata si scippau e accuminciaru autri pezzi sutta di iḍḍi
sciddicari and rollers; then the lumps of rock were disturbed and limited,
sfracicànnusi cu na pruvulazzu and nu scrùsciu. Before a long time, all things will be supra
there and sutta di iddi parìanu 'n movement, and they split,
all piled up, you nzèmmula, nta na cunfusioni fventusa di sciddicari, rannizzari, sfracicari
plates and petri dishes.
Furu l'àrburi 'n funnu ca li sarbàru. Sciddunaru ntô bordu
of nu lignu of climbing pines ca ccà was right above the mountain slopes
dê furesti cchiù prufunni and dark dê vaddi sutta. Quarchi d'un si pigghiau
cut them off and untie the branches, go away, quarchidunu (comu lu picciriddu
hobbit) I stopped to avoid the onslaught of rocks. Soon
the pirìculu was finished, the slide had been signed, and the last sciari putìanu
you feel like the cchiù granni of petri disturbed was going to liggiari and to spins
between the arms and the roots of pine trees, very much so.
"Ben! chistu ci fici n'ata votes," said Gandalf; “and maybe you feed them
rintracciàrici sarà nu travagghiu pi vèniri ccà tranquillomenti.”
“I dared to say,” Bombur complained; “but I didn't find difficult werewolves
The petri dishes bounce off our heads." Li nani (and Bilbu) èranu
they talked about those who were happy, and they exploited the broken and damaged ones
and feet.
"Foolish! Go around the corners of the road along the slide.
We need to be very quick! Look at the lights!”
Lu suli s'avìa annatu pi tantu tempu arrè li muntagni. Già l'ùmmiri
s'apprufunnìanu ntunnu a iḍḍi, puru si luntanu attraversu l'àrburi e supra
li cimi niuri di chiḍḍi ca criscìanu cchiù vasci putìanu still see them
siral lights above the hills beyond. Zoppiàvanu ora tantu viluci comu iḍḍi
rinisceru in scinniri the gentle slopes of a forest of pines nta nu percorsu inclinatu ca purtava
constantments towards the south. Quarchi votes spincìanu across many seas of arms
cu frondi auti ca s'alzanu propriu supra la testa di l'hobbit; certi voti èranu
marchers longu tranquillu comu tranquillu supra nu pavimentu of pinu needles; and everyone there
while the dark one from the furesta pointed to more pisanti and the silence from the furesta cchiù prufunnu. Ḍḍà
nun c'era ventu dda sira pi purtari mancu nu suspiru di mari ntê rami di
the arburi.
"Do you need to go further?" Bilbu called, when it was so dark that it put
sulu vìdiri Thorin's beard ca si oggghìu near iḍḍu, and so calmly ca iḍḍu
I heard the breaths of common dwarves who cried out loudly. “Li me pedi sunnu tutti
cry and bend over, and I'll give them to you, and my stomach will let me down like this
empty bags.”
"N'ata vota," said Gandalf.
After what seemed like so many years, he suddenly arrived at the opening
unni nun criscìanu àrburi. The moon was overhead and bright.
No matter how we all seemed like a nice post, even if there was
no evils of vision.
All of a sudden we heard no screams in the hill basins, no longu trimuri
howl. It was respunnutu of no other far to the right and no good business nearby
to iddi; then there's not much longer to go. Eranu li wolves ca ululavanu a
the moon, the wolves 'nsemmula!
There aren't any wolves nearby where Mr. Baggins is at home, but I
sapia chiḍḍu scrùsciu. I had written it to him quite clearly in the past. Unu
of sò cousins ​​cchiù elderly (ntô latu dû Took), ca avìanu statu nu granni traveling,
he used to imitate her more fearfully. The more you hear it, the more you hear it
the moon was too much more Bilbo. Although the magical anecdotes are not widely used against each other
lupi, suprattuttu contra li branchi mali ca vivìanu sutta lùmmira di
the mountaineers swarmed with goblins, above the Bordu dû Sarvaggiu ntê cunfini di
lu scanusciutu. Wolves of this species stink stronger than goblins, and not
we need to see you more carefully!
“Who's doing it, who's doing it!” he called. “Escape today
they are hunted by wolves!” I said, and addivintau pruverbiu, puru si nuatri now
say "fora dâ padedda ntô focus" nnâ stissa speci di sòmodu
situations.
“Supra l'àrburi prestu!” cried Gandalf; and curreru towards the arbuli ô
bordu dâ chianura, cacciannu chiddi ca avìanu rami assai vasci, o èranu
enough slanciatu pi sciamiari. Li truvaru cchiù prestu ca mai putìanu,
yes some guesswork; and above annaru cchiù auti ca mai putìanu fiduciari dû
branches. Avìsti ridutu (of a safe distance), yes avissi vistu
the dwarfs sat on top of the trees with a beard down, as usual
old gentlemen si nni jeru sgricciati e jucannu a sissiri picciotti. Fili and Kili èranu
ntâ summità di n'àutu larcu comu n'àrvuru di Natali enormi. Dori, Nori, Ori,
Oin and Gloin èranu cchiù còmudi nna nu pinu granni cu nu regulari
Branches appear in the ntirvalli area along the spokes of a wheel. Bifur, Bofur,
Bombur and Thorin èrunu nna n'àutru. Dwalin and Balin avìanu sciugghiutu nu
fir àutu and slender with small branches and they were around the truvari a more pusàrisi postu
lu virdi of cchiù auto branches. Gandalf, he was very old
who the other, avìanu truvatu n'àrvuru nta whose no putìanu acchianari, no granni
pinu ca s'attrova ô bordu dû chianu. Era abbastanza ammucciatu ntâ sò
branches, but you could see the bright eyes of the moon peering out.
And Bilbu? He didn't putìa trasiri nta nuḍḍu àrvuru and he got away
from troncu to troncu, common nu cunigghiu ca you have lost lu pirtusu and you have nu doppu dogs
iḍḍu.
“Lassai arrè lu latru!” dissi Nori a Dori guardannù 'n bassu.
“You don't pozzu purtari you always bark them on the back,” I said Dori, “vasciu
tunnel and above the arbuli! Who thinks about sugnu? Nu purteri?”
“We will tip if we don't have any,” said Thorin, since there are
everyone shouts at me now, always get closer. "Dori!" he called, more
Dori was cchiù vascia nna l'àrvuru cchiù easy, "be quick, and come on ô gentlemen Baggins
na manu supra!”
Dori was veru nu tipu dicenti puru complained. Poviru Bilbu
don't get to the point where you can grab the hand when you grab it ô ramu di sutta
and appiccàu lu vrazzu cchiù luntanu ca putìa. Allura Dori crouched down
out of the air and there Bilbo stood up and stood on his back.
Own chiḍḍu mumentu li wolves trottaru howlannu ntâ chiana. All of
all'improvvisu ci foru cintinara d'occhi ca li taliàvanu. Ancora Dori non lu fici
relax Bilbo. He waited until he had climbed the stairs
rami, e poi salta pi li rami iḍḍu stissu. Sulu giustu 'n tempu!
Nu lupu us scippau lu captellu while he swung and almost pigged him. Nta nu
minutu c'era tuttu nu brancu di iḍḍi ca urlavanu ntunnu a l'arvuru e
they jump on top of the trunk, with their eyes in focus and their tongues in turn.
But even the Warg sarvaggi (picked up the wolves evils above lu Bordu dû
Sarvaggi foru called) can't catch the trees. Little by little we are sure. More luck
it was caudu and not ventu. The tree isn't very common anymore
longu 'n every momentu; but to lu friddu and to lu ventu, cu li wolves all ntunnu sutta
aspittannu, ponnu èssiri places in miserable conditions.
Whoever told the anecdu of l'arbuli was clearly a postu of 'ncontu di l'
wolves. There's always more to come. Lassaru looked at them ê pedi dû
àrvuru unni èrunu Dori e Bilbo, e poi annaru a snuffari nzinu a quannu
It smelled every time there was about one. Who looked at me puru iddi,
while all the others (cintinara and cintinara seemed) were sitting around and were having a rest
granni circu ntâ chianu; and ntô menzu of lu cìrculu there was a great griciu
wolf. I will speak to them the fearful tongue of Warg. Gandalfu
he understood. Bilbu isn't cool, but he seems terrifying to us, and everyone does
I know the discussions seemed so cruel and evil, as they were. Every now and then
all of them Warg ntô Cerchiu rispunnìanu ô so capu grigiou all nzèmmula, and
I know tirribbili chianciri almost fics cadiri the hobbit dû I know pinu.
I'll tell you who Gandalf understood, even if Bilbo didn't understand.
The Warg and the goblin spissu help each other with the one who does the evil.
Li goblin di sòlitu non s'avventuranu assài luntanu dê so muntagni, a menu ca non
sunnu hunted and stannu circannu new cases, or stannu marciannu pâ war
(ca sugnu cuntentu diri ca nun succidìu pi tantu tempu). But whatever
jorna certain votes facìanu ncursioni, speciarmenti pi pigghiari manciari o schiavo
the more troubles the more iḍḍi. Then spissu avìanu li Warg pi airici and cunnivìdunu them
plunder cu iddi. Four of them voted walked above the wolves as men do above them.
Now let's say there's a privation of a great goblin raid more chiḍḍu stissu
nights. Li Warg avìanu vinutu pi ncuntrari li foddi e li foddi eranu 'n delay.
The change, without a doubt, was the death of the Great Goblins, and all of them
excitement caused by dwarves and Bilbo and magu, moreover
we were still hunting.
Nurturing the pirìculi of this distant land, the healed men had been
he returns to the South, tagghiannu the trees and
custruennusi more campari places within the vuschi cchiù piacèvuli ntô
you go there and along the rivers of ciumi. There were many, and many
they were well-armed and well-protected, and even the Wargs did not dare to attack them.
there's a lot of nzemi, or ntô jornu lustrusu. But now avìanu chianificatu
with the help of Foddi you can arrive at night in four nearby villages
you milk them. If you were there slowly, if you were there, come on, if you were there
nuddu left us the next day; everyone had been killed except the piccas
They were guarded by wolves and surrendered as prisoners without their grunts.
This discussion was scary for listeners, I no longer cared about it
lignami and I know them as bellows and I know them as little ones, but even more pirìculu
who was now threatening Gandalf and I know them as friends. Li Warg èranu arraggiati e
shocked by truvàrili ccà ntô sò postu di 'ncontu. Pinzavanu
they were friends of the woods, and they were more discreet, and
purtavanu li nutizzi say sò prugetti ntê go, and then foddi them
and the wolves would come to meet us in terrible battles to capture us
prisoners and dissolute people suddenly woke up from sleep. Dunca lu
Wargs don't have the intention of getting closer and leaving the people above the trees
escape, however, it won't be morning. And long before anyone else, he said:
the overstayed goblins set off to chase the mountains; and fed them
you can acchianari l'àrburi, or tagghiàrili.
Now you understand, Gandalf beats, listen to his roars and
urlannu, accuminciò a aviri paura, magu puru si era, ea sintiri
whoever was there didn't post much, and they still didn't escape anymore. All there
stissu non li lassava fari tutti comu vulìanu, puru si iḍḍu
I can't do it very badly, don't worry about all the wolves, all of them above lu
terra sutta. Arricuogghìu the huge pine trees with branches
àrbulu. Then he added a blu lustrusu cu focus, and he launched friscannu
down among the circus of wolves. Culpìu unu ntâ back, and
suddenly I know cappottu pelusu pigghiò focu, and iddu was jumping from ddà and d'arrè
urlannu orribbilmenti. Poi vinni n'àutru e n'àutru, unu 'n ciammi blu, unu
'n russu, n'autru 'n virdi. Scuppiaru 'n terra 'n menzu a lu
circu and si nni jìu cu culurati sparkles and smoke. No special success happened to the great ones
lu lupu capu supra lu nasu, and iddu jumped in the air ten feet, and then
yes scurrìu 'ntornu and 'ntornu ô circu nerennu and scippannu puru to the other
wolves are not angry and afraid.
The dwarfs and Bilbo screamed and applauded. The fury of the wolves
it was tirribbili di vìdiri, and the cummozzioni ca facianu allinchìu tutta la furesta.
The wolves have always been afraid of fire, but those who were more horrible and
focu strèusu. Si na scintilla trasìa ntê sò cappotti, s'attava e ci abbriciva,
ea menu ca non si sciogghieru prestu, prestu èrunu tutti 'n focu. Assai prestu
all ntunnu â chianura the wolves arrutulavanu above and above more emaciated the sparks
above them swords, while chiddi ca burned themselves currìanu 'ntornu screamannu
and put the fire on autri, and when they hunt them down they will kill them
he ran away from the chianciri and strinciri slopes and the water.
“Who is all this scannalu ntâ furesta stasira?” I said to Signuri from L'Aquila.
He was seated, no moonlight, on the top of nu sulitariu pinnaculu of
rock ô eastern mountain edges. «Hear the voices of wolves! Sunnu there
Foddi li ca fannu badi ntô buscu?”
It swept the air, and immediately I looked at it for two days
li rocci di ogni manu saltaru pi seguirlu. Si circùnnaru 'n celu
and looked down at the aneddu of Warg, no puntu nicu assái luntanu sutta. But
the eagle has strong eyes and can see so clear from a great distance. Lu
Signuri di l'Aquili dî Munti Brumi avìa l'occhi ca putìanu taliari lu
lu suli didn't flash, and he could see nu cunigghiu ca si move pi terra nu chilòmitru sutta
puru ô chianu dâ luna. Then even if you couldn't see the people in the trees,
you could understand the commotions among the wolves and see the little ones
flashes of focus, and you hear the screams and the screams that have faded from the moon
iddu sutta. See the sparkle of the moon above the throws of goblins
casco, mentri li longhi fila dû pòpulu cattiviu strisciàvanu supra li cullini di
I'm canceled and wrapped up in the lignu.
The eagle doesn't come on kindly terms. Quarchi d'unu is cowardly and cruel. But him
the ancient race of mountain goats was the largest of all the aceddi; iḍḍi
they were proud and strong and of noble choirs. They didn't love them, oh
scanned them. When you don't care (it was rare,
since they don't give up on criaturi, they look out and chase them away
screamnnu stop and I know grutti, and signàru qualigghiè wickedness ca èrunu
headlights. Li foddi hated the eagle and timìanu them, but never putìanu jùnciri
they are seats, or they hunt for mountains.
Stasira lu Signuri of l'Aquili was bent on curiosity and knew more about it
he was on foot; thus he called many other eagles to him, and he vultures
from them muntagni, and adaciu adaciu firrennu always tunnu and tunnu arrived
down, down, down towards the aneddu of wolves and the postu of 'ncontru of
I fed them.
A very good thing indeed! There are so many terrible things here.
The wolves there avìanu pigghiatu focus and run away ntâ voisca l'avìanu addumatu ntô
different places. Era l'istati auta, e supra stu latu urientali dû
Muntagni there had been a small Chioggia more than four times. Arms that become frozen,
fallen branches, piled-up pine trees, and here and there dead trees,
furu soon 'n focus. Tuttu ntunnu ô chianu dû focu of Wargs was jumping.
But the wolf guards did not leave the trees. Iḍḍi èranu crazy and angry
saltannu and screamnnu ntunnu ê trunchi, and enchant the dwarfs ntê so
horrible languages, with hanging tongues, and shining eyes
russu e fieru comu li fiammi.
Then all of a sudden I told them to arrive in a rush and scream. Pinzaru na battle
cu lignami was making; but soon you'll understand who's coming to the truth
success. Quarchi d'unu s'assittàu e ridìu. Àutri annuìru
I know how to throw them and hit them against their shields. I foddi them nun sunnu
get scared of the focus, and soon we'll start again and we'll see you again
scialusu.
Quarchi di unu I put all the wolves 'nzemi nta nu brancu. Quarchi ferns piled up and
lignu di spazzula ntunnu ê trunchi di l'arbuli. Others will scurreru 'ntornu and stampru and
strikers, and strikers and stampers, even when almost all the flames are cunning, but
no fire will appear near the arbuli unni èranu li nani.
Who focuses on nourishing them with leaves and dead branches and arms. Prestu iḍḍi
avìa n'aneddu di fumu e ciamma ntunnu ê nani, n'aneddu ca iḍḍi
tinted with spreads towards the outside; but it closed slowly, nzinu a quannu lu focu currìu
he was liccannu lu fuel piled up on the arbuli. The smoke was in Bilbo's eyes, yes
let's feel the heat of flames; and through it you can see it
goblin ca ballanu ntunnu and ntunnu 'n Cerchiu comu li genti ntunnu a nu
menzu estivu bonfire. Fora of the aneddu of dancing guirreri with throws and
The wolves stood there at a respectful distance, they looked and waited.
Sintìa li foddi ca accuminciaru na horrible song:
Quinnici aceddi nta five firs,
I know the feathers have sprung up in the brisa d'arcu!
But, funny things, don't have wings!
Or who would make those so funny? Arrustìlli alive, or
stufalli nta na pignata;
fry them, make them vugghiri and eat them carefully?
Allura signed and shouted: "Vulàti aceddi nichi! Vulàti yes
then you! Get off the aceddi, or you'll get stuck in the nest!
Sing, sing the aceddi! Why don't you sing?”
"Viiti! little guys!" shouted Gandalf more and more. "It's not time to focus on the aceḍḍi's nests. Even the little ones who played the game were punished." Iḍḍu
I said, let them get around more, and more mustralli than they were not afraid of
iḍḍi, puru si naturally era, magu puru si era. But don't pigghiaru
notice, and continue to sing.
Burn, burn the trees and ferns!
Arridùciri and abruciari! Na fizzing torch
P'addumari the nights before our pleasures,
 Hey!
Cook them and toast them, fry them and roast them!
up to how many times the beards get burned, and the eyes get burned;
finu a quannu li capiddi s'odurunu e li peddi si craccanu,
the fat one melts away, and the bones become black
 'in ashes lies
 sutta lu celu!
 Thus the dwarves died,
and illuminates the nights before our pleasures,
 Hey!
 E-harri-ei!
 Hey there!
E cu chiḍḍu Ya hoy! li fochi èranu sutta the àrvuru of Gandalf. Nta nu
mumentu spread to others. The foreshortening pigghiau focus, the branches nfiriuri
you're crazy.
Allura Gandalf croaked â summità dû so àrvuru. Lu splennuri mpruvvisu
he flashed from his common wand a flash of lightning, while he was preparing to flash
'n àutu to starboard between the goblin launches. Who was it?
fini di iḍḍu, puru si probabbirmenti l'avìa ammazzatu assài comu iḍḍu
arriva scurrennu comu nu saettu. Ma non saltàu mai.
Owned by the owner of the Signuri of l'Aquili, above,
he peeped on his paws and yes on me.
There was a howl of anger and surprise from the goblins. He called loudly
Lords of L'Aquila, to whom Gandalf now went. Return swept lu
granni aceddi ca èranu cu iddu, and down vìnniru comu enormous nìuri
ùmmiri. The wolves screamed and gnashed their teeth; you feed them
he screamed and stamped with rays, and threw pisan throws into the fresh air
vanu. Supra di iḍḍi s'avìanu sbuffatu l'aquila; la cursa oscura dî sò ali ca battìanu
I'll throw them to the ground or chase them away; I know they're paws that can be stolen by goblins
do it. Other people go towards the tops of the arbuli and pigghiaru the dwarfs, ca èranu
s'arrizzaru ora nzinu a unni mai osaru iri.
Lu poviru Bilbo was almost left in another vote! Arriniscìu sulu a
pighiari the ranges of Dori, as soon as Dori was awarded the last vote; and above iddi
yes nni jeru nzèmmula supra lu tumultu and the burning, Bilbu balanced the air
cu li vrazza almost rumperu.
Now far above the foddi and the wolves they scattered far and wide
ntô buscu. Quarchi eagle was still circannu and sweeping up above lu
battle camp. I flame them again until the arbuli sprouts â 'ntrasatta above lu
cchiù auto branches. Salìru 'n focu griggianti. There was an unexpected event
sparkles and smoke. Bilbo had run away in time!
Prestu la luci di l'abbruciatura era muore sutta, nu scintillu russu supra lu
pavimentu nìuru; and they were always strong
sweeping circuses. Bilbo never forgot who he wanted, he clung to Dori's who he wanted
ankles. Gimiu “it's worth it, it's worth it!”; but Dori gimiu “it's worth it to me,
li mè poveri gammi!”
Not at the best of times did it make Bilbo dizzy. Iḍḍu turned queer yes
he looked up at the edge of a rather narrow cliff; and I never liked it
climb, and miss the trees (you've never had to run away from wolves before).
So it's a little strange as my head was now nourished, when I looked down below
Between the hanging feet and the vitti, the dark lands open wide
iddu, tuccatu ccà and ddà câ moonlight above the rock of latu of na cullina
o nu ciumi ntê chiani.
The peaks of mountains were approaching, the lunar peaks of
rock ca emerges from l'ùmmiri niuri. Summers or not, it seemed very friddu.
I closed my eyes and thought I could feel so much more. Allura iddu
imagine who got sick if he didn't do it. Si sintìa malatu.
Lu volu finìu sulu giustu 'n tempu pi iḍḍu, giustu prima ca li sò vrazza dàssiru
manner. Sciogghiù Dori's ankles with no anxiety and cadìu ntâ rough barge
of an eagle. Ccà was attruvava without parrari, and there I know pinzeri èranu nu
mixture of surpresa d'èssiri sarbatu dû focu, e paura ca non cascassi
chiḍḍu postu strittu ntâ l'ùmmiri prufunni of every latu. He was sintenu
very strange, I don't know who's head is moving after the scary adventures of
the last three days with almost no handfuls, and he found himself right
loudly: “Now I know what a piece of bacon is like when it's unexpected
grab the padedda on top of the furchetta and put the shelves back!”
“No you don't do that!” sintìu Dori replied, “picchì lu bacon lu sapi
who sooner or later will turn ntâ padedda; and you can expire with us
no. Puru the eagle is not on furchetti!”
"Oh no! It's not like storks... you steal them, I want you to say," said Bilbu, assittànnusi and
guardannu cu n'ansia l'aquila che s'attruvava vicinu. Si dumannò
who was saying other abuses, and the eagle was pincing us
bad manners. You don't have to be scrupulous about an eagle, when you're as big as an eagle
hobbit, and sunnu supra nnâ so eyrie of nights!
The sulu eagle sharpened its beak on the petra and tagged its fins
and he didn't notice.
Prestu vulau n'autra aquila. «Lu Signuri di l'Aquila ti cumanna di purtari
I'll take them to the Granni Scaffali," he called and left again. The other
Pighiò Dori nta the claws and vulau cu iddu ntâ nights partennu
Bilbo all up. Avia sulu the strength of dumannarisi who avìa lu missaggeru
meaning "priggiuneri", and begin to pinch and tear off most common dinners
nu cunigghiu, quannu arriva lu sò turnu.
The eagle turned, stuck it with its paws and gave it its coat,
and he left. Sta vote vulau sulu picca. Very early Bilbo was
sdraiatu, trimannu di paura, supra n'ampiu scaffale di roccia supra lu latu dâ muntagna. Non cera nuḍḍu camminu pi jiri supra, tranni ca vulannu; e nuddu percorsu 'n giù
tranni ca saltannu supra nu precipiziu. Ccà truvò tutti làutri assittati
whose back is a mountain wall. Lu Signuri from l'Aquili was puru
ddà and spoke to Gandalf.
Paria ca Bilbo didn't go for tips after all. Lu magu e
The sign of the eagle seemed to be on top, and perhaps he was above
amicable terms. Comu cosa di fattu Gandalf, ca avìa statu spissu ntô
muntagni, avìanu na vota rinnutu un sirvizzu a l'aquila e guaritu lu sò signuri
of a firita of arrow. Then I saw that 'priggiuneri' wanted to say 'priggiuneri'
save yourself from foddi, and not from the eagle's prisoners. Comu Bilbu
he listened to Gandalf's speech and understood it until he went to jiri
true and true escapes from frightened mountaineers. He was discurrennu
chiani cu lu Granni Aquila pi purtari li nani e iddu stissu and Bilbu
They come and send them goods as soon as they travel through the Chiani
sutta.
Li Munti Nebbiusi ca guardanu a punenti di l'Eyrie versu Goblin
Canceḍḍu
Lu Signuri from L'Aquili didn't purge them nakedly and bans unni l'òmini
vissuu. “They shot us with their big bows of fabric,” I said, “they were shooting
pinzàvanu ca stàvamu appressu ê sò pècuri. E autri voti facianu
aviri catch up. No! We are happy with swindling the money from our sport, and happy with
repay our thanks to Tia, but we won't risk it anymore
Chiani towards the south.”
"Very good," said Gandalf. «Bring us Huns and Huns! Nuiautri
sunnu already prufunnamenti obliged to tia. But in the meantime we didn't have the hunger
câ fami.»
“We're almost dead,” said Bilbo with a little voice and no one left
ntisu.
"Perhaps this can be repaired," said the Lords of L'Aquila.
Cchiù tardu putissi vìdiri nu focus lustrusu ntô menzu dâ rock and lu
imagine dî nani ntunnu a iḍḍa cucinannu and facennu n'oduri di arrustu finu.
The eagles avìanu purtatu dry branches more fuel, and avìanu purtatu
cunigghi, hares and na pècura nica. The dwarves will all arrive there
preparations. Bilbo was too tired to help, and in any case he wasn't very
good at peeling the cunigghia or tagging the meat, you're used to avirila
cunsignati dû butcher all ready to cook. Puru Gandalf was curcatu
after aviri made the parts more lights accuminiciari lu focus, vistu ca Oin and Gloin avìanu pirdutu
I'm a Tinder boxer. (Li nani nun ànnu mai purtatu li parti ancora.)
Here the adventure of Munti Brumiusi ended. Prestu lu stòmacu di Bilbo
sintìa n'autra votes chinu and comomudu, and sintìa ca putìa durmiri
cuntentu, even if we really like it, we like the bread and the butter better than
pieces of meat toasted on sticks. Durmiu cchiù arricutu supra la roccia duro
forti di mai ca avìa fattu ntô so readtu di piumi ntô so pirtusu nicu a
house. But all night he sunned his house and wandered away
I don't think they're all there, there are different rooms about four years old, what can't be done
attruvari nor recurdari as it was.
QUEER ACCOMMODATIONS
The next morning Bilbo woke up with his eyes first. Iddu jumped
the more you read the hour, the more you can put the boiling water on, and you can get it done
no one at home anymore. Allura sits down and goes to the bathroom, washes and brushes.
No pigghiò neither, no tea nor toast nor bacon more culazzioni, sulu
mugna meat and cunigghiu friddu. And then you get ready for a new start.
This time we'll be pirmitteru di acchianari supra la indietro di n'aquila e gabbiarisi
Within them I know wings. The air blew above us and I closed my eyes. Lu
the dwarves chiancìanu the farewell and prumittìanu to reimburse lu Signuri dû
The eagle is never putìanu, as five years ago aceddi dô
latu dâ muntagna. Lu suli was still near the eastern limits of this. Lu
the morning was cool, and the fog was empty and empty and empty
here and there above the peaks and pinnacles of the cullini. Bilbo opened again
keep your eyes peeled and watch the aceddi èranu already above and lu munnu was
luntanu, and the muntagni cadìanu returned to iḍḍi ntô
distance. Close your eyes and ring louder.
“Don't pinch yourself!” I said I'm an eagle. «There is no need to get scared like a cunigghiu,
puru si pari chiuttostu unu. It's a beautiful morning with a little wind. Who
is it the most beautiful of birds?”
Bilbo liked it when he said: “No bagnu caudu e na culazzioni late supra lu
pratu doppu;” but Pinzau Ca was better not in charge, and let's go
go the frinata sulu nu pizzuddu.
After a good time the eagle avissiru seen lu puntu unni èranu
facennu pi, puru dâ sò granni autizza, pirchì accuminciaru a scìnniri
they circled in great spirals. Chistu lu fìciru pi tantu tempu, e â fine
the hobbit opened his eyes again. The land was much closer, and above
there were trees that looked like oaks and elms, and wide grassy lands, and
nu ciumi ca all goes through it. But they didn't emerge from the ground
along the torrents ca s'arrubbava ntunnu a iddu, it was a great rock, almost na
cullina di petra, comu n'ùrtimu avanzamentu dî muntagni luntani, o nu pezzu enormi
throw kilometres into the chiana of four giants into the giants.
Soon now - at the top of this rock the eagle arrubbaru one by one and
misiru li sò passiggeri.
"Cuncedu!" shout: “unni go, nzinu a quannu li tò eyes you will curl up
â fini dû travelu!” Chista is the polite thing right between the eagle.
“Lu ventu sutta l'ali portati unni naviga lu suli e lu
“the moon walks,” replied Gandalf, who could find the right answer.
And then they closed. And even if the Signuri of L'Aquila trasìu doppu
jorna lu King of All the Aceddi and purtava na curuna d'oru, and there are five years
cullarini d'oru chiefs (made of l'oru ca li nani ci davanu),
Bilbo never saw them again, except for the cars and the long battle with Cinque
Armies. But how do you get there? At the end of this story, don't say anything
supra chistu just now.
There was no spazziu chianu on Petra's cradle and no ussuratu stink
walked along so many steps to reach the top, through which no one goes
petri enormous barges purtarunu â land of grass beyond the streams. There was no little one
grutta (a healthy one with a stone floor) at the foot of the steps and
vicinu â fini dû vadu di petra. There the party met and discussed who
it was about lighthouses.
"I always wanted to see you all safe (if possible) on the mountains,"
said the magician, “and now more good fortune and good fortune have been made
iḍḍu. Of course, now we're much further east than we want to be
cu tia, pirchì after all who is not my attraction. We'll put you in another league
prima ca finisci tuttu, ma ntô frattiempu haiu n'autra prissioni
more curate affairs."
The dwarfs were gimivanu and seemed more worried, and Bilbo chattered. Iḍḍi
begin to pinch Gandalf and begin to come along the whole street and
There was always more to help them out of difficulties. "Don't go
scumpari propriu chistu mumentu," dissi iḍḍu. "Ti pozzu dari n'àutru jornu o dui.
I can probably help you out of current situations, and I need help
my stissu. We didn't have tips, or baggage, or ponies or riders; And you
nun sacciu unni stai. Ora ti lu pozzu diri. Tu sì ancora quarchidunu
kilometers north of where you traveled ca avìssimu had to follow you, yes avìssimu
don't leave the mountain pass in a hurry. It's very annoying for people to go to camp in these villages,
on the menu ca non vennu ccà of quannu sugnu the last vote 'n this street, ca è quarchi
years ago. But there are some who can go, who don't live long.
Chiḍḍu ca Quarchi d'un fici the steps ntâ granni rock, lu Carrock, cridu ca iḍḍu
he calls. Don't come here spissu, certainly not jornu, and that's it
nuddu bonu ca l'aspitta. Infatti fussi assái piriculusu. bisogna jiri
and lu truvari; and if everything goes well in our meetings, I think so
I wish you like the eagle "goodbye unni va!"
Please ask him not to leave them. Gghi uffreru l'oru dû dragu e
silver and jewels, but he didn't want to change the idea. “Videmu, nuiautri
he will see!” I said: “And I thought I had already earned some shares today
l'oru dû dragu, quannu l'hai."
Doppu chistu no prigàru cchiù. Then they took off the robbers and
bagnatu ntô ciumi, ca era funnu e chiaru e petrusu ntô vadu.
When they were dry, they were now strong and càudu,
they were refreshed, they still dulurusi and no little hunger. Soon attravirsaru lu vadu
(purchased the hobbit), and then proceeded to march across the lu virdi longu
grass and down there are lines of wide-spread oaks and self-standing elms.
“And why is it called Carrock?” Bilbo called as he walked
latu dû magu.
"He called Carrock, he called Carrock, he's the best friend of all. Call
cosi comu chiddi carru, e chistu è lu Carrock pirchì è l'unicu
someone close to his house and he knows good things."
"Who's calling him? Who knows?"
"Someone of whom you will appear, na pirsuna very great. Everyone lived to be very
educatu quannu ti prisintu. Ti prisintu pianu pianu, dui a dui, iu
staplers; and I had to take care not to bother him, or he knows who
it will kill. You can be terrible when you're angry, but you're kind
enough, it's humorous. As it is, you'll notice that it's easy to get through."
The dwarves all come together when they hear the same thing as usual
chistu to Bilbu. "Who's the pirsuna you're talking to now?" call me.
"Couldn't you have found something easier? It wasn't better
explain everything more clearly?” - and off he went.
– «Yes for sure! No, no shit! And he explained a lot
attentions," the magu replied in a cruel manner. "If you have to know who he is, he's my name
It's Beornu. He is very strong and can sing the peḍḍi."
"Who! a pilucciaturi, no man calls them cunigghi cones, when he doesn't turn around
Are they peddi 'n sciuri?” Bilbu called.
“Boni celi grazziusi, no, no, NO, NO!” said Gandalf. “Nun èssiri nu
stupid sir Baggins can help you; and in the name of all the marvelous people there is no one
parra n'other votes for the word pilucciusu, just because it's a hundred thousand miles away
from my house, nor carpet, mantellu, tippettu, muffu, nor anyone else who suffers misfortune
word! Iḍḍu cancel the peḍḍi. Cancel the peddi: certain votes is a great thing
ursu nìuru, certain votes are n'omu strong granni di capiddi nìuri cu enormous
vrazza and a great beard. You can't tell yourself much more, even if you're ready to be
that's enough. Quarchidunu say ca è n'ursu discinnenti dû granni e
antichi ursi dî muntagni ca ci stàvanu prima ca arrivàssiru li giganti.
Other days there are no men who don't know the first men who come first
Smaug or the other dragons arrive in this part of the world, and before
The goblins arrived in the northern hills. You can't say it, but yes
fantasy l'ùrtima is the true story. Nun è lu tipu di pirsuna ca fa li dumanni
Of.
"Anyway it's not sutta nuḍḍu 'ncantu ca lu sò. Live nna nu
oak lignu and have a great lignu house; and as we all keep our praises and
cavaddi ca sunnu almost marvelous like iḍḍu stissu. Travàgghianu pi iddu e
parrati cu iddu. I don't tip them; neither hunting nor sarvaggiu tip
arm them. Maintain hives and hives of great proud bees, and live much higher
cream and apple trees. Comu ursu goes far and wide. Na vote lu vitti assittatu
everyone on the top of Carrock at nights like the moon is getting weaker
towards the Munti Brumi, and he heard roars in the language of
ursi: «Virà lu jornu ca pèrinu e iu turnarò!» Ca
è picchì cridu ca na vote vinni dî muntagni iḍḍu stissu.”
Bilbo and the dwarfs now had a lot of pinzari, and called no
cchiù dumanni. Avìanu ancùora ssài strata di caminari davanti a iḍḍi. Penenza supra
e 'n valli sciarriàru. Addivintau assài caudu. Quarchi vota si ripusàvanu
sutta l'àrburi, e allura Bilbu sintìu accussì fami ca s'avìa manciatu
acorns, yes qualchidunu was still enough maturu pi cadiri pi terra.
It was the middle of the afternoon before we needed to take care of our grandparents
avìanu accuminciatu a nàsciri macchi di ciuri, criscennu tutti li stissi gèniri
nzèmmula comu si fussiru chiantati. Above all there was lu trifogghiu, unnennu
stains of trifogghiu on gallu's peddi, and purple trifogghiu, and large stripes of
trifogghiu curtu jancu duci ca profuma di meli. C'era nu ronzu e nu
vurrìu and nu dronunta the air. The bees are busy in all the banni. And such
bees! Bilbo had never seen anything like this before.
"Si unu mi puncissi," pinsò, "avìssi a gonfiari n'àutra vota granni comu
Iu sugnu!"
Èranu cchiù granni of frames. Li drones èranu cchiù granni dî tò
inches, a good thing, and the yellow streaks above them are black and prufunni bodies
brillava comu l'oru focu.
"Come closer," said Gandalf. "Semu ô limits dî sò bee pastures."
After a little while I reached a belt of very old and ancient oak trees, and beyond
close to a thorny hedge through which you can't even see
sciarriari.
“It's better to wait here”, I said to the magu ê nani; “and how many years ago
call or friscalettu accumincianu to come near me... I saw the street ca vaju... but
about a couple, mind, about five minutes between each couple of you. Bombur
he's fat and will do more than two, it was better to come to sulu and ùrtimu. Duni
Gentlemen Baggins! There's no cancellation 'ntornu a chista banna." And who knows iddu
I set out around the hedges where I found the hobbit scared.
Arrive quickly at a lignu gate, high and wide, beyond which
you can see the gardens and a group of large buildings made of lignu, quarks of a village with roofs of straw
and made of logs without furma: granaries, staddi, sheds, and a long vasciu di lignu
house. Inside the south side of the large hedges there are threads and threads
of beehives with bell-shaped tops made of straw. The screeching of giant bees
they came forward and stopped and crawled in and cut through all the air.
Lu magu and the hobbit spinciunu apriri lu canceddu pisanti ca strinciva e
skimming along a wide path towards the house. Quarchi cavaddu, assai lignusu e
well-groomed, he trotted over the grass and looked at them attentively.
be very careful; then he left towards the buildings.
"Ci sunnu annati a cuntari l'arrivu di strànii," disci Gandalf.
Soon you will arrive at a curtigghiu, of which three walls you can steal from there
house of lignu and I know them with two long wings. Ntô menzu there was curcatu na
granni troncu di cherzu cu tanti rami tagghiati vicinu a iḍḍu. Stannu vicinu c'era nu
huge men with a beard and the heads of them, the spissi ones, and the granni vrazza and jammi naked
cu musculi knotted. Era vistutu di na tùnica di lana nzinu ê dinocchi,
and he clung to a granni axe. Li cavaddi were close to who I know them
nasu â spalla.
"Uh! Here they are!" I said ê cavaddi. “Don't look
piriculusu. Putissi èssiri fora!" Ridìu na granni risati, messi giù la sò
axe and win forward.
“Who is and who is flying?” he called sgrigghiatu, arrived
in front of iḍḍi and stood up on Gandalf. Pi quantu riguarda Bilbo, iḍḍu putìa
they easily trotted across the ranges without lowering their heads and missing them
fringe of the man's brown tunic.
"I'm Gandalf," said the wizard.
"You've never heard of it before," roared the man. «And who is chistu picciriddu
cumpagnu?" I said, acchinannusi pi aggrottari l'obbit cû so bushy
eyebrows niuri.
“Who is Mr Baggins, a hobbit of good family and 'ncuntrabbili
reputations," said Gandalf. Bilbo bowed. He had no more hoods, and he was
Please note that there are so many buttons missing. "Sugnu nu magu,"
Gandalf continued. "You have sintutu, if you have not sintutu on me; but
maybe you heard me bonu cugnu Radagast ca campa vicinu ô
Do you know the miridiunfini of Mirkwood?"
– «Yes; it's not like the magicians go, criu. Now see him
and yet another time," said Beorn. "Ben, now I know what you are, or what you say
you yes. Are you sick?"
“More the virtue, more the baggage and almost more the road,
and everyone needs help or at least advice. You can say that avìamu avutu
Chiuttostu nu tempu tintu cu li foddi ntê muntagni."
“Do you feed them?” I said the omu granni menu sgrigghiatu. “O ho, so this happened
Are you worried about what you have? Who did you approach him more?”
"We don't want to. We'll be surprised at nights when we pass by
through virsari; We were all over the West in these countries
- it's a long story."
“Allura is better than you are and you tell me something, if you don't want to
pigghiari all lu day," ​​said the man who was walking through the dark door
I opened the door outside the house.
Next you find yourself in a large room with no focus
lu menzu. Puru si era l'istati c'era nu focu di lignu e lu
lu fumu s'alzava ê traversi neri 'n circata di la strata pi nesciri attraversu
no opening of the roof. Passaru pi chista dark room, illuminated sulu dô
focus and lu pirtusu above, and trasìu through another door nica nta na
a type of veranda perched on wooden poles made of single tree trunks. Iḍḍu
it faced south and was still bowed and bent by the western lights
suli ca inclined nta iḍḍu, and cadìu d'oru supra lu jardinu chinu di ciuri ca
arrived right away at the stairs.
Ccà si pusàru supra li panchi di lignu mentri Gandalf accuminciò la sò storia, e
Bilbo fics scirriari them jammi ca us pendavanu and taliò li ciuri dû jardinu,
chiamannusi comu putìanu èssiri li sò nomi, picchì nun l'avìa mai vistu la mità
Before.
“Stava vinennu supra li muntagni cu n'amicu o dui...” I said
magu.
"O dui? Vidu sulu unu, e nu picciriḍḍu," said Beorn.
“Well, more than that, I don't like to bother you with so many of us,
until we found out you were busy. Call me, yes well."
“Go, call away!”
Allura Gandalf said nu friscu longu e stridenti, and now Thorin and Dori
vinni ntunnu â house nearby ô walk to the garden and s'arristau 'nchinatu in front
iḍḍi.
“Unu o tri vulìsti diri, capiscu!” I said Beornu. “But chisti nun sunnu hobbit,
sunnu nani!”
"Thorin Scudo, ô to sirvizziu! Dori ô to sirvizziu!" I said
dui nani ca s'inchinaru n'autra vota.
“I don't need lu to sirvizziu, thank you,” said Beorn, “but I'll wait for you
you need me. Nun sugnu too much loved by dwarves; but yes it is true you yes Thorin
(Thrain's figghiu, Thror's figghiu, criu), and ca lu to cumpagnu is
rispittàbbili, e ca tu sì nimici dî goblin e nun sì 'n gradu di nuḍḍu
evils ntê me terri... who are you doing, by the way?”
“Sò 'n viaggiu pi vìsiri la terra dî sò patri, luntanu a livanti
beyond Mirkwood," said Gandalf, "and it's all accidental to us
sunnu nnî your closest lands. Stavamu attravirsannu lu Passu Autu ca avìa a
they have purtatu â strata ca s'trova ô south dû to paisi, quannu nuiautri
they were attacked by terrible evils, as was the case."
“Allura, continue to tell!” said Beorn, who was never very polite.
«There was a terrifying storm; you can spot the giants of Petra jèvanu fora jittari,
and at capu dû passu we take refuge in a grutta, the hobbit is iu and
several of our comrades..."
“Are you calling two different ones?”
"Ben, no. In fact there are more than two."
"Unni sunnu? Killed, handfuls, turned â home?" “Ben, no. They don't do it
like everyone arrived when I was fresh. Timid, wait for me. See, we are very
I'm very scared because we're much more anxious."
– «Go ahead, fresh n'autra vote! Sugnu first party, even, and one or two
it won't make much difference," roared Beorn.
Gandalf friscau n'autra vota; ma Nori e Ori c'èranu quasi prima di iddu
s'avìa firmatu, pirchì, si ti ricurdi, Gandalf ci avìa dittu di veniri a duppi
every five minutes.
"HI!" I said Beornu. "You came early enough, did you huddle up?
Come to me jack-n-li-scatuli!”
“Nori ô to sirvizziu, Ori a...” accuminciaru; but Beorn broke them.
– «Thanks! Quannu vogghiu l'aiutu vostru vi l'addumannarò: assèttati, e jamu
this story goes on, or it will be time for dinner before you finish."
“As soon as durmìamu,” continued Gandalf, “na fissura ntô funnu di
the crane opened; nisceru them foddi and pigghiaru the hobbit and the dwarves
and our troop of ponies...”
"Troop of poni? Who were you... a traveling circus? Or was it you
Purtari very much like this? Or do you always call there are you in the troop?”
“Oh no! What was there more than six guys, more than here?
There are more than six, and there are two more!” Just who knows
Momentu cumpareru Balin and Dwalin and bowed to the vasci ca li barbi
swept the stone floor. The man at the beginning frowned, but he smirked
It's better to be scared and polite, and continue to nod and bend and bend over
and scarriàvanu the hoods in front and growl (nnâ manera nana), nzinu a quann iḍḍu
he signed to frown at them and burst out laughing: they seemed to be accussì
còmicu.
"Troop, let's get there," I said. "Nu beḍḍu fumettu. Veni ntô me allegru
men, and what is your name? I don't want him to sirvizziu just now, sulu
your names; and then get seated and signed with sciarriari!”
"Balin and Dwalin," I said without daring to be uffinnuti, and si pusàru supra
The floor seemed quite surprising.
“Now let's go ahead and vote!” I said Beorn ô magu. "Unni stavu? O yes... iu
he wasn't caught. Kill no fire or dui cu nu lampu..."
"Bonu!" roared Beorn. "Allura è bonu èssiri nu magu."
"... and I slipped through the crack before it closed. I followed inside
the main room was filled with funds. Lu Granni Goblin was
ddà cu trenta o quaranta guardi armi. Pensài a mia stissa 'puru si iḍḍi
Aren't we all 'ncatinati, who can make a duzzina against so many?”'
– «Na duzzina! It's the first time I've ever heard of calling you a duzzina. O hann
Do you still have any other jacks with no more scats?”
“Well, yes, now we're going to sunnu n'àutri dui ccà: Fili and Kili, iu
cridi," said Gandalf, mentri sti dui ora cumpareru e arristaru surridennu e
to bow.
“Enough!” said Beornu. – “Sit down and be quiet! Now go on,
Gandalf!”
Here Gandalf continued the story, until when he arrived it was dark,
the discovery is canceled out, and I know how to be when I get to the Signuri
Baggins was wrong. “Cuntàmu nuatri stissi and attruvamu ca was there
nuḍḍu hobbit. We'll stop at fourteen!”
- "Fourteen! Who knows, it's the first vote out of ten fourteen.
Want to say new things, or else I won't have told you all your names yet
party."
"Ben, you sure haven't seen Oin and Gloin yet. And, bless me!
here they are. I hope you can get them as soon as I disturb you."
"Come, everyone! Hurry! Come, you two, and sit down!
But look here, Gandalf, puru ora avemu sulu tu e deci
dwarves and the hobbit ca si pirdìu. Chistu fa sulu eleven (cchiù unu
you made a mistake) and no fourteen, on the menu there are no differences from the other people.
But now I beg you, continue this story." Beorn didn't need to know more than I did
I wanted to help you, but you actually started to get into a lot of trouble. You see, yes
old times avìa canusciutu la parti stissa dî muntagni ca era Gandalf
discrivennu. Iḍḍu annuìu e rugghiò, quannu sintìu parrari di chiḍḍu di l'hobbit
reappearances and from there sciarra ntô slide of petra and from lupu ntô buscu.
When Gandalf arrived he was cornered in the trees where all the wolves were
he stood up, walked and muttered: “Avissi vugghiutu ca fussi statu
ḍḍà! I wish I could have seen more fireworks!”
“Well,” I said, Gandalf, I was happy to see that my story was going well.
impressions, "Facìa lu megghiu ca putìa. Ccà trovamu cu li lupi ca ìanu
crazy people from us and the fury starts to burn in places, when
I foddi scinnìru di cousins ​​and scupriru us. Urlaru cu
pleasures and sang pigghiannuci burla songs. Quinnici aceddi nta cincu firs...”
“Bonu celu!” roared Beorn. “Nun fari finta ca li foddi nun ponnu
cunteggiu. Ponnu. Twelve non sunnu quinnical and lu sannu.”
"E puru iu. C'èrunu puru Bifur e Bofur. Nun m'avìa avventuratu
prisintàrili first, but here they are.”
Arrivaru Bifur and Bofur. “And me!” gasped Bombur swollen and stopped.
It was fat and even angry you picked it up and left it 'nzinu all'urtimu. He refused to wait for five
minutes, and siguìu subbitu doppu l'àutri dui.
– «Goods, now of you nni quinnical sites; and since I foddi them sannu cuntari, jo
suppose that everyone was there who was above the tree. Now maybe we'll finish
this story without further interruptions." Lu signuri Baggins lived allura comu
Gandalf had been spertu. Li ntirruzzioni avìanu facttu veru Beorn cchiù
ntirissatu â history, and history had avoided it by werewolf
The dwarfs don't go on a sudden like suspicious beggars. He never invited these old people
I have my house, I could help you. I had a lot of friends and I was a farmer.
bona strata luntanu; e non invitaò mai cchiù di na para di chisti ô so
house â vote. Now let's have five strange people sitting outside my porch!
When the magu had finished my story and had the cuntatu of L'Aquila
ransom and everyone was purged as usual ô Carrock, lu suli avìa
the peaks of Munti Brumi have fallen and the ùmmiri èranu longhi
ntô jardinu di Beorn.
“A very good story!” I said. “The best thing about it is that it happened so often.
all the beggars putìanu diri unu accussì bonu, mi putìanu findvari cchiù gracious. Putissi
stai facennulu tuttu, di sicuru, ma ti miriti na cena pâ storia tutta la
stissu. Let's do some great things!”
“Yes, more favors!” I said to everyone nzèmmula. "Thank you very much!"
Inside the hall it was quite dark now. Beorn clapped his hands, and nta
trottaru quattru beddi pòni janchi e diversi granni grigi di corpu longu
dogs. Beorn told us something in a strange language like the sounds of the dogs
trasfurmò 'n discursu. Nesciunu n'autra vota e prestu turnaru purtannu li torci
'n vucca, ca s'addumàvanu ô focu e 'nfilavanu 'n paramitri vasci supra lu
pillars of the hall ntunnu ô central focu. I know the dogs putìanu stari supra
li gammi di arrè quannu vulìanu, e purtavanu li cosi cchî pedi davanti. Lestu
I punched holes in small tables and walls on the side walls and placed them close by
lu focu.
Allura baa-baa-baa! yes we heard it, and we carried a para di pècuri janchi comu la nivi
guide you by nu granni richiu nìuru comu lu carboniu. Unu purtava nu pannu jancu embroidered ô
edges with figures of weapons; autri purtavanu supra li backs large trays cu
casings and plates and cuteddi and cucchiara of lignu, ca li dogs pigghiàvanu and
subbitu spustatu supra li tabulini. Chisti èranu very vasci, quite vasci puru
more Bilbo sat down with the rules. Next to iddi nu pony spincìa two bowls
benches with wide handles and short, narrow and sharp peaks plus Gandalf and
Thorin, while he finished the great seat of Beorn, gave this speci
(ntô quali s'assittàu cu li jammi granni 'nfilati luntanu sutta lu tavulu). Chisti
there were all the seats in the room, and probably they had to go as usual
li tavuli pâ cumminenza di l'armali maravigghiusi ca aspittavanu supra
iḍḍu. Supra chi s'assittàu lu restu? Don't forget yourself. The others ask
Arrivaru 'n sizzioni tunnes in the shape of tammuru of trunks, smoothed and
polished, and enough vasciu puru pi Bilbo; soon everyone will sit down
Beorn's table, and the hall had not been seen for many years.
Let's make a dinner, or a dinner, those who haven't had anything at all
left the Last Home of Home in the West and said farewell to Elrond.
The lights of the torches and the lights of the lights were brought to light, and above the table
eranu dui cannili auti di cera d'api russi. Tuttu lu tempu ca manciavanu, Beorn ntô so funnu
rolling voices told stories of the wilds of these parts of the mountains, and
suprattuttu dû lignu scuru e piriculusu, ca s'attruvava lungatu luntanu a
North and South no day of giru in front of iḍḍi, excluding the road towards the East, lu
furesta tirribbili by Mirkwood.
The dwarfs shave and shave their beards, as long as they know how
you must soon venture into the wild chidda and after the Muntagni it was there
worse day pirìculi ca avìanu to pass before arriving ô dragu
strongholds. When dinner is over, I'll start picking them up, but
Beorn seemed to be adding to the addurmintatu and was not giving us any attention.
it seemed the majority of the gold and the silver and the jewels and manufactures of such things
firraru, and Beorn didn't seem to care about such things: there was a nu
there is no such gold or silver in the room, and except for the cute ones there are made
of mitaḍḍu pi nenti.
Si pusàru pi tantu tempu â tavula cu lignu trays bent over
midu. The dark night arrived. Fire them 'n menzu â sala
they were built with new trunks and the twists were removed, and still they sat down
the lights of dancing trees on the pillars of the house
I stopped at the top, and darkened the top of the wild tree. Yes it were
magic or not, I'll let Bilbo know I'm not the same as the next day
rami ca si sciogghìunu ntê traversi, e lu howl of the alfi. Prestu started nodding
cu lu sleepnu e li vuci parìanu crìsciri luntanu, nzinu a quannu si arrispigghiau cu na
to begin.
The granni porta avìa strinciutu e sbattutu. Beorn wasn't there anymore. Lu
The dwarves sat there with their hands on the floor and the focus, and
currently we are starting to sing. Quarchi versu was accurate, but ccà
there were many others, and they continued for so long:
The wind was stuck on the moor,
but inside you I was sneering at you:
dà admire the nights and the days,
and those so dark silent strinciunu sutta.
Lu ventu scinnìu of muntagni friddu,
and the common tide roared and washed away;
the branches were gimivanu, the vosca was gimivanu,
and I put them on top of the mudellu.
Lu ventu si nni iu of punenti a livanti;
all the movements stopped before you,
but strident and hard through the marshes
I know the friscanti vuci foru released.
The servants sibbìanu, the folded napkins,
li canni strinciàvanu - supra di iḍḍu si nni iu
o'er swimming pool scuzzulata sutta lu celu friscu
unni li nùvuli di cursa èrunu torn and rented.
Only the naked mountain passed by
and sweep over lu dragu's lair:
ccà s'attruvàvanu massi niuri e scuri
and there were smokes flying in the air.
Lassau lu munnu and pigghiau lu so volu
above the seas wide with nights.
The moon sailed above the storm,
and the lights went off.
Bilbo began nodding. Suddenly Gandalf stood up straighter.
"È ura ca durmimu," dissi iḍḍu, "pi nui, ma non pensu pi Beorn.
Now let's get back to this room safe and healthy, but I warn you all not to worry
chiddu ca I said Beornu before leaving nuatri: you don't have to stravari fora nzinu a quannu it's not lu suli
è supra, a tò pirìculu.”
Bilbo attruvau ca li beds èranu already placed ô latu dû corridoru, above nu
a type of raised platform between the pillars and the external wall. Pi iddu
there were nu picciriddu of pagghia matarazzu and wool cuperti. He went cold
they were very happy, even if it was the summer. The fire burned down both of them
he fell asleep. And yet one night he woke up: the focus now had to come to four hours
embers; the dwarves and Gandalf all addurmìanu, more judgmental than I am
breathe; a splash of jancu ntô pavimentu vinìa dâ luna auta, ca
he was peering through the window of the smoke behind the roof.
There was no roar outside, and no scrùsciu comu chiḍḍu of four great years
arm them ca si sciarriàvanu â door. Bilbo knew who he was, and he was
putìa èssiri Beorn 'n form 'ncantunata, and yes trasìssi comu n'ursu and
kill them. He dived into the cuppi and huddled his head, and went to sleep
n'àutra votes â nunustant ends I'm afraid of them.
It was early morning when he woke up. One of the dwarves had fallen above
long ago the ùmmiri unni was curcatu, and arrutulatu began with no snort of
the barge above the floor. It was Bofur, and he was wailing at us,
when Bilbu opened his eyes.
"Get up, you lazy man," I said, "or your ass won't stop."
Supra jumped Bilbo. "Assholes!" he called. “Unni is the asshole?”
“Supratuttu dintra di nui”, replies the other dwarfs who move
above the room; "but who ḍḍu ca arristau is fora ntâ viranda. Ci nni jemu approximately
circannu Beorn when lu suli gets up; but there is no sign of iddu
It's like that, even if you tighten your ass as soon as you wake up.”
"Unni is Gandalf?" called Bilbo, spustànnusi pi truvari quarch thing of handfuls
cchiù prestu ca putìa.
"Oh! out and around the corner," he told us. But there was no sign of
lu magu tutti chiḍḍu jornu nzinu â sira. Just before sunset trasìu
the hall, unni stavanu cenannu the hobbit and the dwarves, aspittava
di l'armali maravigghiusi di Beorn, comu avìanu statu tuttu lu jornu. Di Beornu avìanu
we had eaten and heard nothing from the nights before, and they were pigghiannu
scuncertatu.
“Unni è lu nostru òspiti, e unni stàsti tu stissu tuttu lu jornu?” iddi tutti
he called.
"Na dumanna â vote, and nuḍḍa nzinu after dinner! You don't have any fattu na
bites of what makes the ass.”
Â fini Gandalf spincìu lu piattu e la brocca, n'avìa manciatu dui interi
breads (with masses of butter and apple trees and coagulated cream) and drinks
almenu nu quartu di midu, and pulled out the pipe. “Rispunnu ô secunnu
dumanna prima," dissi iḍḍu, "... ma benedicimi! chistu è nu postu splèndidu pi lu fumu
aneddi!” Certu pi tantu tempu non putìanu pigghiari nenti di cchiù di iḍḍu, iḍḍu
she was so busy with werewolf anecdotes of smoking dodged the pillars of the hall,
canciannuli nta all types of different styles and cultures, and the settings
â ends you chase the one who the other out of pirtusu dû tettu. Hannu a
parevanu assài strani di fora, spuntannu nta l'aria unu doppu
n'autru, virdi, blu, russu, grigio-argentu, giallu, jancu; li granni, li picciriddi;
the little ones dodged the adults and reached the end, and
the common herd of aceddi ntâ distance.
"Scìgghiu li tracci di l'ursu," I said at the end. “Ci avissi aviri
There were regular encounters with Ursi yesterday evening. Prestu meals approx
Beorn couldn't make them all: there were too many of them, and
eranu puru di vari mesuri. Avissi a diri ca c'èranu l'ursi nichi, granni
bears, common bears, and big, gigantic bears, all of them come out of the shadows
at almost dawn. They came from almost all the banni, except ca dâ
to the west above lu ciumi, dê Munti. Nta chiḍḍa dirizzioni sulu nu nzemi di
purtaru footprints, nuḍḍu vinìa, sulu chiḍḍi ca s'alluntanaru di ccà. I follow you
chisti nzinu ô Carrock. Ccà scumpariru ntô ciumi, but there
the water was too thick and I couldn't cross the rock anymore. It's easy
enough, how do you remember, more jùnciri of this bank ô Carrock vicinu lu vadu,
but on the other side there is a cliff that is bristled with several whirlpool channels. appi a
caminari kilometers before truvari nu postu unni lu ciumi era largu and funnu
no more walking and nutari, and then kilometers arrè pighiari lu
trace another vote. Then it was too late to follow them any further. Iḍḍi
yes nni jìu straight towards the pine trees of the eastern ones
Munti Nebbiusi, unni ficimu la nostra piacèvuli festa cu li Warg
the nights before the last day. And now I thought you were going to spend the next day,
puru iḍḍu," finished Gandalf, and sat back for more time.
Bilbo pinsava ca sapia chiḍḍu ca vulìa diri lu magu. "Chi faremu," iḍḍu
he shouted, "you drive all them Warg and foddi them ccà sutta? Saremu all
pigghiatu e ammazzatu! Pensava ca dissi ca non era n'amicu sò."
"Accussì the appi
addurmisciutu."
L'hobbit si sintìa abbastanza sfracicatu, e siccomu paria ca nun c'era nenti àutru di fari, iḍḍu
fici jiri a lettu; e mentri li nani cantavanu ancora canzuni iddu cadìu
addurmintatu, still scummigghiannu the head pi Beorn, nzinu a quannu sunnò nu sleepnu
of cintinara of ursi nivuri ca ballanu slow pisan dances 'n giru and 'n giru 'n
the moonlight is curtigghiu. Then he woke up when everyone else was there
addurmintatu, and sintìu lu stissu raschiatu, lu stissu sbuffu, lu sbuffu and lu roarghiu
as before.
In the morning after everyone wake up by Beorn stissu. “So there you are
all sunnu ancora!” I said, picking the hobbit and laughing: “Don't eat.
of Wargs or goblins or evil Ursi still ju vìdu"; and iddu appeared chiddu dû signuri Baggins
cchiù vest without respect. “Lu cunigghiu sta addivintannu n'autra vote beddu and grassu
supra lu pani e lu honey," he ridìu. "Come and pigghia n'àutru pocu!"
Allura tutti annaru a fari la culazzioni cu iḍḍu. Beorn era assài allegru pi nu
stracanciari; in fact it seemed that there was a splendidly good humor and I put them there
everyone laughs at the funny stories; nor did they have to be amazed any longer
Unni had been since I was so kind to you, since I told them
iddu stissu. You have been above the peaks and submissive above the mountains...
of which one can understand that it could travel in the shape of a bear
qualigghiè tassu. Parts of the burned ramp of wolves had soon been discovered
my story was true; but I found out more than anyone else: I found out
Warg and nu goblin ca vaga ntô buscu. About who you had pigghiatu nutizzi:
the goblin patrols were still hunting the Warg dwarves, and the
they were very angry with the Great Goblins dead, and so on
plus the burning dû nasu dû lupu capu and the death dû
the focus of many days is the main one. That's what they told us every year
the furzau, but he thought there was more evil than this one at his feet,
and there are great raids of the whole army of foddi where they are allied wolf nta
the lands ùmmiri dê muntagni putìssiru sissiri quickly made more truvari there
dwarves, or first vinnicàrisi of the men and the creatures who were there,
and those who pinzàvanu sent them to take refuge.
"That was a good story, your girl," said Beorn, "but I like you even more."
Now let's be sure it's true. We need to be careful so that we don't look too pale. Yes you
he lived near the limits of Mirkwood, I didn't mention the word of nuddu ca
You were not a canuscìsti like a friar or a better man. As it is, pozzu sulu diri
Whoever brings me home will soon be able to see you more safely, and more
I'll offer you whatever help I can. I'll think about the kindest people and dwarves afterwards
chistu. Kill Granni Goblin, kill Granni Goblin!” iḍḍu ridìu
fiercimenti a iddu stissu.
“Who did you do with the goblins and the Wargs?” Bilbo called suddenly.
“I came and saw!” said Beorn, and I went home.
the goblin's head was pissed off and the warg's peddi was locked up
àrvuru just beyond. Beorn was not accidental. But now he was iddu's friend,
and Gandalf thought that it was wise to know the whole story and reached it
lu sò viaggiu, accussì putìanu ottèniri lu cchiù granni aiutu ca putìa òffriri.
Chistu è chiḍḍu ca prumittìu di fari piḍḍi. Furniva asked them more
each of the gods, and no cavaddu more Gandalf, can travel without furesta, and
he loaded them with more durable, more simani cu cura tips, and packaged them up
the easiest possible purities: nuts, flour, sealed trays of dry goods
fruits, and Russian terracotta pots of apple trees, and twisted two vows ca
tinìanu good more so much time, and above a little of those who putìanu march far away.
The realization of these was one of the secrets; but lu meli there was nta iddi, communta
the majority of them are handfuls, and they are good handlers, even if they are made sites.
The water, I said, nun avìanu bisognu di purtari sta parti dâ furesta, pirchì
c'èranu turrenti e surgenti 'ntornu â strata. “Ma la tò strata attraversu
Mirkwood is dark, piriculusu and difficult," I said iḍḍu. "Water is not easy
find out, nor eat. The time for nuts hasn't arrived yet (but it's possible
you passed and passed in fact before arriving on the other side), and the nuts sunnu around
all the chiddu ca crisci ddà it's good more tip; Come on, these savage sunnus are dark, queer,
and sarbàggiu. I'll ask you to get some more water, and I'll ask you
give you a bow and arrow. But I am very doubtful about something
truvari in Mirkwood will be healthy pi manciari or pi biviri. There is one
brook ddà, lu so, nìuru and forti ca crosses the path. Who you
nun avissi né biviri, né fari lu bagnu; pirchì haiu sintutu ca porta
ncantu and na granni sunnulity and scurdàrisi. It's not dark
l'ùmmiri di chiḍḍu postu nun penzu ca ti spararà nenti, sanu o
not healthy, without escaping the journey. Ca YOU MUST NOT headlights,
pi qualegghiè mutivu.
"Who knows, it's all about the cunsigghiu that can help you. Beyond the edge of the furesta iu
I can't help you much; You have to depend on luck and care
and he will eat you. A la porta dû voscu t'haju addumannari
mannati arè lu me cavaddu and put them there. But I wish you all speed, and mine
the house is open to you, if you never turn n'àutra vote more chista strata.”
Lu ringraziaru, di sicuru, cu tanti arches and spaces of there sò
hoods and with many a “ô to sirvizziu, or patruni dû lignu largu
come up!” But their hearts are filled with grave sadness, and everyone is filled with sadness
the entanglement was much more piriculous than those pinzàvanu, while all of them
tempu, puru si passavanu tutti li pirìculi di la strata, lu dragu l'aspittava
at the end.
All who in the morning are employed in repairs. Na picca doppu menzujornu
tip cu Beorn the last time, and after that you tip him
He gave them out on loan, and they said goodbye to us, and I left.
through it I can cancel a good rhythm.
As soon as I leave the fences auti a est dê so terri ricintati, iḍḍi
you turn towards the north and then turn towards the north-west. Secunnu lu so cunsigghiu nun èranu
cchiù longu facennu pâ main road from furesta to the south of my land. Aìssiru
Follow me, I'll walk, I'll walk you down, more nu ciumi dû
muntagni ca s'unìru ô granni ciumi kilometers south of Carrock. Who knows
c'era nu vadu prufunnu ca putìanu passari, si avìssiru ancora
avìanu I know them, and beyond who knows a trail was pursuing ê flaps of lignu and
at the entrance to the old foreign road. But Beorn had warned them about chiddu
the road was now mostly used in Foddi, while the road in Furesta was still
sentitu, era suvracriciutu e disusatu ntâ lestrema urientali e purtau a 'mpasbabbili
Hun swamps the layers s'avìanu pirdutu pi tantu tempu. The eastern opening has already started
always been long ago south of Lonely Mountain, and avissi partutu
li ancora cu na longa e difficili marcia versu nord quannu arrivaru ô
autru latu. North of Carrock the edge of Mirkwood approached
cunfini dô Granni Ciumi, and even if they are lowered even the Munti
cchiù vicinu, Beorn li cunsigliaò di pigghiari sta strata; pi nu postu di na para di jorna di viaggiu
a nord dû Carrock c'era lu canceddu di nu percorsu picca canusciutu attraversu
Mirkwood was heading almost straight towards the Lonely Mountain.
“I feed them,” said Beorn, “don't dare cross the Granni Ciumi
more than a hundred miles north of Carrock and even closer to my house, it is
good nights! - but I had fast riders; because the raid was carried out
soon cross the hills towards the south and find everything on the edge there
furesta more tagghiariti, and them Warg currunu cchifaster than ask. You still do
cchiù sicuru jiri towards the north, even if you look like you're turningannu cchiù vicinu ô I know
strongholds; pirchì chistu è chiḍḍu ca s'aspittanu cchiù picca, e avrannu lu
cchiù longu giru pi ghiàriti. Go now cchiù quickly boss po!"
Well, now they were riding in silence, galloping together
the land was grassy and smooth, with dark mountains on the left hand, and
In the distance the line of buds that are always very close to the trees. Lu
lu suli had just started punishing them when they started, and soon he was getting better
of gold above the earth ntunnu to iddi. It was difficult to clamp them to follow them
arrè, e quannu avìanu misu tanti chilòmitri ntra iḍḍi e chiḍḍi di Beorn
house accuminciaru a parrari and a cantari n'autra vote and a scurdari lu scuru sentieru dâ furesta ca s'truvava in front. But the sira arrived when twilight and lu arrived
cimi di muntagni lustravanu contra lu tramontu si fìciru n'accampamentu e
I put a guard, and the majority of them were in anguish because of their sleep
the howl of hunting wolves and the cries of goblins arrived.
Even in the morning after dawn the other is bright and fair. There was none
autumn fog covered the earth and the air was cold, but soon it was
lu suli got up russu to Livanti and nebbi scumpareru them, and while you admired him
èrunu still longhi, èrunu n'àutra votes. So I'm going to ride now more than two days ago,
and all the time we don't see anything except grass and ciuri and aceddi and
there are scattered trees, and every now and then some Russian deer are being handled
sat at midday at the ùmmira. For the first time Bilbu saw the antlers of deer
they sprouted out of the long grass, and first they thought there were the dead
branches of the arbuli. Chiḍḍa third sira èranu anxious to push forward, piccì
Beorn said he would have to arrive ô canceddu dâ furesta before lu fourth day, caminavanu still ahead after lu twilight and ntâ nights on lu
moon. As the light faded, Bilbo pinsava ca vidìa luntanu a dritta, oa
missing, the ùmmira form of n'ursu granni ca vagna ntô stissu
directions. But if you dared to speak to Gandalf, he said to you:
"Shut up! Don't worry!"
Every day after that we begin before dawn, even if the night was short.
As soon as I saw the light, I saw it in the mirror
there, or he waited for them comu nu muru nìuru and frowned in front of iḍḍi. Lu
the earth began to rise above and above, and it seemed to the hobbit that there was no silence
began to attracti supra of iḍḍi. Access the menu items. There's nothing there
cerbu; you can't see them without the cousins. Versu lu pumiriggiu avèvanu junciutu
the travails of Mirkwood, and they were almost at their granni
overlapping branches of external trees. I know there are huge and gnarled trunks,
the branches went crooked, the leaves were dark and long. The grass criscìu above you
and more land was growing.
“Ben, here Mirkwood!” said Gandalf. “Lu cchiù granni dî furesti di
lu munnu dû north. I hope you like the wait. Now you have to stop
these little ccizziunal people who have you borrowed 'n loan."
The dwarfs were inclined to lamentarisi pi chistu, but lu magu I told us
they were stupid. “Beorn is not as long as you think and see
It's better to keep them prummisi anyway, since they're not tintu nimicu. Mr. Baggins
the eyes sunnu cchiù nichi tò, if you haven't seen every night after the dark one
granni ursu ca va cu nuatri or ca s'assitta luntanu ntâ luna taliannu lu nostru
fields. No longer are you guarded and guided, but you keep your eyes on him
just ask them. Beorn may be a friend, but he loves them, I know, I arm them as I know them
picciriḍḍi. Don't think what kindnesses I will give you there
the dwarves, the cavaliers, the luntanu and the viloci, nor whoever succeeds you, yes you
circau di purtarili ntâ furesta.”
“And the cavaddu, then?” said Torinu. “Don't talk to me about werewolves.
chiḍḍu arrè."
"Non lu fazzu, picchì non lu mannu."
"And then the tò prumissa?"
"Ci guardu. Nun mannu arrè lu cavaddu, lu cavalcu!"
Allura knew that Gandalf was there there ô limits
of Mirkwood, and èrunu dispirati. But don't worry about it
you'll change the idea.
"Ora l'avìamu fattu prima, quannu sbrcàumu ntô Carrock," iḍḍu
said. "You're no use for discussion. You have, as I told you, some urgent things
luntanu south; and I've already done more trouble with you people in more delays. Nuiautri
putemu ncuntràrisi n'àutra vote first ca everyone finishes, and then n'àutra vote obviously not putemu.
Who depends on your fortune and on your cure and on your sense; and ju sugnu
mannannu lu signuri Baggins cu tia. Vi l'aghju dittu prima ca havi cchiù
Supra iḍḍu of how many you pinned, and you will discover it sooner than that time. Allura shoots
above Bilbo and not even so sad. Take Thorin and the Cumpagnia! Chistu is
I'll give you all the information twice. Think ô tisoriu â fini, and scurdàtisi dû
furesta e lu dragu, comunqui nzinu a dumani matina!”
When he arrived tomorrow morning I said lu stissu again. Dunca now there was
there are no headlight stoppers but allinchiri I ask them for water nta na clear springs ca attruvarunu
close ô cancel dâ furesta, and break them. Distributed there
pacchi cchiù giusti ca putìanu, puru si Bilbo pinzava ca lu sò lottu era
more tired, and we no longer liked the idea of ​​walking more kilometers
and kilomitri cu tu chiḍḍu above the back.
“Don't worry!” I said Torinu. "It will be read too soon. Before
longu aspittu ca tutti auguriamu li nostri pacchi cchiù pisanti, quannu lu manciari accumincia a
scurriri."
Then finally we said goodbye to my pony and left my head
more home. Off iḍḍi trottaru allegri, parinnu assai cuntenti di mettiri la cuda
versu l'ùmmira di Mirkwood. Mentri si nni jìanu, Bilbo putìa aviri
swear to a common thing n'ursu lassau the ùmmira of l'àrburi and you steal
prestu doppu di iḍḍi.
Now Gandalf himself went away. Bilbo sat down on the ground and listened very carefully.
scuntentu and vulìa èssiri cinu ô magu supra lu so cavaḍḍu àutu. Avia
andatu appena dintra la furesta doppu la culazzioni (na assai povira), e avìa
it seemed as dark in the morning as it was at night, and very secretive: “na speci
of taliari and asspittari sintimentu," I said to iḍḍu stissu.
"Ni vìttimu!" ​​said Gandalf to Torinu. "And farewell to all of you, farewell! Drittu attraversu la furesta adesso è tua strata. Don't get off the trail!"
- yes, you'll never find one more and never again
Mirkwood nesciri; and then I don't think about it, or anyone else, ever
ti vìdu n'àutra vota.»
"Avemu veru a passari?" gimiu the hobbit.
“Yes, you!” I said to Magu, “let's fly to the other side.
You have to pass or give up - this search. And don't go to headlights
You dare stop now, Mr. Baggins. I'm ashamed of you anymore.
of chistu. You have to take care of all these dwarves, my dearest," he laughed.
"Ninth!" said Bilbu. "You don't want to say that. You want to say, there's no way
tunnu?"
“There is, if you like me Iri duicentu migghia o cchiù fora dâ to strata
north, and lu double of chiḍḍu south. But then again you won't find a safe path.
There are no safe layers in these parts of the world. Recurdatives you're finished
lu bordu dû sarvàggiu now, and more all types of entertainment unni go.
Before you turn to the north of Mirkwood, you will have reached it
between the slopes of Munti Grigi, and sunnu simpricimenti cu
foddi, foddi and ogres give worse descriptions. First the putìsti
turn 'ntornu ô South, trasissi ntâ terra dû Necrumanti;
and even you, Bilbo, don't use the cuntu stories of ḍḍu streguni nivuru.
Don't let Jiri be near you or neglected places where they are dark
turri! Attachments â pista dâ furesta, maintain your spirit, expire ô better and
with a fear of terrible fortune you can't wait any day and see me again
Longu
Paludi ca s'attròvunu sutta di te, e otri a iḍḍi, auti a Livanti, li
Muntagna sulitaria unni campa lu caru vecchiu Smaug, puru si spero ca non è
you waited for me."
"Sicuru assài cunfurtanti," Thorin roared. "Farewell! Yes
don't come with us, it's better to leave without talking!”
“Goodbye allura, and truly goodbye!” said Gandalf, and iddu vutau I know
cavaddu and cavadau 'n punishers. But you can't stand the color again
the last taste is more greedy. Before going through enough listening holes you will want to know
and I put my hands on the vucca and called them. Sintìru la sò vuci
come cheeky: "Goodbye! Good sites, take care of yourselves - and NOT
LEAVE THE PATH!”
Then you stop and soon you lose sight of it. “O goodbye and go
go!" Grugnuru the dwarves, still get angry and come on
chinu di scantamentu pi pirdìrilu. Ora accuminzau la parti cchiù piriculusa di tutti
lu viaggiu. Ognunu spallava lu pacchettu pisanti e la peddi d'acqua
whoever was there, and was emptied of lights, was bending over the lands
drilled and dived into the fury.
MOSSES AND RAÑU
Camminaru 'n sulu file. L'ingressu dû camminu era comu na speci di arcu
unfortunately it's a sad galliria made of two large trees that are leaning on it,
too old and strangulatu cu l'ivy e 'mpiccatu cu lichens purtari cchiù di nu
pike dark fogs. The walk was tight and wrapped inside and outside
among the trunks. Soon the lights were canceled and the lights were removed
I stopped, and the silence was so close that the feet seemed to be banging
while all the àrburi stuck on top of the iḍḍi and listened.
While my eyes are getting used to the darkness, I can see a little bit more
ogni latu nta na speci di lustru virdi scuru. Ogni tantu nu slanciu
reach suli ca appreciate the fortune of trasiri through four openings in the fogghi
much higher, and even more luck is no longer caught by the graying branches
and branches peeled sutta, stabbed down thin and shiny in front of iḍḍi. But
who was rarely and soon ceased completions.
Ntô lignu cèranu sciarri nivuri. Like Bilbo's accidental curiosity
the eyes get used to seeing them like this
Fora dû I walk and scuppiannu arrè the trunks of the trees. There are even strange noises,
you grunt, shout and hurry away, and get into them
whoever was huddled up without ends spissu nta places ntô funnu dâ furesta; but whoddu ca fics
You can't see the noises. They were so ugly that I saw them
spiders: thick, dark spiders with extraordinarily thick threads, spissu
stinnuta from àrvuru to àrvuru, or ngrannita ntê branches nfiriuri of every latu
of these. Non c'èrunu nuḍḍu stiratu attraversu lu camminu, ma si pirchì
quarchi magìa lu tinìa chiaru, o pi quali autru mutivu non putìanu pinzari.
It wasn't that long before I began to hate the fury of common choirs
You hated the Foddi tunnels, and it seemed like they still gave us a little more hope
of qualigghiè fines. But they went on and on and on, much later there were more sick people
sight of suli and dû celu, and ansiàvanu the sensations of twenty above them I know
do it. There was no movement of air above the roof of the storm, and
he was always still and dark and snorting. Puru li nani lu sintìanu, who
eranu abbituati a fari li tunnel e vivìanu certain votes pi tantu tempu senza li
dû suli lights; but the hobbit, we like the holes more make a house but not
the more summers passed, we felt like we were suffocating slowly.
You make them worse at night. Allura pointed out dark, not chiḍḍu ca tu
call scuru, but really scuru: you can't see anything.
Bilbo asks you to slam your hand in front of him, but don't let him see you
everyone. Well, maybe it's not true to say that you can't see anything: iddi
let's see the eyes. Durmiunu all squeezes nzèmmula, and lu pigghiàvanu a turnu
taliari; and when it was Bilbo's turn, he saw decades ago
scuru ntunnu a iddi, and certain votes for yellow or Russian or green eyes
he stared at him for a little while, and then he slowly faded and
scumpariri and slowly tick off another vote nta n'other postu. And certain votes
branches sparkled just above iḍḍu; and who was it
cchiù scaryusu. But we like the eye, it's picca, it's pale horrors
a species of bulbous eyes. “The eyes of nzetti”, he thought, “not the eyes of l'armali, sulu iḍḍi
sunnu assái troppu granni."
Even if it's not yet very friddu, about adding the fires of the clock ê
nights, but soon we will give up. Prìa purtari cintinara and
cintinara d'occhi tutti 'ntornu a iddi, puru si li criaturi, qualunque fussiru,
they were careful not to let go of them, never to let them down, I know their bodies are small
flames. Even worse purtau migghiara of dark gray palummeddi and niuri,
four of an almost granni comu la tò hand, slamnnu and vurricannu ntunnu a l'aricchi.
Don't putìanu suppurtari mancu chiḍḍu, nor huge bats, niuri comu nu cappeddu; hook
give up the fires and sit at night and put me up against the enormous strèusa
dark.
All this continued, as it seemed to the hobbit centuries after centuries; and iddu
I was always hungry, but I was very careful because I had enough.
Macari accussì, comu li jorna siguìvanu li jorna, e ancora la furesta pareva proprio la stissa,
accuminciaru to be anxious. The handfuls didn't last forever: it was in fact
already accuminciannu a sissiri vasci. Circaru of shooting is sciuri, and iddi
sprecaru assài frècci prima di arrinèsciri a purtari una ntô camminu.
But when it rusted, it turned out to be horrible to taste, and I didn't shoot anymore
squirrels.
Avìanu sites puru iḍḍi, because they don't have too much water, and that's all there
tempu ca nun avìanu seen neither spring nor torrents. Who was there when I was there
nu jornu attruvarunu lu camminu bluccatu di n'acqua currenti. Scurrìa vilocimenti
and strong but not very large on the other side of the road, and it was niuru, or
He looked at her darkly. It was good that Beorn had warned her against it,
or the avìssiru bivutu, whatever the culuri were, and chiniru na picca di
I know they have emptied themselves on the shore. How was pinzaru sulu how to cross
without bathing you don't feel like water. There were no bridges
lignu attraversu, ma s'avìa marciutu e cascatu lassannu sulu li pali rutti vicinu
the bank.
Bilbu, 'nginocchiatu supra lu bordu e guardannu avanti, shouted: “C'è na varca
against the distant shore! Now since there can't be anyone who leaves!”
“Quantu luntanu penzi ca è?” called Thorin, pirchì ora lu sapianu
Bilbo had his eyes wide open among the ḍḍi.
"It's not far. I didn't have to be more than two meters away."
– «Twelve jatti! I would have had to clamp about at least thirty, but my eyes
not seen as they used to be a hundred years ago. Another twelve meters is common
good common nu chilòmitru. We don't have to jump and we don't dare go to walk or walk."
“Can any of you throw a rope?”
– «Who do you serve? The gate is safe if you are tied up, even if you don't
putìa aggiùnciri, what the doubt."
“Non cridu ca è ligatu,” said Bilbo, “puru si di sicuru nun sugnu sicuru
these lights; but it seems to me that you were just spotted on the shore,
whoever is vasciu owns ddà unni lu percorsu scinni nta the water.”
“Dori is the strong one, but Fili is the down wine guy and you still have the best one
"seen," said Thorin. "I came here to Fili, and I saw the passage of the lord
Sta parrannu Baggins."
Fili pinzava ca putìa; quinni quannu avìa fissatu pi tantu tempu pi aviri n'idèa
of directions, the others purtaru us a rope. Avìanu several cu
there, and at the tip of lu cchiù longu nfiscavanu unu of the great irons
hooks ca avìanu usatu pi pigghiari I know bags and straps above I know them
spaddi. Fili piggiò chista 'n manual, the balance more nu secunnu, and then
the jittàu 'ntraversu lu ciumi.
Splash the water! “It's not long enough!” I said Bilbo what was it
they looked forward. “Nu paru di pedi e l'avìssiru lassatu cadiri supra a
crosses it. Try another vote. Don't think about it, the magic is strong enough to cause more harm
you, tuck yourself on a vagnato rope pike."
Fili pigghiau lu hook when the first pulls it back, whoever doubts everyone
lu stissu. This time he threw it with great strength.
"Stabbili!" said Bilbo, “you threw it right there
leave now. He will withdraw it carefully." Fili pulled the rope back slowly, and
doppu na picca di tempu Bilbu dici: “Attenti! Sta curcata supra la varca; speramu ca lu
ganciu pigghiarà.”
Lu fici. The rope snapped, and Fili pulled in vain. Kili came to help us,
and then Oin and Gloin. Tiravanu and tiravanu, and suddenly they all fell
above them you swords. Bilbo was on guard, however, he tightened the rope,
and some piece of stick arrives at Varchetta niura to come in a hurry
attraversu lu turrenti. "Help!" he shouted, and Balin was really in the best mood
crosses it before floating ntâ currenti.
"It was tied after all," I said iḍḍu, taliannu lu pitturi sfracicatu ca era
we still hang on. – «It was a good print run, little guys; and no good work approx
our rope was stronger.”
“Who will cross first?” called Bilbu.
“Fazzu,” said Thorin, “and thou come cu mia, and Fili and Balin.
Who is the one who crosses it putissi teniri â vote. Doppu di chissu Kili and Oin e
Gloin and Dori; near Ori and Nori, Bifur and Bofur; and the ùrtimu Dwalin e
Bombur.»
"I'm always the urtimu and I don't like you," I said Bombur. “It's quarchdunu
today is lu turnu di làutru."
«You don't have to be so fat. Like yes, you have to be the last one
caricu di travers cchiù leggiu. Don't start complaining against orders, or anything strange
it will happen to you.”
"There are no oars. How do you go and push the crossing back ô
distant shore?” called the hobbit.
“Give me another length of rope and another hook”, I said Fili, and when
l'avìanu priparatu, lu jittàu ntô dark in front and àutu comu iddu
I might as well throw it away. Since I don't fall for it, I'll win the day before
'ncapu them branches. “Come now,” I said Fili, “and one of you pulls him up
corda ca è 'ncapu a n'àrvuru di l'autra parti. Unu di l'àutri havi a mantèniri
keep the hook that we used in the beginning, and when we are sure of the other side
you can grab her, and you can pull the gate back.”
In this way everyone rushes to the safe distant shore through the enchantment
ciumisteḍḍu. Dwalin had just left the twisted rope before he reached it, and
Bombur (still lamintannu) was getting closer, when there were four bad things
succidìu. There was no sound of flying hooves as I walked ahead. Out of
the dark one arrived suddenly in the shape of a cervu ca vulava. Si caricau ntô
dwarfs and peeled them above, then curled up pi nu saltu. Altu is
he jumped and freed the water with nu saltu putenti. But he never arrived
autru latu 'n security. Thorin was the only one who had tinutu li pedi e li so
lies. As soon as they disembarked, you bent your bow and placed the arrow on it
casu cumparìu nu guardianu huddled at the entrance. Now mannau nu viloci e
Surely shoot the beast that jumped. When he reached the shore ahead, he stumbled.
I admire it and swallow it, but soon I hear the sound of clogs
it falters and then stops.
Prima di putiri gridari pi ludari lu colpu, comunque, nu lamentu tirribbili
I put all the pinseri of deer meat on Bilbo's head. “Bumbur havi
you fell for it! Bombur sta affunnannu!” he called.
avìa sulu nu pedi 'n terra quannu lu cervu ci s'appicciò, e salta
above iddu. Avìa 'ncazzatu, spinnennu the crossing along the shore, and
then he returned to the dark water, his hands slipped away from the slime
radicachi ô bordu, mentri la varca s'allargava pianu pianu e scumparìu.
Vidìanu still lu capucciu above the water when they flow towards him
vanca. Subbitu, throw us a rope with a hook. The hand pressed us
it, and he pulled it to the shore. It was wet with them understood 'nzinu to them boots,
for sure, but it wasn't worse. Quannu lu misiru ntâ riva iḍḍu
he was already asleep, with his hand gripping the rope so tightly
no one could pigghiari by hand; and addurmintatu arrested everyone
putìanu fari.
Iḍḍi stavanu ancora supra di iḍḍu, ammaliannu la so mala furtuna, e chiḍḍa di Bombur
torpidity, and the mintsnissi of loss of crossing ca lu rinnìu mpussìbbili
more the shifts and schedules lu cervu, quannu si nni accurgìru dû
suffiu scuro di corna ntô lignu e lu sonu comu di cani ca s'affaccianu luntanu.
Allura tutti si zittiru; e mentri s'assittàvanu paria ca putìanu sintiri lu
scrùsciu di na granni caccia ca passava a nord dû camminu, puru si non vidìanu
sign of this.
Ccà si pusàru pi tantu tempu e non osaru fari nu muvimentu.
Bombur durmìu cu no surrisu ntâ make us fat, anyway we don't need to frigàssi cchiù
tutti li guai ca li 'nfacciavanu. Di colpu supra lu camminu davanti cumparìu
four cervu jancu, nu cervu and deer janchi comu la nivi comu l'avìa statu lu cervu
dark. Lucidìanu ntâ l'ùmmiri. First ca Thorin putìa shouti tri
dî nani avìanu leapt 'n pedi and melted the arrows dî sò
arches. Nuḍḍu seemed to find the sign. The cervu si vutau e scumparìu ntô
àrburi tantu silenziusu comu avìanu vinutu, e 'n vanu li nani sparàvanu li sò
frècci doppu di iḍḍi.
"Sign! Sign!" Torinu shouted; but it was too late, the dwarfs were excited
avìanu sprecatu l'urtimi frècci, e ora l'archi ca ci avìa datu Beorn
they were useless.
There were some sad nights, and the sadness came again
cchiù prufunnamenti supra of the following years. Avìanu attravirsatu lu ncantatu
ciumisteḍḍu; but further along the path it seemed that one was escaping just like before, and that was it
the wild girl doesn't putìanu see no canciamentu. And yet if I had known it, I would have known it a lot
and cunziddiratu lu significatu dâ hunting and dû cervu jancu ca avìa
cumpareru ntô I'm walking, avìssiru saputu ca â fini èranu
they drew towards the eastern border, and soon arrived, yes iḍḍi
avìssiru pututu maintain the care and the spiranza, at the trees and the thinnest places
unni arrived n'àutra vote the lights dû suli.
But those who don't know it, and they'll get fat from Pisanti
Bombur's body, ca avìanu a purtari cu iḍḍi megghiu
putìa, pigghiannu lu completed tired in turn of four each while the others
cunnivìru li sò pacchi. Si chisti nun avìssiru addivintatu tutti troppu liggeri nta l'urtimi
jorna, nun l'avìssiru mai arrinisciutu; ma un addurmintatu e surridenti
Bombur was no scanciu scarce more parcels bent over of manchari puru si pisanti. No
a few days there was no moment when every practice there wasn't any tip or food
vippita. Nothing healthy putìanu vìdiri crisciri ntô lignu, sulu
funci and herbs with clear scents and unpleasant odors.
About four days from the torrents you can't reach the Hun parts
the majority of l'àrburi is ranu beech trees. Ntô princìpiu èranu inclined to be accommodated
dû canciamentu, pirchì ccà nun c'era suttavuscu e l'ùmmira nun c'era
accussì prufunna. There were bright lights in the city, and in certain places there were
I saw a certain distance from each latu dû percorsu. Eppuru la luci mustrava sulu
the endless rows of straight grey trunks like the pillars of enormous quartz
sala dû crepusculu. There was no air and no wind, but there was no sadness
sonu. Quarchi fogghia arrivau friscannu pi ricurdari ca fora
autumn was coming. My feet were getting ruffled among the dead leaves of
countless other autumns ca s'avìanu spustatu supra li rivi dû cminu dû
prufunni Russian furesta carpets.
Bombur still lasts and gets very tired. Let's vote for them
disturbing laughter. Quarchi votes there was puru lu cantu di luntanu. Lu
the laughter was the laughter of vuci beddi not of foddi, and lu cantu was
bedda, but I'm scared and strange, and I don't care,
chiuttostu si nni jeru di chiḍḍi parti cu chiḍḍa forza ca avìanu lassatu.
Dui jorna doppu attruvaru lu camminu ca jiva versu sutta, e prima di tantu tempu
eranu ntâ na vaddi china di quasi interamenti di na putenti criscita di querci.
“Is there no end to this sick fury?” said Torinu. “Someone had a
Acchiana above the roof and I saw you poke your head above the roof and take a look
tunnu. The only way is to choose the route that is above the path."
Surely "someone" means Bilbo. He scigghieru, because he is more than
Which way is the mountaineer supposed to put his head above the car's fog, and take care of him
you must be quite liggiru to purtarilu the most self-sufficient and supple branches.
Mr. Baggins had never had much practice climbing up the arbuli, but he
he raised ntê branches cchiù vasci di nu cherzu enormous ca criscìa
I really don't walk, and above I'm ready to get better. Spinciù I know
strata through the intertwined branches with many slaps in the eye; it was 'nvirditu
and you peeled off old glimpses of larger branches; cchiù di na vote iddu
scippau and got caught just in time; and â fini, doppu nu scaryu
fight in a difficult place, it seemed like there was no one there
smaller branches, he approached â summità. All the time we were wondering yes
there are li tarantuli nta l'àrvuru, and as it was in scìnniri n'àutra votes
(tranní ca càdennu).
At the end he popped his head above the roof of fogghi, and then iḍḍu
attruvau li ragnu tutti boni. Ma èranu sulu picciriddi di grannizza urdinaria, e
it was after the farfagghi. Bilbo's eyes were almost blind
lights. Sintìa li nani ca ci gridavanu di luntanu sutta, ma iḍḍu
you don't have to reply, sulu teaniri and lampàri. Lu suli shone brightly,
and it was a time before they fed. Quannu potti, vitti tutti
ntunnu a iḍḍu nu seas of dark virdi, arruffatu ccà and ddà dâ brisa; And
there was a cintinara of butterflies in all the bans. Aspettu ca foru na speci di
“mpiraturi viola”, a butterfly that loves the tops of oak trees, but these
nun èranu viola pi nenti, èranu nu nìuru scuru scuru villutu senza nuddu
signature of vìdiri.
He looked at the “nivuri mpiratura” for more time, and was delighted by the sensations
dû brisu ntê capiddi and ntâ facci; but â finish them shouting
nani, ca ora stàvanu simpricimenti stampannu cu l'impazzienza sutta,
We'll take care of real business. It wasn't good. Look at how many iddu
perhaps, you couldn't see the end of the trees and fogghi in any new direction. Suu
choirs, when you see the lights and feel them
twenty, he quickly stopped walking: there was no more timely tip than sutta.
'In reality, as I told you, it will never be far from the edge of the furesta;
and if Bilbu avìssi had lu without vidirilu, the àrvuru ca iddu avìa acchianatu,
even though she had had more of an idea, she was close to the funnu of a wide one,
right around the top of the trees they all seemed to swell like the edges of
a large bowl, and he didn't expect to see how long the storm lasted. Still
not lu vitti, e scinnìu chinu of desperation. He arrived ô
Funnu n'autra vote â fini, scratch, càvuru, and miserable, and you can't see them
which thing didn't darken when it arrived. I have a quick relationship with you
autri miserable comu iḍḍu.
“The forest goes on and on and on and on in all directions!
Chiddu ca facìamu? And who do you serve werehobbits!” iḍḍi
he shouted, I know how much it was to blame. We didn't mind tuppence dû
let's do it, and we'll know what to do when I told us
nice breeze, ca èranu troppu pisanti pi acchianari e sintiri.
Chiḍḍa nights manciaru the last scraps and crumbs of handfuls; and so on
in the morning when we woke up the first thing about nutaru was when we woke up
still hungry, and the next thing was ca chiovìa and ca
here and there the drop was falling hard on the stormy floor. Approx
sulu li recurdò ca puru iḍḍi avìanu dry sites, without headlights
qualunchi cosa p'allibbiàrili: non si po' astutari na siti tirrìbbili addittannu
sutta giant oaks and wait for a drop of casu that falls on your tongue. Lu
the scrap of cunfortu had arrived there in the private way of Bombur.
He suddenly slunk away and sat down and scratched his head. Don't worry
Hun understandings were no longer there, no longer did they feel so hungry; pirchì avia
scurdàru tuttu c'avìa succidutu di quannu accuminciaru lu viaggiu
It was a May morning a long time ago. The last thing he remembered was the
party at the hobbit's house, and they had great difficulty in making it
cridiri â sò story of all the adventures ca avìanu avutu of tannu.
When we heard there wasn't any mancheri, let's sit down and chiancìu, pirchì
we felt very weak and wavering in the first place. "I'll never wake up again!" iḍḍu
he called. "Avìa sonni accussì beddi. Sunnava ca caminava nta nu
you're the one who's the one who's the one, you're the one who twists them on the arvuli and lights them
branches swing and fires burn more earth; and there it was
a great party that goes on, that goes on more and more. Nu re dû vuscu era ddà cu nu
curuna di fogghi, and there was a cheerful song, and no one could tell or
Discrìviri them so that there are more tips and biviri.”
"There is no need for warning," said Thorin. “In fact, you can't say anything about it
something else, it's better to stay mutu. We are quite angry
how it is. If you don't wake up, I'll leave you there
idiotic sleeps ntâ furesta; no joke anymore purtari puru doppu simani di
short cumuli.”
Now there were no headlights but tighten the seat belts no more
empty stomachs, and they raise their bags and empty bags, and they walk
the track without great hope of arriving never ends before lying down
down and die of hunger. Whoever makes it all the same day, it's very suitable
and tired; while Bombur continued to lamintarisi ca li jammi nun purtavanu
he and he wanted to lie down and sleep.
“No you don't do that!” I said. “Lassati ca li gammi pigghianu I know you're leaving, avemu
I've given you long enough."
Tuttu lu stissu, all'improvisu rifiò di fari nu passu avanti e si lance
'n terra. "Go ahead, if you need it," I said to him. “Go ahead and lie down here
and sleep and sunnari of handfuls, if not lu pozzu pigghiari in any other way. I hope not
wake up another time.”
Nta ddu mumentu propriu Balin, ca era un pocu avanti, chiò:
"Who was chiḍḍu? Pinzava ca vitti nu flash of lights ntâ furesta."
I'll look at everyone, and at a long distance, just like we'll see no Russians
sparkling ntô dark; then n'àutru and n'àutru niscìu near iḍḍu. Even
Bombur stood up, and then he was in a hurry, without importing he was a troll or
foddi. The lights were in front of me and the way is missing, and
quannu â fini l'avìanu tiratu a liveddu, paria chiaru ca li torci e
The fires burn the trees, but they are very far from the trail.
"Pari ca li me sonni s'avìssiru a fari veru," Bombur snorted
above mentioned. Go straight ahead after the lights.
But the others remember too much the warnings of magu and of
Biurnu.
"A party wouldn't be good if we never got back alive," I said.
Turin.
"But without a party we won't be alive anymore," I said.
Bombur e Bilbo foru d'accordu cu iḍḍu. Si contestaru supra a chistu
I'll stop and I'll stop for as long as I can, until when we agree to the end of
Weres don't find spies, get closer to the lights and you'll discover something much higher
iḍḍi. But then we can't get along with the man who is there: we'll stop talking
I'm anxious to be more confident and never find any more friends.
At the end of the day, no longer worried, let the family tell you, let's go Bombur
cuntinuò a scrìviri tutti li cosi boni ca si manciavanu, secunnu
lu sò sonnu, ntâ celebration of lignu; so everyone left the walk and dived in
the wild nzèmmula.
Doppu na good parts of stripers and stripers, sbirraru ntunnu ô
trunchi and looked nta na chiana unni avìanu statu tagged quarchi àrvuru and lu
leveled ground. There are many people there, people who wait for elfin, all of them
vistutu of virdi and browns and assittatu above sawed anecdotes of l'arbuli tagged n
no big circus. 'N menzu in iddi there was a fire and there were torches
fissatu a quarchi àrvuru ntunnu; ma vista cchiù splèndida di tutti:
happy manciavanu and bivìanu and ridìanu.
The smell of roasted meat was so enchanting, without any hint of
each one of us stood up and shuffled forward.
the anecdo cu the only idea of ​​calling pi mancheri. As soon as he leaves
first let's go to Chiana and all the lights will be as cunning as magic.
Quarchi d'unu said nu calciu ô focu e iḍḍu salìu 'n rockets of sparkling sparkles and
scumpariu. Yes pirderunta nu dark cumpritamenti without lights and no putìanu
Puru truvàrisi l'u cu l'àutru, no more so much time. After that I screwed up
shatterings ntô dark, falling on top of the trunks, it embarks nta the trees and
they screamed and called nzinu to how many times they would come to wake up, all the furesta pi
kilomitri, â fini arrinisceru to cugghirisi 'n fasciu and to cuntari
iḍḍi stissi ô toccu. A ddu tempu s'avìanu, of course, enough scurdàtu ntô 1990
what directions was he walking, and foru all pirduti without hope, at least nzinu to
morning.
There was nothing else who knew but to settle down for the last few nights
èranu; I don't dare mancu circari pi land scraps of manciari pi
fear of being separated from another time. But I never stayed here longer, and
Bilbo was just sleeping when Dori had his turn of taliari
first, I said in a loud whisper:
“Nesciunu n'àutra lights them from above, and there are sunnu cchiù di
never of iḍḍi.”
Everyone jumped up. Well, for sure, not far away there are some of them
twinkling lights, and the voices and laughter sounded quite clearly.
Si strinciunu pianu pianu versu iḍḍi, nta na sula fila, ognunu tuccannu lu schienu di
chiḍḍa in front. When Thorin approached I said: "Don't come forward anyone
tempu! Nuḍḍu s'havi a sciogghiri di ammucciari finu a quannu non dicu. Mannu lu signuri Baggins sulu
before parrari cu iḍḍi. They don't scare us... ("It's mine
of iḍḍi?” Bilbo thought) - and in any case I hope they don't do anything
sfacciatu pi iḍḍu."
When he arrives at the edge of the circle of lights, Bilbo will spin
suddenly stopped. Before aviri time of sciddicari above lu sò aneddu, s'incòppiu
forward ntô cu and dî torci. It wasn't good. Out of here
all the lights don't turn and darken cumpletu cadìu.
Yes, before it was difficult to recover, it was much worse
this vote. And I simply can't find the hobbit. Each vote approx
cuntaru iḍḍi stissi ca facìa sulu tridici. He shouted and called: “Bilbu
Sacks! Hobbits! You wide-eyed hobbit! Say hello! hobbit, ti cunfùstu, huns
Are you?" and so on, but there was no response.
They just gave up, when Dori asked him
pure luck. Ntô scuru cadìu supra chiddu ca pinzava fussi nu troncu, e attruvau
it was the hobbit arricugghiutu addurmintatu. We fly a munzeddu of tremuli pi arrisvìgghiari
him, and when he was awake it wasn't any more.
"Avìa nu sonnu accussì beḍḍu," he lamented, "tuttu chiḍḍu di aviri nu
the dinner was even better."
"Bonu celu! jìu comu a Bombur", I said «Don't tell us
above them sleep. They don't sleep well and they don't put them cunnivìdiri."
"I'm the best one who can find those beastly posts," mummuriàu,
as they were close to Nani and around the city of Durmiri and Truvari
n'autra vota lu sò sonnu. Ma chiḍḍa non era l'ùrtima luci ntâ furesta. Cchiù tardu
when the nights were getting older, Kili who looked at allura,
I won and I raised them all again, I said:
“There's a regular focus of lights that doesn't accumulate, around
torches and many fires arose when they were suddenly brought together and more magic. AND
listen to the song and the harp!”
Doppu aviri minchiatu e ascultatu pi nu pocu, attruvaru ca nun putìanu risistiri
He wants to get closer and try not to help you. Supra si nni jeru n'autra votes;
and this time the result was disastrous. The party that was now a victim was
bigger and more magnificent than before; and a long line of
li festi s'assittaru nu re dû vuscu cu na curuna di fogghi supra li capiddi d'oru,
much like Bombur had written the figure as if he were sleeping. The elves
the people passed the bowls from hand to hand and through the fires, and four of a
arpavanu and many cantavanu. Li sò capiddi lucenti èranu 'ntrizzati cu
ciuri; gemmi virdi and janchi scintillavanu above the cuddari and the belts; And
I know faces and I know songs and songs bowed with joy. Strong and clear and just
èrunu chiḍḍi canzuna, and Thorin trasìu ntô menzu di iḍḍi.
The silence now falls apart from the pale one. Not all the lights. You focus them
jumped up in the cloudy fumes. Ciniri and Ciniri were in his eyes
dwarves, and the little lignu bows and wants to chianciri and shout.
Bilbo found himself going round and round (as he was pinzava) and
call and call: “Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, Gloin, Fili, Kili, Bombur, Bifur,
Bofur, Dwalin, Balin, Thorin Oakenshield”, while people would not see
or sintiri ca facìanu lu stissu ntunnu a iḍḍu (cu n'occasional "Bilbo!"
throw it in). But the shouts of others are always ahead and faded, and
even yes doppu no little we'll talk about it and scream and chianci more
aiutu ntâ luntananza, tuttu lu scrùsciu â fini muriu subbitu, e iddu fu lassatu
there was no complete silence and no darkness.
It was a very miserable moment. But soon I know
menti ca nun era bonu pruvari a fari nenti nzinu a quannu arrivau lu jornu cu quarchidunu
small lights, and quite useless the more you mess around the more you get tired
naked spiranza of nuḍḍa culazzioni pi revivirilu. Allura let's see what I know about them
ritornu a n'àrvuru, e non più l'uritima vota cadìu a pinzari ô sò luntanu
hobbit-hole where I know the dispensers. It was prufunnu ntê pinseri dû bacon
and eggs and toasts and butter when he sintìa quarchi cosa ca lu tuccava.
Quarchi common thing a strong sticky rope was against the left hand, and quann
circau di mòvirisi attruvau ca li jammi èranu già avvolti nta lu stissu
roba, accussì ca quannu s'alzò cadìu supra.
Allura lu granni tarantulu, ca l'avìa mpignatu a ligàrilu while chiddu was sleeping,
I came back and won. Let's see the thing
eyes, but he could feel the piluusi jammi while he was struggling to win them so abbuminabbili
fili ntunnu and ntunnu to iddu. It was fortunate that the senses had come to fruition
ntô tempu. Soon he couldn't move anymore. As it was, come on
na cummattimenta expired before essiri libbiratu. I beat the creature with my hand
- stava circannu di avvilinàrilu pi tènirilu mutu, comu fannu li ragnu nichi
Vula, nzinu when he remembered his sword and threw it out. Allura spidered
he jumped back, and at the time he had to cut his loose legs. Then he did
girari piattacco. Lu ragnu chiaramenti non era abbituatu a cosi ca purtavanu accussì
sting your sides, or go to jittari soon. Bilbu arrived at
first I put my eyes on you and I put my eyes on you.
Allura looked crazy and jumped and danced and threw them in a horrible way
fools, let's not wait until we kill him with another blow; and then cadìu and
he didn't think about anything more in the meantime.
There was the usual dark gray lights dû jornu dâ furesta ntunnu a iḍḍu quannu iḍḍu
vinni ê so sensi. Lu ragnu era mortu vicinu a iddu, e la so spata
era macchiatu di nìuru. Nta quarchi manera l'uccisioni dû ragnu gigantiscu, tuttu sulu di
iddu stissu ô dark without the help of magu or dî nani or
some others, fics na great differences ô Mr Baggins. It sounds like something different
pirsuna, and very proud and daring nunustanti with vacant stomachs, as iḍḍu
I dried the sword on the grass and put it back in its sheath.
"I'll give you a name," I told him, "and I'll call you Sting."
After that you set off more exploratory. The wild one was dark and silent, but
clarifications, first of all, I know them as friends, but it's not likely that they'll be there
èssiri assái luntani, a menu ca nun fussiru stati fatti priggiuneri di l'elfi (o peggiu
so). Bilbo sintìa ca nun era sicuru urlari, e arristau pi tantu tempu
to call in which directions the path was taken, and in which directions it had to
go and look after the dwarves first.
“Oh! Why don't we remember Beorn's cunsigghi and Gandalf's chiḍḍi!” iḍḍu
he lamented. – «Who will be rude to us now! No! Vulìssiru sulu ca fùssiru nui: it is
horrible esseri sulu."
Â fini fici n'ipòtisi cchiù bona ca putìa ntâ directions of
whoever shouts for help will have arrived ntâ nights - and more luck (born
cu na good parts) pinsò cchiù or menu right, as you can see.
After making decisions, he takes refuge in more cunning. Hobbits
sunnu sperti ntâ tranquillity, suprattuttu ntê ligni, comu vi dissi già;
Puru Bilbo had stolen the story before starting. Here I go
I saw them neither saw nor heard them coming.
He had slipped away furtively from a certain distance when he noticed
postu di fitta ùmmira nìura davanti a iddu, nìuru puru pi ddu voscu, comu
no piece of menzannotti that was ever removed. As he approached,
vitti ca era fatta di ragnu unu darreri e supra e ngricciati
cu n'autru. Of colpu vitti puru iddu, there are huge spiders and
horrible attendants on the branches above iddu, and aneddu o nuddu aneddu iddu trimava
cu paura ca lu scuprissiru. Stannu arrè a n'àrvuru taliava
no group of people more than a little time, and then no silence and no quiet again
lignu si understand that these waste creations will seem like one
no other. I know there are some types of strips and sibbitu, but I putìa
expose a lot of words to say. Parràvanu dû
dwarfs!
"It was a tough fight, but it was worth it," I said. “Who spissu ugly
They have to be sure, but there's no good stuff inside.”
“Iè, fann manciari boni, quann s'hannu 'mpiccatu nu pocu,” I said n'àutru.
"Don't hang around too long," I said again. “I'm not as fat as I am
putissi èssiri. Nun ci nni stai nutriennu troppu bonu ùrtimamenti, avissi a pinsari."
“Kill them, say,” sibbìu nu quartu; “Kill them now and hang them dead soon
nu pocu di tempu.»
“Now they are dead, I guarantee,” I said first. "Chi nun sunnu. Iu
vitti unu ca was affruntannu just now. As soon as the other one arrives, I'll have to say it later
nu sonnu beddu d'api. Ti lu mustru.»
Who knows, one of the fat spiders curls along the rope until you reach the duzzina
bundles 'hanged' in a row of nu ramu àutu. Bilbo was urruritu now
whoever noticed them first thought about how they came to unravel the sight, the more they could see
pedi nanu ca sprout out of the ropes of quarchs fasciu, or ccà
and there is the tip of a nose, or a pizzuddu of a beard or a cap.
A lu cchiù fatu of these fasci lu ragnu si nni iu: "It's lu poviru old Bombur,
Scumettu," pinsò Bilbo, e fici nu pizzicu forti ô nasu ca spuntava fora.
era n'urlu muffutu dintra, e nu pedi sparò e detti nu calciu drittu ô ragnu
and hard. There was still life in Bombur. There was no scrùsciu comu lu
calciu di un palluni sciaccatu, e lu ragnu arraggiatu cadìu di lu ramu,
sulu pigghiannusi cû so filu just 'n tempu.
The author laughed. “You reached,” he said, “the flesh is alive
and kick them!”
“We'll finish it soon,” hissed the angry ragnu who was getting rich
supra lu ramu.
Bilbo realized that he had arrived at the moment when he started to figure out something. Iḍḍu
he could not rise up towards the brutes and there was no fire; but circannu
about vitti can nta stu postu cèranu many petri curcati nta chiddu
it seemed like he was a water cursu now safe. Bilbo was not hit fair enough
ccu na petra, and you don't want to be there for that long to get a smooth bed from anywhere
a ca was welcoming to us in the first place. Of picciutteddu lu tiru di petri was practiced
to them like this, nzinu to quannu the rabbits and the squirrels, and even the aceddi, we will know from the same way
viloci comu lu lampu si lu vidìanu schianari; and even crisciutu still had it
passava na parti dû sò tempu a li quoits, lanciannu li frecci, sparannu â bacchetta,
bowls, novi pins and others play calmly dû tipu of mirari and lancers:
in fact you could do many things, in addition to blowing smoke anecdotes, dumannannu
puzzles and cooking, ca nun haiu avutu tempu di cuntariti. Nun cun è
now now. While Iddu was peeping the petri, the tarantulu went to Bombur,
e prestu fussi mortu. Nta chiḍḍu mumentu Bilbo lance. La petra
I hit the spider on the head, and he fell without knowing the truth,
flop to the ground, with all their legs curled.
The stone next to it was falling through the great rites, it was breaking the cords,
and they took away the spider that was sitting there, bang, dead. Double who knows
there was a granny cumming in Ragnu's ass, and he forgot about it
nani pi nu little, I can tell you. Not putìanu see Bilbo, but putìanu
Fari n'iPotisi bona dâ dirizzioni di unni vinìanu li petri. Comm
viloci comu lu lampu arriveru currennu and sciarriànnusi towards the hobbit,
we threw the long threads in all directions, even when the air seemed bent
trappi ca s'unnanu.
Bilbo, comunque, prestu si scippau nna nu postu diversu. Vinni l'idea
to the purest iddu the furious tarantuli always be there for a long time
dwarves, yes; make them more curious, enthusiastic and angry all at once.
When about fifty of them arrived first, then
he threw n'autri petri to chisti, and to àutri ca s'avìanu firmatu arrè;
then he danced among the trees and began to sing a song more arraggiàrili and
bring them all near iddu, and even more make you feel the way you know the nani.
Here's who sang:
Old fat spider that doesn't turn around!
The old fat spider can't see me!
 Attack! Attack!
 Don't stop,
Sign up and look for me?
Old Tomnoddy, all big body,
Old man Tomnoddy can't spy on me!
 Attack! Attack!
 You're falling down!
You will never press me above lu to àrvuru!
It's not very good perhaps, but then you have to think about it again
Iḍḍu stissu invents it, above the spurtu of nu mumentu assài streusu. Facìa chiddu ca iḍḍu
whatever way it is. While he sang, he threw some petri and stamped.
Practically all of them ragnu dû postu cci vinniru near: four of a cadìu ô
terra, autri currìanu longu li rami, oscillavanu d'àrvuru a àrvuru, o lanciavanu
new chords within the dark spaces. Facìanu lu so scrùsciu much faster than
s'avìa privatistu. Èranu assài arraggiati. Bastanza a parti dî petri
We've never liked the spider before, it's called Attercop, and Tomnoddy is of course
'nsultannu a nuddu.
Off Bilbo si scampò nta nu locu novu, ma assài ragnu avìanu cursu
now at different points dâ chiana unni vivìanu, and èranu 'mpigliati
spinning rites not all you sweep them among the stems of the arvuru. Very early
the hobbit fussi pigghiatu di na ricinzzioni spissa di tutti ntunnu a iḍḍu, ca a
at least it was ragnu's idea. Stannu now 'n menzu â hunting and
streamers Bilbo took care of himself and began a new song:
Lazy Lob and Crazy Cob
stannu tissennu riti pi ventrmi.
Sugnu very cchiù leaders of the other flesh,
but you still can't find me!
Here I am, little fly;
you are fat and lazy.
Not a bit 'ntrapular, just pruvati,
ntê to raggi pazzi.
Cu chistu si vutau e attruvau ca l'ùrtimu spazziu between two àrburi àuti
I had been closed with some rites, but luckily not the right rites, on the granni
strands of ragnu rope duppiu spissuri currunu hurry forward and back
from trunk to trunk. No one knows the sword. He tagged the wires to
pieces and partìu cantannu.
Li ragnu vidèru la spata, puru si nun penzu ca sapianu chi era
it was, and suddenly the whole group of people quickly arrived near the hobbit
longu the earth and the branches, the gammi pilusi unniàvanu, pinni and rows
they splashed, their eyes popped out, drooping with foam and rays. He siguìru ntô
furesta nzinu a quann Bilbo annatu annatu nzinu a quann he dared. Allura cchiù tranquillu di nu surci
he snubbed himself.
Let's have a good time, let's know, before the spiders get disgusted
and turnaru ê so' àrburi unni èranu 'hang the dwarves. Nto
ntô frattiempu appi them to sarvari. The part cchiù dyed dû travagghiu was raised
supra lu ramu longu unni li fasci s'anu to melt. Don't assume ca iḍḍu
l'avìssi arrinisciutu, si nu taràntulu nun avissi pi furtuna lassatu appizzatu na corda
jusu; cu lu sò aiutu, puru si s'attaccau â manu e ci firìu, si sirriò
above, above you, look forward to an old, fat and slow spider who has arrived
stop guarding the prisoners more, and if you began to pinch them more cruelly
who was lu cchiù succusu di manciari. You have to start the party on Monday
Others were far away, but Mr. Baggins was in a hurry, and before he knew them
sapìa chi stava succèdennu, sintìu la sò puntura e s'arrutulò dû ramu mortu.
Lu travagghiu near Bilbo was chiḍḍu di pirdiri nu nanu. Who's going to headlights? Let's tag him
the rope was sticking to it, the unfortunate man was going to get rid of it ô
earth na bona strata sutta. Take advantage of 'ntornu ô ramu (ca facìa tutti li
the poviri dwarfs ballanu and sciogghiunu like ripe fruit) arrived ô primu fasciu.
“Fili or Kili”, he thought from the tip of a blue cap that was sticking out
suvirchijari. “Assài prubbabbirmenti Fili,” he thought of nu nasu longu ca niscìa di
the enveloping threads. Arriniscìu chiancannusi pi tagghiari the majority of strong
sticky threads ca lu ligàvanu tunnu, and then, of course, cu nu calciu
and a fight was born in most parts of Fili. Timu ca Bilbo ridìu
the sight of Iḍḍu makes his hair melt and makes him stiff while he danced on Ragnu's rope under his armpit, just like one of those who are funny and funny, so much so
thread.
In the same way or another Fili was arrived ô ramu, and then I know
megghiu aiutiri l'hobbit, puru si si sintìa assai malatu e malatu di
ragnu-velenu, and say hang the majority of nights and every day after firita
giru and giru cu sulu lu nasu pi breathe. It took years more
pull out the bestial stuff from the eyes and eyebrows, and even more so from the beard, iddu
let's tag the majority. Goods, among iddi accuminciaru to pull up first
na nana and then n'autra and tagged them there. Whose nuddu was better
off of Fili, and forty one was worse. Quarchi d'unu had almost arrived
shorter breaths (the long noses sunnu certain useful votes I saw) and quarters of an avia
he was more dejected.
Nta sta manèra arricugghieru Kili, Bifur, Bofur, Dori e Nori. Poviru vecchiu
Bombur was so tired, he was the biggest fat guy and he always had it
pinched and ticked, ca iḍḍu as soon as he arrutulo dû ramu and cadìu supra
the earth, more fortune above the molds, and it became stronger from now on. But there aren't many more
dwarves appizzati â fini dû ramu quannu li tarantuli cuminciaru a vèniri
I'll come back, cchiù chinu di raya ca mai.
Bilbu subbitu si nni jìu â fini dû ramu cchiù vicinu ô troncu di l'àrvuru
e tinìa arrè chiḍḍi ca strisciavanu supra. Avìa livatu l'aneddu quannu
redeem Wires and scurdàu to put it in another place, so now everyone will start to
sprayers and hissers:
– «Now I'll see you, dyed creatures! We'll tip you and leave
I have bones and I have peddi 'hanged in n'àrvuru. Ugh! you have a sting, right? Good,
I grabbed everyone, and then I grabbed my head towards my head.
jornu o dui.”
While this person kills himself, the other dwarfs work on the rest of
I will imprison them, and tag the threads and cut them off. Soon everyone will sarìanu
there, even though it wasn't clear what was going to happen next. Li tarantuli avìanu
li pigghiàu bastanti la notte prima, ma chistu s'avìa scupertu e
ntô dark. This time it seemed like there was a horrible fight.
Suddenly Bilbo gathered around four spiders who were moving towards the old man
Bombur 'n terra, and l'avìanu ligatu n'àutra votes and lu stàvanu dragnnu
via. Dicìu n'urlu e tagghiò li ragnu davanti a iḍḍu. Iḍḍi
suddenly he left the post, and he slipped and fell from his own place
menzu di chiddi ca stannu on the ground. The sword was something new
more iḍḍi sting mode. How we rushed forward and back! He shone with common pleasures
you stab them. Menza duzzina foru kill yourself before ca lu restu si tirassi e
lassau Bombur a Bilbu.
"Get down! Get down!" shouted ê nani supra lu ramu.
“Don't stay there above and have rites!” As soon as I saw the tarantuli, they all got busy
the trees are close, and they crawl along the branches above the heads of
the dwarves.
Down there the dwarves will skirriàru or saltàru or cadìru, eleven all of them
munzeddu, the majority very tremulous and picca usu supra li jammi. Ccà èranu
â fini, twelve of iḍḍi cuntavanu lu poviru old Bombur, ca s'avìa appuiatu
above every latu of my cousins ​​Bifur and of my brothers Bofur; and Bilbu was
dance 'ntornu and accinnìri I know Sting; and cintinara of ragnu arraggiati èranu
guardànnuli tutti ntunnu e ntunnu e supra. It seemed quite without hope.
Allura started the fight. Forty-two dwarfs had the cuteddi, and forty-one had
sticks, and all putìanu arrivari a li petri; and Bilbo avìa lu so pugnali elficu.
Again and again I find them beaten, and many of them
killed. But you can't wait any longer. Bilbo was almost tired; sulu
four days the dwarves will come to stand still, and soon they will all be there
pass away like tired mosses. Already the tarantuli were starting to accumulate
tissiri riti all them ntunnu a iḍḍi n'autra vote of n'àrvuru a n'àutru.
Â fini Bilbo no putìa pinsari a nuḍḍu pianiu except ca lassari trasiri li nani
lu sigretu dû sò aneddu. We're sorry, cchiuttostu, but it can't be Siri
help you.
"Vaju a scumpariri," said iḍḍu. “Tirò li ragnu, si
bit; and avissiru to teniri nzèmmula and headlights ntâ opposite directions. See you there
Lassatu ddà, whoever is cchiù or menu the road towards lu postu unni vittimu the last vote
the fires of the elves."
It was difficult to understand, those whose heads were dizzying,
and you shout at them, and you beat them with sticks and throw them with petri dishes; but
â fine Bilbo felt that he couldn't be late, I know them
circu always close by. Iddu scippau di colpu the aneddu, and ô granni
wonderful dî scumparìu.
Soon came the sound of “Lazy Lob” and “Attercop” of menzu
the àrburi luntanu to starboard. Chistu scantau a lot of them. Yes, I'll sign
Avanzannu, e quarchi d'unu si nni jìu versu la vuci. "Attercop"
Li ficsso arraggiari ca pirderu lu minds. Allura Balin, c'avìa pigghiatu
Lu pianu di Bilbo, megghiu dû restu, purtau a n'attaccu. The dwarfs huddle up
nzèmmula 'n nudu, and mannannu na chioggia di petri chaseru towards the tarantuli
left, and burst through the aneddu. Luntanu stopped at iḍḍi ora lu shoutu
and lu cantu signed suddenly.
I hope desperately that Bilbo wasn't supposed to be pigghiatu, the dwarfs annaru
above. Not enough viloci, however. They were sick and tired, and they didn't putìanu
it goes much better than a scarriu and a scirriu, even if many spider days
eranu vicinu arrè. Ogni tantu avìanu a girari e cummattiri li
criaturi ca li Stanu supirannu; and already four tarantulas were there
àrburi supra di iḍḍi and threw down the long threads ca s'agghicanu.
Li cosi èrunu n'àutra vota abbastanza tinti, quannu all'improvisu Bilbo ricumparìu,
and carricatu ntê spiders marvelous 'n way 'mprivista of latu.
“Go ahead! Go ahead!” he shouted. “I’ll get the shot!”
And he's cool. I fici na parade forward and back, tagged the spider threads, tagged the jammi and stabbed the fat bodies as they arrived
too close. The spiders swelled with rays, and sprayed and foamed, and
yes, horrible curses; but avìanu addivintatu mortally saved by Sting,
and he didn't dare get too close, now that he was turned. Allura maldici comu iḍḍi
were it, the prey was slowly but steadily removed. It was nu tirribbili
business, and paria ca ci vulissiru uri. But that's the end, exactly when Bilbo felt like he was there
you can't raise your hand any more, you'll want them to tarantuli â 'ntrasatta
above, and I don't follow them, but I turn to diluputu ô they're dark
asshole.
The dwarves allura s'addunaru ca s'avìanu clinging to the edge of n'aneddu
Huns were the fires of the elves. If you were one of those who had seen it
nights before, not putìanu diri. But there seems to be some good magic
arristaru nta tali macchi, ca ê ragnu non ci piacìanu. In ogni casu ccà lu
the lights were brighter, and the branches were sharp and menacing, and avìanu
there is the possibility of rejection and lu fiatu.
For a little while longer, they snorted and panted. But very soon iḍḍi
he began to make them dumanni. Avìanu aviri all the business ca scumparìa
explain your care, and the discovery of the aneddu there ntirissau so much
As soon as you know, don't forget about my troubles. Balin 'n particulari nzistìu
supra aviri the story of Gollum, the enigma and all, cuntati n'autra vote, cu lu
aneddu ntô so postu justu. But after a little while the lights began to slip away, and then
yes ficir àutri dumanni. Unni èranu, and unni era lu sò camineu,
and some were there, and who was going to do it twice? Chisti
dumanni ca fìciru us again and again, and it was dû picciriddu Bilbo ca
it seemed like they were waiting to get an answer. Of which we saw approx
avìanu canciatu assài l'opinioni dû signor Baggins, e avìanu accuminciatu
more aviri nu granni respect pi iḍḍu (as Gandalf said). Nfacts
I'm waiting for you to see if I can help you more
there, and not èrunu sulu lamintanti. Sapìanu sulu troppu bonu ca iḍḍi
soon everyone would have been dead, if he were no longer the hobbit; and iddi
he thanked him for so many votes. Four of them even stood up and bowed right to him.
the earth in front of iddu, even if you fall with your effort, and not putìanu
yes mèttunu n'àutra vote above the ranges more fourth time. Know the virità supra lu
the disappearance no longer diminished Bilbo's feelings; pirchì vìttiru ca iddu
had four minds, ortrica fortune and n'aneddu màggicu, and all three sunnu very much
useful pussidimenti. Infatti iddi u ludavanu tantu ca Bilbu accinciò a
listen, there was something about the bold adventurers above this place after
everyone, even if you had seen it, you still felt much more concern, if there had been something
more manciari.
But there was nothing, nothing more nothing; and no one was suitable for anything
and around whichever thing, or more around you walk more. I walk longer! No
n'autra idea ci vinni ntâ testa stanca di Bilbo. Iḍḍu s'assittàu sulu fissannu davanti
of iddu to the infinite trees; and after a little while everyone will keep quiet. Everyone
except Balinu. So much so that after the other one we went away signed with parrari and closed our eyes,
he continued to mummuriari and to ridiri tra iḍḍu stissu.
"Gollum! Beni sugnu binidittu! Allura accussì mi passau furtivamenti, veru? Ora
Lu sacciu! As soon as you crawled calmly, right, Mr. Baggins? Buttons on all of you
brings! Good old man Bilbu... Bilbu... Bilbu... bu... bu... bu... And allura iḍḍu
addurmintò, e ci fu nu silenziu cumpletu pi tantu tempu.
Suddenly Dwalin opened his eyes and looked around at them.
"Unni is Thorin?" he called.
It was a terrible shock. Of course there will be three of them,
twelve dwarves and the hobbit. Unni era veru Thorin? Si dumannaru
whoever distinguished evil had succeeded us, magical or dark monsters; and trimàu comu
s'attruvàvanu pirduti ntâ furesta. There's one thing after another
sleep uncomfortable chinu of horrible sleeps, as the evening was purged ô nìuru
nights; and give them to them to keep them present, too sick and tired anymore
put guards or pigghiari to turn the taliari.
Thorin was caught very quickly by iḍḍi. You recur
Did Bilbo fall like he didn't sleep while he was in a circus of lights? Lu
the time after it was Thorin who advanced, and as the lights went out
Fora cadìu common na petra ncantata. All the scrùsciu dî nani pirdutu ntô
nights, I know the Chianti as the ragnu, the pigghiaru and the ligavanu, and all of them
They were there at the battle the next day, they had passed without hearing from you. Allura lu
The elves dû lignu had arrived, lu ligaru and lu purtaru away.
The people who were celebrating were the elves of the Lignu, obviously. Chisti nun sunnu mali
pupulari. Si hannu na culpa, è la disfide dî stranii. Puru si la sò magicìa era
strong, even if the times are careful. They diffirìanu of the Àutu
Elves of the West, and èranu cchiù piriculusi and wise menus. Plus the majority of
there (nzèmmula ê sò scattered relatives ntê cullini and ntê muntagni)
discinnevanu dî tribbù antichi ca nun annaru mai â Faerie ntô
West. Ccà the elves of Luci and the elves of Prufunnu and the elves of Mari Jeru and
campau more centuries, and he identified cchiù just and sàggiu and 'mparatu, and he minted
I know magic and I know cunning mysteries, not realisations of beddi and
so marvelous, before about four of a turnassi ntô Munnu Ampiu. Nto
Munnu largu the elves dû lignu arristaru ntô crepusculu dû nostru Suli and Luna,
but he loved them better; and wandered around the old granni ca criscìanu
àutu ntê terri ca ora sunnu pirduti. Abitavunu cchiù spissu close to the edges of
ligni, of Huns putìanu escape certain votes more hunter, or more cavari and curriri
above the lands open to moonlight or daylight; and after the victory of the Omini
purtaru always cchiù very dark and twilight. Elves again
eranu and ristanu, and who is the Bonu Genti.
Don't granni grutta quarci chilòmitru rintra lu bordu di Mirkwood ntô so latu orientali
latu ccà vivìa nta chistu tempu lu so re cchiù granni. Davanti li sò porti enormi di
petra nu ciumi niscìa di l'autizzi dâ furesta e scurrìa supra e nesciri nta
the marshes are the foothills of the lignusi auto lands. This great grunt, of
who innumerable cchiù nichi open from every latu, firiti luntanu
on land and with many wide passages and climbs; but it was a great read
cchiù sanu di qualegghiè abbitazzioni di goblin, e né accussì prufunnu né accussì
piriculusu. In fact, the subjects of the king above all lived and hunted without
open woods, and they had cases or sheds plus earth and many branches. Lu
The beech trees are the first trees. The King's crane was the palace, and the
postu forti dû sò trisoru, and the stealth dû sò populu against lu sò
enemies.
Era puru la carciri dî sò priggiuneri. Cussì versu la grutta s'arrascinaru
Thorin, non troppu dilicatamenti, picchì non amavanu li nani e pinsàvanu ca iḍḍu era
no enemy. In ancient times there were wars with certain dwarves,
whoever accuses you of cheating, I know darling. It's the right thing to say
the dwarves said nu resucuntu diversu, and said ca pigghiàvanu sulu chiḍḍu ca era
I know you have to, pick up the elven king and barter with the furthest ones, I know you are cruel
and silver, and then you refused to give us your pay. If the elfu king had a dibulizza it was more treasure, above all more silver and lu jancu
gems; and yes, I know, darling, she was rich, she was always anxious to meet me
He still had no treasure gathered as great as other noble elves of antiquity. I'm a little missing
they didn't spend much money on metals or jewels, nor did they bother much about cummerciu or
cu the curvatures of the ground. All chistu was canusciutu of every nanu, puru yes
Thorin's family doesn't know who the old woman will argue about
Of. Therefore Thorin was angry that he could treat us when he
we livàru the enchantment and iḍḍu returned to the senses; and puru iddu was
dicidìu that there was no way to take out a word of gold or jewels.
Lu re guarda durimenti Thorin, quannu lu purtaru davanti a iddu,
and there were so many doubts. But Thorin said only that it was
you are hungry.
“Picchì you and lu to populu circaru tri vows to attack lu me populu ô so'
Will you make merry?" called the king.
“Let us not attack them,” replied Thorin; “let's come to prison, pirchì
stavamu murennu di fami."
"Unni sunnu now I have them friends and who do they do?"
“Non lu sacciu, ma m'aspettu di mòriri di fami ntâ furesta.”
“Chi stavi facennu ntâ furesta?”
"Circàvamu manciari and biviri, piccì stamu murennu di fami."
“But who purged you ntâ furesta?” he called lu re arraggiatu.
Then Thorin shut his mouth and didn't say another word.
“Very good!” I said the king. “Purtalalu and tenerilu safe, nzinu a quannu
if you feel inclined to say virility, even expect a hundred years."
Then the elves put on the thongs and closed one of the internal ones
grutti with strong lignu ports, and lu up there. I told him the tips and
biviri, abbunnanti di tutti dui, si non assai finu; pirchì lelfi dû lignu nun èranu foddi,
and if they were quite good enough towards them, they are the closest enemies, when they are
he captured them. The giant tarantuli were the only living beings in the world
naked pity above.
Once again Thorin was able to help himself; and after that you had passed
sò thankamentu pi pani e carne e acqua, accuminzau a dumannarisi chi
avìa addivintatu li sò sforttunati amici. Nun fu assai tempu prima ca iḍḍu
scupertu; ma chistu apparteni ô capitulu appressu e ô principiu di
In another adventure the hobbit will see another's usefulness.
BARRELS FOR A LIGAMI
Every day after the battle with Bilbo and the dwarfs they don't get together
Let's try harder to find a better way to live before dying, give me and
sites. He got up and went to the direction where he went on eight days
thirteen of iḍḍi pinzàvanu ca era chiḍḍa unni s'truvava lu camminu; but iddi
I never discovered they had reached us. Such a day as there was never a furesta
it was fading in the other nights, when all of a sudden I left
the lights of many torches came out in iḍḍi, like a group of Russian stiḍḍi.
Don't let the elves have bows and throw them and call them dwarves
more signatories.
There was no thought in the morning. Even if the dwarves were never there
tali statu ca 'n rialtà fùssiru cuntenti d'èssiri prigioniati, li sò cuteddi nichi,
the only weapons ca avìanu, avissiru statu di nuddu usu against the arrows
of the elf ca putìanu hit n'occhiu d'aceḍḍu ntô dark. Quinni simply signed
death and s'assittàu and aspittàu, everyone except Bilbo, the aneddu comes out
and soon you'll steal some parts. Here we go, when the elves join him
dwarfs in a long line, one stopped at the other, and he watched them, never
attruvau o cuntau l'hobbit.
Not even the sintìru or sintìru trottari stopped the torch while purtavanu them priggiuneri ntâ furesta. Every dwarf was
blindfold, but this is not very diffrence, pirchì puru Bilbo cu lu
the custom of those eyes could not see anyone, and neither Iddu nor him
autri sapìanu however of unni avìanu accuminciatu. Bilbo had all the things he could do
pi teniri lu passu cu li torci, pirchì the elves facìanu jiri li nani comu
viloci comu putìanu, sick and tired comu èrunu. Lu re avìa urdinatu
Hurry them up more. Suddenly the torches signed, and the hobbit just got going
More time to get them before you can begin to cross the bridges. Chistu was there
bridges that crossed the rivers and ports of kings. The water runs dark
and quick and strong suttas; and â fini cèranu li canceled in front ô
vucca di na grutta enormous ca s'attruvava ntô latu di nu steep slopes cupertu di
àrburi. From there the great beeches arrive right on the shore, then you can walk there
eranu ntô ciumi.
Crossing the bridges the spiny elves I knew were captive, but Bilbo hesitated
lu back. We no longer liked the look of the cave cave, and Iḍḍu sulu
you said not to abandon them, their friends are just the right time to take pictures
the heels of the latest elves, before closing the great doors of the king
li cu nu strisciuni.
He finds the passages aluminized with a Russian torch and elves guarding them
they sang while they marched through the crooked, crossed layers and resurunàvanu.
Chisti is not like the city of goblins; èranu cchiù nichi, prufunni menu
on the earth, and leaning on the cleanest air. Nta na granni living room with tagged pillars
fora dâ petra viventi s'assittàu lu Re Elficu supra na seggia di lignu sculpitu. Supra lu sò
head was a curuna of Russian berries and foggoes, since I won the autumn
again. No spring purtava na curuna of ciuri dû lignu. I don't know how to do it
tinìa nu bastonu oak sculpture.
The Cancella dû Re Elficu.
They will be imprisoned for purtati before iddu; and yet he looked at himself darkly
There, I said, they are Christians to untie them, because they are robbed and tired.
"Besides chistu we don't need any cords here," I said iḍḍu. “There is no escape from
Bring them to me, plus those who can vote have been purged inside.”
Lungu and circannu dumannò the dwarfs above I made them,
and unni ìanu, and unni vinìanu; but iddu
appi picca cchiù nutizzi di iḍḍi ca di Thorin. Èranu surly e
arraggiatu e non facia mancu finta di èssiri educatu.
“Who are we doing, O king?” said Balin, who was the older one on the left. "It is
it's no crime
spider? The ragnu sunnu tamed beasts or domesticated animals, if they were killed
does it make you horny?”
Such dumanna naturally fics arraggiari lu re cchiù di mai, e iddu
he replied: “It's a vagabond crime that doesn't rule me without pirmissu.
scurdàrisi ca stavi ntô me regnu, usannu la strata ca facìa lu me populu?
No three votes did you chase and upset me who was furious
risk the spiders revolting and him to chianciri? After all it disturbs you
haiu fattu ca haiu lu dirittu di sapir chi ti porta ccà, e si non ti volare
tell me now, I'll keep you all in prison, even if you haven't learned your senses and
the ways!”
Then he ordered the nani fussiru to put each one in a separate cell and to disarm them.
given tips and biviri, but no one can stop me from passing you bring them where I'm small
carciri, nzinu a quannu unu almenu di iḍḍi fu dispostu a diricci tuttu chiḍḍu ca vulìa
know. But I didn't tell us that Thorin was puru priggiuneru cu iḍḍu. Iḍḍu
it was Bilbo who discovered it.
I can't wait to see Baggins, I've only been tired of living without anyone after all
sulu, e sempri ammucciatu, nun osannu mai livàricci l'aneddu, difficirmenti osannu
more durmiri, even huddled up in the corner, dark and distant, ca putìa
truvari. More sharply what began to wander ntô King of the Elves
palace. The magic closed them and canceled them, but certain votes might have been nesciri, yes
lestu. Cumpagnìi di l'elfi dû lignu, certi voti cû re ô sò
head, from time to time he was left to chase, or more other business ntô
ligni and ntê terri in Livanti. Then Bilbo was very clever, iḍḍu
putìa snatched as soon as he got back to iḍḍi; after all, it was a pretty lighthouse thing.
Cchiù di na Vota was almost caught in the ports, while you scuntràunu nzèmmula
when the time passed; yet he did not dare march among the gods
dâ sò admire (all fine and oscillating as it was â torch lights), or more
fear of being discovered and discovered. And when you are not there,
it wasn't very spissu, it didn't do anything good. Don't let the dwarves desert you,
e di fattu non sapìa unni ntô munnu iri senza di iḍḍi. Iḍḍu
non putìa tèniri lu passu cu l'elfi di caccia tuttu lu tempu ca èrunu fora, quinni iḍḍu
never discovered the darkest layers of the lignu, and was left to wander
miserable things, not furious, scared of pirdìrisi, nzinu until when I won the possibility of
returned. Aìa fami puru outside, because he wasn't hunters; but inside it
grutti putìa pigghiari na species of life arrubbannu lu manciari dâ buttegha or
tavula when nuddu was at hand.
“Sugnu comu nu latru ca you can't escape, but you have to face many miseries
arrubbàri la stissa casa jornu doppu jornu," ​​​​pinsò. "Chistu è lu cchiù tristu
and the darkest part of this whole wretched, tiring and uncomfortable affair!
vulìssiru èssiri arrè ntô me pirtusu of the hobbit vicinu ô me focus càvuru câ lamp
shiny!” Spissu vulìa puru iḍḍu ca putìa riciviri nu missaggiu d'help mannatu a
lu magu, ma chistu naturalmenti era abbastanza mpussìbbili; e si nni accurgìu prestu
whoever had to do something, Mr. Baggins had to do it,
alone and without help.
Â fini, doppu na simana o dui di chista speci di vita furtiva, di
taliannu and followed them I watched them and pigghiannu them possibilities ca putìa, iddu
arriniscìu a scopriri unni s'attruvava ogni nanu. Attruvò tutti li sò dùdici
Celluli nta several banni dû palazzu, and after a little time you can leave them there
very good way. What was my surprise every day of hearing about it
I looked at them and learned more that in Carciri there was no other nanu puru iddu,
nta nu postu spicialmenti prufunnu e scuru. Iḍḍu pinsò subbitu, di sicuru, ca era
Torinu; e doppu nu pocu scuprìu ca la sò 'nduvinazzioni era giusta. Â fini doppu
so many difficult people arrive at Truvari after when no one was nearby,
and you have a word with a dwarf's head.
Thorin was too much of a misfortune the more he was angry the more he was unlucky, and
he was pure accuminciannu to pinzari to cuntari ô re all lu so tisoriu and
I know the research (ca mustra how much you had added to the vasciu spirit), how much you heard
Bilbo's voice doesn't have keys. Don't believe the rich. Soon
anyway I said no one could make a mistake, and I won
â bring and start a long whispered discussion with the hobbit on the other side.
It was ensured that Bilbo was able to safely purport Thorin's message to everyone
of the other dwarves who were imprisoned, says Thorin, I knew him
Puru 'n nearby carciri, and ca nuḍḍu avìa to rivilari lu sò 'mpiegu a
lu re, not yet, nor before Thorin gave the word. Picchì Thorin avìa pigghiatu
cori n'autra vote sintennu as the hobbit had saved you I know cumpagni dû
ragnu, and it was decided by another vote not to redeem himself
prumetti ô re na parti dû trisoru, nzinu a quannu tutta la spiranza di scappari n
qualigghiè in another way avìa scumparutu; up to when in fact the Invisible Signuri were nutevuli
Baggins (whom he accused of aviri n'upiniuni assài auta) avìa
I didn't end up having to complete the tongs with four pieces of waste.
L'àutri nani foru d'accordu quannu arriciveru lu messaggiu. Tutti iddi
pinzàvanu li sò quoti dû tisoriu (ca cunzidiràvanu comu
I know them, nunustanti lu so difficult status and lu dragu still 'ncunquistatu) avissi
suffriri seriamenti si l'elfi dû lignu ci rivinnicàvanu na parti, e tutti si fidàvanu
Bilbu. The person who said Gandalf was about to take over, I saw. Maybe who he was
parts dû sò mutivu pi partiri and lassàrili.
Bilbo, however, does not feel nearly as breathless as he does. Not cool
like everyone else's painters, and they wanted to be the best
manu. But this was of no use: probably the entire dark distance of Mirkwood was attracted
between them. He put his hands on them and put them on them, until he almost slid his head off,
but I didn't get any bright idea. The invisible story was something very subtle,
but it wasn't very good between fourteen. But for sure, how did you
I thought about the end of Sarbàu, I know them as friends, and I did it.
Nu jornu, sbuffannu e vagannu, Bilbo scupriu nu
what is annoying: the canceled granni do not erunu the only entrance to the grutti. A
torrents scurria sutta na parti dê riggiuni cchiù vasci dô palazzozzu, e si juncìu
lu ciumi Forest na picca cchiù to the east, beyond lu steep slopes go through
whose main opening opened. Unni stu cursu d'acqua sutta terra
no cìu dâ cullija there was no canceddu of water. Ccà lu tettu rucciusu
scinnìu close to the surface of the tops, and of iddu niscìu nu portcullis
putìa èssiri jittatu proprio ntô lettu dû ciumi pi avoidi ca trasìssi nuddu
or fora di chiḍḍa strata. But the purtellu was very open, more good traffic
niscìu and trasìu dû canceddu of water. If anyone was vinututu more this strata, iddu
if you had to find a dark and harsh tunnel, there was no prufunnity
hill choirs; but at some point some people passed over the grutti lu roof
avìanu statu tagghiati e cummigghiati cu granni trappuli di cherzu. Chisti opened
Versu above ntê cantini dû re. Everyone was there, and everyone, and
vutti; pirchì l'elfi dû lignu, e suprattuttu lu so re, l'avìanu assai amanti
Vinu, even if you don't grow vines, those who banni don't grow vines. Lu vinu, and others like this, èranu
purtati of luntanu, of relatives of the South, or of dî
vineyards of l'Omini nta terri luntani.
Huddled back to one day, all the grandparents Bilbo will take them to the trap.
and they used to, and they gathered together, they listened to the words of the king's service,
'mparau comu lu vinu and the others so vinìanu above the peaks, or above the earth,
ô Lagu Longu. Paria ca there was still a city of Omini, built above lu
bridges where the water spreads against enemies of all types, e.g
suprattuttu contra lu dragu dâ Muntagna. Di Lacu-città li vutti
foru purtati supra lu ciumi Forest. Spissu èranu sulu ligati nzèmmula comu
rafts large and cleaned or rowed on clear rivers; certain votes vinìanu loaded
above the Chiani passes.
Quannu li vutti èranu vacanti l'elfi li jittaru attraversu li trappuli,
they opened the canceddu of the water, and out of them they all floated on top of the ciumi, they snorted
longu, nzinu a quannu foru purtati dâ currenti nta nu postu assài sutta lu ciumi
unni the shore emerged, vicinu ô limiti assái urientali di Mirkwood.
Ccà foru arricugghiuti and tied nzèmmula and floats arrè to Lake-town,
whoever got close ô puntu unni lu ciumi Forest scurrìa ntô Longu
Lake.
For a few minutes Bilbo sat down and thought of this water canceddu, and drank himself
yes, you can use it to escape from your friends, and at the end it will go away
inizzi dispirati di nu pianu.
Pastu dâ sira had been purtatu ê priggiuneri. Eranu guards them
they kick the steps while they carry the torch and
everything is dark. Allura Bilbu heard the maggiurdomu of the ordinary kings
lu capu dî look at Bonanotti.
“Now come with me”, I said iḍḍu, “and enjoy the new wine that has just arrived
enter. Stasira travagghiu hard more livari the vacant cellars
lignu, so first we can help you work more.”
“Very good”, ridìu lu capu dî guàrdii. «Gustu cu vui, e
I saw it was suitable for the king. There's a party tonight and I wasn't there
make more werewolves like this, poor men!”
Quannu sintìu chistu Bilbo era tuttu 'n giru, picchì vitti ca la furtuna era cu
iḍḍu and iḍḍu immediately appitu the possibility of pruvari lu sò pianu dispiratu. Siguiu lu
two elves, until then they went to the local cellar and sat at the table above
chi foru misi dui granni flaguni. Prestu accuminciaru a biviri ea ridiri
cheers. Then the fortune of some unusual people came to Bilbo. You have a lot of bad guys
vinu pi fari addurmintari n'elfu di lignu; ma stu vinu, parissi, era lu
vintage head of granni jardina of Dorwinion, not distinguished ô yes
outdone or they are servants, but the more you celebrate them with king sulu, and the more chiddi cchiù nichi
ciotole non pî granni flaghi dû maggiurdomu.
Very soon the guard nodded his head, then I put him on top of the table
and fell asleep strong. The major continued to argue and argue among those who were the most
no peerless little one who cares, but soon the head nods ô
table, and fell asleep and snorted near his friend. Then he sneered
hobbits. Soon the warden didn't have the keys, but Bilbo was trotting around as usual.
cchiù fast ca putìa 'ntornu ê passages towards the cells. Lu granni mazzu
it seemed very pisan to us in Livrazza, and he was right up there in the village, nta
nunustanti lu know aneddu, because you can't avoid the keys being made every now and then
and then nu forte sciarriu and nu sciarriu, ca lu mittìu all in trimuri.
First he unlocked Balin's door, and closed it another time with care as soon as possible.
the nanu was out. Balin was very surprised, as you might imagine; but
cuntentu comu era of nesciri dâ so petra room tiring, vulìa
sign and make the dumans, and know who was doing Bilbo, and all
above this one.
"Now there's no time!" said the hobbit. «You sulu follow me! We all had a good time
nzèmmula and no risk of curtains. All of us had to escape or nuddu, and
This is our last chance. If you come scupertu, goodness know unni lu re
you stand near me, with your basins with your hands and feet, you'll wait for me. Nun
discuss it, there's a good cumpagnu!"
Then he left from door to door, until I followed them again
twelve, no one is too good, those who are dark, and those who
I'm a long time prisoner. Bilbo's choirs beat every vote for one of the iḍḍi
scuntràu cu n'àutru, or grugnìu or whispered ntô buiu. “Drat chistu
dwarf racket!” I said to iḍḍu stissu But everyone was happy, and they didn't fight.
I looked. How was there a great autumn festival before you?
dda nights, and don't go upstairs. Almost all the people dû re èranu
you will make the joy.
After so many mistakes we arrive at Thorin's dungeon, very sutta
nta nu postu prufunnu and more fortune not far from the cantini.
“Supra la mia palora!” said Thorin, when Bilbu whispered to us to come
fora e s'unìu ê so amici, "Gandalf parrava veru, comu ô solitu! Na cosa bona
let's do it, even, when the time arrives. Sunnu sure can semu all more
Never be your sirvizziu, whatever happens after you. But who's coming next?"
Bilbo thought it was time to explain his idea, whatever it was;
but it wasn't as safe as the avissiru pigghiatu the dwarves. I know they're scared
they were quite justified, since we didn't like it a bit, and started complaining
strong nunustanti lu sò pirìculu.
“Saremu firiti e sbatti a pezzi, e affunnamu puru nuiautri, pirchì
sure!" mummuriaru: “Pinsàvamu ca avìsti na sensitive nuzzioni,
when you came to pick up the keys. That's a crazy idea!"
“Asstissimo beni!” said Bilbu assài scantatu, e puru cchiuttostu arraggiatu. "Veniri
I return to the bed of cells, and I close you all in the other place, and then you
assisted by the comforts and stapled to a better plan, but I don't think about it
I will never pick up the keys, even if you are inclined to take care of them."
It was too late, and he calmed down. Â ends, of
obviously, I'd have to do my own thing whoever suggested Bilbo, anyway it was clear
mpussìbbili pi iḍḍi pruvari and find the strata ntê sali supiriuri, or pi
cummàttiri more nesciri than canceddi closed by magic; and it wasn't good
I don't think about passing through any of the others. Dunca followed lu
hobbit, 'n giù ntê cantini cchiù vasci si strinciunu. Passaru attraversu na porta
whoever is the guard guard and the steward can still see many roncari
when you smile at them, don't do it. Lu vinu of Dorwinion brings prufunni and
pleasant dreams. There were different expressions on both faces
head of the guard every day after, even if Bilbo, first of all he went ahead, got up and
I gently put the keys on my belt.
"Who will be able to tell us about parts of this problem," I said to Mr. Baggins
to iddu stissu. "He wasn't a tipu tintu, and was quite discreet towards the prisoners.
It will puzzle them all. Thinking about how the magic would be much stronger
pass through all the closed ports and disappear. Disappear! We have
Let's get busy as soon as possible, if whoever is in charge!”
To Balin we were told to take the guard and the steward and to get ready.
they melted. Lu restu trasìu ntâ nearby cellar that brings trapped people.
There was little pirdiri tempu. Before long, as Bilbo knows, there were four elfs
Sutta the orders of scìnniri and assistants lu majordomu in pigghiari them all vacant
through them you bring ntô ciumi. Chisti 'nfatti èranu already 'n feet ntô
threads ntô menzu dû pavimentu ca aspittunu di ossiri spousti. Quarchi d'unu d'idi
there were barrels of wine, and those were not very useful, since they did not put any facilities
èssiri aperti â fini senza nuḍḍu scrùsciu, e mancu putìanu èssiri facilmenti
assicuratu n'autra vota. Ma ntra chisti c'erunu diversi àutri, ca s'avìanu usato
more purtari others like this, butter, apple and all types of like that, ô
palace of the kings.
Soon there will be three of them with enough space for each one. actually
some were too spaced out, and while they were chasing the dwarfs they pinched them
anxious to tremble and say scuppi ca trasìanu inside, puru yes
Bilbo fics him I know better more truvari pagghia and others so more 'packaging them in a more welcoming way
putissi èssiri gistiti 'n pocu tempu. Â fini foru ammucciati dùdici nani.
Thorin had given you a lot of trouble, and he was exhausted and twisted in the tub and
grunìu comu nu cani granni nta nu cunigghiu nicu; while Balin, who defeated me,
fics na granni scannala more air holes and I said you had suffocatu, even before
The lid was accused. Bilbo had done who could put it more close the holes on both sides of
emptied them, and then fix the covers on them all as safe as possible, and
now it was arristatu n'autra vote sulu, currennu 'n giru mittennu the final touches to
the packaging, and spirannu contra la spiranza ca lu sò pianu niscìssi.
Non fu fattu nu pocu troppu prestu. Sulu nu minutu o dui doppu chiḍḍu di Balin
lid avìa statu muntatu supra ddà came the sound of voices and the flashing of
lights. No certain number of elves arrive ridennu and parrannu ntê chants and
cantari sketches of canzuna. Avìanu had a happy party one day
and vulìanu turnari as soon as putìanu.
“Unni is the old Galiuni, the major?” I said unu. “Non lu vitti ô
tavuli stasira. Let's go to Sissiri, now we can show ourselves who has headlights."
"I'll get angry if the old slowcoach arrives late," I said. “Nun haiu
vulìssiru pirdiri tempu ccà sutta mentri la canzuna è supra!”
"Ha, ha!" nu chianciri arrived. “Here's the old man with his head on top of the jug!
He was having a party with me and my friend the captain."
"Shake them! Wake up!" shouted the other disorientations.
Galiuni was no longer nenti cuntentu di sissiri scuzzulatu or arrisbigghiatu, and still menu
to be reduced. “You're all late,” he lamented. “Here you are waiting for
aspittannu ccà sutta, while you cumpagni biviti and make cheerful and scurdative
I gave them homework. Little wonder, yes, I'm tired of being tired!"
“Picca maravigghia,” he said, “when the explanation is near
nta na jug! Come to daricci nu gustu dû to tiratu addurmintatu prima cascamu!
Nun c'è bisognu di svegghiari la chiave 'n manu ddà. Havi avutu la sò parti di l'aspettu di
iḍḍu."
Then we'll meet again and suddenly be very cheerful.
But don't pirderu propriu lu menti. “Save us, Galiuni!” quarchidunu shouted, “you
the party began early and there was plenty of laughter!
barrichi chini ccà ô postu di chiḍḍi vacanti, si c'è qualchi cosa 'n pisu.”
“Go ahead cû travagghiu!” the majordomu roared. “There's nothing wrong
I feel more like a vasu of spearmen. Chisti sunnu chiddi ca vannu e
nuḍḍu autru. Do as you say!”
“Assài, assái bene”, replied arrutulannu vutti towards lu
opening. “Up your head, yes the tubs of butter chini dû re and lu so vinu cchiù bonu
it's pushed ntô ciumi pi farri party pi nenti ca lòmini dû Lagu!”
Roll up—roll up—roll up—roll up,
rollers-rollers-rollers 'n down ô pirtusu!
Get up! Get some spray!
Down they go, down they snort!
Allura sings like everyone else first and then another rumpìu ô scuru
opening and was pushed into the cold water a few feet under. Arcuni
eranu li vutti veramenti vacanti, quarchi d'una era vasca ordinariamenti 'mpaccata cu nana
Everything is fine; but in the basin they all fall, one close to the other, with so many clashes and no
bump, bang on the chiḍḍi sutta, bang on the water, blow out
against the walls of the tunnel, slam each other, and shake each other
luntanu sutta la currenti.
It was this moment that Bilbo took advantage of in the morning
puntu ntô sò pianu. Assai prubbbabbirmenti lu vitti qualchi tempu fa e l'hai statu
ridennu of iḍḍu; but I don't think I would have done it anyway
you yourself ô I know postu. For sure it wasn't the same thing as anyone, and it wasn't
there is someone more 'packaging, even if there was a possibility! Common pariah
yes for sure I'm going to have friends this time (almost all of them are going to have them)
already go through the dark trap door), and stop completely
and they have always been huddled together with the most remaining groups of the elves.
Picchì puru si putìa scappari subbitu attraversu li canceddi supiriuri, avìa
a precious probability of finding another vote for the dwarves. Nun lu sapìa
the most earthly strata ô postu unni s'arricuogghievunu all of them. Iḍḍu
we wondered who on earth would kill us without help; pirchì iddu nun avia
avìa lu time of cuntari ê nani all chiddu ca avìa mparatu, or zoccu avìa vulutu diri
more headlights, na vote ca foru fora dû lignu.
Mentri tutti sti gocceri ci passavanu ntâ testa, l'elfi essennu
very cheerfully he began to sing na canzuna ntunnu â porta dû ciumi. Quarchi di unu already had it
annatu a tirari li cordi ca tiravunu supra lu purtellu ô canceddu of the water
I'll take care of the lassari as soon as they're all afloat.
Go down the viloci dark streams
Come back and vote for Canuscìsti!
Leave aside the caves and the halls,
Leave the steep sittintriunali milks,
Unni the wide and dark forest
The gray and dark admirer bows!
Float beyond the lu munnu di l'àrburi
Outside lu brisu whisper,
Once the Russians have passed, once the guns have passed,
Pass the grass of the marshes,
Attraversu la negghia chi nasci janca
Above the ground and at night by the pool!
Follow, follow stiddi ca sàutanu
Supra lu celu friddu e steepu;
It turns when dawn comes over the earth,
Supra viloci, supra rina,
Sud luntanu! and Sud luntanu!
Cercati lu suli e lu jornu,
Come back ô pascu, come back ô midu,
Unni si mangianu li vani e li voi!
Return to the jardina above the cullini
Unni the berry swells and jinchi
Sutta la luci dû suli, sutta lu day!
Sud luntanu! and Sud luntanu!
Go down the viloci dark streams
Come back and vote for Canuscìsti!
Now the last one has arrived and brought you! Ntâ inspirations and
They didn't know who had the lights, but Bilbo could find it and it was
spincìu supra lu bordu cu iḍḍa. The water drops, splashes! ntô
dark cold water câ vutti supra di iddu.
Another time arrived, sprinkled and added to the common lignu no surciu, but
the more all my efforts could not be ruined above. Every time around, lu
barrels rolled up and he fell on another barrel. It was truly vacant, and
floating lights common nu sugnu. Even if you are rich, you are bowed down with water, let's hear it
the elves cantunu still in the cellar above. Then suddenly he took them out of a trap
a cu nu boom and there I know you'll be there scumparutu. It was inside the dark tunnel
floating in the frozen water, all of them, because you can't get your friends together, they all belong
'mpaccati 'n vutti.
Very soon a dark gray spot arrived in front. Sintìu lu strisciuni
of lu del ceddu of water ca s'avìa tiratu supra, and attruvau ca was 'n menzu a
a mass of barrels and tanks that look out and everyone looks out nzèmmula pi
pass the bow and leave the tops open. Avia as many iddu
putìa fari pi evitari di essessiri sfracicatu e battutu a pezzi; ma a
ùrtimu the crowd that was spitting began to rumble and chatter, one by one, sutta
the arch of petra and luntanu. So let's meet those who didn't have a good time there
but we were about to arrive to ride there, because there was no more room
I save, even more hobbits, between the top and the sudden bend
tettu unni era lu canceddu.
No sutta the branches of the trees on each bank.
Bilbo wondered who the dwarves were and there was plenty of water
he was passing through the trays. Quarchi d'unu di chiḍḍi ca ci ficiru sciarriari ntô
the sadness seemed quite shallow in the water, and I thought that this was a dream
dwarfs inside.
"I hope you cover me tight enough!" pinzau, but first tantu tempu
si prioccupava troppu di iḍḍu stissu pi ricurdari li nani. Iḍḍu
I came close to keeping my head above the water, but I was still there
friddu, and it was decided that we should die before fortune turns, and so on
assái cchiù longu putissi stari, e si avissi a chiareri lu
pussibbilità di lassari jiri e pruvari a nutari â riva.
Fortune turned all right before long: the current vortices were purging
diversi vutti si chiùdunu a terra a nu certu puntu e ddà pi nu pocu s'attaccaru
against four trees piled up root. Allura Bilbu took advantage of the occasion
above lu latu dâ sò vutti while it was held still against the other. Supra iddu
it crawled like a surciu affunnatu, and crept up on the scattered top more slowly.
balance megghiu ca putìa. The breeze was cold but better than water,
and he was hoping that no one would be able to escape from another place suddenly when he had to leave
one more vote.
Before such a long time everyone will free another vote and turn around and pop up
'n vasciu dû turrenti, e fora rintra la currenti principali. Allura lu truvò propriu comu
difficili 'nfilàrisi comu s'avìa scantatu; ma arriniscìu 'n quarchi manera, puru si
It was miserably uncomfortable. More luck was very light, and the rod
it was a good old age and a lot of losers now I had to spy on a kid
amount of water. All this was common for riding, without frost
staffi, nu pony a panza tunna ca pinzava sempri a ruttari supra lu
grass.
Accussì â fini lu signuri Baggins arrived at nu postu unni l'àrburi supra o
the hand addivintau cchiù lean. Vidìa lu celu cchiù pàlidu tra iḍḍi. Lu dark
ciumi s'aprìu 'improvvisamenti largu, e ddà si juncìu a l'acqua principali di
lu ciumi dâ Furesta ca scurri 'n hastily from the great ports of kings. Ḍḍà
era nu fogghiu d'acqua scuro ca non era cchiù umbriatu, e supra lu so sciogliementu
supirfici c'èrunu dances and reflections of clouds and stiḍḍi.
Then the water rushes two ciumi Foresta swept away the whole company of
barrels and tubs luntanu â north shore, unni s'avìa manciatu n'ampia
baja. Chistu avìa na bank of fabrics sutta li rivi 'hanged and was walled ô
eastern ends of nu cappeddu emerging from hard rock. On the shore the majority works
di li vutti s'affacciaru a terra, puru si na para di chisti continuaru a scuntrari contra li petri
wharf.
There were people who were staying at these rivers. It popped up immediately
and push all of them nzèmmula ntê funni, and quannu avìanu
them cuntaru them strinciunu nzèmmula and them lassaru nzinu â matina.
Poor dwarves! Bilbo wasn't bad now. He stole everything from there and
we walked to the shore, and then we escaped towards four huts where we could see them nearby
lu edge of the water. I didn't even think of two votes for dinner
non invitatu si avìa la pussibbilitati, l'avìa statu obbligatu a farilu pi tantu tempu, e
sapiva ora sulu troppu bonu cosa era èssiri veru fami, non sulu
politeness 'ntirissatu ê delights of a look well bowed. Puru iddu avìa
Let's see fics in the focus between the trees, and who we liked cu
li sò vistiti sgocciolati e sgranati s'aggrappavunu a iḍḍu friddi e sgranati.
There's no need to tell you for a long time, I know you're hooked on those who are here now, because now we're with you
s'avvicinanu â fini dû viaggiu versu livanti e arrivanu all'urtimu
and the bigger the attachment, the sooner we have to hurry. You can help us for sure.
the anecdo màggicu was very good at the beginning, but at the end it was given to us
of such vague steps and traces of drippings that left an era
or assisted; and perhaps he began to riot, and some were about to pile up
I discovered terrifying explosions and suppressed sneezing. Very early
there was a beautiful cummotion in the nearby towns; but Bilbu
he ran away ntô buscu purtannu nu loaves and a bottle of wine from peddi and nu
cake doesn't belong to us. Lu restu dâ nights appi to spend vagnatu comu
he was far away from no focus, but the bottle helped him to do this, and iddu
in reality I slept a little above four hours of dry fog, even if it was the year
They arrived late and the air was cold.
If you svighjàu n'àutra vote cu nu sneeze very strong. He was already griciu
morning, and there was a cheerful racket on the tree.
cumponnennu na raft of vutti, and the elves from the raft will soon come to guide us
'n vasciu dû turrenti nzinu â Città dû Lagu. Bilbo sneezed another time. Nun era chiù
he was dripping but he felt like he was friddu about everything. I'm talking about how I'm annoyed
them jammi lu pigghiavanu and arrive just in time to arrive â mass of
barrichi without being nutati ntô ginirali hustle and bustle. Luckily he wasn't there
at the time of throwing, he didn't admire the streusa, and he didn't sneeze with more mercy
ancora pi nu bonu tempu.
There was a strong pushing of poles. The elf was staying there
the water was rising and pushing. Now all the empty ones are combined
he squeaked and shouted.
“Chistu è nu caricu pisanti!” quarters of a lamintau. "It floats too much, na para di
chisti nun sunnu never vacant. If you notice when you arrive on the ground ô jornu, putìamu
have a look inside,” I said.
"Now there's no time!" lu raftmannu shouted. “Push away!” And off I went
ùrtimu, lentamenti 'n princìpiu, nzinu a quannu avìanu passatu lu puntu di roccia unni l'àutri
the elves stopped as quickly as possible with the poles, and then always as fast as they were
pigghiaru lu main peaks and yes nni jeru to navigate 'n down, 'n down towards
lu Lagu.
Avìanu escaped from the prisons of the King and crossed the lignu,
but whether you are alive or dead, you still have to wait to see it.
A CALUDU WELCOME
The junta became clearer and more cautious as it floated. After a little while on Monday
tops rustled on a steep shoulder of earth that was missing by hand.
Sutta li sò pedi rucciusi commun na internal cliff avìa scurriutu lu ciumi cchiù funnu
lapping and mumbling. The cliff fell by force. The streams rushed. Lu
the tree ended. Allura Bilbu vitti na vista:
The lands open wide to iddu, bent over the waters of the peaks
who rumpiu and wandered a hundred tortuous courses, or signed himself ntô
marshes and pools dotted with islands from all over the world; but still no strong water
scurrìu custantimenti ntô menzu. And now, my dark head is torn apart
cloud, from where the Montagna looked out! I know they are close, closer to the north-east and the land that has fallen around the corner cannot be seen. Everyone
sulu stood up and looked across the marshes â furesta. Lu Sulitariu
Muntagna! Bilbo avìa arrivatu luntanu e attraversu tanti abvinturi pi vìdirilu, e
now we didn't like the wait any more.
While he listened to the rafts and told me to discard them
di nfurmazzioni ca lassaru cadiri, s'adduna prestu ch'era assai furtunatu
Never seen Avirilu, despite this remoteness. Sad as it was when I knew it
priggiuni and sorry as was the way I thought (no more managers than
poveriri nani sutta di iddu) ancora, avìa statu cchiù furtunatu di quantu avìa
he guessed. Lu discursu era tuttu dû cummerciu chi vinìa e jìa supra li vie d'acqua
and the growth of traffic above the mountains, common to the layers of the East
towards Mirkwood scumparìu or cadìu 'n disusu; and say quarrels of
the òmini dû lacu and the elves dû lignu supra lu mantinimentu dû ciumi dâ Furesta
and the care of desks. From the lands you had left many days ago
When the dwarfs were in the Muntagna, now the majority of people are there
Remember the common traditions that are so admired. Avìanu canciatu puru ntô 1990
anni ricenti, e di l'urtimi nutizzi ca Gandalf avìa avutu di iḍḍi. Fantàsticu
floods and sluices had swollen the water towards Scurrìanu towards Livanti; and there it was
it was nu tirrimotu or two (about four of one was inclined to attribute ô
dragu, alludennu to iḍḍu mainly with curses and nu nod uminosu ntô
directions from Muntagna). The marshes and swamps spread far and wide
cchiù largu of every latu. The paths avìanu scumparutu, and many knights and vagabonds
puru, si avìssiru circatu di truvari li strati pirduti. La strata di l'elfi attraversu lu
lignu ca li nani avìanu followed up Beornu's cunsigghiu now get to
a dubious tip and pike used on the eastern edges of the furesta; sulu lu
ciumi uffrìa cchiù a safe strata dê layers of Mirkwood ntô
To the north towards the Chiani ô ùmmiru of the mountains beyond, and the mountains were guarded
dû re di l'elfi dû lignu.
Then I saw that Bilbo had arrived - until the only way there was
good. I can't wait to hear from Mr. Baggins that I'm looking forward to seeing you on Monday.
barrels, si avìa saputu ca la nutizzia di chistu avìa arrivatu a Gandalf luntanu
and I gave us great anxiety, and in fact it was the end of the day
business (this story doesn't go away) and prepare for more serious things
Thorin's company quest. But Bilbo didn't know it.
Everyone who knew what was going on seemed to go on and on and on more and more,
and avìa fami, and avìa nu friddu scarsu ntô nasu, and we don't like him
as the Mountain seemed to us to frown and threaten him as he always started to peep
Closer. Doppu nu pocu pirò lu ciumi pighiò un cursu cchiù miridiunali e
the Muntagna arrived in the other country, and â fini, late ntô day the rivers crisceru
rocciusu, lu ciumi arricugghìu all of them are acqui vagabbunni nta na prufunnità and
rapid flooding, and sweeping away great vileness.
Lu suli avìa tramuntatu when we turned with another sweep towards the East lu
lu furestieri ciumi s'accuppiò ntô Lagu Longu. Ccà avìa na vucca wide cu
you can see from petra to cliffs above every latu whose feet are piled up with fabrics. Lu
Lagu Longu! Bilbu never started to get some water if it wasn't the seas
putìa èssiri accussì granni. It was so wide that the opposite streams seemed narrow
far away, but it was so long at the northern end, it was pointing towards it
Muntagna, we couldn't see anything more. Sulu dâ map Bilbo sapia ca
Luntanu ddà above, some already sparkled them stiddi dû Wain, lu
Lu ciumi Running scinnìu ntô lagu di Dale e câ Furesta
Ciumi chinu d'acqui prufunni chiddu ca na vote avìa a sissiri statu nu granni prufunnu rucciusu
vaḍḍi. Nta lestrema miridiunali l'acqui radduppiati si spurgaru n'autra vota supra l'autu
fell and ran away quickly towards the barren lands. Ntâ sira ferma
air lu scrùsciu dê cascati si putìa ascutari comu nu roarghiu luntanu.
Nun luntanu dâ vucca dû ciumi Forest there was the strange city ca iddu
sintìu the elves parrari ntê cantini dû re. It was never built on the shore,
Yes, there are some sheds and buildings there, but right above it
surfaces of the lake, prutetta of vortices of tops ca trasi di nu
prumuntoriu di roccia ca fumava na baia tranquillo. Nu granni ponti fattu di
lignu scurriu finu a unni supra enormi munzeddi fatti di àrburi furestieri fu custruiutu nu travagghiu
country of lignu, not country of elves but of men, who still dare to stay here
sutta l'ùmmira dâ luntana muntagna-dragu. I still popped up above it
lu cummerciu ca arrived above lu granni ciumi dû Sud and was carruggiatu passannu lu
casca â sò city; but in the great times of antiquity, when Dale was in the North
rich and prudish, avìanu statu rich and putenti, and there was
foru flotti di varchi supra l'acqui, e quarchidunu era chini d'oru e
some have warriors in armour, and there were warriors and made approx
now eranu sulu na liggenna. The putrid munzeddi of a city cchiù granni putìssiru are still siri
you saw the rivers for a long time when the water was afflicted by drought.
But the recurdaru picca of all those, even if forty of one still sang old songs
gods dwarf kings of Mountain, Thror and Thrain of Durin's race,
and the victory of Dragunu, and the fall of the lords of Dale. Arcuni
cantava puru ca Thror e Thrain turnavanu nu jornu e l'oru
scurriri ntê peaks, through the erased mountains, and all who were on the ground
chinu of nova canzuna and novi laughter. But you don't like this thing
'nfluenzanu assái I know cutiddiàni business.
As soon as the raft of everyone is seen, no one should cross them
from the city, and cheered the esteemed ones from the raft. Then f uru melted strings and
the oars were pulled, and soon the raft was pulled out of the currents
Ciumi Furesta and tow 'ntornu to the other shoulder of rock ntô picciriddu
bay of the city of Lacu. There it was moored not far from the head towards the shore
the great bridges. Soon the men vinìanu dû Sud and pigghiaru quarchidunu
of the barrichi luntanu, and others the chinivanu of goods ca avìanu purtatu
the most purtati arrè above the streams â home of the elves dû lignu. Ntô frattiempu
li vutti foru lassati a gallu mentri l'elfi dâ zattera e li varchieri
annau a celebration in Lake-city.
Avìssiru statu marvelavigghiati, yes avìssiru pututu vìdiri who
succidìu 'down the shore, after that you'll have annatu and admire it during the nights
I had fallen. First of all everyone was tagged by Bilbo and pushed
shore and it opened. The moans come from inside, and no one is very sad
dwarf. There was no tattered beard on his beard; it was accussì dulurusu and rìggidu, accussì
firitu e sbuffatu non putìa stari o 'ncittari attraversu lu funnu
water more lying down gimiannu ntâ shore. Come and wait for us, hungry and happy
common dogs that are 'ncatinatu and scurdàtu nta nu cunigghiu pi na simana. Iḍḍu
era Thorin, ma putìsti diri sulu câ so catina d'oru, e câ
culuri dû I'm cappucciu now dirty and snatched blue-celu cû I'm silver stained
tassel. Passàu no little time before ca iḍḍu fussi puru educatu cu l'hobbit.
“Ben, are you alive or dead?” called Bilbu quite ncruciatu.
Maybe you'd have lost your mind because you'd already done a good meal anyway
the dwarves, and also the custom of vrazza and jammi, no more words than great ones
air allowance. – «Siti still in prisons, or are they there? Yes, you have a handful,
and if you continue with this stupid adventure, it's yours doppu tuttu e
don't lu meu, it's better to slap them and rub them, jammi and pruvari and
help me get out of here while there's room for improvement!"
Thorin naturalmenti vitti lu sensu di chistu, quinni doppu àutri gemiti iḍḍu
he got up and helped the common hobbit. Not dark
sciarriànnusi nta l'acqua fridda àppiru un travagghiu diffìcili e assai bruttu
find the right ones. Knock on and call Sulu
scupriù circa sei nani ca putìanu rispùnniri. Chisti foru spaccati e
help ashore unni s'assittàvanu or s'attruvàvanu mummuriannu and giminnu; èranu accussì
wet and dried and squeezed, it is difficult to still put them together
Relax or be grateful for more care.
Dwalin and Balin were two darkest gods, and it wasn't good
ask for help. Bifur and Bofur èranu cchiù picca banged and cchiù sicchi,
but they curl up and don't want to do anything. Fili and Kili, however, ca èranu
young people (smaller dwarfs) and avìanu puru statu 'packed with lots of orders
pay nta barrichi cchiù nichi, niscìa cchiù or smiling menus, cu sulu na firitizza
or two and na stiffness ca soon you sdirrubbàu.
“I hope you never smell the apple again!” said Fili. “My tub was
chinu di chista. The apple stinks more often when there is little muviri and
sunnu friddi and sick dâ fami è 'nfami. Putissi manciari qualigghiè what ntô
munnu largu now, more auri, but not an apple!”
Cu l'aiutu vuluntariu of Fili and Kili, Thorin and Bilbo â fini
scupriù lu restu dâ company and li fics nesciri. Scarsu fatu
Bombur durmìa or without sensu; Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin and Gloin werenu
'he was born and seemed half alive; avìanu a sissiri purtati all one of
unu and curcatu 'mpietusu ntâ riva.
"Well! Here we go!" said Torinu. "And suppose we should thank you?"
our stiḍḍi and lord Baggins. Sunnu sure that you have the right to wait for him, even if you do
vulìssiru ca putìa organize nu cchiù còmudu trips. Again, all of them
assài ô vostru sirvizziu ancora na vota, signuri Baggins. Senza dubbiu sentimu
grateful goodness, when we are fed and recovered. Not frattiempu who
next?"
"I cunsigghiu la città dû Lacu," I said Bilbo. “Who's there, Autru?”
No one can suggest anything else, obviously; quinni lassannu l'autri
Thorin and Fili and Kili and the hobbit si nni jeru longu the shore ô granni
bridges. There were some guards at the head, but they didn't keep their heads very high
be careful, since it was so long ago there was no real need. Except
more occasional arguments over the tolls of ciumi èranu friends with them
Elves dû lignu. Other people were distant; and 4 cristianu cchiù giuni ntô
the city openly doubted the existence of nuḍḍu dragu ntâ muntagna, and
ridìanu dî grigi e dî jucatura ca dicìanu ca l'avìanu vistu
vulannu ntô celu ntê so jorna giuvini. Whoever is here isn't a surprise
li guardii bivìanu e ridìanu vicinu a nu focu ntâ sò capanna, e non
hear the scrusciu of the crack of the dwarfs or the footsteps of the four
scouts. It was marvelous when Thorin Oakenshield was enormous
trasìu dâ porta.
“Who is and who is flying?” shouted they jumped towards them
feet and cleaned their weapons.
“Thorin figghiu di Thrain figghiu dû Re Thror sutta la Montagna!” I said
nanu cu na vuci strong, and he looked at him, nunustanti them seen torn and
hood dragged. The gold lucid us ntô coddu and ntâ life; I know those eyes areranu
scuru and prufunnu. "I'm back. I want to see Patruni from this city!"
Then there was enormous excitement. Quarchidunu dî cchiù foolish currìu
outside the hut as they waited for the Muntagna jissi d'oru ntâ nights
and all the acqui dû lagu addivèntanu subbitu yellow. Lu capitanu dâ
I went ahead on guard.
“And who sunnu chisti?” he called, pointing to Fili and Kili and Bilbo.
“Li figghi da figghia di me patri”, replied Thorin, “Fili and Kili di
Durin's race, and Mr. Baggins can travel to the next place
West."
“Come in peace, put your weapons!” said the captain.
“Nun n'avemu nuḍḍu,” said Thorin, and it was quite true: li so cuteḍḍi avìanu
he was pigghiatu of iḍḍi of the elves of lignu, and puru of granni spata Orcrista.
Bilbo had his sword bent, curled up as usual, but he didn't tell us anything.
“Non avemu bisognu di armi, ca â fini turnanu ê nostri comu si parra
old man. We didn’t want to do this to you so many. Get us to your patrun!”
“It's a celebration,” I said to the captain.
“Allura tantu cchiù mutivu pi purtaricci a iḍḍu”, Fili burst out, as it was
impatient addivintari more than these solemnities. “We are used and hungry doppu
our long road and we had sick companions. Now hurry up and lassamu aviri
there is no more pallor, or your father might have something to say.”
“Follow me allura”, I said the captain, and he guided you as Christians.
Li over the bridges, cross them and look away
citta. Chistu era nu circu largu d'acqua tranquilla circhiatu di l'auti munzeddi supra
whoever built the largest houses, and long banks of lignu with many
steps and steps ca scìnnunu â superficial dô lagu. Of nu grandparents
The room shone with many lights and I was overcome by the sound of many voices. Iḍḍi
passau I know the ports and they arrive flashing no lights taliannu longhi tàvuli chini
cu lu pòpulu.
"I am Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King of the Mountain! Iu
turnari!" shouted Thorin with loud noises from the door, in front of the captain
putìa diri qualegghiè cosa.
Everyone will jump 'n walk. Lu Maistru was born in the city of his grandparents
sit. But no one got up cu cchiù granni surprise of the òmini dâ raft of the elfi ca
they were seated in the room. Press forward before dû
Tavula di Maistru gridavanu:
“Chisti sunnu priggiuneri dû nostru re ca fugaru, vagannu
nani vagabbunni ca di iddi stissi nun putìanu dari nuddu bonu cuntu,
escape the buscu and harass our people!”
"Is that true?" called the Master. In fact, how he pinched the whole thing
they are likely to return to the King on the Mountain, if some such
pirsuna avìa mai esistutu.
“It's true that there's a lot of blunders spouted by King Elficu e
'get imprisoned without mutivu while you wander around our land,'
rispunnìu Torinu. “But neither the lock nor the bar ponnu ostaculari lu ritornu â casa di cui si parra
old man. Not even this city is the kingdom of the elves of the lignu. Parru a lu Maistru di lu
city ​​of l'Omini dû Lagu, non ê zatteri dû re."
Then the Master hesitated and looked from one to the other. Lu
Elvenking was very bad when he was banned and the Master didn't want to
enimicizia cu iddu, né pinzava assai di canzuni vecchi, dannu la menti a
lu cummerciu and the tolls, ê loads and to the gold, to whose habits duvìa the sò pusizzioni.
Other differences occurred, however, and the issue was resolved immediately
without iddu. The news spread across the ports of Saluni in common focus
across the whole city. People were shouting inside the room and outside.
The docks are full of people in a hurry. Quarchidunu began to sing the snatches
of old songs concerning lu ritornu dû Re sutta la Montagna; about lu
he was Thror's nephew, not Thror, he was the one who didn't bother us
the least. Others pigghiaru the canzuna and became strong and self above lu
lake.
The King is on his milk,
 The King of sculpted stone,
Lu signuri of the silver funtani
 It will arrive soon!
La sò curuna havi a èssiri sustinuta,
 My harp is strumming,
Li sò sali fannu ecu d'oru
 To the songs of antiquity re-sung.
Li voschi s'unnanu supra li muntagni
 And the grass on his back;
My riches will show off their funtani
 And the ciumi currunu d'oru.
Li ciumi currunu 'n gioia,
 The lakes have been made to shine and add,
All the sorrows fail and the sadness
 Ntô ritornu dû Re-Muntagna!
Allura cantaru, o assài cussì, sulu c'era assài cchiù,
and there were many cries similar to the music of harps and violins
ammiscatu cu iddu. Certu ca tali entusiasmu non era canusciuta ntâ città
'n memory of nannu cchiù old. The same dû lignu elves
he began to marvel greatly and even to be afraid. They didn't know about
Naturally, as Thorin went, he ran away, and began to pin down the spoiled king.
hannu fattu n'erruri gravi. Pi quantu riguarda lu Maistru vitti ca nun c'era nenti
autru more chistu but more obey ô chianciri ginirali, can mumentu anyway, and
more pretend to criticize Thorin was who I said iḍḍu. Dunca iddu renounced iddu
I know the great seat and I placed Fili and Kili near the old men's seats.
Puru to Bilbo told us nu postu ô tavulu àutu, and nuḍḍa explanations of huns
trasìu - nuḍḍa songzuna had it alludutu puru ntâ dark way - it was
call you ntô bustle ginirali.
Na picca doppu the other dwarves foru purtati ntâ ammenzu city
scenes of enthusiasm and wonder. Furu all ducturi and nourished and
host and spoil you in the most delightful and satisfying way. A
a large house was given to Thorin and his company; passages and rows
foru misi ô sò sirvizziu; e foddi s'assittàvanu fora e cantavanu canzuni tuttu lu jornu, o
he stayed if some nanu mustrava as much as his nasu.
Quarchi canzuna was old; but some are quite new and
it seemed that the security of the dead was accompanied by dragu and cargoes of the rich
rigali ca scìnnunu dû ciumi nzinu in Lake-town. Those who are inspired in large parts
dû Maestro and we don't particularly like dwarves, but no
ntô frattiempu èranu cuntenti e addivintàru soon 'nfat and strong
di novu. Certu nna na simana foru assai ricupirati, arricanusciuti boni
Pannu dî sò culura righteous, with barbs combed and tagged, and proud
steps. Thorin looked and walked as if the reign had already been recovered
and Smaug tagghiau to nichi pieces.
Allura, as you said, the good feelings of dwarfs towards the little ones
the hobbit grew louder every day. There were no more moans or groans.
Bivìanu I know, greetings, and we will ficiru na sword, and we will ficiru na
great sciarra of iddu; whoever was pure good, didn't feel bad
particularly cheerful. Non s'avìa scurdatu dû sguardu dâ Muntagna, né
lu pinseri dû dragu, and iḍḍu had over a shocking friddu. More three
Jorna sneezed and coughed, and never again, and even twice
li sò discursi ntê banchetti èrunu limitati a "Thag you very buch."
Ntô frattiempu l'elfi dû lignu avìanu turnatu supra lu ciumi dâ Furesta cu
They were busy, and there was great excitement in the king's palace. iu àju
never heard who killed the chief guard and the steward.
He never held keys or anything while dwarfing them
He arrived in the city of Lagu and Bilbo was careful not to find anyone who was never invisible.
However, I dared to say that it was stapled more than anyone who wanted a canuscìa, even if without a doubt Mr.
Baggins arrives in mysteries. In any case, the king knows now
'ncaricu dî nani, or pinsò ca lu facìa, and I said to iḍḍu stissu:
"Okay! Videmu! We won't go back to Mirkwood again."
without having something to say on the matter. But I was waiting for him to do it
everyone arrives at a bad end, and they are right!” However, Iḍḍu didn't believe us
nta ni ca cummàttunu and slayer dragons like Smaug, and iḍḍu fortimenti
suspittatu tintativu of furtu or four what you could say, it proves that it wasn't
wise elfu and cchiù cchiù wise of the city men, even if not quite right, common nuiautri
vidiri â fini. Mannau I know them spy 'ntornu ê rivi dû lagu e
as long as you go north towards the Montagna, and wait.
At the end of the quinnicès Thorin began to pin down his departure. While Monday
l'entusiasmu ca durò ancora ntâ città era lu tempu pi pigghiari aiutu. Nun fussi
make the headlights more relaxed, all arriving at a later time. Here I will talk to the Maistru e
I knew them and I said soon Iddu and I know the company they have moved forward towards
the Mountain.
Allura, first of all, the Master was surprised and not a little scared;
and si dumannò si doppu tuttu Thorin era veru nu discinnenti dû vecchiu
king. Never had you pinched the dwarfs before you dared
get closer to Smaug, but believe that sooner or later he will have to
there were discoveries and there were results. He was wrong. Thorin, for sure, was
truly the nephews of the King on the Mountain, and there is none
knowing who can do nothing will not dare and will be vindicated or can recover from
I know it.
But the Master no longer regretted leaving them. They were dear
more keep us, and when I arrived you would have transformed them into a long holiday
the business has stopped. “Lassalli jiri and bother Smaug, and I saw comu
welcome them!” he thought: “Of course, oh boy of Thorin Thrain, Thror.
cool!” it was who I said: “You had to get back to me. The hour is near,
parratu of antiquity. What help you can offer will be tò, and you won't have to
gratitudini quannu lu to regnu è ripigghiatu.”
Allura no day, even if autumn was now arriving long ago, and there twenty it was
friddu, and them fogghi cadìanu vilocimenti, three great passages left of Lake-town, loaded
with rowers, dwarves, Mr Baggins and many sailors. Cavaddi e
you put them avìanu statu mannati 'n giru more surrounding layers more ncuntràrili ô yes
postu di disembarkation numinatu. Lu Maistru and I know Cunzigghieri there cumannaru
goodbye to the great steps of the town hall in Scinnìa ô Lagu.
The people sang on the docks and outside the windows. Li janchi remi diving and
sprayed, and set off towards the north above the lake until the last phase was long
travelu. The only person who was very unhappy was Bilbo.
SUPR'Â DOOR
Nta dui day, remaru proprio uppra lu Lagu Longu and s'avìanu scumparutu ntô
lu Ciumi Currennu, e ora tutti putìanu vìdiri la Muntagna Sulitaria
dark streams and àuti in front of iḍḍi. The ciumi was strong and I went
slow. At the end of the third day, four kilometers above the top, arrive at
the left bank or kill them and disembark. Ccà si junceru there
get rid of other supplies and nissari and place them further
usu ca avìa statu mannatu pi 'ncuntràrili. Pack up the chiḍḍu ca putìanu above lu
pony and he restu was made in a warehouse sutta a tent, but nuddu of the men
of the city he was cu iddi puru for nights close to the sight of
the Mountain.
"Not until now until the song can't be seen!" I said. Era
cchiù easy cridiri ô Dragunu and easy cridiri menu in Thorin nta chisti
sarvaggi parts. There are some warehouses that don't need naked guards, more than the whole earth
era disulatu e vacanti. Quinni escorted her and left them immediately
lu ciumi e li strati versu la riva, puru si la notti stava già tirannu
above.
A cold and sultry night passed and my spirits fell. Next day
Let's leave and vote. Balin and Bilbo ride back, each riding another pony
pisantimenti caricu vicinu a iddu; l'autri èranu 'n pocu avanti pi scègghiri nu
slow layer, because there are no layers. Facìanu north-west, slanzànnusi
dû ciumi Running, and you always get closer to nu granni
spur dâ Muntagna ca fu lanciata versu sud versu iḍḍi.
Fu nu viaggiu stancu, e tranquillu e furtu. Nun cera
laugh or canzuna or sound of the arpi, and the orgògliu and the spiranzi ca avìanu
Shut up ntô choirs ô cantu of old songs nearby ô lagu muriru away to nu
saddens the dust. Sapìanu ca s'avvicinàvanu â fini dû sò
he travels, and he finds himself in very horrible ends. Criscìu the earth ntunnu a iddi
sad and sterile, but yes, as Thorin told us, he was virdi and
right. There was little grass, and before so much time neither ruschiu nor arvuru,
and on the belching and dark strains more parrari of those who can scumpareru more so much time.
Arrivaru â Disulazzioni dû Dracuni, and arriving to
lu declinu di l'annu.
Arriving and layers from Muntagna all the same without any problems
pirìculu o qualegghiè signu dû Dracuni diversu dû disertu ca avìa fattu
above my den. The Muntagna grew dark and silent in front of the gods and always
cchiù auta supra di iḍḍi. Ficiru lu sò first campu ntô latu kill them dû
granni spur miridiunali, ca finiunta n'autizza called Ravenhill. Supra chistu
there was an old guard post; but he still didn't put it down to Acchianari, it was
troppu espostu.
Before leaving, we killed the spurious ones from Muntagna more around
porta ammucciata, supra cui appuiàvanu tutti li sò spiranzi, Thorin mannau nu scout
more spying on the land ô South unni lu Frunti
Lu canceddu stopped. Pi chistu scigghìu Balinu and Fili and Kili, and cu
iḍḍi annaru Bilbu. You march on the gray and silent rocks nzinu ê pedi
of Corvo. Ccà lu ciumi, doppu aviri wrapped n'anchiu largu supra la vaddi di
Dale, turn from Muntagna not so strata ô Lagu, quick scurri and
rumorusu. Its shore was bare and rocky, steep and steep above the streams; and
they looked over the narrow water, foamed and splashed inside
so many boulders, if you putìanu vìdiri ntâ go wide ô ùmmiru dû
Li vrazza dâ muntagna sunu the gray ruins of ancient buildings, towers and walls.
"There's all of Dale's arrivals," said Balin. «The sides of the mountain
eranu virdi cu ligni and all the vaddi repaired rich and pleasant ntô
jorna quannu li campani sunàvanu nta chiḍḍa città.” Parìa sia tristu ca scuro mentri
I said to him: he had been one of Thorin's companions every day of Dragunu
vinutu.
Don't dare follow the dogs much further ahead towards the Gate;
but annaru oltri la fini dâ spurta miridiunali, nzinu a quannu s'attruvaru ammucciati
back to a rock putìanu look out and see the dark cavernous opening nta nu
granni muru di roccia ntra li vrazza dâ Muntagna. Nesci di iddu l'acqui di
the Currents appeared; and of whoever they were, there was a vapuri and a dark one
smoke. Nothing moves any waste, except steam and water, and
ogni tantu nu corvu nìuru e minacciusu. L'unicu sonu era lu
I sound of the water of Petra, and every now and then I will croccu di nu
aceḍḍu. Balin trimò.
“Turnamu!” I said iḍḍu. «Don't put any lights on! And I don't like you
these dark aceddi, parinu spyi dû mali.”
Lu canceddu davanti.
“Lu dragu is still alive and didn't go up the Muntagna allura... o
Immagginau accussì dû fumu," said the hobbit.
“He doesn't prove it,” I said Balin, “even if you don't doubt it, you do
curttu. But maybe it's been a long time since you've been there for the first time, or maybe you're curcatu supra
lu latu dâ muntagna ca look, and I still expected smokes and vapors
leave the ports: all the salts inside have gone to Chiniri from there
you smell shameless.”
Cu gocceri accussì tristi, siguiti sempri di corvi ca croccanu supra di iḍḍi,
fìciru the tired road more shifts ô campu. Sulu in June avìanu statu
guests in Elrond's proud house, and puru si l'autunnu ora strisciava
towards the winter those who liked it now seemed like years ago. Èranu suli
ntê piriculusi waste without hope of further help. Èranu â fini dû 1990
I know he travels, but more often than not, I don't know the ends of my research.
Nuḍḍu di iḍḍi avìa arristatu assài spìritu.
Now it's strange to say that Mr. Baggins had more than the others. Iḍḍu avissi
spissu pigghia 'n lend Thorin's map and look at it, pinsannu ê runi e ê
message of littri from the moon ca Elrond avìa liggiutu. Fu iddu ca fic lu
the dwarves accumulate the circata piriculusa ntê kill pinnici dû sigretu
brings. Spustaru lu sò campu allura nta na longa vaddi, cchiù tight from grandparents
valleys ntô South unni s'attruvàvunu li Canceddi dô ciumi, and muratu cu cchiù vasci
spurious from Muntagna. Dui di chisti ccà spinciunu forward to punishing dû
main mass nta longhi steep-sided ridges ca cadìanu always towards sutta towards lu
chianu. Nta stu latu kill them there's ranu cchiù picca signs dû dragu
I walked marauder, and there was more grass. About who
campu kill them, shadow them all day of cliffs and walls until when they began to
rush towards the furesta, jornu doppu jornu travagghiàvanu 'n parties circannu
paths above lu latu dâ muntagna. Yes the map was real, four banna auta above
the cliff ntâ head dâ vaddi you have to stay â porta sigreta. Jornu doppu jornu iḍḍi
turnaru ntô so campu without success.
Ma â fini, 'n manera 'mprivista, attruvaru chiḍḍu ca circàvanu. Fili e
Kili and the hobbit turnaru nu jornu 'n vaddi and si sciarriàru
among the fallen rocks ntô sò àngulu miridiunali. Versu menzujornu, striscianti
back to Petra Granni who was on the common pilastru, Bilbo vinni supra chiḍḍu ca
they looked like rough steps that went up and down. Seguennu chisti cu entusiasmu iḍḍu e
li nani attruvaru tracci di na traccia stritta, spissu pirduta, spissu riscuperta,
who wandered above the summit of the southern crest and purged them to the end
with a sponge still narrower, as we turned towards the north across the face there
Muntagna. Guardànnusi 'n bassu, vittiru ca èranu 'n cima â roccia a
the head went away and they looked at 'so' campu sutta.
Silence, clinging to the rock wall with a straight hand, annaru 'n file sulu
as long as the sponge, once the wall opens and transforms into a bay with steep walls, a grass floor, still and quiet. Lu sò ngressu ca avìanu
attruvatu you can't see from above because of the cliff edge,
nor was it any further than that, because it looked like a dark fissure
and nothing more. It wasn't a cave and it was open above the sky; but there is
nternal end rose nu muru chianu ca ntâ parti cchiù vascia, near ô terrenu, it was
smooth and straight like the travagghiu of masonry, but without more joints or cracks
we have seen them. There were not a single postu or lintel or threshold sign, and no sign of
bar or bolts or pirtusu of keys; yet there is no doubt that you will find the door
at the end.
We banged, we spun, we spun, we implored to muvìrisi,
parràvunu fragments of spells rutti d'apirtura e nenti si sciogghìu. A
The last of us, tired, lay back on the grass and walked on, and then the sira crouched down
I'm long hooked down.
There was excitement in the night. La matina priparàvanu
pi muvirisi n'autra vota. Sulu Bofur e Bombur arristaru pi custodiari lu
the ponies and the warehouses ca avìanu purtatu dô ciumi. Lu
others scinniru dâ vaddi and above lu walk as soon as you find you, and so nzinu ô
narrow sponge. Luncu chistu non putìanu purtari bundles or parcels, so narrow
e era senza fiatu, cu na caduta di centucinquanta pedi vicinu a iḍḍi supra
to sharp rocks sutta; but each of the gods took a good bbucchedda of wrapped rope
Strittu 'ntornu â life, and so â ends without misfortune arriving ô picciriddu
grassy bay.
Ccà fìciru lu third campu, pigghiannu chiḍḍu ca ci serbia
sutta cu li sò cordi. Ntâ stissa manera ca putìanu ogni tantu
get one of the most active dwarves, like Kili, more scanciari such nutizzi
as there was, or pighiari na parti ntâ ntâ guardia sutta, while Bofur was pulled
finu ô campu cchiù àutu. Bombur nun vinìa né la corda né lu
pircursu.
"I'm too fat to hang out," I said. “I felt dizzy and
kick my beard, and allura avissi avutu n'autra vota tridici anni. E lu annodatu
li cordi sunnu troppu suttili pû me pisu.” Pi furtuna pi iḍḍu chistu non era veru, comu
I will see.
Ntô frattiempu quarters of one of the iddi explored the sponge beyond the opening and
Attruvau nu camminu ca purtava semper cchiù supra â muntagna; but he did it
Don't dare venture very far ahead, and there wasn't much use anyway. Out above
ddà reigned no silence, ruttu di nuddu aceddu or sound except chiddu dû ventu
ntê firitòi di petra. Parràvanu bassu e nun chiamanu mai e nun cantavanu, pirchì
pirìculu had trimmed every rock. L'àutri ca èranu 'mplicati cû sigretu di
the door didn't open again. Èranu too enthusiastic, the more I'll worry about them
runes or litri dâ luna, but circau without refusal to discover the Huns
exactly on the smooth rock face the door was piled up. Avìanu
purtaru peaks and instruments of many types of Lake-town, and at the beginning iḍḍi
circau di usari chisti. Ma quannu curperu la petra li manichi si scipparu
and they are cruelly torn apart, and the steel heads are broken or bent as they are.
The minirariu travagghiu, they saw clearly, was not good against the magic that had happened
close this door; and yet I was scared when the scrùsciu resounded.
Bilbo attruvau assittatu ntâ porta sulu e stancu, ddà
it wasn't a door, for sure, but it was a little boy who was erbosu
spazziu ntra lu muru e l'apirtura lu “spurtatu” n divertimentu,
I remember Bilbo's palori a long time ago, it's not an unexpected party, I'm not a hobbithole, when I said that putìanu sissiri sit down, don't bring nzinu to anyone who doesn't pinsàunu to
something. And seated and pinned down ca lu fìciru, or ca vagavanu without purpose, and
addivintaru glummer and glummer.
I know the spirits avìanu crisciutu no little â scuperta dû percorsu, but now Iḍḍi
affunnaru ntê boots; and maybe we don't want to give up and jiri. Lu
the hobbit wasn't the most lustrous of dwarves. Facia
nenti autru ca stàrisi câ spalla â facci dâ roccia e taliari luntanu versu punenti attraversu
the opening, above the cliff, above the wide lands nzinu ô muru nìuru of
Mirkwood, and even further away, some votes were pinned approx
putìanu vìdiri the Munti Brumiusi nichi and luntani. You dwarf them
dumannatu whoever does iddu answers:
“I said let's stay at the door and think about whether it would be possible for me to work, not
parrari di trasiri inside, quinni sugnu assittatu e pinzu." But you're afraid because iddu
it didn't staple very much, but whoever was there was beyond the blue
distance, the quiet Terra Uccidintali and the Cullina e lu so pirtusu hobbit sutta.
Na granni petra gray stood on the grass and iḍḍu looked at it in a cheeky way
Iddu looked at the big snails. Paria ca we really like the closed bay
where there are walls of cool rock, and there are many enormous granite ones
they crawled slowly and stickily around both sides.
"Dumani accumincia l'ùrtima simana di l'autunnu," dissi Thorin nu jornu.
“And winter comes after autumn,” said Bifur. “And the annu doppu doppu
who," said Dwalin, "and our barbs criscirannu nzinu a quannu s'appiccicanu â roccia
â go before anything happens. More who is making our latru
nuiautri? I saw that you had no visible aneddu, and you had no specially excellent aneddu
now, accuminciau a pinsari ca putissi passari pû Fronti
Bring and spy on them just like that!"
Bilbo heard him: the dwarves were above the rocks just above him
recintu unni era assittatu... and "Bonu Grazziusu!" pinzò, “accussì
It's who's the one who's responsible for pinzari, isn't it? It's always good to have it
I know more about the difficulty, at least for how many years he left. Chiḍḍu ca è-è
are you going to headlights? Avissi pututu sapiri ca something scary
you happen to me â fini. I don't think about having any substitutes to see them
valli di Dale n'autra vota, e quantu a chiḍḍu canceddu vapuriusu! ! !”
Those nights were very unfortunate and almost didn't last. Monday after Monday
the dwarves are all in various directions; some were
exercised you put them on, four of a man was walking in the mountain. Every day Bilbo sat sad in the grassy bay and looked at the stone, or
pierce sharply through the narrow opening. I had a strange feeling about it
they waited for four things. “Maybe lu magu will suddenly return
today,” he thought.
He raised his head as if to see the idea of ​​a distant fury. Come lu
lu suli vutatu a punenti there was no shine of yellow above lu so tettu luntanu, as lu
lights pressed the last fogghi pàliri. Soon I won the orange ball of suli
affunnannu versu lu liveddu di l'occhi. Si nni jìu all'apirtura e ddà
pale and faded was the new moon above the Earth.
Nta chiḍḍu mumentu sintìu na forti fissura arrè a iḍḍu. Cà above lu
the grey stone in the grass was a huge tordu, almost a carbon nucleus, lu so pàlidu
yellow breast with dark spots. Ciacca! Avìa pigghiatu na snail e
he was banging on the stone. Ciacca! Ciacca!
Suddenly Bilbo understood. Scurdànnusi of all the pirìculi s'arristau supra lu spyeru
and greeted the dwarves, screamnnu and sciarriànnu. Those who were closer
arriving cadennu above the rocks and cchiù speeds ca putìanu 'ntornu â sponge pi
he, dumannannusi who was there the thing; the other one shouted of èssiri
he pulled up the ropes (except Bombur, of course: durmìa).
Bilbo explained to us immediately. Everyone fell silent: the hobbit was close by.
gray petra, and the dwarves with the barbs can melt away like crazy.
Lu suli was always anxious to keep going, and there I was only a few moments away. He tightened his belt
rusty cloud and scumparìu. Li nani gimiru, but still Bilbo
he was almost without moving. The moon was tuffannu nzinu a l'urizzunti.
The sira was coming. Then all of a sudden when I knew the hope was there I came to Russia
he reached Suli and ran away like a jiritu through a cloud. No sparks
lights arrived straight through the opening of the bay and fell on the smooth surface
make us rock. The old man tordu, ca avìa taliatu di n'àutu percu cu
beady eyes and a peeled head of na parts, called nu trillu mpruvvisu. There was nu
strong cracks. No escape from the rock is divided between walls and falls. Cumparìu nu pirtusu
suddenly about three feet of land.
Prestu, trimannu pi nun spariri la pussibbilità, li nani si precipitaru a
the rock and spincìu - 'n vanu.
"The keys! The keys!" cried Bilbu. "Unni is Thorin?"
Thorin hurried.
"The keys!" Bilbu shouted. "The key chi jiva câ map! Check it now
while there's still tempu!”
Allura Thorin got up and pulled the key from the door to the door.
coḍḍu. Lu misi ô pirtusu. It fit and turned! Spizzari! Lu scintillu si nni jìu
Fora, he was exhausted, the moon disappeared, and the syra dawned in the sky.
Now everyone spincìru nzèmmula, e pianu pianu na parti dû muru di roccia detti
manner. Cumpareru and s'allargàru them long and straight. Na porta àuta cincu pedi e
three wide it was diliniatu, and slowly without any sound it swayed towards the back. Iḍḍu
it seemed like the dark night was gone
latu di muntagna, e prufunnu scuru unni non si putìa vìdiri nenti
before the eyes, a yawning vucca purtava inside and sutta.
INTERNAL INFORMATION
For more time the dwarfs stood in the dark in front of the door and discussed,
up to how many times Thorin spoke:
“Now is the time for our esteem sir Baggins, who has learned
iddu stissu a bonu cumpagnu pâ nostra longa strata, and a hobbit chinu di curaggiu
and I will rise again, I will supiranu much of my greatness, and I can say that I can accumulate a wealth of goods
la furtuna supira assài lu sòlitu indennitati, ora è lu tempu pi iḍḍu di
carry out the most important service which was closed to our Company; it's now
more time iḍḍu earn my Recumbency."
You can use Thorin's styles during the most important occasions, so let's do it
There's nothing more to you, but you can expect a lot more
this. It was certainly an important occasion, but Bilbo felt impatient.
now let Thorin know, and know who he was
guide you to.
“If you want to say that you think about it, it's light, I'll travel before you pass by, or
Oakenshield, the figghiu of Thorin Thrain, with your beard you always cry longa," iḍḍu
said ncruciatu, " you say this right and you did it! You could refuse. T'aju
of two messengers already, ca èranu difficultly not the urigginali affair, quinni
who sugnu, penzu, already duvutu four recumbent. But 'everyone pays more in the third vote'
comu dicìa me patri, e quarchi vota non penzu ca mi rifiutu. Forsi
I began to trust my fortune more than I did in the old days" - iḍḍu
I thought it was last spring before I left my house, but it was centuries ago
- "but anyway I think I'm going to take a quick look and finish it.
Now are you coming with me?”
No return of vuluntari was expected, so it was not diluted.
Fili and Kili seemed uncomfortable and sat on top of the jam, but the others
non facìa finta di uffriri, tranni lu vecchiu Balin, l'omu di guardianu, ca
he was cchiuttostu amatu from the hobbit. I said let's go to the inside menu
maybe just a little day, ready to call for more help if necessary.
The one who can say more about the dwarves is who he is: ntinnìanu pagari
Bilbo veru beḍḍu pî sò sirvizzi; l'avìanu purtatu a fari nu
little work was done the first time, and we didn't mind that the little one could do it
iddu lu facìa; but I would have made everyone better by getting him out of those troubles,
Yes, it's true, as it happens in the case of trolls at the beginning of
I got them hooked before I reached more grateful individuals
to iddu. Ccà è: the dwarfs aren't heroes, but carculanti folk cu na
great idea of ​​the values ​​of the deaf; certain Sunnu tricks and treacherous and
lots quite dyed; cer'uni non sunnu, ma sunnu genti abbastanza dimenti comu Thorin e
Cumpagnìa, if you don't expect too much.
Arrieri di iddu niscìanu li stiddi nta nu celu pàllidu barratu di nìuru
when the hobbit s'arrubbò attraversu la porta ncantunata e s'arrubbò ntô
Muntagna. It was much easier than expected. Chistu wasn't a goblin
entrance, oh rough grutta of the lignu elves. It was a passage made by dwarves, a
the authorizes him to be rich and empowered: straight common suvranu, smooth-flooring and
smooth, hollow with delicate fins that can never be directed - within a quarter of a mile
far end ntô nìuru sutta.
After a while Balin said to Bilbo “Good luck!” and it was signed unni
I could still see the blurring of the door, and the trick of the echoes of
The tunnel feels the coolness of the whispering voices of others just
out. Then the hobbit snatched the tale, and heard the echoes
pigghiari cchiù care of the hobbit no more no lighthouses nuḍḍu sonu, iḍḍu squeezed without a cry,
down, down ntô dark. He was trembling with fear, but I didn't know what to do
she was stared and gloomy. Already he was a very different hobbit of chiḍḍu ca
I ended up without a pocket handkerchief from Bag-End a long time ago. Avia
He hadn't had any pocket handkerchiefs for many years. Sciogghiù lu daggers ntâ so
sheath, tightened the belt, and continued.
"Now you're done, Bilbo Baggins," I said to him. "You
jiu e ci misi lu pedi drittu dda notti di festa, e ora hai
you have to take it out and pay for it! Dear, whoever is stupid is stupid!” dittu
the cchiù picca Tookish part of iḍḍu. “You absolutely don't have any more custody of dragu
treasures, and all the lottu could stay there more always, if they could wake up
supra and truvari ca these beastly tunnels were my room in front of the house!”
Obviously he didn't wake up, but he kept going on and on, nzinu a quannu tutti li segni di
the back door has begun to fade. It was completely sulu. Quick pinzau
he was starting to feel caudu. "It's a kind of lustrous sight
Are you coming right in front of the sutta?” I thought.
Era. While he walked forward, cries and cries, until then there was no doubt
above this one. It was a Russian light that was always more Russian. It was pure
now without doubt caudu ntô tunnel. You smear them with vapuri floatru and passaru
him and began to shroud. Nu sonu, puru iḍḍu, began to beat the rich man, na speci
of burbugghiari comu lu scrùsciu of na pignata granni ca gallops above lu focus, ammiscatu cu nu
rumbrìu comu nu ronrunu di nu jattu gigantiscu. Chistu criscìu ô 'ncunfusibbili
noises of quarks armalu vastu ca ronca ntô sonnu ddà sutta ntô
lustru russu davanti a iddu.
It was at this point that Bilbo signed. Avantinnu di ddà c'era lu
the most curable thing ever. They are so terrible that they will kill you later
eranu comu nenti rispettu a iḍḍu. Cumbattiu la vera battagghia ntô tunnel
sulu, prima di vìdiri mai lu granni pirìculu ca l'aspittava. In ogni modu doppu
a short stop goes on lights; and you can imagine it comes to an end
tunnel, opening from this grannizza and furma from the upper door.
Attraversu iḍḍu peeks out the hobbit's head. In front of iḍḍu there is the largest cellar or dungeon-room of the ancient dwarves on the Muntagna
radica. It's almost dark because it's so vast that it could be sung in dark places, but
get up close to the pavimentu rucciusu there is a granni lustru. Lu reached out
of Smaug!
Ccà s'attruvava, nu vastu dragu russu-oru, addurmintatu; arriva nu trumpu
days I know masciddi and days I know nostrils, and streaks of smoke, but there are fires and vasci 'n
sleep. Sutta of iddu, sutta all the limbs and the enormous curled up tail, and
ntunnu a ddu from all sides that stretched across the invisible floors, it was strengthened
countless munzeddi of such priziusi, of gold made and not made, gems and
jewels, and silver stained with Russian lights.
Smaug made himself curcatu, with his wings curled like a pipistreḍḍu 'immeasurable, turning you into parts
of a part, so that the hobbit could see them above all and I'm long pale
panza crusted with gems and fragments of gold dâ sò longa curcata supra lu sò
read dear. Come to the Huns, the walls are close, closer you can see dark things
coats of arms, helms and axes, swords and spears 'hanged; and give in
row s'arristavanu granni vases and vases chini of na richness ca nun putìa èssiri
he guessed.
Diciri ca ci livaru lu fiatu di Bilbo non è na discrizzioni. Ḍḍà
there's no sunnu cchiù palori more express lu sò scantu, pick the Omini canciaru lu
language ca mpararu of the elves at the time when all the world was
marveligghiusu. Bilbu had heard cuntari and cantari draghi them before, but lu
splennuri, the lust, the glory of such treasure nun avìanu ancora mai turnatu a casa a
iḍḍu. Lu sò cori era chinu e trazzatu d'incantu e dû disìu
of dwarves; and he looked motionless, almost scurdnussi dû fearusu
guardianu, to the gold beyond price and cuntu.
Look at the one who seemed older, before you were pulled almost against your own vulnerability, I
arrubbàu of the ùmmira from the door, across the floor nzinu ô bordu cchiù cicinu
dî mounds dû trisoru. Supra di iddu s'attruvava lu dragu addurmintatu, nu tirribbili
minazza puru ntô sonnu. He grabbed a large two-handled cup, common pisanti
let's purtari, and throw our frightened eyes towards the top. Smaug shakes his wing,
opened n'artigliu, lu rumpu dû sò roncu canciau I know it.
Allura Bilbo ran away. But lu dragu didn't wake up, not yet, but he died
nta àutri sonni di avidità e viulenza, curcatu ddà ntâ sò sala arrubbata
while the little hobbit travaggiava arrè supra lu longu tunnel. He beat us
and a tremu cchiù fibbrusu there was within the range, of how many scinnìa,
but he still grabbed the cup, and lu sò gocceru principali fu: « L'haju fattu! Chistu
he will muster them. "Cchiù comu nu mircanti ca nu latru" veru! Beni, nni jemu
don't hear anything more than this."
Nemmenu iḍḍu. Balin fu assài cuntentu di vìdiri n'àutra vota l'hobbit, e comu
cuntentu comu fu surprisu. He yelled at Bilbo and punched him
the open air. It was menzannotti and li nùvuli avìanu cummigghiatu li stiḍḍi, but Bilbo
curl up with your eyes closed, anxiously sniffing and pigging out the pleasures of fresh sensations
The air is empty, and it is difficult to nourish the excitement of dwarves, or common people
lu ludaru and lu battèru ntâ shoulder and sisiru and everyone knows them
family more future adventures ô I'm sirvizziu.
The dwarfs still passed the cup from hand to hand and parràvanu
allegrati dû ricupiru dû sò tisoriu, quannu all'improvisu nu vastu
rumbling si svegliava ntâ muntagna sutta comu si fussi nu vecchiu vulcanu ca
I had a discussion about starting the eruptions. The door returns to iddi
it was pulled almost to, and blocked from closing with a petra, but above it
long tunnel arrives at the terrible echoes, of long time, of long hours, of new ones
scream and nu calciu ca facìa trimari la terra sutta di iḍḍi.
Then the dwarves will forget about the joy and the certain advantages of new ones.
He moaned first and was filled with fear. Smaug is about to come again
cuntatu cu. Nun fa lassari nu dragu vivu fora dû to
càrculi, stay close to iddu. Li dragons putissiru nun aviri very usu riali more
all the richness, but the canusciunu to no common rule, above all after
pussessu longu; and Smaug was not excited. We've passed by again
sonnu inquietu (unni nu guerrieru, nsignificant cumplitamenti of grannizza but
furnitu of a bitter spata and of great cure, figuratu cchiù unpleasant)
a nu sonnu, e di nu sonnu a larga sveglia. Ci fu nu ciatu di stranu
air ntâ so grutta. Ci putissi èssiri na draft chiḍḍu pirtusu? It never starts
si sintìa abbastanza cuntentu, puru si era accussì nicu, e ora lu guarda nta
he suspected and wondered since he had never blocked it. I'll leave later
half pinsava ca avìa pigghiatu the dark echoes of nu sonu of luntanu
supra chiḍḍu scinnìu through di iḍḍu â sò tana. It shrunk and stretched out
lu coddu pi sniffari. So we missed the cup!
Thieves! Fire! Assassins! What happened before?
I won â Muntagna! The same ray passes the description, the type of ray is what it is
yes I saw Sulu quannu the rich people ca hannu cchiù di chiḍḍu ca ponnu godiri pèrdinu â 'ntrasatta
qualchi cosa ca avìanu pi tantu tempu ma ca nun avìanu mai usatu o vulùtu.
Lu sò focu spuntàu, the room smoked, scuppiàu li radicachi dî muntagni. Iḍḍu
spincìu la testa 'n vanu ô pirtusu, e poi arrivatolgìu la lunghezza
nzèmmula, roarghiannu comu truònu on the earth, he stuck to his den prufunna
through my great door, through the great passages of the mountain palace
e supra versu lu Canceddu Frontali.
More hunters all over the mountain nzinu to quannu avìa pigghiatu lu latru and avìa strazzatu
and calciàrilu was lu sò sulu pinseri. Niscìu dâ Porta, the purchase
it rose in crisp steam, and rose up into the air and
he settled on the top of the mountain with the beak of the virdi and scarlet ciamma. Lu
the dwarves heard the fearful voices of their escape, and crouched against
the walls of the grassy terrace cling to the boulders, they blow in four ways
more escape from the frightened eyes of hunting dragu.
Ddà avissiru statu tutti ammazzati, si nun fussi statu pi Bilbu na vota
again. "Quick! Quick!" he anxious. «The door! The gallery! It's not good
about."
Arrusbigghighi of these palors they were barely crawling inside the tunnel
when Bifur desi shouted: « Cook for me! Bombur and Bofur — avemu
scurdàru them, sunnu 'n down 'n go!”
"They will be killed, and all our factories, and all our warehouses ruined,"
gimiru l'àutri. "Non putemu fari nenti."
"Abuse!" said Thorin, they will recover their dignity. “You can't leave
iḍḍi. Come between Misters Baggins and Balin, and you two Fili and Kili, lu
dragu didn't have everyone. Now you others, unni sunnu li cordi? Essiri
lestu!"
Maybe it was the moments that were still in the past. Lu
they are the horrible ones of Smaug's rays resonating with the hollows of distant stone
supra; ogni mumentu putìa vèniri 'n focu o vulari 'ntornu
and find them there, close to the edge of the cliff near the tyrants' madness above lu
cords. Bofur arrived, and still everything was safe. Bombur arrived, he snorted
and they sufficed while they tightened the ropes, and still everyone was safe. Four of us arrived
tools and bundles of shops, and then there was lu pirìculu.
There were no noises. Na Russian lights tuccau them points of stari
rocks. The dragon arrived.
Avìanu as soon as time of vulari stops in the tunnel, tyrannus and drags inside
I know them, when Smaug won the race to the north, I liccannu them
milk sides cu ciamma, battennu them I know granni ali cu nu scrùsciu comu nu
twenty roaring. Lu so ciatu caudu arridduciù the grass in front â door, and
trasìu ntâ fissura ca avìanu lassatu and abbruciàu them while they piled up.
The flashing fires passateru and the ùmmiri dâ rock niura ballaru. Then dark
fell while another time passed. The poni screamed in terror, and snatched the cords
and galloped wildly. Lu dragu appeared and wanted to secure them,
and he had disappeared.
“This will be the end of our poor beasts!” said Torinu. “Nothing can
run away Smaug na vote I saw him. Ccà semu and cà nni nni jemu a stari,
a menu ca nuḍḍu we don't like you caminari li longhi kilomitri open arrè ô ciumi cu
Smaug 'n vigilance!"
There were no pleasant thoughts! Si strinciunu cchiù 'nfiriuri ô tunnel, and
ddà si curcàvanu e trimàvanu macari ca era càudu e sciuccu, nzinu a l'alba
Pàlidu arrived through the crack in the door. Every now and then I cross it
nights putìanu sintiri lu rugghiu dû dragu vulanti crisciri and then pass by and
fade, while he hunted ntunnu and ntunnu ê sides of mountains.
Nduvinò of places, and of traces of fields he left
scupriu, ca l'òmini avìanu arrived from ciumi and dû lagu and avìanu
scalaru lu latu dâ muntagna dâ vaddi unni èrunu stati li poni
'n pè; but the door resisted as the eye wandered around and the bay where the walls stood still had stronger flames outside them. Longu had hunted 'n vanu nzinu a
the dawn came to us, the rays cooled down and I turned away from the golden sofa...
and you will gain new strength. He didn't retreat or gather his furtu, he didn't
mille'anni lu trasfurmaru 'n petra fumanti, ma si putìa permettiri di
wait. Lentu e mutu si strinciù arrè ntâ sò tana e chiudìu l'occhi a metà.
When the morning arrived, the terror of the dwarfs criscìu cchiù picca. Yes nn'addunaru
those who are the piriculi of this guy will be unavoidable not to deal with a guardian there,
and it wasn't good to give up yet - I'm looking for it. Not even putìanu escaperi
just now, as Thorin had suttuliniatu. I know you put them dead or killed, and
avìssiru to wait for a little while before Smaug relaxed the scream
just dare the long road on foot. More luck avìanu sarbatu
enough of these more durable shops that last even longer.
Discutìru pi tantu tempou supra chiḍḍu ca avìa fari, but non putìanu pinsari a nuḍḍu
modu pi livari Smaug, ca avìa semper statu nu puntu dèbbuli ntâ so
Chiani, as Bilbo felt inclined to make understandings. Allura comu è la natura dû populu ca
sunnu pirpless accuracies, accuminciaru a lamintarisi against the hobbit, accusannu
We liked him a lot at the beginning: more purtari via a cup and
Smaug's ray arrived soon.
“Chi àutru do you think can nu latru have to do?” Bilbu called angrily. "IU
you were no longer busy killing dragons, those who are busy with warriors, but more rogues
trisoru. Fici lu mègghiu princìpiu ca putìa. He was waiting for you to come back
cu all the treasure of Thror ntâ back? Yes, there are some complaints from Sissiri
fattu, penzu ca putissi aviri na parola. Avìsti a purtari cincucentu
others not one. Sunnu sicuru ca reflect nu granni crèditu pi to nannu, but
one cannot pretend to ever clarify the vast extent of one's riches
to mine. Avissi vulùtu cintinara more years purtarilu all above, if you were fifty years old
Votes cchiù granni, e Smaug domesticatu comu nu cunigghiu."
After that of course the dwarfs will call us sorry. “Who then are you?
I'm ready to meet you, Mr. Baggins?" Thorin called politely.
"I have no idea what this moment is about, if you fly straight to Livari lu
trisoru. Who obviously depends entirely on four new turns of fortune and
the libidinousness of Smaug. Livari the dragons are no longer there, I'm not there, but
Facìu lu me megghiu pi pinzaricci. Pirsonalmenti nun haiu spiranzi, e
vulìssiru is safe at home."
"You don't care anymore who's talking! Who's going to do it now, today?"
“Well, if you fly to see me, I would have to say that you can't do anything authentic
stay unni semu. Of day without doubt putemu nesciri quite sure piggier
the air. Perhaps before such a long time one or two putìanu have been released more often ô
sarbari close ô tops and strengthen our escorts. But no, frattiempu
tutti avissiru a èssiri boni dintra lu tunnel di notti.
– «Now I'll make you an offer: haiu lu me aneddu and I'll crawl
this half-wit, then if ever Smaug had to pigghiari na sleepnu, and see who does it
it's nzinu a. Maybe something will come. "Every worm you have lu so puntu dèbbuli."
comu dicìa me patri, puru si sugnu sicuru ca non era di pirsunali
wisdom."
Naturally li nani accittaru cu entusiasmu l'offerta. Già avìanu
come and say goodbye to little Bilbo. Now you have added the real capu ntê sò
victory. You began to cultivate your own ideas and desires. Quannu menzujornu
arrived yes priparau more n'autru journey down ntâ Muntagna. Not cool
we like you obviously, but it wasn't like this, now you know, more or less, who was it?
in front of iddu. There are many dragons and cunning ways, iḍḍu
putìa èssiri cchiù scared and menu spiranza di pigghiari chista
sleep.
The moon was visible when it began, but it was dark like last night
tunnel. The door lights, almost closed, soon disappeared while I was walking
jusu. Accussì mutu era lu sò 'ntrattamentu ca lu fumu supra nu ventu liquididu difficilmenti putìa
They supiratu, and iḍḍu was inclined to feel a little proud of iḍḍu stissu comu iḍḍu
approached â bring cchiù vascia. There was sulu lu lustru cchiù lignu di vìdiri.
"Old Smaug is tired and tired," he thought. “Iddu can't see me and iddu
you can't hear me. Come to Bilbo!" You might have been lost or you'd never heard of it
above the sense of the smell of dragons. It's macari nu fattu streusu ca ponnu
keep your eyes open while you are silent, you are suspittusi.
Smaug certainly seemed dark, almost dead and dark, cu
almost no snoring noise of invisible vapors, when Bilbo peeked
still na vote of the entrance. He was barely on the ground anymore
quannu pigghiò n'impruvvisu raggiu di russu suttili e trapanti di sutta lu
the lid that was lowered from Smaug's left eye. He was just pretending to sleep! It was
taliannu l'ingressu dû tunnel! A fretta Bilbu fici nu passu arrè e binidicìu
the fortune dû is aneddu. Allura spoke to Smaug.
– «Ben, latru! t'oduru and felt the air. Sentu lu to fiatu. Come
longu! Help yourself by voting, there's plenty and you can save some money!”
But Bilbo wasn't so familiar with dragon traditions like everyone else, and yes
Smaug breathed his last breath so easily that he was diluted.
“No grazzi, o Smaug lu Tremendu!” rispunnìu iḍḍu.
"I didn't win any more brigs. Vulìa sulu dariti n' look and
I saw that you were truly great, as the stories tell you. Don't believe them."
"You now?" said lu dragu 'n pocu lusingatu, puru si lu fici
don't cridiri na parola.
“Veru canzuni and cunti sunnu assài cchiù picca dâ rità, o Smaug the
Lu cchiù granni e cchiù granni di calamìu," replied Bilbu.
“You have good manners, no thief and no liar”, I said lu dragu. "You
pari familiari cu lu me nomu, ma pari ca non mi ricuòrdu di sententi l'odori
Before. Who yes and of unni come, ti pozzu dumannari?”
«Putissi veru! Vegnu di sutta la crallina, e sutta li cullini e
above them I cugghi purtavanu them layers. And through the air. Sugnu iu who walks
invisible.”
"Quinni may cry," said Smaug, "but it is hardly usual
name."
"They are surrounded by pinzers, they are tagged by rites, the musca is pungent.
lu nùmmaru furtunatu."
"Tituli beddi!" he scolded lu dragu. “But the lucky ones don't always sun
come out."
“Sugnu chiddu ca sippillisci I know them as living friends and it torments them and pulls them
vivu n'autra vota di l'acqua. Vinni di la fini di na borsa, ma nudda borsa ci nni jìu
above my own.»
"Chisti non pàrunu accussì accreditabilibbili," burlàu Smaug. “I'm the friend of
bears and the guests of the eagle. Sugnu Vincituri of l'Aneddu and Furtunatu; and ju sugnu
Knights of all," continued Bilbo accuminciannu a sissiri cuntentu dû so 'ndovinellu.
“It's better!” said Smaug. “But don't let your imagination run wild.”
cu tia!”
Who knows for sure the best way to understand the dragons, if you don't want to ridicule them
I have my own name (it's wise), and I don't want to get around to it
refuse chianu (ca è puru very wise). Nuddu dragu po ristiri â fascinazzioni
of parrari sciarriati and pirdiri tempu to circari di capirilu. There was a lot
Well, Smaug doesn't understand anymore (even if I'm waiting for you to understand, darling
you all know Bilbo's avnturi he referred to), but iḍḍu
He thought he understood enough, and he said no more.
"Pinsài accussì ieri sira," surrìu tra iḍḍu stissu. “Omini dû lacu, quarchi bruttu
scheme of whoḍḍi miserable òmini dû lagu ca cummèrcianu li trays, or sugnu na lagarta. you don't have it
statu 'n chista strata more age and age; but I'll soon cancel those people!”
“Well, all the knights!” I said aloud. “Perhaps Barrel was there…
nomu dû pony; and maybe not, even though he was quite fat. Putissi caminari
invisible, but you didn't walk the whole way. I'll tell you I ate six poni
yesterday sira and pigghiu and ate all the others before so much time. 'N canciu di
lu excellent pastu ti fazzu nu cunsigghiu pû to goods: nun
aviri cchiù to those who will make them dwarfs than you can help them!”
“Dwarves!” Bilbu said, feigning surprise. “Don't talk to me!” he said.
Smagnu. "I know the smell (and the taste) of nana, no better. You don't say
I can't wait to eat a pony ridden by dwarfs and not him canusciri! You arrived at nu
bad ends, if you go with friends here, Ladru Cavalieri di Vutti. I'm not sorry, you are
turn around and tell him about my.” But I didn't tell Bilbo that there was
n'oduri ca no more understanding, the oduri of the hobbit; it was pretty rough
I know spirènzia and I'm very scunvurgìu.
"Suppose yesterday sira you had the right price for the cup?" he continued.
"You're coming now, aren't you? Don't worry! Beni, this person is just like anyone else. And he
suppose that they snort outside, and the work is done to make everyone so piriculous
toils and worries who can't find them when they don't look for them? And you
do you get the right share? Don't believe us! If you live alive, you will be
fortunately."
Bilbo now began to feel truly uneasy. Every time Smaug came
eyes vagabbunnu, ca lu circavanta the ùmmiri, lu flashed above, iddu
he trembled, and no disìu without reproaches he peeped with nesciri in a hurry and
reveals himself and speaks all manhood to Smaug. In fact it was 'n gravity
pirìculu di vèniri sutta l'incantu dû dragu. But he managed to cure me
I'll speak another vote.
“You do not know everything, O Smaug lu Putenti,” I said iḍḍu. “It's not the oru
sulu ci purtò ccà.”
"Ha! Ha! You admit the 'nuàutri'" Smaug laughed. “Come on, don't say 'nuàutri
fourteen and fari cu chistu, signuri Nùmmaru furtunatu? Sugnu cuntentu of feelings
whoever saw other business, who would banni beyond me oru. Not in this case
putissi, perhaps, not pirdiri completions lu tempu.
“I don't know if I won you in your mind, even if you could mess with him
the gold spade by spade, in questions of a hundred years or much more, not he putìsti pigghiari
very long? Isn't there much used latu d'muntagna? Isn't there much of a furesta?
Bless me! Haven't you ever seen pinched â capture? Na fourteenth share, iu
suppose, or what do you think, who is going to end them, eh? But who do you say about
cunzigna? And the paper? And guard them armed and pay tolls?” AND
Smaug laughed loudly. Avìa nu cori tintu e russu, e canuscia I know them
the stapled ones are not far away, even if they were suspected of the man from the lake it was
the back of the plans, and now the great part of the looting had to sign the
ntâ città vicinu â riva ca quannu era giòvini era chiamata Esgaroth.
Non ci criditi, ma lu poviru Bilbo fu veru assài scantatu.
Finu a ora tutti li sò pinser e energii s'avìanu cuncintratu pi arrivari ô
Muntagna and truvari the entrance. You've never had the trouble of calling me
lu tisoriu avìa a èssiri livatu, di sicuru mai comu qualchi parti di chistu ca
putìa cadiri â sò parti fussi purtatu arrè nzinu a Bag-End
Sutta-Cullina.
Now he began to cry about his suspicions in his head: avìanu them dwarfs
scurdàru puru chistu mpurtanti, or ridìanu ntê manichi a
lu all lu tempu? Chistu è l'affetu ca lu discursu dû dragu havi supra lu
without wisdom. Bilbo naturally had to be on guard; but Smaug
had a pirsunality overflowing.
"Ti dicu," dissi, ntô sforzu di ristari leali ê sò amici ea
keep the end, "who oru was sulu nu pinseri doppu cu nuiautri. Arrivàumu
supra cullina e sutta cullina, di onda e ventu, pâ Vindicata. Di sicuru, o Smaug
The rich invaluables, you must understand what happened to you
quarchi nimicu amaru?”
"Allura Smaug said it again, they're not so devastating," Bilbo burst out
ô pavimentu, while luntanu supra ntô tunnel the dwarfs s'accugghieru nzèmmula and
immagginau ca l'hobbit avìa arrivatu a na fini mpruvvisa e sgraziata.
"Vinnitta!" he snorted, and the light from his eyes illuminated the room on the floor
ô suffittu comun nu lampu scarlattu. «Vinditta! Lu Re sutta la Montagna
is he dead and unni sunnu are they relatives ca osanu circari vindicata? Giriuni Signuri of Dale
he is dead, and I ate him as a common wolf among the pècuri, and unni
sunnu the cool ones say I'm cool about osanu getting close to me? Kill unni vogghiu and nuddu dare
laugh. I lowered the warriors of antiquity and I know they are similar, there is no one today.
Allura ero sulu giovini e tìnniru. Ora sugnu vecchiu e forti, forti, forti,
Ladru nta l'ùmmiri!” iḍḍu glutò: “La me armatura è comu scudi deci voto, la me scudi.
the teeth sunnu swords, the claws throw me, lu shake me cuda nu saettu, lu me
ali n'uraganu, e lu me fiatu morti!”
“He always understands,” said Bilbo with a startled squeal, “about
the dragons are soft, sutta, above all don't reggiuni dû... er...
pettu; but without a doubt someone accused you of theft thought about it."
Lu dragu signed himself picca ntê so advantages. “Li tò 'nfurmazzioni sunnu
anticu," he snorted. "I'm armed above and beyond the iron steps
and hard gems. No blade can pierce me."
"L'avìa pututu pinzari," said Bilbo. “Veru ca n't a bit of bare parts
attruvau l'uguali dû Signuri Smaug l'Impinètrabbili. Who magnificence a
pussidiri nu gilet di diamanti fini!”
"Iè, è raru e maravigghiusu, veru," I said Smaug absurdities cuntentu.
Non sapìa ca l'hobbit avìa già pigghiatu n'idea dû sò
particular covers were not visited by people, and they were itching to be closer to each other
more muted visions. Lu dragu bristled. "Taliata!" I said iḍḍu.
“Who do you tell us?”
"Dazzling marvelous! Pirfettu! Pirfettu! Dazzling!" he exclaimed
Bilbu spoke loudly, but the only thing he thought about was: "Old fool! Come on, there's a
granni scrub ntô cavu dû pettu di manca nudu comu na snail fora dû sò
tanning!"
After all, Mr Baggins' idea was to run away. “Good, iu
I really don't have to keep Your Magnificence any longer," I said, "or keep it
It gives you very good rest. You put them pigghiunu on a capture pike, criu, doppu nu
longu inizziu. E cussì fannu li latri," aggiuncìu comu nu colpu di siparazzioni, mentri ca sparava
he returned and escaped up the tunnel.
It was an unfortunate observation, the dragon spurted fiammi tirrìbbili
doppu di iḍḍu, e viloci puru si accilirava lu penditi, non era annatu quasi luntanu
no more common words are needed before Smaug's frightened head is pushed
against the opening he stopped. More fortunately the whole head and the masciddi did not putìanu
strinciri, but the nostrils mannaru focus and vapuri pi 'nseguerilu, and iddu
she was almost overwhelmed, and she stumbled blindly with great pain and fear. Iḍḍu
if you had enough knowledge of the cunning of these conversations
cu Smaug, but I know he's sbagghiu â fini lu purtàu a nu sensu cchiù bonu.
“Never laugh at living dragons, Bilbo, you fool!” I said between iddu stissu, and chistu
Addivintàu nu dittu prifirutu dî sò doppu, and passàu nna nu pruverbiu. "You
I'm not even now almost through this twist," I said, and it was good
veru puru.
Lu pomeriggiu si stava trasfurmannu 'n sira quannu niscìu n'autra vota e
he stumbled and fell 'n svenu above the "portu". The dwarfs lu fìciru arrivals,
and ducturaru they are burned like putìanu; but it was a long time ago
first we understand them above, we return from the head and the heels we crisciunu n'other vote as is right:
avìa statu tu tu cantatu e frizziatu nzinu â peddi. Ntô frattiempu
I know them as friends, I know them better and more friendly; and if you avìanu addisiggiatu pâ sò story,
above all, you want to know how the dragu had made a very tirribable cry,
and how Bilbu had escaped.
But the hobbit was worried and uncomfortable, and had difficulty
more peep something about iḍḍu. Now he thought it was like this
pintannusi of certain things that he had said about dragu, and he wasn't anxious
repeat them more. The old man was sitting on a rock near his head
s'accuppiò di na parti, ascultannu tuttu chiḍḍu ca si dicìa. Mustra chi malatu
lu timpiramentu Bilbo was: he picked up a petra and threw her ô tordu, ca
sulu sbaldò di latu e turnò.
“Drat the aceddu!” I said Bilbu ncruciatu. “Cridu ca sta ascultannu, e iu
I don't like the way Iḍḍu looks."
“Let the birds go!” said Torinu. “The birds are good and friendly...
this person is very old indeed, and is perhaps the last one missing from the ancients
breed that lived around here, domesticated by the hands of my ancestors and
nannu. Iḍḍi èranu a long-lasting and magical race, and chistu putìa puru
èssiri unu di chiddi ca èranu vivi allura, nu paru di cintinara d'anni o cchiù
back. Dale's men avìanu lu truccu di capiri I know
language, and the most popular messengers used them towards the Omini dû Lagu e
n'àutra banna.”
“Ben, you will have more purtari nutizzi in Lake-town, okay, yes chiḍḍu is chiḍḍu ca
it's doppu," you say Bilbu; "just don't suppose that there are so many people
ccà chiḍḍu prubblema câ tongue dû thrush.”
“Chick who succidìu?” shouted the dwarves. “Go ahead cû to
tell me!”
Then Bilbo told us all there so that he would remember, and he stared and went on
na bad feeling ca lu dragu pinzava too much I know puzzles juncìu a
you field them and place them. “I'm sure I know the wine of Laketown
and get help from dda; and you have a horrible feeling about my next move
there are no directions. Best wishes to the kindness that has never been said before
Vutti Knights; let's do pinzari puru a nu cunigghiu ciecu nta sti parti ô
L'omini dû lacu."
– «Okay, okay! You can't help us, and it's difficult to get away from each other
a nu dragu, or I have always felt it”, I said Balin anxious to cunsulidàrilu.
"I think you made it very good, if you ask me, you found it very useful
thing anyway, and he went home alive, and whoever is more than whoever the majority can say
who knows what people like Smaug. Pò èssiri na mercy e nu
blessings again of canùsciri the naked piece ntô diamonds of old man Worms
vest.”
Chistu canciau la cunversazzioni, e tutti accuminciaru a parrari di l'assassino di drago storico, dubiusi e mitici, e di li vari tipi di stabbing
and the points and the subtags, and the different instruments and stratagems of arts of
whoever had avanu statu cumplitati. The initial opinion was ca pigghiari
nu sonnu di dragu non era accussì facili comu pareva, e lu tintativu di 'nfilarisi
unu or prod unu addurmintatu era cchiù probbbabbili ca ended up more nu disastru ca nu audacious
fruitful attacks. All the while he was listening to him, until the end
quannu li stiddi accuminciaru a sbirciari, iddu 'n silenzio spassi l'ali e vulau
away. And all the time parràvanu and the ùmmiri lengthened Bilbo
addivintàu always scuntentu and criscìu I know them.
At the end he interrupted them. "I'm sure that I'm not very sure," iḍḍu
I said: "and I didn't see the meaning of being there. The dragon stuck all over
lu virdi piacèvuli, and anyway the night has arrived and it's friddu. But listen
it's the case that this postu come attacked another time. Smaug lu know now
as scinnìu ntâ sa sala, and you can trust iḍḍu pi capiri unni lu
the other end of the tunnel is. Stu latu dâ Muntagna will break all over
bits, if it is necessary, please sign our entrance, and we will destroy ourselves with those who are there
megghiu ca ci piaci."
“Yes, very sad, Mr. Baggins!” I said Torinu. “Woodpecker not Smaug
blocked the extremity of the vascia, then, are you anxious about tenirici fora? He doesn't have it, either
You will have heard it very much.”
“Not lu sacciu, not lu sacciu, although at the beginning he wanted to attract you
Vote for me again, suppose, and now maybe I'll wait until later
the hunt for stasira, or as long as you don't want to damage my bed room
I can help you a little, but you don't want to argue. Smaug will be born
every minute now, and our hope is to stay in the tunnel and close the tunnel
brings."
Parìa accussì sinceru cal li nani â fini fìciru comu i said iḍḍu,
puru si ritardaru a chiudiri la porta, paria nu pianu dispiratu, picchì non
one knows how to put avirilu another vote inside, and
lu pinzeri d'essiri closed nta nu locu di unni purtava the only street in nesciri
across the dragu den there wasn't anyone we liked. Puru all it seemed
assai tranquillu, sia fora ca sutta lu tunnel. Dunca pi nu pocu di tempu iḍḍi
he sat inside the half-open door and continued to talk.
The discussion was directed towards the evil ones from the dwarfs. Bilbu
vulìa ca non l'avìa mai sentiti, o almenu ca putìa èssiri abbastanza sicuru
whoever dwarfs them now will be absolutely honest when they declare approx
I've never had to pinch pins to someone who's going to succeed after the tisoriu goes
he was victorious. "Sapìamu ca fussi n'company dispirata," said Thorin, "and
we still know; and I still think about how many times we have won
no more pincers to those who do it. As far as this part is concerned, Mr. Baggins, iu
I assure you that you are are grateful and you choose the way
fourteen, as soon as we had something to score. I'm sorry yes you yes
take care of more transport, and admit the difficulties of the greatest magnitude: the lands
don't point out to anyone who's a little sarvàggi who spends time, whoever is here:
but we will do everything we can do, and let's take our part from him
when the time arrives. Believe me or not as you like yourself!”
Who knows what's going on, you'll see the great ones, darling, and it's like this
Thorin and Balin recurdaru. Yes dumannaru you were still liars
ccà 'nfiritu ntâ sala sutta: li lanzi ca èranu get more army
dû granni Re Bladorthin (di tantu tempu mortu), ognunu avìa na tri voti furgata
head and there I know the drums are ranu 'taccati cu l'oru astute, but never foru
cunsignatu or pagatu; shields made more dead warriors than many times; lu granni
Thror's golden cup, two-handed, Tuesday-date and sculpted with the aceddi and
ciuri ca l'occhi e li petali èranu di gioielli; cloaks of golden mail and
argintatu and mpinètrabbili; the necklace of Giriuni, Lords of Dale, made of
cincucentu smaraldi virdi comu l'erba, ca ci desi pi l'armamentu di li sò
figghiu cchiù granni cu nu cloak of anecdotes linked to nani ca nun avìanu mai statu
made first, since it was made of silver pure ô putiri and â strength of
triple steel. But the most beautiful of all was the great joy janca, ca li nani
avìa truvatu sutta li radichi from Muntagna, lu Cori from Muntagna,
the Thrain Arkstone.
"The stone ark! The stone ark!" Thorin muttered in the darkness, half
sunnannu cu lu menzucòlu supra li jinuocchi. “It was common nu globbu cu nu
a thousand facets; it shone like silver in the fire, like water in the sun,
like the snow sutta li stiddi, like the chioggia above the Moon!”
But I didn't want you to have fallen for Bilbo's treasure. Everyone
attraversu lu sò discursu iḍḍu li stava ascultannu sulu pi metà. Si pusò cchiù vicinu ô
porta cu n'aricchia 'ncucciata pi qualegghiè principiu di nu sonu senza, l'autra sò
the echoes beyond the murmurs of dwarves were more attentive, the more every whisper
di nu muvimentu di luntanu sutta.
Lu buiu addivintàu cchiù prufunnu e iḍḍu addivintàu sempri cchiù inquietu. “Close the door!”
he begged them: «Timu ddu dracu ntô me midoddu. I like you in silence
menu dû scànnalu di ieri sira. Close the door first because it’s too late!”
Four things don't know what people say - dwarves don't feel uncomfortable.
Thorin slowly broke out of his sleep and raised him up and chased him away
Petra was close to the door. Then they push us, and we close ourselves
I splash and don't sleep. There was no sign of nu pirtusu dâ rintra keys. Iḍḍi
foru chiusi ntâ Muntagna!
And I don't move too soon. Avìanu almost annatu naked distance 'n down
lu tunnel quannu nu colpu colpìu lu latu dâ Muntagna comu lu sfrattu di
rich in beats made of wild oaks and swayed by giants. The rock
you scream, the walls are torn and the petri falls from the roof above your head.
I don't like whoever happened if the door was still open
staplers. Fujiru cchiù sutta lu tunnel full of Sissyrians still alive, while he returns
iḍḍi fora sintìru lu rugghiu and lu rumpu dâ fury of Smaug. Era
rumpiennu li rocci a pezzi, sfracicannu mura e roccia cu li sciarri dî sò
huge cudas, nzinu ô sò picciriddu autu campiu, the burnt grass, lu
the stone of the tordu, the walls covered with snails, the squeezed sponge, and all
scumparìu nta nzemi of splashes, and an avalanche of splashes
the petri falls on the cliff ntâ vaddi sutta.
Smaug avìa lassatu la sò tana 'n furtu mutu, s'alzau tranquillomenti nta l'aria, e
then it floated pisianti and slow ntô common darkness nu monstrousu corvu, down ô
twenty punishing verses from Muntagna, no spiranza of pigghiari without understanding
something or something to give, and to spy on the exit ô passage
whoever had used it lu latru. Whoever was the one burst forth from the moment he could
nun truvari nuddu e nun vìdiri nenti, puru unni inguvinò l'uscita avissi a
it is true.
After I left the light, I felt better and thought about
I'm sure you shouldn't be too upset about the directions. Nto
ntô frattiempu avìa n'autra revenge of pigghiari. “Knights of all!” he snorted.
“Li tò pedi vinìanu dû latu of the water and above the water you vinìsti without nu
doubt. You can't smell anything, but you don't know who the men are
Lagu, avìsti lu sò aiutu. Mi vìdinu e si ricurdanu cu è lu veru
King of the Mountain!”
He got up in the focus and moved towards the south towards lu ciumi Running.
NOT AT HOME
For that matter, the dwarves sat in the dark, and there was absolute silence
iḍḍi. Picca manciavanu and picca parravanu. Nun putìanu cuntari there
passari dû tempu; e quasi nun osaru muvirisi, pû sussurru dî sò
vuci resonaru and friscavanu ntô tunnel. They fell asleep, they woke up again
dark and ô silenziu ca goes on without interruptions. Â ends doubpu jorna and jorna di
aspittannu, comu pareva, quannu s'avìanu suffocatu e sturditi pi
lack of air, not the putìanu cchiù suppurtari. Aìssiru almost had
he welcomed the son of sutta dû ritornu dû dragu. No silence iḍḍi
she got away from the cunning devil for a few times, but she couldn't stay there any longer.
Thorin spoke: “Pruvamu the door!” I said iḍḍu. “You must sintiri lu ventu supra
get me done quickly or die. I think about prifirisciu èssiri sfracicatu of Smaug ntô
apertu ca suffucari ccà dintra!” Allura diversi di li nani s'alzaru e spuntaru
ritornu unni era la porta. Ma attruvaru ca l'estrimità supiriuri dû
The tunnel was ruttu and bluccatu cu rutta rock. Neither keys nor
the magic can vote, avìa obey, avìa never open, nor vote whoever brings it.
“Semu 'ntrapped!” gimiru. "Chista è la fini. Murimu ccà."
But for those who vote, just for those who are dwarfs they are more inspired, Bilbo hears no more
strange alleggiari di lu cori, comu si nu pisu pisanti fussi passatu di sutta
I'm wearing a vest.
“Come, come!” I said iḍḍu. ""While there is life there is hope!" like my father
it is said, and "The third vote pays more everyone". Scennu dû tunnel na vote
di novu. Fui accussì du' voti, quannu sapìa ca c'era nu dragu ô
autra parti, quinni rischiu na terza visita quannu non sugnu cchiù sicuru. Comunque lu
the only most nesciri layer is sutta. And I think that this vote would be better for vinissiru all cu
me."
Ntâ dispirazzioni accurdaru, and Thorin was the first to iri ahead of
Bilbo's latu.
“Now be careful!” whispered the hobbit, “and don't worry
yessiri! Putissi sissiri ca nun cunssiri nuḍḍu Smaug ntô funnu, but then ci po sissiri n'àutra votes.
Don't let us take unnecessary risks!”
Down, down annaru. The dwarves don't putìanu, di sicuru, paragunari
cu l'hobbit 'n veru furtu, e fìciru n'affari di sbuffari e
ammiscamentu ca ecu enlargement alarmisms; but yes every now and then
still one vote Bilbo more afraid he signed and listened, he did not sciogghìu nuḍḍu sonu sutta. Vicinu
lu funnu, comu putìa judgingi, Bilbo si scippau supra l'aneddu e si nni iu
davanzi. Ma iddu nun nn'avìa bisognu: lu scuru era cumpletu, e èranu tutti
nvisibbili, aneddu or nuddu aneddu. In fact it was accussì niuru ca l'hobbit vinni ô
they opened unexpectedly, put their hands in the air, stumbled forward, and rolled up
head in the room!
Ccà s'attruvava a facci versu sutta ntô pavimentu e nun osava alzàrisi, o
difficulty even breathing. But nothing moved. There weren't any sparkles of lights
—a menu ca, comu ci parìa, quannu â fini alzapianu pianu la testa, ddà
era nu scintillu jancu pàlidu, supra di iḍḍu e luntanu ntô scuru. Ma di sicuru lu
non era na scintilla di focu di dragu, puru si l'oduri di vermi era pisanti ntô
postu, and lu gustu dû vapuri there was no tongue.
At the end of the day, Mr. Baggins, you don't want any more substitutes. “You're welcome, Smaug,
you worm!” he shrieked loudly “Stop messing around! Give me na
lights, and then eat me, yes, you'll pinch me!”
Light echoes were invisible in the room, but there was no response.
Bilbo stood up and wondered what direction he was going.
"Now I wonder who Smaug is talking about," I said. "I don't know
home today (or stasira, or whatever it was), cridu. Yes Oin and Gloin
I don't have any luck with them, I know Tinder boxes, maybe I can put some lights on them, and
take a look before the fortune turns.”
"Lights!" he called. "Can anyone make some lights?"
The dwarves, of course, were very alarmed when Bilbo fell forward and down.
lu passu cu n'urtu ntâ sala, e iḍḍi s'assittàru 'ncucciati own unni iḍḍu avìa
he left them at the end of the tunnel.
"Sh! Sh!" sibbìru, when I hear you I know it; and yes who
helped the hobbit to understand unni èranu, fu nu pocu di tempu prima ca iḍḍu
putìa pigghiari qualchi àutra cosa di iḍḍi. Ma â fini, quannu Bilbo 'n rialtà
he began to stamp on the ground, and shouted “lights!” at the top of the hill
vuci stridenti, Thorin detti lu postu, e Oin e Gloin foru mannati arrè ô so
bundles ntâ summità dû tunnel.
Doppu nu pocu di tempu nu glittering sparkles I mustrò ca turnavanu, Oin cu nu
little pine tree torch lowers its hand, and Gloin cu nu fasciu di autri
sutta lu vrazzu. Subbitu Bilbu trots â carries and holds the torch; but iddu
nun putìa cummìnciri li nani a luciri l'autri or a vèniri a juncìrisi a iddu
Still. As Thorin explained, Mr Baggins was still officially there
expert thief and detective. If we like to shine the lights, who was it?
facenna. Aspittàvanu ntô tunnel lu sò rapportu. Cussì si pusàru vicinu ô
door and look.
Vidìru la forma oscura di l'hobbit accuminciari dû pavimentu
I can't wait to see the lights elsewhere. Every now and then, while he was still close
enough, pigghiaru no sparkle and no tinticchiu while the iḍḍu stumbled over the gold
thing. The light was brighter and brighter as it moved away from the vast hall;
he began to get up and announce the air. Bilbo was looking at the granni tumulu di
trisoru. Soon he arrived at the top and continued further. Allura lu vittiru
sign up and move on more; but no one can mutivu.
It was the Arkenstone, lu Cori dâ Muntagna. Dunca Bilbo pinzau
gives descriptions of Thorin; but in fact we can't find two such gems,
after all, darling, marvelous wonders, after all, all over the world. Always as he acchianana,
lu stissu lustru jancu avìa luciutu davanti a iḍḍu e ci tratteva li pedi versu iḍḍu.
Planu planu criscìu a nu globbu nicu di luci pàlida. Ora ca s'approcinrò, era
tintatu di na scintilla flashing di tanti culura ntâ supirfici, riflessi
and you steal the flickering lights of my torch. At the end he looked down
supra di iḍḍu, e si pigghiò lu fiatu. Lu granni gioiellu brillava davanti ê sò pedi di
I know the internal lights, and in any case, tagged and stolen by dwarfs, ca avìanu
la scavau di lu cori di la muntagna assai tempu arretu, ci pigghiau tutta la luci ca cascau
supra di iḍḍu and lu canciau nta ten thousand sparkles of radiance janca fired cu
sparkles of the archinuè.
Di colpu lu vrazzu di Bilbu ci nni jìu attractu dû so 'ncantu. Suu
manual did not close us, because it was a joy great and weeping; but
he raised it, closed his eyes and put it in his pocket.
“Now sugnu veru nu latru!” iddu thought. “But suppose I have to say ô
nani supra di chistu, quarch tempu. Dissiru ca putìa scègghiri e scègghiri lu me
own share; and as long as you choose who you are, you'll pigghiassiru everything else!” Everyone
lu stissu avìa na feel uncomfortable ca lu cugghiri e scigghiri
it wasn't true that you no longer had to say who was marvelous with joy, and who was worried
I wish you wouldn't come again.
Now he turned forward. Down from the autru latu dû granni tumulu iddu
he grabbed, and the spark of his torch disappeared from the sight of the observations
dwarves. But soon I saw no one to vote for him. Bilbu was
across the hall floor.
Cuntinuò, nzinu a quannu arrivau ê granni porti di l'autru latu, e
There's no air left to refresh it, but the lights almost came out. Iḍḍu
he looked timidly across, and got the idea of ​​great passages and of
dark beginnings of wide steps that got dark. And still there was
naked sight nor sound of Smaug. He was on multiple turns and shifts every year
a black shape appeared and wiped his face. He squinted and
he crouched down, stumbled and fell. The torch fell towards my head
and nothing!
“Sulu nu pipistreḍḍu, suppose and hope!” I said miserably. “But now who sucks
What are you doing? Which is east, south, north or punenti?”
"Torinu! Balin! Oin! Gloin! Fili! Kili!" chiancìu cchiù strong ca putìa...
it seemed like a little scrùsciu ntô largu nìuru. “The lights went out!
Quarchi d'unu veni e mi trova e m'aiuta!” Pi lu mumentu lu sò curaggiu
avìa fallitu completi.
The dwarves sintìrunu I know Chianti nichi, even if the only palora ca dìssiru
putìa pigghiari was "help you!"
“Now who killed the land or the sutta?” I said Torinu. "Of course
not lu dragu, or he wouldn’t keep on squeezing.”
Aspittaru no mumentu or two, and still there are no noises of dragu, no
I'm in fact Bilbo's distant voice. “Come, one of you, come
no lights or two!” Thorin called out, “Pari ca avemu a jiri e.
help our son.”
"È lu nostru turnu d'aiutari," dissi Balin, "e sugnu dispostu a jiri.
However, I expect it's safe to change."
Gloin addumàu àutri torci, and then they all disappeared, one by one,
and annaru 'ntornu ô muru cchiù soon ca putìanu. It wasn't that long ago
scuntraru lu stissu Bilbo ca turnava versu iḍḍi. La sò menti avìa subbitu
As soon as I came back, the lights sparkled.
“Sulu nu pipistreḍḍu e na torcia cascata, nenti di peggiu!” dissi rispunnennu a
I know them dumanni. Although they are very relieved, they are inclined to be sick
you shout at the more frightened Sissyrians; but chiddu ca avìssiru said, yes
He told them he was the Arkenstone man, not the sacciu. Lu
on fleeting glances of treasure ca avìanu pigghiatu while walking
'nsemmula avìanu riaddumatu all the focus of the dwarf choirs; and whenever Monday
choirs of a nanu, puru lu cchiù respectable, is awakened by the gold and
jewels, suddenly becomes curaggiusu, and a little more proud.
In fact, the dwarfs don't have any urgent needs. Everyone is now anxious
esplurari la sala mentri avìanu la pussibbilità, e disponibbili a cridiri ca,
pi chistu mumentu, Smaug was far from home. Everyone is now enlightened
torch; and while they looked away, first on one side and then on the other, they turned dark
fear and perhaps caution. Talk loudly, and call the one to the other, as usual
raised the old trisori dû tumulu or dû muru and tinìanu 'n them
the lights, caress them and finger them.
Fili and Kili were almost in a cheerful mood, and were still hanging
give them so many gold harps and silver threads, they pinched them and beat them
iḍḍi; and èssiri màggici (and macari 'ntuccati dû dragu, ca avìa
picciriḍḍu ntiressi pâ musica) èrunu ancùora 'n sintonia. The dark room was chini
a melody that had been silent for a long time. But the majority of dwarves are ranu
cchiù pràtticu: arricugghièvanu gemmi and they nchiudìanu them tax, and leavesavanu zoccu
non putìanu purtari la caduta arrè attraversu li jìdita cu nu suspiriu. Torinu era
not menu among chisti; but he always wandered from place to place
something that can't be found. It was the Petra of the Ark; but it seemed like
still at nuddu.
Now the dwarves stole the mail and the weapons from the walls, and
yes armed. Thorin seemed to be alive, wearing a gold-plated cloak of years, with an ax with silver and a belt crusted with scarlet petri.
"Messrs Baggins!" he called. “Here's the first payment for this reward!
Pull your old coat and put this on!”
Cu chistu I put to Bilbo a mantellu nicu of post, made more fours giuvintù
elven princes long ago. It was made of silver steel, which the elves called mithril, and
cu idda annava na cintura di pirli e cristalli. Un timoni liggeru di peddi figurata,
reinforce the steel rims, and stucco the head
gemmi janchi, fu misu supra la testa di l'hobbit.
"I felt magnificu," he thought; "but I expected it to be very absurd.
Comu ridìanu ntâ Cullina at home! I still wish there were no more
lu specchiu a manu!”
Tuttu lu stissu signuri Baggins tinìa la testa cchiù chiara di l'incantu
dû darling compared to the dwarfs. Long before the dwarves got tired of it
they examined the treasures, got tired and sat down on the ground;
and he began to call nirvusations what was the end of all those. "Make it happen
give some good parts of these prizziusi glasses," he thought, "more biviri than
something was going on with one of Beorn's lignue trays!”
"Torinu!" he called out loudly. "Who's coming? We're armed, but who do we serve?"
Has there ever been any armor against Smaug the Terrible before? Chistu
darling, he's not a winner yet. We're not looking for the gold yet, but in a way
of escape; and we had dyed our fortune too long!”
“You speak of virtue!” Thorin returned, recovered his mind. “Lassamu
go! I'll guide you. Not in a thousand years will I forget the ways of
this palace.” Allura greeted the other, and they reunited, and
tinennu li torci supra la testa passaru attraversu lu sbucciatu
bring, not without many longing glances.
La sò posta scintillanti avìanu cummigghiatu n'àutra vota cu li sò vecchi mantelli e
there are shiny rudders with stolen hoods, and one after another walked
back to Thorin, a row of lights not dark enough to sign themselves spissu,
ascultari cu paura n'autra vota pi qualegghiè vuci di l'arrivu dû dragu.
Even if all the old cures have been molded or destroyed over a long period of time, and
even if everything was poisoned and exploded when you arrived and left there
monster, Thorin misses every passage and every curve. Acchianaru longhi
climbs, and you see and skim large ecuanti layers, and you see another turn and
He climbed even more stairs, and even more stairs. These were smooth, tagged
wide and fair rock hole; and supra, supra, li nani jeru, and
non scuntraru nuḍḍu segnu di nuḍḍu èssiri viventi, sulu ùmmiri furtivi ca scapparu di
l'avvicinamentu dî sò torci ca sbalzavanu ntê bozzi.
The passages were not made, all the same, more than the hobbit, and Bilbo was
sulu sintennu ca non putìa cchiù iri avanti, quannu all'improvisu lu tettu saltò
àutu e luntanu oltri la purtata dâ sò luci di torcia. Nu scintillu jancu putìa
I saw you coming through an opening very high up, and the air stank like hell.
In front of me the lights came darkly through great ports, where they hung crookedly
I know the hinges and half are burnt.
“This is Thror's great chamber,” said Thorin; “the feast hall
and of cunsigghiu. Non luntanu ora cè lu Canceddu Frontali."
Pass through the ruined chamber. The tables s'avìanu marciutu ddà;
seats and benches s'attruvàvanu ḍḍà canciati, charred and decaying.
Skulls and bones were on the ground between flags and bowls and belches
horns of biviri and pruvulazzu. As they arrived they crossed yet more ports
come on, no sound of water fell on the aricchi, and the gray lights criscìu
suddenly he got smaller.
“There is the birth of dû ciumi Running,” said Thorin. “There is
hurry to the door. Let's follow her!”
From a dark opening a wall of rock flows into the water, and
scurrìa vurtizzannu nta nu canali strittu, scurputu e fattu drittu e prufunnu
plus the cunning of the ancient hands. Next to this curría there is a wide asphalt road of stone
enough more òmini ò stissu tempu. Vilocimenti 'ntornu a chistu curreru, e 'ntornu a
wide turn - and here it is! in front of him was the large lights of
jornu. Ahead came n'arcu àutu, still amassed the fragments of old
sculpted travagghi reintra, used and tattered and dark puru it was. A
lu suli brumusu mannau the pale lights within the valley of Muntagna, and the rays
d'oro cadìu above the pavementu ô limits.
Nu vortici di pipistrelli frightened dû sonnu dî sò torci fumanti
sbuffatu supra di iḍḍi; mentri saltàvanu avanti li pedi scippavanu supra li petri
smooth and peeled dû passageu dû dragu. Now before iddi
the water fell noisily towards the hole and foamed towards the valley. Iḍḍi
they threw the torches on the ground, and they looked at the glare
eyes. Arrivaru ô Portu Frontali e stavanu taliannu Dale.
"Good!" said Bilbo, “He never waited for me outside this door.
And I never expected to be full of people to see each other again, and to hear about them
ventu 'n do it. But, oh! this ventu is friddu!”
It was. Suffiò na brisa amara di livanti cu na minazza di n'invernu ca veni.
He turned up and went straight to Muntagna, and
he sighed between the rocks. After a long time there is no need for stewing
caves enchanted with dragons, trimàvanu ô suli.
Suddenly Bilbu went to sleep because he wasn't tired but also very hungry
nfacts. "It's probably late in the morning," I said, "and then you assume it's late."
or menu tempu pâ culaztions, yes there is na culaztions more lighthouses. But he didn't hear me
whoever is at the door of Smaug is the postu cchiù safe pi mancheri. Vamu
quarchi banna unni putemu stari tranquillo pi nu pocu!”
"Fair enough!" said Balinu. "And think about knowing which way to go:
avissiru to make the old guard post ntô cantu southwest dû
Mountain."
"How long is it?" called the hobbit.
"Five hours of walking, have some thoughts. It will be difficult. The road
from the Gate along the left edge of the stream seems all broken up. But
look down there! The river loops suddenly east across Dale in front of the
ruined town. At that point there was once a bridge, leading to steep stairs
that climbed up the right bank, and so to a road running towards Ravenhill.
There is (or was) a path that left the road and climbed up to the post. TO
hard climb, too, even if the old steps are still there.”
“Dear me!” grumbled the hobbit. “More walking and more climbing
without breakfast! I wonder how many breakfasts, and other meals, we
have missed inside that nasty clockless, timeless hole?”
As a matter of fact two nights and the day between had gone by (and
not altogether without food) since the dragon smashed the magic door, but
Bilbo had quite lost count, and it might have been one night or a week of
nights for all he could tell.
“How, how!” said Thorin laughing—his spirits had begun to rise
again, and he rattled the precious stones in his pockets. “Don't call me
palace to nasty hole! You wait until it has been cleaned and redecorated!”
“That won't be till Smaug's dead,” said Bilbo glumly. “In the
meanwhile where is he? I would give a good breakfast to know. I hope he
is not up on the Mountain looking down at us!”
That idea disturbed the dwarves mightily, and they quickly decided that
Bilbo and Balin were right.
“We must move away from here,” said Dori. “I feel as if his eyes were
on the back of my head.”
“It's a cold lonesome place,” said Bombur. “There may be a drink, but I
see no sign of food. A dragon would always be hungry in such parts.”
"Come on! Come on!" cried the others. “Let us follow Balin's path!”
Under the rocky wall to the right there was no path, so on they trudged
among the stones on the left side of the river, and the emptiness and
desolation soon suffered even Thorin again. The bridge that Balin had
spoken of they found long fallen, and most of its stones were now only
boulders in the shallow noisy stream; but they forded the water without
much difficulty, and found the ancient steps, and climbed the high bank.
After going a short way they struck the old road, and before long they came to a
deep dell sheltered among the rocks; there they remained for a while and had
such a breakfast as they could, chiefly cram and water. (If you want to
know what cram is, I can only say that I don't know the recipe; but it is
biscuitish, keeps good indefinitely, is supposed to be sustaining, and is
certainly not entertaining, being in fact very uninteresting except as a
chewing exercise. It was made by the Lake-men for long journeys.)
After that they went on again; and now the road struck westwards and
left the river, and the great shoulder of the south-pointing mountain-spur
drew ever closer. At length they reached the hill path. It scrambled steeply
up, and they slowly plodded one behind the other, until at last in the late
afternoon they came to the top of the ridge and saw the wintry sun going
downwards to the West.
Here they found a flat place without a wall on three sides, but backed to
the North by a rocky face in which there was an opening like a door. From
that door there was a wide view East and South and West.
“Here,” said Balin, “in the old days we always used to keep watchmen,
and that door behind leads into a rockhewn chamber that was made here as
to the guardroom. There were several places like it round the Mountain. But
there seemed small need for watching in the days of our prosperity, and the
guards were made over comfortable, perhaps—otherwise we might have
had longer warning of the coming of the dragon, and things might have
been different. Still, here we can now lie hid and sheltered for a while, and
can see much without being seen.”
“Not much use, if we have been seen coming here,” said Dori, who was
always looking up towards the Mountain's peak, as if he expected to see
Smaug perched there like a bird on a steeple.
“We must take our chance of that,” said Thorin. “We can go no further
today.”
“Hear, hear!” cried Bilbo, and flung himself on the ground.
In the rock-chamber there would have been room for a hundred, and
there was a small chamber further in, more removed from the cold outside.
It was quite deserted; not even wild animals seemed to have used it in all
the days of Smaug's dominion. There they laid their burdens; and some
threw themselves down at once and slept, but the others sat near the outer
door and discussed their plans. In all their talk they came perpetually back
to one thing: where was Smaug? They looked West and there was nothing,
and East there was nothing, and in the South there was no sign of the
dragon, but there was a gathering of very many birds. At that they gazed
and wondered; but they were no closer understanding it, when the first
cold stars came out.
FIRE AND WATER
Now if you wish, like the dwarves, to hear news of Smaug, you must go
back again to the evening when he smashed the door and flew off in rage,
two days before.
The men of the lake-town Esgaroth were mostly indoors, for the breeze
was from the black East and chill, but a few were walking on the quays,
and watching, as they were fond of doing, the stars shine out from the
smooth patches of the lake as they opened in the sky. From their town the
Lonely Mountain was mostly screened by the low hills at the far end of the
lake, through a gap in which the Running River came down from the
North. Only its high peak could they see in clear weather, and they looked
rarely at it, for it was ominous and dreamed even in the light of morning.
Now it was lost and gone, blotted in the dark.
Suddenly it flickered back to view; a brief glow touched it and faded.
“Look!” said one. "The lights again! Last night the watchmen saw them
start and fade from midnight until dawn. Something is happening up
there.”
“Perhaps the King under the Mountain is forging gold,” said another.
"It is long since he went North. It is time the songs began to prove
themselves again.”
“Which king?” said another with a grim voice. “As like as not it is the
marauding fire of the Dragon, the only king under the Mountain we have
ever known.”
“You are always foreboding gloomy things!” said the others. “Anything
from floods to poisoned fish. Think of something cheerful!”
Then suddenly a great light appeared in the low place in the hills and
the northern end of the lake turned golden. “The King beneath the
Mountain!” they shouted “His wealth is like the Sun, his silver like a
fountain, his rivers golden run! The river is running gold from the
Mountain!” they cried, and everywhere windows were opening and feet
were hurrying.
There was once more a tremendous excitement and enthusiasm. But the
grim-voiced fellow ran hotfoot to the Master. “The dragon is coming or I
am a fool!” he cried. “Cut the bridges! To arms! To arms!”
Then warning trumpets were suddenly sounded, and echoed along the
rocky shores. The cheering stopped and the joy was turned to dread. I know it
was that the dragon did not find them quite unprepared.
Before long, so great was his speed, they could see him as a spark of
fire rushing towards them and growing ever bigger and brighter, and
not the most foolish doubted that the prophecies had gone rather wrong.
Still they had a little time. Every vessel in the town was filled with water,
every warrior was armed, every arrow and dart was ready, and the bridge
to the land was thrown down and destroyed, before the roar of Smaug's
terrible approach grew loud, and the lake rippled red as fire beneath the
awful beating of his wings. Amid shrieks and wailing and the shouts of
men he came over them, swept towards the bridges and was foiled! The
bridge was gone, and his enemies were on an island in deep water—too
deep and dark and cool for his liking. If he plunged into it, a vapor and a
steam would arise enough to cover all the land with a mist for days; but
the lake was mightier than he, it would quench him before he could pass
through.
Roaring he swept back over the town. A hail of dark arrows leaped up
and snapped and rattled on his scales and jewels, and their shafts fell back
kindled by his breath burning and hissing into the lake. No fireworks you
ever imagined equaled the sights that night. At the twanging of the bows
and the shrilling of the trumpets the dragon's wrath blazed to its height,
till he was blind and mad with it. No one had dared to give battle to him
for many an age; nor would they have given up now, if it had not been for the
grim-voiced man (Bard was his name), who ran to and fro cheering on the
archers and urging the Master to order them to fight to the last arrow.
Fire leaped from the dragon's jaws. He circled for a while high in the
air above them lighting all the lake; the trees by the shores shone like
copper and like blood with leaping shadows of dense black at their feet.
Then down he swooped straight through the arrow-storm, reckless in his
rage, taking no heed to turn his scaly sides towards his foes, seeking only
to set their town ablaze.
Fire leaped from thatched roofs and wooden beam-ends as he hurt
down and past and round again, though all had been drained with water
before he came. Once more water was flowing by a hundred hands wherever
a spark appeared. Back swirled the dragon. A sweep of his tail and the roof
of the Great House crumbled and smashed down. Unquenchable flames
sprang high into the night. Another swoop and another, and another house
and then another sprang afire and fell; and still no arrow hindered Smaug
or hurt him more than a fly from the marshes.
Already men were jumping into the water on every side. Women and
children were being huddled into laden boats in the market-pool. Weapons
were flung down. There was mourning and weeping, where but a little time
ago the old songs of mirth to how had been sung about the dwarves. Now
men cursed their names. The Master himself was turning to his great
gilded boat, hoping to row away in the confusion and save himself. Soon
all the town would be deserted and burned down to the surface of the lake.
That was the dragon's hope. They could all get into boats for all him
cared. There he could have fine sport hunting them, or they could stop till
they stared. Let them try to get to land and he would be ready. Soon he
would set all the shoreland woods ablaze and wither every field and
groundbaits. Just now he was enjoying the sport of town-baiting more than he did
had enjoyed anything for years.
But there was still a company of archers that held their ground among
the burning houses. Their captain was Bard, grim-voiced and grim-faced,
whose friends had accused him of prophesying floods and poisoned fish,
though they knew his worth and courage. He was a descendant in the long line
of Girion, Lord of Dale, whose wife and child had escaped down the
Running River from the ruin long ago. Now he shot with a great yew bow,
till all his arrows but one were spent. The flames were near him. His
companions were leaving him. He bent his bow for the last time.
Suddenly out of the dark something fluttered to his shoulder. He started
—but it was only an old thrush. Unafraid it because by his ear and it
brought him news. Marveling he found he could understand his tongue, for
he was of the Dale race.
"Wait! Wait!" it said to him. "The moon is rising. Look for the hollow
of the left breast as he flies and turns above you!” And while Bard paused
in wonder it told him of tidings up in the Mountain and of all that it had
heard.
Then Bard drew his bow-string to his ear. The dragon was circling back,
flying low, and as he came the moon rose above the eastern shore and
silvered his great wings.
“Arrow!” said the bowman. "Black arrow! I have saved you to the last.
You have never failed me and I have always recovered you. I had you from
my father and he from old. If ever you came from the forges of the true
king under the Mountain, go now and speed well!”
The dragon swooped once lower than ever, and as he turned and
dived down his belly glittered white with sparkling fires of gems in the
moon—but not in one place. The great bow twanged. The black arrow shipped
straight from the string, straight for the hollow by the left breast where the
foreleg was flung wide. In it smote and vanished, barb, shaft and feather,
so fierce was its flight. With a shriek that deafened men, felled trees and
split stone, Smaug shot spouting into the air, turned over and crashed
down from on high in ruin.
Full on the town he fell. His last throes splintered it to sparks and
gledes. The lake roared in. A vast steam leaped up, white in the sudden
dark under the moon. There was a hiss, a gushing whirl, and then silence.
And that was the end of Smaug and Esgaroth, but not of Bard.
The waxing moon rose higher and higher and the wind grew louder and colder.
It twisted the white fog into bending pillars and hurrying clouds and drove
it off to the West to scatter in tattered shreds over the marshes before
Mirkwood. Then the many boats could be seen dotted dark on the surface
of the lake, and down the wind came the voices of the people of Esgaroth
lamenting their lost town and goods and ruined houses. But they had really
much to be thankful for, had they thought of it, though it could hardly be
expected that they should just then: three quarters of the people of the
town had at least escaped alive; their woods and fields and pastures and
cattle and most of their boats remained undamaged; and the dragon was
dead. What that meant they had not yet realized.
They gathered in mournful crowds upon the western shores, shivering
in the cold wind, and their first complaints and anger were against the
Master, who had left the town so soon, while some were still willing to
defend it.
“He may have a good head for business—especially his own business,”
some murmured, “but he is no good when anything serious happens!” And
they praised the courage of Bard and his last mighty shot. “If only he had
not been killed,” they all said, “we would make him a king. Bard the
Dragon-shooter of the line of Girion! Alas that he is lost!”
And in the very midst of their talk a tall figure stepped from the
shadows. He was drained with water, his black hair hung wet over his
face and shoulders, and a fierce light was in his eyes.
“Bard is not lost!” he cried. “He dived from Esgaroth, when the enemy
was slain. I am Bard, of the line of Girion; I am the slayer of the dragon!”
"King Bard! King Bard!" they shouted; but the Master ground his
chattering teeth.
“Girion was lord of Dale, not king of Esgaroth,” he said. “In the Laketown we have always elected masters from among the old and wise, and
have not endured the rule of mere fighting men. Let 'King Bard' go back
to his own kingdom—Dale is now freed by his valor, and nothing hinders
his return. And any that wish can go with him, if they prefer the cold
stones under the shadow of the Mountain to the green shores of the lake.
The wise will stay here and hope to rebuild our town, and enjoy it again
time its peace and riches.”
“We will have King Bard!” the people near at hand shouted in reply.
“We have had enough of the old men and the money-counters!” And
people further off took up the cry: “Up the Bowman, and down with
Moneybags,” till the hype echoed along the shore.
“I am the last man to underestimate Bard the Bowman,” said the Master
warily (for Bard now stood close beside him). “He has tonight earned an
eminent place in the roll of the benefactors of our town; and he is worthy
of many imperishable songs. But, why O People?”—and here the Master
rose to his feet and spoke very loud and clear—“Why do I get all yours
? For what fault am I to be deposed? Who aroused the dragon from
his slumber, I might ask? Who obtained of us rich gifts and ample help,
and led us to believe that old songs could come true? Who played on ours
soft hearts and our pleasant fancies? What sort of gold have they heard
down the river to reward us? Dragon-fire and ruin! From whom we should
claim the recompense of our damage, and aid for our widows and
orphans?”
As you see, the Master had not got his position for nothing. The result
of his words was that for the moment the people quite forgot their idea of
a new king, and turned their angry thoughts towards Thorin and his
company. Wild and bitter words were shouted from many sides; and some
of those who had before sung the old loudest songs, were now heard as
loudly crying that the dwarves had stirred the dragon up against them
deliberately!
“Fools!” said Bard. “Why waste words and wrath on those unhappy
creatures? Doubtless they perished first in fire, before Smaug came to us.”
Then even as he was speaking, the thought came into his heart of the
fabled treasure of the Mountain lying without guard or owner, and he fell
suddenly silent. He thought of the Master's words, and of Dale rebuilt, and
filled with golden bells, if he could but find the men.
At length he spoke again: “This is no time for angry words, Master, or
for considering weighty plans of change. There is work to do. I serve you
still—though after a while I may think again of your words and go North
with anyone who will follow me.”
Then he steps off to help in the ordering of the camps and in the care
of the sick and the wounded. But the Master scowled at his back as he
went, and remained sitting on the ground. He thought much but said little,
unless it was to call loudly for men to bring him fire and food.
Now everywhere Bard went he found talk running like fire among the
people concerning the vast treasure that was now unguarded. Men spoke of
the reward for all their harm that they would soon get from it, and
wealth over and to spare with which to buy rich things from the South; and
it cheered them greatly in their plight. That was as well, for the night was
bitter and miserable. Shelters could be contributed for few (the Master had
one) and there was little food (even the Master went short). Many took ill
of wet and cold and sorrow that night, and afterwards died, who had
escaped uninjured from the ruin of the town; and in the days that followed
there was much sickness and great hunger.
Meanwhile Bard took the lead, and ordered things as he wished, though
always in the Master's name, and he had a hard task to govern the people
and direct the preparations for their protection and housing. Probably most
of them would have perished in the winter that now hurried after autumn,
if help had not been to hand. But help came swiftly; for Bard at once had
speedy messengers sent up the river to the Forest to ask for the aid of the King
of the Elves of the Wood, and these messengers had found a host already
on the move, although it was then only the third day after the fall of
Smaug.
The Elvenking had received news from his own messengers and from
the birds that loved his folk, and already knew much of what they had
happened. Very great indeed was the emotion among all things with
wings that dwelt on the borders of the Desolation of the Dragon. The air
was filled with circling flocks, and their swift-flying messengers flew here
and there across the sky. Above the borders of the Forest there was
whistling, crying and piping. Far over Mirkwood tidings spread: “Smaug
is dead!” Leaves rustled and startled ears were lifted Even before the
Elvenking rode forth the news had passed west right to the pinewoods of
the Misty Mountains; Beorn had heard it in his wooden house, and the
goblins were at council in their caves.
“That will be the last we shall hear of Thorin Oakenshield, I fear,” he said
the king. “He would have done better to have remained my guest
ill wind, all the same,” he added, “that blows no one any good.” For him too
had not forgotten the legend of the wealth of Thror. So it was that Bard's
messengers found him now marching with many spearmen and bowmen;
and crows were gathered thick above him, for they thought that war was
awakening again, such as had not been in those parts for a long age.
But the king, when he received the prayers of Bard, had pity, for he was
the lord of a good and kindly people; so turning his march, which had at
first been directed towards the Mountain, he hastened now down the river to
the Long Lake. He had not enough boats or rafts for his host, and they
they were forced to go the slower way by foot; but great store of goods he sent
ahead by water. Still elves are light-footed, and though they were not in
these days much used to the marches and the treacherous lands between
the Forest and the Lake, their going was swift. Only five days after the
death of the dragon they came upon the shores and looked on the ruins of
the town. Their welcome was good, as may be expected, and the men and
their Master were ready to make any bargain for the future in return for
the Elvenking's aid.
Their plans were soon made. With the women and the children, the old
and the unfit, the Master remained behind; and with him there were some men
of crafts and many skilled elves; and they busied themselves felling trees,
and collecting the timber sent down from the Forest. Then they set about
raising many huts by the shore against the oncoming winter; and also
under the Master's direction they began the planning of a new town,
designed fairer and larger even than before, but not in the same place.
They removed northward higher up the shore; for ever after they had a
dread of the water where the dragon lay. He would never return to again
his golden bed, but was stretched cold as stone, twisted upon the floor of
the shallows. There for ages his huge bones could be seen in calm weather
amid the ruined piles of the old town. But few dared to cross the cursed
spot, and none dared to dive into the shivering water or recover the
precious stones that fell from his rotting carcase.
But all the men of arms who were still able, and the most of the
Elvenking's array, got ready to march north to the Mountain. It was thus
that in eleven days from the ruin of the town the head of their host passed
the rock-gates at the end of the lake and came into the desolate lands.
THE GATHERING OF THE CLOUDS
Now we will return to Bilbo and the dwarves. All night one of them had
watched, but when morning came they had not heard or seen any sign of
danger. But ever more often the birds were gathering. Their companies
came flying from the South; and the crows that still lived about the
Mountain were wheeling and crying unceasingly above.
“Something strange is happening,” said Thorin. “The time has gone for
the autumn wanderings; and these are birds that dwell always in the land;
there are starlings and flocks of finches; and far off there are many carriages
birds as if a battle were afoot!”
Suddenly Bilbo pointed: “There is that old thrush again!” he cried. “He
seems to have escaped, when Smaug smashed the mountain-side, but I
don't suppose the snails have!”
Sure enough the old thrush was there, and as Bilbo pointed, he flew
towards them and perched on a stone near by. Then he fluttered his wings
and sang; then he cocked his head on one side, as if to listen; and again he
sang, and again he listened.
“I believe he is trying to tell us something,” said Balin; “but I cannot
follow the speech of such birds, it is very quick and difficult. Can you
make it out Baggins?”
“Not very well,” said Bilbo (as a matter of fact, he could do nothing
of it at all); “but the old fellow seems very excited.”
“I only wish he was a raven!” said Balin.
"I thought you didn't like them! You seemed very shy of them, when
we came this way before.”
“Those were crows! And nasty suspicious-looking creatures at that, and
rude as well. You must have heard the ugly names they were calling after
us. But the ravens are different. There used to be great friendship between
them and the people of Thror; and they often brought us secret news, and
they were rewarded with such bright things as they coveted to hide in them
dwellings.
“They live many a year, and their memories are long, and they hand on
their wisdom to their children. I knew many among the ravens of the rocks
when I was a dwarf-lad. This very height was once named Ravenhill,
because there was a wise and famous couple, old Carc and his wife, that lived
here above the guard-chamber. But I don't suppose that any of that ancient
breed linger here now.”
No sooner had he finished speaking than the old thrust gave a loud call,
and immediately flew away.
“We may not understand him, but that old bird understands us, I am
sure,” said Balin. “Keep watch now, and see what happens!”
Before long there was a fluttering of wings, and back came the thrush;
and with him came a most decrepit old bird. He was getting blind, he
he could hardly fly, and the top of his head was bald. He was an aged raven of
great size. He alighted stiffly on the ground before them, slowly flapped
his wings, and bobbed towards Thorin.
“O Thorin son of Thrain, and Balin son of Fundin,” he croaked (and
Bilbo could understand what he said, for he used ordinary language and
not bird speech). “I am Roäc son of Carc. Carc is dead, but he was well
known to you once. It is a hundred years and three and fifty since I came
out of the egg, but I do not forget what my father told me. Now I am the
chief of the great ravens of the Mountain. We are few, but we remember
still the king that was of old. Most of my people are abroad, for there they are
great tidings in the South—some are tidings of joy to you, and some you
will not think so good.
“Behold! the birds are gathering back again to the Mountain and to
Dale from South and East and West, for word has gone out that Smaug is
dead!”
"Dead! Dead?" shouted the dwarves. "Dead! Then we have been in
needless fear—and the treasure is ours!” They all sprang up and began to
caper about for joy.
“Yes, dead,” said Roäc. “The thrush, may his feathers never fall, saw
him die, and we may trust his words. He saw him fall in battle with the
men of Esgaroth the third night back from now at the rising of the moon.”
It was some time before Thorin could bring the dwarves to be silent
and listen to the raven's news. At length when he had told all the tale of
the battle he went on:
"So much for joy, Thorin Oakenshield. You may go back to your halls
in safety; all the treasure is yours—for the moment. But many are
gathering hither beside the birds. The news of the death of the guardian
has already gone far and wide, and the legend of the wealth of Thror has
not lost in the telling during many years; many are eager for a share of the
spoilers. Already a host of the elves is on the way, and carrion birds are with
them hoping for battle and slaughter. By the lake men murmur that their
sorrows are due to the dwarves; for they are homeless and many have died,
and Smaug has destroyed their town. They too think to find amends from
your treasure, whether you are alive or dead.
“Your own wisdom must decide your course; but thirteen is small
remnant of the great folk of Durin that once dwelt here, and now are
scattered far. If you will listen to my advice, you will not trust the Master
of the Lake-men, but rather him that shot the dragon with his bow. Bard is
he, of the race of Dale, of the line of Girion; he is a grim man but true. We
would see peace once more among dwarves and men and elves after the
long desolation; but it may cost you dear in gold. I have spoken.”
Then Thorin burst forth in anger: “Our thanks, Roäc Carc's son. You
and your people shall not be forgotten. But none of our gold shall thieves
take or the violence carry off while we are alive. If you would earn ours
thanks again, bring us news of anything that comes near. Also I would beg of
you, if any of you are still young and strong of wing, that you would send
messengers to our kin in the mountains of the North, both west from here
and east, and tell them of our plight. But go specially to my cousin Dain in
the Iron Hills, for he has many well-armed people, and dwells nearest to
this place. Bid him hasten!”
“I won't say if this advice be good or bad,” croaked Roäc, “but I will
do what can be done.” Then off he slowly flew.
“Back now to the Mountain!” cried Thorin. “We have little time to
lose.”
“And little food to use!” cried Bilbo, always practical on such points.
In any case he felt that the adventure was, properly speaking, over with the
death of the dragon—in which he was much mistaken—and he would have
given most of his share of the profits for the peaceful winding up of these
affairs.
“Back to the Mountain!” cried the dwarves as if they had not heard
him; so back he had to go with them.
As you have heard some of the events already, you will see that the
dwarves still had some days before them. They explored the caverns once
more, and found, as they expected, that only the Front Gate remained
open; all the other gates (except, of course, the small secret door) had long
ago been broken and blocked by Smaug, and no sign of them remained. I know
now they began to work hard in fortifying the main entrance, and in
making a new path that led from it. Tools were to be found in plenty that
the miners and quarriers and builders of old had used; and at such work the
dwarves were still very skilled.
As they worked the ravens brought them constant tidings. In this way
they learned that the Elvenking had turned aside to the Lake, and they still
had a breathing space. Better still, they heard that three of their ponies had
escaped and were wandering wild far down the banks of the Running
River, not far from where the rest of their stores had been left. So while
the others went on with their work, Fili and Kili were sent, guided by a
raven, to find the ponies and bring back all they could.
They were four days gone, and by that time they knew that the joined
armies of the Lake-men and the Elves were hurrying toward the Mountain.
But now their hopes were higher; for they had food for some weeks with
care—chiefly cram, of course, and they were very tired of it; but cram is
much better than nothing—and already the gate was blocked with a wall of
squared stones laid dry, but very thick and high, across the opening. There
were holes in the wall through which they could see (or shoot), but no
entrance. They climbed in or out with ladders, and hauled stuff up with
ropes. For the issuing of the stream they had contributed a small low arch
under the new wall; but near the entrance they had so altered the narrow
bed that a wide pool stretched from the mountain-wall to the head of the
fall over which the stream went towards Dale. Approach to the Gate was
now only possible, without swimming, along a narrow ledge of the cliff, to
the right as one looked outwards from the wall. The ponies they had
brought only to the head of the steps above the old bridge, and unloading
they there had bidden them return to their masters and sent them back
riderless to the South.
There came a night when suddenly there were many lights as of fires and
torches away south in Dale before them.
“They have come!” called Balin. “And their camp is very great
must have come into the valley under the cover of dusk along both banks
of the river.”
That night the dwarves slept little. The morning was still pale when
they saw a company approaching. From behind their wall they watched
they come up to the valley's head and climb slowly up. Before long they
could see that both men of the lake armed as if for war and elvish bowmen
were among them. At length the foremost of these climbed the tumbled
rocks and appeared at the top of the falls; and very great was their surprise
to see the pool before them and the Gate blocked with a wall of new-hewn
stone.
As they stood pointing and speaking to one another Thorin hailed them:
“Who are you,” he called in a very loud voice, “that come as if in war to
the gates of Thorin son of Thrain, King under the Mountain, and what do
what do you desire?”
But they answered nothing. Some turned swiftly back, and the others
after gazing for a while at the Gate and its defenses soon followed them.
That day the camp was moved to the east of the river, right between the
arms of the Mountain. The rocks echoed then with voices and with song,
as they had not done for many a day. There was the sound, too, of elven-
harps and of sweet music; and as it echoed up towards them it seemed that
the chill of the air was warmed, and they faintly caught the fragrance of
woodland flowers blossoming in spring.
Then Bilbo longed to escape from the dark fortress and to go down and
join in the mirth and feast by the fires. Some of the younger dwarves
were moved in their hearts, too, and they muttered that they wished things
had fallen out otherwise and that they might welcome such folk as friends;
but Thorin scowled.
Then the dwarves themselves brought forth harps and instruments
regained from the hoard, and made music to soften his mood; but their
song was not as elvish song, and was much like the song they had sung
long before in Bilbo's little hobbit-hole.
Under the Mountain dark and tall
The King has come unto his hall!
His foe is dead, the Worm of Dread,
And ever so his foes shall fall.
The sword is sharp, the spear is long,
The arrow swift, the Gate is strong;
The heart is bold that looks on gold;
The dwarves no more shall suffer wrong.
The dwarves of yore made mighty spells,
While hammers fell like ringing bells
In places deep, where dark things sleep,
In hollow halls beneath the fells.
On silver necklaces they strung
The light of stars, on crowns they hung
The dragon-fire, from twisted wire
The melody of harps they wrung.
The mountain throne once more is freed!
OR! wandering folk, the summons heed! How haste!
Come haste! across the waste!
The king of friend and kin needs.
Now call us over cold mountains,
'Come back unto the caverns old'!
Here at the Gates the king awaits,
His hands are rich with gems and gold.
The king is come unto his hall
Under the Mountain dark and tall.
The Worm of Dread is slain and dead,
And ever so our foes shall fall!
This song appeared to please Thorin, and he smiled again and grew
merry; and he began reckoning the distance to the Iron Hills and how long
it would be before Dain could reach the Lonely Mountain, if he had set out
as soon as the message reached him. But Bilbo's heart fell, both at the
song and the talk: they sounded much too warlike.
The next morning early a company of spearmen was seen crossing the
river, and marching up the valley. They bore with them the green banner of
the Elvenking and the blue banner of the Lake, and they advanced until
they stood right before the wall at the Gate.
Again Thorin hailed them in a loud voice: “Who are you that come
armed for war to the gates of Thorin son of Thrain, King under the
Mountain?” This time he was answered.
A tall man stood forward, dark of hair and grim of face, and he cried:
"Hail Thorin! Why do you fence yourself like a robber in his hold? We are
not yet foes, and we rejoice that you are alive beyond our hope. We came
expecting to find none living here; yet now that we are met there is matter
for a parley and a council.”
“Who are you, and what would you talk about?”
“I am Bard, and by my hand was the dragon slain and your treasure
delivered. Is that not a matter that concerns you? Moreover I am by right
descent the heir of Girion of Dale, and in your hoard is mingled much of
the wealth of his halls and towns, which of old Smaug stole. Isn't that a
matter of which we may speak? Further in his last battle Smaug destroyed
the dwellings of the men of Esgaroth, and I am yet the servant of theirs
Master. I would speak for him and ask whether you have no thoughts for the
sorrow and misery of his people. They aided you in your distress, and in
recompense you have thus far brought ruin only, though doubtless
undesigned.”
Now these were fair words and true, if proudly and grimly spoken; and
Bilbo thought that Thorin would at once admit what justice was in them.
He did not, of course, expect that any one would remember that it was him
who discovered all by himself the dragon's weak spot; and that was just as
well, for no one ever did. But also he did not reckon with the power that
gold has upon which a dragon has long brooded, nor with dwarvish hearts.
Long hours in the past days Thorin had spent in the treasury, and the lust
of it was heavy on him. Though he had hunted chiefly for the Arkenstone,
yet he had an eye for many another wonderful thing that was lying there,
about which were wound old memories of the labors and the sorrows of
his race.
“You put your worst cause last and in the chief place,” Thorin
answered. “To the treasure of my people no man has a claim, because
Smaug who stole it from us also robbed him of life or home. The treasure
it was not his that his evil deeds should be amended with a share of it. The
price of the goods and the assistance that we received of the Lake-men we
will pay fairly—in due time. But nothing will we give, not even a loaf's
worth, under threat of force. While an armed host lies before our doors, we
look on you as foes and thieves.
“It is in my mind to ask what share of their inheritance you would have
paid to our kindred, had you found the hoard unguarded and us slain.”
“A just question,” replied Bard. “But you are not dead, and we are not
robbers. Moreover the wealthy may have pity beyond right on the need
that befriended them when they were in want. And still my other claims
remain unanswered.”
"I will not parley, as I have said, with armed men at my gate. Nor at all
with the people of the Elvenking, whom I remember with small kindness.
In this debate they have no place. Begone now were our arrows fly! And if
you would speak with me again, first dismiss the elvish host to the woods
where it belongs, and then return, laying down your arms before you
approach the threshold.”
“The Elvenking is my friend, and he has delighted the people of the
Lake in their need, though they had no claim but friendship on him,”
answered Bard. “We will give you time to repent your words. Gather yours
wisdom era we return!” Then he departed and went back to the camp.
Ere many hours were past, the banner-bearers returned, and trumpeters
stood forth and blew a blast:
“In the name of Esgaroth and the Forest,” one cried, “we speak unto
Thorin Thrain's son Oakenshield, calling himself the King under the
Mountain, and we bid him consider well the claims that have been urged,
or be declared our foe. At the least he shall deliver one twelfth portion of
the treasure unto Bard, as the dragon-slayer, and as the heir of Girion.
From that portion Bard will himself contribute to the aid of Esgaroth; but
if Thorin would have the friendship and honor of the lands about, as his
sires had of old, then he will give also somewhat of his own for the
comfort of the men of the Lake.”
Then Thorin seized a bow of horn and shot an arrow at the speaker. It
smoke into his shield and stuck there quivering.
“Since such is your answer,” he called in return, “I declare the
Mountain besieged. You shall not depart from it, until you call on yours
side for a grim and a parley. We will bear no weapons against you, but we
leave you to your gold. You may eat that, if you will!”
With that the messengers departed swiftly, and the dwarves were left to
consider their homes. So grim had Thorin become, that even if they had
wished, the others would not have dared to find fault with him; but indeed
most of them seemed to share his mind—except perhaps old fat Bombur
and Fili and Kili. Bilbo, of course, disapproved of the whole turn of
affairs. He had by now had more than enough of the Mountain, and being
besieged inside it was not at all to his taste.
“The whole place still stinks of dragon,” he grumbled to himself, “and
it makes me sick. And cram is beginning simply to stick in my throat.”
A THIEF IN THE NIGHT
Now the days passed slowly and wearily. Many of the dwarves spent theirs
time piling and ordering the treasure; and now Thorin spoke of the
Arkenstone of Thrain, and watch them eagerly to look for it in every corner.
“For the Arkenstone of my father,” he said, “is worth more than a river
of gold in itself, and to me it is beyond price. That stone of all the treasure
I name unto myself, and I will be avenged on anyone who finds it and
withholds it.”
Bilbo heard these words and he grew afraid, wondering what he would
happen, if the stone was found—wrapped in an old bundle of tattered
oddments that he used as a pillow. All the same he did not speak of it, for
as the weariness of the days grew heavier, the beginnings of a plan had
come into his little head.
Things had gone on like this for some time, when the ravens brought
news that Dain and more than five hundred dwarves, hurrying from the
Iron Hills, were now within about two days' march of Dale, coming from
the North-East.
“But they cannot reach the Mountain unmarked,” said Roäc, “and I fear
least there be battle in the valley. I do not call this advice good. Though
they are a grim folk, they are not likely to overcome the host that besets
you; and even if they did so, what will you gain? Winter and snow is
hastening behind them. How shall you be fed without the friendship and
goodwill of the lands about you? The treasure is likely to be your death,
though the dragon is no more!”
But Thorin was not moved. “Winter and snow will bite both men and
elves,” he said, “and they may find their dwelling in the waste grievous to
bear. With my friends behind them and winter upon them, they will
perhaps be in a softer mood to talk with.”
That night Bilbo made up his mind. The sky was black and moonless.
As soon as it was full dark, he went to a corner of an inner chamber just
within the gate and drew from his bundle a rope, and also the Arkenstone
wrapped in a rag. Then he climbed to the top of the wall. Only Bombur
was there, for it was his turn to watch, and the dwarves kept only one
watchman at a time.
“It is mighty cold!” said Bombur. “I wish we could have a fire up here
as they have in the camp!”
“It is warm enough inside,” said Bilbo.
“I dare say; but I am bound here till midnight,” grumbled the fat dwarf.
"A sorry business altogether. Not that I venture to disagree with Thorin,
may his beard grow ever longer; yet he was ever a dwarf with a stiff neck.”
“Not as stiff as my legs,” said Bilbo. “I am tired of stairs and stone
passages. I would give a good deal for the feel of grass at my toes.”
“I would give a good deal for the feel of a strong drink in my throat,
and for a soft bed after a good supper!”
“I can't give you those, while the siege is going on.
But it is long since I watched, and I will take your turn for you, if you
like. There is no sleep in me tonight.”
“You are a good fellow, Mr. Baggins, and I will take your offering kindly.
If there should be anything to note, rouse me first, mind you! I will lie in
the inner chamber to the left, not far away.”
“Off you go!” said Bilbo. “I will wake you at midnight, and you can
wake the next watchman.”
As soon as Bombur had gone, Bilbo put on his ring, fastened his rope,
slipped down over the wall, and was gone. He had about five hours before
him. Bombur would sleep (he could sleep at any time, and ever since the
adventure in the forest he was always trying to recapture the beautiful
dreams he had then); and all the others were busy with Thorin. It was
unlikely that any, even Fili or Kili, would come out on the wall until it was
their turn.
It was very dark, and the road after a while, when he left the newlywed
made path and climbed down towards the lower course of the stream, was
strange to him. At last he came to the bend where he had to cross the
water, if he was to make for the camp, as he wished. The bed of the stream
it was there shallow but already broad, and fording it in the dark was not
easy for the little hobbit. He was nearly across when he missed his jogging
on a round stone and fell into the cold water with a splash. He had barely
scrambled out on the far bank, shivering and spluttering, when up came
elves in the gloom with bright lanterns and searched for the cause of the
noise.
“That was no fish!” one said. “There is a spy about. Hide your lights!
They will help him more than us, if he is that queer little creature that he is
said to be their servant.”
“Servant, indeed!” snorted Bilbo; and in the middle of his snort he
sneezed loudly, and the elves immediately gathered towards the sound.
“Let's have a light!” he said. “I am here, if you want me!” and he
slipped off his ring, and popped from behind a rock.
They seized him quickly, in spite of their surprise. "Who are you? Are
you the dwarves' hobbit? What are you doing? How did you get so far past
our sentinels?” they asked one after another.
“I am Mr. Bilbo Baggins,” he answered, “companion of Thorin, if you
want to know. I know your king well by sight, though perhaps he doesn't
know me to look at. But Bard will remember me, and it is Bard I
particularly want to see.”
“Indeed!” said they, “and what may be your business?”
“Whatever it is, it's my own, my good elves. But if you wish ever to get
back to your own woods from this cold cheerless place,” he answered
shivering, “you will take me along quick to a fire, where I can dry—and
then you will let me speak to your chiefs as quickly as may be. I have only
an hour or two to spare.”
That is how it came about that some two hours after his escape from the
Gate, Bilbo was sitting beside a warm fire in front of a large tent, and
there sat too, gazing curiously at him, both the Elvenking and Bard. TO
hobbit in elvish armor, partly wrapped in an old blanket, was something
new to them.
“Really you know,” Bilbo was saying in his best business manner,
"things are impossible. Personally I am tired of the whole affair. I wish I
was back in the West in my own home, where folk are more reasonable.
But I have an interest in this matter—one fourteenth share, to be precise,
according to a letter, which fortunately I believe I have kept.” He drew
from a pocket in his old jacket (which he still wore over his mail),
crumpled and much folded, Thorin's letter that had been put under the
clock on his mantelpiece in May!
“A share in the profits, mind you,” he went on. “I am aware of that.
Personally I am only too ready to consider all your claims carefully, and
deduct what is right from the total before putting in my own claim.
However you don't know Thorin Oakenshield as well as I do now. I assure
you, he is quite ready to sit on a heap of gold and starve, as long as you sit
here.”
“Well, let him!” said Bard. “Such a fool deserves to starve.”
“Quite so,” said Bilbo. "I see your point of view. At the same time
winter is coming on fast. Before long you will be having snow and what
not, and supplies will be difficult—even for elves I imagine. Also there
there will be other difficulties. You have not heard of Dain and the dwarves of
the Iron Hills?”
“We have, a long time ago; but what has he got to do with us?” asked
the king.
"I thought as much. I see I have some information you haven't got.
Dain, I may tell you, is now less than two days' march off, and has at least
five hundred grim dwarves with him—a good many of them have had
experience in the dreadful dwarf and goblin wars, of which you have no
doubt heard. When they arrive there may be serious trouble.”
"Why do you tell us this? Are you betraying your friends, or are you
threatening us?” asked Bard grimly.
“My dear Bard!” squeaked Bilbo. “Don't be so hasty!
suspicious folk! I am merely trying to avoid trouble for all concerned.
Now I will make you an offer! !”
“Let us hear it!” they said.
“You may see it!” said he. “It is this!” and he drew forth the
Arkenstone, and threw away the wrapping.
The Elvenking himself, whose eyes were used to things of wonder and
beauty, stood up in amazement. Even Bard gazed marveling at it in
silence. It was as if a globe had been filled with moonlight and hung
before them in a net woven of the glint of frosty stars.
“This is the Arkenstone of Thrain,” said Bilbo, “the Heart of the
Mountain; and it is also the heart of Thorin. He values ​​it above a river of
gold. I give it to you. It will help you in your bargaining.” Then Bilbo, note
without a shudder, not without a glance of longing, handed the marvelous
stone to Bard, and he held it in his hand, as though dazed.
“But how is it yours to give?” he asked at last with an effort.
“Oh well!” said the hobbit uncomfortably. “It isn't exactly; but, well, I
am willing to let it stand against all my claim, don't you know. I may be a
burglar—or so they say: personally I never really felt like one—but I am
an honest one, I hope, more or less. Anyway I am going back now, and the
dwarves can do what they like to me. I hope you will find it useful.”
The Elvenking looked at Bilbo with a new wonder. “Bilbo Baggins!” he
said. “You are more worthy to wear the armor of elf-princes than many
that have looked more comely in it. But I wonder if Thorin Oakenshield
will see it so. I have more knowledge of dwarves in general than you have
perhaps. I advise you to remain with us, and here you shall be honored
and thrice welcome.”
“Thank you very much I am sure,” said Bilbo with a bow. “But I don't
think I ought to leave my friends like this, after all we have gone through
together. And I promised to wake old Bombur at midnight, too! Really I
must be going, and quickly.”
Nothing they could say would stop him; so an escort was provided for
him, and as he went both the king and Bard saluted him with honour. As
they passed through the camp an old man, wrapped in a dark cloak, rose
from a tent door where he was sitting and came towards them.
"Well done! Mr. Baggins!" he said, clapping Bilbo on the back. “There
is always more about you than anyone expects!” It was Gandalf.
For the first time for many a day Bilbo was really delighted. But there
there was no time for all the questions that he immediately wanted to ask.
“All in good time!” said Gandalf. “Things are drawing towards the end
now, unless I am mistaken. There is an unpleasant time just in front of
you; but keep your heart up! You may come through all right. There is
news brewing that even the ravens have not heard. Good night!”
Puzzled but cheered, Bilbo hurried on. He was guided to a safe ford and
set across dry, and then he said farewell to the elves and climbed carefully
back towards the Gate. Great weariness began to come over him; but it
it was well before midnight when he clambered up the rope again—it was
still where he had left it. He untied it and hid it, and then he sat down on
the wall and wondered anxiously what would happen next.
At midnight he woke up Bombur; and then in turn rolled himself up in
his corner, without listening to the old dwarf's thanks (which he felt he
had hardly earned). He was soon fast asleep forgetting all his worries till
the morning. As a matter of fact he was dreaming of eggs and bacon.
THE CLOUDS BURST
Next day the trumpets rang early in the camp. Soon a single runner was
seen hurrying along the narrow path. At a distance he stood and hailed
them, asking whether Thorin would now listen to another embassy, ​​since
new tidings had come to hand, and matters were changed.
“That will be Dain!” said Thorin when he heard. “They will have got
wind of his coming. I thought that would alter their mood! Bid them like
few in number and weaponless, and I will hear,” he called to the
messenger.
About midday the banners of the Forest and the Lake were seen to be
borne forth again. A company of twenty was approaching. At the
beginning of the narrow way they laid aside sword and spear, and came on
towards the Gate. Wondering, the dwarves saw that among them were both
Bard and the Elvenking, before whom an old man wrapped in cloak and
hood bore a strong casket of iron-bound wood.
“Hail Thorin!” said Bard. “Are you still of the same mind?”
“My mind does not change with the rising and setting of a few suns,”
answered Thorin. “Did you come to ask me idle questions? Still the elfhost has not departed as I bade! Till then you come in vain to bargain with
me."
“Is there then nothing for which you would yield any of your gold?”
“Nothing that you or your friends have to offer.”
“What of the Arkenstone of Thrain?” he said, and at the same moment
the old man opened the casket and held the jewel aloft. The light leapt
from his hand, bright and white in the morning.
Then Thorin was struck dumb with amazement and confusion. No one
spoke for a long time.
Thorin at length broke the silence, and his voice was thick with wrath.
“That stone was my father's, and it is mine,” he said. “Why should I
purchase my own?” But wonder overcame him and he added: “But how
came you by the heirloom of my house—if there is need to ask such a
question of thieves?”
“We are not thieves,” Bard answered. “Your own we will give back in
return for our own.”
“How did you come by it?” shouted Thorin in gathering rage.
“I gave it to them!” squeaked Bilbo, who was peering over the wall, by
now in a dreadful fright.
"You! You!" cried Thorin, turning upon him and grasping him with
both hands. "You miserable hobbit! You undersized—burglar!" he shouted
at a loss for words, and he shook poor Bilbo like a rabbit.
“By the beard of Durin! I wish I had Gandalf here! Curse him for his
choice of you! May his beard wither! As for you I will throw you to the
rocks!” he cried and lifted Bilbo in his arms.
"Stay! Your wish is granted!" said a voice. The old man with the casket
he threw aside his hood and cloak. “Here is Gandalf! And none too soon it
it seems. If you don't like my Burglar, please don't damage him.
Put him down, and listen first to what he has to say!”
“You all seem in league!” said Thorin dropping Bilbo on the top of the
wall. “Never again will I have dealings with any wizard or his friends.
What have you to say, you descendant of rats?”
"Dear me! Dear me!" said Bilbo. “I am sure this is all very
uncomfortable. You may remember saying that I might choose my own
fourteenth share? Perhaps I took it too literally—I have been told that
dwarves are sometimes politer in word than in deed. The time was, all the
same, when you seemed to think that I had been of some service.
Descendant of rats, indeed! This is all the service of you and your family
that I was promised, Thorin? Take it that I have disposed of my share as I
wished, and let it go at that!”
“I will,” said Thorin grimly. “And I will let you go at that—and may we
never meet again!” Then he turned and spoke over the wall
betrayed,” he said. “It was rightly guessed that I could not forbear to
redeem the Arkenstone, the treasure of my house. For it I will give one
fourteenth share of the hoard in silver and gold, setting aside the gems; but
that shall be accounted for the promised share of this traitor, and with that
reward he shall depart, and you can divide it as you will. He will get little
enough, I doubt not. Take him, if you wish him to live; and no friendship
of mine goes with him.
“Get down now to your friends!” he said to Bilbo, “or I will throw you
down.”
“What about the gold and silver?” asked Bilbo. “That shall follow after,
as can be arranged,” said he. “Get down!”
“Until then we keep the stone,” cried Bard.
“You are not making a very splendid figure as King under the
Mountain,” said Gandalf. “But things may change yet.”
“They may indeed,” said Thorin. And already, so strong was the
bewilderment of the treasure upon him, he was pondering whether by the
help of Dain he might not recapture the Arkenstone and hold the share
of the reward.
And so Bilbo was swung down from the wall, and departed with
nothing for all his trouble, except the armor which Thorin had given him
already. More than one of the dwarves in their hearts felt shame and pity at
his going.
“Farewell!” he cried to them. “We may meet again as friends.”
“Well off!” called Thorin. “You have mail upon you, which was made by
my folk, and it is too good for you. It cannot be pierced by arrows; but if you
do not hate, I will sting your miserable feet. So be swift!”
“Not so hasty!” said Bard. “We will give you until tomorrow. At noon
we will return, and see if you have brought from the hoard the portion that
is to be set against the stone. If that is done without death, then we will
depart, and the elf-host will go back to the Forest. In the meantime
farewell!”
With that they went back to the camp; but Thorin sent messengers by
Roäc telling Dain of what he had passed, and bidding him come with wary
speed.
That day passed and the night. The next day the wind shifted west, and the
air was dark and gloomy. The morning was still early when a cry was
heard in the camp. Runners came in to report that a host of dwarves had
appeared round the eastern spur of the Mountain and was now hastening to
Dale. Dain had come. He had hurried on through the night, and so had
come upon them sooner than they had expected. Each one of his folk was
clad in a hauberk of steel mail that hung to his knees, and his legs were
covered with hose of a fine and flexible metal mesh, the secret of which
making was owned by Dain's people. The dwarves are exceedingly
strong for their height, but most of these were strong even for dwarves. In
battle they wielded heavy two-handed mattocks; but each of them had also
a short broad sword at his side and a roundshield slung at his back. Their
beards were forked and plaited and thrust into their belts. Their caps were
of iron and they were shod with iron, and their faces were grim.
Trumpets called men and elves to arms. Before long the dwarves could
be seen coming up the valley at a great pace. They halted between the river
and the eastern spur; but a few held on their way, and crossing the river
drew near the camp; and there they laid down their weapons and held up
their hands in sign of peace. Bard went out to meet them, and with him
went Bilbo.
“We are sent from Dain son of Nain,” they said when questioned. “We
are hastening to our kinsmen in the Mountain, since we learn that the
kingdom of old is renewed. But who are you that sit in the plain as foes
before defended walls?” This, of course, in the polite and rather oldfashioned language of such occasions, meant simply: “You have no
business here. We are going on, so make way or we shall fight you!” They
meant to push on between the Mountain and the loop of the river; for the
narrow land there did not seem to be strongly guarded.
Bard, of course, refused to allow the dwarves to go straight on to the
Mountain. He was determined to wait until the gold and silver had been
brought out in exchange for the Arkenstone; for he did not believe that this
would be done, if once the fortress was manned with so large and warlike a
company. They had brought with them a great store of supplies; for the
dwarves can carry very heavy burdens, and nearly all of Dain's folk, in
despite their rapid march, bore huge packs on their backs in addition to
their weapons. They would stand a siege for weeks, and by that time yet
more dwarves might come, and yet more, for Thorin had many relatives.
Also they would be able to reopen and guard some other gate, so that the
besiegers would have to encircle the whole mountain; and for that they had
not sufficient numbers.
These were, in fact, precisely their plans (for the raven-messengers had
been busy between Thorin and Dain); but for the moment the way was
barred, so after angry words the dwarf-messengers retired muttering in
their beards. Bard then sent messengers at once to the Gate; but they found
no gold or payment. Arrows came forth as soon as they were within shot,
and they hastened back in dismay. In the camp all was now astir, as if for
battle; for the dwarves of Dain were advancing along the eastern bank.
“Fools!” laughed Bard, “to come thus beneath the Mountain's arm!
They do not understand war above ground, whatever they may know of
battle in the mines. There are many of our archers and spearmen now
hidden in the rocks upon their right flank. Dwarf-mail may be good, but
they will soon be hard put to it. Let us set on them now from both sides,
before they are fully rested!”
But the Elvenking said: “Long will I tarry, ere I begin this war for gold.
The dwarves cannot pass us, unless we will, or do anything that we cannot
mark. Let us still hope for something that will bring reconciliation. Our
advantage in numbers will be enough, if in the end it must come to
unhappy blows.”
But he reckoned without the dwarves. The knowledge that the
Arkenstone was in the hands of the besiegers burned in their thoughts; also
they guessed the hesitation of Bard and his friends, and resolved to strike
while they debated.
Suddenly without a signal they sprang silently forward to attack. Bows
twanged and arrows whistled; battle was about to be joined.
Still more suddenly a darkness came on with dreadful swiftness! TO
black cloud hurried over the sky. Winter thunder on a wild wind rolled
roared up and rumbled in the Mountain, and lightning lit its peak. And
beneath the thunder another blackness could be seen whirling forward; but
it did not come with the wind, it came from the North, like a vast cloud of
birds, so dense that no light could be seen between their wings.
“Halt!” cried Gandalf, who appeared suddenly, and stood alone, with
arms uplifted, between the advancing dwarves and the ranks awaiting
them. “Halt!” he called in a voice like thunder, and his staff blazed forth
with a flash like the lightning. “Dread has come upon you all! Alas! it has
come more swiftly than I guessed. The Goblins are upon you! Bolg
* of the
North is coming, O Dain! whose father you slew in Moria. Behold! the
bats are above his army like a sea of ​​locusts. They laugh upon wolves and
Wargs are in their train!”
Amazement and confusion fell upon them all. Even as Gandalf had
been speaking the darkness grew. The dwarves halted and gazed at the sky.
The elves cried out with many voices.
"As!" called Gandalf. "There is yet time for council. Let Dain son of
Nain come swiftly to us!”
So began a battle that no one had expected; and it was called the Battle of
Five Armies, and it was very terrible. Upon one side were the Goblins and
the Wild Wolves, and upon the other were Elves and Men and Dwarves.
This is how it fell out. Ever since the fall of the Great Goblin of the Misty
Mountains the hatred of their race for the dwarves had been rekindled to
fury. Messengers had passed to and fro between all their cities, colonies
and strongholds; for they resolved now to win the dominion of the North.
Tidings they had gathered in secret ways; and in all the mountains there
it was a forging and an arming. Then they marched and gathered by hill and
valley, going ever by tunnel or under dark, until around and beneath the
great mountain Gundabad of the North, where was their capital, a vast host
was assembled ready to sweep down in time of storm unawares
upon the South. Then they learned of the death of Smaug, and joy was
in their hearts; and they hastened night after night through the mountains,
and came thus at last on a sudden from the North hard on the heels of
Dain. Not even the ravens knew of their coming until they came out in the
broken lands which divided the Lonely Mountain from the hills behind.
How much Gandalf knew cannot be said, but it is plain that he had not
expected this sudden assault.
This is the plan that he made in council with the Elven-king and with
Bard; and with Dain, for the dwarf-lord now joined them: the Goblins were
the foes of all, and at their coming all other quarrels were forgotten. Their
only hope was to lure the goblins into the valley between the arms of the
Mountain; and themselves to man the great spurs that struck south and
east. Yet this would be perilous, if the goblins were in sufficient numbers
to overrun the Mountain itself, and so attack them also from behind and
above; but there was no time to make any other plan, or to summon anything
help.
Soon the thunder passed, rolling away to the South-East; but the batcloud came, flying lower, over the shoulder of the Mountain, and whirled
above them shutting out the light and filling them with dread.
“To the Mountain!” called Bard. "To the Mountain! Let us take ours
places while there is yet time!”
On the Southern spur, in its lower slopes and in the rocks at its feet, the
Elves were set; on the Eastern spur were men and dwarves. But Bard and
some of the nimblest of men and elves climbed to the height of the Eastern
shoulder to gain a view to the North. Soon they could see the lands before
the Mountain's feet black with a hurrying multitude. Ere long the vanguard
swirled round the spur's end and came rushing into Dale. These were the
swiftest wolf-riders, and already their cries and howls rent the air afar. TO
few brave men were strung before them to make a feint of resistance, and
many there fell before the rest drew back and fled to either side. As
Gandalf had hoped, the goblin army had gathered behind the resisted
vanguard, and poured now in rage into the valley, driving wildly up
between the arms of the Mountain, seeking for the foe. Their banners were
countless, black and red, and they came on like a tide in fury and disorder.
It was a terrible battle. The most dreadful of all Bilbo's experiences,
and the one who at the time he hated most—which is to say it was the
one he was most proud of, and most fond of remembering long afterwards,
although he was quite unimportant in it. Actually I may say he put on his
ring early in the business, and vanished from sight, if not from all danger.
A magic ring of that sort is not a complete protection in a goblin charge,
nor does it stop flying arrows and wild spears; but it does help in getting
out of the way, and it prevents your head from being specially chosen for a
sweeping stroke by a goblin swordsman.
The elves were the first to charge. Their hatred for the goblins is cold
and bitter. Their spears and swords shone in the gloom with a gleam of
chill flame, so deadly was the wrath of the hands that held them. As soon
as the host of their enemies was dense in the valley, they sent against it a
shower of arrows, and each flickered as it fled as if with stinging fire.
Behind the arrows a thousand of their spearmen leapt down and charged.
The yells were deafening. The rocks were stained black with goblin blood.
Just as the goblins were recovering from the onslaught and the elfcharge was halted, there rose from across the valley a deep-throated roar.
With cries of “Moria!” and “Dain, Dain!” the dwarves of the Iron Hills
plunged in, wielding their mattocks, upon the other side; and beside them
came the men of the Lake with long swords.
Panic came upon the Goblins; and even as they turned to meet this new
attack, the elves charged again with renewed numbers. Already many of
the goblins were flying back down the river to escape from the trap; and
many of their own wolves were turning upon them and rendering the dead
and the wounded. Victory seemed at hand, when a cry rang out on the
heights above.
Goblins had scaled the Mountain from the other side and already many
were on the slopes above the Gate, and others were streaming down
recklessly, heedless of those that fell screaming from cliff and precipice,
to attack the spurs from above. Each of these could be reached by paths
that ran down from the main mass of the Mountain in the center; and the
defenders had too few to bar the way for long. Victory now vanished from
hope. They had only stemmed the first onslaught of the black tide.
Day drew on. The goblins gathered again in the valley. There a host of
Wargs came ravening and with them came the bodyguard of Bolg, goblins
of huge size with scimitars of steel. Soon actual darkness was coming into
to stormy sky; while still the great bats swirled about the heads and ears of
elves and men, or fastened vampire-like on the stricken. Now Bard was
fighting to defend the Eastern spur, and yet slowly giving back; and the
elf-lords were at bay about their king upon the southern arm, near to the
watch-post on Ravenhill.
Suddenly there was a great shout, and from the Gate came a trumpet
call. They had forgotten Thorin! Part of the wall, moved by levers, fell
outward with a crash into the pool. Out leapt the King under the Mountain,
and his companions followed him. Hood and cloak were gone; they were
in shining armor, and red light leapt from their eyes. In the gloom the
great dwarf gleamed like gold in a dying fire.
Rocks were hurled down from on high by the goblins above; but they
held on, leapt down to the falls' foot, and rushed forward to battle. Wolf
and rider fell or fled before them. Thorin wielded his ax with mighty
strokes, and nothing seemed to harm him.
"To me! To me! Elves and Men! To me! O my kinsfolk!" he cried, and
his voice shook like a horn in the valley.
Down, heedless of order, rushed all the dwarves of Dain to his help.
Down too came many of the Lake-men, for Bard could not restrain them;
and out upon the other side came many of the spearmen of the elves. Ounces
again the goblins were stricken in the valley; and they were piled in heaps
till Dale was dark and hideous with their corpses. The Wargs were
scattered and Thorin drove right against the bodyguard of Bolg. But he
could not pierce their ranks.
Already behind him among the goblin dead lay many men and many
dwarves, and many a fair elf that should have lived yet long ages merrily
in the wood. And as the valley widened his onset grew ever slower. His
numbers were too few. His flanks were unguarded. Soon the attackers were
attacked, and they were forced into a great ring, facing every way, hemmed
all about with goblins and wolves returning to the assault. The bodyguard
of Bolg came howling against them, and drove in upon their ranks like
waves upon cliffs of sand. Their friends couldn't help them, for the
assault from the Mountain was renewed with redoubled force, and upon
either side men and elves were being slowly beaten down.
On all this Bilbo looked with misery. He had taken his stand on
Ravenhill among the Elves—partly because there was more chance of
escape from that point, and partly (with the more Tookish part of his mind)
because if he was going to be in a last desperate stand, he preferred on the
whole to defend the Elvenking. Gandalf, too, I may say, was there, sitting
on the ground as if in deep thought, preparing, I suppose, some last blast
of magic before the end.
That didn't seem to make off. “It will not be long now,” thought Bilbo,
“before the goblins win the Gate, and we are all slaughtered or driven
down and captured. Really it is enough to make one weep, after all one has
gone through. I would rather old Smaug had been left with all the wretched
treasure, than that these vile creatures should get it, and poor old Bombur,
and Balin and Fili and Kili and all the rest come to a bad end; and Bard
too, and the Lake-men and the merry elves. Misery me! I have heard songs
of many battles, and I have always understood that defeat may be glorious.
It seems very uncomfortable, not to say distressing. I wish I was well out
of it.”
The clouds were returned by the wind, and a red sunset slashed the West.
Seeing the sudden gleam in the gloom Bilbo looked round. He gave a great
cry: he had seen a sight that made his heart leap, dark shapes small yet
majestic against the distant glow.
"The Eagles! The Eagles!" he shouted. “The Eagles are coming!”
Bilbo's eyes were rarely wrong. The eagles were coming down the
wind, line after line, in such a host as must have gathered from all the
eyries of the North.
"The Eagles! the Eagles!" Bilbo cried, dancing and waving his arms. If
the elves could not see him they could hear him. Soon they too took up the
cry, and it echoed across the valley. Many wondering eyes looked up,
though as yet nothing could be seen except from the southern shoulders of
the Mountain.
“The Eagles!” cried Bilbo once more, but at that moment a stone
hurtling from above smoke heavily on his helm, and he fell with a crash
and knew no more.
THE RETURN JOURNEY
When Bilbo came to himself, he was literally by himself. He was lying on
the flat stones of Ravenhill, and no one was near. A cloudless day, but cold,
was broad above him. He was shaking, and as chilled as a stone, but his head
burned with fire.
“Now I wonder what happened?” he said to himself. “At any rate I
am not yet one of the fallen heroes; but I suppose there is still time enough
for that!”
He sat up painfully. Looking into the valley he could see no living
goblins. After a while as his head cleared a little, he thought he could see
elves moving in the rocks below. He rubbed his eyes. Surely there was a
camp still in the plain some distance off; and there was a coming and
going about the Gate? Dwarves seemed to be busy removing the wall. But
all was deadly still. There was no call and no echo of a song. Sorrow
seemed to be in the air.
“Victory after all, I supposed!” he said, feeling his aching head. “Well, it
seems a very gloomy business.”
Suddenly he was aware of a man climbing up and coming towards him.
“Hullo there!” he called with a shaky voice. "Hullo there! What news?"
“What voice is it that speaks among the stones?” said the man halting
and peering about him not far from where Bilbo sat.
Then Bilbo remembered his ring! “Well I'm blessed!” said he. “This
invisibility has its drawbacks after all. Otherwise I suppose I might have
spent a warm and comfortable night in bed!”
“It's me, Bilbo Baggins, companion of Thorin!” he cried, hurriedly
taking off the ring.
“It is well that I have found you!” said the man striding forward. “You
we are needed and we have looked for you long. You would have been
numbered among the dead, who are many, if Gandalf the wizard had not
said that your voice was last heard in this place. I have been sent to look
here for the last time. Are you much hurt?”
“A nasty knock on the head, I think,” said Bilbo. “But I have a helmet
and a hard skull. All the same I feel sick and my legs are like straws.”
“I will carry you down to the camp in the valley,” said the man, and
picked him lightly up.
The man was swift and sure-footed. It wasn't long before Bilbo was
set down before a tent in Dale; and there stood Gandalf, with his arm in a
sling. Even the wizard had not escaped without a wound; and there were
few unharmed in all the host.
When Gandalf saw Bilbo, he was delighted. “Baggins!” he exclaimed.
“Well I never! Alive after all—I am glad! I began to wonder if even yours
luck would see you through! A terrible business, and it nearly was
disastrous. But other news can wait. As!" he said more gravely
are called for;” and leading the hobbit he took him within the tent.
"Hail! Thorin," he said as he entered. “I have brought him.”
There indeed lay Thorin Oakenshield, wounded with many wounds, and
his rent armor and notched ax were cast upon the floor. He looked up as
Bilbo came beside him.
“Farewell, good thief,” he said. “I go now to the halls of waiting to sit
beside my fathers, until the world is renewed. Since I leave now all gold
and silver, and go where it is of little worth, I wish to part in friendship
from you, and I would take back my words and deeds at the Gate.”
Bilbo knelt on one knee filled with sorrow. “Farewell, King under the
Mountain!” he said “This is a bitter adventure, if it must end so; and not to
mountain of gold can amend it. Yet I am glad that I have shared in yours
perils—that has been more than any Baggins deserves.”
"No!" said Thorin. “There is more in you of good than you know, child
of the kindly West. Some courage and some wisdom, blended in measure.
If more of us valued food and cheer and song above hoarded gold, it would
be a merrier world. But sad or merry, I must leave it now. Farewell!”
Then Bilbo turned away, and he went by himself, and sat alone wrapped
in a blanket, and, whether you believe it or not, he wept until his eyes were
red and his voice was hoarse. He was a kindly little soul. Indeed it was
long before he had the heart to make a joke again. “A mercy it is,” he said
at last to himself, "that I woke up when I did. I wish Thorin were living,
but I am glad that we parted in kindness. You are a fool, Bilbo Baggins,
and you made a great mess of that business with the stone; and there was a
battle, in spite of all your efforts to buy peace and quiet, but I suppose you
can hardly be blamed for that.”
All that had happened after he was stunned, Bilbo learned later; but it gave
him more sorrow than joy, and he was now weary of his adventure. He was
aching in his bones for the homeward journey. That, however, was a little
delayed, so in the meantime I will tell something of events. The Eagles
had long had suspicion of the goblins' mustering; from their watchfulness
the movements in the mountains could not be altogether hid. I know they too
had gathered in great numbers, under the great Eagle of the Misty
Mountains; and at length smelling battle from afar they had come
speeding down the gale in the nick of time. They it was who dislodged the
goblins from the mountain-slopes, casting them over precipices, or driving
them down shrieking and bewildered among their foes. It wasn't long
before they had freed the Lonely Mountain, and elves and men on either
side of the valley could come at last to the help of the battle below.
But even with the Eagles they were still outnumbered. In that last hour
Beorn himself had appeared—no one knew how or from where. He came
alone, and in bear's shape; and he seemed to have grown almost to giantsize in his wrath.
The roar of his voice was like drums and guns; and he coughed wolves
and goblins from his path like straws and feathers. He fell upon their rear,
and broke like a clap of thunder through the ring. The dwarves were
making a stand still about their lords upon a low rounded hill. Then Beorn
stooped and lifted Thorin, who had fallen pierced with spears, and bore
him out of the fray.
Swiftly he returned and his wrath was redoubled, so that nothing could
withstand him, and no weapon seemed to bite upon him. He scattered the
bodyguard, and pulled down Bolg himself and crushed him. Then dismay
fell on the Goblins and they fled in all directions. But weariness left them
enemies with the coming of new hope, and they pursued them closely, and
prevented most of them from escaping where they could. They drove many
of them into the Running River, and such as fled south or west they hunted
into the marshes about the Forest River; and there the greater part of the
last fugitives perished, while those that came hardly to the Wood-elves'
realm were there slain, or drawn in to die deep in the trackless dark of
Mirkwood. Songs have said that three parts of the goblin warriors of the
North perished on that day, and the mountains had peace for many a year.
Victory had been assured before the fall of night; but the pursuit was
still on foot, when Bilbo returned to the camp; and not many were in the
valley save the more grievously wounded.
“Where are the Eagles?” he asked Gandalf that evening, as he lay
wrapped in many warm blankets.
“Some are in the hunt,” said the wizard, “but most have gone back to
their eyries. They would not stay here, and departed with the first light of
morning. Dain has crowned their chief with gold, and sworn friendship
with them forever.”
"I am sorry. I mean, I should have liked to see them again," said Bilbo
sleepily; "perhaps I shall see them on the way home. I suppose I shall be
going home soon?”
“As soon as you like,” said the wizard.
Actually it was some days before Bilbo really set out. They buried
Thorin deep beneath the Mountain, and Bard laid the Arkenstone upon his
breast.
“There let it lie till the Mountain falls!” he said. “May it bring good
fortune to all his folk that dwell here after!”
Upon his tomb the Elvenking then laid Orcrist, the elvish sword that
had been taken from Thorin into captivity. It is said in songs that it gleamed
ever in the dark if foes approached, and the fortress of the dwarves could
not be taken by surprise. There now Dain son of Nain took up his abode,
and he became King under the Mountain, and in time many other dwarves
gathered to his throne in the ancient halls. Of the twelve companions of
Thorin, ten remained. Fili and Kili had fallen defending him with shield
and body, for he was their mother's elder brother. The others remained
with Dain; for Dain dealt his treasure well.
There was, of course, no longer any question of dividing the hoard in
such shares as had been planned, to Balin and Dwalin, and Dori and Nori
and Ori, and Oin and Gloin, and Bifur and Bofur and Bombur—or to
Bilbo. Yet a fourteenth share of all the silver and gold, wrought and
unwrought, was given up to Bard; for Dain said: “We will honor the
agreement of the dead, and he has now the Arkenstone in his keeping.”
Even a fourteenth share was wealth exceedingly great, greater than that
of many mortal kings. From that treasure Bard sent much gold to the
Master of Laketown; and he rewarded his followers and friends freely. To
the Elvenking he gave the emeralds of Girion, such jewels as he most
loved, which Dain had restored to him.
To Bilbo he said: “This treasure is as much yours as it is mine; though
old agreements cannot stand, since so many have a claim in its winning
and defence. Yet even though you were willing to lay aside all your claim,
I should wish that the words of Thorin, of which he repented, should not
proves true: that we should give you little. I would reward you most richly
of all.”
“Very kind of you,” said Bilbo. “But really it is a relief to me. How on
earth should I have got all that treasure home without war and murder all
along the way, I don't know. And I don't know what I should have done
with it when I got home. I am sure it is better in your hands.”
In the end he would only take two small chests, one filled with silver,
and the other with gold, such as one strong pony could carry. “That will be
quite as much as I can manage,” he said.
At last the time came for him to say good-bye to his friends. “Farewell,
Balin!” he said; “and farewell, Dwalin; and farewell Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin,
Gloin, Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur! May your beards never grow thin!” And
turning towards the Mountain he added: “Farewell Thorin Oakenshield!
And Fili and Kili! May your memory never fade!”
Then the dwarves bowed low before their Gate, but words stuck in them
throats. “Good-bye and good luck, wherever you do!” said Balin at last.
“If ever you visit us again, when our halls are made fair once more, then
the feast shall indeed be splendid!”
“If ever you are passing my way,” said Bilbo, “don't wait to knock! Tea
is at four; but any of you are welcome at any time!”
Then he turned away.
The elf-host was on the march; and if it was sadly lessened, yet many were
glad, for now the northern world would be merrier for many a long day.
The dragon was dead, and the goblins overthrown, and their hearts looked
forward after winter to a spring of joy.
Gandalf and Bilbo rode behind the Elvenking, and beside them strolled
Beorn, once again in man's shape, and he laughed and sang in a loud voice
upon the road. So they went on until they drew near to the borders of
Mirkwood, to the north of the place where the Forest River ran out. Then
they halted, for the wizard and Bilbo would not enter the wood, even
though the king bade them stay a while in his halls. They intended to go
along the edge of the forest, and round its northern end in the waste that
lay between it and the beginning of the Gray Mountains. It was a long time ago
cheerless road, but now that the goblins were crushed, it seemed safer to
them than the dreadful paths under the trees. Moreover Beorn was
going that way too.
"Farewell! O Elvenking!" said Gandalf. “Merry be the greenwood,
while the world is yet young! And merry be all your folk!”
"Farewell! O Gandalf!" said the king. “May you ever appear where you
are most needed and least expected! The oftener you appear in my halls
the better shall I be pleased!”
“I beg of you,” said Bilbo stammering and standing on one foot, “to
accept this gift!” and he brought out a necklace of silver and pearls that
Dain had given him at their parting.
“In what way have I earned such a gift, O hobbit?” said the king.
“Well, er, I thought, don't you know,” said Bilbo rather confused, “that,
er, some little return should be made for your, er, hospitality. I mean even
a burglar has his feelings. I have drunk much of your wine and eaten much
of your bread.”
“I will take your gift, O Bilbo the Magnificent!” said the king gravely.
“And I name you elf-friend and blessed.May your shadow never grow less
(or stealing would be too easy)! Farewell!”
Then the elves turned towards the Forest, and Bilbo started on his long
road home.
He had many hardships and adventures before he got back. The Wild was
still the Wild, and there were many other things in it in those days beside
goblins; but he was well guided and well guarded—the wizard was with
him, and Beorn for much of the way—and he was never in great danger
again. Anyway by midwinter Gandalf and Bilbo had come all the way
back, along both edges of the Forest, to the doors of Beorn's house; and
there for a while they both stayed. Yule-tide was warm and merry there;
and men came from far and wide to feast at Beorn's bidding. The goblins
of the Misty Mountains were now few and terrified, and hidden in the
deepest holes they could find; and the Wargs had vanished from the
woods, so that men went abroad without fear. Beorn indeed became a great
chief afterwards in those regions and ruled a wide land between the
mountains and the wood; and it is said that for many generations the men
of his line had the power of taking bear's shape, and some were grim men
and bad, but most were in heart like Beorn, if less in size and strength. In
their day the last goblins were hunted from the Misty Mountains and a
new peace came over the edge of the Wild.
It was spring, and a fair one with mild weather and a bright sun, before
Bilbo and Gandalf took their leave at last of Beorn, and though he longed
for home, Bilbo left with regret, for the flowers of the gardens of Beorn
they were in springtime no less marvelous than in high summer.
At last they came up the long road, and reached the very pass where the
goblins had captured them before. But they came to that high point at
morning, and looking backward they saw a white sun shining over the
outstretched lands. There behind lay Mirkwood, blue in the distance, and
darkly green at the nearer edge even in the spring. There far away was the
Lonely Mountain on the edge of eyesight. On its highest peak snow yet
unmelted was gleaming pale.
“So comes snow after fire, and even dragons have their ending!” said
Bilbo, and he turned his back on his adventure. The Tookish part was
getting very tired, and the Baggins was daily getting stronger. “I wish now
only to be in my own armchair!” he said.
THE LAST STAGE
It was on May the First that the two came back at last to the brink of the
valley of Rivendell, where stood the Last (or the First) Homely House.
Again it was evening, their ponies were tired, especially the one that
carried the baggage; and they all felt in need of rest. As they rode down
the steep path, Bilbo heard the elves still singing in the trees, as if they had
not stopped since he left; and as soon as the riders came down into the
lower glades of the wood they burst into a song of much the same kind as
before. This is something like it:
The dragon is withered,
His bones are now crumbled;
His armor is shivered,
His splendor is humbled!
Though sword shall be rusted,
And throne and crown perish
With strength that men trusted
And wealth that they cherish,
Here the grass is still growing,
And the leaves are still swinging,
The white water flowing,
And elves are still singing
 Come on! Tra-la-la-lally!
 Come back to the valley!
The stars are far brighter
Than gems without measure,
The moon is far whiter
Than silver in treasure;
The fire is more shining
On hearth in the gloaming
Than gold won by mining,
So why go roaming?
 Oh! Tra-la-la-lally
 Come back to the Valley.
Oh! Where are you going,
So late in returning?
The river is flowing,
The stars are all burning!
Oh! Whither so laden,
So sad and so dreary?
Here elf and elf-maiden
Now welcome the weary
 With Tra-la-la-lally
 Come back to the Valley,
 Tra-la-la-lally
 Fa-la-la-lally
 Fa-la!
Then the elves of the valley came out and greeted them and led them
across the water to the house of Elrond. There a warm welcome was made
them, and there were many eager ears that evening to hear the tale of theirs
adventures. Gandalf it was who spoke, for Bilbo was fallen quiet and
drowsy. Most of the tale he knew, for he had been in it, and had himself
told much of it to the wizard on their homeward way or in the house of
Beorn; but every now and again he would open one eye, and listen, when a
part of the story which he did not yet know came in.
It was in this way that he learned where Gandalf had been to; for him
overheard the words of the wizard to Elrond. It appeared that Gandalf had
been to a great council of the white wizards, masters of lore and good
magic; and that they had at last driven the Necromancer from his dark
hold in the south of Mirkwood.
“Ere long now,” Gandalf was saying, “the Forest will grow somewhat
more wholesome. The North will be freed from that horror for many long
years, I hope. Yet I wish he were banished from the world!”
“It would be well indeed,” said Elrond; “but I fear that will not come
about in this age of the world, or for many after.”
When the tale of their journeyings was told, there were other tales, and
yet more tales, tales of long ago, and tales of new things, and tales of no
time at all, till Bilbo's head fell forward on his chest, and he snored
comfortably in a corner.
He woke to find himself in a white bed, and the moon shining through
an open window. Below it many elves were singing loud and clear on the
banks of the stream.
Sing all ye joyful, now sing all together!
The wind's in the tree-top, the wind's in the heather;
The stars are in blossom, the moon is in flower,
And bright are the windows of Night in her tower.
Dance all ye joyful, now dance all together!
Soft is the grass, and let foot be like feather!
The river is silver, the shadows are floating;
Merry is May-time, and merry our meeting.
Sing we now softly, and dreams let us weave him!
Wind him in slumber and there let us leave him!
The wanderer sleepeth. Now soft be his pillow! Lullaby!
Lullaby! Alder and Willow!
Sigh no more Pine, till the wind of the morn!
 Fall Moon! Dark be the land!
 Hush! Hush! Oak, Ash, and Thorn!
Hushed be all water, till dawn is at hand!
“Well, Merry People!” said Bilbo looking out. “What time by the moon
is this? Your lullaby would waken a drunken goblin! Yet I thank you.”
“And your snores would waken a stone dragon—yet we thank you,”
they answered with laughter. “It is drawing towards dawn, and you have
slept now since the night's beginning. Tomorrow, perhaps, you will be
cured of weariness.”
“A little sleep does a great cure in the house of Elrond,” said he; “but I
will take all the cure I can get. A second good night, fair friends!” And
with that he went back to bed and slept until late morning.
Weariness fell from him soon in that house, and he had many a merry
jest and dance, early and late, with the elves of the valley. Yet even that
place could not long delay him now, and he always thought of his own
home. After a week, therefore, he said farewell to Elrond, and giving him
such small gifts as he would accept, he rode away with Gandalf.
Even as they left the valley the sky darkened in the West before them,
and wind and rain came up to meet them.
“Merry is May-time!” said Bilbo, as the rain beat into his face. “But
our back is to legends and we are coming home. I suppose this is the first
taste of it.”
“There is a long road yet,” said Gandalf.
“But it is the last road,” said Bilbo.
They came to the river that marked the very edge of the borderland of
the Wild, and to the ford beneath the steep bank, which you may
remember. The water was swollen both with the melting of the snows at
the approach of summer, and with the daylong rain; but they crossed with
some difficulty, and pressed forward, as evening fell, on the last stage of
their journey.
This was much as it had been before, except that the company was
smaller, and more silent; also this time there were no trolls. At each point
on the road Bilbo recalled the happenings and the words of a year ago—it
seemed to him more like ten—so that, of course, he quickly noted the
place where the pony had fallen in the river, and they had turned aside for
their nasty adventure with Tom and Bert and Bill.
Not far from the road they found the gold of the trolls, which they had
buried, still hidden and untouched. “I have enough to last me my time,”
said Bilbo, when they had dug it up. "You had better take this, Gandalf. I
daresay you can find a use for it.”
“Indeed I can!” said the wizard. “But share and share alike! You may
find you have more needs than you expect.”
So they put the gold in bags and slung them on the ponies, who they were
not at all pleased about it. After that their going was slower, for most of
the time they walked. But the land was green and there was much grass
through which the hobbit strolled along contentedly. He mopped his face
with a red silk handkerchief—no! not a single one of his own had
survived, he had borrowed this one from Elrond—for now June had
brought summer, and the weather was bright and hot again.
As all things come to an end, even this story, a day came at last when
they were in sight of the country where Bilbo had been born and bred,
where the shapes of the land and of the trees were as well known to him as
his hands and toes. Coming to a rise he could see his own Hill in the
distance, and he stopped suddenly and said:
Roads go ever ever on,
 Over rock and under tree,
By caves where never sun has shone,
 By streams that never find the sea;
Over snow by winter sown,
 And through the merry flowers of June,
Over grass and over stone,
 And under mountains in the moon.
Roads go ever ever on
 Under cloud and under star,
Yet feet that wandering have gone
 Turn at last to home afar.
Eyes that fire and sword have seen
 And horror in the halls of stone
Look at last on meadows green
 And trees and hills they have long known.
Gandalf looked at him. “My dear Bilbo!” he said. “Something is the
matters with you! You are not the hobbit that you were.”
And so they crossed the bridge and passed the mill by the river and
came right back to Bilbo's own door.
"Bless me! What's going on?" he cried. There was a great emotion,
and people of all sorts, respectable and unrespectable, were often round the
door, and many were going in and out—not even wiping their feet on the
mat, as Bilbo noticed with annoyance.
If he was surprised, they were more surprised still. He had arrived back
in the middle of an auction! There was a large notice in black and red hung
on the gate, stating that on June the Twenty-second Messrs Grubb, Grubb,
and Burrowes would sell by auction the effects of the late Bilbo Baggins
Esquire, of Bag-End, Underhill, Hobbiton. Sale to begin at ten
o'clock sharp. It was now nearly lunchtime, and most of the things had
already been sold, for various prices from next to nothing to old songs (as
is not unusual at auctions). Bilbo's cousins ​​the Sackville-Bagginses were,
in fact, busy measuring his rooms to see if their own furniture would fit. In
short Bilbo was “Presumed Dead”, and not everybody that said so was
sorry to find the presumption wrong.
The return of Mr. Bilbo Baggins created quite a disturbance, both under
the Hill and over the Hill, and across the Water; it was a great deal more
than a nine days' wonder. The legal bother, indeed, lasted for years. It was
quite a long time before Mr. Baggins was in fact admitted to be alive
again. The people who had got especially good bargains at the Sale took a
deal of convincing; and in the end to save time Bilbo had to buy back quite
a lot of his own furniture. Many of his silver spoons mysteriously
disappeared and were never accounted for. Personally I suspected the
Sackville-Bagginses. On their side they never admitted that the returned
Baggins was genuine, and they were not on friendly terms with Bilbo ever
after. They really had wanted to live in his nice hobbit-hole so very much.
Indeed Bilbo found he had lost more than spoons—he had lost his
reputation. It is true that for ever after he remained an elf-friend, and had
the honor of dwarves, wizards, and all such folk as ever passed that way;
but he was no longer quite respectable. He was in fact held by all the
hobbits of the neighborhood to be 'queer'—except by his nephews and
nieces on the Took side, but even they were not encouraged in theirs
friendship by their elders.
I am sorry to say he didn't mind. He was quite happy; and the sound
of the kettle on his hearth was ever after more musical than it had been
even in the quiet days before the Unexpected Party. His sword he hung
over the mantelpiece. His coat of mail was arranged on a stand in the hall
(until he slows it to a Museum). His gold and silver was largely spent in
presents, both useful and extravagant—which to a certain extent accounts
for the affection of his nephews and his nieces. His magic ring he kept a
great secret, for he chiefly used it when unpleasant callers came.
He took to writing poetry and visiting the elves; and though many
shook their heads and touched their foreheads and said “Poor old
Baggins!” and though few believed any of his tales, he remained very
happy to the end of his days, and those were extraordinarily long.
One autumn evening some years afterwards Bilbo was sitting in his study
writing his memoirs—he thought of calling them “There and Back Again,
a Hobbit's Holiday"—when there was a ring at the door. It was Gandalf
and a dwarf; and the dwarf was actually Balin.
"As in! As in!" said Bilbo, and soon they were settled in chairs
by the fire. If Balin noticed that Mr. Baggins' waistcoat was more
extensive (and had real gold buttons), Bilbo also noticed that Balin's beard
it was several inches longer, and his jeweled belt was of great magnificence.
They fell to talking about their times together, of course, and Bilbo asked
how things were going in the lands of the Mountain. It seemed they were
going very well. Bard had rebuilt the town in Dale and men had gathered
to him from the Lake and from South and West, and all the valley had
become tilled again and rich, and the desolation was now filled with birds
and blossoms in spring and fruit and feasting in autumn. And Laketown
was refounded and was more prosperous than ever, and much wealth went
up and down the Running River; and there was friendship in those parts
between elves and dwarves and men.
The Hall at Bag-End Residence of B. Baggins Esquire
The old Master had come to a bad end. Bard had given him much gold
for the help of the Lake-people, but being of the kind that easily catches
such disease he fell under the dragon-sickness, and took most of the gold
and fled with it, and died of starvation in the Waste, deserted by his
companions.
“The new Master is of wiser kind,” said Balin, “and very popular, for,
of course, he gets most of the credit for the present prosperity. They are
making songs which say that in his day the rivers run with gold.”
“Then the prophecies of the old songs have turned out to be true, after a
fashion!” said Bilbo.
“Of course!” said Gandalf. “And why shouldn't they prove true?
Surely you don't disbelieve the prophecies, because you had a hand in
bringing them about yourself? You don't really suppose, do you, that all
your adventures and escapes were managed by mere luck, just for yours
well-fit sun? You are a very fine person, Mr. Baggins, and I am very fond
of you; but you are only quite a little fellow in a wide world after all!”
“Thank goodness!” said Bilbo laughing, and handed him the tobaccojar.

Original text
rooms devoted to clothes), kitchens, dining-rooms, all were on the same
Rate this translation
Your feedback will be used to help improve Google Translate
