
AN UNEXPERIENCED FIESTA 
In a forest there lived a hobbit. It wasn't a dirty, dirty and unpleasant smell, 
full of taste residues and a muddy smell, but very dry, bare and sandy. 
a dream without anything in order to hear or come: it was a hobbit's cave, and 
This means comfort. 
It had a perfectly red door like an ox eye, painted green, with a 
bright yellow brass bead just in the center. The door opened at a tubular step, like a tunnel: a very comfortable, silent tunnel, with 
walls covered with panels and soles of tiles and carpets, provided with clean covers. 
saddles and muttons and muttons of hangers for hats and coats (the hobbit enchants them). 
visitors. The tunnel followed and followed, straight enough but not completely. 
he stands on the side of the hill—The Hill, like all the people in many thousands of people on the hillside, 
called it—and many small doors on the hillsides opened from there, first on one side 
and then on the other. No need to undergo scales for the hobbit: dormitories, 
bathrooms, cellars, pantries (many of these), wardrobes (there were all 
rooms dedicated to the house), kitchens, dining rooms, everything was in the same 
room, and everything in the same room. The best homes were all at the front door (when entering), they were the only ones that had twenty, twenty deep and rounded ones that were in their garden and the most sloping lawns. 
up to the river. 
This hobbit was a very old hobbit and his name was Baggins. 
The Baggins lived in the neighborhood of The Hill for a while. 
mind, and the people considered them very respectable, not only because the majority 
Many of them were recognized, but also because no adventures ever occurred nor 
anything was unexpected: one could guess what a Bolsón would say in anyone 
who asked without the bother of asking them. This is a story of how 
Baggins had an adventure and met doing and saying things 
completely unexpectedly. You may have lost the respect of your neighbors, but... 
well, well, you'll probably have something at the end. 
The mother of our hobbit in particular... who is a hobbit? I suppose... 
Hobbits need some description every day, because they are often rare and 
shy of the Big People, like us. They are (or were) small people, 
Like elephants, they can be a thousand miles away. They tend to be fat in 
the stomach; They are seen in bright colors (mainly green and yellow); They use 
without shoes, because their feet have natural, greasy and warm heart soles. 
brown hair like what they have on their head (which is straightened); They keep the broad and smart hair
of dark-haired men, dear good-natured men and deep and heartfelt laughs 
(over all after dinner, which eats twice a day when they can). 
Now you know that's enough to continue. As I said, the mother of this... 
The hobbit, it is said, the one of Bilbo Baggins, was the famous Belladonna Took, one 
of the three notable daughters of the Old Took, chief of the hobbits who 
lived on the other side of The Water, the little river which ran to the foot of The Hill. 
On the menu it was said (in other families) that for a long time one of the previews of the Took 
had to have been taken a long time. This was, supposedly, absurd, but certainly 
Still had something not like all the hobbits in them, even when 
the members of the Tuk clan went up to live adventures. 
He disappeared discreetly and the family silenced him; but that remains. 
that the Tooks were not as respectable as the Baggins, although they were 
undoubtedly more delicious. 
It's not like Belladonna Took has any adventures after converting into... 
Lady Bungo Baggins. Bungo, who was Bilbo's father, built his greatest 
hobbit master for her (and in part with his money) who was to be 
found at the bottom of the hill or above the hill or on the other side of the water, and 
there they remained until the end of their days. However, it is likely that Bilbo, 
His Only Guy, appeared and behaved exactly like a second edition. 
From its solid and comfortable father, it has a little extra in its build. 
On the side of Took, someone who was just hoping for an opportunity to get married. 
outside. The opportunity never came, until Bilbo Baggins grew up, being 
one fifty years or so, and living in the beautiful hobbit cave built by 
his father, who also described it, until from that point he 
apparently became immovable. 
By some curious chance, a long time ago, in the tranquility of the 
Gandalf! If I only wore a quarter of what I wore above it, 
and I only excoriated very little of all that you had to hear, I would say... 
prepared for any type of notable event. Stories and adventures emerged. 
for all the parts where it was, in the most extraordinary way. I have 
not been because of the under The Hill since he had his acronyms, since his 
old friend Took died, of course, and the hobbits in some cases have forgotten him. 
On aspect. He had been there, on the other side of the hill and the water. 
in my own shops that were all little hobbit boys and girls. 
All that the despised Bilbo this morning was to an old man with 
to stick. He had a tall and pointy blue hat, a wide gray cape and a platinum buffoon on top 
of his large white beard that tied it to the bottom of the belt, and an immense 
black boot. 
- Good morning! -I said Bilbo, and I said it seriously. The sun shone and 
the grass was very green. But Gandalf looked at him from the bottom of a large 
pobladas chejas that above the brim of his shaded hat. 
"What do you want to decide?" I say. "So I want good days or...?" 
it means that it's a good day, whether you want it or not; or what do you feel 
? Is this morning good? Or is it a morning to be good? 
"All at once," said Bilbo. And a very good hand for a pipe. 
free tobacco, for sure. Take a pipe, sit down 
Come down and drink a little of mine! No surprise, we'll have it all the day before. 
Us!" Once Bilbo reached the door, he crossed the stones and 
found a beautiful ring of gray humus that rose into the air 
and floated over 
the 
hill morning. I'm looking for someone to share an adventure that I'm... 
organizing, and it's very difficult to meet someone." 
- I think so, now! We are simple and calm people and we don't 
care about adventures. Disappointing, uncomfortable and disturbing things! Don't wait until late! 
Come and have dinner! I don't imagine what the people see —I say our Mr. Baggins—. 
and I put a bag behind my orthopedic devices and a bigger bag. 
tuxedo Then he took his morning papers and went to read, 
pretending not to pay attention to the old man. You had decided that... 
It wasn't exactly who you were and you were wondering what it was. But the old man doesn't know it. 
movement. He stood on his stick and aimed at the hobbit to the left 
without saying anything, until Bilbo felt quite uncomfortable and even a little annoyed. 
"Good morning!" I say finally. "We won't ask for adventures here, 
marvelous things in celebrations, about dragons and elves and giants and the 
rescue of princes and the unexpected mercy of the men of the streets? Isn't it...? 
A man who only makes such excellent artificial fires! Memory 
Those! The old Tuk should be kept in anticipation of the winter solstice. Splendid! 
they will only suffer like great lilies and dragon mouths and fire laburnums and 
to fall into the twilight all night long!” You will notice that Mr. Baggins was not as prosaic as he thought he was, 
and 
he also enjoyed many 
flowers. "My God!" I have continued. 
Whatever thing, from the moment you reach the trees you have to visit the elves, or sail on boats, sail... 
To other shores! Bless me! Life alone will be interesting enough... I want to decide, just... 
I'll seriously change things for now. I apologize to you, but... 
I had no idea what was still in the shop. 
""Where else could I be?" I say the magician. "In all ways, I am happy 
to meet someone above me. It seems that I recover 
artificial fireworks amicably, in any case, and I need not have any hope. After all, 
for the good of the old Grandpa Took and for the good of the little Belladonna, 
“I'll give you what you asked for.” 
"Excuse me, I didn't order anything!" 
Good morning! But, please, eat and have tea when you want. For what no morning? 
Eat morning! Goodbye! -And I say this, the hobbit went and ran out 
into the green door,and looked for it as quickly as he came, so as not to appear
rudely 
​The wizards, after all, are wizards themselves while if he directed. 
at the pantry. I tried to indulge, but I thought that 
I would give her a cake or two and a drop of something after the meal. 
Meanwhile, Gandalf followed from the outside of the door, and 
I walked away but silently. After one day, he grabbed himself and, with the tip 
of his stick, he grabbed an extra bed in the beautiful green door of the hobbit. This happened just when Bilbo finished writing. 
After the cake I started thinking that I had escaped from the adventures. 
Very good. 
On the following day Gandalf was forgotten. No... 
record very well things, unless you have placed them in the Commitment 
Tablet: like this: Gandalf Tea Wednesday. Yesterday had been too 
nervous to do anything like this. 
Just before tea time there was a tremendous bell in the main door. 
Bell, and then he remembered! I ran and put the kettle on to boil, and picked up 
another cup and platter, and one or two more cakes, and ran to the door. 
"I see that you have been forced to leave," I told the man. 
Dwalin's green cap was picked up. I grabbed the redhead right next to her, and 
"Balin at your service!" I say with my hand on the chest. 
"Thank you!" said Bilbo with a gasp. No, it was correct. 
But you may have been forced to read, which made him very nervous. They enjoyed the visits,  
but they enjoyed knowing them before they left, and they preferred to ask them. 
It's the same. I had the horrible idea that the pastries could be lost, 
and therefore, as the host, I had to know and was drawn to the painful fact that it was. 
- Now you have to ignore it. 
"Come in and have a tea!" I'll say after taking a 
deep breath
- A little bit of brain would make me better, if it doesn't matter to you, I wonder friend. 
"Sir," said Balin, the one with the white beard. But I don't care a bit about pastel... about seeds, it's kept. 
"A lot!", he put Bilbo replying, to his own surprise; and he 
also found himself going to the door to fill a jar of medium liter beer and 
Then he went to a pantry to get some delicious half-rounded cakes that had been 
eaten that late for his meal after dinner. 
When he returned, Balin and Dwalin were talking on the table like they used to. 
friends (in fact, they were brothers). Bilbo had to look for his 
head and the cake in front of him, when a loud bell sounded again, 
and then another doorbell. 
"Now I'm sure that Gandalf", he thought as he returned to the 
street. But it wasn't. There were two older men, both with blue caps, 
plaid belts and yellow beards; and each one of them carried a bag of herbs and 
a shovel. They entered with a leap, as ready as the door began to open; Bilbo was 
absolutely surprising to me. 
-What can I do for you, my little ones? -asked. 
"Kili at your service!", one said. "And Fili!" added the other; and
both of them dropped their blue caps and tilted them. 
-In your home and your family! -Bilbo replied, recording his manners. 
this day 
-I see that Dwalin and Balin are here -I say Kili-. Let's join the 
crew!" 
"Crowd!" thought Mr. Baggins. "I don't like it the way it sounds. To tell the truth, 
They understood, and they didn't want to, because they felt they were too adventurous. 
when, ding-dong-a-ling-dang, the bell turned to the sonar, as some small person went astray. 
The little hobbit was trying to steal the mango. 
"There are others at the door!" I say blinking. 
"One of the four, I'll say by the sound," said Fili. "Furthermore, we saw 
"They are coming from us, we are in the distance." 
The little hobbit felt himself in the hallway and put his head between his hands, 
and he wondered what he had passed, and what time he was going to stop, and 
whether they would all come to dinner. Once the bell began to ring louder than 
ever, and you had to run to the door. They weren't the four after all, they were the five.  
The other child was tied up while walking on the walk. They had 
just turned the knob, when everyone was inside, giving a reverence and saying: "in 
your service", one after the other. Dori, Nori, Oin and Gloin were their 
names; and very ready two dark hoods, a brown hood and one of
the white hoods held their hats and marched with their 
hands as well as on their plates to join them. 
Some pedantic brains, others, black brains; 
so the hobbit kept himself very 
busy for a while, 
so that he could place a large jar of coffee in the house, 
and the little ones were filling a round of bubbles with butter 
. Not a bell, but a strong coup in the hobbit's hand. 
Beautiful green door. Someone coup with a pole! 
Bilbo ran for the pass, very elated and completely disconcerted. 
and turdid—this was the most annoying miracle that we had ever seen vividly. 
He remembered. Open the door of a door and everyone fits inside, one 
at the top of the other. More, four more! And there was Gandalf. 
enormously important Dwarf, since the great Thorin had 
his own Shield of Roble, who was not at all happy with the bruces of Bilbo, 
mat with Bifur, Bofur and Bombur on top. For one thing, Bombur 
It was immensely fat and heavy. Thorin, in fact, was very tall and said 
nothing about the service; but poor Mr. Baggins said that he complained so 
often, that at the end he grunted: "Please, don't mention it", and I understood it. 
frowning. 
"Now we're all here!" I said to Gandalf, looking at the row of three 
hoods—the best removable party hoods—and his sombrero tied to his
pegs "This is such a happy meeting! I hope there is something to eat and drink for those who eat late! What is this? Tea! No, thank you! A little tinted wine, 
"I think for myself." 
-And for me -I said Thorin. 
"And raspberry jam and apple pie," I say Bifur. 
"And pastries and cheese," Bofur said. 
"And pork pie and salad," said Bombur. 
"Yet more cakes, and beer, and coffee, if you don't mind," shouted the 
other half-year-olds across the door. 
"Lay some eggs, good boy!" Gandalf shouted behind him, 
"And simply take out the cold 
Chicken and pickles! 
"It seems like I know as much about the inside of my cupboards as I do. 
"Myself!" thought Mr. Baggins, who felt really disconcerted, and 
was busy wondering whether a very desirable adventure had occurred. 
directly to your home. For when he got all the bottles and plates and 
spoons and spoons and jars and plates and spoons and things stacked in 
large bands, he was putting very hot, and red in the dear, and annoying.
"Confuse and harass these people!" I say in a loud voice. "Why don't 
I come and give you a hand?" And behold! There were Balin and Dwalin. 
at the door of the kitchen, and Fili and Kili behind them, and before the 
Could decided that with a knife they should beat the bands and a couple of months. 
He entered the salon and started all over again on his site. 
Gandalf stood at the head of the group with the three elder brothers: 
and Bilbo felt himself in a stool coming to the fire, biting into a cake (he 
completely rejected his appetite), and trying to make sure how everything was perfect. 
ordinary and for nothing an adventure. The wines came and went, and 
they talked and they talked, and the time passed. Finally, they pressed their stools again, 
and Bilbo started a movement to collect the plates and vases. 
"I suppose everyone will be coming to dinner," I say in a more polite tone. 
rejected tones. 
Of course! -I say Thorin-. And after that. We won't stop going through the 
work until it's late, and let's start listening to music. Now let's collect! 
Encounters the little goats - no Thorin, it was too important - and 
they remained chatting with Gandalf, they took a leap from the foot and raised large sheep all over. 
the things. Then they were, without hoping the bands, balancing columns of 
plates, each one with a bottle on the upper part, with one hand, while the hobbit ran 
among them screaming the fear: "Please, keep them safe!" and "please, 
Don't bother you! I can stop them. But the young men only started singing: 
'Break the vases and break the plates! 
 'Sharpen the knives and bend the forks!' 
is 
Baggins 
 hates 
 . 
And so I suppose I didn't see any of these terrible things, and everything... 
They were cleaned and looked at with the speed of the light, while the hobbit was 
giving twists and turns in the middle of the kitchen trying to see what 
they were doing. They returned and put Thorin with his feet on the earth. 
The lookout smoking in a pipe. I was singing huge rings of humus, and then I would say them to someone who was away, went: through the chimney or away from 
the clock on the mantelpiece, or the bottom of the table, or giving turns around the
leave it 
 at 
the 
 door 
! 
 Send them to the road stop! 
That's what Bilbo Baggins hates! 
So, be careful! Done with the dishes!
ceiling but wherefore, he was not fast enough for Gandalf to escape. 
Pop! Send a smaller ring of hum from the short bow pipe directly 
across each of Thorin. Then Gandalf's humus ring would turn green. 
and he returned to float above the magician's head. There was a cloud of eyes. 
Above you, and in the faint light it seemed strange and 
strange. Bilbo sat quietly and observed (the humming rings enchanted them) and then 
he began to think of the proud man who had been there for the morning. 
rings of humor that had been sent to the wind over the hill. 
- Now let's play music! -I say Thorin-. Remember the instruments! 
Kili and Fili ran to look for their bags and carried small violins; Dory, 
Nori and Ori played flutes from somewhere inside their coats; 
Bombur brought out a drum from the hall; Bifur and Bofur also rose, and 
They returned with clarinets that had left between the sticks. 
Dwalin and Balin said: "Excuse me, I left mine on the porch!" "Just bring me 
"Mine with you!" I say Thorin. They returned with violas as large as 
the others, and with Thorin's harp wrapped in a green cloth. It was a 
beautiful golden harp, and when Thorin touched it the music began to sound. 
Once again, so suddenly and sweetly, Bilbo forgot everything else and was arrested 
by Far away, he had dark lands under the moons outside, much by the top of the water and many more. 
from the hobbit corner to the bottom of La Colina. 
Darkness entered the house by the small wind that rose on the 
side of the hill; the light of the fire shone, it was April, and so 
he continued touching, while the shadow of Gandalf's beard moved against the wall. 
The darkness filled the entire room, and the fire was satisfied and the shadows... 
They were lost, and others continued to touch. And suddenly, first one and then another. 
they began to sing during the playing, the guttural song of the dwarfs in the 
deep places of their ancient homes; and this is like a fragment of your 
song, it can be like your song without music. 
Farther from the friars, the foggy mountains 
, to the deep dungeons and ancient caverns, 
we must see ourselves before the dawn. 
To find the enchanted golden light. 
The old wines created powerful spells, 
While the hammers fell like resounding bells 
In deep places, when the dark things sleep, 
In the hued hallways below the hills. 
For the ancient king and elven lord, 
many shining golden treasures 
They were molded and forged, and they captured the light. 
To hide within the edges of the sword's grip. 
They strung necklaces made of silver. 
The flowering stars, in crowns gather 
the fire of the dragon, in twisted wings 
They mixed the light of the moon and the sun. 
Farther from the friars, the misty mountains 
, to the deep maggots and ancient caverns, 
We must go before the lover. 
to reclaim our largely forgotten gold. 
There they tall cups for themselves. 
And harps of gold; where no man excavated 
There they remained for a long time and many songs were heard. 
It was sung until men and elves watched it. 
The pine trees roar on the hill, 
The winds groan at night. 
The fire was red, its names extended; 
The trees, like torches, glow with light. 
The bells ring in the valley. 
And the men looked forward to arriving with pale faces; 
The wrath of the dragon is more ferocious than the fire. 
They demolished their towers and their fragile houses. 
The mountain hummed below the moon; 
The dwarves heard the sound of doom. 
They fled from his room to die in the fall. 
Lower your feet, lower the moon. 
Farther from the misty and dark mountains 
To the deep dungeons and dark caverns 
We must come before the lover, 
To win our harps and our gold! 
As they sang, the hobbit felt the love for the beautiful things he had in his hands. 
and by cunning and magic moving through him, a fierce and jealous 
love, the desire of the hearts of the elfins. Then something Tookish woke up. 
inside it, and I wanted to go to the great mountains and explore the 
pine trees and waterfalls, and explore the caves, and carry a sword 
instead of a stick. He looked out the window. The stars are 
In a dark sky above the trees, I thought in the joys of the trees. 
shining in dark caves. Suddenly, in the forest farther from the water, a flame 
jumped, probably someone setting fire to a fire of wood, and I thought that 
hunting dragons were settling on a quiet hill and enkindling it all in the flames. 
If extreme; and very ready to convert to Señor Bolsón de Bolsón Cerrado. 
Newly lower the hill. 
Hey rose thundering. Don't hold on to the half of your teeth to look for the lamp, 
and have no more half-hearted intention of pretending, and trying to hide behind the barrels of brain in the tree, and don't want to go up until all the horns are hidden away. 
do Suddenly God realizes that the music and the singing have stopped, and 
everyone looks at it with eyes that shine in the darkness.
"Where are you?" said Thorin, in a tone that seemed to show that 
he had acquired both parts of the hobbit's mind. 
-What's this little light? asked Bilbo discussing it. 
"We enjoy the darkness," everyone said. "Darkness for dark things! 
Many hours for the lover. 
-Clear! —I said Bilbo, and I have heard it all over again. I miss the stool. 
and he felt himself in the guard, pulling the poker and the shovel with a bang. 
-Silence! —I say Gandalf—. Let Thorin speak! And so he was like Thorin... 
began. 
Gandalf, dwarves and Mr. Baggins! We reunite at home. 
of our friend and fellow conspirator, this excellent and daring 
hobbit - who never cares about the hair of his feet! 
—I took a break to go back to the air, but 
The praise was not 
well 
received 
by the poor Bilbo Baggins. dragon and all his relatives, and they will all believe that... 
I heard more than the emotion! In fact, if you don't know 
If you see the sign at the door, you should be sure that we are connected to the wrong house. 
As ready as there is to the little animal that is balanced and placed on the 
Matt, I had my doubts. It seems more tender than a thief! 
Then Mr. Baggins turned his hand and entered. The side of Took held 
Won. Suddenly I realized that I would be left alone with no desire to think. 
ferocious As for the small companion who was swinging on the mat, in cases he would really be 
hurt. Many times later, Baggins's side regretted what happened now, 
and I said to him: "Bilbo, you were a fool; come in and 
"Put the ball in." 
"Forgive me", I say, "I have forgotten the words you said. 
I don't pretend to understand what you are talking about, nor do you refer 
to the thieves, but I think I have reason to believe it" (so I called him). 
standing in his dignity) "I think that no man. I will show you. I keep 
no sign on my door (the painted lasts a week) and that's enough I'm sure 
I've come to the wrong house. As ready as you are, my dear friends, in 
the door, I had my doubts. But treat it as it is correct. Tell me what... 
I want to know what you want, and I'll try it, even if I want to walk from here until the East is
Rayo, I scored for a Rayo!" once again; and that was all that
It could rise from it for a long time. So they took him and thought he
there and I'll try to save myself in the Last Desire. You're a great-great-grandfather, Bullroarer Tuk, and... 
"Yes, yes, but it was a long time ago," Gloin says. I was talking about you. 
And I assure you that there is a brand in this door, the usual one in the office, 
or only it will be. The thief wants good work, a lot of emotion and 
a reasonable reward, as it is usually interpreted. If you can decipher an expert 
treasure hunter in the place of a thief, you would prefer it. Some people do it. It's all... 
The same thing happens to us. Gandalf told us that there was a man like this in these 
parts looking for immediate work, and that he had arranged a meeting here 
"This miracle at tea time." 
"So I suppose you have a brand," said Gandalf. "I put myself. Because of 
all the good reasons. I'm sorry that I'll meet a man in the tenth quarter for your 
expedition, and choose Mr. Baggins. Who says that I choose the wrong one. 
Man or the wrong house, and you can stop in three and take care of the bad all the time 
." coal". 
I looked at Gloin with such a gaze that the horn was curled in his chair; 
"Besides," continued Gandalf, "I forgot to mention that with the map came a 
song, a small and curious song! "Here it is! -I said, and I gave it to Thorin a 
song 
from a wide canal and complete protections, made of silver. I had it - I said Thorin, and I took it to a fine line that... 
grasped his neck and the bottom of his jacket "Now the things fill the most 
hoped for. This news changes a lot for the better. Here we are now... 
Let's have a clear idea of ​​​​what to do. Let us think in this summer, as calm and careful as we are modest. 
You can go to Lago Largo. After that, the problems will be solved... 
"Long before this, we rise above the paths of the East, 
interrupted Gandalf. 
"Let us go from there to the shore of the Running stream," Thorin continued. 
Without chance, "and so let us go to the ruins of Dale, the ancient city in the 
There valley, under the shadow of the mountain. But none of us liked the idea. 
from the Main Door. The river runs just outside it across the great cliff in 
the South of the Mountain, and from there the dragon also rises, no longer left 
in its menu, unless it has changed its habits. 
""No one will be served," said the magician, "not without a mighty 
warrior, including a hero. He intended to meet someone; but the warriors are busy fighting against each other. 
others on the distant lands, and in this neighborhood the heroes are escaped, or
simply they are not found. The swords in these places are mostly worn out, and the swords and the swords 
are used as arbors and shields as cribs or plate cubes; and the dragons are 
comfortably distant (and therefore so legendary). That's why I decided to leave
something, especially when I recorded the existence of a side door. 
And here is our little Bilbo Baggins, the thief, the chosen one. 
thief So now we move forward and we close some plans. 
"Very well," said Thorin, "we assume that the expert in thieves gives us 
some ideas or suggestions." He returned with feigned courtesy to Bilbo. 
"First I would like to know a little more about the things," I said, feeling 
all confused and a little fearful inside, but until now I would be Tookishly determined to 
continue with the things. "I refer to the gold and the dragon, and all of it, and 
how I got there, where it belongs, and so on." 
- Bless me! -I say Thorin-. Do you have a map? And hasn't... 
Our song? Are we not talking about all this now? 
"In all ways, I would like that everything was clear and simple," I said obstinately. 
adopting a professional attitude (normally reserved for people who intend 
to ask for borrowed money), and doing everything possible to appear wise, prudent and 
professional and to stand by Gandalf's recommendation. "I would also like 
to know the risks, the fuel consumption, the required time and 
remuneration 
, etc.", with what I wanted to decide: "What do I want to achieve 
? of my Grandfather Thror, 
our family was expelled from the far north and returned with all of them 
Wealth and its tools on this mountain on the map. If I had discovered it 
beforehand, Thrain the Elder, but now they mined and excavated the tunnels. 
and they built bigger rooms and bigger workshops, and also... 
I think they encountered a great quantity of gold and also a lot of joy. 
In all ways, they became immensely rich and famous, and 
I went down the mountain again, and treated with great reverence 
by the mountain and were 
gradually 
extending to the 
mountain herdsmen to look for, and generously reward even the least possible. Our fathers 
It urges us to tell our children how we learn and pay us generously, especially 
to food ministers who never bother us to grow or meet our friends. 
In general, those were good days for us and we kept the poorest of us in money. 
indulge and lend yourself, and the heart to do beautiful things only for fun 
of yourself, so as not to talk about the most marvelous and magical games, as 
you no longer enter the world today. Like my grandfather... 
The halls were filled with armor, joys, shoes and clothes, and the game.
Dale's market was the wonder of the North. 
"Without a doubt this was what I attracted to the dragon. The dragons stuff gold. 
And joys, you know, men, elves and elfs, wherefore they can. 
They find them, and look at their loot while they live (which is 
practically always the case, unless they keep them), and they will never use a ring of course, they 
dog 
​​only distinguish a good job from a bad one, however... 
For the most part, they have a good idea of ​​​​the current value of the market 
gold 
Probably he was rushing to escape at the top or 
to 
be killed, and all the waste and general destruction that the 
dragons 
cause 
. 
wind. Some of the teenagers who were outside (I was one of them) 
—a good many adventurer on those days, always wandering by wings, and 
he saved my life that day)—good, from many years ago the dragon 
settled on our mountain in a chorus of callers. He went down the ladders 
and when he got into the woods, they all caught fire. By then, there 
the bells ring in the valley and the warriors arm themselves. The dwarfs 
climbed up running out of the big door; but there the dragon was waiting. 
Nobody ran away. The river rushed in steam and a cloud fell over 
Dale, and in the cloud the dragon swooped over them and destroyed the majority of the 
warriors – the usual sad story, it was common in those days. 
The product returned and was removed from the Main Door and expelled in its entirety. 
the halls, the streets, the tunnels, the streets, the steps, the mansions and the passageways. 
After that they no longer had anyone alive inside, and went back to all theirs 
answers for the same reason. Probably, because this is how dragons act, I have accumulated it. 
All in a big mountain at the bottom, and sleep in it as it comes. later only 
Saldrán would rush to the big door and go to Dale at night, and people would gather 
, especially girls, to come, until Dale was ruined and all the 
people died or disappeared. What happens there now is not certain, but 
I don't suppose that anyone lives further from the mountains than at the other end of 
the wide lake in the present day. 
"The little things that have happened to us have left us feeling and crying, and 
I curse Smaug; and there we were unexpectedly joined by my father and 
my son with his shaggy beards. They looked very somber, but said 
very little. When I wondered how they had escaped, they told me that 
language, and I say that one day, at the right time, we would know it. After that 
we were and we would earn our lives as we should, 
by hunting as low as herding or even 
coal mining. And even 
Now, when you allow me, we don't feel so bad. 
—Here Thorin tightened the red of the heart—, still we would decide 
to recover it and bring our curses home with Smaug 
. 
Now I see that they must have a private side door that only they know 
Gandalf took over from him, and why didn't he bring me the rightful heir? 
heir." 
"I didn't get it, they gave it to me," said the magician. "You 
Grandfather Thror was killed, remember?, in the Mines of Moria by 
Azog the Goblin." 
"My name is wrong, yes," said Thorin. 
"And Thrain, your father, it was the twenty-first of April, a 
year ago the youth passed, and you have never seen him since then..." 
- It is true, it is true - I say Thorin 
And if I choose 
the moment and the way to meet it, you can't blame me, 
considering the effort you have to meet. Your father could not record 
his own name when I told him the paper, and I never told him your name; SW 
In general, I believe that I would be praised and appreciated. "Here it is", I said. 
Entering the map to Thorin. 
-I don't understand it -I said Thorin, and Bilbo felt that he had enjoyed it... 
Say the same thing. The explanation doesn't seem to explain it. 
-You boy -I said the magician slowly and somberly-, God forbid the map. 
To your friend for safety before going there Moria mines. 
He tried his best with the Mataron after 
his 
are 
; 
"What are you doing there?" Thorin asked with a shiver, and all 
The dwarves trembled. 
- Don't worry. He was seeing things, as always; and a despicable 
It was a dangerous assumption. Including me, Gandalf, I just managed to escape. Try... 
Save your father, but you were too late. He was a wandering fool, and 
I have forgotten everything except the map and the word. 
"There is much that we pay for the goblins of Moria," said Thorin; "we must
"Think about the Necromancer."
Don't be absurd! It is an enemy that is much more beyond the power of all the 
young men, they can all be reunited again with the four 
corners of the world. The only thing your father wanted was that his son... 
Read the map and use the club. The dragon and the mountain are bigger than ever. 
Sufficiently large tasks for you!” 
-Listen 
, listen! -I say Bilbo, and without asking I say it loudly. They all said suddenly turning away from him, and he was so 
nervous that he replied: "Explain what I want to say!" 
"What is this?" they asked. 
-Good, I'll tell you that you should go back to this place and have a look. 
After all, there is the Side Door, and the dragons should sleep sometimes, I think. 
I suppose you've been in the shadows for long enough, I'm trying to figure out what you'll think... 
of something. And good, don't you know? I think we've talked a lot. 
Enough for one night, if you want me to. How can such a girl and a friend be tempted? 
And all that? I'll give you a good break beforehand. 
"Before we go, I suppose that's what you mean," said Thorin. "Aren't you the 
Thief? Isn't it your job to feel yourself in the shadow of the door, so you can't figure out how to get...? 
Inside the door? But I'm careful with the lodging and discussion. I enjoy six words with 
me, to learn a journey 
no sweat, 
and 
hello 
And there you are in 
the seats and sofas, before looking at them all and going to your own little one, 
you are very happy and not at all happy. One thing I had to decide on 
was that no one bothered me to get up and cook everyone's food. 
A miserable breakfast. The bad mood was disappearing and it wasn't there. 
I am so sure that I will take some trips in the morning. 
As soon as he was in his room, he could look at Thorin all the time looking for the same in 
the best bedroom next to him: 
More to the side in the cloudy mountains 
of the deep dungeons and ancient caverns 
We must go before the lover. 
to meet our forgotten gold for a long time. 
Bilbo went to sleep with her in his eyes, and he made her very 
uncomfortable. It was much later than the lover, when he finally arrived 
. 
ROAST LAMB 
Bilbo jumped up and, putting his hand on his back, entered the dining room. There I don't go to anyone, except for all the signs of a great and unexpected... 
Breakfast. There was a terrible mess in the house and the sheep were left unwashed. 
pots and pans in the kitchen. All cases The jars and pans that you put there seem to 
have been used. The wash was so depressingly real that Bilbo was 
forced to believe that the party of the previous night was no part of his bad 
dreams, as he had most hoped for. After all, he felt really relieved after all. 
I think that everyone has been without him and without bothering him and depriving him. 
I raised him ("but without a thank you ever", he thought); and yet, in some way 
I can't help but feel a little disappointed. The feeling surprised him. 
- Don't be stupid, Bilbo Baggins! —if I say to myself—, thinking about... 
Dragons and all this extravagant nonsense at your age! So I used to 
brush, lit the flames, pumped in water and washed it. Here is a small and pleasant 
dish in the kitchen before cleaning the dish. To tell the truth, 
The sun was shining and the main door was open, as a warm spring entered. 
breezy Bilbo began to silence loudly and forget about the previous night. 
Indeed, I was sitting at the table enjoying a pleasant second meal in the 
dining room in the open air, when Gandalf entered. 
"I wonder friend", I say, "when are you going to come? What 
are you looking for a quick start? -And here you are having breakfast, or what is what you want. 
Let's call it a day and a half! I'll leave the message to you, because you can't 
wait." 
"What message?", I said the poor Mr. Baggins, very nervously. 
"Big elephants!" I say to Gandalf, "Not so yourselves absolutely this time. 
Good days, you have never stopped the dust of the chimney's repousse! 
"I already have enough with scrubbing. 
"Fourteen away!" 
"If you had cleaned the dust from the cake of the fireplace, you had found this just 
"lower the clock," said Gandalf, giving her a note to Bilbo (written, above all, 
on his own paper of notes). 
This is what I read: 
Thorin and company say hello to the thief Bilbo! For your hospitality. 
Our most sincere thanks and for your offer of professional help. 
Kindly accepted. Conditions: I pay against refund, up to a maximum of one 
tenth part of the total payments (if they are free); 
the funeral expenses will be carried out by us or our representatives, 
the occasion arises 
and 
the matter cannot be settled in any other way 
.
Trusting that it will be punctual, 
"We keep the honor of remaining 
 "Carefully about
 "Thorin & Co." 
- Only for ten minutes. - I say Gandalf. 
-But... 
-I say Bilbo 
. 
There's still time for this! Come on! 
Until the end of his days, Bilbo can never remember how 
he put the same person outside, without a hat, without a cane, without any money or anything. 
who used to return when he went up, leaving on a second meal to finish and without washing, leaving his hands in Gandalf's hands. 
and running as quickly as his hairy feet could travel along the path, passing 
the great mill, to the other side of the water, and sometimes for a thousand or more. 
I was very impressed when I went to Bywater just at the moment of... 
once, and I discovered that I was carrying a bag! 
"Bravo!" I said Balin, who was standing on his feet at the door of the lodge hoping. 
to the 
again, Wires and Kili cases are included, and all the equipment that was carried 
it was very little for dinner and less for dinner. 
There they were all feeling, sad, sad and murmuring, while Oin and Gloin 
They continued trying to ignite the fire and argued about it. Bilbo was sadly 
reflecting that the adventures are not all pony rides under the sun of May, when 
Balin, who was always there, said: "There is a light above 
you!" Have a hill at a certain distance with trees, thick enough in some parts. 
From among the dark mass of trees you can now see a shining light, a 
red light of pleasant appearance, as if it were a fire or a torches. 
scintillation. 
After looking at it for a moment, they began to discuss it. some 
said no and others said yes. Some said they could come to the truth, and 
what was better than a small dinner, less dessert and muddy clothes. 
the night. 
Others said: "These parts are not very familiar and they are often looking for the... 
mountains. Travelers rarely pass by here now. Old maps are not seen by you. 
Use: things have changed for the worse and the path is not supervised. 
Rarely so I hear of the king by here, and they less curious 
"As we move forward, less problems will arise." some 
He said: "After all, we are tortured." 
Would you like it?” This comment was repeated by everyone. Then it started to rain. 
The water fell because never before and Oin and Gloin began to peel. 
This solved it. "After all, we have a thief with us," they said; and 
Thus they marched, guiding their ponies (with all due and adequate precaution) 
in the direction of the light. They are tied to the hill and ready to sit in the forest. 
They went up the hill, but there was no suitable path, such as 
They could lead to a house or a granya; and they learned what they could, they tied it to a note. 
of creaks and creaks and creaks (and a good song of grunts and 
(damn), while passing between the trees in total darkness. 
Suddenly, the red light shone very brightly through the trunks of the trees, not 
far away. 
“Now it's the thief's turn,” they said, referring to Bilbo. "
Come in and see everything in this light, so that everything is perfect,
"Safe and cunning", I say to the hobbit 
Come on! 
two times like a common owl and one like a chillone owl, and we will have what we can. 
power." 
Bilbo asked himself before he could explain that no one could howl. 
Once again like any kind of bull, they don't fly like a bat. But in any case 
the 
Hobbits can move silently through the woods, absolutely in silence. once in a while they called it "everything is 
would have noticed anything on a windy night. 
The 
cavalcade had passed two steps away 
, I suppose that no one in the house had even moved a mustache. - because it was fire - without 
bothering anyone. This is what I see. 
Three very great people felt at the heart of a great fire of hay trunks. 
They were stringing large Madeira saucers and lapping the willow. 
his fingers. It has a pleasant smell. You also have a barrel of 
good drinking water by hand, and bottles of jars. But they are 
trolls. Obviously trolls. Including Bilbo, to weigh his life protected, I could see 
that: because of its large and heavy weight, and its size, and the shape of 
its stones, so as not to speak of its language, which was not in the living room. 
Not fashionable at all, not at all. 
"I'll leave the rope today, let's go, if it doesn't seem so, 
'Tomorrow he will return to the food,' said one of the trolls. 
'We're never harmed by the burden of human flesh for so long,' I said to 
second. 'What demons were thinking of William to bring us to these 
parties in absolute, surpasses me, and the drink is absorbing, what is more", I say. 
Having trotted the tail of William, who was drinking a sip of his jar. 
William was attracted. "Shut your mouth!", I said as promptly as I could. "You 
can't hope that people are always standing here only for that you and Bert command them. 
It's a middle-of-the-road village, where we live in the 
mountains. What more do you want? And the time has left us, 
When I would have I say "thank you Bill" for a good piece of rope gordo of the valley 
I enjoy what this is."God a big bite on the stone of an egg that was looking and
I wiped my lips with the manga. 
Yes, I fear that the trolls behave like this, including those who only have a 
head Each one. After listening to all this, Bilbo should have something to do with 
Item 
, 
probably otherwise, you should have it here. 
A good quick item. A first class and legendary thief. 
At this point they have stuffed the bags of trolls, which is always the case. 
it's worth it, you can forget it—, I peeled off the same cord of the observers, 
I stole the neck and walked until they noticed it. Others are more 
practical but with less professional pride, sometimes they will hang a 
club with a dagger each time before they are told. Even at night 
They passed away happily. 
Bilbo knew it. He read about many things that he had never seen or seen. 
made I was very alarmed, also disgusted; I thought it was the same... 
at a thousand miles of distance, and yet, and yet, in any way I could not 
return directly to Thorin and company with empty hands. So I asked myself there and I wondered. 
the shadows. Of the different things I wanted to 
steal, stealing the bags from the trolls seemed less difficult, so in the end he got angry. 
Detract from a tree just detract from William. 
Bert and Tom were in the barrel. William was going to another cup. 
Then Bilbo was armed with courage and used it on William's hand. 
A huge wallet. He had a wallet, as big as a bag for Bilbo. "Ah!" 
he thought, thrilled with his new work while eating with care, "this is a 
Start! 
It was! The bags of the trolls are the mischief, and this was not the exception. 
"Where are you?" chilled when the bag rose; and William turned around. 
He turned immediately and grabbed Bilbo by the ass, before he could get away. 
the tree. 
- Gee, Bert, look at what I was carrying! -I said William. 
"What's wrong?" I told them what they were looking for. "Lumme, I know! What are they?" 
You? 
—Bilbo Baggins, a hobbit—said poor Bilbo, trembling all over. 
and he wondered how to make good noises before they untangle them. 
"A donkey-goat?" they said a little surprised. Trolls are slow to understand, 
and very disheartened by anything new for them. 
"Why do I have a butter with my pocket, in all ways?" I said 
Guillermo. 
"And do you know how to cook them?" I say Tom. 
-You can try it -I said Bert, picking up the spike.  
"There would be no more than a mouthful," said William, who had
a good dinner, "not when I was left alone and left behind." 
"Perhaps there are more like him around here and we can make a
cake", I say Bert. "Here you are, are there any more from your class? 
-"These woods, a watery bunny! -I said, looking at the hobbit. 
The hairy feet; and I lifted him up by the toes of his feet and shook him. 
-Yes, a lot," said Bilbo, before recording, don't give him money to friends. 
"No, no one absolutely, no one," I immediately said 
"What do you want to decide?" I said Bert, supporting him in a vertical position by his hair. 
this day 
—What I say —I say Bilbo panting—. Please don't cook me, lovely ladies! 
I wish you didn't want to invite me to dinner. 
-Poor 
-I said William. Let him go! 
go!" 
"No more saying that I want to decide with much and nothing absolutely", I said Bert. "YO 
don't want to cut my hair out while I'm sleeping! Keep your feet in the fire, until the 
end! 
"I won't allow it," said William. I pulled it in all ways. 
-You're a dumb fat, William -I say Bert-, as I said before. 
evening. 
" 
And 
you 
're 
a 
jerk 
! 
" the fire, hitting and 
hitting 
the shots on both to make them react. 
Now was 
the 
moment for Bilbo to 
march 
away Balin appeared. The enos had heard... 
their ears, and after waiting a while for Bilbo to eat 
again, or howl like a bull, they began one by one to grab 
the light as silently as they could. As ready as Tom goes to Balin to enter 
the light, then God a terrible dream. Trolls simply hate the mere sight of 
(raw) chicken. Bert and Bill left the boat immediately, and "a 
lot, Tom, quick!" they said. Before Balin, who wondered where in 
all this dawn was Bilbo, they knew that he was passing by, a bag was on top 
of his head, and he was below.
"There's more to come," I said. Tom, "or am I very much mistaken. Much
"Ye none absolutely", I say. "There are no burraconejos, but there are many of them here 
Dwarves. This is more or less the form! "I believe that they are right", I say Bert, "and it will be better 
that we go up to the 
light 
"In the shadows, every time 
I reached for and looked at the fire, the broken jars and the 
gnawed 
jars Together, and Dori 
and Nori and Ori all in a mountain, and Oin and Gloin and Bifur and Bofur and 
Bombur fell down 
"That 
will teach 
them 
. 
" You can get to the 
Riégate, it says something more." 
-Be quiet! -I said Tom, who thought it was William's voice. 
"What's the discussion with you? I'd like to know." 
"Here's a fool," I said William. 
"You put yourself in bed!” I say Tom. 
And so the discussion became more heated than ever before. 
"Are we going to hear this first?", I said 
, 
" 
Don't talk to yourself 
. 
" I say Tom. "But if you want to hear it in the last 
one, listen to it. What is it? 
"The half of the yellows", I say Bert. 
"Nonsense, the middle of the grays", I say a voice like 
William's. 
"I made sure that it was yellow", I said Bert. 
"It was yellow", I said William. 
- So why did you say that it was gray? 
- I don't 
say 
it anymore 
. 
"Enough!" Tom and Bert said in unison. "It's night and 
It's dawning early. Let's go! 
"May the dawn take you all and be stone for you!" 
I say once that it sounded 
like 
William 
's no more than today, completely alone, 
unless the people sit on top of them; because the trolls, as they probably know, must be 
small land before the bait, or they return to the things of the mountains 
that are there and never move. This is what happened to 
Bert,
"Excellent!" I said to Gandalf, while he climbed out of a tree and helped
Bilbo gets off thorn. Then Bilbo understood. It was 
the voice of the magician who had kept the trolls discussing and peeling, as long as 
the light was wine and met with them. 
The next step was to unpack the bags and wait to go up to the wines. They 
have been asphyxiated and very annoying cases: they have not enjoyed anything. 
There he tumbled, scolding the trolls and making plans to attack them and 
pin them and pinch them. You were asked to learn Bilbo's story of 
what had happened to him twice, before seeking satisfaction. 
"It's a shame to practice theft and theft," he said 
Bombur, "when what we wanted was fire and joy!" 
"And this is precisely what we have not achieved from these types without one 
—Fight, in any case —I say Gandalf—. Of all forms, now you are wasting time. 
Don't you know that trolls should have a hole or a spear in some place? 
Where does the sun hide? Let us give you a view! 
They searched for all sides and promptly encountered the brands of stone boots of the trolls. 
moving away among the trees. Follow the hills up the hill, until 
hidden among the shrubs, they closed with a large stone door that led to a cave. But 
they couldn't open it, even though they all attempted 
various enchantments. 
"Is this something to serve?" asked Bilbo when they were crying. 
And angry. "I put him in the land where the trolls had a fight." 
held out a fairly large ring, although William might have considered it very small. 
and secret. He must have dropped his pocket, for his part, before he 
was converted into stone. 
"Why didn't you mention it before?", he shouted. Gandalf 
He grabbed her and placed her in the woods. Then the stone door opened. 
From a strong push, everyone entered. It has bones on the floor. 
and it had an unpleasant smell in the air; but it had a good quantity of mixed food 
carefully in the moments and in the ground, among a messy pile of bottles, 
of all kinds, from the buttons on the side until lots of gold coins placed in a 
bag. There was also a lot of clothes attached to the walls, too small for 
trolls, I fear that they would belong to the victims, and among them there were 
various swords of different brands, shapes and sizes. Two calls for attention. 
In particular, enjoyed by your beautiful cows and grasses. 
Gandalf and Thorin took each of them; and Bilbo took a knife to a 
hearth case. There was only a small bag of sword for a troll, but 
it was as good as a short sword for the hobbit. 
-These seem like good swords -I say the magician, unraveling the media and 
marveling at them with curiosity. "We were not heard by any troll, nor by anyone 
were we among the men in these places and days; but when we could read the runes, 
"In them we will know more about them." 
"Let us rise from this horrible smell!" said Fili. So that they brought up the 
bags of money and any food that was never eaten and seemed suitable for eating, even 
a barrel of beer that was once full, would make them happy 
and as they would take a lot of heat, they would not regret what they had achieved. 
of the pantry of the trolls. Now... 
The tips of the snowy peaks shine 
. Bilbo asked in a solemn voice, marveling at her. 
with red eyes. He had never seen anything that seemed so great before. 
"Of course not!" I say Balin. "This is only the beginning of the Misty 
Mountains, and we must cross them, or pass through the top, or through the bottom of them. 
In any case, before we can reach the Wild Lands beyond. And it is a part of 
A fireplace included from the other side of them until the Lonely Mountain in the country 
"where Smaug lies in our treasure." 
-I said Bilbo, and just at this moment he felt more confused than before. 
He was thinking more often in front 
of 
the 
fire in his room 
. "We need to be safe, on one side, and avoid it with reasonable safety... 
It is also very necessary to approach the Cloudy Mountains along the right path. 
Otherwise, you will lose yourself in them and you will tend to return and start from the beginning. 
" 
return ) 
" 
. 
message from meas friends and we are... 
desperate." 
This sounded pleasant and comforting, but they still didn't have to go there, and 
it wasn't as easy as it seems to find the last home on the west side of the 
mountains. There didn't seem to be any trees, or valleys, or hills. 
They break the ground in front of us, just a large slope that slowly descends and 
you just have to encounter the foothills of the most sought-after mountain, a wide land of the color of 
breeze and crumbled rocks, with parks and branches of green grass and
green moss that shows where you could get water
, passed the morning; but in all silence and solitude there 
They were no signs of any life. They are more anxious every now and then, because now they see 
that the house could be hidden in any place between them. 
mountains. They tied themselves to the unexplored valleys, stretched out and with loaded ladders, 
which suddenly rose at their feet, and looked down at the surprised 
trees beneath them and the water flowing at the bottom. There were cliffs that 
I could jump over, but they were very deep and kept falling. 
There were dark cliffs that could not be jumped or stepped on. there 
are swamps, some green trees, places pleasing to the eye, with flowers. 
growing bright and tall; but a pony that walked there with a backpack on 
the shoulder never wanted to get on. 
Indeed, it was much wider terrain from where I went to the mountains that 
I had imagined. Bilbo was shadowed. The only chimney was 
marked with white stones, some of which were small and others were medium. 
covered with moss or heather. In general, it was a very slow shop. 
Following the trail, including guides by Gandalf, who seemed to know the path. 
More or less good enough. 
His head and beard moved from one side to the other while they were looking for the 
stones, and they followed the example, but it didn't seem like they were looking for the ending of 
The Search when the day began to fall. Tea time has passed, and 
apparently dinner time will be the same. The leaves were flying back 
to the redhead, and the light flew very faintly, because the moon had not yet risen. Bilbo 
The pony started to trip over roots and stones. They tied them to the edge of a... 
A sudden fall into the ground was so sudden that Gandalf's horse tripped. 
going down the slope. 
"It's finally here!" he shouted, and the others reunited with their elder and 
looked at the edge. They saw a very low valley. Then they hear the 
voice of the water running in a rocky bed at the bottom; the aroma of the trees was 
in the air and there was a light in the valley on the other side of the water. 
Bilbo never forgot the shape in which they slipped and slid to the rear. 
The hill was sent in a zigzag that led to the secret valley of Rivendell. The air that flew more 
It was warmer to the medicine that descended, and the smell of the pine trees made it 
sleepy, in the way that once in a while when it fell or if it fell, or 
if it struck the nose against the butt of the pony. Our souls were elevated as they fell. 
and down. The trees changed to hays and robes, and had a
pleasant sensation at dusk. The last green case has disappeared. 
the grass, when they finally tied it to a clear open door not far from the 
banks of the stream. 
"Hmmm! It smells like elves!", thought Bilbo, and I saw that he had arrived. 
stars Shine bright and blue. Just then I produced a 
song like laughter in the trees: 
Oh! What are you doing? 
Where do you go from here? 
All you need is horseshoes! 
The river is flowing! 
 Oh! tra-la-la-lally 
 Down here in the valley! 
Oh! What are you looking for? 
Where are you? 
The wooden beams stink. 
The bannocks are horny! 
 Oh! tril-lil-lil-lolly 
 The valley is happy, 
 ha ha! 
well...interesting. The elves know a lot and they are wonderful people for the news, and they know 
that they are passing through the towns of the earth, as quickly as the water flows, or 
more quickly. 
But the dinners are on all ready to dine as soon as possible at this moment, and 
they cannot be forgotten. They all followed forward, guiding their ponies, until they were 
led to a good path and finally to the same shore of the river. It was 
flowing rapidly and noisily, as the mountain streams do in a late winter, 
when the sun shines all day over the snow arriving. Only if you had a 
narrow bridge of stone without the parapet, as narrow as a bridge you could easily 
walk further; and you will see that they pass through the first place, with space and with care, one by one, each one 
lifting each other up for the rides. The elves brought the bright innards to the 
shore, and sang a cheerful song while the group crossed. 
- Don't dip your beard in the foam, father! -they shouted to Thorin, who 
He was double-crossed in his hands and rods. "It's wide enough to 
hold." 
-I'm with Bilbo like all the pastries! -they shouted-. I'm looking forward to coming. 
We can't even pass through the doors! 
- Silence, silence! Good people! And good night! - I said Gandalf, who was 
the last one. "The valleys have sounds, and some elves have happy languages. Good 
night! 
And so, at the end, they all went to the Última Casa Acogedora and put on 
the doors that opened from pair to pair. 
Now well, it's something else, but things that are good to keep and days that 
they are good to enjoy, they are ready for you and you don't have much to think about; While 
uncomfortable, heart-rending and even horrifying things can make
a good story, and in all forms, it is quite difficult to tell. If they spent a lot of time in this... 
Good house, ruin days at least, and the results were difficult. Bilbo 
With great pleasure I have always asked myself, even assuming that a dream 
had brought it back to my hobbit without problems. However 
there is little to count on staying. 
The owner of the house was a friendly elf, one of the same people whose 
fathers entered into the extra stories before the beginning of the story, the 
war of the evil goblins and the elves and the first men of the North. on 
those days of our story there would still have been some people who had as many elves as 
heroes of the North for the ancestors, and Elrond, the love of the house, was 
on boss. 
He was as noble and as handsome as an elven lord, as fierce as a warrior, 
as wise as a magician, as venerable as a king of elf and as friendly as 
to summer. It appears in many words, but on paper in the story of Bilbo. 
The great adventure is only a small one, although important, as truth be told, 
some of us come to the end. Your home was perfect, you will enjoy food, 
or sleep, or work, or tell stories, or sing, or simply feel and think 
better, or a pleasant mixture of everyone. The bad things did not enter there. 
valley. 
I would like to have time to count to at least a few of the songs or one or two of the 
songs that are played in that house. All of them, including the ponies, will grow 
fresh and strong within a few days. His clothes were remembered as 
his injuries, his bad mood and his hopes. Your suitcases were full. 
with light cargo and provisions to carry but strength to cross the 
mountain ports. Your plans improved with the best advice. SW... 
I'm waiting for the winter solstice and I have to continue with the temporary celebration. 
only in the full morning. 
Elrond knew all about runes of all kinds. That day I looked at the 
swords that had brought about the healing of the trolls, and I said: "These are not 
ancient swords, very ancient swords of the High Elves of the 
West, familiar to me. They were made in Gondolin for the wars of the Goblins. 
They must have come from the treasure of a dragon or the loot of a goblin, because dragons and 
the goblins destroyed that 
city 
ages 
Used. Take care of them! 
"I wonder where the trolls sack," said Thorin, aiming at his 
sword with new interest. 
—I couldn't say it —said Elrond—, but one might assume that your trolls had...
sacked other plunderers, or met with the rest of ancient robberies and 
some of them clung to the mountains. I hate that you will always forget. 
ancient treasures that can be found in the deserted caverns of the mines of Moria, 
"since the war of the dwarves and the goblins." 
Thorin reflected on these words. "I will look at this sword with honor", I say. 
I say. "Hopefully ready to go to the goblins!" 
"A dream that will probably be fulfilled very quickly in the mountains!" 
—I say Elrond—. But show me now your map! 
He removed it and looked at it carefully for a long time, and took off his head; because yes no... 
He completely loved the dwarfs and his love for gold, he hated the dragons and 
his cruel evil, and it pained him to record the ruin of the city of 
Dale and his happy bells, and the quenched shores of the brilliant 
Running river. The moon shone on a large, medium-sized moon. I have raised the one 
you must follow through the Cloudy Mountains to the land that is farther there. 
There are many paths that lead to these mountains and many steps. 
above them. But the majority of the paths were steep and difficult and led 
nowhere or with bad ends; and the majority of the places were infested with evil 
things and terrible criminals. The ghosts and the hobbit, aided by the 
wise counsel of Elrond and the knowledge and memory of Gandalf, will take the 
correct path at the correct pace. 
Many days after climbing up the valley and leaving the last 
kilometer of Homely House, they continue to suffer and suffer. It was 
a hard and dangerous chimney, a twisted, lonely and wide chimney. 
Now we can look further, at the lands that have gone beyond. 
them very low. Many, many others in the West, when things were blues and 
Weak, Bilbo knew that there he was in his own country of safe and comfortable things, 
and on the little hobbit hole. If extreme. There was a glacial chill here, 
and the wind sounded piercing through the rocks. The rocks also sometimes move. 
Galloping along the slopes of the mountains, deserted by the mid-day sun over the 
snow, and passed between them (which was a blessing), or over their heads 
(which was alarming). The nights were uncomfortable and frisky, and no... 
I didn't dare to sing or talk too loudly, because the echoes were strange and 
the silence seemed not to stop, except for the sound of the water and 
The groaning of the wind and the cruciding of the stone. 
"The porch is tied to the bottom," thought Bilbo, "and 
they're having a lot of picnics. They'll be packing up and
eating, even before starting to go to 
the 
other 
side 
on 
this 
price 
. with his head and I didn't say anything. 
So it was for many years, and he knew the evil one and 
the dragons had expelled him. 
Men of the earth, and the goblins had secretly hidden themselves after the battle of 
the Mines of Moria. Including the good plans of wise wizards 
like Elrond often wander away from home. 
dangerous adventures on the edge of the rescue; and Gandalf was a wise man, 
the magician enough to know it. 
Hope that they can experience terrible adventures on top of those great and high 
mountains with lonely peaks and valleys where no king can rule. The did 
No. All is well, until one day they encountered an electric storm, more than a 
storm, a battle of thunder. You know how terrible it is such a big storm. 
Electrical storms can occur across the country and in a river valley; especially in 
moments when great storms strike and shock you. Even more terrible ones are 
Truenos and haunt us in the mountains at night, when the storms arise. 
of East and West and they are waging war. The flames are stuck in the tops, 
and the rocks there, and large structures part the air and roll and 
fall into each hole and tone; and the darkness is full of 
brumador noise and sudden light. 
Bilbo never saw or imagined anything. They were tall 
in an extreme place, with a terrible fall in a dark valley on the side of 
them. There they were, sheltering under a rock to pass the night, and 
He laid under a blanket and a handful of feet on their heads. when he stopped 
On the slopes of the lightning, I see that on the other side of the valley there are the stone giants. 
They climbed and threw stones one at another as they played, and they caught them. 
and hide them in the darkness where they strung against the 
very low trees, or stuck on small steps with a roar. Then came a wind 
and a rain, and the wind whipped the rain and the grain on all sides. 
direction, so that a rock that rose was not any protection. Ready
They are soaking and their feet are stuck with their heads 
underneath and with the rabe between the legs, and some of them neighed 
of minedo. They could hear the giants returning and shouting for all parts. 
mountain slopes. 
"This won't serve anything!" I say Thorin. "If we don't want the wind, or 
if we love each other or if we catch a light, we will be supported by some giant and 
"we will fly to the sky for a football ball." 
The journey to the mountains 
— Good, we know a better place, let's go there! - I say Gandalf. 
I felt a lot of grunt and was happy to be happy with the giants 
so much. 
The end of their discussion was that they sent Fili and Kili to seek 
better refuge. They kept very keen eyes and, when they were the youngest of them... 
The teenagers, in general, achieved this type of work (when they were one of the five youngest years old). 
the young adults). Surely you may come across something, you're looking for it, but 
it's not always what you're looking for. So I demonstrated it this... 
occasion. 
Ready Fili and Kili came crawling back, clinging to the rocks in the 
wind. "We have come across a dry cave," they said, "not much of the next 
corner; and all the dogs can enter." 
“Have you explored it thoroughly?” I told the magician that he knew that
The caves in the mountains were rarely abandoned. 
"Yes, yes!" they said, even though everyone knew that they couldn't have 
said a lot about it; they have returned very quickly. "It's not that big, and 
it won't come back much later." 
So, above all, it's the trick of the caves: you don't know how... 
Sometimes 
the news from Fili and Kili seems good 
enough they prepared to leave. The wind roared 
and the wind followed roaring, and they had a business to do. 
and their ponies. It didn't take a long way to travel, and in a short time... 
I came across a large rock that jumped up the path. If you stop, 
find a low bow on the mountainside. There is just enough space to enter. 
The ponies passed with a squeeze, when they were unpacked and 
desensitized. As we passed the arch below, it was pleasant to see the wind and 
the rain flowed towards the elder's place, and we felt safe from the giants. 
and its rocks. But the magician didn't want to run again. I lit up a variety, like 
I heard on that day in Bilbo's comedy that seemed so funny, if I thought about it. 
remember—, already on light explored the cave from point to point. 
Quite a reasonable size, but not too big or mysterious. Keep a 
bed with you and some comfortable rinses.At the end there was space for the
ponies; and there they were (very happy with the change) fuming, and 
biting their backpacks. Oin and Gloin would like to set a fire in the 
door to dry the rope, but Gandalf doesn't know what to say about it. So that if they extended 
they took their wet things to the ground and took out the dry things from their bulks; 
Then they laid out their comfortable blankets, took out their pipes, and blew. 
Humorous rings, which Gandalf converted into different colors and I can dance them 
under the roof to entertain them. They talked and talked, and forgot about the 
storm, and discussed what would happen to someone with part of the treasure. 
(when they realized it, what at that moment didn't seem so impossible); and 
so they slept one by one. And that was the last time that... 
They have received advice. 
It turns out that they betrayed little Bilbo that night. 
with them, after all. Because, in any case, I can't sleep for a long time. 
while so much; and when I last, I heard very despicable things. I dream that 
a smile on the wall at the bottom of the cave fell bigger and bigger and opened. 
Every time it was bigger and bigger, and I took a lot of heart, but I couldn't cry out or do anything. 
all the less lie and look. The truth is that the floor of the cave was 
giving way, and it was slipping, starting to fall, fall, bound 
to where it came from. 
At this moment he was shocked with a horrible shock and discovered that part of his 
dream was real. A smile had been opened at the bottom of the cave and it 
was a long step. I took just enough time to see the last of the ponies. 
queues disappearing on the table. So, God, a very strong scream, a scream as strong 
as a hobbit can give, which is amazing in its size. 
They skipped the duendes, large duendes, huge and ugly-looking duendes, many... 
duendes, before they could say rocks and blocks. There are six for each one. 
one, at least, and two including for Bilbo; and they were all grabbed and 
lifted across the crack, before they could decide tinder and flint. But not 
Gandalf. Bilbo's grit was very good. I had it unskilled. 
even in a second distilled, and when the goblins came to record it, there was not 
a terrible smell like a flash in the cave, a smell like dust, and 
several of them killed. 
The smile came with a drink and Bilbo and the elves were in it... 
The wrong side! Where was Gandalf? Of this neither they nor the tragedies... 
They had no idea, and the tragedies did not take long to discuss it. They captured Bilbo.
and the enos and the hurried. It was deep, deep, dark, as 
only the goblins who are accustomed to living in the heart of the mountains can see 
through it. The passages there were crossed and taken in all directions, but 
the duendes knew as well as you the path to the workshop of the most sought after ones; 
And the path went down and down, and it was terribly suffocating. 
The goblins were very rude, they walked on foot, they stood among people and 
they stood with their horrible petrified voices; and Bilbo was even more desired. 
that when the troll lifted him by the fingers of his feet. I have wanted once and again 
for his good and bright hobbit hole. Not for the last time. 
Once upon a time, a glimpse of red light appeared before us. The elves 
began to sing, or croar, to the rhythm of the song of their flat feet above the 
stone, and also protecting their prisoners. 
Applause! Click! The cruel black man! 
Grab, grab! Pinch, grab! 
And going to Goblin-town 
 Let's go, lad! 
Crash, crash! Crush, crush! 
Hammer and tongs! Knocker and gongs! Coup, coup, away! 
They go underground! 
 Oh, oh! My boy! 
Swish, smack! That's it! 
Coup and coup! Scream and bleat! Work, work! Don't try to avoid it, 
While the goblins drink and laugh, they go round and round in the distance. 
underground 
 Down, boy! 
It sounded really lander. The audience resonates with applause, cheers! and the 
Smash, smash! And before the ugly laughter of his oh, oh! My boy! The general 
meaning of the song was too clear; because now the goblins stood 
up and stopped them with a zap!, zap!, and the soldiers ran as 
quickly as they could in front of them; and more than one of the dwarfs were 
stammering and moaning like locos, when they stumbled upon a 
large cave. 
It was illuminated by a great red fire in the center and by lights at the edge of the 
walls, and it was full of two. Everyone stood back and shouted and 
applauded, when the dwarfs (with little Bilbo behind them) 
and even more trying to get to the fights came running, while the drivers of the duel 
They shouted and stayed at their fights. The ponies were already there. 
curled in a corner; and there are all the equipment and packages rolled 
up and being worn for dues, and oiled for dues, and 
touched for dues and disputed for dues. 
I fear that this was the last time these excellent little ones would see them. 
ponies, I include a very white, robust and cheerful little one that Elrond had lent to
Gandalf, who on horseback was not suitable for mountain walkers. For 
The elves eat horses, ponies and donkeys (and other much more terrible animals). 
things), and always keep warm. However, for a moment the prisoners were 
thinking only of themselves. The goblins encased their hands behind their 
swords and joined them all in a line, and arrested them until the other end 
of the cave with the little boy Bilbo pulling the end of the line. 
There, in the shadows, on a large flat stone, I felt a tremendous duende with 
an enormous head and armed goblins who stood on their feet, supporting their axes 
and the double swords they use. The goblins are cruel, evil and ruthless. They don't do wonderful things, but they do a lot of ingenious things. 
particularly uncomfortable for you!” 
"We are on a journey to visit our relatives, our nephews and nieces, 
and our first, second and third sons, and our descendants of our 
elders, who live on this side of these truly 
mountain hospitallers," said Thorin, without knowing how to decide one time. 
moment in which, obviously, the exact truth would not be absolutely enough. 
"It's a lie, oh, truly terrible!", one of the drivers said. "Various people 
from our village were brought to a spot in the cave, when we invited us to these 
creatures that grow below; and they are as dead as stones. Furthermore, not having 
He explained this!" He extended the sword that Thorin had used, the sword 
that brought about the healing of the Trolls. 
The Great Duende emitted a truly terrible blast of rage when I looked at it, 
and all their soldiers carried away their soldiers, choked their shields and beat the ground. 
They knew swords it instantly. He has killed hundreds of goblins in his life. 
when the fair elves of Gondolin chase them on the hills or play against them 
before their walls. They called him Orcrist, the hende-goblins, but 
the goblins simply called him Biter. They hate it and they hate anything more than 
that led 
"Murderers and elves!" shouted the Great Goblin. "Cut them off!" 
Hit them! Bite them! Make them crunch! Bring them to the dark corners of 
the snakes, so they never want to see the light again!” He was so furious that 
he jumped from his ascent and swung over Thorin with his mouth open. 
Just at that moment the lights of the cave were extinguished and the great 
fire disappeared in a tower of brilliant blue humus, just as the 
white sparks spread between him. elves 
The gritters and the wings, the croaks, the stammerers and the talkers; the howls
the grunts and the curses, the screams and the chills that followed were inaudible. 
Description. Save the cats and legs being slowly lifted. 
Living together has not been compared to this one. The sparks Ardian. 
we prayed in the duende, and the mood that now came from the roof made that the 
air was too thick so that no one could let his eyes see through it. Ready if they are ready. 
one to another and walking in the sheep on the ground, biting and pawing and 
peeling as all the others would do on each other. 
Caó is dead, and the goblin soldiers hurriedly leapt into the 
darkness before the sword. 
The sword returned to its valley. "Follow me quickly!", I said in a voice. 
fierce and silent; and before Bilbo understood what had happened, he was 
trotting again, as quickly as he could, at the end of the line, down. 
More dark passages with the grits of the hall of the duende every more sad. 
Beyond that, a pale light shines. 
- Quick, quick! -I say the word-. Ready to turn on the torches. 
“Middle minute!” I say Dori, who was next to Bilbo, is 
a decent guy. Because the hobbit prepares his men the best he can. 
I can hold them with my hands, and then they all went up running, with a tinkle of chains and many stumbles, who didn't need their hands to stabilize themselves. 
They didn't disappear for a long time, and for that matter you must have 
been right in the heart of the mountain. 
Then Gandalf lit his wand. So I suppose it was Gandalf; but just now 
I'm left busy wondering how I got there. He took out his sword again, 
and again it shines in the darkness so alone. He dared with a fury that would make him 
shine if he were to be sought after; now it was as bright as a blue flame to delight in 
the murder of the great lord of the cave. It didn't cause any problems. 
cutting the chains of the goblins and freeing all the prisoners. 
as quickly as possible. The name of this sword was Glamdring the Hammer of the Enemy, yes 
Do you remember? The two simply call him Beater and hate him more than... 
Bitter if possible. Orcrist was also saved; because 
Gandalf also took him on board, handing him over to one of the 
terrified guards. Gandalf thought about the majority of things; and although you couldn't 
do everything, you could do a lot for your friends in a difficult situation. 
"Are we all here?" God, return her sword to Thorin with a 
bow. "Let me see: one, that's Thorin; two, three, four, five, six, six, 
Eight, nine, ten, eleven; where are Fili and Kili? Here they are! Twelve,
thirteen, and here is the Mr. Baggins: fourteen! Go, go! You might be poor, 
And on the other hand 
, 
It could be much better. 
They went on. Gandalf held all the reason: they entered upon these ruins of goblins. 
and horrible screams to read, in the passages for those who have come. They 
sent them more quickly than ever, and like little Bilbo they couldn't follow the lead 
so quickly, because the enos can advance at a tremendous pace, I assure you, 
when they did it, they turned to lift it over their shoulders. 
Even so, the goblins travel faster than the dwarfs, and these goblins know the path. 
better (the same ones had the fireplaces), and they were furious; so that 
they learned what they could do to the dwarfs and to listen to the gritty and silent ones 
Ready, they could hear, including the ticking of the goblin's feet. 
many, many feet that seem to be only on the turn of the corner. The flicker of 
Behind them, in the tunnel that follows, you can see red torches; 
and they were dying mortally. 
-So, so I would abandon my hobbit anguish! -I said the poor Mr. Baggins. 
by attacking he has arrived and has lowered Bombur's sword. 
"Why, oh, why do you take a miserable hobbit to look for treasure?" 
Come on!, I said to the little Bombur, who was happy and was dancing with the sweat. 
enjoying his nose in his heat and terror. 
At this moment Gandalf stopped by, and Thorin with him. They turned 
a sharp corner. "Come back!" shouted. "Draw your sword, Thorin!" 
There was nothing more to do; I didn't like the two duendes. 
He ran around the corner at full speed and put the Goblin cleaver, and 
the enemy hammer shone freshly and brilliantly just in his dull eyes. 
Those who were at the front left their antlers and gave a shout before they attacked them. 
murdered. Those who were among them shouted even more and jumped at each other, deriding 
those who ran past them. "Bitter and beater!" they shouted; and 
Ready everyone is confused and most people are ready to return. 
where they came from. 
Enough time you have passed before some of them will be able to double this horse. 
For example, the ghosts had to follow another path, a large, wide path leading to the inside of the 
dark tunnels of the goblins' king. When the goblins discovered this,... 
They put out their torches and they asked for soft shoes and chose 
their quickest companions with the sharpest eyes and eyes. These ran 
fast, as quickly as comrades in the darkness, and without even making a noise. 
that the bats.
That's why neither Bilbo, nor the dwarves, nor Gandalf heard 
They didn't see them eat. But the goblins did. 
who ran silently behind him, because Gandalf was about to deliver a coup. 
A soft light to help the kidneys move forward. 
Suddenly, Dori, once again when he was carrying Bilbo, he was 
grappling with him in the darkness. He screamed and fell; and the hobbit ran away. 
of his men was in darkness, he hit his head against a hard rock and 
Nothing more was recorded. 
Surprised in the darkness 
When Bilbo opened his eyes, he wondered if he had it; because it was equally dark. 
As if they were closed. No one is looking for it. Imagine the shock! 
I couldn't hear anything, I couldn't see anything and I couldn't hear anything except the... 
stone of the ground. 
blood and we also noticed that such weapons made a great impression 
on those who suddenly approached them. 
"Go back?" I thought. "Don't worry about anything! I'm on the side? I'm impossible! I'm 
Forward? I'm the only one who needs to be done! Let's go! So he rose and followed trotting. 
With his small sword held in front of him and one hand touching the wall, 
and all his heart palpitations and 
Well, certainly Bilbo was in what was called a difficult situation. But he must 
remember that he wasn't as prepared for it as he was for me or for 
you 
. happy and well ventilated, very different from the 
goblins' tunnels, so they are more accustomed to making tunnels than ours, 
and they do not easily pierce the path of orientation on the lower ground, not when 
their heads have recovered from the blows. They can also move very 
silently, they hide easily and they recover wonderfully from falls and bruises, 
and they keep a fund of wisdom and they know that men in their neighborhood 
never keep it secret or forget it for a long 
time enjoyed being in Señor Baggins' place, all of his time. 
I love it. The tunnel seemed to never last. The only thing he knew was that he was 
bashing constantly enough and keeping himself in the same direction to weigh one 
lap or one or two turns. He had passages that led to a certain place every 
time, as he knew it through the shine of his sword, or could feel it with 
his hand on the wall. Don't pay close attention, except to pass while running. 
I remember the duendes or the dark things imagined by us that arise from us. Once again. 
He continued walking, and down and down; and I still don't want to sound.
except for the occasional splash of a bat coming to his eyes, which started him at first, 
as long as he flew around as frequently as to worry. No matter how long I kept it 
so I continued, hating to continue, without stopping, I continued, I continued, as long as I was more aware of it. 
that tired. It seems that the whole journey continues until today and over the 
next few days. 
Suddenly, without prior notice, I jumped into the water! Phew! Was... 
chilled. This I discovered abruptly. no one knew it 
was just a load on the fireplace, or on the edge of an underground stream that 
crossed the path, or the edge of a deep and dark underground lake. He 
The sword only shone. If I know and I can see, when 
I listen carefully, my hands go away, go away, go away from an invisible glass to the water. 
below; but I didn't seem to have any other type of sound. 
However, he would never be able to enter the darkness again. No one knew anything; and 
I also thought about despicable and viscous things, with big jumping and blind eyes, 
twisting in the water. There are strange things living in the swimming pools and 
lakes in the heart of the mountains: the sins of which the fathers were born in them, bonded 
Only if they knew how many years ago, and never turned to swim, while on 
the eyes they fell more often when attempting to see the 
darkness there are also other things more viscous than the fish. Included in the 
tunnels and treasures that the goblins have kept for so long are other 
living things that they don't know and that they have left behind to lie 
in the darkness. Some of these caves are also reassembled from their origins. 
centuries before the goblins, here only the ensancharon and the united with 
passages, and the original two still remain there in the strange chases, escaping 
and hugging each other around there. 
In the depths of here, near the dark waters, lived the old Gollum, a small and viscous... 
creature. Not where it came from, not here or where it was. Item 
was Gollum, as dark as darkness, except through two great dark and pale eyes. 
with thin rostrum. He held a small boat and paddled silently by the 
lake; because it was a lake, too, deep and deadly cold. We sailed with 
our large feet that we grabbed from the edge, but we didn't move even once. It's not. 
With his pale eyes like a lamp he was looking for blind spots, that... 
I grabbed him with his wide eyes as quickly as I thought. She also enjoyed the meat. 
Goblin believed that it was good when he could achieve it, but he never thought about it...
I have discovered it. Simply extract them for more, once or twice. 
only in any place look for the edge of the water, while waiting there. 
Rarely do they do it, they can only have the sensation of something unpleasant... 
it was left at the bottom, in the same branches of the mountain. They kept 
coming to the lake, when they were having a tunnel for a long time, and they 
discovered that they could not go further there; so that the journey ended in that direction, 
and there was no reason to return for that journey, unless the Great Duende sent 
him. Sometimes she enjoyed the fish from the lake, sometimes 
neither the duende nor the fish returned. 
telescopes. Bilbo couldn't see it, but he wondered a lot about 
Bilbo, because he couldn't see it was nothing due. 
Gollum suffered his boat and climbed absurdly from the island, while Bilbo stood 
at the edge of the abyss, completely disconcerted and at the end of his journey and 
his genius. Suddenly, Gollum stood up and whispered and said: 
"Bless us and sailpanos, my preciousnesses! I suppose it's a select feast; 
at least we'll have a savory mouthful, Gollum!" And when I say Gollum, 
it makes a horrible noise when I travel. This is how the 
name follows, although it has always been called 'precious me'. 
The hobbit jumped off his skin when the sylph came to his body. 
ears, and suddenly I see the pale eyes that gaze at him intently. 
"Who are you?" I say, pressing the dagger in front of him. 
"What is my price?" whispered Gollum (who always spoke with 
me so as not to speak to anyone else). This is what I wanted 
to discover that, in reality, I didn't have much time at this moment, just 
curious; On the contrary, he grabbed it first and whispered it later. 
"I am Lord Bilbo Baggins. I lost the wines and I lost the magician, and I don't know 
where 
I am; and I don't want to know, I can only 
escape." "What does he have in his hands? 
" 
said Gollum, looking at the sword. sword, a blade that came forth from Gondolin!” "Sssss", I 
say 
, 
and 
he 
was 
quite 
polite you've ever played with other amusing creatures you've heard.
in his holes he took a long, long time, before he lost all his friends and he was 
expelled, alone, and he crashed down, down, in the darkness down the 
mountains. 
-Very well -I said Bilbo, who was anxious to accept, until he discovered that... 
Above the creature, he was completely alone, he was ferocious. 
or he was hungry, and he was a friend of the duendes. 
"Please ask me first", I say, because I haven't had time to think about a 
puzzle. 
Then Gollum said: 
What holds the roots that you see, 
Is it higher than the trees? 
 Below, below, 
 Does it never grow like that? 
-Easy! said Bilbo. The mountain, I suppose. 
Is it easy to eat? You must have a competition with us, my treasures! 
If you ask me darling and don't answer, we like it, my darling. We're wondering 
if we don't answer, let's do what we want, huh? Let's demonstrate it. 
The one who does not have legs stands on one leg, the one who holds two legs feels like looking for the one who holds three legs, the one who holds four legs feels like that. 
Gollum might have some problem figuring it out if you were wondering about it. 
On another occasion. In fact, talking about fishing, "without fish" wasn't that difficult, 
and after that the rest was easy. "Fished in the middle, man sitting at the table 
on a table, the cat holds the bones" that's the answer, and Gollum 
Ready if God. He then thought that the time had come to ask for something difficult. 
and horrible. This is what I say: 
This thing devours all things: 
birds, beasts, trees, flowers; 
It gnaws at iron, it bites at steel; 
Grind hard stones to convert them into flour; 
Kill the king and ruin the city, 
and strike the high mountain below. 
Little Bilbo felt himself in the darkness thinking of all the horrible names of all the 
giants and ogres of those who had never heard of words, but none of them could 
see all these things. I had the feeling that the response was very different. 
and he had to know it, but he couldn't think about it. I had to keep 
thinking, and that's bad to think about. Gollum began to climb out of his 
boat. If you put it in the water and remove it as long as the shore; Bilbo can see 
his eyes direct him. Your tongue seemed to be stuck in your mouth; I have 
shouted: "Give me more time! Give me time!" But everything 
rose with a sudden chill that said: 
Time! Scary! 
Bilbo was saved by sheer courage. Because this, above all, was the answer.
Gollum was disappointed more than once; and now he was enjoying himself, 
and he was also bored with the game. I had a lot of clothes on them. This time 
do not return to the bottle. It was heard in the darkness near Bilbo. That's 
why the hobbit felt terribly uncomfortable and lost his mind. 
"Let us have a prayer, my precious ones, yes, yes, yes. Only one 
- more prayers to help, yes, yes - said Gollum. 
But Bilbo simply couldn't think of any question with that despicable humility. 
He had felt something on his side, handing it and I 
I'm going 
to 
get him small 
sword; even if you touched the bubble with your other hand. There he met the 
ring he had forgotten in the hallway. 
"What do I have in the bag?", I say in a loud voice. He was talking to 
me, but Gollum thought it was a certainty and bothered him a lot. 
—No it's fair! It's not fair! —he whispered—. No, it's just, my dear, to ask us... 
What do you have in your small and unpleasant bags? 
Bilbo to the truth what he had passed and don't think anything better than to expect if he was caught. 
-Don't worry about it -I say Bilbo—. A promise is a promise. 
"How unwell you are, impatient one, my dear!" hissed Gollum. "But you have to wait, yes." 
It must be like this. We cannot suffer through the tunnels so unexpectedly. We have to look for something. 
"I'll tell you, yes, what we can help you with." 
- Good, start! - I say Bilbo, relieved to think that Gollum is gone. 
I thought that he was just making an excuse and that he had no intention of regressing. 
What did Gollum say? What is it useful to hide? 
Is the dark lake? But he was misunderstanding. Gollum wanted to return. I was... 
now I was drunk and drunk. He was a miserable and wicked creature, and 
He had a plan. 
Not many people were on the island, where Bilbo knew nothing, and there in 
his secret place he looked at so many miserable things and one very beautiful thing. 
what, very beautiful, very marvelous. I had a ring, a gold ring, 
a precious ring 
"I give myself a birthday gift!", I whispered to myself, as I usually do every day. 
on the endless dark days. «This is what we ask for now, yes; We'll ask for it!” 
I asked him because it was a ring of power, and if you remove that ring... 
In you it was invisible; only in full light of the sun could it be seen. 
seen, and only by your shadow, that it would seem dark and terrible. 
I'm giving you a birthday present! I took the day of my birthday, my darling. Ace
I have always said to myself. But here you know how Gollum came to this conclusion. 
Present, centuries ago, in old times, when such rings would once again be abundant in the 
world? Perhaps not even the Master who ruled them could have said it. 
At first, Gollum only used it as long as he could; and then she looked at it in a 
bag close to her skin, as long as it hurts her; and now I used to hide it in a corner 
on the rock of his island, and he always wanted to look at it. And sometimes 
you asked yourself this when you couldn't bear to part with him. 
more time, or when there was a lot of water and I was unable to fish. Then he... 
he gets stuck in dark passages looking for errant duendes. Even they could 
venture into places where the antlers were set on fire and made them stop their eyes and 
intelligence; because he would be safe. Oh yes, completely safe. Nobody would see it, Nobody 
One would notice it, as long as she had her fingers in her throat. Only a few 
hours ago that I had used it and it had been attached to a small one in two decades. How it screeched! 
They also asked for a few shades for the color, but they wanted something more soft. 
"Totally safe, yes," I whispered for my sake. "He won't see us, will he, my...?" 
Precious? No. It won't be true, and your disgusting will be useless. 
Yes, exactly. 
This is what he had in his small and evil mind, when he suddenly slipped away from 
Bilbo's side, and left his boat behind, and flew into the darkness. Bilbo 
I thought that you didn't know anything about it. Even so, I experienced a rat; because I had no 
idea how to meet the salt alone. 
Suddenly I felt a chill. A chill ran over her shoulder. Gollum 
was slandering and wandering in the darkness, not far from the sound. 
of him. He was on his island, excavating here and there, searching and 
searching in vain. 
Where is it? Where is it? -Bilbo cried-. If you have lost, I... 
Beautiful, lost, lost! Curse us and crush us, my darling is lost! 
-What happened? -Bilbo asked-. What have I lost? 
"No need to stop it," chilled Gollum. "It's none of your business, no, Gollum! It's... lost."
gollum
,
Gollum, Gollum." Come and let me go up, and then 
I'll look again! Because of how miserable Gollum sounds, Bilbo 
couldn't find much sympathy in his heart, and he had the feeling that no matter what 
Gollum wanted, he could hardly be anything good. "Come!" 
shouted. 
"No, not yet, my love!" Gollum replied. "We must seek it, it's..." 
Lost, Gollum. 
"But you never guessed my last request, and you promised it," said 
Bilbo. 
"You never imagined it!" I say Gollum.Suddenly, one rose from the penumbra
Sharp hissed. "What do you have in the bags? Say it. You have to decide 
first." 
As long as Bilbo knew, he didn't have any particular reason why he shouldn't... 
count. Gollum's mind had jumped to a more rapid assumption than his; of course, because 
Gollum had meditated on this one thing for years, and he always kept it. 
of which they will steal him. But Bilbo was annoyed by his temper. After all, I 
won the game, just enough, with a terrible success. "The answers must be 
"I guessed it didn't happen," I say. 
—But it wasn't a just question —I say Gollum—. It's not certain, it's precise, 
No." 
-Good, it's about common questions -Bilbo replied-, then... 
He asked for one first. What have I lost? Say it! 
"What does he have in his bags?" The sound is louder and louder. 
clearer, and as he looked there, for his alarm, Bilbo now saw two small 
points of light that observed him. As the suspicion grew in Gollum's mind, the 
light of his eyes burned with a pale flame. 
-What have I lost? - Bilbo insisted. 
But now the light in Gollum's eyes had turned into a green flame, and it was 
the light of his eyes shining brightly even from behind. Painfully he rose and
I would recommend it to you to be having a discussion. 
"We don't need anything to go there to look for it, no. Let's not record it all. 
The places we visited. And we don't need anything. The Baggins holds it in its 
bags; the despicable nostrils have encountered it, tenths." 
"Only assumptions, precious, only assumptions. We can't know until we meet the 
despicable creature and the opening. But don't you know what the present can 
do? Simply look at it in its bags. You don't know and you can't. 
See more. If it's lost, it's a despicable and curious thing. You don't know the salt. 
So I say it. 
"I say it, yes; but it's deceptive. He doesn't say what it means. He won't have it. 
Say what he has in the bags. He knows it. He knows a way to enter, you must... 
I know to climb, yes. It's by the door behind. By the door by the door, that's all. 
- Then the duende will catch him. You can't escape there, precious. 
"Ssss, sss, gollum! Duendes! Yes, but we keep the gift, ours 
precious gift, so the goblins will get it, Gollum! They will meet him, they will have him. 
Have a look at what happens. We will never be safe again, never again, Gollum! One of 
the two will ponder it, and then nobody will see it. It will be there. 
but we don't see it. No one will notice our intelligent eyes; and it will come out 
“Special and lively and catch us, gollum,gollum!” 
"So we need to talk, price, and learn. If the Baggins has...
If we are there, we must quickly come to the truth. Let's go! Don't miss much anymore. Start now! 
Gollum jumped up and started walking at a great pace. 
Bilbo ran through it, still with caution, although his main fear now was... 
Tripping over another obstacle and falling with a noise. On the head it was a whirlwind. 
of hope and amazement. Apparently the ring he held was a magic ring: 
You are invisible! I need to talk about these things, so above all, in the old days. 
cents; but it was difficult to believe that he had actually met one, by accident. 
He was there: Gollum with his bright eyes had left him behind, only a 
patio on one side. 
They pressed on, Gollum giving turns, slandering and slandering; Bilbo 
said, walking as silently as a hobbit. They were ready to go to places where, as 
Bilbo had noticed, that at the bottom, they passed side by side, one by one and another by another. 
Gollum immediately started counting on him. 
One on the left, yes. One at the back, yes. Two on the right, yes, yes. Two on the left, yes, yes. 
And so on. 
As the count increased, he decreased his speed and began to jump. 
tearful because I was happy to fall more than once in the water, and I was 
accustomed to it. You could have two searches, and you would have lost your ring. Finally... 
If they are removed in a low opening, they will be released while they are away. 
- You are here, yes. You're right, yes! -he whispered-. Here it is. Here is the 
Camino at the door, yes! Here is the passage! 
He looked inside and was welcomed. "But we didn't dare to attack you, my dear, no, no." 
Don't you dare. There are goblins down there. A ram. We smell them. Shhh! 
What do we have? Curse them and crush them! We must wait here, 
“Precious, wait a little and see.” 
So they were deduced dry. Gollum brought Bilbo to the house. 
After all, Bilbo can't come in! There stood Gollum, surrounded. 
Just at the opening, and your eyes sparkle freshly on your head, while you swing. 
from side to side between their rods. 
Bilbo moved away from the wall more silently than a rat; but Gollum 
If used immediately, oil and his eyes will turn green. He sat down gently. 
but pleasantly. He could not see the hobbit, but now he was alert, 
and he had other feelings that the darkness had sharpened: the sight and 
the smell. It seems to be tied with the hands flatly extended over 
the ground, and on the head raised, the nose touching the stone. Although there was 
only a black shadow in the shine of his own eyes, Bilbo could see or feel
that it was as tense as the tail of a bow, prepared for a leap. 
Bilbo stopped breathing and felt stiff. It was 
desperate I wanted to escape from this horrible darkness, while I kept 
the burning forces. You have to play. You must address this disgusting thing, put your eyes on it. 
Go out, kill him. I wanted to kill him. No, it wasn't just a fight. Now he was invisible. 
Gollum did not hold the sword. Gollum had not been tormented with the killing, nor 
did he intend to do so again. And he felt miserable, alone, lost. A sudden understanding, 
Sympathy mixed with the horror sprang up in Bilbo's heart: a time of endless 
Days without marking, without light no hope of better, hard stone, fresh fishing, 
hiding and whispering. All these thoughts passed in an instant. 
He trembled. And then, suddenly, in another body, as the would have rose up... 
With new strength and resolution, I jumped. 
It's not a big leap for a man, but a leap into the darkness. Directly above Gollum's head. 
From the head he jumped, you are three feet forward and three in the air; after all, 
step. 
Gollum hurled himself towards him and grabbed the hobbit who was flying above him. 
But it was too late: his hands were clasped in the air and Bilbo, walking over 
with his sturdy feet, accelerated through the new tunnel. He didn't turn around to see where he was. 
Gollum was working. I have a silence and bad news about your stories. 
First, then I figured it out. Suddenly a shocking cry was heard, filled 
with hatred and despair. Gollum was destroyed. Don't go any further. I have 
had lost it: he had lost his grip, and he had also lost the only one who ever had mattered to him, 
His precious one. The grit was that Bilbo would suffer the heart in his mouth, but somehow he would be offended. 
Now, faint as an echo, but haunting, the voice was heard: 
Thief, thief, thief! Baggins! We hate it, we hate it, we hate it for... 
again! 
There was silence. But it also seemed annoying to Bilbo. "Forks 
, the duende is so long after the oil", he thought, "these will tend 
to ignore their screams and curses. Keep watch, this path will lift you up to... 
What's worse? 
The step was low and tuscan built. It was not too difficult for the 
hobbits, except when, weighing down all the caretakers, he turned to hitting the little ones on the foot, 
several times, on the despicable stones toothed in the ground. "A little lower for the goblins, 
at least for the great ones," thought Bilbo, knowing that including the great ones, 
the ogres from the mountains advance at great speed
clutching their hands on 
the 
ground. abruptly. That braked Bilbo. But at the end... 
The slope was clear, the passage doubled a corner and turned to descend, and 
then, at the end of a short slope, I went, filtering through the network of the other 
corner—a thin streak of light. Not a red light, such as a fire or an internal light, but a pale 
type of external light. Once Bilbo started running. 
Escaping as quickly as his piers allowed him, double the last corner. 
and suddenly he reached an open space, where the light, after all that 
time in the darkness, seemed dazzlingly bright. In reality, it was just an escape from 
The light of the sun entrance through a door, where it had a great door, a door of stone. 
of open foot. 
Bilbo departed and suddenly went to the duendes: duendes in full form. 
armor with clear swords placed just inside the door, and observing it 
with very open eyes, and observing the passage that led to it. They were excited, 
alert, ready for anything. 
They saw it before their lives. Yes, they will see it. Whether... 
It was an accident, or a last trick of the ring before a new love would be found. 
It wasn't on my side. With spirits of joy, the two men danced over him. 
A cruel and bitter blow, like an echo of Gollum's misery, struck Bilbo, 
and even forgetting to take the sword, he put his hands in the bags. 
And there the ring was still, in its plain bag, and it was unslipped in its place. 
The goblins were destroyed in a row. No one can see the ring of the child. There was... 
They disappeared. They shouted double the strength that before, but not with so much joy. 
"Where is this?" they shouted. 
"Return to the hallway!" some shouted. 
"This way!" some shouted. "That way!" others shouted. "Keep me close to the 
door," the captain shouted. They sounded the swords, they shouted the armor, the swords 
The two were extreme, they hurt and they swore and they ran from here to there, falling to the ground. 
one to another and they enjoyed each other a lot. There was a terrible clamor, a shock and a 
disturbance. 
Bilbo was terribly surprised, but I still had the common feeling to understand. 
what happened and escaped from a large barrel that contained drink for 
the goblins guard, and so climb the chimney and avoid being shot, 
stopped until death, or caught by the touch. 
"I want to get to the door, I want to get to the door!", he continued by saying. 
Yes, but it took a long time before he was able to attempt it. The story was like a
horrible game played by the blind chicken. The place was filled with duels running 
to the surrounding area, and the little hobbit ran from one side to the other and was ridiculed. 
for a reason that could not be distinguished from what had been shocked, 
he went out to four balls and slipped between the captain's pins just in 
time, got up and ran to the door. 
It was all ready, but for a while I had to fill it up to the edge. Bilbo struggled. 
But I can't move it. I intended to pass by for the joy. 
Open and open, that's when I got stuck! It was horrible. These buttons have been lost. 
embedded in the edge of the door and the mark of the door. Then go outside 
to the open air: there will be one stairs that descends from an extreme valley. 
Between high mountains; the sun rose from behind a cloud and shone. 
brilliant on the outside of the door, but it cannot go away. 
Suddenly, one of the two who were inside shouted: "There's a shadow at the 
door. There's something outside! 
were placed in all directions. He ended up, with a rope and a round waistcoat, 
Jumping for them steps like a goat, while the disconcerted duens were still 
picking up their good bronze buttons on the door. 
So, ready to push through it, punching and shouting, and 
thrusting between the trees. 
staggering and with the tidal head. They couldn't meet Bilbo with the ring, 
running quickly and silently; 
so 
that they quickly returned, complaining and cursing themselves 
. 
Bilbo 
had escaped from the tragedies, but he didn't know where he was his friends wandering. 
and so subsequently, as long as the sun began to hide from the west, beyond the mountains. 
The shadows fell on Bilbo's path, and the sight was clear. Then I moved 
forward and only I could face the crests and slopes that fall with 
lowlands and hills that occasionally appear between the trees. 
"Heavens!" I have exclaimed. "It seems that I am bound to the other side. 
The side of the Cloudy Mountains, just at the edge of the Earth More Beyond! Where are they? 
Gandalf and the dwarfs met? Only I hope... 
My God, you are not there in the power of the duendes! 
He followed them wandering, climbing the small valley high, above the edge, and 
by the highest sides; but all the time a very uncomfortable thought 
was 
growing inside it.
his friends. I had to decide what was right, what had to be 
God's turn and I felt very miserable in my voices. 
I learned and learned. No song like elves; so he got angry. 
I have advanced with care. She was on a stony path that descended with a 
rocky wall to the left; on the other side the ground would descend and 
there would be valleys below the level of the chimney, covered with shrubs and lower trees. 
threes In one of these valleys below the shrubs people talk. 
If I try even more and suddenly I go to the great ones, atonement. 
rocks, one head with a red hood: it was Balin standing guard. They may 
have applauded and shouted with joy, but that's not what happened. Everyone kept the ring. 
he followed quickly, trying to meet something unexpected and despicable, and I could see 
that Balin looked at him directly without noticing him. 
"I'll give everyone a surprise," he thought as he climbed into the 
shrubbery at the edge of the valley. Gandalf was discussing with the men. They 
were discussing everything that had happened in the songs, and 
wondering and debating what they should do next. The enamels are 
refueling, and Gandalf said that they could not follow him forward. 
on the road leaving Señor Bolsón in the hands of the duendes, without 
securing him, he was trying to be alive or dead, and without attempting to rescue him. 
"After all, it's my friend," I say the magician, "and it's not a bad thing. You 
are responsible for it. Please don't lose it." 
The elves wanted to know why they had betrayed him, why... 
They could not ask themselves with their friends and companions, and why 
the magician had not chosen anyone with more common feelings. "There are more 
problems than we are using now," one said. "Let us now turn to 
those abominable tunnels to seek it, so I say, I say. 
Gandalf replied embitteredly: "I'll get it, and I'll get nothing that 
It doesn't matter to me. Either help me to get it, or I'll let you and I'll ask you. 
here to climb the best you can from there. If only we can meet you 
If you want to do it, I will appreciate it before this end. What are you asking? 
Do you want to stop me, Dori? 
"We've got it right now," Dori said, "since a sudden sudden attack happened. 
I'll grab you the legs behind them in the darkness, I'll walk you with the feet and 
I'll pat you in the sword! 
—So why don't you read it again? 
Heavens! Can you ask? Goblins peeling and biting in the darkness, 
Everyone falls on their bodies and hits each other!If you cut me
I removed my head with Glamdring, and Thorin stabbed me here and there. 
everywhere with Orcrist. Suddenly, you called one of your 
Destellos watchers, and we went to the duende running back and forth. You shouted, "Follow me!" 
Everyone to me!' and everyone should be followed. Let's think about 
everything the world has. There was no time to count, like everyone knows, until that... 
They passed through the door guards, they climbed through the lower door and they got there. And here we are, without the thief, confused. 
"He's the one!" 
"Here's the thief!" I said Bilbo walking to the center of the house. 
them, and slipping of the ring. 
Bless you, how they jumped! Then shouted with surprise and 
delight. Gandalf was as overshadowed as anyone else, but probably 
happier than everyone else. He called to Balin and told her what 
I thought in one day that people would enter directly into them that way. 
Without prior notice. It is a fact that Bilbo's reputation increased so much. 
deal with the dwarves after this. You still doubt that he was really 
a first class thief, considering the words of Gandalf, you don't doubt. 
Balin was the most disconcerted of all; but everyone said he was a very intelligent man. 
a little work. 
Indeed, Bilbo was so happy with his praise that he simply returned among others. 
inside and I don't say anything about the ring; and when they asked them 
like him, I say: "Oh, just follow me dragging myself, you know, with a lot of attention and 
in silence." 
"Good, it's the first time that even a rat is arrested with care. 
And silently lower my nostrils and without being seen", I said Balin, "and I 
"Take off my cap." I'm the guy. 
"Balin to your service," I said. 
—Your servant, Mr. Baggins—I said Bilbo. 
I wonder why everyone knows about you After having missed them 
, 
I heard them all, except the discovery 
of the ring ("not now", I thought 
) 
. ask with it from you. 
"He told me. Then he asked her: "What do I have in the bag 
? Let's eat the salt!". 
But the wine made me sick, and I ran, and I fell, and it failed me in 
the darkness. Then he followed him, because he said the same thing to me. I have 
he thought that he really knew the salt, and that's why he directed it. And then 
you heard it at the entrance and you couldn't stop.So I jumped over it. 
and I escaped and ran to the door.”
"And the guards?", they asked. "Doesn't anyone have it? 
"Many; but I knew it. I was stuck in the door, as 
"It was just a little open and I lost a lot of buttons," I said looking sadly. 
On torn clothes. "But I managed to get through without trouble, and here I am." 
The teenagers looked at him with a new look when he stopped. 
overlooking the guards, jumping over Gollum and opening up through them, as 
it was not very difficult nor very alarming. 
"What are you saying?", I said to Gandalf. "Mr. Baggins holds more 
"than what you imagine." He gave Bilbo an extra look at two of his 
people, as he said this, and the hobbit wondered if he was guessing it. 
the part of his story that had been omitted. 
Also, I was wondering what to do, because Gandalf would explain it... 
For me, the dwarfs didn't hear anything from Bilbo. I would like to know how... 
The magician has started to appear and now everyone is there. 
The magician, to tell the truth, can never be told to explain his intelligence. 
More than once, I now tell Bilbo that, like Elrond, they have become 
very aware of the presence of evil duos in this part of the mountains. 
But on the main door I can only take a different pace, one that is easier to reach. 
they traveled, so that on the way they met people who were looking for their doors at night. 
Evidently people have stopped going along this path, and the duendes must have... 
opened a new entrance in the upper part of the path that had taken the enos, 
recently enough, because they have now considered it safe enough. 
"I believe that one can encounter a more or less decent giant to block him. 
—Again —said Gandalf—, or ready there is no way to cross the mountains. 
Absolutely." 
As ready as Gandalf heard Bilbo's cry if God knew what had happened. 
happened. On the side that gave him to the goblins who were grabbing him, he 
had bitten him inside the heart, just when he broke. After the 
conductors and prisoners they followed him to the edge of the great hall, and there he heard it. 
Below and worked the best magic I can in the shadows. 
"It was a very delicate assumption," I said. "It was a delicate assumption matter!" 
But, presumably, Gandalf had a special study of the spells with 
Fire and Lights (including the hobbit who had never forgotten the magical artificial fires in 
the real holidays of the old Took, as will be recorded). The rest is all here. 
know, except that Gandalf knew everything above the lower door, and that the goblins 
called the lower door, when Bilbo lost his buttons. Indeed,
it was well known to anyone who was familiar with this part of the 
mountains; but here's a magician to keep your head in the tunnels and guide 
them in the correct direction. 
"They made this door centuries ago," I said, "partly as an escape route, one 
needs one; partly as a climb to the farthest lands, where they would always 
Come into the darkness and cause great harm. They always watch over it and nobody... 
they are able to block it. They will protect it doubly after this", I say. 
if river. 
All of them also came back. After all, they have lost a lot, but... 
Many others have gone to the Great Duende, and they have 
all escaped, so it could be said that they were the ones who carried the most part at the time. 
But the magician let him get into reason. "We must advance at a good pace." 
Once again, now we are a little disappointed", I say. "We will pursue 
when hundreds the night comes; and the shadows widen. 
They were the trees of the bottom that saved them. If you unslipped the border. 
of a pine tree climber who rose here just on the mountainside 
of the deepest and darkest woods of the lower valleys. Some of them clinging to 
the trunks and swinging them around the lower branches, some of them (like the little one) 
The 
Hobbit is hidden behind a tree to protect himself from the trunk of the rocks. 
The 
last and most terrible blows 
could 
come. I'm going to try to do a job to get down here in silence". "I was trying 
to decide, 
" 
asked Bombur; "but it won't be difficult to send 
stones 
by 
saying about our 
heads 
" 
. grow lower still you can see the 
lights in the trees further away. 
Let 
us go by the soft edges of a pine forest that 
constantly 
led 
to the south thicker silence of the deepest forest. Then 
it wouldn't be until late that you would hear a marine breath from the branches of 
the trees. 
-Should we continue next? -Bilbo asked when you were so dark that I couldn't help it.
Only I see Thorin's beard moving on his side, and so silent that 
he could hear the breath of the elfins like a harsh roar. "I keep the sides of my feet 
mangled and doubled, and I duel the legs, and I wonder if it moves like an 
"empty sack." 
"A little more," I said to 
Gandalf suddenly they left an opening. 
where no trees grow. The moon was high and shining in the light. 
In any case, it seemed to everyone that it wasn't an absolutely pleasant place, even though it had 
nothing to do with it. 
Suddenly they heard a sound that descended from the hill, a wide and extreme sound. 
Howl. I was answered by another to the right and much more asked. 
all of them; I can't wait to hear from anyone else. They were wolves singing 
the moon and the wolves were back! 
I didn't have to live looking for Mr. Baggins' tormentor at home, but his 
knowledge was rude. I have described it many times in the stories. One 
of his first elders (on the side of Tuk), who had great travelers, 
used to imitate him to experience him. To pick him up in the lower woods the 
moon was too long for Bilbo. Don't let the magic rings work much against… 
wolves, especially against the evil men who live below the shadow of 
the mountains infested with duende, even at the edge of the rescue on the borders of 
the unknown. The lobes of this species are more sharply colored than the two and not... 
It is necessary to see the other way! 
"What will we do, what will we do?" he shouted. 
"


 Escape from the goblin to 
"We will be trapped by the wolves!", I said, and was converted into a proverb, even now 
say "from 
the 
frying pan to the fire" with the same type of uncomfortable 
situation 
. 
trees Ori, 
Oin and Gloin are most comfortable in a huge pine tree with regularity, 
branches that rise at intervals like the spokes of a street. Bifur, Bofur, 
Bombur and Thorin were in each other. Dwalin and Balin were brought to the masses. 
A tall and thin fir tree with few branches and we are trying to find a place to leave us. 
the greenery of the highest branches. Gandalf, who was much more skilled 
than the others, had encountered a tree that they could not bear, a large 
pine tree that rose on the very edge of the light. It was completely hidden in its
branches, but you could see your eyes shining under the moon while looking outside. 
And Bilbo? I couldn't put up with a single tree and just ran. 
From trunk to trunk, like a cone who has lost his mother and holds a cross between him. 
hey 
"You left the thief again!" I tell her Nori to Dori looking down. 
"I can't always be charging thieves on my shoulders", I say Dori, "I've got 
the shafts and trees coming! What do you think I am? To porter? 
" "If we don't do anything", I say Thorin, we'll have 
to help our elder now, looking for something to fall more often, "Dori!", he shouted, because 
Dori was lower in the tree easier, "give it to Mr. Baggins" 
. 
Dori was a really good guy to weigh his questions. Poor Bilbo. 
I cannot move my hand even when I reach the lower branch 
and reach the arm as much as I can. So Dori really climbed. 
outside the tree and now Bilbo is preparing and standing on his shoulders. 
Just at this moment the lobos entered trotting and yelping into the light. Suddenly 
, hundreds of eyes marvel. Dori followed without... 
left Bilbo below. He waited until he was surrounded by his men, 
and then the same thing jumped out at her. 
One lobe bit her head. At one 
time there was a whole group of them calling the tree and 
their 
tongues 
out. reach the trees. For a while they will be safe For strong 
heat and no wind. The trees are not very comfortable to feel. 
Wide in at any time, but in the cold and the wind, with all the leaves 
waiting 
for you, they could be perfectly 
miserable 
places were Dori and Bilbo, and they were eager to wait until 
they had oil from each tree where they had someone. At these they also kept watch, 
while all the men (hundreds and hundreds, apparently) were and felt themselves in a 
great circle in the light; and in the middle of the circle there was a large gray 
lobe. He spoke to them in the terrible language of the wargs. Gandalf 
understood it. Bilbo no, but they are terrible, and as they all 
talk about cruel and perverse things, as it was to hope for. Again and again 
All the members of the circle would respond to his gray chief all the time, and 
his terrible outcry would cause the hobbit to fall out of the woods.
I'll tell you what Gandalf said, even though Bilbo didn't understand it. 
The wargs and the goblins can help each other in evil deeds. 
The goblins don't usually venture far into the mountains, except that... 
they are expelled and look for new homes, or march to war 
(which I am happy to say has not happened in a long time). But on some 
occasions we only make incursions, especially to achieve ideas or exclavos. 
work for them. Then, they often had the help of the wargs and shared the 
They looted with them. Sometimes they rode their wolves like men on their horses. 
Now it seems that a large incursion of goblins has been planned for this very moment. 
Evening. The wargs have come to meet the goblins and they come late. 
The reason, undoubtedly, was the death of the Great Duende and of all 
the excitement caused by the dwarfs and Bilbo and the magician, for those who 
would probably still be chasing. 
To the detriment of the pilgrims of this distant country, bold men have recently been formed. 
returning from the south, cutting trees and 
building places to live among the most pleasant woods of 
the valleys and the wide shores of the rivers. There were many of them, and 
they were valuable and well-armed, and even the armor did not have to be attacked if 
there were many joints, or on a bright day. But now they have planned 
With the help of the goblins, they took off at night to some of the most sought-after towns. 
the mountains. If on the plane if I now lifted myself to the top, I would have 
Nobody come up from there the next day; all of them were murdered except for the few who 
They were kept free from their wolves and taken like prisoners to their caves. 
It was terrible to listen to this talk, not only by the brave... 
lovers and his wives and sons, but also by the pilgrim 
who now made fun of Gandalf and his friends. The humans were annoyed and 
disconcerted when they put them there, in their same place. They thought 
they were friends of the woodcutters and they were coming to atone for them, and 
they would hear news of their plans in the valleys, and then the goblins 
and the wolves would tend to wage a terrible battle in the place of capturing 
Prisoners and devourers of people suddenly became discouraged from their dream. So that 
The wargs did not intend to rise and stop the people from being subjected to the trees. 
escape, at least no longer until morning. And much earlier, I said, 
The Bajaran goblin soldiers of the mountains; and goblins 
can climb trees or claws.
Now you can understand why Gandalf, listening to his grunts and 
shouting, began to have a terrible story, even though he was a wizard, and felt 
that they were in a very bad situation and that they had never escaped completely. All the 
same passes to them, but there is no time to stop them as they come up with the sauce. 
You couldn't get much tired on a tall tree with wolves on all sides. 
ground below. Receive the huge pines from the branches of the 
tree. He took fire from someone with a bright blue fire and rolled him up by zumba. 
within the circle of wolves. He hit someone on the shoulder, and 
immediately his hair was set on fire and he jumped from one side to another. 
hooting horribly. I play wine another and another, one in blue llamas, one 
in red, another in green. They were installed in the soil in the middle of the floor 
and were installed in sparks and colorful humus. An especially large one hit 
the chief wolf in the nostril, and jumped into the air of ten feet, and then 
ran once and again to the redhead of the circle biting and snapping even at the others. 
Wolves in their anger and fear. 
The dwarves and Bilbo shouted and cheered. The fury of the wolves 
It was terrible to see it and the tree that had filled the entire forest. 
The wolves feared the fire at all times, but this was one of the most horrible and 
supernatural fires. If a child is placed in the wood, if they are tied and burned. 
The less those who turn around quickly, everyone will soon be called. Very ready 
to clear the lobes once and again to fit the sparks. 
Above their warriors, while those who are burning run, shouting 
and taking fire from others, until their own friends drove them away and they 
will fall below, shouting and shouting and looking for water. 
"What are all these trees in the forest tonight?" I say the Lord of the Eagles. 
I was there, black in the moonlight, on top of a solitary 
rock pinnacle on the eastern edge of the mountains. "I hear voices of the wolves! Are the 
two men making mischief in the woods? 
He rose into the air, and immediately two of his guards from the 
rocks jumped on both sides to follow him. They flew in circles in the sky. 
And I looked down, at the ring of the Wargs, a small point very low. But 
The eagles keep sharp eyes and can see small things from a great distance. 
The Lord of the Eagles of the Misty Mountains kept eyes that could aim at the 
sun not shining and could see a rabbit moving on the ground a thousand lower.
Included in the moonlight. Thus, even though it could not be seen by the people in the trees, 
it was possible to distinguish the emotion between the ears and towards the small 
fire fighters, and therefore the howls and howls that bring the weak from the distance. 
under him. Then he went towards the moonlight in the attacks of the goblins and 
helmets, while large rows of evil people ambushed themselves by the sides from 
the door and entered the forest. 
The eagles are not friendly. Some are cowards and cruel. But 
the ancient race of the northern mountains were the greatest of all we had; 
They were proud, strong and noble-hearted. Don't love the elves, don't 
fear them. When they happened (which would happen rarely, 
because no such creatures would appear), they would fall over them and expel them. 
shouting to return to their caves, and they realized what evil they were doing. 
doing. The two hated the eagles and the fear, but they could not leave them. 
their high seats, or expel them from the mountains. 
This night the Lord of the eagles was filled with curiosity to know why 
he was in the march, so he called to many other eagles and many more flew. 
From the mountains, and slowly, giving twists and turns, they came. 
Down, down, down is the circle of the lobes and the place where 
The duende takes place. 
Excellent! They have been doing terrible things all over the place. 
The wolves that had set the forest on fire and that had hushed the same thing had caught fire. 
various places. It was very clear, and on this eastern side of the 
mountains I saw little during some time. Amaryllis trees, 
fallen branches, deeply prickled pine needles and, here and there, dead trees, 
ready to be called. Around the light, the fire of the wargs extended. 
But the guardian lobos did not abandon the trees. Speechless and furious, they were... 
jumping and hollering at the redder of the trunks, and cursing the idiots in their 
horrible language, with the foreign language and the brilliant eyes. 
As red and fierce as llamas. 
Suddenly, the goblins came running and shouting. I thought it was a fight. 
it was happening with the leaders; but I'm ready to tell you what actually happened. 
happened. Some of them included felt and laughed. Other healthy people. 
His lances and collided the shafts against his shields. The goblins were not 
afraid of the fire and soon they came up with a plan that seemed to be the most 
fun. 
Some of them joined all the wolves in one go. Some of them sharpened the blades and
blades of the tree trunks. Others ran and shot and 
hit, hit and hit, as long as all the calls stopped, but 
they didn't stop the fire but looked for the trees where the dwarfs were. 
They fed this fire with leaves, dead branches and ferns. Ready... 
You have a ring of humus and the ring that 
stops them from extending outwards, but it should be removed slowly, until the fire that runs 
is laminating the fuel pinned under the trees. The hum brought to Bilbo's eyes. 
You could feel the heat of the calls; You can cross the Reek towards the 
Goblins dancing in the circle like people who are around a... 
Full day of life. Outside the circle of warriors dancing with lances and 
they held their lobes at a respectful distance, observing and hoping. 
I can bring you to the duens by starting a horrible song: 
Fifteen birds in five fir trees, 
Their plumes are waved in a fiery breeze! 
But, because these cute little birds!, they don't hold on to them! 
What are we going to have with these strange things? Roast them alive or...? 
stew them in a jar; 
Are you happy, happy and hot? 
They said and shouted: "Let's play, let's play! Let's 
play! Let's play, let's play, or we'll sit in our nests! 
Let's sing, let's play, let's play! Why don't they sing 
? 
reply— . It's not a time for nests. Furthermore, the misguided children who play with fire will receive their 
punishment 
. 
Burn, burn the tree and the tree! 
Wrinkle and burn! A chirping torch 
To illuminate the night for our delight, 
 Yes, hello! 
Bake them and toast them, fry them and grill them! 
until the beards shine and the eyes see; 
until the hair is sore and the skin is getting worse, 
the fat is drying up and the hair is becoming grey. 
 at dinner, 
 The sky is below! 
 So they will die, 
and light up the night for our delight, 
 Yes, hello! 
 Ya-harri-hey! 
 Yes, today! 
And with that, today! The llamas are below Gandalf's tree a 
moment it extended to them. The court was set on fire, the lower branches 
were engulfed. 
Once Gandalf suffered the punishment of his tree. The sudden splendor... 
A flash shone in its variety like a ray, while he was preparing to jump from 
it high up, just between the leaps of the goblins. This would have been the 
end of it, although it would probably have seen as many of them as the 
He fell like a ray. But he never jumped.
Just at this moment the Lord of the Águilas descended from the arrival, 
I grabbed him with his arms and went away. 
He was struck by the wrath and surprise of the goblins. He shouted fiercely 
Lord of the Eagles, to whom Gandalf had spoken. Fall back. 
Big guys who were with him, and they were like huge black guys. 
Shadows. The wolves howled and gnashed their teeth; the two men 
shouted and screamed with anger, and threw their weights into the air in 
vain. The eagles launched themselves above them; the dark impetus of his flapping wings 
They knocked them to the ground or they drove them away; their claws tore the goblins apart. 
Darling. Other birds flew to the handfuls of the trees and caught the dwarfs, who were 
now climbing as far as they were eager to bring. 
Little Bilbo is about to ask again! Just now... 
I will hold Dori's pins, because Dori was the last one to be lifted; and they suffered. 
Iban joints at the top of the tumult and the ardor, Bilbo balanced on the air 
with his arms breaking. 
Now, much lower, the goblins and the wolves are dispersed everywhere. 
in the forest. How many eagles follow, flying in circles over the 
battle field. The red calls of the trees suddenly rose to the top of 
the tallest branches. They rose in a crackling fire. Suddenly I saw 
a cloud of sparks and smoke. Bilbo escaped just in time! 
Soon the light of the fire faded below, a red flash in the 
black soil; and they are very high in the sky, rising all the time in strength, 
wide circles. Bilbo never forgot his journey, clinging to Dori's 
ankles. The song: "My arms, my arms!"; but Dori moaned: "My poor legs, 
"My poor legs!" 
In the best of cases, the highlands tide over Bilbo. Only rarely if 
placed at the edge of a small hooked; and I never even tasted 
scales, or much less trees (I never even tried to escape from the lobes). 
So you can imagine how I turned my head when I looked down. 
between its two folds and through the dark lands, opening from side to side 
, I fell here and there by the light of the moon in the rock. 
The pale peaks of the moon 
that overwhelms the black shadows. 
I looked for my eyes and wondered if I 
did 
n't 
know it his arms gave way.
fireplace. He picked up the Dori tombs with a gasp and landed on the steep platform. 
of an eagle's nest. When he spoke, his thoughts were a 
surprise to be saved from the fire and I was left 
in this extreme place with deep shadows on both sides. He was feeling 
the reality, something very strange in his head at this moment, after the terrible adventures of 
the last three days without ever coming, and he met him saying 
in a loud voice: "Now you know how to feel like a bastard when suddenly you are 
." with a fork and I wanted to place it in the instant!” 
"No, it doesn't happen!", I asked Dori to reply, "because the bacon knows 
that it will return to the grill late or early; and it is to be hoped that we can 
No! The eagles are also tender! 
-Oh no! It doesn't seem like anything to the storks... forks, I want to say - Bilbo said, incorporating himself and 
looking anxiously at the eagle he was looking for. I have wondered, 
"What other fools were saying and would the eagle think so?" 
rudely You shouldn't be too big on an eagle, when you only have the size of an eagle. 
Hobbit, and they rise in their nest at night! 
The eagle just pierced its pin on a stone and cut its feathers. 
and he did not listen to him. 
Ready another eagle flew. "The Lord of the Eagles orders you to take 
"To your prisoners to the Great Platform," shouted and went away again. The other one 
He grabbed Dori between his arms and flew with him towards the night, leaving Bilbo alone. Only he 
kept 
strength to wonder what the message had said. 'prisoners', and began to think about being stripped for dinner as 
a rabbit, when I took them 
in 
turn 
He approached, trembling at the edge of the mountain, in a wide, rocky slope of the mountain slope. There was no way to fly except when flying; and it almost had the shape of going down. 
except jumping off a cliff. There he met all the other warriors 
at the edge of the mountain. The Lord of the Eagles was also 
talking to Gandalf. 
It seems that Bilbo is no longer devoured all over again. The magician and 
the eagle lord seemed to know each other a little, and even to be in 
friendly terms. Indeed, Gandalf, who had been hiding in the 
mountains, had once lent a service to the eagles and had looked after his master 
of an arrow herd. As it happens, "prisoners" meant "prisoners." 
only rescued from the tragedies, and no bailouts from the eagles. Like Bilbo 
I heard Gandalf's talk and knew that in the end I could 
actually escape from the terrible mountains.I was sailing.
plans with the Great Eagle to lift the birds, and Bilbo 
and I left them well on our journey across the islands 
below. 
The cloudy mountains looking to the west from the Águilas nest have Goblin 
Gate 
The Lord of the Águilas will not take them to any place looking for where the men 
live. "We shot with our great bows of fabric," I say, "because 
we think that we are among our wives. And on other occasions... 
No! No! We will happily engage in the duende of our game and we will 
give you our happiness, but we will not risk it for dwarfs in the 
southern plains." 
"Very well," says Gandalf. They are here and as many people as they are! We 
owe it to you deeply. But for as long as we are, we are happy. 
"with hunger." 
"This case is dead," Bilbo said in a weak voice that had never been heard before. 
I'm listening 
"That might be fixable," I said the Lord of the Eagles. 
Later, it is possible that you have seen a brilliant fire on the roasting platform and the 
figures of enos on your table cooking and enjoying a delicious flavor. 
The eagles have transported dry branches for fuel and have transported 
cones, food and a small object. The dwarfs are packed in full. 
preparatory. Bilbo was too tired to help, and in all ways it wasn't much. 
Good for peeling cones or cutting meat, accustomed to keeping it 
mixed with the meat, cooking list. Gandalf was also nearby. 
After burning the fire, you have lost Oin and Glory 
their tinderboxes. (The wines never returned to the brains, they never stopped.) 
This is how the adventures of the Cloudy Mountains ended. Ready Bilbo's magician... 
He felt light and comfortable again, and felt like he could sleep. 
happy, although in reality I enjoyed more than a bread with butter than 
a few toasted meats. I was curled up in the harsh hoarseness. 
More profoundly, I never had it in my pillow of feathers on my own little boy at 
home. But every night I sleep in my own house and wander to 
sleep in all its different habitats looking for something I can't meet. 
I don't remember how it was. 
QUEER ACCOMMODATIONS 
The next morning, Bilbo despaired with the sun of love in his eyes. Leap. 
He raised his gaze to look at the time and put his head to her head, and discovered that he was... 
He wasn't at home at all. So I felt and wished in vain to wash and brush. 
Don't eat tea or toast or tomato to enjoy, only 
take away the chilli and rabbit. And now you're ready to prepare for a new start.
Now he allowed himself to be attacked by an eagle and grabbed. 
between its wings. The air will clear of him and he will close his eyes. 
The wines will be saying goodbye and promise to pay them to the Lord of the 
Águilas, if sometimes they can, while they rise five large trees from 
the mountain side. The sun was still looking for the eastern border. 
The morning was cool and the mists extended through the valleys and the hollows and were entrenched. 
Here and there above the peaks and pinnacles of the hills. Bilbo opened a 
I looked and there the birds were high up and the world was 
In the distance, the mountains were left behind, in the 
distance. I will look for the eyes again and will hold on more strongly. 
- Don't pinch me! -I say on eagle-. Don't worry about eating like a meal, 
even if it seems like one, it's a long day with little wind. What? 
Is it better than flying? 
Bilbo enjoyed saying: "A hot bath and a late afternoon on the 
grass afterwards", but he thought it would be better not to say anything and wait 
a little. 
After a good time the eagles must have understood the point in which they are. 
heading, even from there, up to a great height, because they began to descend, 
turning in great spirals. This happened for a long time, and finally 
the hobbit began to open his eyes. The earth was much more searching, and below 
it had trees that seemed to be oaks and trees, and widened grasslands, and 
A stream that flows through it all. But rising from the soil, just along 
the path of the stream that snaked to his elder was a large rock, such as a 
hill of stone, like the last step advanced from the mountainous mountains, or an enormous piece 
thrown miles towards the wool by a gigantic among gigantis. 
Quickly now the eagles launched themselves one by one to the top of this rock and 
left to their passages. 
"Bye bye!" they shouted, "Wherefore I go, until my nests receive. " 
" 
At the end of the journey!" This is the most polite thing that should be 
said 
among 
the 
eagles 
. ones, in the battle of Five Armies. 
But 
as it relates to the ending of this story, we will not say more. 
It had a flat space at the top of the stone hill and a very busy fireplace.
fireplace with many stairs that go down the river, across which there is a path of 
huge flat stones leading to the meadow further away from the stream. There is a little... 
hole (a healthy hole with a lot of shoes) at the foot of the stairs and 
look for the end of the pedestrian walk. Then the group met and discussed what 
should be done. 
"Always keep everyone safe (if possible) further away from the mountains." 
I say to the magician, "and now, with good management and good strength, I appreciate it. 
After all, now we are much more than what we had previously thought of connecting. 
Next, after all, this is not my adventure. Let's try to see it. 
Before this end, but I still care so many other urgent things to do 
. 
The teenagers were walking and they seemed very afflicted, and Bilbo loved it. 
He was busy thinking that Gandalf had to come until the end and that 
he would always be there to help him overcome the difficulties. "I don't want to 
disappear now," I say. "I can give you a day or two more. 
It can probably help you get out of your current situation, and I need a little help. 
myself. We don't have any equipment, we don't have any equipment, we don't have any equipment to ride; and you 
don't know where you are. Now I can tell you. Still heres a little... 
miles to the north of the path that we must have followed, yes we would have 
Don't abandon the mountain walk with surprise. Very few people live here, 
unless they have come here since the last time they were here, which is the same thing. 
Years ago. But I know a few who live a little longer. 
Here are some steps on the big rock, the Carroca, I think. 
He calls it. He doesn't come here on the run, certainly not during the day, and there 
will be no need to wait for him. Indeed, it would seem very dangerous. We must go. 
and meet him; and if everything goes well in our reunion, I believe that I will return to you and 
"I wish you as the eagles a 'goodbye wherever you go!'" 
They asked her that they would not abandon him. They offered her dragon gold and 
plate and joy, but they did not change their opinion. "We will see you, we will see you. 
"We'll see!" I said, "I believe that you will get me some of your 
"dragon gold when you hold it." 
After that I stopped being. Then they stopped the clothes and... 
I bathed in the river, which was not very deep and clear and pedestrian on the way. 
When they were dried in the sun, which was now hot and hot, 
they felt renewed, although still painful and a little shaky.Ready to cross and go.
(raising the hobbit), and then he started walking across the wide green chimney. 
Hide the width of the hills from old arms and tall trees. 
"Why is Carroca called?" asked Bilbo as he walked to the 
wizard's side. 
"He called it Carrock, because Carrock is on the word for him. He calls it 
something like these Carrocks, and this is the Carrock because it is the only one 
" 
"He's looking for his house and he knows it well" 
Everyone should be well 
educated in presenting art. I will introduce you slowly, two and two, I 
Think; and you must be careful not to disturb him, or God knows what 
will happen. He can be expanded when he is bored, even though he is lovable. 
Enough with giving her the side. However, please note that it is easily done. 
All the kids are reunited when they tell the magician how... 
I'm with Bilbo. "Is this the person who brings us now?", they asked. 
"Could you find someone more calm? Could it be better than...? 
Can you explain it all a little more clearly?", etc. 
- Yes, of course it is! No, no way! And I was explaining it very much 
-With advice -the magician replied with emphasis-. If you want to know more about your name... 
It's Beorn. It's very strong and changes your skin. 
"That's it! A furrier, a man who calls rabbits to rabbits, when he's not on the move 
“Convert his hairs into squirrels?" asked Bilbo. 
-Heavens, no, no, NO, NO! -I say Gandalf-. If you don't 
talk to Señor Bolsón you can avoid it; and in every name the marvelous, not the hazes. 
Mention the word "furrier" again while you are less than a thousand years old. 
of your home, no carpet, cape, cape, muff, no other object of semi-disgrace. 
Word! It's a skin changer. He changes his hair: sometimes he is a huge 
black man, sometimes he is a big black man with huge 
arms and a big beard. I cannot say much more, although this should 
be sufficient. Some say that he is a descendant of the great and 
ancient mountain men who lived before the giants. 
Others say that he is a man descendant of the first men who lived before 
Smaug or the other dragons came to this part of the world, and before 
the goblins came to the hills from the north. I can't say, though... 
I suppose the last one is the true story. He's not the kind of person who makes you wonder. 
of. 
"In any case, there is nothing more enchanting than his own. He lives in a 
robber and has a large house in Madeira; and like a man he keeps cattle and 
horses that are cases as wonderful as he is.He works for him and talks with
him 
​filled with large and ferocious trees, and most of the time lives 
cream 
and 
honey 
. day that I will perish and I will return!' That 
's why I believe that once in a while there's wine from the mountains." 
Bilbo and the enos still kept thinking about it a lot and didn't even think about it. 
They wondered even more. They still asked for a wide path to travel. This arrived. 
And they went down through the valley. There was a lot of heat. Sometimes they 
lowered the trees, and thus Bilbo felt so much heat that they were so 
beautiful, that some of them were sufficiently hardened to fall to the ground. 
I saw this big piece of flowers 
, all of the same kind. 
Especially have clover 
, purple clover and wider extensions of 
sweet honey. 
The trees are occupied by 
everyone 
anything the same me," he thought, "I'll be touched again as much as 
I am! 
They were bigger than the previous ones. The claws were bigger than you 
could read, enough, and the yellow bands on their deep black bodies 
shone like fiery gold. 
-We are looking for -I say Gandalf-. We are at the edge of our meals. 
After the rat, they were tied to a belt of tall and very old clothes, and even then 
to a high set of pins across which no one could see anything 
. 
-It will be better than what I hope here -I say the magician to the elves-; and when you... 
call the whistle it fills to come between me—you will see the path I travel—but 
only in pairs, oh, one five minutes between each pair. Bombur 
It is the most delicious and best served by two, better than it comes alone and last. Let's go. 
Mr. Baggins! There is a door here. And with this he 
was off to the edge of the silk, warning the well-worn hobbit. 
Ready to take them to a door in Madeira, high and low, further away from the one... 
They can be found in gardens and a group of low buildings in Madeira, some with a rack. 
and made of trunks in the same shape: large ones, stables, capes and a low and large wooden cabin. 
house. Inside, on the southern side of the great silk, there were rows and rows 
of filled with bell-shaped lids made of straw. The sound of the giant bees 
flying from one side to the other and crawling in and out of the air.
The wizard and the hobbit filled the door and door and 
went to the house for a while. Some horses, very elegant and 
well-arranged, trotted over the grass and looked at them faithfully with 
very intelligent dears; then they galloped towards the buildings. 
- I had to warn her of the arrival of a stranger - I said Gandalf. 
Ready to attach to a patio, three of which walls are formed by 
wooden house and on two wide wings. In the middle there was a... 
A large tree trunk with many branches attached to its side. Look for there to be a 
huge man with a thick beard and black hair, and big arms and bare bones. 
with tense muscles. He wore a woolen tunic with the rods, 
and wore a large hat. The horses are right next to him with his 
nostrils in his hand. 
"Phew! Here they are!" he told the horses. "Don't look 
Dangerous! You can leave! He laughed loudly, leaving his 
ax and went ahead. 
"Who are you and what do you want?" he asked abruptly, standing on his feet. 
in front of him and rising to the top of Gandalf. As for Bilbo, he could 
easily get caught between his legs without grabbing his head to avoid it. 
flecks of the man's brown tunic. 
"I am Gandalf," said the wizard. 
"I never hear from him," the man grunted. "And what is this little 
Fellow? I say, bending down to eat the hobbit's dinner with his thick fur. 
Black ones. 
"He is Señor Bolsón, a hobbit of good family and untouchable. 
reputation," I said to Gandalf. Bilbo bowed in reverence. He didn't keep his shade off and was 
painfully aware of his many faulty buttons. "I'm a magician," 
continued Gandalf. "I hate to talk about you, if you don't want to talk about me; but 
sometimes I hear about my first good Radagast, who lives in search of... 
Fronts of the Black Forest? 
-Forks; He's not a bad guy to be a magician, I think. Only see it now. 
and again", I say Beorn. "Good, now we're here, or we 're saying this." 
Here we are. What do you want? 
"To tell the truth, we've lost our equipment and in this case we'll lose the rumble, 
and we need help, or at least advice. I can say that we knew 
"We had a bad time with the goblins in the mountains." 
“Goblins?” I say the big man with less abruptness. "Oh, hello, so what have you been having 
?" Do you have any problems with him? Why were you looking for him? 
"It wasn't our intention.They surprised us at night in a step that we kept 
cruising; We are climbing the Western Tiers of these countries 
"It's a big story."
-Entirely it will be better to enter and tell me something, if it doesn't suit you. 
"To be seen again all day", I said to the man who led me through a dark door which 
opened from the patio outside the house. 
Then they put in a large hall with a fireplace in 
the middle. Even if it was true there was a fire of wood burning and the 
humidity was subjected to the blackened beams in search of the salt through 
an opening in the door. They passed through this dark passage, illuminated only by the 
fire and the hole that had it there, and entered through another smaller door to a 
kind of terrace supported on Madeira posts with individual trunks. 
It was oriented towards the south and was still warm and full of western light. 
Only if you tilted it was the gold leaf above the garden full of flowers that 
led up to the steps. 
Then they heard each other on the Madeira benches while Gandalf began his speech, and 
Bilbo balanced his pickles and admired the flowers of the garden. 
Wondering what might be their names, who have never seen even half of them. 
before. 
"I was coming to the mountains with one or two friends..." I said the 
magician. 
- Or two? Only one, and very small, too - said Beorn. 
"Good, to tell the truth, I didn't like bothering you with many of us, 
until you were busy. I'll call you, if you allow me. 
"Let's go, call me!" 
Then Gandalf blew a wide and sharp whistle, and chased Thorin and Dori... 
God returned to the house by the path of the garden and he was leaning deeply towards 
him. 
—I know you're referring to one or three! said Beorn. But these are not hobbits, 
They are dwarfs! 
—Thorin Oakenshield, at your service! —I said the 
two years leaning forward 
, I say Beorn, “I hope you'll use them 
. but it is certain that you are Thorin 
(son of Thrain, son of Thror, I believe), and that your companion is 
respectable, and that you are enemies of the goblins and are not at the height of anyone. 
Do you have a problem in my country? What are you plotting, for sure? 
"We are on our way to visit the land of our fathers, to the east. 
More to the Mirkwood," added Gandalf, "and it is completely accidental that 
we are in your land. We are cruising through the Alto Paso which must 
have led us to the road which is located at the top of our country, when 
"we were attacked by the evil ones duendes, as he was at the point of contact."
-Continue counting it then! -I say Beorn, who was never very polite. 
"There is a terrible storm; the stone giants are outside throwing rocks, 
and at the head of the road we take refuge in a cave, the hobbit and I and 
various of our companions..." 
"Where are the various calls?" 
- Good, no. Of course, it has more than two. 
"Where are they? Are they sick, devoured, back home?" "Good, no. It doesn't 
It seems like everyone eats when they sing. Shy, I guess. See, we're very... 
I'm afraid that we're desperate to be entertained." 
Come on, let's go again! It seems like I'm expecting a party, and one or two 
“It won't make much difference,” Beorn grunted. 
Gandalf was born again; but Nori and Ori brought cases before that... 
they had been detained, because, if you remember, Gandalf had told them that they would come in pairs. 
every five minutes. 
-Hello! said Beorn. Get it very quickly. Where are you hiding? 
Let's go, my surprise! 
"Nori at your service, Ori at..." they began; but Beorn interrupted him. 
Thank you! When you need help, I'll get it for you. Sit down and... 
Continue with this story, or it will be time to dine before that deadline." 
"While we were asleep," Gandalf continued, "if we heard a cry in the evening part of the 
cave it opened; the goblins climbed up and grabbed the hobbit and the dwarves. 
and our trope of ponies—" 
A troop of ponies? What was it? A traveling circus? Or were you...? 
Do they have a lot of merchandise? Do you always call yourself a trope? 
—Oh no! Of course, we have more than six ponies, because here... 
We have more than six, and good, here we have two more! Just at this moment 
Balin and Dwalin appeared and they read so deeply that their beards 
barricaded the stone ground. The man tasted the dinner at first, but left his work. 
The best was to listen, leaning and showing reverence. 
and shaking their caps off their reels, until 
they are ready to taste the dinner and are reminded of the 
shells 
. Come in, my happy 
Ladies, how do you call? I don't want my service now, only... 
your names; and I'm sure you need to bring the cola!" 
"Balin and Dwalin," they said in reverse to offend each other, and they exploded in the ground. 
The floor seemed quite surprising. 
—Now see you again again! —I told her Beorn to the magician—. Where was this? Oh yes!
Don't record me. I killed one or two goblins with a flash... 
"Good!" Beorn grunted. "So being a wizard is an advantage." 
"—and I left myself inside the heartbreak before it closed. He went down to 
the main room, which was full of goblins. The Great Duende was 
there with three or four armed guards. He thought: "Anyway they... 
"Dozen against so many?" 
To dinner! It's the first time I know what the eye calls me after. Oh what... 
So you still have more connectors that haven't climbed out of your boxes? 
-Good, yes, it seems that you have a greater pair here now: Fili and Kili, I believe. 
"Creed", I say Gandalf, while these devices are smiling and 
reverence. 
"Enough!" said Beorn. "Sit down and call! Now, continue!" 
Gandalf! 
So Gandalf continued with the story, as long as he led the boy in the darkness, 
the discovery of the lower door, and their horror when they discovered the Mr. 
Baggins had gone astray. "We talked to each other and discovered that there was no hobbit 
. 
" 
We only asked for fourteen 
! 
-Good, it's clear that no one has seen Óin and Glóin. And, my God! 
Here it is. I hope you forgive me for bothering you. 
Everyone eats! Give yourself a prize! Let us see you and your friends! 
But look, Gandalf, even now only we care about you today 
The elfins and the hobbit who were lost. This only takes once (more than one) 
lost) and no troubles, unless the magicians tell in a different way to other people. 
But now, please, let's talk to him." Beorn didn't show him more than I could. 
He could help me, but in reality he would have become very interested. Indeed, in 
the old days I would have known the same part of the mountains where Gandalf was 
describing. 
He stopped and grunted, when I heard the hobbit's 
reappearance and his descent through the slide of stones and the ring of lobes in the wood 
He murmured: "I wish there had been..." 
There! They had given them more than fireworks! 
—I said Gandalf very happy to see that his story was successful— 
. Here we were with our wobes, seeing 
us below, and the forest starting to burn in some places, when the 
two of us descended the hills and we discovered them 
. 
Fifteen birds in five fires... 
"Heavens!" Beorn growled. 
. They are also Bifur and Bofur. I'm not afraid of... 
“I introduced them before, but here they are." 
Enter Bifur and Bofur. "And me!" exclaimed Bombur, resounding to the others.
It was good and also enjoyable for having been left alone for the final. He refused to wait five 
minutes, and immediately followed the other two. 
-Good, now you are fifteen; and how the goblins knew how to count, I... 
Let's assume that this is all that was in the trees. Now let's ask if we can finish. 
This story has no more interruptions.” Lord Baggins began to understand how 
the intelligent Gandalf had been. The interruptions actually meant that Beorn was more 
interested in the story, and the story prevented him from sending the story. 
The teenagers immediately leave like suspicious beggars. I have never invited people to come in. 
at 
home, it could be avoided. house again. 
Now 
I had to meet those unfamiliar people who were sent in their sluts. 
" 
A 
very 
good story!" I say. "The best that I have learned in a long time. If 
all the beggars could recognize such a good thing, so often they would find me more lovable. You may find that 
everyone is inventing it, perhaps, but you need a dinner for the whole story. 
Same here! Let's get something to eat! 
- Yes, please! -they said all the time-. "Many thanks! 
Inside the room it was quite dark. 
Beorn I said something in a foreign language, like the sounds of animals 
. 
" conversion in conversation. They came up again and quickly returned with the torches. 
in their mouths, which ignited in the fire and hung in low supports above the 
pillars of the living room in the central house. The dogs could appear on their 
potatoes when they asked for and carried things with the trousers. Quickly 
They took out tables and trestles from the side walls and placed them searches for 
the fire. 
Then they heard baa-baa-baa!, and they entered a white tree like snow. 
led by a big black meat like coal. One carried a white canvas bordered on the 
edge with animal figures; others They also carried on them the bands with 
bowls and plates and knives and spoons from Madeira, which the dogs returned and 
quickly placed on the easel tables. These were very low, low enough included 
so that Bilbo would feel comfortable. Once you're there, just put two lower seats. 
counters with large bottoms of rush and short and thick legs for Gandalf and
Thorin, while at the other end I placed the great black chair of Beorn of the same type. 
(which was felt with its large stones well behind the table). These 
were all the saddles I had on the living room, and probably they would keep them as low as 
the tables for the comfort of the wonderful animals that await 
him. Where did the others hear? Don't forget them. The same ones ask... 
It arrived in sections of trunks in the shape of drums, rolling and smoothed. 
clean, and sufficiently small included for Bilbo; so that ready all are sent again and again. 
Beorn's table and the hall have not seen such a meeting for many years now. 
There you will have a dinner, or a lunch, as they have never had before. 
They abandoned the Last Home of the West and were despised by Elrond. 
The light of the antlers and the fire shone on his redhead, and above the table 
there were two veils high in the wax of red trees. As they began, Beorn was in his deep 
A waving voice recounting the stories of the lands saved on this side of the mountains, and 
especially of the dark and dangerous forest that extends as far as 
the North and the South, on a day of travel by many of them, they closed the path of the East. 
The terrible forest of the Black Forest. 
The dwarfs scrutinized and protected their beards, they might know that... 
they had to enter this forest promptly and after leaving the mountains it was 
the worst of the snails who had to pass before luring the dragon. 
fortress. When dinner was over, they began to tell their stories, but 
Beorn seemed to be drowsy and paid them little attention. I have 
spoken more about the gold, the plate, the joys and the manufacturing of things for 
herring, and Beorn didn't seem to worry about such things: he 
had no objects of gold or plate in his hall, and few, except for the knives, were 
absolutely metal objects. 
They felt wide at the table with their slices of honey and 
honey. The dark night goes outside. The fires in the center of the hall 
were built with fresh trunks and the antlers were attached, and they still felt remained in 
the light of the dancing llamas with the pillars of the house standing 
behind them, and dark at the top like the trees of the forest. Whether it's 
magic or not, it seemed to Bilbo that it sounded like the wind in the 
branches moving in the streets and the howling of the trees. Ready to listen. 
with the sound and the voices seem to fly, until I despair with a 
start. 
The great door was crushed and a coup was attempted. Beorn had it. The
enos were heard with their crumpled piercings in the ground beneath the fire and 
at this moment they began to sing. Some verses were like this, but there 
were many more and the song continued for a long time: 
The wind passes over the branded bread, 
but in the forest not a single thing moves: 
Here there were shadows of day and night, 
and dark and silent things are behind them. 
The wind below the mountains, 
and like a tide it roared and rolled; 
The branches creaked, the forest is over, 
and they are placed leaves above the mold. 
The wind overwhelms from west to east; 
All the movement in the forest ceased, but the strident and hopeless 
voices 
through the swamp were released. 
The hives were whistling, their tassels were folding, 
The dogs tinkled, and they continued sounding. 
Above a turbulent swimming pool there is a cool sky 
from which the clouds of the road break and fall. 
I have passed the solitary mountain naked 
and swept away the healing of the dragon: 
There lay black and dark rocks. 
And there was a hum in the air. 
I left the world and learned about it. 
over the same seas of the night. 
The moon rose above the gale, 
and the stars opened in a fan until they converted into salty light. 
Bilbo turned to listen. Suddenly, Gandalf rose. 
"It's time to sleep," I say, "for us, but I don't think it's for Beorn. 
In this room we can sleep peacefully and safely, but we warn everyone who doesn't forget. 
What I say Beorn before the day: we must not go up until the sun rises. 
"He's coming, as low as you can go." 
Bilbo discovered that the rooms were placed on one side of 
the floor, on 
a kind of elevated platform between the pillars and the 
outside 
wall that's when I slept: the fire had been reduced to a few 
embers; 
a white windlass in the soil came from the high moon 
. 
If you hear a grunt like some great 
animal... he 
could be Beorn in an enchanted form, and he would wine like a dare and 
kill them. He put his blankets down and hid his head, and then I slept. 
Again until I weigh my own. 
It was full morning when he got tired. One of the wines has failed.
I put him in the shadows where he was, and he had rolled down with a blow from 
the platform to the ground. It was Bofur, and he wondered 
when Bilbo opened his eyes. 
"Get up, lazy man," I say, "or I won't let you forget." 
Bilbo jumped up. “Breakfast!” I shouted. "Where is the story?" 
"Mainly inside us," replied the other teenagers who were moving. 
above the living room; "but what is on the terrace. We have been talking 
looking for Beorn since the sun rose; but there are no signs of him 
in any place, although we find the dish prepared as ready as we eat." 
- Where is Gandalf? - Bilbo asked, eager to look for something to eat. 
as quickly as I can. 
"Oh! Over there, over there," they said. But I don't see a signal from 
The Magician all day until late. Just before the last hour I entered 
the hall where the hobbit and his elflings were having a desperate dinner 
with Beorn's marvelous animals, as they have done so all day long. De Beorn had 
not seen anything since the previous night, and they were 
wondering. 
"Where is our host and where have you been all day?", they all asked. 
cry. 
"A question once in a while, no one has to wait after dinner! I don't have a 
"A bite after dinner." 
Finally Gandalf set aside the plate and the jar: he had two 
breads (with butter masses, honey and coagulated cream) and drank in 
at least a quarter of honey—and he sacked his pipe. "I will answer the second question, 
"The question is the first," I said, "but bend over! This is a splendid place to smoke. 
rings!" Therefore, for a long time they could not be bothered by anything more, it 
was so busy sending rings of humus that were worn by the piles of the living room, 
transforming them into all kinds of different shapes and colors, and establishing them 
Finally, one after another was pursued to climb the needle into the roof. There must 
be many strangers from the outside, appearing in the air like someone else. 
black, green, blue, red, gray plated, yellow, white; large, small; 
The little ones meet the big ones and join together, forming eyes, and 
walking together like a gang of birds in the distance. 
"He was detecting bear tracks", I finally said. "We must 
They also have a regular meeting of bears here outside. Hello there... 
Beorn couldn't have done them all: there were too many and 
They also came in various sizes. I must decide that there were small ones, large ones 
ones, ordinary ones and giant ones, all leaping out of the darkness.
until almost dawn. They went in all directions, except from the 
west over the river, from the mountains. In this direction only a combination of 
The hues took me away, none of them came, only one of them left here. 
These until the Carroca followed. Then they disappeared into the river, but the 
water was too deep and strong beyond the rock to be able to cross. It is easy 
enough, as we will record, to lift from this bowl as long as the wagon goes, 
but on the other side there is a hook that rises above a jammed canal. You know... 
I walked kilometers before finding a place where the river was also not very deep. 
Enough to walk and run, and you can travel back kilometers to accommodate it. 
new hues. To find out it was too late to follow it. 
He headed directly to the pine forests on the east side of the 
Cloud Mountains, where we had our small and pleasant celebration with the 
The night before last Wargs. And now I believe that I answered your first question, 
"Also," finished Gandalf, and remained silent for a long time. 
Bilbo thought he knew what the magician was referring to. "What do we have?" I have asked. 
he shouted, "is he going to all the wargs and goblins, are you here? We'll all be the one 
to catch him and they killed them! I think he had to say that he wasn't his friend. 
-So I know. You're not stupid! It will be better if you go to your house, you're desolate. 
Sleepy." 
The hobbit felt completely devastated, and as he seemed to have nothing more than he did, 
he was in his room; and while the young men would still sing songs, they would be happy. 
I slept, still giving her turns to her head above Beorn, until I heard a dream 
of hundreds of black men dancing slow and heavy dances one time or another in 
the moonlight on the patio. Then he was in despair when all the men were 
asleep, and I saw the same scratched, forced, collapsed and grunted ones. 
as before. 
The next day, Beorn will wake up all of them. "So that now 
"Everyone is quiet!" I say. He took the hobbit and laughed: "They haven't eaten." 
"I still see wargs or goblins"; and it's up to Mr. Baggins. 
vest in the most irrespective way. "The idea is new to me." 
—With bread and honey —I say again—. Come and stay a little longer! 
So everyone was enjoying it with him. Beorn was very happy to serve... 
change; In fact, there seems to be a lot of good humor and I can 
all come back with his amusing stories; they didn't have to worry about it for a long time. 
where he was or why he was so friendly with him,because I said
he was the same. I had crossed the river and returned to the mountains. 
From this you can guess that you could travel quickly, in the way you dare. 
In all ways. From the clear question of the wolf, I quickly discovered that part of 
his story was true, but he had encountered more than that: he had caught a 
horse and a dream wandered through the woods. Here's some news: 
The goblin patrols follow each other by chasing the horns to the dwarves, they... 
they were furious about the death of the Great Duende, and also 
about the question of the nostril of the chief wolf and the death due to the 
fire of the magician of many of his main servants. They told her so much when they 
obliged, but I assumed that it was worse at the game than it was. 
and that a great incursion of the whole army of goblins with their winged wings in 
the shadowed lands through the mountains could be ready to be converted into places to meet 
the monsters, or to come across the men and creatures who live there, 
and who would believe that they should be there protecting them. 
"It was a good story, your story," I said Beorn, "but I like it even more. 
Now I'm sure that it's true. You must forgive me for not believing in your word. If you... 
Live in search of the edge of the Black Forest, don't believe in the word of anyone who... 
Don't know it as well as your brother or better man. As such Those are the things, I can only say 
that I'm anxious to get home as quickly as possible to 
" Ensure that I'm safe and 
I'll give you all the help you 
can," 
he said 
fiercely for my sake. I said Beorn, and followed him around the house. 
The goblin's head was caught outside the door and a warg's skin was nailed to a 
larger tree. Beorn was a feral enemy. But now he was on his friend, 
and Gandalf thought it would be prudent to tell her the whole story and the reason for his death. 
on travel, so that they can get the best possible help. 
This is what I promised you would do. They provided ponies. 
each one of them, and a horse for Gandalf, for their journey to the woods, and 
They were filled with food so that they would last the weeks with care and attention for them. 
so that If it is as easy to remove as possible: nuts, flour, dried branches of dried fruit 
, and red barrels filled with honey, and horny cakes that 
can be kept in good condition for a long time and with little material you can make them.
The preparation of these was one of his secrets; but there was honey in them, as in 
most of their foods, and they were good to eat, no matter how old they were. 
Water, I say, there is no need to raise it on this side of the forest, because 
it has streams and springs across the chimney. "But your journey through 
"The Black Forest is dark, hairy and difficult," I say. "The water is not easy to get into. 
There is no food there. The time of the babies has not yet taken place (although it may be that they have 
passed and if they have to before carrying them to the other side), and the babies are at the point of 
everything that grows up and is suitable for consumption; there the saving things are dark, strange, 
and saving. I will give you pieces to transport water and I will 
give you some bows and arrows. But I really doubt that anything like 
that in the Black Forest will be healthy to eat or drink. there 
is a haystack there, the same, black and strong that crosses the path. You 
shouldn't drink anything in it, because I hear it brings 
enchantment and great drowsiness and forgetfulness. And in the twilight 
shadows of this place I don't think that anything will disappear, healthy or 
unhealthy, without straying from the path. This MUST NOT be done 
for any reason. 
This is all the advice I can give to art. More than the edge of the forest, I... 
I can't help you much; It must depend on your strength and courage. 
and the delivery I am sending you. At the door of the forest I must ask that 
Return my horse and my ponies. But I long for everything very warm and I think 
"The house is open for you to come here whenever you want." 
They welcomed them, above all, with much reverence and gestures of assent. 
hoods and with many a “to your service, oh master of the wide Madeira 
Halls!” But their hearts were hushed before their grave words, and everyone realized that the 
adventure was much more dangerous than what they had thought, while all the 
time, including all the perils of the fireplace, the dragon was waiting 
for the final. 
This morning we were busy with the preparations. Shortly after the middle of the day 
they came to Beorn with Beorn for the last time and after the meal they soon took the 
cake and, after having felt it many times, they marched. 
Crossing the door at a good pace. 
As soon as they left their high silks to the east of their searched lands, 
they turned north and then headed to the north east. For my advice, 
do not go to the main forest road on the south side of your land. They then
followed the path, on their path they had taken it through a stream from the 
mountains that joined the great stream to the south of the Carrock. At 
this point there was a deep passage that could have passed and they would still have been 
They held their ponies, and further from there a path led to the slopes of the forest and 
to the entrance of the ancient forest path. But Beorn had noticed that this 
path was now frequently used by goblins, while the forest path itself had it... 
It was discovered that it was covered in evil and dissolved in the Far East and led to an impassable place. 
the quagmires where the senders have been lost for a long time. On the eastern opening they also 
always had to be far above the Solitary Mountain and were left behind. 
They still had a large and difficult march to the north when they joined the 
other side. To the north of the Carroca, the edge of the Black Forest approaches the 
borders of the Gran Río, and even here the mountains descending 
further, I advise you that you will continue along this path; because in a few days of travel 
To the north of Carrock one encountered the door of a little-known path that passed through 
Black Forest which conducted cases in a straight line up the Lonely Mountain. 
"The goblins," said Beorn, "will not venture to cross the Great River. 
For many thousand to the north of Carrock, do not come to my house, it is 
well protected at night! - but they must rush quickly; because they are making their raid. 
Soon, they will cross the river above it and they will all go back to it." edges of the 
forest to shorten the path, and the horses run more quickly than the ponies. Even so, you 
are more sure to reach the north, even if it seems that you return more in search of its 
strengths; and I will tend to take 
a wider journey to get you. Come on, as quickly as you can! 
So now they ride in silence, galloping towards where the sun approaches. 
The terrain was grassy and smooth, with the dark mountains above it, and 
in the light, the line of the river with its trees fell more often than not. 
The sun had barely turned to the west when they left, and until late it remained like this. 
golden in the land that surrounds them. It was difficult to think about pursuing goblins 
without, and when they had so many thousands between them and Beorn 
At home, they began to sing and sing again and forget the dark path of the forest that extended in front of them. But at night, when the twilight arrived and... 
The peaks of the mountains shone against the fire, they raised a camp and
called a guard and the mayor slept quietly with dreams in those who had 
watched the howls of the bull fighters and the gritters of the duendes. 
Even so, the next morning was brilliant and beautiful again. There was a 
white cloud like the autumn covered the soil and the air was cold, but ready... 
The sun rose red for it and the clouds disappeared, and while the shadows 
were still shining a lot so that they would appear again. As they came together for more than two days, 
and during the whole of this time there was no more 
scattered grass and flowers and trees and, occasionally, small handfuls of red deer walking or 
walking in the shade in the middle of the day. Sometimes Bilbo would see the hearts of the eyes. 
who rose above the tall grass, and at first I thought that they were the dead. 
branches of the trees. This third time they were so anxious to follow along, because 
Beorn had told me that they would go to the door of the woods for the fourth day, and that they would follow each other after the night and at night the 
moon was lower. When the light faded, Bilbo looked towards the back, or towards 
the left, the shadowy shape of a great daredevil wandering down the same path. 
direction. But if you happened to mention it to Gandalf, the wizard would just say: 
'Silent!' No big deal! 
On the following day they left before the lover, even though the night was short. 
As ready as they were, they could go into the woods, trying to decide, so as to meet him. 
them, or hope for them like a black and dark wall before them. 
The earth began to ascend more and more, and it seemed to the hobbit that there was silence. 
they began to look for him. The players began to sing less. no more 
eyes; don't worry if you see rabbits. Late in the evening they tied up 
the trees of the Black Forest, and rested cases under the large 
branches attached to their external trees. Its trunks were huge and bare, 
its branches twisted, its trees were dark and wide. The question grew inside her. 
and he was arrested by the soil. 
- Well, here is the Black Forest! -I say Gandalf-. The largest of the forests of 
the northern world. I hope you enjoy it as you see it. Now you must send back 
"These excellent points that you have returned." 
The kids were inclined to ask for this, but the magician said 
they were stupid. "Beorn no one is as far as one seems to think, and we hold 
in every way, better full your promises, because it is a bad enemy. Mr. Baggins 
The eyes are more keen than yours, if you have not seen every night after the year a
great dare that accompanies us or that you have heard far away, on the moon, observing our 
camps. Not just to protect and guard you, but to supervise the 
other ponies. Beorn can be your friend, but he loves his animals like his 
children. Do not guess the kindness that they showed to leave you 
The mountain goats so light and so fast, nor would it happen to you... 
"Let's try to take them to the forest." 
"What happened to the horse?" said Thorin. "No mention send 
this message." 
"No, because I don't send it." 
"What happens with your promise?" 
-I'll take care of that. I don't want to give up the horse, I want to ride it! 
It occurred to him that Gandalf forced him to leave the edge of the abyss. 
of the Black Forest, and they were desperate. But nothing that they can say... 
change their opinion. 
"We talked about everything this time before, when we landed in the Carrock," I said. 
I say. "No need to discuss anything. I have, as you say, some urgent matters, 
I'm going to the top; and I'll take it late to bother them. We 
wanted to meet you before that end, and you can assume that not. 
It depends on your strength, your courage and your common feeling; I'm here... 
I'll send you to Mr. Baggins, I'll tell you that you have more 
than what you imagine, and I'll find 
out 
soon shipping after all. Think of the treasure at the end and forget about it... 
“The forest and the dragon, at least until morning for the morning!” 
When he got there the next morning, he continued by saying the 
same 
thing 
. although Bilbo thought that it was his sweetheart, 
he was desperately weighed and he didn't really like the idea of ​​walking for kilometers. 
and miles with all that to cook. 
- Don't worry! -I say Thorin-. Ready you will love it. Before... 
I hope that for a long time we all wish that our little ones were heavier, when the food starts to wear off. 
Then they left their ponies and turned their heads around 
the 
house. They trotted happily, seeming very happy to place their tails 
in the shade of the Black Forest. While they were moving away, Bilbo could have 
sworn that someone seemed to dare abandon the shade of the trees and walked away dragging their feet 
. 
Now Gandalf also left. Bilbo felt himself in the ground feeling very 
unhappy and longing to be joined by the wizard on his high horse. he had 
just been inside the woods after dinner (a very poor one), and it was 
as dark in the morning as it was at night, and very secret: “a kind of
"A feeling of observation and waiting," if I say the same to you. 
-Bye bye! -I told Gandalf to Thorin-. Goodbye to everyone! Now you're heading to the woods! 
- Yes, you have a good chance of 
going up to the Black Forest. no more, we can already... 
"We'll see you again." 
"So we really know what to happen?" The hobbit groaned. 
"Yes, you will!" I said to the magician, "You want to join me on the other side. 
You must continue or abandon your mission. And I don't go to... 
I allow you to retire now, Mr. Baggins. I warn you that you must think about 
—You must take care of all these things for me," 
I say, returning. -No! Don't ask here. 
Round?" 
"There, you want to take a couple of thousands from your path, 
to the north and the double to the south. But there was no need to find a safe path. 
There are no safe paths in this part of the world. Remember that you are here. 
You are on the edge of the rescue now and you expect all kinds of amusements wherever you go. 
Before you can go to Mirkwood in the North, you will be there. 
Between the slopes of the Gray Mountains, they are simply stiff with 
Goblins, hobgoblins, and orcs of the worst kind. Before you could... 
If you ride it over the surface, you will take it to the land of the Necromancer; 
And don't worry, Bilbo, you need to know the stories of this black guy. 
I do not advise you to look for places that pass through the dark 
tower! Follow the forest path, keep your heart, hope for the best and 
with a little courage, you can go up for a day and see the 
wide 
swamps that are below you, and above all, in the high country of the East, the 
solitary mountain where the white old Smaug lives, although I hope he is not 
"Waiting for you." 
"That's certainly very comforting," Thorin grunted. "Goodbye!" 
, don't come with us, it will be better if you go without talking more! 
-Goodbye then, and truly goodbye! - I said Gandalf, and turned on his head. 
he rode and rode towards the east. But I can't resist the temptation. 
to hold the last word. Before I lost all the moisture, I turned 
and raised his hands to his mouth and called them. They heard the voice. 
Come sadly: "Goodbye! Be good, take care and NO 
LEAVE THE ROAD! 
Then he took off at the gallop and quickly lost sight. "Oh, goodbye and see you." 
"Out!" growled the enos, even more angry because they were really 
tired of consternation to lose it. Now the most dangerous part of all begins.
the journey. Each one carries the heavy weight and the smell of water to the man. 
that was on the side, and they parted from the light that was shining over the 
outer lands and was submerged in the forest. 
FLIES AND SPIDERS 
They walked in single file. The entrance to the path was like a kind of arch. 
which leads to a dark tunnel formed by two large trees that are placed one against the other, 
separated from each other and separated by the lid and covered with liquids to support more than a 
few young people. The journey itself was long and serpentine. 
between the trunks. Ready the light in the door was like a little bright pin to the light. 
furthermore, the silence was so profound that his feet seemed to strike 
while all the trees leaned over them and shook them. 
Since their eyes were accustomed to the darkness, they could see a little more. 
on both sides with a dark green species of color. Again and again, a sweet 
ray of sun that I had the strength to pour through some opening between the holidays 
very arrives, and even more strength not to ask entangled in the branches wrapped in branches 
and branches embedded in small, delicate and brilliant, clasped before them. But 
this happened on rare occasions and is ready to complete. 
He has black squirrels in the forest. Despite Bilbo's keen curiosity... 
The eyes were accustomed to seeing things, they could be seen quickly. 
of the fireplace and climb out through the trunks of the trees. There are also strange noises, 
grunts, forceful noises and surprises in the woods and among the people 
who encounter piles endlessly in some places on the forest floor; but that's what made 
the noises that couldn't be seen. The most despicable things you saw were the 
canvases: dark and dense canvases with extraordinarily thick branches, slowly 
pulled from tree by tree, or wrapped in the lower branches on both sides 
of them. There was no one tending to the edge of the fireplace, but you know, because 
some magic kept it clear, or because another reason I couldn't divine it. 
Not much time passed before they began to hate the forest as deeply as they did before. 
He hated the goblins' tunnels, and they seemed to offer less hope. 
of any end. But you will know that they will continue and continue, much after being sick for a while. 
the sight of the sun and the sky, and they also feel the wind in your 
dear. There was no movement of air beneath the wood's roof, and 
it was eternally quiet, dark and suffocating. Even teenagers feel it, people who
are used to playing tunes often live for long periods without them. 
light of the sun but the hobbit, who enjoyed the teachers to make a home, but not 
even the days of reality, he felt that little by little he was being asphyxiated. 
The nights were the worst. The place was completely dark, not what one... 
call it total darkness, but in reality total darkness: so much black that it really couldn't be seen at all. 
Bilbo tried to wave his hand away, but I couldn't see it completely. 
everything. Good, it's not safe to say that you can't see anything: you 
can see eyes. They sleep all the time and turn around. 
to observe; and when it was Bilbo's turn, he saw stars in the 
darkness to his elder and, sometimes, looks of yellow, red or green eyes. 
I marveled at it from a certain distance and it slowly faded away and 
disappeared and slowly shone again in another place. And sometimes 
they shine from the branches just at the top of it; and that was 
more landscaping. But the eyes that at least enjoyed them were horribly dull. 
bulbous eyes. "Insect eyes", he thought, "not animal eyes, just that... 
"They are too big." 
Even though they didn't have much heat, they tried to fire the flames to keep watch 
at night, but they were ready for the kill. He seemed to attract hundreds and 
hundreds of eyes to his father, even the creatures, if they were, 
they were careful not to forget that their bodies would never appear in the small space of the 
call. Then again, I drew thousands of gray and black poles, 
Some cases as large as your hand, swinging and swinging at the red of your ears. 
They could not bear this, nor even the enormous bats, black ones like a cup hat; SW 
they abandoned their fires and felt like sleeping in the huge and distant place that night. 
darkness. 
All this continued during what seemed like an eternity to the hobbit; and they 
They always had hunger, since they were extremely cared for with their provisions. 
In this way, the days happened and the forest followed, seeming the same, 
He was filled with anxiety. The meal wouldn't last forever: after all, it was... 
I had to stop. They tried to shoot them at the squirrels, and... 
They squandered a lot of arrows before cutting them down the chimney. 
But when they tasted it, the flavor was horrible and they didn't disappoint anymore. 
squirrels. 
They also kept sitting, because they didn't have enough water, and all the 
time they didn't see any spring or stream. They were there when 
one day they came across a path blocked by a stream of water. Fast flow.
and strong but not very much along the way, and he was black, or 
they looked at him in the twilight. It was good that Beorn was warned against him, 
or they drank from her, whatever was his color, and they tore up a little of 
his vacated hair in his shore. As they are the things, just think about how they look. 
without soaking in its water. You have a 
Madeira bridge on the other side, but if you have money and fall, leaving only the round posts, look for 
the counter. 
Bilbo, leaning to the edge and looking forward, shouted: "Have a bottle." 
Against the other shore! Why can't I be on this side? 
"What distance do you think it is?" asked Thorin, may 
Bilbo keep his sharpest eyes between them. 
-Not much less. I don't think more than two yards. 
Sweet yards! I thought they would be at least three years old, but my eyes... 
I don't see as much as I did a few years ago. Anyway, two yards is the same. 
As good as a thousand. We can't skip it, and we can't even try to see it. 
"Can any of you throw a rope?" 
"What is this for? The boat will land safely, even if 
you can dock it, as long as you do." 
"I don't think I was attacked," said Bilbo, "although, as a matter of fact, I can't be sure. 
this light is low; but it seems to me how it was said on the shore, 
"that it is low just where the path below has the water." 
"Dori is the strongest, but Fili is the youngest, and he still has the best 
"Sight," said Thorin. "Come here, Fili, and look towards the boat, sir." 
Of what Baggins says is: 
Fili thought that he could; so that, after observing him for a long time, to get an idea, 
of the direction, the two took a swing at 
them, and at the very end they took one of the great iron 
hooks that they used to hold their backpacks to the runners of their 
menu Fili took this in his hand, he balanced it for a moment I then 
rolled it across the stream. 
Go to the water! "Don't read it enough!" said Bilbo, who was 
looking forward. "A couple of feet and you have left him falling on 
the boat. Try it again. I don't think the magic is strong enough to do damage. 
You, let's touch a little of the wet heart." 
Fili picked up the boy when the hub was withdrawn, doubtfully enough. 
I love it. Now I threw it with a lot of strength. 
- Don't worry! said Bilbo. I have wrapped it right in the woods. 
another side now. Pull it again with care.” After slowly pulling the hook 
, Bilbo said: "Keep it! He's in the bottle; We hope that...
“The boy will pick up.”
So it was. The lock was tense and Fili pulled in sheath. Kili listened to his help. 
And then Oin and Gloin. They pulled and pulled, and suddenly everyone fell. 
above their shoulders. Bilbo was careful, however, he grabbed the door, 
and with a stick of pole he caught the small black bottle that was reaching for him while running. 
on the other side of the stream. "Socorro!", he shouted, and Balin had just enough time to record 
the boat before it floated downstream. 
"At the end and at the end, it was done," I said, looking at the round painter who was 
still grasping it. "It was a good shot, many people; and how well... 
"Our body was stronger." 
-Which one will cross first? - Bilbo asked. 
-I have it -I say Thorin-, and you will come with me, and Fili and Balin. 
This is all that the boat can lift once again. After that, Kili and Oin and 
Gloin and Dori; then Ori and Nori, Bifur and Bofur; and finally Dwalin and 
“Bombur.” 
"I'm always last and I don't like it," Bombur said. " 
Today it's someone else's turn." 
"You shouldn't be so fat. The way you are, you should be wearing the latest and 
the lightest ship. Don't start complaining about the orders or anything bad. 
It's going to happen to you. 
"There are no oars. 
" How are you going to push the boat back 
to 
sea 
? 
" pull the 
rope that is stuck in a tree on the other side. One of the others must hold 
Hold onto the hook we used at the beginning, and when we're safely on the other side, 
You can hook it up and you can retract the boat.” 
In this way, soon everyone was on the other side, safe, on the other side of the enchanted river. 
stream. Dwalin had just come out with the rope wrapped around his arm and 
Bombur (still complaining) was preparing to follow him, when something bad happened. 
It happened. A sound of hooves was heard on the road. Outside 
The gloom suddenly appeared: the figure of a deer in flight. It charged at the 
He knocked down dwarves, then prepared for a jump. High 
He jumped and cleared the water with a powerful leap. But he didn't reach the 
On the other side, safe. Thorin was the only one who had remained standing, and his
Ingenuity. As soon as they disembarked, he drew his bow and placed an arrow in 
In case any hidden guardian of the ship appeared, he felt a swift and 
He fired confidently at the leaping beast. Upon reaching the other side, he stumbled. 
Shadows enveloped him, but they quickly heard the sound of hooves. 
to hesitate and then stand still. 
However, before they could shout in praise of the shot, a terrible groan was heard. 
from Bilbo put all thoughts of venison out of their minds. "Bombur has 
fallen in! Bombur is drowning!" I cried. It was only too true. 
had only one foot on the ground when the heart bore down on him, and sprang 
over him. He had stumbled, thrusting the boat away from the bank, and 
then toppled back into the dark water, his hands slipping off the slimy 
roots at the edge, while the boat slowly spanned off and disappeared. 
They could still see his hood above the water when they ran to the 
bank. Quickly, they flung a rope with a hook towards him. His hand caught 
it, and they pulled him to the shore. He was drained from hair to boots, 
of course, but that wasn't the worst. When they laid him on the bank he 
was already fast asleep, with one hand clutching the rope so tightly that they 
could not get it from his grasp; and fast asleep he remained in spite of all 
they could do. 
They were still standing over him, curing their ill luck, and Bombur's 
clumsiness, and lamenting the loss of the boat which made it impossible 
for them to go back and look for the heart, when they became aware of the 
dim blowing of horns in the wood and the sound of dogs baying far off. 
Then they all fell silent; and as they sat it seemed they could hear the 
noise of a great hunt going by to the north of the path, although they saw no 
sign of it. 
There they sat for a long while and did not dare to make a move. 
Bombur slept on with a smile on his fat face, as if he no longer cared for 
all the troubles that vexed them. Suddenly on the path ahead appeared 
some white deer, a hind and fawns as snowy white as the heart had been 
dark. They glimmered in the shadows. Before Thorin could cry out three 
of the dwarves had jumped to their feet and loosened off arrows from their 
bows. None seemed to find their mark. The deer turned and vanished in the 
trees as silently as they had come, and in vain the dwarves shot their 
arrows after them. 
"Stop! stop!" shouted Thorin; but it was too late, the excited dwarves 
had wasted their last arrows, and now the bows that Beorn had given them 
were useless.
They were a gloomy party that night, and the gloom gathered even 
deeper into them in the following days. They had crossed the enchanted 
stream; but beyond it the path seemed to struggle on just as before, and in 
the forest they could see no change. Yet if they had known more about it 
and considered the meaning of the hunt and the white deer that had 
appeared upon their path, they would have known that they were at last 
drawing towards the eastern edge, and would soon have come, if they 
could have kept up their courage and their hope, to thinner trees and places 
where the sunlight came again. 
But they did not know this, and they were burdened with the heavy 
body of Bombur, which they had to carry along with them as best they 
could, taking the wearisome task in turns of four each while the others 
shared their packs. If these had not become all too light in the last few 
days, they would never have managed it; but a slumbering and smiling 
Bombur was a poor exchange for packs filled with food however heavy. in 
a few days a time came when there was practically nothing left to eat or to 
drink. Nothing whole they could see growing in the wood, only 
mushrooms and herbs with pale leaves and unpleasant smell. 
About four days from the enchanted stream they came to a part where 
most of the trees were bees. They were at first inclined to be cheered 
by the change, for here there was no undergrowth and the shadow was not 
so deep. There was a greenish light about them, and in places they could 
see some distance to either side of the path. Yet the light only showed 
them endless lines of straight gray trunks like the pillars of some huge 
twilight hall There was a breath of air and a noise of wind, but it had a sad 
sound. A few leaves came rustling down to remind them that outside 
autumn was coming on. Their feet ruffled among the dead leaves of 
countless other autumns that drifted over the banks of the path from the 
deep red carpets of the forest. 
Still Bombur slept and they grew very weary. At times they heard 
disturbing laughter. Sometimes there was singing in the distance too. The 
laughter was the laughter of fair voices not of goblins, and the singing was 
beautiful, but it sounded strange and strange, and they were not comfortable, 
rather they hurried on from those parts with what strength they had left. 
Two days later they found their path going downwards, and before long 
they were in a valley filled almost entirely with a mighty growth of oaks.
"Is there no end to this accused forest?" said Thorin. "Somebody must 
climb a tree and see if he can get his head above the roof and have a 
round look. The only way is to choose the tallest tree that overhangs the path." 
Of course "somebody" meant Bilbo. They chose him, because to be of 
any use the climber must get his head above the topmost leaves, and so he 
must be light enough for the highest and slenderest branches to bear him. 
Poor Mr. Baggins had never had much practice in climbing trees, but they 
hoisted him up into the lowest branches of an enormous oak that grew 
right out into the path, and up he had to go as best he could. I have pushed his 
way through the tangled twigs with many a slap in the eye; he was greened 
and grimed from the old bark of the greater boughs; more than eleven I have 
slipped and caught myself just in time; and at last, after a terrible 
struggle in a difficult place where there seemed to be inconvenient 
branches at all, he got near the top. All the time he was wondering whether 
there were spiders in the tree, and how he was going to get down again 
(except by falling). 
In the end he poked his head above the roof of leaves, and then he 
found spiders all right. But they were only small ones of ordinary size, and 
they were after the butterflies. Bilbo's eyes were almost blinded by the 
light. He could hear the dwarves shouting up to him from far below, but he 
could not answer, only hold on and blink. The sun was shining brilliantly, 
and it was a long while before he could bear it. When he could, he saw all 
round him a sea of ​​dark green, ruffled here and there by the breeze; and 
there were everywhere hundreds of butterflies. I expect they were a kind of 
"purple emperor", a butterfly that loves the tops of oak-woods, but these 
were not purple at all, they were a dark dark velvety black without any 
markings to be seen. 
He looked at the "black emperors" for a long time, and enjoyed the feeling 
of the breeze in his hair and on his face; but at length the cries of the 
dwarves, who were now simply stamping with impatience down below, 
reminded him of his real business. It was no good. Gaze as much as I 
could, he could see no end to the trees and the leaves in any direction. His 
heart, that had been lightened by the sight of the sun and the feel of the 
wind, sank back into his toes: there was no food to go back down below. 
Actually, as I have told you, they were not far off the edge of the forest;
and if Bilbo had the sense to see it, the tree that he had climbed, 
Although it was tall in itself, it was standing near the bottom of a wide valley, 
so that from its top the trees seemed to swell up all round like the edges of 
a great bowl, and he could not expect to see how far the forest lasted. Still 
he did not see this, and he climbed down full of despair. I got to the 
bottom again at last, scratched, hot, and miserable, and he could not see 
anything in the gloom below when he got there. His report soon made the 
others as miserable as he was. 
"The forest goes on for ever and ever and ever in all directions! 
Whatever shall we do? And what is the use of sending a hobbit!" they 
he cried, as if it was his fault. They didn't care about the 
butterflies, and were only made more angry when he told them of the 
beautiful breeze, which they were too heavy to climb up and feel. 
That night they tied up their very last scraps and crumbs of food; and next 
morning when they woke up the first thing they noticed was that they were 
still gnawingly hungry, and the next thing was that it was raining and that 
here and there the drip of it was dropping heavily on the forest floor. That 
only reminded them that they were also patchy thirsty, without doing 
anything to relieve them: you cannot quench a terrible thirst by standing 
under giant oaks and waiting for a chance drip to fall on your tongue. The 
only scrap of comfort there was came unexpectedly from Bombur. 
He woke up suddenly and sat up scratching his head. He couldn't 
make out where he was at all, nor why he felt so hungry; for he had 
forgotten everything that had happened since they started their journey 
that May morning long ago. The last thing that I remembered was the 
party at the hobbit's house, and they had great difficulty in making him 
believe their tale of all the many adventures they had had since. 
When I heard that there was nothing to eat, he sat down and wept, for 
he felt very weak and wobbly in his legs. "Why did I ever wake up!" I have 
cried. "I was having such beautiful dreams. I dreamed I was walking in a 
forest rather like this one, only lit with torches on the trees and lamps 
swinging from the branches and fires burning on the ground; and there it was 
a great feast going on, going on for ever. A woodland king was there with a 
crown of leaves, and there was a merry singing, and I could not count or 
describe the things there were to eat and drink." 
"You need not try," said Thorin. "In fact if you can't talk about
something else, you had better be silent. We are quite annoying enough 
with you as it is. If you hadn't woken up, we should have left you to your 
idiotic dreams in the forest; you are no joke to carry even after weeks of 
short commons." 
There was nothing now to be done but to tighten the belts round their 
empty stomachs, and hoist their empty sacks and packs, and trudge along 
the track without any great hope of ever getting to the end before they lay 
down and died of starvation. This they did all that day, going very slowly 
and wearily; while Bombur kept on wailing that his legs would not carry 
him and that he wanted 
to lie down and sleep. they said. "Let your legs take their share, we have 
carried you far enough." 
All the same he suddenly refused to go a step further and flung himself 
into the soil. "Continue, if necessary," I said. "I'll ask you here." 
and sleep and dream with comfort, if I cannot get it any other way. I never hope... 
"Wake up again." 
At this very moment Balin, who was a little more advanced, shouted: 
"What was that?" It seemed to me that there was a little bit of light in the woods. 
Everyone looked at it and, to the eyes, to the look, they saw a red ray. 
shine in the darkness Then another and another jumped to the side. including 
Bombur stood up and took notice, no matter whether they were trolls or... 
elves The light was in front of him and the light of the chimney, and 
when they finally reached their level, it seemed evident that the lights and 
fires were burning near the trees, but at a great distance from their route. 
"It seems that my dreams are coming true," Bombur gasped and replied. 
behind. I would like to run directly into the forest through the lights. 
But the most recent records have been neglected as well as the advertisements of the magician and 
Beorn. 
"Nothing would serve a feast if we would not return alive," he said. 
Thorin. 
"But without a party, in all ways we won't survive much longer," I say. 
Bombur and Bilbo learned to read with him. They will discuss it respectfully. 
of day and time for a long time, until they finally agreed, 
send a pair of atones so that they can carefully look at the lights and discover more on 
them. But then they couldn't ask themselves carefully about who they should be sent to: they seemed 
anxious to run the risk of getting lost and would never meet their friends again. 
At the end, weighing the advertisements, he decided, because Bombur
continued by describing all the good things that came, following 
his dream, in the forest festival; so that they all left the path and launched themselves into 
the woods together. 
After they got up and went away to a lot, they looked at their elder. 
the trunks and the view made it clear where some trees were and the 
ground was clear. There were many people there, people of elven appearance, all 
dressed in green and brown and seen above the closed rings of the tall trees in 
a great circle. There was a fire in the middle of them and there were torches. 
tied to some of the red trees; but the view is more splendid than all: 
They are sitting, drinking and relaxing happily. 
The color of the whole meats was so enchanting that, without waiting to 
be consulted between them, each one of them rose up and rushed forward. 
The ring with the only idea of ​​​​being for something. As soon as 
he entered the light the first time, all the lights went off as if by magic. 
Some passed the fire and disappeared in the midst of brilliant and 
sparks disappeared. They are lost in completely dark darkness and no one can 
even meet us, at least not for a long time. Then make mistakes 
Frankly in the twilight, climbing over trunks, choking against trees and 
shouting and calling until they have to distract everyone in the forest. 
thousands, to end up they joined in a bulk and count 
the same ones by the touch. For example, above all, they have forgotten completely... 
In which direction the path was, and all of them were irremediably lost, at least until 
today. 
There was nothing more to do than settle in to spend the night there. 
they were; no one would ever have to look for food remains on the ground to 
help them separate again. But they didn't stay together for a long time, and 
Bilbo was just trying to catch his eye when Dori, who was to look at him, 
First, said in a loud and whispering voice: 
"The lights are turning to shine there, and there are more than 
"each one of them." 
They all jumped. There, indeed, not many people had decades of 
bright lights, and they heard their voices and laughter with full clarity. 
If they slowly crawled towards them, in a single file, one falls touching the sword. 
that's what it was. When they approached, Thorin said: "Don't worry about this again." 
Now! That nobody was moving out of sight until I tell you. Send only to Mr. Baggins. 
first to talk to him. I won't let them go—('What are they?') 
'Of them?', thought Bilbo), and in all ways I hope they won't have anything.
"Unpleasant for him." 
When they went to the edge of the circle of lights they pumped Bilbo. 
Suddenly, from behind. Before there was time to put the ring on, I stopped. 
I have advanced to the glare of the fire and the torches. No need for anything. All the lights went 
up again and there was total darkness. 
If before it cost you to recover, now it is much worse. 
This day. And they simply couldn't meet the hobbit. Every time... 
They counted that there were only three. They shouted and called: "Bilbo 
Baggins! Hobbit! Damned hobbit! Hello! Hobbit, damn you! Where? 
"Is that you?" and other things for the style, but no answer. 
They were losing hope when Dori left with him. 
Pure kindness. In the darkness he thought he thought it was a log and found it 
. The curly hobbit was deeply asleep. I just need to protect him a lot to discourage him. 
He, and when he despaired, he was not at all happy. 
"I was having a very beautiful dream," if I asked, "all about having a 
"most beautiful dinner." 
"If he has an idea like Bombur. 
The dinners that follow are no surprise. 
I 
am the best that can be achieved in this place," he murmured 
. Later, 
when the night should be getting older, Kili, who was observing things, 
He came and I looked forward to everything again, saying: 
"There is a regular shine of light that has not begun many lights, hundreds of 
Torches and many fires must go out suddenly and by art of magic. And 
listen to the songs and the harps!" 
After going back and learning for a moment, they realized that they could not resist 
the 
desire to try and get more help 
bigger and more magnificent than before; The head of a large line of 
festivals was seen in front of a king of the forest with a crown of leaves on his golden hair, 
as Bombur described the figure in his dream. The elf 
People passed bowls from hand to hand through the fires, and some 
They were playing the harp and many sang. The shiny hair was braided with 
flowers; green and white gems shine on their necks and belts; and 
Your words and songs are full of joy. Strong, clear and fair. 
Those were the songs, and Thorin appeared in the middle of them. 
A sepulchral silence fell in the middle of a word. All the light shines. The fires...
It jumped up in black smoke. Ashes and embers were in the eyes of the 
wine, and the forest began to be filled with its clamor and its grit. 
Bilbo put himself running in circles (as he thought) and 
calling and calling: "Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, Gloin, Fili, Kili, Bombur, Bifur, 
Bofur, Dwalin, Balin, Thorin Shield of Oak", while the people who could not see 
he felt that all his elders were doing the same (with an occasional "Bilbo!"). 
But the screams of the men were humbled even more weakly and feebly, and 
even after a certain moment they seemed to change to gritty and weak ones. 
Ayuda in the distance, all the noise finally died immediately, and it was loved 
alone in complete silence and darkness. 
It was one of his most miserable moments. But he was soon reconciled. 
Keep in mind that there is no point in trying to do anything as long as the day is filled with 
little light, and it is quite useless to go around giving yourself troubles and worrying about 
not having the hope that some dream will revive you. As I felt with my 
return to a tree, and not for the last time I can think about the 
Hobbit's dream with his beautiful pans. He was absorbed in his thoughts about the bacon. 
and toast and stir and stir when you feel something is touching it. 
Just like a strong and sticky arm was held against his unsteady hand, and when 
he attempted to move he discovered that his bones were twisted into the same 
thing, so that when he stood up he fell. 
Once the great spider, which had been eating it while sleeping, 
rose from it and headed towards it. Only the thing could happen. 
Oh, but you could feel their hairy bones as you tried to train them on the abominable 
hills that surround them. It was a lesson that helped me recover the common feeling. 
With the weather. Ready you can't move at all. As it was, I had 
He desperately tried to free himself. He hits the creature with his hands. 
-I was trying to wrap it up to keep it warm, as small spiders do away... 
flies-until I recorded it on the sword and the bag. Once the spider 
jumps up again and you have the time to lift the pins. After that, I had to 
turn to attack. The spider was evidently not accustomed to things that would bring such 
stings to its ribs, or if it had become aroused more quickly. Bilbo reached for 
the attack before it could disappear and hit the sword just in his eyes. 
Then he turned the place and jumped and danced and extended his legs in horrible movements. 
Tyrones, wait until I kill him with another coup; and then there is 
no record for a long time.
He had the usual faint gray light of the forest day on his father when... 
I have recognized the feeling. The spider was dead on his side, and the blade of his sword 
was missing from the black. In any case, the mating of the giant spider, completely alone 
in the darkness without the help of the magician or the birds or 
any other person, made a great difference to Mr. Baggins. I felt like a different 
person, and was much more fierce and daring to consider keeping the stomach empty, as he 
He wiped his sword in his grass and looked at it in his cowherd. 
"I'll give you a name", I tell her, "and I'll call you Sting". 
After that you are willing to explore. The forest was dark and silent, but 
obviously, the first one wanted to look for his friends, who probably wouldn't be there. 
They will stay much longer, except that the elves will be held captive (or even worse). 
things). Bilbo felt that it was not safe to cry out and asked himself for a long time. 
Wondering in which direction the fireplace will come and in which direction it should go. 
I'll start by looking for dwarfs. 
-Oh! Why don't we record Beorn's council and Gandalf's council? - I say. 
I have complained. "Where we are now! Here we are! We heard our words: 
"It's horrible to be alone." At 
the 
end, I had the most precise guess possible about the direction from which I was about to stop. (he was born 
with a good part of it) he arrived more or less correctly, as I decided, 
he advanced 
ace 
carefully as I could begin. That's why... 
The spiders didn't see him, they didn't hear him eat. 
He had carefully walked a certain distance when he noticed a place 
of 
dense black shadow in front of him, like 
a middle 
ground 
that would never be 
forgotten observed 
a group of them for some time, and then in the silence and stillness of the 
land he knew what these disgusting creatures were talking about among them. 
other. His voices were a kind of cruel and sad, but he could 
hear a lot of the words he said. I'm talking about the 
words! 
"It was a tough game, but it was worth it," one said. "That thick and unpleasant
They have to keep skin, I'm sure, but only that there is good juice inside.” 
"Yes, it will be a good taste when I grow up a little," I said again. 
"No more time spent," I said a third time. "There are as many fat people as they seem." 
Could be. I suppose he hasn't enjoyed it very well lately. " 
I remember them by 
a crime. 
" I... 
Let's have a moment playing. Now let's turn yes, I'll tell you, after... 
A wonderful dream. I'll show you. 
With this, one of the giant spiders ran along the edge of a tree until it was brought to a table. 
Bundles plucking in a row of a tall branch. Bilbo I was horrified, now 
that I first noticed them when I grasped the shadows, to see a 
small piece rising from the lower part of some of the packages, or here 
and 
there the tip of a nostril, or a little bit of beard or cap spider: "It's the little old Bombur, 
now that yes", thought Bilbo, and bit down hard on the nostril that surprised him. 
If he uttered a sharp cry inside, and a heel of the foot rose and struck directly at the spider. 
and hard. Everyone had life in Bombur. It had a sound like the 
paste of a soft ball and the angry spider fell from the branch, 
only by trapping it with its own hair just in time. 
The rest of them came back. "You were absolutely right," they said, "the flesh is alive." 
And kicking! 
"Ready to pick up with this", the angry spider sat down while turning to three. 
on the branch. 
Bilbo saw that he had arrived at the moment when he had to do something. I 
could not get close to the brutes and could not hold anything with which to shoot; but looking 
at the sky that in that place there were many stones pulled into it that 
seemed to be a small one now rolling with it. Bilbo had a good enough tip. 
with a stone, and it didn't take long to find a good and thin mold in the shape of an egg. 
one that can be adjusted comfortably by hand. As a child, just practice throwing stones. 
things, until the cones and the squirrels, and including the birds, are separated from their fireplace. 
Quick as a ray you can see it crouch; and even as an adult, he would still 
spend most of his time playing at the table, throwing darts, playing with variety, 
bowling, skittles and other quiet games of aiming and throwing. 
After all, you could do a lot of things, just pick up the hummus rings and ask. 
Certainties and cooking,I don't have time to count them. No
time now. As soon as he picked up the stones, the spider was tied to Bombur, 
and he was ready to die. At this moment Bilbo launched. the stone 
hit the spider on the head and fell unconscious from the tree. 
stick to the ground, with all your rolled legs. 
The next stone passed by leaping across a large network, breaking its bones, 
and removing the spider that was in the middle, wham!, dead. After this 
I've seen a lot of worms in the colony of spiders and they'll forget about the 
dwarfs for a while, I assure you. They couldn't see Bilbo, but they could 
have a good guess as to where the stones came from. Ace 
Quickly as a ray, they ran and balanced the hobbit. 
Launching on the wide poles in all directions, until the air seemed full of 
waving traps. 
Bilbo, however, ready to go out to another place. The idea arose 
that he would be led to the furious spiders every time as soon as 
possible; to make them feel curious, excited and happy all the time. 
When one of the five had ventured to the place where he had previously been, 
he turned more stones at those others who had been held by him; 
Then, dancing among the trees, began to sing a song to anger him and 
draw him to everyone, and also stop the dwarfs from listening to his voice. 
This is what he sang: 
Old, fat spider turning in a tree! 
The old fat spider cannot be a worm! 
 Attercop! Attercop! 
 Don't you hate it? 
Are you tired of turning and are you looking for me? 
Old Tomnoddy, all a big body, 
Old Tomnoddy can't atone for me! 
 Attercop! Attercop! 
 You're falling! 
Don't worry about me on your tree! 
The quiz isn't very good, but you have to remember that I wanted to... 
invent it myself, in a very inconvenient moment. Hi I know what 
I'm asking for in any way. As I sang, I threw more stones and patted. 
Practically all the grapes of the place will wine in the same place: some will be planted in the ground. 
As a result, others run through the branches, swing from tree to tree or throw 
new arrows across the dark spaces. They took to the road much more quickly than 
they had hoped. They were terribly bored. Apart from the stones 
No one has tasted them that calls them Attercop, and Tomnoddy, for example, it is. 
Insulting anyone. 
Bilbo found a new place, but many of the spiders were still wet. 
Now they head to different clear spots where they live and are occupied. 
weaving canvases across all spaces between tree trunks. well ready
the hobbit will be caught in a rush looking for his elder, that's what 
the spiders thought of at least. From the foot now in the middle of the house and 
Bilbo armed himself with courage and began a new song: 
Lazy wolf and crazy cob 
They are weaving networks to enroll me. 
I'm much sweeter than other meats, 
But you can't meet me again! 
Here I am, a little misguided fly; 
Here's good and sweet. 
You can't grab me, no matter how you try, 
in your local area. 
With this he turned and discovered that the last space between the tall trees 
had been closed with a red, but fortunately it was not a properly named red, only a large 
branch of spider of double size running quickly across and forward 
from trunk to trunk. He took out a small sword. I have shortened the hills for 
the pedestrians and was singing. 
The spiders put the sword, although I don't suppose they would surpass what it was. 
It was, and immediately everyone came running towards the hobbit. 
through the soil and the branches, the hairy potatoes move, the tongs and the spinners 
snapping the teeth, with the disorbitant eyes, filled with foam and rages. They followed him to the 
forest until Bilbo took as many steps as he saw them. So, more silently than a mouse 
He turned to steal. 
I knew it would last a little while before the spiders would get disgusted. 
and they returned to their trees where the wines were harvested. Even so 
, all you have to do is save them. The bulk of the work was removed. 
To the wide branch where the bulbs hang. I don't think it's... 
I've got it right now, I've got a no-brainer, I've got the upper hand to leave a corner by grasping it. 
below; with your help, even if you hold them by the hand and give them, he climbed. 
he arrived, only to encounter a slow and wicked old spider of a gord body that had remained 
behind to protect the prisoners, and had been occupied by peeling them to see 
that he was the most juicy one to eat. I had thought about starting the party while the 
others were away, but Mr. Baggins had taken the lead, and before that the spider... 
I knew what was passing by, I felt on the sting and the dead rod of the branch. 
Bilbo's next task was to free a man. What should we do? If you cut the... 
rope who grabbed it, the dedicated would be the risk of a coup on the ground. 
enough ground below. Twisting them across the branch (so that all 
the little ones are swinging and swinging like ripe fruits) tied them to the first package.
"Fili or Kili", I thought at the tip of a blue cap that had just arrived 
. "The most probable thing is that it is Fili," he thought at the tip of a wide nostril rising above 
the sinuous hills. He managed, leaning, cut off the major part of the strong hills. 
sticky wires that hit him and then, in fact, with a potato 
and I sucked up a piece of which the majority of the threads stopped. I fear that Bilbo will actually return. 
The image of him hugging his arms and stiff bones while swinging over the lower arm of his axles, like one of those amusing games that swing on a 
wire. 
In one way or another, Fili took it to the branch and then hid it. 
The best thing was to help the hobbit, even if he felt very sick and weak from 
the poison of the spider, and to be held like this all night and on the following day 
he would take turns and turns breathing only through the nostril. I gave her some 
simple words that were the color of his eyes and eyes, and as for the beard, 
I wanted to cut off the majority of it. Good, between the two they started to pull first. 
one year and another and they shortened him to free him. None of them were better 
than Fili, and some of them were worse. Some people can barely 
breathe at all (wide nostrils are sometimes useful, often?) and some people tend 
to feel more welcome. 
In this way they returned to Kili, Bifur, Bofur, Dori and Nori. Poor old time. 
The bomb was so exhausted, it was the best and had been constantly... 
peeled and punctured—which simply broke off the branch and fell on 
the ground, fortunately on the trees, and was left there. But they still asked 
Enanos for five days, grasping the end of the branch when the spiders began to 
fly, with less anger than ever before. 
Bilbo was immediately at the end of the branch closest to the trunk of the tree. 
and I return to those who were angry. He had let go of the ring when 
he returned to Fili and forgot to put it on himself again, so that now everyone began to 
stutter and shout: 
"Now we're with you, little disgusting creature!" We will love you and we will love you. 
Your bones and skin picking from a tree. Phew! It has a twist, right? Good, 
we'll grab it in all ways and then we'll stick it underneath for a while. 
"One day or two." 
As this happened, the other half-year-olds were working on the rest of 
the guards, and cutting the hills with their knives. Ready everything will be 
free, although it was not clear why it would happen after that. The spiders could have
caught them with sufficient ease the previous night, but that had been the case until they were told 
in the darkness. Now it seems like a horrible battle will unfold. 
Suddenly, Bilbo was aware that some of the spiders had reunited with the old red father... 
Bombur was on the ground, they had fed him again and they were arresting him. 
do God, I shouted and attacked the spiders that were killing me. She 
quickly gave in, swayed and dropped the tree just in the 
middle of those who were in the ground. On the small sword there was something new in the 
shape of a pick for them. How did you move from one side to the other! I shone with happiness while 
I was waiting. The middle part of the day was as if they were sitting before the rest of the day was retired and 
They sent the bomb to Bilbo. 
- Come down! Get down! he shouted to the young men who were in the branch. 
"Don't ask me to come and let me catch you!" Because there are spiders swarming everywhere. 
the old trees grow on the branches at the top of the stems of 
the grapes. 
The dwarfs were lowered by running, jumped or left at eleven, eleven in total. 
lots, the majority very fearful and with little use of the pins. There they were 
at the end, where they were counting on the little Bombur, who was supported 
on both sides by the first Bifur and his brother Bofur; and Bilbo was 
dancing and shaking his tail; and hundreds of bored spiders were 
gazing at them with open eyes, at their elder and from there he arrived. It seems quite desperate. 
Then the battle began. Some enos had knives and others... 
poles, and all of them could move the stones; and Bilbo had his elven dagger. 
Once and again the spiders were broken off and many of them were... 
murdered. But it couldn't last very long. Bilbo was exhaustive cases; Only 
four of them could keep their signatures and soon everyone would be 
dominated by the canned flies. The spiders began to 
They weave their nets to their elder again, from tree to tree. 
At the end, Bilbo didn't know any plan except to stop getting the kids. 
The secret of your ring. I complained about it enough, but it wasn't possible. 
I help. 
"I'm going to disappear," I say. "I'll attract spiders if I can." 
they can and we must remain united and advance in the right direction. 
On the other hand, the path is more or less the place where we travel for the last time. 
"the elven fires". 
It was difficult to understand them, with their tidal heads, 
and the grit, and the shots with poles and the throwing of stones; but
finally, Bilbo felt that he could no longer hope: the spiders are withdrawing their 
circle every time he tries. Suddenly I put the ring on and, for a big surprise, 
for the shadow of the elfins, it disappeared. 
Ready to hear the sound of "Lazy Lob" and "Attercop" from 
the right side of the trees. This bothered the spiders a lot. If they stopped. 
advancing, and some were in the direction of the voice. "Attercop" 
They were so stressed that they lost their juice. Then Balin, who had grasped 
Bilbo's plan, better than the rest, led an attack. The beans are pinned. 
they joined in a nude, and sending a shower of stones rolling to the spiders 
in the left, and crossed the circle. Let go of them now the grits 
and suddenly the song stopped. 
Desperately hoping that Bilbo would no longer be caught, the horns were released 
but not fast enough. They are sick and tired, and they cannot 
be much better than a chest and a wobble, although many of the spiders 
follow them in search. Sometimes when they wanted to turn and fight against the 
creatures that were chasing them; and you have a few spiders in the 
trees on top of them and rolling them down on the large attached hills. 
These things were put in sufficient detail once again, when suddenly Bilbo reappeared. 
and I carried against the shadowed trees unexpectedly from one side. 
Let's go! Let's go! -shout-. I am loaded with sting! 
And he did it. He threw it from one side to the other, cutting off the branches of the spider, cutting off its pinnacles and pinning down its gorgeous bodies as they reached for each other. 
wanted search. The spiders were swollen with rage, and crackled and foamed, and 
they hissed horrible curses; but they were once mortally afraid of Sting, 
and didn't bother to try much until he had recovered. As a result, 
the flu was slow but constant. It was a terrible experience. 
I shop, and I seem to take hours. But at the end, just when Bilbo felt that 
I couldn't raise my hand or even a single blow anymore, the troubles suddenly came their way. 
I took him away and no longer followed him, until he returned disappointed to his dark house. 
colony. 
The horns noticed that they were tied to the edge of a ring. 
where the elven firemen came from. It was one of the things they saw, 
the previous night, they couldn't say it. But it seems like some good magic... 
was held in these places, which was not what the spiders enjoyed. In any case, here 
the light was greener and the branches less expensive and distressing, and they had 
an opportunity to rest and breathe.
There they wanted a piece, pondering and panting. But very ready... 
They began to ask twelve questions. They should keep the issue of disappearance all the time. 
They explained it carefully and the discovery of the ring interested them a lot. 
who for a while forgot their own problems. Balin in particular insisted 
on keeping the story of Gollum, with certainty and everything, told again, with the 
ring in its appropriate place. But after a while the light started to fail, and then 
other questions were asked. Where was this and what was on the fireplace? 
Where did you get food? Why should I continue? These 
questions were asked one time or another, and it was from the little Bilbo who 
They seemed to hope to get the answers. What can be seen is that 
they have changed their opinion a lot about Mr. Baggins and have begun 
to have a great deal of respect for him (as Gandalf said he would tend to). That is, 
I really hope that he will think of some wonderful plan to help me. 
them, and they don't limit themselves to complain. They knew very well that 
soon everyone would die, if they were not dead for the hobbit; and I 
liked them many times. Some of them stood up and gave her a bow. 
the soil of the former, although it deteriorates due to exhaustion and cannot 
recover for a while. Knowing the truth about the 
lack of complete diminution of the opinion about Bilbo, you can see that he 
had something of genius, also of wisdom and a magic ring, and the three are very 
useful poses. Indeed, they praised him so much that Bilbo began to 
feel that he really had something like an adventurer's courage in the aftermath of... 
all, even if he felt much more courage yet, he would soon be able to 
come back again. 
But it didn't have anything, absolutely nothing; and none of them were in gone conditions. 
and look for anything, or look for the lost path. The lost path! No 
other idea came to Bilbo's head. It was simply felt when aiming at the front. 
from it to the endless trees; and after one hour everyone turned to ask themselves in silence. Everyone 
except Balin. Much after the others stopped talking and closed their eyes, 
he continued to murmur and looked back to himself. 
Gollum! Come on, that's sweet! What was it like if I got out? now 
, forks! So you stop carefully, Mr. Baggins? Buttons for all parts. 
In the shadows! The goodness of Bilbo... Bilbo... Bilbo... bo... bo... bo... And then he... 
I slept and had absolute silence during a good night. 
Suddenly, Dwalin opened an eye and looked at his father.
"Where is Thorin?" he asked. 
It was a terrible shock. Of course there were only three. 
The sweet dwarfs and the hobbit. Where was Thorin? If you ask. 
What evil fate overtook her, magic or dark monsters? And if they are extreme while 
they are lost in the forest. There they were falling one by one in 
an uncomfortable dream full of weights, thinking that later they would turn black. 
night; and there we must leave them for the moment, leave ourselves sick and ready to 
establish the guards or take turns to keep watch. 
Thorin was captured much more quickly than they were. Do you remember? 
Did Bilbo sleep like a log when he entered a circle of light? 
The next time it was Thorin who took a step forward, and when the lights alighted 
I came like an enchanted stone. All the noise of the dwarfs was lost at 
night, their scream when the spiders caught them and tied them, and all 
the sounds of the following day's fight had passed unadvertised to them. Eleven 
The elves of the forest looked after him, they tied him and took him away. 
Those who celebrated were elves of the forest, above all. These are not evil. 
people. There is a defect and the disappointment of strangers. Although their magic was 
fierce, even on those days they were cautious. They differed from the High 
Elves of the West, and they were hairier and less wise. For the majority of 
them (together with their relatives dispersed on the hills and mountains) 
They were descendants of the ancient tribes who were never in Faerie in the 
West. There were the elves of the light, the elves of the depths and the sea elves. 
she lived for centuries and became more beautiful, more knowledgeable and more erudite, and invented 
her magic and cunning in the creation of beautiful and 
marvelous things, before some people would return to the World too. in 
the same world the Elves of the Forest were discouraged in the twilight of our Sun and Moon, 
but they loved the stars more; and they wander through the great forests that grow 
high up in the lands that are now lost. They live with greater frequency within the limits of the 
forests, which can sometimes escape to fall, or to climb and run 
over the open lands in the light of the moon or the stars; and after the arrival of the men, 
they stop getting up each time more often at dusk and at night. All the elves 
They were there and they always were, and they were good people. 
In a large cave with thousands of people within the limits of the Black Forest, at the very end of this 
All lived in this greatest time. In front of the enormous doors of
the forest there rose a stream that flowed inside. 
the seas at the foot of the high wooded lands. This great cave, from 
which innumerable little ones opened on all sides, snaked through 
the underground and took many passages and large halls; but it was more luminous and 
more healthy than any abode of duende, and not so profound nor so 
hairy. Indeed, the king's subordinates lived and lived mainly in the 
open woods, and kept houses or houses in the soil and in the branches. The 
trees were their favorite trees. The king's cave was on the palace, and the 
stronghold of his treasure, and the fortress of his people against his enemies. 
enemies. 
It was also the dungeon for their prisoners. So that in the cave they arrested 
Thorin, not very amiably, they could not love the men and thought that he was 
an enemy. In the anti-gay they had wars with some of the men, 
who accused them of stealing their treasure. It is fair to say that the 
Dwarfs gave a different version and said that they only returned the one that 
corresponded to them, because the king elf had negotiated with them to give shape to their raw gold. 
and after that he refused to pay them. If the king elf had a weakness, it was for the treasures, especially for the plate and the white. 
gems and although he was rich in his treasure, he was always anxious for more, since 
nor did he hold a treasure as great as other senior elves of the antiquity. Most people who 
don't go abroad don't work on metals or joys, they don't worry much about trade or 
working on the earth. All this was well known to all the men, although 
The family of Thorin was nothing to behold with the old dispute of which I spoke. 
of. For that matter, Thorin was thrilled by the trait they gave her when... 
They stopped her pain and recognized the feeling; and it was also 
decided that no words of gold or joy should be sacrificed to her. 
The king looked sternly at Thorin when they took him before him, 
and I have asked her many questions. But Thorin only said that it was 
to a hungry one. 
"Why did you and your people try to attack my village three times in their own house?" 
"Party?" asked the king. 
"We do not attack them," replied Thorin; "Let us beg, because 
"We are dead in the woods." 
Where are your friends now and what are they doing? 
"I don't know, but I hope to die in the woods in the woods." 
What are they doing in the woods? 
"We eat and drink because we are hungry." 
—But when do I take you to the woods? —he asked the angry king.
Before this, Thorin closed his mouth and said no more words. 
"Very good!" I say the king. "Keep it safe and keep it safe until 
"You feel inclined to tell the truth, even if you hope for many years." 
Then the elves asked them to run and locked them in one of the most hidden doors. 
caves with strong doors of Madeira, and they left it. They gave her food and 
drink, a lot of them, even not very much; because the elves of the forest were not saddened, 
and they carried them reasonably well with their enemy enemies, when 
they captured them. The giant spiders were the only living ones they kept. 
Without foot. 
There, in the king's dungeon, lay poor Thorin; and after having surpassed 
his appreciation for the bread, the meat and the water, he began to wonder whether 
he had become one of his unfortunate friends. Not much time passed before he was 
discovered; but this belongs to the following chapter and to the beginning of 
Another Adventure in which the hobbit wanted to demonstrate its usefulness. 
BARRELS WAS OF GOODNESS 
On the following day of the battle with the spiders, Bilbo and the elflings made a 
last desperate effort to meet a woman before dying in the morning and 
in the morning. They stood up and danced there direction that the eyes of the 
threeses of them assumed that it was the one who encountered the fireplace; but 
No one knows why. A day like any other in the woods. 
he was disappearing once more in the darkness of the night, when suddenly 
the light of many torches rose up on his elder, like hundreds of red stars. 
The elves of the forest jumped with their bows and spears and called to the elfins. 
hold 
Not if I thought about it in a pinch. Even if the wines were not there. 
such a state that in reality they were happy to be captured, their small knives, 
the only weapons they held had no service against the rifles. 
of the elves who could approach a bird in the darkness. So they simply deduced it. 
dead and he felt and hoped, everyone except Bilbo, who placed himself on the ring 
and quickly slipped away on one side. Thus, when the elves threw the 
elfins in a wide row, one behind the other, and they counted, never 
met or counted the hobbit. 
Little by little the eye did not hear it trotting much beyond the light of its torches as it led its prisoner to the woods. Every year he was 
with the sold eyes, but there wasn't much difference, because including Bilbo with the 
With the use of his eyes he couldn't see where they were headed, and neither
in all ways, the others knew where they left. Bilbo knew everything I could. 
To follow the rhythm of the torches, the elves could be made aware that the elves were as 
fast as they could be, as weak and as tired as they were. The king ordered 
them to be reassured. Suddenly, the torches disappear and the hobbit turns up... 
now to leave them before they start to cross the bridge. This was the 
bridge that crossed the river just beyond the doors of the king. The water flowed dark 
and fast and strong; and at the other end there were doors in front of the mouth 
of an enormous cave that fell into the depths of a steep pile of 
trees. All the great beech trees are tied until the shore, until their feet 
are in the stream. 
The elves imprisoned their prisoners across the bridge, but Bilbo wondered. 
the part passes. He didn't really enjoy the aspect of the mouth of the cave, and he just 
He decided not to abandon his friends just in time to escape. 
The heels of the last elves, before the great gates of the king will close between them. 
They with a metallic sound. 
Inside, the steps were illuminated with red antlers and elf guards... 
They sang while walking along the winding, cruising and resonating paths. 
These were not like the goblin townspeople; they were smaller, less profound. 
underground, filled with a clearer air. In a large hall with tall pillars 
From the living stone I heard the Elf King on a tall wooden saddle. on 
the head there was a crown of bays and many red ones, because the autumn was tied. 
again. In spring a crown of flowers rose up in the forest. In his hand 
he held a tall stick in oak. 
The Elf King's Gate. 
The prisoners were taken before him and, although I looked at them with a somber expression, 
they ordered their men to untie them, because they were captivated and canned. 
"Besides, those who don't need ropes," I say. "There is no escape. 
"My magic doors for those who once are lifted inside." 
I have questioned the young men carefully and thoughtfully about their actions, 
from where they stopped and from where they came; but they 
did not receive more news from them than from Thorin. They were moody and 
I was bored and I didn't want to be educated. 
"What are we here, oh king 
? 
"Are the spiders your domestic animals or your pets, or the bushes? 
Does it make you angry? 
So, above all, this most angry question never reaches the king, and... 
he replied: "It is a crime to wander through my king without permission. Did
you forget that you were in my kingdom, using the fireplace that I used to do? 
Have I not chased and disturbed my village in the woods three times and 
chased the spiders with your tree and clamor? After all the work that... 
I'm sure you need to know what's going on for you here, and if you don't do it, 
decide now, let's keep everyone in prison until you learn the common and 
modal feeling! 
I then ordered that each one be left in a separate cell and 
she was given well and drunk, but she was not allowed to pass through the doors of her small 
prison 
, until at least one of them was willing to tell her everything that she 
wanted he discovered it. 
Little Lord Baggins, who lived there for a long time, was a great admirer. 
Alone and always hidden, never to let go of the ring, without even 
sleeping, even hiding in the darkest and most remote corners that I can 
encounter. To have something to do, he dedicated himself to wandering through the house of the Elven King. 
palace The magic was hidden in the doors, but sometimes it could rise, it was 
Quick. Companies of Wood Elves, sometimes with the king on their side. 
head, he would go up again when he was trading or doing other business in the 
woods and in the lands of the East. Indeed, if Bilbo was very clever, 
he could only escape from them, even though he was doing something dangerous. 
More than once I was at the point of asking myself to be trapped between the doors, to the shock inside. 
when the last elf passed; However, he didn't even try to walk inside him because 
of his shadow (light and swaying as he was in the light of the torch), or to 
be shocked and uncovered. And when he went up, the one who 
It wasn't very frequent, it didn't serve anything. I didn't want to abandon the wines, 
because I didn't know where to go in the world without them. Yo 
could not follow the rhythm of the hunting elves all the time they were outside, so that 
I never discovered the climbs of the forest and wondered while wandering. 
miserably in the forest, terrified of getting lost, until an opportunity presented itself. 
regressing. He also had a hunger outside, he might not have been a hunter; but inside 
the caves one could enjoy one's life in some way by packing food from the shelves or 
the table when there was none at hand. 
"I am like a thief who cannot escape, until he must continue miserably. 
'Rob my house for another day,' he thought. 'This is the saddest 
part of all this miserable, miserable and uncomfortable adventure!'
I would like to be again in my hobbit hole next to my warm fireplace with the lamp. 
"shining!" At the same time I wanted to be able to send a message of help to 
the magician, but this, supposedly, was completely impossible; and ready 
if God knows what needs to be done, Lord Baggins will tend to do it, 
alone and without help. 
Finally, after a week or two of this type of furtive life, by 
observing and following the guards and asking what I can do, the 
He managed to make sure where they look at every day. He put his two 
secrets in different parts of the palace, and after a while he got to know him 
well enough. What was my surprise one day at school some of 
the guards talked about and learned about what they also had in prison, 
in a particularly dark and profound place. I realized immediately, because I assumed, that this was 
Thorin; and after a while I discovered that my assumption was correct. Finally, after 
weighing so many difficulties, I will find the place when there is no redecoration, 
and have words with the boss of the wines. 
Thorin was desperate to follow his misfortunes, and 
he was even busy thinking about telling them all to the king about his treasure and 
his search (which revealed the disheartened person who he was), when he heard 
Bilbo's voice in his doorway. Only then can you create what you want. Hello 
However, I decided that there could be no mistake and no wine. 
up to the door and I had a large conversation in whispers with the hobbit who was on the other side. 
Thus it was as Bilbo could secretly take Thorin's message to each of them. 
of the other impressed men, telling them that Thorin, on chief, 
was also in search of prison, and that Nobody must reveal to them his mission. 
the king, no, not before Thorin gave the order. Because Thorin had taken away 
his heart, he had flown away to his side as the hobbit had rescued his companions from the 
spiders, and he had decided once again not to escape with promises to the king of a part of the treasure, until all hope of escaping in 
any other form 
was lost had disappeared; until now the notable Mr. Invisible 
Baggins (the one who strived to hold a very high opinion) had 
no thought of anyone being intelligent at all. 
The same old ones learned when they received the meal. Everyone... 
believe that their own shares in the treasure (which they consider 
their assets to be enough, considering their difficult situation and the unconquered dragon) 
will seriously worry if the Forest Elves claim part of it, and everyone will trust
Bilbo Just what Gandalf said would happen, right? Perhaps that was it... 
Part of your reason to wake up and relax. 
Bilbo, however, did not feel as hopeful as he did. It is not 
as if everyone depends on it, and it is desirable to keep the magician on his side. 
hand. But that's not the case for anything: probably the dark distance of the Black Forest lies 
between them. She felt and thought and thought, as long as she put her head on it, 
but no bright idea occurred to her. An invisible ring was something very fine, 
but not much was needed among the wreckage. But clearly, as I told you, 
I assumed that in the end he saved his friends and that was how it happened. 
One day, while we were alone and walking around, Bilbo discovered 
something interesting: the large doors were not the only entrance to the caves. 
The stream ran below a part of the lower regions of the palace and there was 
the Forest River a little further east, more to the steep slope that goes up 
whose main mouth was opened. Where this underground water course 
went up from the lake, there was a water door. At the bottom of the rocky tree 
he looked for the surface of the stream, and from there a rake was formed. 
You could leave the water directly at the edge of the river to avoid anyone entering. 
or for example a fireplace. But the rake on the menu was open, for good traffic clarity. 
He went up and entered the Puerta de las Aguas. If anyone entered there, 
they found themselves in a dark and bumpy tunnel that led to the depths of the 
heart of the hill but at a point where the caves passed under the roof 
had been shortened and covered with large stumps of oak. This is where you arrive 
, at the king's wineries. There he had barrels, and barrels, and 
barrels; because the elves of the forest, and especially their king, enjoy a lot of 
wine, even though they don't grow wines in those areas. The wine and other products were 
drawn from many people, from their relatives in the South, or from the 
Vineyards of Men in distant lands. 
Hidden behind one of the largest barrels, Bilbo discovered the traps. 
and as I used it, and listening there, listening to the conversation of the king's servants, 
I learned how the wine and other products come from the rivers or the land, 
to Long Lake. It seems that a community of men prospered there, built on 
bridges that entered the water as protection against enemies of all kinds, and 
especially against the mountain dragon. From the City of the Lake, the barrels...
they were crossed by the river arriving through the forest. The menu is simply stuck with 
large balsams and the river arrives with boats or paddles; Sometimes they are loaded 
on flat boats. 
When the barrels were empty, the elves rolled them across the treadmills, 
he opened the door and the barrels floated up the stream, mercilessly. 
across the river, until they were carried along the stream to a lower place. 
from where the bank rises, looking for the eastern edge of the Black Forest. 
Once they were there, they caught up with them and floated back to Lake City. 
They found themselves looking for the point where the Forest River drained into Long 
Lake. 
For a while, Bilbo felt and thought about this water gate, and wondered: 
could he use it to help his friends escape, and finally I was just 
starting out desperate for a plan. 
The dinner had to be brought to the prisoners. The guards were 
walking through the steps, I looked at the torch and 
left everything in the darkness. Then Bilbo asked the king's butler to order 
The guard's chief, good night. 
«Now I'm with you», I say, «and I'll try the new wine that I need to come up with». 
Enter. I'll work hard tonight cleaning the drains of the empty drains. 
Madeira, so we took a drink to help us at work. 
""Much good," said the guards' boss. "I'll try it next and 
Mira is suitable for the king's table. Have a party tonight and it wouldn't be... 
How badly you feel it! 
When I saw this, Bilbo became very nervous, I could see that his heart was on his side. 
This is the opportunity to try your desperate plan. He followed the 
elves, until they entered a small shop and found themselves at a table where 
two large jars were placed. Ready to drink and return. 
cheerfully. An unusual companion accompanied Bilbo then. There should be a powerful 
wine to put an elf in the woods to sleep; but this wine, apparently, was a 
thing embellished with the great gardens of Dorwinion, not intended for his 
soldiers or his servants, but only for the celebrations of the king and for the most small 
bowls not for the great bushes of the mayordomo. 
Very soon the guard's chief stood up with his head and then I put him over the table. 
and after that I slept soundly. The mayor followed the conversation and went back alone for 
a moment without seeming to give a word, but ready on his head he also left the 
table, and he slept and slept next to his friend. Then entered the 
hobbit stealthily. Very quickly the guard's chief was queried without his hands,but Bilbo trotted as
quickly as he could through the corridors behind the cells. The large group 
They seemed to weigh a lot on their arms, and had the heart in their mouths, and 
by the weight of their ring, they couldn't avoid letting their lavas hiccup once in a while 
when there was a loud, rattling, metallic noise that I used to shake it. 
First he opened Balin's door and went back to lock it with care as ready as I could. 
The moment was outside. Balin was very surprising, as you can imagine; but 
even though he was happy to move up from his small and heavy stone room, he wanted... 
to keep and ask questions, and to know what Bilbo had to do, and 
in all respect. 
- No time now! -I say the hobbit-. Just follow me! We must all maintain 
our joints and not risk separating them. We all have to escape no one, and 
this is our last opportunity. If you find out this, you know where the king will be. 
I'll ask you to continue, with chains on your hands and feet too, I suppose. No 
Argue, good boy! 
Then it was from door to door, until the group of followers increased to... 
sweet, not a single one of them was left alert, due to the darkness and 
its wide confinement. Bilbo's heart lapses with strength every time one of them 
shouted at another, grunted or whispered in the darkness. "Damn!" 
Eno uproar!, if I say so. But they all went up well and didn't meet Nobody. 
guards. Indeed, there was a great autumn fiesta in the forest. 
This night, I arrived at the salons. Almost all the people of the king were 
revelry. 
Finally, after many stumbles, they joined Thorin's dungeon, very low. 
in a deep place and fortunately not far from the wineries. 
-I give you my word! - I said Thorin when Bilbo whispered to her that he would wine. 
and he joined his friends, "Gandalf tells the truth, as always! It's a good 
idea that you'll be converted into a thief when the moment comes. I'm sure that we're all in your favor. 
Always at your service, whatever happens after that. But what's next? 
Bilbo sees that It was time to explain his idea, as far as he could go; 
but 
He wasn't entirely 
sure 
How the men would take it to the bone, and we too will drown 
! —they murmured—.Qué 
locura 
! —I said Bilbo very annoying, 
I will be able to 
feel comfortable there, but I don't think I can.
I will never return to achieve the goals, even if I feel inclined to attempt it". 
So they were forced to calm down. At the end, above 
all, they had to do exactly what Bilbo suggested, because obviously it was... 
it was impossible to try to find the path to the upper halls or 
to climb up from them. doors that were closed by art of magic; and no use of any refunñando 
in 
the passages until they were caught again 
. he would continue snoring happily. 
There was a different expression in the rostrum of the 
following 
day, although Bilbo entered 
with 
all 
his heart decent with the prisoners. 
He will also disconcert everyone. They will think that we have a very strong magic to... 
pass through all these closed doors and disappear 
. happen!” 
Balin was ordered to keep watch over the guard and the mayor and give a warning if 
they were filmed. The rest was on the ground adjacent to the trampolines. 
You have little time to lose. In a short time, as Bilbo knew, some elves were... 
bajo ordénes de bajar and help the mayordomo to get the empty barrels 
through the doors of the arroyo. Indeed, these are all there. 
rows in the middle of the ground hoping to be filled. Some of them 
were barrels of wine, and they didn't need much, so they couldn't be easily measured. 
if they could open to the final without a lot of noise, they couldn't open easily either. 
newly secured. But among them there were various others, which were used 
to make other things, mantequilla, manzanas and all types of things, at the 
royal palace. 
Ready to meet three with enough space for one year in each one. After that 
, some of them were spaced out and, as soon as they passed, the young men thought 
anxiously about the fear and the blows they would receive inside, although 
Bilbo did everything possible to find the paja and other things to pack them in the most comfortable way possible. 
If I can manage it in a short time. Finally, sweet dwarfs were stored. 
Thorin had caused a lot of trouble, and he turned and twisted himself in his bag and 
grunted like a big dog in a small dog; While Balin, who was the last one,
took a big breath for his breaths and told me that he was asphyxiating himself, even before 
that. Bilbo knew what he could do to secure the holes on the sides of 
the barrels and finish all the tapas with the greatest possible security, and 
now he asked himself only once more, running from one side to the other giving her the final touches. 
the packaging and hoping against all the hope that on the plan you will find success. 
Not if he or she is ready. Just a minute or two after Balin 
Once you put the tap on you will hear the sound of voices and a blink. 
luces Various elves came walking and talking to the trees and 
singing fragments of songs. They had a happy party in one of the salons. 
and they are determined to return as quickly as they can. 
"Where is the old Galion, the mayor?", one said. "I didn't see him on the 
table tonight. He should be here now to show us what he's doing. 
"I'll be amazed if the song is late and the slow car rolls on late," I say. "I don't 
want to waste the time below while the song plays! 
- Yes, yes! -gritted a hand-. Here is the old villain with his head in a jar! 
He was enjoying a little party for himself and his friend the captain." 
-¡Sacúdanlo! ¡Despiértenlo! -the men shouted with impatience. 
Galion didn't like it at all that they would savage or despair him, and least of all 
they would be ridiculed. late", if asked. "Here I am hoping and 
waiting here below, while your babies are having fun and forgetting. 
tus tareas. Don't worry about me! 
"It's not to be missed," they said, "when the explanation is at the tip of your hand. 
In a year! Come and give us a drop of your medicine before we leave! 
There's no need to leave the package behind. We've held you aside for what seems like 
it." 
They were given a round and suddenly they were very happy. 
But they didn't lose the whole reason. "¡Sálvanos, Galion!" Some of them shouted, " 
Come on, you're getting ready and you're perplexed! You've accumulated some of them 
here and there are empty barrels in the vacancies, so that's why you have a lot of weight." 
"Continue with the work!" the mayor grunted. "There's nothing left to the 
feeling of weight in the arms of an indolent person. These are the ones who come and go. 
No one else! What I'm telling you! 
"Muy bien, muy bien", they responded by rolling the barrels until they 
opened. "Sobre tu cabeza sea,si las tinas llenas del rey y su better wine 
It is poured into the river so that the men of the lake go to a party to change nothing!
Rolling, rolling, rolling, rolling, 
Rolling, rolling, rolling for the sharpener! 
Yummy! ¡Chapoteo regordete! 
Abajo van, abajo chocan! 
So they sang while they first opened a barrel and then another echoed in the darkness. 
Open and fill the water one meter lower. Some 
had really empty barrels, some were carefully filled with a drink 
each; but all cayeron, one after another, with many shocks and 
blow, blow on the bottom, choking against the water, pushing 
against the walls of the tunnel, choking between them and balancing 
against the water, following the current. 
It was just at this moment that Bilbo suddenly discovered his weakness 
right on the spot. The most probable is that you have seen him some time ago and have been 
returned to him; but I don't suppose that the hubieras did not do the half of good. 
you will find the same ones in your place. So, it wasn't in a barrel, so 
there was no one else who would find it, even if there was an opportunity? Apparently 
this will surely be lost to your friends (in case all of them have 
disappeared by the dark trap), and you will be completely lost 
and will tend to remain in the blind like a permanent thief in the elves' caves forever. 
Because you will now be able to escape immediately through the upper doors, you will have 
a very small chance of turning to meet the dwarves. The path through the earth did not know 
until the place where the barrels were stored. He 
wondered what it would be like for him, because he didn't have enough time to... 
He had time to tell them everything he had learned, or what he wanted to say. 
that they do, once they are outside the forest. 
While all these thoughts passed through his mind, the elves were... 
many happy people began to sing a song to the rededor of the river gate. Some of you have 
to pull the rods that raise the rake in the water tank 
to be able to get the barrels up as ready as they will put all the boats down. 
Down through the dark and rapid arroyo 
. Go back to the lands you once knew! 
Abandon the deep pasillos and caverns, 
Leave the steep mountains of the north, 
Where the forest is wide and dark 
. It leans in a gray and dark shade! 
Float further into the world of trees. 
Outside, let the whispering breeze, 
Farther from the juncos, Farther from the juncos, 
Farther from the waving grasses of the marsh, 
Across the snow that rises white 
Arrive at the lake and the swimming pool at night!
Follow, follow the stars that jump. 
Arrive, the cold and filled skies; 
Turn when the lover connects to the earth, 
Over quickly, over the sand, 
On the surface! Y on! 
Look for the light of the sun and the day, 
To go to the meal, to go to the meadow, 
From where the holidays and the goodies go! 
Go back to the gardens on the hills 
Where the bay is swollen and full 
. Low light of the sun, low day! 
To the top! Y on! 
Down through the dark and rapid arroyo 
. Go back to the lands you once knew! 
Now the last barrel headed for the doors! Desperate and 
without knowing what else to do, little Bilbo grabbed him and ran away... 
I pushed him over the edge. Falling to the water, ¡chapoteo! 
Cold and dark water with the barrel on top of it. 
He wanted to undergo remodeling and cling to the island like an installment, but 
considering all his efforts, he couldn't reach the top. Once he tried it, he 
turned the barrel and submerged it again. It was really empty, and 
floated as light as a cork. Even though the eyes were full of water, then 
the elves followed singing in the tree. Suddenly, the trapdoors opened. 
With an extrusion, their voices will disappear. He was in the dark tunnel. 
Floating in clean water, completely alone, because you can't count friends who are all 
encased in barrels. 
Very soon appeared a gray mancha in the darkness that took place. Oyó el crujido. 
from the door of the Waters being raised, and he encountered in the middle of 
a mass of barrels and vats that are swinging and choking inside, all making sure to 
pass through the bottom of the arch and climb to the open arroyo. He kept everything that he could 
do to avoid being surprised and the shot had to be done slowly; but 
finally, the multitude that was bouncing above her began to disperse and flew, one by one, under 
the arch of the stone and flew away. I realize that I didn't have any service. 
Even if you were willing to be subjected to shocks on the barrel, you may have no space 
above, no need for a hobbit, between the top and the sudden inclination 
of the door from which the door was. 
Climb below the branches bearing the trees of the same banks. 
Bilbo wondered why they were feeling the wine and there was a lot of water. 
if he put in his tines. Some of the ones who swung close to each other in 
the penumbra seemed to be quite low in the water, and I assumed that they would 
keep them inside.
"I hope to have found the tapas well!", I thought, but in a short time... 
I was almost as worried about recording the wines. 
It is advisable to keep the head outside the water, but keep it cold. 
refreshed, and wondered if he would die before his life would change, and how 
much more time could he take and risk escaping? 
opportunity to sunbathe and deal with nothing until the shore. 
The woman promptly changed: the moving stream brought up 
various barrels that hit the bank at one point and there they stopped for a while. 
against any hidden cause. Once Bilbo recognized the opportunity to tread 
on the side of his barrel while he supported it firmly against the other. Arrive it 
as a fixed installment and place it on the extended upper part to maintain the 
balance as best as possible. The breeze was cold but better than the water, 
and they hoped not to fall suddenly when they left. 
once more 
In a short time, the barrels were opened again and turned and twisted. 
I lowered the river and went up to the main stream. Once he met him enough, 
it was difficult to follow him as he feared, but in some way he lost him. 
It was terribly uncomfortable. Please, it was very light and the cannon... 
It was quite large and, as there were enough escapes, I now had to send a small one. 
container of water. In all ways, it was like trying to ride a horse, without reins or 
strakes, a place from the back that I was always thinking about riding over the 
grass. 
In this way, Señor Bolsón finally arrived at a place where the trees on both sides 
settled on his hand. I could see the palest sky between us. The darkness 
of the river suddenly opened and there it joined the main water of 
the river of the forest which flowed from the great gates of the river for the first time. There 
was a thin sheet of water that was not shadowed and on its slide 
there were dancing reflections and swirls of clouds and stars on the surface. 
Once the impetuous waters of the Rio del Bosque caught up with the entire company of 
barrels and vats at the northern shore, where there was a wide 
bay. This had a coast of low guijarros with hanging banks and was walled up in the 
Far East by a small salient cable of hard rock. In the not very deep shore, the majority 
of some of the barrels fell, although some ended by choking against the rock. 
soft 
There were people watching over the banks. Quickly they can be searched for with the help. 
and pump all the joint barrels into shallow waters, and when they touch
them, they will drain them and leave them until the morning. 
Poor people! Bilbo wasn't that bad now. He slipped from his barrel and 
walked towards the bank and where he headed carefully to find one of the things he could look for. 
the orilla del agua. I didn't think about it twice before having dinner. 
Without invitation he would take the opportunity, if he had been obliged to do so for a long time, and 
now he would know very well what it was to have a shadow of truth, not only 
courteously interested in the delicacies of a well-filled pantry. I also 
saw a fire through the trees, and I pulled them. 
On the soaked and ragged clothes, he tied them to his body, chilled and hugged. 
It is not necessary to tell you a lot about your adventures tonight, now... 
If you are looking for the end of the journey, remember this and connect with the last 
and greatest adventure, so we must be prepared for it. So, helped by the 
magic ring at the beginning it was very good, but at the end they gave it away. 
for his mojadas pisadas and the trail of gotas that dejaba from where he passed 
or felt; and he also began to hide, and where he attempted to hide, he was 
exposed by the terrible explosions of his repressed secrets. Very ready 
There was a great commotion in the community near the river; but Bilbo 
escaped into the woods, taking a bread, a bottle of cow wine and a 
pastel that did not belong to him. I had to spend the rest of the night as mildly as 
it was a fire, but the bottle helped her to make it, and 
after that she slept a little on some dry days, considering how 
late the year had been and the air was cold. 
He was awakened again with an especially strong tone. It was gray. 
In the morning, there was a happy tree reaching the river. They are 
forming a balsa of barrels, and the elves of the balsa ready will direct it. 
The river below is in the City of Lake. Bilbo found it again. It wasn't 
Goteaba, but it felt cold for everyone. It goes as quickly as I can. 
His legs were picked up and they were just occasionally subjected to the mass of 
barrels without being noticed in the general bullying. Luckily there was no sun. 
At this moment to cast an uncomfortable shadow, and for mercy I did not extort 
again for a good time. 
Hubo a powerful empuje de postes. The elves who were standing in 
the shallow water stirred and moved. The barrels are now all old. 
he crumpled and was worried. 
"It's a heavy load!", some asked. "Float long gone deeply, some of
these are never empty. If they are still tied to the ground during the day, we can... 
" 
We have seen a look inside", they said. 
- No time now! -shouted from a balsero-. "Arriba! beginning, until they pass the point of rock from where others 
The elves were forced off their feet to defend themselves with poles, and then, more quickly, 
Tomaron took the main stream and were sailing downward, downward. 
The lake. 
They have escaped from the king's mazmorras and have crossed the forest, 
but to a certain extent they are dead or alive. 
A WARM WELCOME 
The day is the clearest and warmest thing that floats. After one day, 
the river rode away a steep earth that descended to its izquierda. 
Below his rocky feet, like an internal acantilado, the deepest arroyo had fluidity. 
chapoteando and burbujeando. Suddenly, the acantilado exploded. The orillas are hundieron. 
The trees ended. Bilbo says something like this: 
The lands are opened by their elder, filled by the waters of the river. 
who divided and wandered along tortuous paths, or found themselves in 
marshes and distant sailors from the islands on all sides; but still a strong water 
flowed constantly through the center. And to the light, on a dark head on an unraveling spiral 
, in a cloud, where the mountain rose! Their elders are looking to the north and the deruid earth that united them to them could not verse them. 
Only if he stood up and looked across the sea to the forest. El Solitario 
¡Montaña! Bilbo had traveled a long way and had gone through many adventures to see it, and 
now he didn't enjoy them in the slightest way. 
While listening to the conversation between the boats and reuniting the rest 
of the information that had happened, I was ready to tell God who was very lucky. 
I've seen it before, even from this distance. As sad as he was in 
confinement and as despicable as he was in his position (so that he couldn't even hear about the 
little ones behind him) yet, he was even stronger than he was. 
fortune teller There was all the trade that came and went along the river routes. 
and the increase in traffic on the river, as the paths rising from the river 
has made the Bosque Negro disappear or fall into disuse; and the disputes of 
the Hombres del Lago and the Elfos del Bosque over the maintenance of the Rio del Bosque 
and the care of the banks. These lands have changed a lot since the days 
when the Enos lived in the mountains, days that the majority of people are now 
only recorded as a very vague tradition. They have changed even in
the last few years, and since the last news that Gandalf has left him. Great 
floods and floods have increased the waters that flow in the summer; y había 
He has experienced one or two earthquakes (which some are inclined to attribute to the 
dragon—alluding to it mainly with a curse and a hominous gesture in the 
direction of the mountain). The swamps and swamps have extended further and 
further on both sides. The senders have disappeared, and many jinetes and wanderers 
alike, are intent on meeting the lost paths to cross. The journey of the elves through 
the forest that the elflings had followed by Beorn's advice now led to 
a dubious and little-used end at the eastern edge of the forest; Only 
the river does not offer a safe route from the slopes of the Black Forest. 
In the north, the plains were shaded by the mountains that extended farther away, and the river was watched. 
by the king of the forest elves. 
So, like you, Bilbo reached the end by the only possible path. 
Good. He might have had a habit of Señor Bolsón shaking in the 
barrels, he would have known that the news of this had led to Gandalf from many years ago 
and had given him great anxiety, and that he was ending up on another 
business (which does not enter into this matter) and preparing for it to enter 
the Thorin company. But Bilbo didn't know it. 
All I knew was that the river seemed to continue and continue and continue eternally. 
and she had the shadow, and a horrible breeze in her nose, and she didn't enjoy 
La Montaña, she seemed to enjoy her dinner and amuse it every time she looked at it more often. 
more search. After a while, without embargo, the river took a further course upwards and 
the mountain retreated again and, finally, at the end of the day, the banks turned smaller. 
Rocoso, the river reunited all its wandering waters in a deep and 
rapid flood, and they rose at great speed. 
The sun was clear when he went around the East with another barricade. 
The forest stream rushed down to Lake Largo. There he also had a desembocadura with 
stone doors that seemed to be attached on both sides, whose feet were covered in tejas. 
Lake Largo! Bilbo never imagined that any water other than the sea... 
It could seem so big. It was so wide that even the opposite shores seemed small and 
light, but it was so wide that on the far north, where 
the mountain could not be seen at all. Only through the mother Bilbo would he know that 
when he arrives, from where the stars of the Chariot shine,
the running river descends as far as the lake from the Dale and with the forest 
the Rio is filled with deep waters which once must have been a great and deep rocky one 
valley. At the extreme end, the duplicated waters flew to the bottom of the high 
waterfalls and were surprisingly exposed to unfamiliar lands. In the quiet late 
In the air the sound of the cataracts was heard like a rusty lejano. 
Not long after crossing the Forest River, he encountered the outsider village that was there... 
and the elves talked about it in the bodegas of the River. It was not built on the lake, 
although it had some rocks and buildings there, but just on the 
surface of the lake, protected by the small river that enters through a 
rocky promontory that formed a quiet bay. A great bridge from 
Madeira was built until a concurred 
city of Madeira was built over the enormous pilots of trees of the forest, not a city of elves but of men, who still tended to live here 
under the shadow of the distant mountain of the dragon. They still prospered in the 
trade that came from the great river from above and was transported even further to 
the city above; but in the great days of the year, when Dale in the North was 
rich and prosperous, they were rich and powerful, and there 
were fleets of boats in the waters, and some were filled with gold and 
some with warriors with armor, and they had wars and those who 
were now just a legend. The scavengers of a larger city would later be... 
Seen off the shores when the waters were caught in a row. 
But the men recorded little of all that, although some still sang many songs. 
of the ancient kings of the Mountain, Thror and Thrain of Durin's race, 
and of the dragon's llegada, and the fall of the lords of the Valley. Some 
also sang that Thror and Thrain would fly one day and that gold would 
flow in the rivers, across the doors of the mountain, and the whole earth would be 
filled with new songs and new laughter. But this nice word doesn't... 
affect much of your daily business. 
As ready as the barrel balsa appeared to the sight, the bottles remained behind the sheep. 
of the community, and voices greeted the helms of the balsas. Then the tails were pulled and 
the oars were pulled and soon the balsa was sacked from the stream of the 
Forest River and towed away by the elder of the tall man of rock towards the small 
bay of Ciudad del Lago. There he was landed not far from the coastal point of 
the great bridge. Soon they will bring men from the south and take some
of them from the barrels, and others will bring them with merchandise that they have brought 
to be brought to the river and arrive at the house of the Elfos del Bosque. Mientras a lot 
The barrels came floating by while the elves of the balsa and the barqueros 
were partying in the City of Lake. 
If they were surprised they would soon be able to see what 
happened in the shore, after they had seen me and the shadows of the night 
had fallen. First, Bilbo shortened a barrel and pumped it into the 
bank and it opened. If there were moans from within, and from within there was a 
slight drop. He had a little mojada in his disheveled beard; It was so painful and stiff, so 
painful and shocked, I could barely keep my feet or stand in the shallow water. 
water for yacer walking in the shore. It was a wonderful shelter and rescue 
like a dog that has been trapped and forgotten on a journey during a week. 
it was Thorin, but only he could be recognized by his gold chain and by the 
color of his now slut and beautiful blue cap in the sky with its slush plain 
. Some time passed before he was courteous to the hobbit. 
- Good, are you alive or dead? —Prayed Bilbo enough infatuation. 
Quizás had forgotten that he had at least a good meal more than 
the dwarfs, and also the use of his arms and pins, so as not to have a greater 
permission to air. "Are you still in prison or are you free? If you want to be comfortable, 
and if you want to continue with this stupid adventure, it's all after all and 
it's not mine, it will be better than hitting your arms and rubbing your lips and intent... 
Help me to save the others while I have one opportunity! 
Thorin, above all, I feel the feeling of this, so that after one of the most groanings, 
he 
rose up and helped the hobbit the best I 
could the correct barrels. Touching outside and calling only 
that could answer. They were unpacked and 
helped to get to the ground where they heard or gimiendo; There were so many 
people who were so overwhelmed and worried that they could barely give a clue to their situation. 
Dwalin and Balin were two of the most unhappy, and it wasn't good that... they 
helped 
them less and more often, 
but they remained quiet and did not hear anything. Fili y Kili, left However, those who were 
young (for dwarfs) and also had been packed in a more orderly manner with a ram of
pay in smaller barrels, rose more or less soundly, with only a moreton 
or two and a stiffness that soon disappeared. 
"I hope you never want to eat more than that!" I say Fili. "I'm bañada estaba 
full of him. Oler manzanas eternally when only you can move and 
keep you cold and are sick of hambre, es enloquecedor. Podría comer anything in the 
day, all over the world, during hours, but not a manzana! 
With the voluntary help of Fili and Kili, Thorin and Bilbo finally... 
I discussed the rest of the company and the boys. 
Bombur 
was asleep or unheard; Dori, Nori, Oin and Gloin were 
alone and 
" Defenseless 
in 
the 
sea 
. 
" 
"Suggest Ciudad del Lago," said Bilbo. What more have you got? 
Basically, we couldn't suggest anything more, so let's say it again. 
Thorin, Fili, Kili and the hobbit returned to the shore until the great... 
bridge. There were guards on the head, but they were not kept very careful. 
Watch carefully, it may take a long time until there is no real need. Except 
for the occasional disputes over the river peaches, they were friends of the 
Forest Elves. There were other personal laws; and some of the young people in 
the village openly doubted the existence of any dragon in the mountains, and 
they laughed at the bearded people and the young people who said they had seen it. 
flying through the sky in his youth. Being like this, it is not surprising that 
the guards are drinking and returning to a fire in their choza, and not 
hearing the sound of the unpacking of the dwarves or the steps of the four 
explorers. The shadow was enormous when Thorin Shield of Roble 
entered the door. 
"How many are you and who wants?" they shouted jumping at their 
feet and looking for weapons. 
"Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror Rey under the Mountain!" I said the 
meal in a loud voice, and it seemed like it, considering the weight of his rotas and 
capucha desaliñada. The gold shone on his neck and belt; His eyes were 
dark and deep. «¡He vuelto! I want to see the love of your city!» 
There is tremendous excitement. Some of the dumbest people ran.
outside the cabin as they hoped that the mountain would turn golden at night 
and all the waters of the lake would turn yellow instantly. The captain of 
the guard moved forward. 
-¿Y quiénes son éstos? -asked reporting to Fili, Kili and Bilbo. 
—The sons of my father's hija — replied Thorin —, Fili and Kili of Durin's race, 
and 
Mr. 
Baggins, who traveled with us from the 
West. The elves 
of the forest had taken away their power and also the great Orcrist sword. 
Bilbo had his short sword, hidden as usual, but we did 
n't have any need for weapons, so let us return to ours as we say. 
Viejos! We can't play against much! Llévanos with you I love! 
"It's a party," I said to the captain. 
"Then, with more reason we have to keep going," Fili burst in, who was 
getting impatient before these solemnities. "We are tired and happy after 
our wide path and we have sick bedrooms. Now let's start and let's keep it. 
No more saying, or you love me will tend to do what you said." 
"Sígueme entonces", I said to the captain, and with six men I led him. 
I lead them by the bridge across the doors to the market plaza. 
city This was a large circle of calm water rode by the tall pilots where 
the largest houses were built, and close to the large Madeira streams with many 
ladders and ladders that bottomed out at the surface of the lake. From a large 
hall shone with many lights and the sound of many voices was heard. 
I passed by its doors and I wondered under the light looking at the large masses crowded 
with the people. 
"Soy Thorin hijo de Thrain hijo de Thror Rey bajo la Montaña! Yo 
¡Vuelve! —Thorin shouted in a loud voice from the door, before the captain. 
I could decide anything. 
Everyone wondered from the foot of a leap. The love of the city jumped from his great 
saddle. But Nadie rose up with greater surprise than the rafters of the elves who 
were sent to the lower end of the ball. Advancing rapidly before the... 
At the Master's table they shouted: 
"These are prisoners of our king who have escaped, wandering 
among the wanderers who could not give a good account of so many, 
please me. the forest and harass our people! 
"Is it true?" asked the Maestro. Indeed, I would create it a lot. 
It is more probable that the return of the King to the Montaña, if there is anyone. 
some person once existed. 
"It is certain that we were unjustly attacked by the King Elf and
imprisoned while we were traveling back to our own country," 
Thorin replied. "But no lock or fence can prevent the return to the house of the 
old man. This village is also in the kingdom of the Elfos del Bosque. He spoke with the Maestro of the 
"village of the Men of the Lake, not of the rafters of the King". 
Once the Maestro learned and admired one another. 
The Rey Elfo was very powerful in these areas and the Maestro didn't seem to be at all 
hostile to him, he didn't think much about the old songs, dedicating his mind to the trade and the peas, the goods and the gold, 
dwelling on 
what he deserved in his position assumed if resolved. 
Himself from The notification was extended from the doors of the living room as a dust collector. 
Por todo el pueblo. People shouted inside and outside the hall. 
The piers were barred by frightened people. Some began to sing fragments 
of ancient songs about the return of the King down the mountain; What 
was Thror's death and no Thror's own return? Not if he harassed. 
them absolutely. Others returned the song and sounded loud and loud across the 
lake. 
El Rey below the mountains, 
 El Rey of the tall stone, 
El señor de las fuentes de plata 
 It will give you your maximum potential! 
Your crown will be supported, 
 Your harp will be newly tuned, 
Your halls will resonate with a golden echo. 
 Sing old songs again. 
The woods will wave in the mountains 
 and the grass below the sun; 
On the river it will flow in rivers 
 and golden rivers. 
The arroyos will run with joy, 
 The lakes will shine and burn, 
All pain and sadness will shatter 
 in the return of the Mountain King! 
So they sang, or something like that, only that it had much more. 
and he had a lot of grit, as well as harp and violin music. 
mixed with it. Indeed, such excitement was not known in the city. 
In memory of Abuelo Mayor. Our own Forest Elves 
began to marvel very much and even took heart. They no longer knew 
how Thorin had escaped, and they began to think that 
a serious mistake could have been made on their king. As for the Master, I see he didn't have anything. 
There was no other option than to obey the general outcry, at least for the moment, and 
pretend to believe that Thorin was what he said. So he entered it. 
on his own large shoulder and placed Fili and Kili on his side in places of honor. 
Even Bilbo was given a welcome at the main table, and no explanation as to where.
He entered - not one song had mentioned him in the darkest way - he was 
solicited by the general bully. 
Shortly afterwards, the last few years were brought to the city in the middle of... 
scenes of dark enthusiasm. Everyone was waited on, fed and 
welcomed and admired in the most enchanting and satisfying way. A 
The great house was given to Thorin and his company; boats and boats 
were waiting for your service; and the multitudes hear each other and sing songs all day long, or 
I am very happy if someone is shown to me. 
Some of the songs were old, but others were quite new and 
had the security of the sudden death of the dragon and of the packages of rich 
gifts that flowed down the river in the City of Lake. These were inspired in great measure 
by the Maestro and were not particularly liked by the dwarfs, but by the 
Both of them were very happy and quickly became happy and hearty. 
New. Indeed, within a week they were completely recovered and equipped with all the details. 
canvas of its appropriate colors, with beards trimmed and short, and proud 
steps. Thorin looked and walked as his rein and now he was recovered. 
y Smaug cut on small pieces. 
Indeed, as I said, the good feeling of the dwarfs is the little one... 
The hobbit is strong every day. You don't have any more grunts. 
They drank her health, gave her palms on her shoulder and gave her a 
large bowl on her side, which was good, because she didn't feel good. 
particularly cheerful. I hadn't forgotten the aspect of the mountain, nor 
the thought of the dragon, and yet I had a terrible refreshment. For three 
days he was stared at, and could not go up, and after that 
his conversations at the banquets were limited to "Thag you very good". 
Meanwhile, the elves of the forest returned to the river of the forest with 
their cargoes, and there was great commotion in the royal palace. I 
never know why I passed with the guard's jefe and the mayordomo. 
Basically, I never say anything about the keys or barrels while the wines 
are left in Ciudad del Lago and Bilbo you looked after will never turn invisible. 
At the same time, I was forced to decide that it was more assumed than what was known, even if the Mr. was doubtful. 
Bolsón followed being a mystery. In any case, the king now knew... 
mission of the dwarfs, or thought that he had it, and I said to myself: 
¡Much good! We'll see you again! No darling will return to the Black Forest. 
As long as I have nothing to decide respectfully. But I hope they will have it.
Everything ends badly, and if only!” In any case, he would not believe 
in his dreams that Luchan and Matan dragons like Smaug, and would be strongly 
suspected of the intent of the robe or something similar, which would demonstrate that he was a 
wise Elf and even more knowing that the men of the city, although not entirely correct, as 
we will see at the end. They went to their shores by the shores of the lake and 
to the north, towards the mountains, and they waited. 
At the end of the fifth day, Thorin began to think about leaving. While 
the enthusiasm that still persisted in the community was the time to ask for help. No need 
to do anything to stop everything from calming down. Entonces I talked with the Maestro and 
his ideas and said that he and his company should soon follow 
the mountain. 
First of all the Maestro was surprised and got used to it a little; 
And he wondered whether Thorin was truly a descendant of the old 
kings. They never thought that the dwarfs would actually try to 
approach Smaug, but they believed that they were impostors who were slow to temper... 
they would be deceived and expelled. It was misunderstood. Thorin, supposedly, was 
in reality the darkness of the King below the mountain, and you don't 
know what a young man won't have to do by coming or by recovering 
his own. 
But the Master doesn't mind letting them go. They were expensive. 
to maintain, and the customer had converted the things into one of the large vacancies in which 
the business was paralyzed. "They're going to harass Smaug, and he's like this... 
I'll give him a welcome!", he thought. "Certainly, oh Thorin, hijo de Thrain, Thror. 
¡Hijo! —I say—. You must reclaim what belongs to you. The hour is sought, 
If it has been spoken in the past. The help we can offer them will be yours, and we trust in your 
gratitude when you recover your king." 
As one day, even though the thunder was very advanced and the winds were strong, 
it became cold and the holidays fell quickly; three large boats departed from Lake-town, loaded 
with oars, boats, señor Bolsón and many provisions. Horses and 
ponies had to be sent along winding paths to meet up with them at their 
designated deboarding location. The Maestro and his advisors ordered them 
off from the large staircase of the ayuntamiento that goes down to the lake. 
People sang in the muelles and after the winds. The white oars were huddled and 
chapoteron and headed north by the lake at the last stage of their long journey.
travel. The only person who was completely unhappy was Bilbo. 
IN THE DOOR 
On two days they sailed towards the lake Long and joined to... 
The river that ran, and now everyone could see the imposing and dark Solitaire Mountain 
before them. The current was fast and slow 
. At the end of the third day, some thousands of rivers arrive, arriving at 
the western shore and setting off. Here you combine the 
cables with other provisions and necessary items and place them for your own use. 
who have been sent to that place. They packed what they could into the 
ponies and the rest were converted into a tent under a carp, but none of the men 
of the city would be queried with them included during the night long search for the shadow of 
the mountain. 
"No, until the songs are realized!", they said. It was 
easier to create the Dragon and less easy to create Thorin in these 
saving parts. Indeed, their warehouses do not need guarding, the entire earth 
may be desolate and vacant. As he heard it, he abandoned it and moved on quickly. 
The river and the paths of the coast, no matter what happens at night. 
in. 
They spent a cold and lonely night and their soul decayed. On the following day 
I will leave again. Balin and Bilbo go back and forth, each time he asks the other. 
very loaded on your side; They are a little more advanced, choosing a 
slow path, they can't walk. They headed north, on a slope. 
of the river that runs, and trying to fall again at a great 
expanse of the mountain that extended above, in the direction of him. 
It was a journey of pleasure, silence and silence. There were no 
laughs or songs or harp sounds, and the pride and the hopes that had 
the singing of the old songs reaching the lake moved their hearts and they were satisfied. 
a heavy twilight. They knew they were looking forward to the end of their 
journey, and it could be a very horrible ending. The earth that rode them grew 
soft and clean, although once, like the gods Thorin, it was green and 
just. It has little grass, and in a short time it has no shrub or tree, 
and only round and enegrecid twigs to clear of those that have disappeared for a long time. 
They were connected to the Desolation of the Dragon, and they were connected at 
the end of the year. 
They went to the slopes of the mountain without meeting their nadie. 
dangerous or any other Dragon signal apart from the desert that has been created 
above your recovery. The mountain was dark and silent before us and always
came closer to us. They made their first camp on the western side of the 
great southern expanse, which ended at a height called Ravenhill. In this place 
there was an old watchdog, but they never came back to undergo it, they had 
to wait 
until they went up to look for the western frontiers of the mountain in search of the 
hidden door, and in which they abandoned all their hopes, Thorin sent an expedition of exploration. 
expedition to expiate the earth to the south where the Front was encountered 
. The door was raised. For him he chose Balin, Fili and Kili, and with 
Allí was Bilbo. They marched down the gray and silent cries over the 
Ravenhill pies. At the river, after crossing a large hole above the 
Dale valley, it devolved from the mountain on its way to the lake, flowing rapidly and 
roughly. On the shore she was naked and rocky, tall and steeped above the arroyo; and 
looking from there at the extreme waters, foaming and tumbling within 
you can see many rocks in the wide valley shaded by 
the arms of the mountain are the gray ruins of ancient houses, towers and murals. 
"All this is what Dale wants," said Balin. "The mountain leaders 
were green with forests and all the protected valley was rich and pleasant on the days 
when the bells tolled in this village". I looked sad and sad as 
I said this: I had been one of Thorin's companions on the day that the Dragon 
came. 
They didn't have to follow the river much further to the gate; 
But they continued further to the extreme of the southern exposure, as long as they got hidden. 
Beyond a rock you could look outward and towards the dark cavernous opening in a 
large rocky wall between the arms of the mountain. From her the waters of 
the river that ran were soaked; and from it also arose a vapor and a 
humous darkness. Nothing moved in the desert, except the steam and the water, and 
every time when a black and sinister deer. The only sound was the 
sound of stony water and, once in a while, the harsh croak of a 
bird. Balin was extreme. 
"¡Let's go back!", I say. "We can't do anything good here! And I don't like it. 
"These dark people seem to be the source of evil." 
The main door. 
"The dragon is still alive and in the pasillos below the mountain it entonces—o 
-I imagine it por el humo -I say the hobbit. 
"I don't think so," said Balin, "even if I don't think so." 
sure But I could have a drink for a while, or I could stay close to 
the mountain slope and watch, and then I expect hum and steam.
Clean the doors: all the interior rooms must be filled with oil. 
"a fetid hedor". 
With so many thoughts, always followed by the grace of the hearts above them, 
I walked along the path back to the camp. Only in June were they 
invited to the beautiful house of Elrond, and even if the oton ya looked for 
Hacia in winter, this pleasant time seemed now to come. They were alone. 
in the hairy desert without hope of more help. They are at the end of 
their journey, but as always, as it seems, at the end of their journey. 
None of them had much heart. 
Now well, it's strange to say that Señor Bolsón cared more than the others. He... 
At the moment I borrowed Thorin's map and looked at it, reflecting on the runes and the 
explanation of the lunar cards that Elrond had read. It was he who was the one 
who began the dangerous hunt in the western corners of the secret 
door. They moved onto a campsite in a wide valley, wider than the great 
valley on the south side where the river gates meet, and walled up with a lower wall 
extending out from the mountain. Two of them are extended to the west from the 
main mass in wide and steep crests that always fall below, to the 
plain. On this western side there were fewer dragon signals. 
sweet-loving pies, and had some grass for his ponies. From this 
western camp, in the shade all day by the cliff and the wall as long as the sun began to rise. 
if they go to the forest, from day to day they work in groups looking for 
senders who pass through the mountain slope. If the map was certain, in some high place 
it must be the secret door. Day after day... 
They returned to their camp until the end. 
But finally, unexpectedly, they encountered what they were looking for. Fili and 
Kili and the hobbit returned to the valley for a day and trembled 
among the ruined rocks on the southern corner. Middle Lord, struggling 
behind a large stone that stood alone like a pillar, Bilbo encountered the 
many steep steps that were under him. Siguiéndolos with enthusiasm, el y 
Los enos encountered traces of an extreme journey, a menudo lost, a menudo redecubierto, 
I wandered to the top of the ridge above and finally took them 
to a longer ledge, which turned north across the face of the 
mountain. Looking down at the bottom you will see that they are at the top of the cliff at 
the top of the valley and looking at the bottom at the top, on your own camp. 
In silence, clinging to the rocky wall on their backside, they advanced in Indian line.
At the edge of the cornice, as soon as the wall opened and they entered a small bay of crowded walls, with a soil of grass, calm and silent. Upon entry, who have... 
The hall cannot be seen from below due to the salient of the cliff. 
I didn't read any more because it was so small that it seemed like a dark sadness 
and nothing more. It was not a cave and it was open to the sky of arrival; but in the 
extreme interior a flat wall was raised which in the lower part, seeking the ground, was 
as smooth and straight as the work of a dawn, but without a junta or cry that day. 
Don't see any post office, no cell phone, no umbral light, no sign from the 
bar or cerrojo or cerradura; but they did not doubt that they had reached the door 
by the end. 
They shot them, they accused them, they implored them to move, 
they spoke fragments of the hechizos' opening rolls, and nothing moved. Finally 
, having sat down, they walked down the grass to their feet, and then, at night, they began 
a wide descent. 
He was enthusiastic in camp that night. In the morning they prepared 
to move again. Only Bofur and Bombur stayed behind to protect the 
ponies and the provisions that crossed the river. 
Others descended through the valley and suffered through the back path, and so the 
horn was stretched. So no one could take the bags or packages, so stretched 
and without being there, with a fall of one hundred and fifty pies on their side. 
to the stringy rocks below; but each one of them took a good roll of coiled leather, 
tied it to the handle of his belt, and so at the end, without contract, they tied it to the little 
bahia covered with grass. 
Then they went to the third camp, picking up what they needed. 
below with your arms. On the same path they can occasionally 
visit one of the most active teenagers, like Kili, to exchange these news. 
as he had, or to take part in the lower guard, while Bofur was arrested 
at the upper camp. The bomb did not suffer either through the door or the 
chimney. 
"I'm long gone for these steps," I say. "The tide would make me and 
Pisa beard me, and then I would return for three years. And the naked 
The eyes are too thin for my weight." Fortunately, this was not certain, as 
you will see. 
In the meantime, some of them explored the horn beyond the opening and 
encountered a path that took them every time they reached the mountain; but they didn't hit it. 
Name me I had to venture for a long time along this path, and there was 
still
a silence that was not interrupted by anyone except the 
wind those who are busy with the secret of 
the door no longer exists. They were almost anxious to worry about the 
runes or the lunar letters, but they wanted to discover where 
exactly the door was hidden on the worn surface of the rock. I 
took pictures and tools of many types from Lake Town, and at first 
I intended to use them. But when you hit the stone, the mangoes were distilled. 
and they savaged their arms cruelly, and the maple heads broke or cracked as they did. 
The mining work, they clearly saw, was not good against the magic that had 
closed the door; and also they were terrified by the sound that sounded. 
Bilbo found himself in the shadow of the door, alone and unconscious. 
It wasn't an umbral, supposedly, in reality, but they just called the little prado. 
space between the wall and the opening of the "door umbral" in an amused tone, 
recording Bilbo's words takes a lot of time in the unexpected party in his hobbit dream, when I say that they can hear themselves in the door umbral as long as they think about 
something. And to feel and think that they hid them, or wandered without noise, and 
if they flew away more sadly. 
His soul had risen a little discover the path, but now... 
if they dog ​​in their boots; and neither did they die for revenge and march. 
The hobbit wasn't much brighter than the old ones. There would 
be no more remedy than feeling yourself against the rocky wall and looking hard at the west. 
the opening, above the cliff, above the wide earths until the black wall of the 
Black Forest and the furthest distances, where at times it seemed 
possible to view the cloudy, small and light mountains. If they are drunk... 
I was wondering what this was doing and he replied: 
"Tell me that feeling myself in the door and thinking would be a good job for me, I don't 
mind going in, as I'm feeling and thinking". But I'm afraid that it is 
I didn't think much about the work, until the one that was most in the blue. 
To the lejos, the quiet Land of the West and the Hill and the hobbit's hole behind it. 
A large gray stone was found in the center of the bush and it was miraculous with a melancholic air. 
or observe the great snails. I seem to love the small closed bay. 
with its walls of fresh rock, and there were many of them of enormous size 
crawling slowly and carefully along the coasts. 
"Today the last week of the world begins," I said to Thorin one day.
"The winter comes after the thunder," said Bifur. "And the year that comes after 
'Now,' I say Dwalin, 'and our beards will grow as long as the cliff ends.' 
Down the road before we pass something else here. ' 
Ours? Who has an invisible ring, and I'm thinking about 
how 
I 
could pass through the Front 
! 
' it? Always I am the one who holds... 
to save his troubles, at least since the magician was. What 
do you want to do? You should know that something terrible will happen. 
I moved on to the final. I don't think I can tolerate the unhappy people 
in Valle de Dale again, nor in that humiliating door! ! !” 
That night I felt very bad and barely slept. On the following day 
all the elfins were wandering in various directions; some were 
down, training on the ponies, some wandered along the mountainside. Bilbo felt all day long, dark, on the grassy bay, contemplating the stone, or 
the face of the west through the extreme opening. I had the extra feeling of what I was 
hoping for. "Quiz the magician suddenly returned 
"Hoy", he thought. 
He could lift his head towards a gap in the woods. 
When the sun turned to the west, it had a faint amber color on it more than ever, as the 
light caught the last pale houses. Ready I go to the bola naranja del sol. 
hundiéndose asta the height of your eyes. It was at the opening and there 
pale and faint was a good new moon above the edge of the Earth. 
At this very moment I saw a raw heartache outside of it. There in el 
A stone gris en la hierba was an enormous thrush, as black as the carbon, with a pale beak. 
Pecho amarillo with dark leaves. Crack! He had caught a snail and 
was hitting it against the stone. Crack! Crack! 
Suddenly, Bilbo understood. Oblivious all the way, he landed on the horn. 
and I greeted the dwarfs, shouting and greeting. Those who were most looking for 
Cayeron on the rocks and as quickly as they could reach the edge of the cornice 
wondered what the devil would pass by; they shouted to help them. 
raised the eyes (except Bombur, clearly: they were asleep). 
Bilbo explained quickly. They all watched in silence: the hobbit of the stone reached the 
gray stone, and the young men with beards moved about, observing with impatience.
The sun shone again and again, and their hopes vanished. If it was wrapped in a 
cloud belt it became red and disappeared. The enos were gone, but Bilbo followed 
if these cases were unmovable. The small moon hung on the horizon. 
It was annoying. Suddenly, when their hopes were lower, a red light... 
A ray of sunshine escaped like a dede through a cry into the cloud. A piece of 
light entered directly through the opening on the bay and fell over the smooth surface. 
rocky wall The old zorzal, who had been observing from an elevated position with 
small and brilliant eyes and a shining head, emitted a sudden trinity. Hubo a 
Crujido fire. A raucous trozo got lost from the wall and fell. A key appears. 
De sudden, a tres pies del soil. 
Quickly, fearing that the opportunity would vanish, the young men rushed to 
the rock and chased it in vain. 
- The key! The key! -gritted Bilbo-. Where is Thorin? 
Thorin was surprised. 
- The key! -gritted Bilbo-. The girl who came with the map! Try it now. 
We'll have more time today!” 
Then Thorin looked up and knew the heart of his heart. 
neck I use it on the sharpener. I went and turned! Clara! The shine disappeared. 
Outside, the sun disappeared, the moon disappeared and later appeared in the sky. 
Now they all pressed together and little by little a part of the rock wall gave way. 
fireplace. There will be large and straight lines that will please you. A door of five feet high and 
three years were outlined and, slowly and without making a noise, they swung inside. 
It seemed as if the darkness flowed like a vapor from the hole in it the 
mountain slope and a profound darkness therein in which nothing could be seen. 
Before your eyes, an open mouth that was directed inwards and downwards. 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 
For a long time the ghosts remained in the darkness in front of the door and discussed: 
Until Thorin said: 
"Now is the moment of our esteemed Sr. Baggins, who has demonstrated 
that my friend was a good companion on our long journey and a hobbit full of 
courage 
. the moment of 
fulfilling the service for which he was included in our Company; now is the 
moment of receiving his reward". 
You are familiar with Thorin's style on important occasions, so that... 
I will not give you more, even if it continues much longer than 
this. It was certainly an important occasion, but Bilbo felt impatient. 
Now he was also quite familiar with Thorin and knew what he was. 
leading it.
"You want to say that you think it's my job to enter the secret passage first, oh... 
Hello Thorin Thrain Shield of Roble, that your beard grows even more", I say 
with emphasis, "Say it once and you're right! You could deny me. I care about you". 
For two of them, which are not in the original version, so 
I believe that you owe me a reward. But in the third place, everything is valid. 
as my father said, and for some reason I don't think he denies me. Quiz 
"I've tried to trust in my heart more than in the old days"—I say. 
Here I say the spring passed before moving up to my house, but it seemed that it had passed in the past. 
-But in all ways I think I'll go to get a view immediately and end with this. 
Are you coming with me now? 
I didn't expect a chorus of volunteers, because I wasn't disappointed. 
Wires and Kili seemed uncomfortable and stood on a stone, but the rest... 
I had no pretense of offering anything, except the old Balin, the one who 
would care enough for the hobbit. I say that at least I will enter and... 
Quiz a little about the way also, list to ask for help if necessary. 
The maximum that can be said about the elfins is this: they had the intention of paying 
Bilbo received a very generous portion for his services; They had to do it to make it. 
It was a very despicable job for them, and they didn't care that many people would have 
it; but everyone knows that it is possible to save them from the problem, 
if they try to do so, as they did in the case of the trolls at the beginning of 
their adventures before they will find some particular reason to be liked 
by them. There it is: dwarfs are not heroes, but calculating people with a 
great idea of ​​​​the value of money; some are deceitful and treacherous and 
there are many very bad things; some of them are not, but they are quite decent people like Thorin and 
Company, if you don't expect too much. 
The stars rise out of the sky into a pale sky with black fringes. 
When the hobbit went to the charming door and went to the 
mountain. It was much easier than I hoped. Este no was a duende. 
entrance, or rudimentary cave of the elves of the forest. It was a passage made for years, at 
the height of his wealth and ability: straight as a ruler, with a smooth floor and 
smooth sides, with a gentle slope that would never vary, directed to some place. 
A final scene in the darkness below. 
After one day, Balin told Bilbo: "Good luck!" and I figured out where it was.
Then he could see the faint outline of the door and, through a trick of the echoes of 
the tunnel, he heard the whisper of the whispering voices of others. 
outside. Then the hobbit uses the ring and, warned by the echoes, 
you must take more care than a hobbit not to make noise, so that it slides silently down. 
Down, down in the darkness. I was tired, but on charity 
I decided and sobered up. He was a very different hobbit than that... 
he had been waiting for a long time since he had left the Bolsón for a long time. There were 
symbols that didn't have a bag of bread. Put the dagger on it and 
use the base, adjust the belt and follow it forward. 
"For now, wait for the opportunity, Bilbo Bolsón", I say to you. "You 
have eaten and put the cake this night of the party, and now you 
have to pay for it and pay for it! My God, how stupid I was and soy! -I say 
the least common part of it. "I don't have any use for the dragons protected 
treasures, and you can always ask yourself here, yes. Just let me know 
. I stood up and discovered that this horrible tunnel was the recipient of my house! 
So, don't worry, but follow and follow until no sign of... 
The door behind you has disappeared. He was completely alone. Ready thought 
Empezaba to heat up. "Is this a kind of shine that I see?" 
"Are we just coming down there?", he thought. 
It was. As I progressed, I was growing and growing, as long as no one doubts. 
to the respect. It was a red light that turned every more red. También era 
Ahora, sin duda, hacía heat en el tunnel. Volutas de vapor flotaban hacia arriba y passaban. 
He started sweating. A sound also ran away in his eyes, a kind of 
roar like the roar of a great olla galloping into the fire, mixed with an 
extrusion like the snoring of a gigantic cat. This is reflected in the unmistakable 
gurgling noise of some enormous animal snoring while close to the bottom in the 
shining red in front of it. 
It was at this point that Bilbo discovered himself. Starting from now, he continued the 
most valiant thing he had ever seen. The terrible things that happened later... 
They were nothing compared to this. Play the real fight in the tunnel. 
alone, before seeing the great pilgrim who blinded him. In any case, after 
Hizo a short parade and continued; and you can imagine it by attaching to the end of the 
tunnel, a large opening and a shape very similar to the arrival door.
Through it is the head of the hobbit. Before that you enter the great hall or hall of mazmorras of the ancient ancients, just at the top of the mountain. 
root It is dark cases, because one can only vaguely perceive its immensity, but 
from the side they seek of the rocky ground a great shine rises. The shine 
of Smaug! 
There he came, an enormous golden red dragon, deeply asleep; if you've noticed a change. 
of his jaws and nasal passages, and volumes of humor, but his fires were low in 
sleep. Below it, below all its extremities and its enormous rolled neck, and 
A on its red, for all sides, extending to the width of the invisible planes, it extended 
Countless sheep of precious things, gold and without lips, gems and 
joys and plain red color below the red light. 
Smaug lay, with the wings folded like an immeasurable bat, turned in part. 
on the one hand, so that the hobbit can see his lower parts and on his wide and pale 
body he will be covered with gems and fragments of gold for his large rest on his 
expensive bed. Beyond that, where the faces are most looking, they could vaguely see 
the shoulders, arms and hats, swords and lances grasping; and there 
in the rows there were large jars and pots filled with a row that could not be 
added. 
Deciding that Bilbo was robbed of the alien is no description. 
No words to express the sound, because the men changed the 
language they learned from the elves in those days so that the whole world was 
marvelous. Bilbo had longed to talk and sing about the treasures of the dragons before, but the 
splendor, the splendor, the glory of this treasure had never been brought home. 
From His heart was filled and filled with enchantment and with the desire 
of wine; and I looked motionless, forgetting the expansive 
guard, the gold, more than the price and the reward. 
I looked at myself during what seemed like an eternity, before being tempted against my will. 
if they rob themselves of the shadow of the door, across the ground, as far as the edge is concerned, they search 
for the sheep of treasures. When the dragon slept, there was a terrible 
amenity even while he slept. I grabbed a large bowl of two ass, as heavy as 
I could carry, and launched a fearful sight to arrive. Smaug moved a wing, 
opened a claw, the snoring of his snoring changed to note. 
Then Bilbo howled. But the dragon was not lost, not until it moved. 
in others he spoke of greed and violence, lying there in his stuffed room
while the little hobbit advanced laboriously through the wide tunnel, his heart lain with strength. 
and there was a more feverish fear in the corners that when he lowered himself, 
but he still grabbed the cup, and his main thought was: "I love it! This is it!" 
I'll show it to you. I look more like a tender than a thief! Good, 
no more than that.” 
That's right. Balin was very happy to return to the hobbit, and how 
enchanted he was, how surprised he was. He got up to Bilbo and took him to 
the open air. It was in the middle that the clouds had covered the stars, but Bilbo 
Yacía with his eyes closed, gazing and enjoying the sensation of the freshness. 
new air, and just noting the excitement of the dwarfs, how 
they praised him and gave him palms on his shoulders and they wondered how all their 
families for generations would come to his service. 
The wines follow, passing the cup from hand to hand talking. 
Enchanted to have recovered their treasure, when suddenly a large 
train was desperate in the mountain below as there was a previous volcano that 
had decided to start eruptions once again. The door behind them 
was pulled right up to the edge and blocked with a stone, but suffered. 
From the wide tunnel lurked the terrible echoes, from the deepest depths of the depths, of a 
roar and a stone that made the ground beneath his feet tremble. 
Entonces the teenagers forgot about their happiness and their confidences for a 
moment before and they were encouraged by me. Smaug aún It was for you. 
It is not better to leave a living dragon outside your 
calculus, if you live looking for it. Dragons may not have much real use for 
all their subjects, but as a general rule they know until the last moment, especially after 
wide stance; y Smaug was not the exception. He had passed a 
quiet sound (as a warrior, completely insignificant in the same way but 
equipped with a bitter sword and great courage, he appeared in a very despicable way) 
to sleep, and of sleep to despair. Has an alien alien. 
air in his cave. Can you have a stream of air from this little guy? I never 
felt very happy about it, even though it was so small, and now I looked at it carefully. 
He wondered and wondered why he had never blocked it. Lately, 
Casi believed he had heard the faint echoes of a coup from him parents 
I arrived and descended through the road to recovery. It is moved and pulled 
on the leg to protect it. Then missed the cup!
Thieves! Fuego! Murder! Something like this hasn't happened since the first time that... 
I went to the mountains! On rabies is indescribable, the class of rabies that is 
only seen when rich people who have more than what they can take advantage of suddenly find 
something they have held for a long time but have never used or wanted before. 
The fire erupted, the room hummed, the roots of the mountain were sacked. He 
put his head in vain in the small sharp one, and then he rolled on his longitude 
Juntos, roaring like a subterranean thunder, they rose running from his deep healing. 
Through its large door, you can access the enormous steps of the Palacio de la Montaña. 
y hacia the Puerta Principal. 
To get to the mountain all the time until the thief has been caught and the thief will be robbed. 
and it was my only thought. It rose from the door, the waters 
rose in a ferocious and hissing vapor, and rose loudly into the air and 
settled on the top of the mountain in a chorus of green and scarlet llamas. The 
dwarfs heard the terrible rumor of their huida and they acted against it. 
The walls of the covered terrace of grass are nestled beneath the rocks, with the hope that in some way... 
to escape the fearful eyes of the hunting dragon. 
There they all died if no one left for Bilbo once again. 
another time "Quick! Quick!" jaded "The door! The tunnel! No need for anything 
here." 
Skilled for these words, they are about to enter the tunnel carefully. 
when Bifur shouted: "My first! Bomber and Bofur, let's keep them. 
I forgot them, they're down in the valley!" 
"We will be killed, and all our ponis also, and all our provisions will be lost". 
-se quejaron los demás-. We can't do anything. 
-It's crazy! said Thorin, recovering his dignity. We cannot ignore it. 
them. Enter, Señor Bolsón and Balin, and you, Fili and Kili, the 
dragon will not tend to us all. Now, you guys, where are the eyes? 
Quick!" 
They asked the poorest moments for those who had passed away just now. 
The horrible sounds of Smaug's wrath resounded in the feet of the lejos. 
He arrived; at any moment he could pounce or fly while taking turns. 
And meet him there, looking for the edge of the the dangerous soldier pulled the bullets in place 
. Bofur was hit, and everyone 
was 
safe if I looked over them. 
If you asked for a change. A red light touched the apoyo points. 
wine the dragon. 
Only then will you have time to fly back to the tunnel,pulling and hauling.
their bulls, when Smaug came running from the North, lamenting the 
slopes of the mountains with llamas, beating his great wings with a roar like the 
roaring wind. In the hot weather they wrinkled their hair in front of the door and 
they entered through the cry that had left them and they were hidden while they were inside. 
The burning fires jumped and the black shadows from the rocks danced. Then the darkness 
fell at the next step. The raised a cry of terror, broke their hearts. 
and galloped safely. The dragon lowered himself and turned to pursue him, 
and he was gone. 
"This will be the end of our little beasts!" I say Thorin. "No one can 
escape from Smaug as soon as he sees it. Here we are and here we will tend to wait for us. 
Unless someone appetizing walk the wide open miles back to the river with 
Smaug on guard! 
It was not a pleasant thought! If they got deeper into the tunnel and 
they all yacized and thundered even though it was hot and suffocating, stop loving them. 
if it was blocked by the door's return. Every now and then, through the 
night, the roar of the flying dragon grows and then passes away and 
disappears, while once or twice on the slopes of the mountains. 
He told him about the ponies and about the bones of the camps that he had... 
He discovered that the men had suffered from the river and the lake and had 
climbed the mountain slope from the valley where the ponies had been 
; but the door resisted the scrutinizing gaze, and the small space in the high walls was kept free ferocious calls. For a long time he had searched in vain until 
the lover cooled his anger and returned to his golden light to sleep. 
and to reunite new strengths. I would not forget or forgive the robe, no yes 
A thousand years converted him into a humid stone, but he could then allow himself the light of... 
He waits. Slowly and in silence, I recovered and entered my eyes. 
When I reached the morning, the terror of the ghosts disappeared. They realized 
that this type of hair was inevitable when dealing with such a guard, 
and that there was no need to abandon their search all the time. Soon they could escape. 
Just now, how Thorin was reported. Their ponies were lost or killed, and 
they tended to wait a little longer before Smaug would relax his guard. 
enough to allow them to reach the wide path. For your part, we have saved 
enough reserves so that they will last all the time. 
They debated long and hard about what they needed to do, but they didn't care about it at all.
form of destruction of Smaug, who always had a weak point on his 
planes, as Bilbo felt inclined to point out. Thus, as is the nature of people who 
were completely perplexed and began to wonder about the hobbit, liking him. 
for what he had initially liked so much: to take a cup and 
provoke the wrath of Smaug so readily. 
-What more do you think a thief can do? —asked Bilbo bored—. Yo... 
I didn't dedicate myself to killing dragons, which is the work of warriors, up to robber. 
treasure. Do the best you can. Are you hoping to fly trotting? 
Does Thror's treasure spread above me? If you have any question that you can 
do, I think you can comment. You must be betrayed quinientos 
No thieves. I'm sure you give a lot of credit to your boyfriend, but... 
You can't expect that once in a while you'll lose sight of the enormous significance of your claim. 
away from me It would take hundreds of years to save it to the light, you will get fifty. 
once greater and Smaug as docile as a rabbit." 
After that, above all, the two men forgave her again. "What does this mean?" 
—What do you propose that we do, Señor Bolsón? —asked Thorin kindly. 
"I have no idea at this moment, if you refuse. to eliminate the 
treasure. This obviously depends entirely on some new turn of heart and 
the deshacerme of Smaug. Deshacerme de los dragones is not for anything special to me, but... 
I'm sure everything is possible to think about it. Personally, I don't have any hope, and 
"I hope he will be safe at home". 
Don't forget about it now! What do we have today? 
"Good, if you really want to advise me, we should decide that we can't do anything more than that... 
Ask where we are. From day to day, without doubt, we can go up safely and go back." 
the air. Quiz in a little while one or two could be chosen to go back to the 
table towards the river and put our leaders back. But even so, 
everyone in the world should be inside the tunnel at night. 
"Now I have an offer for you. I'll keep my ring and I'll look for it carefully. 
This same average day, yes, every time Smaug should be waiting for a siesta, and that's what I'm doing. 
I'm plotting it. Quiz something similar. 'Each taste has a weak point'. 
As my father said, I'm sure of this anyway which was not by any personal 
experience." 
Naturally, the dwarfs accepted the offer with enthusiasm. I know... 
You have to respect the little Bilbo. Now he has become the true leader of his 
adventure.He was busy having his own ideas and plans. When I got there in the middle of the day
I got ready for another trip up the mountain. Well, that's it. 
I enjoyed them, supposedly, but they weren't that bad now that I knew, more or less, what they were. 
in front of the el. If you were more knowledgeable about the dragons and their cunning forms, it... 
You might have become more accustomed and less hopeful of catching them. 
siesta 
The sun shone when it struck, but it was as dark as the night in the 
tunnel. The light from the door, once closed, quickly disappeared as the thought advanced. 
bye So silent was he on the path that the hum in a soft wind could barely 
have overcome him, and he felt inclined to feel a little proud of the same thing as the truth. 
If you look at the lower door. Only if there was a very faint shine. 
"Old Smaug is sleepy and sleepy," he thought. "It can't be a worm and it 
'll come to me. Come on, Bilbo! If you forgot or never heard 
above the scent of the dragons' sense of smell. It's also a strange thing that can 
keep your eyes open and look at them carefully, because they're suspicious. 
Surely it's bad." I seemed deeply asleep, dead and dark, with 
only a hint of invisible vapor, when Bilbo was 
once again about to rise to the 
ground 
. Left of Smaug. Just trying to sleep! I was... 
Observing the entrance to the tunnel! Bilbo quickly retreated and bent 
the heart of his ring. Then Smaug spoke. 
- Good, thief! You hue and feel your air. Now you breathe. Fri. 
Moving on! Come on again, have more! 
But Bilbo wasn't that ignorant about the dragons, yes 
Smaug hoped that it would be so easy to find that he would feel disappointed. 
- No, thank you, oh Smaug of Tremendous! -answered. 
"They don't come for gifts. Only the truth is that 
to see you really were as big as the stories said. Don't believe them. 
"Do you know now?" I said the dragon I spoke of, although I didn't 
know 
it 
. 
"There are good ways to be a thief and a liar." 
It seems like the name sounds to you, but I don't remember having any oil. 
Before. Here are you and where does it come from, if you allow me to ask? 
"Clearly you can! I come from the bottom of the hill, and from the bottom of the hills and 
over the hills I took my paths. Y across the air. I am the one who walks 
invisible." 
-As I believe it -I say Smaug-, but this is not the usual 
name." 
"I am the track chaser, the short tarpaulin, the fly that strikes.I was chosen for 
"the number of the best."
"This title is so good!", the dragon joked. "But the numbers on the phone don't always 
go up." 
"I know he's the one who keeps his friends alive, picks them up and hauls them 
alive from the water again. He went up from the end of a bag, but not a single bag went up 
above me." 
"These don't deserve so much credit," Smaug joked. "I am a friend of 
the souls and the guest of the eagles. I am the ring keeper and the bearer of the ring; and I am 
—Jinete de barrel —continued Bilbo, starting to feel complacent with his certainty. 
"This is the best!" I say Smaug. "But don't let your imagination fly. 
Let 
's 
continue 
!
​
​ 
you all know about Bilbo's adventures to what he referred to), but 
Creyó had understood it enough and found himself among others in his wicked interior. 
"I thought about it too", I dreamed for myself 
. No 
, I've been like this for a few years, but I'm ready to change it! 
- Very good, oh, jinete de barrel! -I say in a loud voice-. Quizás Barril was your 
name; and sometimes not, but it was still good enough. You can walk 
invisible, but don't wait until the end. Let me tell you that I am as old 
as ever and ready to pick up and come to everyone else. In exchange for 
the excellent food I will give you some advice for your benefit: don't 
worry more about what you can avoid! 
- Dwarves! -I said Bilbo feigning surprise-. Don't bother me! said 
Smaug. "I know the smell (and the taste) of the wine, no one better. Don't say it." 
Tell me that I can like a pony mounted on a horse without giving me credit! We'll go to a 
bad end, we'll go with these friends, the thieves of the barrel. I don't care if 
you go back and tell me." But I didn't tell Bilbo that he had 
a color that I couldn't distinguish absolutely, the color of a hobbit; it was completely outside. 
The experience disconcerted him enormously. 
"I suppose you got a fair price for that too," he continued.
-Let's go, are you serious? "Nada Well, it's typical of them.
Let's assume that they're hidden away and you're doing the 
right 
job Sales alive, I'll be... 
lucky." 
Bilbo began to feel really uncomfortable. Every time Smaug... 
A wandering gaze, chasing him between the shadows, suddenly crossed him. 
He struck him, and an inexplicable desire arose from him running up and 
revealing himself and telling the truth to Smaug. heh, he was in grave 
danger 
below 
the dragon's henchman 
. 
"Yes! Yes! Admits from 'nosotros'", replied Smaug. "Why can't we decide 'nosotros'?" 
Is this the case, Mr. Your number? I'm happy to know that you 
've got other things to do with my 
gold 
. In this case, 
sometimes it's not a total waste of time. years, no one could achieve it. 
¿Muy lejos? Not much use on the road? Little use in the forest? 
My God! Did you ever think about it in the street? A tenth of a part, yo... 
I guess, oh my guess, that these were the terms, huh? But what happens with...? 
¿Entrega? What about transportation? What about the armed guards and the peas? 
Smaug returned to the carcajadas. He had a wicked and cunning heart, and he knew that up 
The conjectures were not very questionable, although it was suspected that the Men of the Lake were on 
the rear side of the planes, and that the majority of the loot must be held there. 
in the city it would be that in its youth it was called Esgaroth. 
I won't believe it but little Bilbo was really very disconcerted. 
Now all your thoughts and energies have been concentrated on heading to the 
mountain and meeting the entrance. No one was bothered to wonder how 
the treasure should be removed, certainly no one knew how any part of it was. 
Could fall into his part if he revolves hasta Bolsón Cerrado. 
I lower the hill. 
Now a despicable suspicion began to arise in their mind: whether they had... 
They also forgot this important point, or whether they were wondering about it. 
Do you listen to it all the time? This is the effect that keeps the language of the dragon in... 
inexperienced. Bilbo, above all, must have been on guard; but Smaug 
had a personality that was quite annoying. 
"I say", I say, in an effort to remain loyal to my friends and 
keep you apart, "it was only a last minute idea for us. Let us come 
to the top of the hill and to the bottom of the hill, to the waves and the wind, to come. Surely, oh Smaug 
I remember you incalculably, well Let us know what the outcome has been 
:"Are there any bitter enemies?"
Then Smaug actually returned, a sound devastating that struck Bilbo. 
On the ground, as soon as they reached the tunnel, the ghosts curled together and 
I imagined that the hobbit had a sudden and despicable ending. 
"Venganza!" resoplò, and the light of his eyes illuminated the passage from the ground. 
at the roof like a scarlet flash. "Venganza! The King below the Mountain 
has died, and where are his relatives who are trying to come? Girion, Señor de Valle. 
he is dead, and I have devoted myself to his village as a lobe among the old ones, and where 
are the sons of his sons who are trying to look for him?" I know where I wanted to 
stand and resist the warriors of the past and there was no one like them in the world 
today 
. if he settled. "My armor is like the shields of these capes, my 
swords are swords, my swords are thrown, the impact of a ray falls on me, my 
hurricane wings and I am alienated from death!" 
-I always mean it -I say Bilbo with a tired chill- that 
The dragons were more suave because of this, especially in the region of... eh... 
chest; but no doubt someone so fortified has thought about it." 
The dragon was taken with him in his jacket. "This information is 
old," he said. "I'm armored to arrive and to go down with bullets from my body 
and hard stones. No sword can pass through me. 
-You can get it right -I say Bilbo-. In truth, no one can have any part 
equal to Lord Smaug the Impenetrable. This is the magnificence of 
wearing a shawl of fine diamonds!” 
- Yes, it's rare and wonderful, in truth - I said Smaug absurdly complacent. 
I didn't know that the hobbit had noticed that 
I had a peculiar cover on my previous visit and I was eager to get to know him more. 
seen for your own reasons. The dragon rod. "¡Mira!", I say. 
What does this say? 
Wonderfully decluttering! Perfect! Immaculate! Impressive! -Bilbo exclaimed 
in a loud voice, but what he thought inside was: "I'm stupid! But you have a 
great loss in the color of your naked body, as naked as a snail outside of your 
shell!" 
After seeing that Señor Bolsón's only idea was raised. "Good, yo... 
"I really don't have to keep your Magnificence for more time", I say, "I don't have to keep it 
for a long time". I think 
it 
's very necessary. 
It was an unfortunate comment, because the dragon was called terrible. 
between him, and even though he quickly went down the slope, he didn't have much time.
enough to be comfortable before Smaug's expansive head was tucked 
against the opening of the others. Please, the head and the jaws were not released... 
they were removed, but the nasal passages sent fire and steam to pursue it, and it was 
in this case I was killed and fell blindly with great pain and pain. He 
felt sufficiently complacent with the intelligence of his conversation. 
with Smaug, but with a mistake at the end he found himself right. 
"You'll never get back from living dragons, Bilbo, stupid!", I said to him so much, and 
he became converted into one of his favorite sayings later and it became a proverb. " 
We still didn't finish this adventure," he agreed, and that was 
certainly enough too. 
Late he was converting into the night when he 
climbed up again and found himself lost in the umbral. The dwarves revived him. 
and they took care of their quemaduras the best they could; but it took a long time. 
before the hair on the back of the neck and the heels will begin to grow as they should: 
everything was chamosed and wrinkled along the skin. As many 
of your friends did everything possible to animate him and were eager to learn his story. 
wondering to know especially why the dragon had made such a horrible noise, 
and how Bilbo had escaped. 
But the hobbit was worried and bothered, and they encountered difficulties. 
en sacarle something Thinking about it well, he was now... 
Complaining about some of the things I had told the dragon, and he wasn't anxious 
to repeat them. The old thrush was found on a rock with his head 
tilted to one side, listening to everything he wanted. Show the sick man who he is. 
Bilbo was in a very bad mood: he took a stone and turned it to the thrush, who 
simply turned it back to one side and returned. 
- Cursed bird! —I say Bilbo enfadado—. I think I'm listening, and I... 
"I don't like it." 
-Déjalo in peace! -I say Thorin-. The zorzales are good and friendly... 
This is a very old bird, and it is the last question of the ancient 
race that lived here, domesticated in the hands of my father and 
grandfather. They were a long-lived and magical race, and this could even 
be one of those who were alive for a hundred years or more 
. The men of Dale used to keep the trick of understanding their 
language, and they used them as messengers to fly to the Men of the Lake and 
on the other side." 
-Good, I'm sure you will tend to get news to bring to City of the Lake, if that's what you want. 
"It's over," said Bilbo; people."
"There is a problem with the twist of the twist. 
" "What has happened?" the dwarves screamed. "Sigue con tu 
¡cuento!" 
Bilbo told her everything that could be recorded, and he confessed that he had... 
A despicable feeling that the dragon had finally arrived, starting from his certainties he reached 
the campsites and the ponies. "I am sure that you know that we are coming from the City of Lake 
and that we will receive help from there; and I have a horrible feeling that the next movement 
may be in that direction. Oh, I'm never shy about saying this above 
the barrel; it would have been a blind idea in these places to think of the 
"Hombres del lago". 
-¡Go, go! It cannot be avoided, and it is difficult not to fall into the temptation of talking. 
"To a dragon, that's what I always hear," Balin said, eager to console him. 
"I believe that he is very good, if you ask me: discover something very useful. 
In every way, he went home with life, and this is more than what the majority can say. 
Who have held words with people like Smaug. It may be a mercy and a 
blessing 
even to know the naked park in the diamond 
of 
old 
Gusano 
chaleco 
. blows to a sleeping one had a higher probability of falling into disaster 
from the front. While they were talking, the thrush was listening, until 
the stars began to appear. 
And while they talked so much and the shadows widened, Bilbo 
turned away more and more unhappily. 
At the end I interrupted him insecure here», I 
said don't see the feeling of feeling here. The dragon has marked all 
the pleasant green, and in all ways it has brought the night and it's cool. But I feel 
in my eyes that this place will be attacked again. Smaug now you know. 
How I came to your living room, and you can trust that you will find out where 
the other end of the tunnel is... It will break all this 
side 
of the mountain. 
- You are very sad, Señor Bolsón! -I say Thorin-. Why didn't Smaug come?
So, are you so anxious to keep us outside, blocking the lower end? No, I don't have it, or 
we must have it shielded." 
"No, no, because at first I wanted to try to attract someone. 
I want to come in, I suppose, and now I'll ask why I'm hoping until after 
the end of this night, or because I don't want to lose money in the dormitory 
, I can avoid it, but I'd rather not discuss it. Smaug will seal in 
any moment, and our only hope is to recover ourselves in the tunnel and close the... 
door." 
It seemed so serious that the men finally understood what the word was. 
Even though they delayed in closing the door, it seemed like a desperate plan, because no 
one knew they could open it again From here on in and how. 
The idea of ​​being locked up in a place like this was... 
He didn't like the journey to the healing of the dragon. Likewise, 
as far out as in the tunnel... 
He felt inside, and continued talking 
about the dragon's evil words. Bilbo 
said 
he would never be safe, or at least be able to be completely safe 
. disappear. 
"We know that it would be a desperate adventure," said Thorin, "and 
we all knew it; and we thought that when we were ready it would be a 
sufficient moment to think about what to do with respect. On the other hand, Sr. Bolsón, I... 
I assure you that we are more pleased and able to choose Your own Decimocuarto 
, 
as ready as we have something to 
divide 
. and we will assume our part of the cost. 
When you arrive at the moment, cream or not, as you want. 
Starting from there, the conversation turned to the great treasure in itself and to the things that... 
Thorin and Balin recorded. If they asked they would still be lying. 
There, ilesas, in the lower hall: the lances that were made for the armies 
of the great king Bladorthin (dead long ago), each one held a forged sword three times. 
The head and its shafts were encrusted with ingenious gold, but were never 
bought or paid; Hechos shields for dead warriors last a long time; the great 
C opa Thror's gold, of his hands, hammered and tall with pajaros and 
flowers, his eyes and petals were joyful; sides of the skin golden and
plated and impenetrable; the collar of Girion, Lord of the Valley, he of 
the Quinientas emeralds as green as the grass, that God to arm his 
hijo mayor with a brigo of rings thin as never before had seen 
before, because it was made of pure plate with the power and strength of the 
triple maple. But the most beautiful of all was the great white gem, which the young men 
had encountered below the roots of the Mountain, the Heart of the Mountain, 
the Stone of the Ark of Thrain. 
- The Piedra del Arca! The Stone of the Ark! -Thorin murmured in the darkness, 
dreaming with the barbilla over the rods. "It was like a globe with a 
thousand facets; it shone like light in the light of the fire, like water in the sun, 
"Like the snow below the stars, like the rain above the moon!" 
But the enchanted desire of the treasure had fallen on Bilbo. All 
during your conversation, only listen to the media. If I hear you look for the 
door with a look attentive to any sound coming from outside, the other one 
will be alert to the echoes more than the murmurs of the birds, to any whisper. 
of a movement from very low. 
The darkness was more profound and he felt more restless every day. "Close the door!" 
He said: "I'm afraid this will drag on my medula. I really enjoy this silence." 
Less than the old tree. Close the door before it's too late! 
Algo in his voice the God to the dwarfs an uncomfortable sensation. 
Little by little Thorin was freed from his dreams and, rising, he passed the 
stone that was blocking the door. Then push it and close it with a 
metal cap and a scratch. No cracks inside the door. 
They are stuck in the mountains! 
Y just in time. Just had a trecho. 
the tunnel when a coup hit the coast of the mountain as the 
deeds of the forest and balanced by giants. The rock 
was scratched and the stones were covered by the techo on their heads. 
I don't like 
thinking about it. Huyeron lower through the tunnel, while turning away at 
the 
estrus of Smaug pebbles, destroying walls and rocks with the azotes of its 
enormous cola, until its small and elevated place of camp, the quemada hierba, the 
stone of the thrush, the cubiertas walls of caracoles, the end of the horn and everything 
disappeared in a mountain of pedazos and an avalanche of arrows
The stones cayeron by the cliff towards the lower valley. 
Smaug had abandoned his recovery in silence and stealthily, he rose into the air and 
Luego floated heavy and slow in the darkness like a monstrous beast, for the 
wind took the west of the Mountain, with the hope of catching someone unprevented by 
someone else or someone else there, and to atone for the loss of his 
passing the thief has used it. This was the end of his anger when I 
couldn't meet anyone and I wouldn't leave anyone, even where I assumed the salt should be. 
Actually ser. 
After having released his anger in this way, he felt better and thought about it 
on his heart that he would not want to be disturbed by this direction. In the 
meantime, I wanted to come back again. "Jinete de barrel!", he replied. 
"Your feet come out of the water's edge and suffer through the water without a 
doubt. I don't know your color, but if you weren't one of those men from the 
Lake, you saw your help. I'll see and record this is the real thing. 
¡Rey low the mountain!" 
He rose in llamas and headed towards the south, rumbling along the Rio Corriente. 
NOT IN THE HOUSE 
For a long time, the little ones were heard in the darkness and absolute silence was above them. 
them. They come little and talk little. You can't count the 
passage of time; and as soon as they start to move, the whisper of their 
voices can resound and whisper in the tunnel. If they slept, they were still afraid of... 
the darkness and the silence that continued uninterrupted. For now, after days and days of 
hope, it seems, when they are tormented and tormented by 
the lack of air, they can no longer bear it. Cases have 
the sounds received from below announcing the return of the dragon. In silence... 
they fear some cunning diablura about it, but they can't ask themselves there forever. 
Thorin said: "We know the door!" I said. "I must feel the wind in 
my dear one ready or I will die. I think I would rather be clasped by Smaug in the 
Open before he asphyxiates himself here!" So that several of the wines rose up and turned 
away from where the door had been. But they found that the upper end of 
the tunnel had been shattered and blocked with rocky wheels. No 
magic that once obeyed will never open that door again. 
- We are caught! -gimieron-. This is the end. We will die here. 
But in some ways, just when the teenagers were most desperate, Bilbo felt an 
extra breath in his heart,like a great weight if there was a lot of weight on 
his chest.
"¡Come, come!", I say. "When you have life, have hope!", as my father said. 
only to say, 'Everything is worth it in the third place'. Go to the tunnel once 
again. I have been like this two times, when I had a dragon at the 
other end, so I risked a third visit when I wasn't sure. In all ways, 
the only salt is below. And I believe that this time it will be better that everyone comes with 
me." 
Desperate, they accepted, and Thorin was the first to advance. 
Bilbo's side. 
—¡Ten looked after! —whispered the hobbit—, and have the least noise possible. 
If! You may not have any Smaug in the bottom, but you may also have it. 
Don't let us run unnecessarily!" 
Bajaron, Bajaron. The enamels, above all, cannot be compared. 
with the hobbit in a green seal, and they are forced to reflect and 
drag the feet, which echoes are magnified in an alarming way; but every now and then 
when New, Bilbo, as usual, is discovered and learned; not a sound if I'm down. Search 
In the bottom, until he could play, Bilbo put the ring and went away. 
moving forward But it wasn't necessary: ​​the darkness was complete and everyone was 
invisible, with or without a ring. Indeed, it was such a black man that the hobbit led to the 
door unexpectedly, I put my hand in the air, if I swung forward and backwards. 
Leave the head behind the aisle! 
Once his mouth was down on the floor and he couldn't get up, 
he couldn't even breathe. But nothing moved. It doesn't have a ray of light. 
-except that, as it seemed to him, when he slowly raised his head to the end, 
there was a pale white surface, above him and the light in the twilight. But he certainly 
didn't have a hint of dragon fire, although the taste was intense in the 
place, and the taste of the vapor was on his tongue. 
At the end, Señor Bolsón could not stand it anymore. "Damn you, Smaug! 
Gusano! -chilló in a loud voice-. Stop playing in secret! Give me a 
Luz, and then how, you can catch me! 
If you hear poor echoes in the invisible room, but no answer. 
Bilbo stood up and realized that he didn't know which way to turn. 
"Now I wonder what demons are playing Smaug," I say. "It's not... 
in my house today (or this night, or whatever it is), I create. If Oin and Gloin 
have not lost on yesqueros, now we can get a little light, and 
here's a look before the light changes." 
- Luz! -shouted-. Can anyone get a light? 
So they were very alarmed when Bilbo took 
a step towards 
the end of the tunnel.
"Shh! Shh!" sylbaron cuando oyeron su voz; and although this 
helped the hobbit to discover where they were, it was some time before the 
Podría saw them more. But at the end, when Bilbo really... 
He came to pat the floor and shouted "Luc!" with all the strength of his 
voice, Thorin gave way, and Óin and Glóin were sent back to their 
bulges in the upper part of the tunnel. 
After one day, a refreshing shower showed them that they would return, once again with a 
small pine torch lit in his hand, and Gloin with a package of others 
under his arm. Quickly Bilbo trotted out of the door and took out the door; but I 
can't persuade them to ignite them or to come and join them. 
Todavia As Thorin carefully explained, Mr. Bolson followed, officially being an 
expert thief and detective. If you enjoyed a light, that was what you 
expected. They would expect in el tunnel su informe. So they felt like they were looking for the 
door and observed. 
See the small dark figure of the hobbit beginning to cross the land. 
supporting small light on high. Once in a while, while they were looking 
for enough, they caught a spark and a tinkle when they crossed with something golden. 
What. The light was thinner than the light that alighted in the vast hall; He began 
to elevate himself by dancing in the air. Bilbo was climbing the great 
treasure mountain. Ready he went to the top and continued moving forward. Then they saw it 
and thought about it for a moment; but they don't know the reason. 
It was the Piedra del Arca, from Corazón de la Montaña. So I suppose Bilbo. 
following Thorin's description; but in reality you could not have two gems like this, 
including such a marvelous treasure, including the whole world. As he ascended, 
the same white shimmer had shone before him and behind him. 
Little by little he converted into a small globe of pale light. Now, when I looked at it, it was... 
dark with a glimmer of many colors on the surface, reflected 
and distilled before the flickering light of its lamp. From the end I looked down. 
above her, and I knew the alienation. The great joy shone before his pies. 
on its own internal light, and without embargo, cut and molded by the trees, which had 
the excavation of the heart of the mountain for a long time, it took up all the light that fell 
on it and transformed it into a thousand sparkles of disparate white shine with 
the stems of the iris arch. 
Suddenly, Bilbo's arm headed straight for his enchantment. On
the small hand no one could reach over it, because it was a big and heavy gem; but 
he took it up, closed his eyes and looked at it more deeply. 
"Oh yes, I'm a thief!", he thought. "But I guess I have to decide on my 
own, some time. I said I could choose 
my part; and I think I'd choose this, if they'll take away all the rest!" All 
the same things happened to him, he had the uncomfortable feeling of having to choose. 
In fact, I didn't expect to include this wonderful joy, and that's a problem 
anyway, this could come up there. 
Now he continued again. On the other side of the great mountain, 
he suffered, and the spark of his torch disappeared from the sight of those who observed it. 
dwarfs But I'm ready to see it again at the moment. Bilbo was 
crossing the floor of the corridor. 
He continued until he reached the large doors on the other side, and 
then a stream of air cooled him, but in some cases he settled on the light. 
I admired timidly and saw the great passages and the 
vague beginnings of the wide stairs that were under the darkness. And yet there 
was no sign of the sounds of Smaug. She was about to give a half turn and get back, when 
a black shape fell on her and robbed her dear. Chilled and 
salted, it shook atrás y cayó. On the internal cayó de cabeza. 
Come on! 
“Just a bat, I suppose and hope!” I say sadly. "But now, what am I doing? 
What should I do? What is the East, the South, the North or the West? 
-Thorin! "Balin! "Oin 
! little noise in the wide darkness. 
Let someone come and help me!" By now the heart 
had been completely smashed. 
The teenagers said their little grits, even though the only word they said was... 
The only thing they could hear was "Ayuda!" 
- Now what demons have passed? Thorin asked. Of course 
it's not the dragon, or it won't continue chilling." 
They waited for a moment or two, and still there were no noises from the dragon, no... 
No one heard anyone, except Bilbo's distant voice. "Let's go, one of us, 
another light or two!" ordered Thorin. "It seems that we must come and 
help our thief." 
"It's our turn to help," Balin said, "and I'm willing to help you. 
In all ways, I hope that it will be safe for the moment." 
The light lit up several more people and then they all climbed up stealthily, one by one, 
and ran up the wall as boldly as they could. Not much time passed before 
they met their own Bilbo who had returned to him.He had recognized his genius the cordura quickly
returned 
as soon as the shine of 
its 
lights I say, yes 
I've talked about the Stone of the Arca at this moment, I don't know. The 
mere fleeting glimpses of the treasure that had captured the mind that was advancing 
along the way had relived all the fire of their hearts; and when 
the heart of a man, including the most respectable, is despised with gold and 
joy, it suddenly becomes fearful and can lead to being ferocious. 
You don't need to insist on them. Everyone is anxious. 
to explore the room while you will find the opportunity, and willing to believe that, 
For the moment, Smaug was away from home. Each time you grab a flashlight 
; and while they looked, first on one side and then on the other, they forgot 
to take care and even be careful. They speak in a loud voice and one shouts at another, as 
they see treasures on the hill or on the wall and they look at them in 
the light, touching them and touching them. 
Wires and Kili were cases of good humor, and when they met they would always be picked up by someone... 
There they would find many gold harps strung with the plate and the tocaron. 
them; and being magical (and also touched by the dragon, who had 
little interest in music) they were still refined. The dark passage was filled 
with a melody that remained silent for a long time. But the majority of the wines were 
more practical: they joined the gems and filled their bags, and let go of the one who 
couldn't retreat between their fingers with a sigh. Thorin was 
not the least important of them, but he always searched from one side to another 
that he could not meet. It was the Piedra del Arca; but I 
don't know if I tell no one. 
Now the enos removed the malla and the weapons of the murals, and 
they armed themselves. Thorin looked truly real, wearing a cloak of gold rings and a hat with a hard plate and a belt adorned with scarlet stones. 
- Mr. Bolson! -shouted-. Now you'll get the first reward! 
Stop this day and this bridge! 
I say this, I'll give Bilbo a little sweatshirt, for some youngster. 
elf prince makes a lot of time. It was made of plated maple, which the elves call mithril, and 
there was a belt of pearls and crystals. A light brown heart, 
strengthened with maple leaves and pinned to the edge with 
white gems, was placed on the hobbit's head. 
«I feel magnificent», he thought; «but I think it seems more absurd. 
How to return to the Capitol! So, I would like it to be a... 
A handmade one!
In all ways, Señor Bolsón kept the boy's most excited head. 
of the treasure that the dwarfs. Much before the dwarfs were unable to 
examine the treasures, they could and felt in the ground; 
and he began to nervously wonder what the end of everything would be. "Yo... 
"I'll give a lot of these precious pieces", he thought, "for a trago of 
some happy salt from one of Beorn's madera cuencos! 
-¡Thorin! -shouted in a high voice-. What now? We are armed, but what are we going for? 
Have you used any armor against Smaug the Terrible? This 
treasure has not yet been recovered. We don't look for gold anymore, but a form 
of escape; We are trying to live for a long time!” 
-Say the truth! -replied Thorin, remembering the words-. Come on, 
I'll see you again 
. Then they called to the others, and they gathered, and 
supporting their antlers above their heads, they passed through the enormous 
doors, without much looking at each other with stillness. 
They went to cover their shining skin with their bright young capes and 
their bright yellow ones with their bright hoods, and one by one they walked 
behind Thorin, a line of small lights in the darkness that was held in the distance, 
listening with honey once more to any noise above the light of the dragon. 
Although all the ancient adornments had been desmoroned or destroyed some time ago, and 
although everything was contaminated and ruined by the days and comings of the 
monster, Thorin knew every step and every turn. They went through large 
stairs, and went around and down the even and resonant paths, and went around again and 
went through more stairs, and more stairs. They were lisas, cut 
from the living rock, even and beautiful; and they arrived, arrived, the birds were subjected to it, and 
they did not encounter a single signal that they were alive, only furtive shadows that were near 
the proximity of their torches revolving in the corridors of the air. 
In every way, the stairs were not there for hobbit stones, and Bilbo was... 
Realizing that you couldn't continue, suddenly the tech was knocked off. 
tall and much more than the reach of the light of its torches. A white piece could 
be seen coming through some opening at the top, and the air would be sweeter. 
A soft light entered before them through one of the large doors that were twisted. 
their two pieces and half burned. 
"This is the great chamber of Thror," said Thorin; "The banqueting room 
and the boardroom. Not far away is the Main Door.
They passed through the room in ruins. There the mesas were rotting; 
There were volcanic seats and benches, charred and decomposed. 
It has skulls and bones in the ground, between jars and bowls, and round objects. 
cups for drinking and dust. As they passed through more doors 
farther away, a sound of water reached their eyes and the gray light became more intense. 
Suddenly more full. 
"Where the Rio Corriente is born," said Thorin. "From here 
the door opens. Let's go! 
From a dark opening in a rocky wall the water rushes in, and 
the flow stops in a narrow canal, tall and straight and deep. 
By the cunning of ancient hands. At the entrance to the corridor is a blocked chimney, also 
sufficient for many. men from the front ran quickly across the sea, and rode in 
a wide circle and here! the broad light of the 
day rose before them, a high arch rose in front, which also showed the fragments of the ancient work, 
although it was dripping. 
The misty sun sent its pale light 
over the floor in the umbral. 
A small wheel of murciélagos antorchas 
sobre 
ellos; dragon's peace. Now before us 
the water flows ruidly outward and forms foam in the valley. 
they lowered their poles against the ground and stood there looking out of the light. 
eyes They are connected to the Main Door and are looking at it towards Dale. 
-Good! said Bilbo. Don't expect to be looking at this door. 
And I never expected to be so happy as to turn to the sun and feel the 
wind in my dear. But, alas! It's so cold! 
It was. A bitter breeze from this morning, pleasant with the winter's light. 
He stood on the arms of the mountain and rode down the valley, and 
he sighed among the rocks. After a long time in the depths of the 
caves inhabited by dragons, the sun shines below. 
Suddenly, Bilbo realizes that not only was he killed until he was too happy. 
Indeed "It seems like it's late in the morning", I say, "so I suppose there is more 
or less time to say, if you have said something. But I don't feel... 
That the door of Smaug is the safest place to come. Let's go. 
Somewhere where we can feel calm a rat!” 
"Muy bien!" said Balin. "And I believe that this is the path to take:
We must head to the old lookout point on the south side of the 
mountain.” 
“How many hours is this?” asked the hobbit. 
Five hours of walking, I believe. It will be a hard path. The path... 
From the door to the wide edge of the river 
The road seems to 
be completely 
round Ravenhill. 
There is (or has) a path that goes up the road and goes to the post office 
. 
"My God!" growled the hobbit. 
"Sin desayuno! I wonder how many desserts and other goodies 
... 
Indeed, they may have passed two nights and a day (and 
not all of them without joy) because the dragon broke the magic door, but 
Bilbo had lost the whole thing, and he could have had just one night or a week of 
nights for what he could count. 
- Let's go, let's go! said Thorin laughing; his soul had begun to improve. 
again, and now I've sounded the precious stones in his bowls. "Don't call me 
. The palace is a harsh tormentor! Hope to clean it up and redecorate it! 
-It 
won't be until Smaug is dead, 
" Bilbo said sadly. the mountain amazed them! 
This idea greatly disturbed the young men, and they quickly decided that 
Bilbo and Balin were 
right 
. 
"It's a cold and lonely place," Bombur said. "You may have a drink, but I... 
I don't see the food. A dragon will always tend to walk in these places. 
Let's go! Let's go! —the men shouted—. Let's go along Balin's path! 
Below the rocky wall on the back side there was no path, so we followed the path. 
between the stones of the quiet side of the river, and the vacancy and 
desolation quickly returned to calm even 
Thorin 
. the arroyo is rough and not very deep; but they left the water 
Much difficulty, and suffered the high orilla. 
After traveling a short trecho they reached a 
deep 
valley overlooked among the rocks; There they sat down for a meal 
as 
they could, mainly merida and water a flavor, it keeps well indefinitely, it is supposed to be nutritious and it is 
certainly not entertaining, since it is very little interesting except as a
chewing exercise. The men of the lake did it for travel After that they continued again 
; and now the path headed towards the west and 
towards the river, and the great man of the mountain espolón who headed up 
the hill once again. 
they arrived, and they slowly advanced one behind the other, until finally, at the end of the day. 
By the end they reached the top of the ridge and saw the winter sun rise. 
Hacia abajo hacia el oeste. 
There they encountered a flat place without walls on three sides, but with a back 
to the north through a rocky wall in which there was an opening like a door. From 
behind this door there was a wide view of the east, the south and the west. 
"Here", I said Balin, "we have always kept ourselves vigilant, 
and this door behind leads to a room hollowed out in the rock which is here like 
a guard room. It has various places like ese alrededor de la Montaña. However, 
it seems that there is not much need for vigilance on the days of our prosperity, and 
the guards were not too comfortable, on the contrary, we could 
have no more warnings about the dragon's warning, and things could have changed. 
different side. Now we can hide ourselves for a long time. 
" 
No need for much if they saw us coming 
here 
, 
" 
said 
Smaug shouted 
and left himself alone in the rocker's room for several people, and 
there is a smaller room inside, more open than the outside window. 
Completely deserted location; Don't let the rescued animals seem to use it. 
the days of Smaug's dominion. There they deposited their cargo; and some of them 
landed on the ground immediately and hardened, but the others felt like they were looking for the outer edge. 
door and discussed their plans. Throughout their lives, they always turn to the same thing. 
Only one thing: where was Smaug? They looked to the west and there was nothing. 
And in the East there was nothing, and in the South there were no signs of the 
dragon, but there was a reunion of many people. Before that, they looked 
and marveled; but they are no longer trying to understand it, when the first 
Salieron stars freezes. 
FUEGO AND AGUA 
Now well, you wish, like the dwarfs, to hear news of Smaug, you must go
back to the night when he broke the door and went up flying furiously, 
two days before. 
The men of the lakeside town of Esgaroth stood in their majority in the interior, because the breeze 
was black and cold, but some walked by the muelles, 
and observing, as they liked to do, the stars shine from the 
sweet light of the lake to the opening in the sky. From its village, 
Lonely Mountain was completely hidden by the lower hills at the farthest extreme of the 
lake, across a hill from the river running from the 
north. Only on the highest peak could they see when the time was gone, and they 
rarely looked at it again, because it was ominous and gloomy even in the morning light. 
Now he was lost and disappeared, surrounded by darkness. 
Suddenly, he returned to appear; I touched it for a short while and it vanished. 
- Amazing! -I say one-. The lights again! Last night the vigilantes watched. 
They begin and leave from the middle until they love it. Everything is happening next. 
there." 
"Sometimes the King down the mountain was forging gold," I said again. 
"There's a lot that was in the north. It's time for the songs to show off 
the same things again.” 
"What is the king?", I said again in a sombre voice. "It is very probable that he is the 
Dragon's greatest warrior, the only king in the mountains that we 
know of." 
"You're always predicting what's sad!" they said. "Whatever 
the floods have been. Think about it happily! 
Suddenly a great light appeared on the lower part of the hills and 
the extreme north of the lake turned golden. "El Rey debajo del ¡ 
Montaña! —gritaron—. On the riqueza it is like the sun, on the plate like a 
stream, ¡sus rivers run golden! The river runs gold from the 
¡Montaña!, gritaron, and for all the parts they drink winds and they eat pies. 
Tenían prisa. 
Once again there was tremendous excitement and enthusiasm. But the 
kind of somber voice ran to the Master all the time. "The dragon comes or yo... 
I'm a fool! -shouted-. Call on the people! Call on the weapons! Call on the weapons! 
Suddenly warning trumpets sounded and resounded along the road. 
The rocky coasts. The victors stopped and happiness was converted into fear. As it 
was The dragon didn't meet them 
in such a short time, his speed was so great that they could see him like a 
fire snake as he ran and turned every time bigger and brighter, and 
there was no one who doubted that the prophecies had gone far
enough They took a little time. All the boats in the community are full of water. 
Each warrior was armed, each rifle and arrow was clear, and the bridge 
on the earth was rolled up and destroyed, before the roughness of Smaug. 
The terrible approach was more fierce and the lake waved red like the underlying fire of the... 
terrible beating of its wings. Between the shouts and complaints and the shouts of 
men, he crossed them, headed towards the bridges and was frustrated. 
The man has disappeared and his enemies are on an island in deep waters, long gone 
Deep, dark and fresh for his taste. If it were submerged in it, a vapor and a 
sufficient vapor would rise to cover the whole earth with a cloud during the days; but 
the lake was more powerful than it, it would settle before it could pass. 
across the street. 
Roaring, he returned to bar the city. A flood of dark arrows rose. 
and they chattered and resounded in their escapees and joys, and their flechas cayeron were 
ignited by the alien who was burning and simmering on the lake. There are no artificial fires that... 
I imagined the same views as that night. At the sonar of the bow 
and at the sound of the trumpets the wrath of the dragon led to its maximum point, 
wait until I'm blind and silent. Nobody was eager to fight against him. 
during many years; They were not afraid now, if they were not afraid of the 
man of his voice (Bard was his name), who ran from one side to the other, animating the 
archers and telling the Maestro to order them to shoot until the last shot. 
The fire leapt from the dragon's jaws. He flew in circles during a high flight. 
The air above it illuminated the entire lake; the trees in the banks shine like 
coppers and like blood with shadows jumping from thick black to his feet. 
Luego launched hacia below, directly across the storm of flechas, imprudently up 
anger, without worrying about turning their escaping coasts, hacias their enemies, seeking only 
to set the city on fire. 
The fire jumped from the ropes and from the ends of the Madeira vigas as it fell. 
below and above and again, although everything had been soaked with water 
before the wine was made. Once again, our hands rolled up the water so that 
a fish appeared. The dragon stopped moving at once. A movement of his company and the roof... 
of the Gran Casa was destroyed and destroyed. Inextinguishable Llamas 
Jumped high at night. Another flight, another, another home. 
and then others jumped on calls and fell; and yet no one could tell me about Smaug.
or hurt them more than a fly from the swamps. 
The men jump into the water on all sides. Women and 
children are pinned in loaded bottles at the market stall. Arms 
were locked on the ground. Once and for all, when only a little time 
has passed, the old songs of happiness to come have been sung over the years. Now 
the men cursed their names. The Maestro himself was sailing around on a large 
golden boat, with the hope of staying in the confusion and saving himself. Ready 
Toda the city would be deserted and burned hasta the surface of the lake. 
Esa was the dragon's hope. Everyone could be subjected to the bots for all that is... 
Then they could have a good sport by fucking them, or they could keep themselves until 
they died in the shade. They will try to attach it to the ground and it will be listed. Ready he 
would set fire to all the forests of the coast and mark each field and 
meal. Just now I was enjoying the sport of provoking the city more than 
I had enjoyed anything in years. 
But there was also a company of archers that was maintained within 
the houses in the name. His captain was Bard, of voice and our brother, 
whose friends accused him of prophesying floods and poisoned fish, 
although they knew his valor and courage, he was a descendant of the broad line. 
de Girion, señor de Dale, exposed him and he had escaped by the 
river that had flowed since the ruin of the past. Now shoot with a large bow of cloth, 
until all the arrows less than one are tasted. The calls are looking for. His 
companions dejaban lo. He held his bow for the last time. 
From suddenness, from the darkness, someone hastily revolts on man. started 
- But it was only an old thrush. From now on, I sat down next to my ear and... 
I'll get you the news. Astonished, I discovered that I could understand it in the language, because 
it was Dale's race. 
Hopeful! Hopeful! -I tell you-. The moon is rising. Look for the color 
of the left chest while you go and walk around!” And while Bard took a 
marvelous pause, he heard everything that had happened. 
The dragon was giving turns, 
and while the moon was rising, I 
said , 
" 
I saved you until the end. 
" recovered. You are from 
my father and from the old one. If you once visited the fortress of the greenery
below the mountain, see you now and give prisa!” 
The dragon was launched once more lowly than ever before, and as it turned and 
leaped towards it, it shone white with brilliant flames of gems in the 
moon, but not in a single place the great black bow disappeared 
directly from the body, towards the shade from which it was hidden. The ball 
of 
the anther opened from par to par. With a cry that urged the men, he knocked down the trees and 
the stone departed, Smaug disappeared into the air, if God turned and took off. 
From the top, in ruins. 
It fell over the city. His latest exterres the hicieron añicos, converting her into chispas and 
Glades. The lake roared. A vast vapor leapt, white in the sudden 
darkness below the moon. There's a whistle, a mumbling remolino and a little silence. 
And this was the ending of Smaug and Esgaroth, but not of Bard. 
The crescent moon rose more often and the wind became stronger and fresher. 
I twisted the white cloud to form curved piles and compressed clouds and led 
the west to spread it on foot through the swamps before... 
Bosque Negro. Then they could see the numerous boats sailing in darkness on the surface. 
of the lake, and through the wind the voices of the people of Esgaroth 
lament the loss of their city and their blessings, and their houses in ruins. But really... 
Much to be welcomed, they thought about it, although it could hardly be 
hoped that just the words: three quarters of the population of the 
city had at least escaped with their lives; its forests, fields, pastures and 
the ganado and the majority of its boats remained intact; and the dragon was 
dead. They still didn't understand what it meant. 
They gathered in multitudes of sad people on the western coasts, shaking. 
in the cold wind, and the first few of them and the others were against the 
Maestro, who had abandoned the city so quickly, while some still were willing to 
defend him 
"He can have good courage for his businesses, especially for his own businesses". 
Some muttered: "But don't worry about anything when something serious happens!" And 
they praised the Bard's courage and his 
last 
and 
powerful 
shot 
.
Bard is not lost! -shouted-. He leapt from Esgaroth, when the enemy... 
was assassinated. Soy Bard, from the Girion line; I'm the dragon matador! 
- Rey Bardo! Rey Bardo! - scream; but the Maestro plastered on the 
castañeteo dientes. 
—Girion was señor de Valle, no rey de Esgaroth —dijo—. In the City of Lake we have always been honored among the elderly and wise, and 
have not endured the rule of simple warlike men. Que from 'Rey Bardo' regressively. 
to his own king—Dale is now free for his valor, and nothing stops him. 
On recourse. And anyone who wants to be able to travel with it will prefer the cold. 
the lower stones, the shadow of the mountain, hasta the green shores of the lake. 
The wise men will stay here and hope to rebuild our city and enjoy it again in 
"Time is peace and happiness." 
"¡Tendremos to Rey Bardo!" they shouted in response to the people they were looking for. 
"We are proud of the citizens and the money counters!" And 
the most excited people repeated the cry: "The Bowman is coming and I'm down with 
bags of money", until the clamor resounded across the border. 
"I am the last man who underestimates Bard el Arquero," said the Maestro. 
with caution (because Bard now was looking for it). "This night he achieved an 
eminent place in the list of benefactors of our city; and he is worthy 
of many imperious songs. But, why, oh People?"—and here the Maestro 
shows his piety and says very loudly and clearly: "Why do I receive all your 
guilt? Why do you feel sorry for yourself? 
Why 
would you like to know what the old songs could be? tocó en nuestra 
Are your heartfelt and pleasant fantasies? What class of gold did they send? 
Want the river to reward us? Dragon fire and ruin! Where do we go from here...? 
claim compensation for our lives and 
our lives?" 
As you can see, the Master did not achieve this in vain. The result... 
One of his words was that at the moment people completely forgot about the idea of 
​​​​a new king, and they directed their airy thoughts to Thorin and his 
company. They shouted words of salvation and love from many sides; and some 
of those who previously sang the loudest old songs, now listen to them as 
they shouted at the shouts that the young men had deliberately incited to dragon against them 
! 
"Tontos!" I say Bard. "Why do you hate words and anger in those unhappy people?" 
Creatures? Without doubt they perished first in the fire, before Smaug came to us.
Entonces, while talking, I took her to the heart and thought of... 
The legendary treasure of the Mountain was found without guard in dueño, and it was 
suddenly, in silence. He thought in the words of the Master, and in the rebuilt Dale, and 
full of gold bells, he could meet the men. 
Finally he came back to say: «This is not the moment to talk about words, Master, or 
to consider important change plans. I'm working hard to do it. You sir. 
So, even after a while you can turn to think about your words and turn north. 
with what I want.” 
Luego marched to help in the organization of the camps and in the care 
of the sick and the heralds. But the Master shared the meal with his soldiers while 
he 
was there and thought about it a lot, but I said little men to whom they 
would draw fire and comfort 
. The men talked about 
the reward for all the damage that they would promptly receive, and 
they asked above to buy things from the South; and 
he encouraged him a lot in his difficult situation. I was well here, because the night was 
sad and miserable. If they could devise refuges for a little (the Master had 
one) and had little comfort (including the Master he missed them). Much sickness. 
of humid, cold and sad night, and after death, who had 
escaped unharmed from the ruin of the city; and on the days that followed 
he had a lot of illness and a lot of pain. 
Meanwhile, Bard took the initiative and organized things as usual, although 
always in the name of the Master, and took on the difficult task of governing the people 
and directing the preparations for their protection and accommodation. Probably the majority 
of them were perished in the winter which now fell after the thunder, 
if they had no time to help by hand. But the help arrived quickly; because Bard immediately had 
the men sent quickly and arrived as far as the forest to ask for the help of the King 
of the Elves of the Forest, and these men had raised an army. 
in movement, even though it was only the third day after 
Smaug's death. 
El Rey Elfo received news from his own men and from 
the people who loved his people, and they knew a lot about what had 
happened. In truth, there was a great deal of emotion between all the things 
that lived within the limits of the Dragon's Desolation. The air 
was full of gangs flying in circles, and their men flying fast were flying right here. 
And there, in the sky, above the limits of the forest, he was
singing, crying and howling. Around the Black Forest the news spread: «Smaug 
is dead!» The hojas crujieron and the thorns were raised assured. Even before 
El Rey Elfo approached and the news was sent to the west, just to the pines of 
the Cloudy Mountains; Beorn had him in his house in Madeira, and 
the goblins were gathered together in his caves. 
"I fear that it will be the last time we ever see Thorin's Shield of Roble," 
the king said. "Habría hecho mejor en continuar siendo mi huésped. It's a 
"Bad fate, in all ways", added, "that doesn't bring anything good to anyone". Because he also 
hadn't forgotten the legend of Thror's quest. So he was like a Bard... 
Mensajeros met him marching with many spears and bows; 
and the hearts were reunited above it, they might believe that the war was 
a new experience, such as had not been seen in these places in a long time. 
But the king, when he received the Bard's prayers, felt sorry for him, 
turning as he did on the march, which lasted less than 
the first time, he began to go down the river towards 
Lake Largo, and they 
were forced to walk down the slower path; 
quickly through the water are ligerous, and yet they are not there 
These days many people were accustomed to the marches and the rural areas between 
the forest and the lake, on which they left quickly. Only five days after the 
Death of the Dragon did they go to the shores and contemplate the ruins of 
the city. His welcome was good, as he was to hope for, and the men and 
His Maestro were willing to do whatever they wanted for the future in exchange for 
the help of the Elfo Rey. 
Sus plans ready if hicieron. With the women and the children, the old man 
and the novices, the Master met; and with them there are some men 
of craftsmanship and many elves who live there; and they dedicated themselves to cutting trees, 
and collecting the madeira sent from the forest. They are forced to work. 
building many chozas in the shore against the approaching winter; and 
under the direction of the Maestro they began the planning of a new city, 
designed more justly and grandly than before, but not in the same place. 
If they moved to the north, they arrived further from the coast from there you took a 
step to the water where the dragon came from. It would never fly back to
the gold, but it was as cold as a stone, twisted in the soil of 
shallow waters. There, during the last few days, his enormous hues could pour out in quiet time. 
among the ruins of the ancient helmet. But little did they have time to cross the cursed 
place, and they had time to submerge themselves in the stormy water or recover the 
precious stones that fell from their fallen corpse. 
But all the men of arms who were also capable, and the majority of the 
King Elfo's formation prepared to march towards the north, towards the mountains. It was thus 
that on the once days of the ruin of the city the head of his army passed 
the gates of the rock at the end of the lake and we entered the desolate lands. 
THE REUNION OF THE CLOUDS 
Now we will turn with Bilbo and the dwarves. Throughout the night, one of them... 
kept watch, but when they got there in the morning they didn't see a 
warning sign. But the players are reunited more densely. Their companies 
flew from the south; and the hearts that once lived with the redodor 
The mountains turned and gritted incessantly towards the arrival. 
"Everything else is happening," said Thorin. "The time has passed for 
the oton wanderings; and these are the ones who always live on the earth; 
They have starlings and gangs of pinzones; and the lejos have a lot of carriage. 
They are as if they were flying a battle! 
Suddenly, Bilbo signaled: "Oh, it's here I see another thrush again!", he shouted. "El 
We seem to have escaped when Smaug destroyed the mountainside, but I... 
I don't suppose that the caracoles will have him! 
Indeed, the old thrush was there, and when Bilbo signaled, he flew. 
take them and place them on a stone. Luego beat his wings 
and sang; then tilted the head to one side, as for playing; and I sang again 
, and I listened again. 
"I think it's about saying something," said Balin; "but I can't 
follow the word of these people, it's very quick and difficult. Can you...? 
Can 
you move forward, Bolsón? 
-No very good, 
" I said Bilbo (in reality, I can't do anything). fuese un cuervo!” I said Balin. 
"I think you don't like it! We looked very shy with him, when 
"We passed by here before." 
They were horses! And they were despicable and suspicious creatures, yes, and 
they were also great. We must have learned what we have been using since... 
ours. But the horses are different. Only he had a great friendship among 
them and the people of Thror; We were told secret news, and
we were rewarded with things as brilliant as those we were anxious to hide in our 
lives. 
"They live for many years, and their records are wide and they transmit 
their wisdom to their children. They knew many among the heads of the rocks. 
When they were young, this same height was called Ravenhill. 
Because they had a sandy and famous look, the old Carc and their wife, who live 
here, on the top of the But 
I don't suppose that any of that ancient 
" 
The race remains here now" 
. 
—Claro —dijo Balin—. Keep watch and see when it passes! 
At the moment there was a flap of the wings and the thrush flew; 
And with it I brought a old and decrepit pájaro. If he was blind, 
he could sometimes fly and keep the upper part of his head bald. It was a 
big old cow . He placed himself rigidly on the ground before him, swinging slowly. 
his wings and he swung around Thorin. 
—¡Oh, Thorin, hijo de Thrain, y Balin, hijo de Fundin! —thank you (and 
Bilbo could understand what I said, you can use a common language and current. 
no habla de pajaro). "I'm Roäc, hijo de Carc. Carc died, but he was good. 
You met him once. He's been alive for one hundred and fifty years. 
of the huevo, but I don't forget what my father told me. Now I'm the 
jefe of the great mountains of the Mountain. We are little, but let's record 
again being the king of the year. Most of my people are abroad, because there are 
great news in the South: some are happy news for you and others for you. 
I won't think so well 
. You have returned again to the Mountains and 
Dales of the South, East and West, because you have followed the voice of that Smaug is 
dead!" 
—¡Muertos! Deaths? —gritaron los enanos—. ¡Deaths! Thus we have been in 
my unnecessary state, because the treasure is ours!" They all jumped up and started to 
cheer. 
"Yes, dead 
," said Roäc. I want to go into battle with 
Esgaroth's men on the third night of returning from now on, when the moon rises". 
Some time passed before Thorin could forget that the dwarfs would watch in silence. 
And listen to the news of his brother. Finally, when I finished the story of 
The Battle that I had written: 
What happiness, Thorin Shield of Roble! You can return to your estancias 
safely 
; all the treasure is yours, for the 
moment 
. lost in the relationship for many years; many are eager to share it.
extrapolate There is a shade of elves on the path, and those who have walked are with 
them waiting for battle and slaughter. Once at the lake the men murmur that on 
Las penas they must be to the elves, they can't keep home and many of them have died. 
y Smaug destroyed his city. They also think about finding compensation. 
you, darling, know that you are alive or dead. 
"Your own wisdom must be decided by you; but three is little. 
Remnant of the great community of Durin who once lived here, and now 
many are scattered. If you take my advice, don't trust the Master. 
of the men of the lake, even more well than the one who shot the dragon with his bow. Bardo is 
El, of the Dale race, of the Girion line; He is a severe but sincere man. We 
will find peace more often among men, men and elves after the 
great desolation; but you may find yourself dear. 
Then Thorin stood in anger: "Our appreciation, son of Roäc. You 
and your people will not be forgotten. But none of our gold will be stolen. 
fall or fall violently while we are alive. If you would like to receive our 
thanks again, here's some news from anyone you're interested in. I would also ask 
you, if some of you are still young and strong, who send me 
wise men to our relatives in the mountains of the North, both to the west 
and to the east, and our difficult situation. But especially at my first Dain on 
the Hills of Hierro, because many people are well armed and live more in search of 
this place. Tell her to welcome you! 
-I won't say whether this advice is good or bad -thanks Roäc-, but yes... 
Do what you can do." Then, it was flying slowly. " 
Go back to the mountain! —Thorin shouted—. We have little time to... 
lose." 
—That's easy to use! —exclaimed Bilbo, always practical in these aspects. 
In any case, he felt that the adventure, speaking properly, had ended. 
the death of the dragon—in what was most misunderstood—and led to 
the majority of his shares for the peaceful liquidation of these 
businesses. 
"Go back to the mountain!" Grit the wines as if they were not oily. 
From; so I want you to return with him. 
As you have learned about some of the events, you will see that the 
wines will last a few days for a while. They explored the caves once. 
Further on, they discovered, as they hoped, just entering the Main Door. 
opened; all the other doors (except, above all, the small secret door) are left open for a long time.
There was time for Smaug to break them and block them, and no more than that. So 
now they began to work arduously to fortify the main entrance, and to 
create a new path leading from there. Herramientas were encountered in abundance that 
miners, singers and builders of the past had used; and in this work the 
young men were still very difficult. 
While they work, their hearts receive constant news. In this way 
they learned that the King Elf had strayed to the lake, and they still 
took a breath. Better still, remember that three of his ponies have 
escaped and wandered safely through the banks of the Running River. 
river, no far from where they have lost the rest of their provisions. So while 
the others continued with their work, Fili and Kili were sent, guided by a 
horse, to meet the ponies and take back all those who could. 
Four days have passed and so we know that the union 
The armies of the men of the lake and the elves are approaching the mountain. 
But now their hopes were greater, they could take food for some weeks. 
attention, mainly atiborrarse, above all, and they were very fond of it; but being afraid is 
much better than anything - and the door was blocked with a wall of 
square stones placed next to it, but very thick and high, across the opening. There 
you will have to look at the wall across the things you can see (or disappear), but don't 
enter. They climbed or climbed with ladders and climbed things with 
ropes. For the climb of the arroyo they have devised a small low arch. 
below the new wall; but from the entrance they had altered the 
edge so much that it formed a large swimming pool that extended from the mountain wall to the edge of the 
waterfall so that the arroyo crossed Dale. The access to the door was 
Now only possible, except, off a corner end of the cliff, 
On the backside, looking out from the wall, the ponies that kept 
lifted only until the top of the stairs above the old bridge, and unloading 
There they were ordered that they will return with their loved ones and they have sent them the return. 
Without jinete hacia el sur. 
He took a night when suddenly many lights appeared like fire and 
the antlers rose above the Dale, in front of him. 
"They're coming!" shouted Balin. "And your camp is very large. 
You must be tied to the valley at the light of twilight on the edge of the banks 
of the river." 
This night the dwarfs lasted a little. The morning was still rough when 
I was looking for a company. From the side of the wall
look at the bottom of the valley and slowly move on. In a short time... 
I can see that many of the men on the lake were armed as if for war and the elf archers 
were among them. At the end, the first men trembled this derruida. 
rocks and appeared at the top of the cataracts; and it was a great surprise 
to see the swimming pool in front of you and the blocked door with a closed stone wall. 
piedra 
As they spoke and spoke to each other, Thorin greeted them: 
"What are you like?", he shouted in a very loud voice, "who come as in war to 
the gates of Thorin hijo de Thrain, Rey bajo la Montaña, what happened? 
What do you want?" 
But I didn't answer at all. Some turned around quickly, and the others... 
After contemplating the door and its defenses for a moment, they were ready to follow. 
That day the camp was moved to the east of the river, just between the 
arms of the mountain. The rocks resonated with voices and songs, 
as they had not done for many days. There is also the sound of the elves... 
harps and sweet music; and while it resonated it seemed to them that 
the chill of the air warmed up and therefore the fragrance of 
the flowers of the forest blossomed in spring. 
Then Bilbo could escape from the dark fortress and 
indulge in joy and celebration at the holidays. Some of the younger teenagers... 
They also moved in their hearts and murmured that they wanted things. 
If things could happen in another way, they could welcome these people as friends; 
But Thorin enjoyed the dinner. 
Entonces your own sacaron harps and instruments. 
recovered the treasure, and played music to pacify the state of the soul; but on 
the song it wasn't an elvish song, and it was very similar to the song they sang. 
much earlier in Bilbo's little cave. 
Below the dark and high mountain 
, El Rey has arrived at his living room! 
The enemy has died, the Gusano del Terror, 
and so will their enemies. 
The sword is sharp, the lance is wide, 
The sword is fast, the door is strong; 
I fear the heart that looks at the gold; 
The dwarfs will no longer suffer injustices. 
The old wines created powerful spells, 
While the hammers fell like resonating bells 
In deep places, whence the dark things duermen, 
In the hued pasillos below the hills. 
Ensartaban in flat collares. 
The light of the stars, in the crowns gather 
The fire of the dragon, of twisted wings 
The melody of the harps that play.
The throne of the mountain has been liberated once more! 
Oh, wandering people, attended to the call! Come ready! 
Come ready, cross the desert! 
The king needs friends and relatives. 
Now let's call over the mountain mountains, 
'Go back to the ancient caves!' 
Here in the doors he waits for the king, 
His hands are embroidered in gems and gold. 
The king went to his living room. 
Below the dark and high mountain. 
The Gusano del Terror is crippled and dead, 
so our enemies will fall! 
This song seemed to please Thorin, and he sang again and grew up. 
happy and I started to calculate the distance to the Hills of Hierro and how much time 
would it take before I could go to the Lonely Mountain, if I wanted to 
As ready as the message brought him, Bilbo's heart broke down, so much so that 
the song and the conversation sounded despicable. 
The next morning, I'm tempered, if I leave a company of spearmen crossing the 
river, and marching up the valley. They took the green stand of 
El Rey Elfo and the blue stand of the Lake, and advanced to the 
point just outside the door wall. 
Again Thorin called him in a loud voice: "Who are those who come 
armed for the war at the gates of Thorin hijo de Thrain, King below the 
Mountain? This time they responded. 
A tall man approached, with dark hair and wiry beak, and shouted: 
'Hail, Thorin!' Why are we trapped like a thief in 
our 
fortress 
? 
"What are you wondering about?" 
"I am Bard, and by my hand the dragon was seized and your treasure 
entreated. Isn't it an assumption that worries you? Also, here in my right here 
are descendants of the heir of Girion de Dale, and in your treasure there is much of 
the reward of your palaces and towns, that the ancient Smaug Robo. Isn't this an 
assumption that we can talk about? Además, in his last battle, Smaug destroyed 
the lives of the men of Esgaroth, and still his 
servant 
. and the misery of its people. They helped you in your anguish and in 
the reward that has just now been ruined, although without doubt 
not discussed." 
These were just and truthful words, although they said with pride and severity; and 
Bilbo thought that Thorin would immediately admit that he had justice in them. 
So, above all, no hope that someone would record that it was the 
one who discovered only the weak point of the dragon; and that was exactly what happened
. But I also realized with the power that 
gold does not keep a dragon for a long time, nor even small hearts. 
Thorin had spent many hours in the treasure in the last few days, and the happiness 
weighed heavily on her. Although he had mainly searched for the Stone of the Ark, 
nevertheless, he would keep an eye on many other marvelous things that are there, 
as to what the old memories of his labors and pains involve 
. 
"Put your troubles in the last place and in the first place," Thorin 
replied. "To the treasure of my country no one holds right, because 
Smaug, who robs us, also robs her life and home. The treasure 
was not enough that his bad deeds were mended with a part of him. 
Price of the goodies and the help that we receive from the men of the lake. 
We will pay with justice, to your due But we will not give anything, we will not 
ask for 
a meal of 
force 
. hubieras matado". 
-A just question -Bard replied-. But you are not dead, and ours are not 
thieves. Likewise, the rich can keep foot, even to what corresponds to them, to the needs. 
Who loved them when they were in need. And also my other complaints 
remain without response". 
"I will not speak, as I say, with armed men at my door. Not absolutely 
with the people of the Elven King, a person who is sheltered with little amiability. 
In this debate, let's not hold it. Let us, before you see our arrows! And if 
you want to talk to me, first of all, in the name of the Elven army. from 
where he belongs, he returns, laying down 
his 
weapons 
before 
you stop your words. Return to your 
wisdom before we return!” Then he left and returned to the camp. 
Not many hours had passed when the marauders and the trumpeters returned. 
He went forward and uttered a cry: 
"In the name of Esgaroth and of the Forest", shouted one, "we hail 
the son of Thorin Thrain, Shield of Roble, who is called the Low King". the 
Montaña, and we ask you to consider well the affirmations that have been presented, 
or our enemy will be declared. At the very least, he will take a small part of 
the treasure for Bard, like the dragon slayer and the heir of Girion. 
In this case, your Bard will contribute to the aid of Esgaroth; but 
if Thorin wanted to keep the friendship and honor of the surrounding lands, like his 
fathers who were you of old, therefore he will also give something of his own for the 
advice of the men of the Lake.”
Then Thorin took a bow from his heart and shot a bullet at the one he spoke. 
He struck the shield and stood there, storming. 
"Since this is your answer", he exclaimed once again, "I declare the 
Mountain to be settled. We will not part with you until we call on you 
for a truce and a parliament. We will not raise weapons against you, but 
I owe you with all your gold. You can do it if you want! 
With this, the men will leave 
quickly and the 
men asked themselves alone 
. gordo Bombur. 
y Fili y Kili. Bilbo, above all, disapproved todo the round of 
affairs. He was the first to leave the mountains, and being 
surrounded inside was not for anything of his taste. 
"Every place was still haunted by the dragon", if I asked for the same thing, "and 
I'm waiting for you. And the food is still waiting for me to hang on to the throat. 
A THIEF IN THE NIGHT 
Now the days pass slowly and tiringly. Many of the teenagers spend their days 
accumulating and sorting the treasure; and now Thorin revealed the 
Stone of the Ark of Thrain, and ordered them to search for it with enthusiasm every time. 
"Because the Stone of the Ark of my father", I say, "is worth more than a river 
of gold in such a way, and for me it has no value. This stone of the whole treasure 
I name it to myself, and I will come to whatever it is that holds it and 
"retains it." 
Bilbo listened to these words and listened to me, wondering what would happen. 
It will happen if the stone was found, wrapped in an old package of andrajos. 
objects that were used as a pillow. Don't worry about it, because 
considering that the day's crisis has become more burdensome, they have been managing the beginnings of a plan. 
These things followed during some time, 
that Dain and more than five years old, learned from the 
hill hills, coming from 
the north, 
" 
said Roäc, "and I'm afraid 
that there won't be be a fight in the valley. I don't consider this advice good. Even though 
they are sombre people, it's not probable that they can defeat the army that besieges them. 
You; and no matter what they ask, who will win them?" winter and snow are 
approaching us 
Is it the good will of the lands that roam you? The treasure is probably dead, 
although the dragon does not exist!" But Thorin was not moved." 
The
winter and the snow will bite men as much as women. 
" 
Perhaps he is in a better mood to converse with him". 
Last night Bilbo made a decision. The sky was black and without the moon. 
As soon as the darkness was complete, he headed to the corner of an interior room just 
inside the door and inside the door, and also to the Stone of the Ark 
wrapped in a trap. Then he suffered at the top of the wall. Only Bombur 
was there, because it was his turn to look, and the only ones left with one. 
daily security guard. 
"Hace un frío terrible!", said Bombur. "I wish we could ignite a fugata here. 
How did they do it in the camp!" 
"There's enough heat inside," Bilbo said. 
-I had to decide; but I'm stuck here until the middle - if that's the good thing. 
A generally regrettable assumption. This is not what made me disagree with Thorin, 
"Who on his beard grows every time; without embargo, he was always a dwarf with a stiff ass." 
-Not as stiff as my bones -I said Bilbo-. This is removed from stairs and stones. 
Passages I would give you something to feel the grass in your feet. 
"I'd give you something to feel a strong drink in your throat, 
like a sweet one after a good dinner!" 
"I can't give you this while the siege continues. 
But I have time to observe you, and I'll take your turn again, if you're interested. 
I like it. I can't sleep tonight. 
—You're a good man, Señor Baggins, and I'll accept the offer with pleasure. 
If there's anything that stands out, Let me know first, I'll ask you in 
" 
The room inside the room, no more" 
—I 
say 
Bilbo— he slid down the wall and disappeared. 
Bombur would sleep at any moment, 
he was always trying to recover the beauty; 
and all of them were busy with Thorin, 
would hold jump on the wall until it was... 
It 
was very dark, when I went up the fence 
and went down the lower path of the arroyo, it was 
outside of it. Once you have reached the curve where you want to cross the 
water, you will need to attach it to the camp as you wish. The light of the arroyo 
was not very deep but I was there too, and walking in the darkness was not easy. 
Easy for the little hobbit. Sometimes he crossed when he lost his balance.
on a round stone and let the water cool with a splash. Only then did 
he first go up to the other shore, trembling and wondering, when 
Elves appeared in the twilight with bright interior lights and searched for the cause of the 
noise. 
- It wasn't a piece of cake! -I say one-. There's a spy out here. Hide the lights! 
They will help you more than we do, if you are the extra creature that is 
"I said it was your servant". 
-Servantly, in truth! - Bilbo replied; and in the middle of his dark... 
He shouted loudly and the elves immediately reunited around the sound. 
"Let's light a light!" I say. "I'm here, if I need it!" and he 
left the ring and appeared behind a rock. 
They grabbed him quickly, considering his surprise. "Where are you? Are you...? 
Are 
you the hobbit of the dwarfs? 
" I 
'm 
curious 
. 
he said, "What is your business?" 
"Sea what sea, it's mine, my good elves. But if you ever want to get it... 
"Return to your forest from this place, fresh and desolate," I replied. 
fearing, "He quickly took me to a fire, where I could dry myself and 
then I stopped talking to your boyfriend as quickly as possible. Only I keep 
"One or two hours above". 
As it happened, once after escaping the 
door, Bilbo was sent to the a warm fire in front of a large field of countryside, and 
they were also heard, looking at him with curiosity, both the King Elf and the Bard. 
A 
hobbit with elven armor, partially wrapped in a manta vieja, was something 
new to him best business style—. 
"These things are impossible. Personally, I'm heart from all this assumption. Ojalá... 
I was new in the West, in my own house, where the people are more reasonable. 
But I have an interest in this assumption: a tenth of a part, to be precise, 
follows a card, which fortunately I believe to have preserved". I found 
a bag of my old chaqueta (which would still be left on the top of the backside), 
wrinkled and very double, Thorin's card which had the lowest part of it 
"The answer is in my opinion! 
-A part of the comments, you understand?" I am 
aware 
of 
that Escudo de Roble as well as I am now. I assure you. 
You, you are willing to feel yourself on a mountain of gold and to die in the shadow, always and when you are 
here." 
-¡You can go! —says Bard—. "An idiot like me will die in the shadow! 
-As it is -says Bilbo-. Taking your point of view.At the same time…
The winter is Please search quickly. Hello, I'll tell you what... 
No, and the ministers will be difficult, including for the elves, I imagine they will also 
have more difficulties. Don't you hear about Dain and the enamels of...? 
"Las Colinas de Hierro?" 
"We have done much time; but what does he want to see with us?", he asked. 
El rey. 
"I could imagine it. I know I have information that you don't have. 
Come on, I can say, it's now less than two days of march and at least 
five years old sombreros with him, many of them have had 
experience in the terrible wars of men and goblins, of which they have no idea. 
Don't think you're tired. When you read them, you may have serious problems. 
"Why are we talking about this? Are you talking to your friends or are you... 
Are we sorry? Bard asked gravely. 
I wonder Bard! Chill Bilbo. Don't worry! I never know anyone like that. 
People suspicious! I just want to avoid problems with all the packaging. 
Now I have an offer!!" 
"Let's hear it!" they said 
"You can see it!" I say el. "It's going to be!" and I took the 
Arkenstone and pulled the envelope. 
Your own Rey Elfo, whose eyes were accustomed to the marvelous and 
beautiful things, was overshadowed by his feet. Including Bard looked at her in amazement. 
silence. It was like a globe was filled with moonlight and placed 
the stars in a red cloth with the rest of the shining stars. 
- This is the Stone of the Ark of Thrain - said Bilbo -, the Heart of the 
Montana; and so is Thorin's heart. The value is greater than a 
golden river. I'll give it to you. He will help you in your negotiation." Entonces Bilbo, not 
without a last resort, not without a glimpse of hope, took the marvelous 
stone to Bard, and replaced it in his hand, as it became dull. 
"But how is it that you can give it?", he finally asked with energy. 
—Oh, good! —I say the hobbit inconvenienced—. It's not exactly like that; but, good, yo... 
I'm willing to leave it on my feet against all my complaints, 
but can I be 
an honest one. In all ways, 
I 
hope 
this is useful to you 
. But I wonder if Thorin Shield of Roble... 
So I'll see. I have more knowledge about men in general than you.
Quiz. I advise you to ask with us, and here You will be honored 
and very welcome.” 
" 
Thanks a lot, this is safe 
. 
" 
She wouldn't hold back anything, so she was offered a listen. 
An 
old 
man passed through the camp, and rose 
from the door of a room where he had been 
sent expect!” It was Gandalf. 
For the first time in many days, Bilbo was truly enchanted. But 
there was no time to ask all the questions that you immediately wanted to ask. 
"Everything in its time!" I say Gandalf. "These things are about the end 
Now, unless I'm misunderstanding, there's a despicable moment just before... 
you; but keep your heart! You can solve problems quickly. There's 
news that no one's hearts have heard. Good nights! 
Disconcerted but animated, Bilbo is apsuró. I was guided until I went safely and 
I put it with me and then I left the elves and was looked after. 
Turn back to the door. A great noise began to take control of him; but 
it was a long time ago when I trembled over the next corner. 
He left it and hid it, and then he felt it on 
the wall and anxiously wondered what would happen next. 
In the middle of the day, he was lost in Bombur and where, once again, he turned to 
his ring, without listening to the pleasures of the old man (which he felt he should give). 
only had a chance). Ready if you sleep soundly, forgetting all your worries until 
the morning. After all, I was dreaming with tones and tomatoes. 
THE CLOUDS ESTALL 
The following day, the trumpets sound harder in the camp. Hello, only one carrier is present... 
Please be assured by the end of the journey. Let me tell you and say hello. 
Hello, I'm wondering if Thorin will now check out the other item, because 
I've read new news and things have changed. 
"It will be Dain!" I say Thorin at the door. "He has achieved 
the success of his coming. He thought that this would change his soul! Invite him to come 
soon and disarmed, and I will be there," he called to the 
men.
Around the middle day saw the bands of the Forest and the Lake. 
He turned to go up. A company of twenty is looking for. At the 
beginning of the narrow path they set their sword and spear and followed forward. 
Hacia la Puerta. Shadowed, the young men saw that between them were both 
the Bard and the King Elf, before which an old man was wrapped in a cape and 
the cap carried a strong Madeira chest strengthened with the iron. 
- Hello, Thorin! said Bard. Are you thinking about the same thing? 
"I don't mind that it changes with the strength and strength of so many suns," 
-Thorin replied-. Are you coming to Hacerme with vain wishes? The elf ghost still has no idea what you're looking for! Hasta entonces, in vain come to negotiate with me. 
to me." 
"Do you have anything to say to the one who would be willing to give part of your gold?" 
"No matter what you or your friends need to offer." 
"What happens with the Stone of the Ark of Thrain?", I said, and at the same time 
the elderly man opened his chest and raised his joy. The light shone. 
of his hand, brilliant and white in the morning. 
Then Thorin that look of darkness and confusion. Nadie 
Habló during a large party. 
Thorin finally broke the silence and his voice was filled with anger. 
"This stone was my father's and it's mine," I say. "Why should I... 
Buy my own?" But the shadow invaded him and he said: "But, as 
I present to you the relic of my house, it is necessary to ask something like this. 
What are the thieves?" 
-No we are thieves -Bard replied-. We will give you your money back. 
"We are returning for our people". 
- How did you achieve it? -gritted Thorin more furiously. 
"¡Se los di!" Chilled Bilbao, who was looking at the top of the wall, 
now he was terribly tired. 
-You! You! cried Thorin, turning around and grasping it with force. 
both hands "Wretched hobbit! He's a low-life thief!" he shouted. 
Without words, I told little Bilbo how he was a rabbit. 
By Durin's beards! Let's go to Gandalf here! ¡Maldito sea por su 
¡Que se marcia le beard! As for you, you will end up at 
¡Rocas! - shouted and raised Bilbo on his arms. 
- Stay away! I want you to have a full day! - I say a voice. The old man with his chest... 
he left his hood and his head. "This is Gandalf! And just in time." 
It seems. If you don't like me as a thief, please don't give them away. 
Let me know first what I have to decide!” 
-It seems like everyone is aware!-I said Thorin leaving Bilbo at the top of the
wall. "Never again will I want to deal with any magician or with my friends. 
What do you have to say, descendant of the installments? 
- My God! My God! - I say Bilbo. I'm sure that everything is very 
inconvenienced. Let's remember if I've said what I could do I chose my own 
10th part? Quiz I literally missed it; they told me that 
sometimes they are more educated in words than in work. There was a time in which all the 
same, when it seemed to think that it was out of some use. 
Is this the entire service of you and your family? 
Suppose he is willing to share with me as I 
desire!" "I have it, 
" 
Thorin said gravely. Then he turned and stood at the top of the wall. "Soy 
traicionado," I say. "If I assume correctly that I cannot avoid it. 
I will redeem the Stone of the Ark, the treasure of my house. For it I will give a 
tenth part of the treasure in plate and gold, placing the gems on the side; but 
the promised part of this traitor will be considered, and with this 
he will give you the reward, and you can divide it as you wish. Just a little 
, I don't think so. Let me go, 
I 
'll tell Bilbo, I'll 
stop 
you . -Bilbo asked-. It will sell later. 
how can I adjust", I said. "Abajo!" 
-Hasta entonces we will preserve the stone -screamed Bard. 
"You are not making a very splendid figure like the King of the 
Mountains 
," said 
Gandalf 
. he could not recover the Stone of the Ark and retain his share 
of the reward. 
And so, Bilbo was defeated by the wall and left with 
Nada to weigh all his strength, except the armor that Thorin had given 
him 
. 
-Adios! -les screamed-. 
Quizá we wanted to see you like friends. Thorin shouted. "Take a shoulder bag for 
my people, and it's a good thing for you. It cannot be crossed by arrows; but if you 
don't pressure yourself, I'm going to pick up the pies. So let's start! 
- No pressure! —said Bard—. We'll give you a quick morning. In the middle of the day 
we'll turn and we'll say yes. The part of the treasure that 
should be placed against the stone 
has been removed. Mientras so much 
¡despedida!" 
With this they returned to the camp; but Thorin sent messengers by 
Roäc, he told them to Dain what had happened and he told her that he would come with caution and 
speed.
This day and night passed. On the following day the wind changed to the west and the 
air was dark and gloomy. morning was early when a cry was 
heard in the camp. They sent word to inform them that a group of Enos had 
arrived at the eastern edge of the mountain and had now arrived at 
Dale also 
the wines before the hope. Each one of his people was 
dressed with a maple shank that tied them to the rods, and their pins were 
hidden with a thin and flexible metal shackle, which was a secret. 
The creation was in the hands of the Dain people. The dwarfs are extremely 
strong for high altitude, but the majority of these were also strong for dwarfs. In 
battle they wield heavy weights in two hands; but each of them also held 
a short sword and also a round shield attached to his sword. On 
Las beards they were bifurcatas and trenzadas y put them on your belts. Their gorras were 
hierro and they were shod with their hierro, and their beaks were shaggy. 
The trumpets called to men and elves to weapons. In a short time, the young men were able to... 
They saw them going down the valley at great speed. They detoured between the river 
and the eastern spur; but a few continued on the path and crossed the river. 
they approached the camp, and there they deposited their weapons and kept their signatures. 
your hands in a sign of peace. Bard went up to receive them, and with the 
late Bilbo. 
"We sent you from Dain hijo de Nain," they said when asked. "We 
are eager to visit our relatives in the Montaña, so that we understand that 
the king of the past returned. But why are you people who felt we were enemies in the countryside? 
Are there any defended walls?" This, above all, in the short and sufficiently ancient language of such occasions, meant simply: "No holds 
here there are any trades! Let's go and follow, as far as we are from the seafarers! 
Destined to follow fast between the mountain and the back of the river; to reach 
the terrain It didn't seem like he was under much surveillance. 
Bard, therefore, refused to allow 
the gold to go directly 
to the 
mountain army so great and warlike. 
company. They have received a great deal of provisions; for 
the enos can carry very heavy loads, and even all the people of Dain, at 
the weight of their rapid march, they carry enormous loads on their armor alongside 
their weapons. They would resist a siege for weeks, and so even 
more could come, and even more, because Thorin had many relatives.
They could also reopen and guard some other door, so that 
the site-seekers tend to gnaw all over the mountain; and for him they wanted 
No you have enough numbers. 
These were, in fact, precisely on the planes (because the men-bearers had 
been occupied between Thorin and Dain); but for the moment the path was 
forbidden, so that after having aired their words the elderly men withdrew, murmuring in 
their beards. Bard sent entonces messengers immediately to the door; but they 
put I don't pay for gold. The arrows came up as soon as they were ready to shoot, 
and they were ready to return to the surrounding area. In the camp everyone was now in movement, as they 
fought; because the Dain's horns advance off the eastern shore. 
"Tontos!", Bard said, "The mountain arm is so low! 
They don't understand the war on the surface, so much so that they separate from it. 
Fight on the mines. There are many of our bows and spears now 
hidden in the rocks on the right side. The dough can be good, but 
when ready it will be difficult. We attacked them now on both sides, 
before we were completely disappointed!" 
But El Rey said: "It will take a long time before starting this war for gold. 
The wines cannot pass along to us, unless we ask for something that we cannot do. 
brand. We will always hope for something that brings about reconciliation. Our 
numerical list will be sufficient to finally connect to a note. 
unfortunate coups." 
But it doesn't count with the dwarfs. The knowledge that the 
Arkenstone was in the hands of the sites burned in their thoughts; They also 
understood the Bard's hesitation and his friends and decided to attack. 
While they were debating. 
Suddenly, without a signal, they silently flashed forward to attack. Arcos 
The horns resonated and the arrows were silent; the battle was about to begin. 
Even more suddenly, a darkness came with terrible speed! 
A black cloud opened above the sky. A winter true in a wind saved me 
roaring and rolling in the mountains, and a Flashlight illuminated on top. And 
below the truth could be seen by another black woman moving forward; but 
no wine with the wind, wine from the North, like a great cloud of 
birds, so dense that not a single light could be seen between its wings. 
-High! cried Gandalf, who suddenly appeared and stood alone, with 
his arms raised, among the advancing dwarfs and the rows that were waiting for 
them. "High!" he shouted with a voice like thunder, and on the stick he shone
with a flash like lightning. "The terror has conquered all of you! ¡Ay! It 
came quicker than I imagined! The Goblins acechan you! Bolg 
* del 
¡El norte se acerca, oh Dain!, cuyo padre mataste en Moria. Look! 
The murciélagos are under his army like a sea of ​​​​langostas. Cabalgan over lobos y 
¡Los wargs están en su train! 
The shadow and confusion took over all of them. Even when Gandalf had... 
As they spoke, the darkness grew. The 
angels fell away and looked at the sky. 
—¡Fri! —There is still time for the council. 
¡Naín, come ready to us!" 
So began a battle that no one had hoped for; and it was called the Battle of 
Five soldiers, and it was very terrible. On one side there are the Goblins and 
the rescued wolves, and on the other there are the elves, the men and the dwarfs. 
That's how it happened. From the fall of the Gran Duende de la Niebla. 
In the mountains the hatred of his race had revived the wines. 
fury. Messengers have been there and come to all their cities, colonies 
and fortresses; because now the solution is to gain the dominion of the North. 
They had heard news through secret paths, and in all the mountains there 
was a force and an armament. They marched and gathered over the hill and 
valley, always passing through the tunnel or the darkness below, just above the 
great mountain of Gundabad in the North, where the capital was, a vast army 
was assembled and ready to attack in times of storm without prior notice. 
above the top. They entered into the death of Smaug, and the joy was 
in his hearts; and they dawned night after night through the mountains, 
and so they finally suddenly came from the North by pinching their heels on 
Dain. Don't let your bodies know about their legacy until they ascended the 
quaint lands that divided the Lonely Mountain of the hills behind. 
It is not possible to say how much Gandalf knew, but it is clear that he did not 
expect this sudden attack. 
This is the plan that I have in council with the elf king and with 
the Bard; and with Dain, the lord can now be united: the Goblins are 
the enemies of all, and with his help all the other disputes were forgotten. On 
La única esperanza he was attracted to the goblins in the valley between the arms of the 
Montaña; and we are there to handle the great targets that attack the South and 
the East. However, this would seem dangerous if the goblins were found in sufficient quantities.
to invade the Montaña misma, and so attack them also from behind and 
arrive; but I don't have time to do another plan, nor to call anyone. 
help 
Ready to pass the truth, making the sure thing; but the cloud of bats flew, flying lower, over the shadow of the mountain, and stopped. 
above them, appeasing the light and filling them with fear. 
"¡A la Montaña!" Bard shouted. "To the mountain! Let's go to our 
places again for a long time!" 
In the upper strait, in its lower slopes and in the rocks at its feet, the 
Elf stands there; in the eastern spur there were men and women. But Bard and 
some of the more agile men and elves were subjected to the heights of the East. 
man to have a look at the north. Soon they were able to see the lands before them. 
The feet of the mountain were darkened by the crowded crowd. In a short time, the vanguard 
turned to the edge of the spur and rushed to Dale. These were 
the jinetes of the lobes faster, and ya their gritty and howls rasgaban the air to the lejos. 
Some brave men put themselves behind them to make a feint of resistance, and 
many fought to the front and the rest retreated and hugged on both sides. 
Gandalf hoped that the goblin army would soon be reunited behind the resistance. 
vanguard, and now you fight with fury in the valley, leading safely 
between the arms of the Mountain, chasing the enemy. Their stands were 
innumerable, black and red, and they advanced like a furious and disordered tide. 
It was a terrible fight. The most terrible of all Bilbo's experiences, 
and the one he hated the most at that moment, so to speak, was the 
one who was most proud and who most enjoyed recording them a lot of time later, 
although it wasn't very important in him. In fact, I can say that if I put on 
Suena they harden in the shop and disappear from sight, if not all hairy. 
A magic ring of this type is not complete protection in a goblin pack. 
Nor does he hold the flying arrows and the saving spears; but it helps to get 
out of the fireplace, and avoids your head being chosen especially for a 
rolling blow from a goblin sword. 
The elves fired the first ones in the car. I hate hacia los goblins es frio. 
y bitter Their spears and swords glittered in the twilight with the spark of a 
chilled llama, so deadly was the wrath of the hands that supported them. As soon as 
the army of their enemies was numerous in the valley, they sent against the 
flood of arrows, and each one of them flashed as soon as a biting fire rose.
Apart from the flechettes, a thousand of their spears jumped and loaded. 
The screams were deafening. The rocks are black tinged with duende blood. 
Just when the goblins were recovering from the attack and the elven load was discovered, a deep rust was heard from the other side of the valley. 
With screams from “¡Moria!” y “Dain, Dain!” the dwarfs of the Colinas de Hierro 
were thrown, coaxing their azadones, to the other side; and now to the 
Vinieron the men of the Lake with broad swords. 
Panic arose from the Goblins; and just when they turned to face this new thing 
At the gate, the elves returned to the load with renewed numbers. Many of 
the two men were flying down the river to escape from the trap; and 
many of their own lobes were turning against him and losing sight of the dead. 
and the heroes. Victory seemed to be sought when a cry rang out on the 
hills. 
The goblins have climbed the mountain from the other side and many 
are standing on the slopes above the door, and others descend in droves. 
imprudently, except for those who cayeron shouting from the edge and the precipice, 
to attack the blades from the moment they arrive. Each of them could be joined by senders. 
which descended from the main mass of the mountain into the center; and 
the defenders were a little short of blocking the pass for a long time. Victoria now disappeared. 
hope Only they have detained the first attack of the black tide. 
The day was advancing. The goblins reunited again in the valley. There a multitude of 
huargos gathered voraciously and with them brought Bolg's personal guard, the goblins. 
of enormous size with maple scimitars. Soon the real darkness entered 
a tormenting sky; while the great bats also grab hold of the heads and ears of 
elves and men, or cling like vampires to the heroes. Now Bard was 
fighting to defend the eastern spur, and without the embargo slowly giving way; and 
the elves are huddled around their king on the southern coast, looking for the 
watchdog in Ravenhill. 
Suddenly there was a big shout and there was a trumpet in the door. 
Calling They have forgotten Thorin! Part of the wall, moved by poles, was demolished. 
He went up with a loud bang and was standing still. El Rey jumped down the mountain, 
and his companions followed him. The hood and the head have disappeared; They were 
in brilliant armor, and a red light leapt out of their eyes. In the twilight, 
the great spirit shone like gold in a dying fire. 
Los duendes arrojaron rocks from the top; but she...
She grabbed hold of herself, jumped at the foot of the cataract and launched herself into battle. Lobo 
y el jinete fell or hooted before them. Thorin flattered his hatchet with powerful 
blows, and nothing seemed to do them any harm. 
- To me! To me! Elfos y hombres! To me! Oh, my relatives! - cried, and 
your voice thundered like a horn in the valley. 
In case of no order, all of Dain's wines ran to his aid. 
Many of the men of the lake also descended, because Bard could not contain them; 
and on the other side many of the elven spears came up. Once 
again the duendes were attacked in the valley, and they piled up among the sheep. 
wait for Dale to be dark and expansive with his corpses. The warriors were 
missing and Thorin launched himself against Bolg's personal guard. But it is 
not possible to pierce its rows. 
And yet, between the two deaths, there were many men and many 
dwarfs and many lovely elves who must have been vividly alive 
in the woods for a long time. And the thought that the valley was enraged, the advances were made more slowly. On 
the numbers there were many missed ones. Your sides are unprotected. The attackers were ready 
and the attackers were forced to form a large circle, dear to everyone, surrounded. 
All about duendes and areas that return to the assault. The guardsmen 
of Bolg came clattering against them and moved against their rows like 
the ones above the arena's cliffs. His friends could not help him, because 
the assault from the mountain was renewed with redoubled strength, and 
on both sides, the men and the elves were slowly rolling away. 
Bilbo looked at everything with sadness. He returned to his position in 
Ravenhill among the elves, partly because he had a better chance of 
escaping from this point, and partly (with the most Tookish part of his mind) 
Because he was forced to be in a desperate last position, he preferred to be in the 
defense of the King Elfo. Gandalf also, I must say, was there, feeling himself 
in the ground as he was thinking deeply, preparing, I suppose, for some last explosion 
of magic before the finale. 
That doesn't seem to be the case. "It's a little while ago," thought Bilbo, 
"before the goblins take the door and all of us are massacred or expelled 
below and captured. Really, it's enough to make us cry, after all we've 
passed. I'd rather the old Smaug would have stopped with all the miserable 
darlings, who these vile creatures recommend it, and the little old Bombur,
and Balin and Fili and Kili and all the others have a bad ending; and the Bard 
also 
, and the Men of the Lake and the happy elves can be glorious. 
It seems very uncomfortable, so I wouldn't say it's distressing. I wish I was out of here. 
of him." 
The clouds were torn apart by the wind and a slow red lightened the west. 
When the sudden shine in the twilight appeared, Bilbo looked at his father. God a great 
cry: he had seen something that leapt from his heart, dark shapes, small but 
majestic against the distant shine. 
The Águilas! The Águilas! —gritó—. The eagles are coming! 
Bilbo's eyes are often mistaken. The eagles descended by the 
wind, line by line, in such a way that they must have 
been 
reunited 
with 
the 
Águilas 
! " 
Las Águilas!" -Bilbo shouted once more, but in this moment a stone... 
A flecha who rushed from the moment he landed struck hard on his helmet and landed with a bang. 
and no more. 
THE ROUTE OF RETURN 
When Bilbo returned, he was literally alone. It was next to 
the flat stones of Ravenhill, and no one was looking for it. A day without clouds, but cold, 
I was very far from it. It was shaken and held like a stone, but its head 
was quenched with fire. 
"Now I wonder what happened", if I say to you. "In any case, I... 
I'm not one of the bad heroes, but I assume that I still have enough time. 
That's why!" 
It was incorporated with pain. Looking out over the valley, no one will be alive. 
duendes. After one day, when his head cleared up a little, he saw 
elves moving in the rocks below. He rubbed his eyes. Surely he would have a 
camp every day in the plain at a certain distance; did you have a comer and 
are you busy with the door? The teenagers seem to be occupied by closing the wall. But 
everything was in sepulchral silence. There was no call or echo of a song. Pain 
seems to be in the air. 
"I suppose victory is over!" I said, feeling the pain of my head. "Good, 
"It seems like a very dark story". 
Soon God knows what a man is going through and coming to. 
- Hello! -he shouted with a thunderous voice-. "Hello! What new days are there?
"What's the voice between the stones?" I said to the man, 
and looking at his friend, I said, "This is all there is 
to 
it." On the contrary, I suppose you could have... 
It's a warm and comfortable night in the bedroom!” 
-¡Soy yo, Bilbo Bolsón, companion of Thorin! - gritted openly. 
Quit the ring. 
"Less mis que te met!" I told the man who was making great progress. "We 
need you and we will look for you for a long time. We have been 
counted among the deaths, which are many, if Gandalf the magician does not 
say that you want to look for the last time in this place. They sent me to look 
here for the last time. Are you due much?" 
-A hard blow in the head, I think -I say Bilbo-. But I have a hard skin 
and a hard 
skull 
. 
So, I feel bad and my bones are like men before Bilbo was... 
I stood in front of a shop in the valley, there stood Gandalf, with his arm up. 
honda. No wonder the magician had escaped without a curse; and there were 
only a few injuries in the entire army. 
When Gandalf went to Bilbo, he was very happy. "¡Bolsón!", he exclaimed. 
-¡Pues yo never! I'm still alive after all! I'm happy! Please ask me, including you... 
Your help will help you to go up further! A terrible assumption, and in some cases it was. 
disastrous But other news you can hope for. Fri! -I say with greater gravity-. I am 
you called;” and taking him to the hobbit 
, I 
said hello to Thorin 
as 
I entered él. 
"Adiós, buen ladrón", I say. "Go now to the waiting room to feel myself 
joined by my fathers, until the world returns. Since I have to go back to all the gold 
and silver, and where it has little value, I want to separate myself from 
your friend, and I will withdraw from my words and actions at the door." 
Bilbo curled up on a roller relieved of pain. "Adios, Rey bajo el 
¡Montaña! -I say-. This is a bitter adventure, it must end like this; and not a 
mountain of gold can mend it. However, I am happy to have shared with you 
pilgrims—it has more than what any Bolsón deserves." 
-No! —I say Thorin—. I'm more attached to you than I believe, little girl. 
of the lovely West. A little courage and some wisdom, mixed with measure. 
If we valued the joy, the joy and the music on top of the accumulated gold, it would be... 
It would be a happier world. But sad or happy, I have to leave it now. Goodbye! 
Entonces Bilbo went around and was alone, and felt alone, enveloped
wrapped in a manta and, believe it or not, they will wait until their eyes of tears are filled. 
red and his snotty voice. He was a good soul. In fact, it was 
a long time before you had the courage to want to make a joke. "Es una suerte," I say. 
Finally, for so much, "who despised me when I went. Ojalá Thorin live, 
but I am happy that we will part with kindness. You were a fool, Bilbo Bolsón, 
and you had a great deal with him taken from the stone; and now a 
battle, to weigh all your efforts to buy peace and tranquility, but I suppose that 
"You can't blame her for that." 
Bilbo later everything that happened after the terrible dream, but God 
inspired her with more sadness than happiness, and now she was longing for 
the journey back home, so much 
so that I could count on some of the 
goblins; For your surveillance 
the movements in the mountains cannot be completely hidden, 
under the great Águila of the Brumosa 
Montañas, they were tied. 
Advancing at full speed for the sale just in time. They were the ones who abandoned the 
Duendes from the slopes of the mountains, rolling them over by precipices or expelling them 
from the derribaron shouting and disconcerted among his enemies. Not much time has passed. 
Before they freed the Lonely Mountain, the elves and the men on both sides 
could finally come to the side of the valley to help in the battle that was unfolding below. 
But included with the Águilas, they continue to be inferior in number. At this last hour 
his own Beorn had appeared, but he knew how to come from where. Venia 
solo, y con forma de oso; and it seems that we have grown up in cases where we have to overcome the burden of a giant in his wrath. 
The wrinkle of his voice was like the wrinkle of drums and weapons of fire; y ahuyentaba a los lobos. 
and the duendes on the fireplace like paja and plumas. It clicked on its latch, 
and it broke like a truncheon through the ring. The wines were 
held next to their seniors on a low and rounded hill. Then Beorn 
leaned and rose towards Thorin, who had fallen across his lances, and loaded 
his bag with refreshments. 
He quickly subsided and his anger was reduced, so that nothing could 
resist it, and no weapon seemed to lift it. Dispersed to him 
guardspaldas, and knocked down to the own Bolg and flattened it. Then the consternation
He fell over the Goblins and huyeron in all directions. But he abandoned the dog. 
enemies with the lure of a new hope, and pursued them in search, and 
prevented the majority from escaping from where they could. They expelled many 
of them to the Rio Corriente, and those who heard the noise on the surface or in the west. 
in the seas that rode the Forest River; and there the majority of 
the last fugitives arrived, while they were bound with difficulty to the house of the Elfos del Bosque. 
they were left behind, or arrested to die in the depths of darkness along the paths of the 
Black Forest. The songs say that three parts of the goblin warriors of 
the North perished and the mountains were peaceful for many years. 
The victory was assured before the death of the night, but the persecution was... 
Everyone was at the foot when Bilbo returned to the camp; and there wasn't much in the camp. 
valley saves the most seriously injured. 
"Where are the Águilas?", he asked Gandalf late, while he was 
surrounded by many warm mantas. 
"Some of us are scared", said the magician, "but the majority has returned to 
their nests. They did not go there and left with the first light of the day. 
Morning. They crowned their chief with gold and they promised to be friends 
with them forever." 
- I feel it. O sea, I enjoyed turning to see him," said Bilbo. 
somnolent; "We asked you on the way home. I suppose you were 
ready to go home? 
"As ready as you are," I said to the magician. 
Actually, it was a few days before Bilbo actually left. 
Thorin entered the depths of the mountain, and the Bard placed the Stone of the Ark above his 
mother. 
"Déjalo ahí longa que la Montaña caiga!", I say. "That brings good 
luck to all the people who live here after!" 
Above his grave, the Elven King deposited in Orcrist, the elven sword that 
had been captured by Thorin in captivity. If it is said in the songs that it shines, 
always in the dark the enemies seek it, and the strength of the elves could 
not be surprising. Daín, son of Naín, settled there 
and was converted into King under the Mountain, and over time many other young men 
reunited on their throne in the ancient halls. Of 
Thorin's sweet companions, quedaban diez. Fili and Kili had to defend themselves with a shield. 
and body, perhaps he was the mayor of his mother. Los demás stayed 
with Dain; because Dain left his treasure well. 
So, there was no reason to divide the treasure into
the actions that had been planned, to Balin and Dwalin, to Dori and Nori 
and Ori, to Oin and Gloin, to Bifur and Bofur and Bombur—or to 
Bilbo. Without embargo, a tenth part of all the plate and the gold, forged and 
without work, was delivered to Bard; because Dain said: "We will honor the 
knowledge of the dead, and now we will keep the stone of the lower Arca in its custody". 
Including a tenth part was a supremely large reward, greater than that 
of many mortal kings. Of this treasure, Bard sent much gold to the 
Lords of the City of Lake; and generously rewarded his followers and friends. 
At Rey Elfo I gave her the emeralds of Girion, the joys they enjoyed the most. 
I loved it, that Dain gave it back to her. 
I told Bilbo: «This darling is as much as mine; although 
the old ones cannot last, because many people want to win them. 
and defensively. However, even if you were willing to let go of all your pretensions, 
it would seem that the words of Thorin, from the ones that stopped you, it 
is certain that we will give you little. I will reward you with growth. 
of all." 
—Very lovely from all sides —says Bilbo—. But, in reality, it's a drink for me. How...? 
Should we have all this treasure at home without war or assassinations? 
On the way, no one. And no one who should have that. 
With that when you get home. I'm sure it's better in your hands. 
At the end only two small chests would be removed, one piece of plate, 
and the other with gold, as one might be able to remove it with a little force 
. 
Finally it was time to send off your friends. "Adiós, 
¡Balin!" bye; "goodbye, Dwalin; and goodbye Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, 
Gloin, Bifur, Bofur and Bombur! Those beards never fade away! And 
when you go up the mountain, say goodbye: "Goodbye Thorin Shield of Roble! 
¡Y Fili y Kili! Your memory will never disappear! 
Once the glasses were tilted deeply towards the door, but the words were stuck in their eyes. 
gargantas. "Goodbye and good luck, where you go!" I say Balin finally. 
"Whenever we visit again, when our salons are once again clean, we realize that 
the party will be truly splendid!" 
—Sometimes you pass along my path —I say Bilbo—, 
I'm the four; But any one of you is welcome at any time!” 
Luego se god la vuelta. 
The color of the elves was in march; and if it had recovered considerably, many were still... 
I am happy, because now the northern world would be happier for many long days.
The dragon was dead, and the two deribados, and their hearts marveled 
Adelante after the winter, hacia a spring of joy. 
Gandalf and Bilbo walked past the King Elf, and towards them they walked 
Beorn, once more in the form of a man, and they stood and sang in a loud voice. 
in the fireplace. So they continued until they approached the limits of 
the Bosque Negro, to the north of the place where the Rio del Bosque emerged. Once 
they were told, the magician and Bilbo didn't want to enter the forest, nor did they know that 
even though the king thought they would ask for a moment in their halls, they had the intention of going there. 
off the edge of the forest, and above the extreme north of the desert that 
is found between it and the beginning of the Gray Mountains. It was a wide and 
desolate chimney, but now that the goblins were crushed, it seemed more certain. 
ellos que los terribles senderos under the trees. Likewise, Beorn was 
Yendo by this path also. 
- Goodbye! Oh, King Elf! -I say Gandalf-. Happy green forest, 
The world is still young! That's why all of you people are happy! 
- Goodbye! Oh, Gandalf! -I say the king-. Always keep track of where 
you are most needed and least expected! As soon as I start in my steps 
, I'll be happier!” 
-I'll tell you -I say Bilbo as he turns away and takes the cake-, 
"Accept this gift!" and there was a platinum collar and pearls 
when he was sent away. 
" 
What way do 
I 
want this, oh hobbit? 
" 
-I will accept your gift, oh Bilbo el Magnifico! -I say the king gravely 
. That you never seem to forget 
(the stuff seems too easy!) For me! 
Then the elves flew into the woods, and Bilbo set off on the long road. 
fireplace at home. 
There were many difficulties and adventures before recovery. The rescue was 
everyone was saved, and there were many other things in those same days 
due; but he was well guided and well protected: the magician was with 
Él and Beorn during most of the journey, and he was never in great danger. 
In every way, halfway through the winter, Gandalf and Bilbo were still there. 
turn, across both edges of the forest, to the doors of Beorn's house; and
then they both waited for a while. The weather of Christmas was warm and cheerful there; 
and men come from all parts to celebrate by the order of Beorn. The goblins 
The inhabitants of the Cloudy Mountains were now few in number and were terrified, and hidden in 
the deepest holes that could be encountered; and the huargos had disappeared from the 
woods, so that the men went up without me. Beorn he became a great 
chief afterwards in those regions and ruled a large land between the 
mountains and the forest; and it is said that for many generations the men 
of their lineage held the power to take on the form of courage, and some were sinister men. 
and bad, but the majority were of courage like Beorn, although less in size and strength. On 
that day, the last goblins were chased into the Cloudy Mountains and a 
new peace took them to the edge of safety. 
It was spring, a wonderful time, with a warm climate and a brilliant sun, before 
Bilbo and Gandalf departed at the end of Beorn, and although it was still early 
at home, Bilbo was with weight, for the flowers of the gardens of Beorn. 
They were no less marvelous in spring than in full. 
They finally underwent the wide path and reached the same place where 
the goblins had previously been captured. But they reached this high point in 
the morning, and as they looked beyond, they saw a white sun shining over the 
extended earth. There, however, the Black Forest extends, blue in the distance, and 
dark green in the edge as they seek, including in spring. A lo lejos estaba el 
Montaña solitaria cases invisible. On the highest peak, I can't wait until the end. 
Sin derretir, shone pale. 
"So take the snow after the fire, and even the dragons hold on to the end!", I said 
Bilbo, and God sent her on her adventure. Tookish's part was 
very loud, and the Bolson was stronger every day. "Ojalá hora 
¡Only be in my own chair!" I say. 
THE LAST AGE 
It was the first of May when the two finally returned to the edge of the 
Rivendel valley, where the last (or first) Casa Hogareña was found. 
Again it was nighttime, their ponies were exhausted, especially the one who 
loaded the equipment; and everyone felt the need to avoid it. Mientras cabalgaban hacia abajo 
On the way to the embankment, Bilbo listened to the elves still singing in the trees, as they would 
not have stopped since he was; and as ready as the jinetes lowered to 
the lower parts of the forest they were installed in a very similar song to the one 
before. This is another example:
The dragon has been branded, 
its colors are now crumbled; 
Your armor is full of three, 
Your splendor is humiliated! 
Although the sword is oxide, 
And the throne and the crown perish 
With strength in which the men trust 
And the wealth they appreciate, 
Here the grass still grows, 
And the men still swing, 
The white water flowing, 
And the elves continue singing 
 ¡Ven! Tra-la-la-lally! 
 Go back to the valley! 
The stars are much more brilliant. 
What gemas sin medida, 
The moon is much whiter. 
That the flat in treasure; 
The fire is most brilliant 
In the house at night 
That the gold is obtained through mining, 
Why should I go wandering? 
 Oh! Tra-la-la-lally 
 Return to the Valley. 
Oh! Where does it go from here? 
Is it too late to return? 
The river is flowing, 
all the stars are burning! 
Oh! Are you so burdened, 
so sad and so gloomy? 
Here elf and maiden elfa 
Now let's give the welcome to the cansados 
 ​​​​With Tra-la-la-lally 
 Go back to the Valley, 
 Tra-la-la-lally 
 Fa-la-la-lally 
 ¡Fa-la! 
Then the elves of the valley salteron and the health and the guidance. 
Cross the water until Elrond's house. There they gave you a warm welcome. 
them, and there were many people eager to hear the story of his 
adventures that night. Gandalf was there, because Bilbo was called and 
sleepy. He knew most of the story, he could have participated in it and the same thing... 
They told the magician a lot on his way home or to 
Beorn's house; but once in a while I opened an eye and discovered it, when 
I read a part of the story that no one else knew. 
It was in this way that, knowing where Gandalf had been, he 
could listen to the wizard's words to Elrond. It seems that Gandalf was 
in a great council of the white wizards, masters of tradition and goodness. 
magic and that by now they had expelled the Negromancer of their darkness. 
Celebrated in the south of the Black Forest. 
-In a little while -said Gandalf-, the forest will grow a little more. 
more healthy. The North will be free from this horror for many years. 
years, I hope. But it would seem that they would destroy the world! 
"It would be good, in truth," said Elrond; but I'm afraid that this won't happen. 
"over this era of the world, or for many futures".
When you tell the story of your travels, you will find other stories, and 
even more stories, stories that have happened for a long time, stories of new things and stories of things that didn't exist before you. 
time in absolute, until Bilbo's head has reached its height and snored. 
comfortably in a corner. 
He despaired and found himself in a white bed, with the moon shining through it. 
An open woman. Behind her, many elves sing loud and clear in the 
banks of the arroyo. 
Sing to everyone who is happy, sing to everyone now! 
The wind is in the cup of the tree, the wind is in the breeze; 
The stars are in flower, the moon is in flower, 
And the winds of the night in its tower are brilliant. 
Bailed all the happy ones, bailed all the joints! 
The grass is sweet and the foot is like a feather! 
The river is flat, the shadows are fleeting; 
Happy is the time of May and happy our place. 
Let us sing sweetly now and let us hear your dreams! 
Let's sleep and let's leave it there! 
Out of vagrancy twoerme. Your pillow will be soft! Cuna song! 
Cuna song! Alder and Willow! 
No more sighs, pine, until the wind of the morning! 
 Fall Moon! The earth is dark! 
 Quiet! Quiet! Oak, ash and hawthorn! 
All the water stays in silence until you get the love! 
-¡Go on, Gente Alegre! -I said Bilbo looking away-. What now, for the moon! 
Is this? Your dwarf would miss a duende borracho! Anyway, I'll appreciate it. 
"And your ronquidos d'expertarian a dragón de stone, but we appreciate it". 
They answered between the laughs: "If you look for love and keep yourself 
asleep since the beginning of the night. Morning, quiz, you'll be... 
" Take care of the bed." 
"A little sleep cures a lot in Elrond's house," I say; "But I 
'll give you the cure that can be achieved. A second good night, dear friends! And 
with this I returned to my bed and lasted until the high hours of the morning. 
I quickly abandoned the dog in this house and I had many happy parties. 
Bromear and dance, hard and late, with the elves From the valley, even this 
place could not depress him much, and he always thought about his own 
home after a week, for that long, he longed for Elrond and God 
Accept any small gift and be with Gandalf. 
Just when they left the valley, the sky darkened in the west before them. 
And the wind and the rain came at the same time. 
"Happy May!" I say Bilbo, while the rain hits the dear one. "But
let's turn to the words and return home. I suppose this is the first 
"try." 
"A long way to go," said Gandalf. " 
But it's the last path," said Bilbo. 
They took to the river that marked the very limit of the front of 
the rescue, and off I went. due to the empinada 
orilla 
, 
which 
could 
recover similar to what had been before, except that the company was... 
more small and silent; also, this time there are no trolls. At every point 
on the road, Bilbo recorded the words and words of a year ago. 
They seemed to her more than once, because, above all, she quickly noted the 
place where the place had fallen into the river, and if they had gone astray, 
she had a despicable adventure with Tom, Bert and Bill. 
Not many people along the path encountered the gold of the trolls, which they had 
entered, hidden and intact. "I have enough for my life", 
-I said Bilbo when the hubieron was disentered-. It will be better than this, Gandalf. Yo... 
I was trying to decide what you can find a use for. 
" "Claro que puedo!" I say the magician. "But they share and share equally! You can 
find out that you have more needs than those who hope for". 
Then they put the gold in bags and put them on the ponies, which 
I absolutely liked. After that, the march was slower, for the greater part of 
the time that they walked. But the earth was green and there was a lot of grass, 
so the hobbit passed away happy 
with a blanket of red silk – not a single one of them had 
survived, he had taken back this one from Elrond, because now June had 
left the truth and the truth. 
As all the things related to it, it lasted for a day in which 
they were at the sight of the country where Bilbo was born and 
the trees were as familiar to her as 
his hands and the feet of his feet. When connecting to an elevation you can see your own hill on it 
and said: 
The paths follow onward 
 , the rocks and the lower trees, 
To the caves where the sun has never shone, 
 Through the arroyos that never touch the sea; 
Over the snow it seems like winter, 
 And across the happy June flowers, 
Over the grass and over the stone, 
 And below the mountains in the moon. 
The paths always follow 
 below the clouds and below the stars, 
Without embargo,the feet that wander are gone
 Finally, we went home, which is light. 
Those who have seen the fire and the sword have seen 
 the horror in the stone halls. 
Look at the green meadows 
 and the trees and the hills and have known them for a long time now. 
Gandalf looked at him. "I wonder Bilbo!" I said. "Something is happening". 
What's up! You're not the hobbit you were. 
And so they crossed the bridge and passed the mill towards the river and 
returned directly to the Puerta de Bilbo. 
- My God! What happens? he shouted. I got a lot of sympathy. 
And all kinds of people, respectable and regardless, were pinned on the rededor. 
door, and many entered and went up, without having to clean their feet on the 
outside, as Bilbo noted with annoyance. 
If they were surprised, they were surprised even more. Has returned. 
In the middle of a sub auction! There was a big announcement in black and red 
on the door, indicating that on the 22nd of June the gentlemen Grubb, Grubb, 
and Burrowes would sell at once the effects of the late Bilbo Baggins 
Escudero, de Bolsón Cerrado, Underhill, Hobbiton. The wind will start in December. 
in point It was the last hour of the day, and most of the things had 
been sold, for various prices, in this case for as long as old songs (as 
is not unusual in the below auctions). Bilbo's first parents, the Sacovilla-Bolsón, were, 
in fact, occupied midday in their homes to see their own furniture. 
The little Bilbo was "presumably dead", and not everyone who said it was. 
I complain that the presumption is incorrect. 
The return of Señor Bilbo Bolsón created a great revue, so low down 
the hill and further down the hill, he crossed the water; it was much more 
than a marvel of new days. The legal problem, in fact, lasted years. It was 
a long time before it was admitted that Señor Bolsón was alive. 
again. People who received especially good offers on the market found 
it difficult to convince him, and in the end, to save time, Bilbo had to buy enough back. 
Lots of your own furniture. Many of his plate spoons mysteriously 
disappeared and never stopped. Personally I suspected that... 
Sacovilla-Bolsón. For their part, they never admitted that Bolson's return 
was genuine and they never maintained a friendly relationship with Bilbo. 
Después I really wanted to live in this pleasant hobbit house. 
After all, Bilbo discovered that he had lost more than anyone: he had lost his 
reputation. It is certain that from these times he followed being a friend of the elves and
the honor of the elves, wizards and all those people who once passed through this path; 
But it wasn't entirely respectable. Indeed, he was considered by all 
the hobbits of the mayor were considered "rare", except by his nephews and 
nieces on the side of the Tuk, but it was not safe for them to feel animated in his 
friendship by some of his mayors. 
I regret deciding that she didn't care. I was very happy; and the sound 
The sound of the tetera above the house was every more musical than before. 
Included on the quiet days before the Unexpected Fiesta. Hanged on sword. 
over the response of the fireplace. On the shoulder it was placed on a shelf in the vestibule. 
(hasta que lend it to a museum). Most of their gold and silver were bought as 
gifts, both useful and extravagant, which has a certain point to explain 
for the cuteness of their nephews and nieces. The magic ring keeps it in 
great secrecy and you can use it mainly when you receive unwelcome visitors. 
He dedicated himself to writing poetry and visiting the elves; and even so many people 
hugged their heads and touched their foreheads and said: "Poor old 
Bolsón! and no matter how few people believed in his words, he remained very 
happy until the end of his days, which were extraordinarily long. 
A late year, a few years later, Bilbo was heard in his studio, 
writing his memories—he thought, "Yesterday, 
the holidays of a hobbit," when they called at the door. I said Bilbo, and 
he was 
ready comfortable in their seats. 
If Balin noticed that Señor Bolsón's waistcoat was more 
extensive (and had buttons of real gold), Bilbo also noticed that Balin's beard 
was of great magnificence. 
So, they started talking about the moments that had just passed and Bilbo asked: 
Many of them 
are very good reunited. 
From the lake and from the south to the west, the whole valley 
began to be cultivated and rich, and the desolation was now full of birds 
and flowers in spring and fruitful and festive in autumn. The City of the Lake 
was refunded and was more hopeful than ever, and much compensation had arrived 
at the bottom of the Running River; and they were friends in these places, 
including elves, elves and men. 
The Hall of the Bolsón Residence Cerrado del Escudero B. Bolsón 
The old Maestro had a bad ending. Bard gave her a lot of gold.
for the help of the people of the lake, but being of the type who easily catches 
this illness, he took him to the bottom of the dragon's illness and took away the majority of the gold. 
and I hugged him, and I died in the woods, abandoned by his 
companions. 
"The new Maestro is of a more sage type", said Balin, "and very popular, because, 
presumably, to him is attributed the greatest part of the credit for actual prosperity. They are... 
making songs that say that in their time the rivers ran with gold". 
"Though the prophecies of the old songs turned out to be true, after a 
fashion!" I say Bilbo. 
- For suposuet! -I say Gandalf-. Why don't you be certain? 
Surely no descreéis de las prophecies, porque habéis tenido parte de las prophecies. 
Do you want to provoke me? Don't you really think that everyone...? 
Your adventures and escapes will be managed with ease, just for you. 
Is the only benefit? You are a very pleasant person, Señor Bolsón, and I care about you very much. 
from you; But after all, you are no more than a man in such a large world! 
-Thanks to God! - I said Bilbo when he came back and gave her the tobacco.
