An unexpected party
In a hole in that ground it's just a hobbit. Not a nasty, dirty, wet hole,
filled with those points of worms and a slimy smell, and not a dry, bare, sandy hole with nothing in it to sit on or eat: this was a ho this means convenience.
This was a perfectly round door that had a patry gate, painted green, with a
shiny yellow copper button exactly in the middle. That door was constructed after a tubular room like a barrel: a simple barrel without chair, and baie, baie penne vir hoede en jasse-that hobbit was sweet vir
visitors. That barrel was twisting and turning, quite but not completely, not in that side of that hill - That Hill, so all those peopl bathrooms, cellars, spens (baie of this), caste (hy the whole
rooms dedicated to clothes), galley, dining rooms, always laundry on the same
floor, and indeed on the same corridor. The best rooms were always on the left side (a bit entering), because this was the only window Here this hobbit was a very wealthy hobbit, and his name was Baggins.
Those Bagginses live in a time outside the house in the vicinity of Die Heuwel, and people respect the hull as baie respectfully, not j van Hulle was rich, but also because he never had any adventures or did anything unexpected: you could see what a Baggins was like in a without having to go to the trouble of asking him. Here is a story of how
Baggins had an adventure and kept himself busy with things he did and did. completely unexpected. He lost a lot of respect, but he cry-well, you will see if he finally does cry something.
That mother of our specific hobbit - what is a hobbit? I assume Hobbits need an explanation now, since it has become all scarred and
skaam for those Great People, so they call us. Hulle is (or was) a small person, about half our height, and smaller than that bearded D You and I, big stupid people, come stuttering and making a noise
what an elephant he can go a mile away. Hulle is inclined to be fat in his stomach; wear bright colors (mainly green and yellow); dra no shoes, because their feet naturally have leathery soles and thick warm brown hair that fit well on their heads (which are curly); th (after all, what can you do twice a day when you can do this). Now you know enough to go with it. Soos ek sê it, that mother of this ho of those three remarkable dogs of that Ou Neem, head of those hobbits what
the ear side of Die Water just, that little river that runs at the foot of Die Heuwel. This is often said (in other families) that long If only a fairy woman had to take it. This was of course absurd, but whatever
there was always something not entirely hobbit-like about them, and once in a while members of that Took clan would go and have an adve discreetly disappeared, and that family silenced it; but that fact remains
that those Tooks were not as respectful as those Bagginse, although he was undoubtedly richer.
Not that Belladonna Took ever had any adventure after she became Mrs. Bungo Baggins. Bungo, this was Bilbo's dad, the most building luukse hobbit-gat vir her (and partly with her money) what might have been found under Die Heuwel or ear Die Heuwel or ear Die Water, a there the holiness remains until the end of the shell. However, it is true that Bilbo, her only support, although he had exactly the sa on that Take side, something that just means there's a chance to come
out. That opportunity never came until Bilbo Baggins grew up, when he was about fifty years old or so, and lived in that beautiful hobb sy dad, what do I do next to you, until he is apparently immovable in action.
By a strange coincidence, an looking long joint in the silence of that world, when there was less noise and more green, and those hobbi barely until by sy woolly tone (neat geborsel)-Gandalf the faraway. Gandalf! If you just heard a quarter of what I heard of him,
and if I listen to everything there is to hear, you should be prepared for some kind of strange story. Story and adventure originate wh hasn't been like that under Die Heuwel for a long time, not since sy
friend that Ou Neem is in work-death, and those hobbits hardly forget it

how he likes it. He was gone by Die Heuwel and by Die Water
In their daily lives they were always small hobbit boys and hobbit girls.
All that unsuspecting Bilbo saw there was an old man
a staff. He had a long, pointed blue hat, a long gray cloak and a silver serp ear. from which her long white beard hangs beneath her wa swart stewels.
"Goeiemôre!" Bilbo said, and he meant this. They could see the sky, and the grass was completely green. But Gandalf looked at the man f means that this is a good look, whether I want it or not; or that you feel good catching; or that this is something worth paying attent "Always simultaneously," Bilbo said. "And a nice looking pyp with tobacco outside, boonop. If you have a pyp with you, sit
off and have a bite of mine! There's no hare there, it's for us all day long!" Go, sit Bilbo on a sitting spot by his door, cross his l a beautiful gray ring of smoke from what that lug breaks into the water and floats away from Die Heuwel.
"Baie beautiful!" the Gandalf sê. "But it's not time to blow smoke rings right now. I'm looking for someone to share in an adventure th real, and it is difficult to find someone."
"I would think so in this part! We are ordinary, quiet people and have no use for adventure. Nasty, disturbing, inconvenient things! Ma vir aandete! "I can't imagine what anyone sees in that person," it said to us, Mr. Baggins, and put an inch behind the wire, and blew o smoke. Then take out your oggendbriewe and start reading,
don't pretend that he doesn't care about that old man anymore. He decides that he
wasn't quite his kind, and he wanted to leave. But that old man doesn't move. He leaned on his stick and stared at that hobbit without somewhat, until Bilbo became quite uncomfortable and even a little angry. "Goeiemôre!" he finally said it. "We don't want an adventure "What are the things you use Goodiemôre for!" the Gandalf sê.
"Now you mean that you want to get rid of me, and that this won't be good." until I leave." "No, no, no, no, my dear sir! Let me see, I don't think I know your name?"
"Yes, yes, my dear sir--and I know your name, Mr. Bilbo Baggins."
And you know my name, although you don't remember that I belong to him
this. Ek is Gandalf, and Gandalf means ek! To think that I had to live to receive good news from Belladonna Took every day, as if I wer "Gandalf, Gandalf! Good grief! Not that wanderer-tower
the old Take a pair of magic diamond studs and give some help to tie it and
never undone until this order is nie? Not that old thing, tell it a wonderful story by partytjies, ear drake and gnomes and giant and t rescue of the princess and the unexpected happiness of the widow's seuns? Not that man who made some excellent fireworks! I remember there! Ou Neem always had it on Midsummer Day. Wonderful! Hulle it has risen so many lilies and snapdragons and fire deer and
"Hang the whole time in that skemer!" You will already find out that Mr. Baggins
was not quite so prosperous as he wanted to be happy, also that he was very sweet to nature. "Ah no!" he continued. "Not that Gandalf w

Anything from tree climbing to a visit to Elwe or Seil in Skepe, Seil
after other oewers! Seen my, that lewe was quite inter-ek mean, jy was quite
things in this part get very disturbing from time to time. I asked for a fresh king, but I had no idea you were still busy."
"Where else should I be?" it was said by that roper. "I'm pleased to find that you remember something about me. This seems as if you re fireworks friendly, in any case, and this is not without hope. Indeed vir jou for old grandfather Took's sake, and for poor Belladonna' gee jou wat jy gevra het."
"Sorry, I didn't ask for anything!"
"Yes, you have it! Twice now. I'm sorry. I'll give you this. Trouens, I'll go so far as to send you on this adventure. It's amusing for more! But please come and drink whatever you want for some time! Why not more? "Come more! See you later!" With that the hobbit turned inside your round green door, and this was as quick as he said, without seeming rude. After all, Towenaars are towenaars.
"For what on earth did I ask him to drink tea!" it happened to him while he was walking. after that sponge. He recently ate it for brea and a drink of something would do him good after sy skrik. Meanwhile, Gandalf has always stood outside that door, and

long but silent chatter. After a while he stepped forward, and with that spyker
on your staff a strange sign was scrawled on that hobbit's beautiful green front door. Then he steps away, just about that time Bilbo i very good.
That next day he barely forgets about Gandalf. He doesn't
remember things well, unless he wrote this down on your engagement date on the Tablet: so here: Gandalf Tee Wednesday. Yesterday he was scared to do anything of that nature.
Just before dinner time, a huge crowd came to the front door
bell, and then he remembers! He ran and put on that kettle and that
another cup and pie, and an extra cookie or two, and ran to that door. "It's such a shame that I let you risk it!" he wanted to see him that this wasn't Gandalf. This was a dwarf with a blue beard with a gold belt tucked into it, and a bright face under his dark green ca the door was opened, he pushed in, just as if he expected. He hung the sy hooded cloak on the nearest peg, and "Dwalin by yours!" he sa "Bilbo Baggins by yours!" it happened to that hobbit, too surprised to ask anything about that look. What effect did that silence have? awkwardly, he added: "I'm just about to have tea; please come and enjoy some with me." A bitch may be stiff, but he means it in a frien would you do if an uninvited dwarf came and hung it up in your house? saal without a word of clarification?
Hulle was not yet long at the table, trouens, hulle the third cake, until an even louder noise came by that bell. "Spare me!" sê that h "So you finally got here!" This was what he wanted
Gandalf here that time. But this wasn't Gandalf. Instead, there was a good old dwarf on the stairs with a white beard who jumped in as "I can see it already beginning," he said when he saw this.
from Dwalin se green kappie what to hang. He said he was hanging along, and "Balin to you!" he said with his hand on his chest.
"Thank you!" the Bilbo with a hyg sê. This was not the right thing to do, but the beginning arrived and made me very dismayed. He loves but he wanted to know him before he got there, and he chose to ask him himself. He had a terrible idea that that cake would run out, and then he-as that host: he knew the syllable and stood by it, no matter how painful
-hy will have to cum underneath.
"Come in and have a drink!" he managed to sê after taking a deep breath. "A Bietjie beer will suit me better, if it is the same for you, my good
"sir," the white-bearded Balin said. "But I don't care about vir 'n bietjie koek nie - saadkoek, if you only have it." "Baie!" Bilbo an the man also rushed to that cellar to fill a pint beer cup, and
After a drink, I went to get two beautiful round sweet cakes that he had that afternoon, pastries for your snack.
When he returned, Balin and Dwalin were already sitting at the table. friends (trouens, hulle were brothers). Bilbo that one beer and that cake for hulle, then the bell rings loudly again, and then a ring.
"Gandalf came here this time," he thought as he walked along that path. But this wasn't. This was two more dwarfs, both with blue hair, silwer belts and yellow beard; and every one of them wore a suitcase and a count. Thank you for jumping in as soon as that door started glad nie verbaas nie.
"What can ek vir julle do, my dwarf?" it he said.
"Kili at your service!" it is a gesture. "And Fili!" it is added to the other; and kudos to both hulle blou kappies take away and bow. "By you and your family!" Bilbo replied, remembering his manners. here that time.
"Dwalin and Balin is already here, see ek," Kili said. "Come join the skare!"
"'n Skare!" the Mr. Baggins dinking. "I don't like how this sounds. I really should sit down and get my mind together and have a drink. table, and talking about mine and gold and trouble with those leprechauns, and that drake raid, and all the other things he didn't do
I didn't understand it, and I didn't want to, because the whole thing sounded too adventurous, ding-dong-a-ling-dang, the clock was laz "Someone at that door!" the hy gesê and sy oë wink.
"About four, sou ek according to that sound sê," the Fili gesê. "Boon, let us see what is coming behind us in the distance." That poor little hobbit sat down in that hallway and sat her head in her hands, and wonder what happened, and what happened, and or hulle almal vir aandete sou bly. Then the bell rings louder again
ever, and he had to run after that door. After all, this wasn't four, this was five.

Another dwarf arrived while he was wondering in that hall. When he turned the knob, everyone was inside, bowing and praying "by you" on name; and let's say two persian caps, a gray cap, a brown cap, and a white cap, hang it on that penne, and wrap it with your
bree hands tied in your gold and silver belts to connect with the other. this barely became a skare. Some the vir ale gevra, and some v besig vir 'n rukkie.
A large pot of coffee had recently been placed in that firecracker, those sad cookies were gone, and that dwarf had started with a roun there it came - a loud knock. Not a lazy one, but a hard rat-tat on that hobbit's beautiful green door. Someone hit it with a stick!
Bilbo ran through that hallway, angry and completely confused and dumbfounded - this was the most awkward Wednesday he ever
remember. He pulled that door open with a jerk, and in all cases, a bo-on on the other one. More dwarfs, four more! And there was Ganda behind, leaning on your staff and lying down. He made quite a dive on that beautiful door; he also casually knocked out that secret bra he sat there that previous day.
"Versigtig! Versigtig!" it he said. "It's not you, Bilbo, to detain your friend from what was on that mat, and then open that door with "At your service!" sê Bifur, Bofur and Bombur while they all stand in a row.
Then the whole thing hung up two yellow caps and a green one; and also a heavenly blouse with a long silver tossel. Last mentioned it t Oakenshield himself, who was quite unhappy with Bilbo himself
mated with Bifur, Bofur and Bombur bo-op hom. Vir a thing Bombur
was very fat and heavy. Thorin was indeed very proud and it meant nothing to him; but poor mr. Baggins het gesê hy is pity vir so baie time, he finally groaned, "Please don't mention that," and stopped frowning.
"Now we're always here!" sê Gandalf while he is looking at that row of thirteen hats - those best removable party hats - and the hat th

penne. "A whole happy meeting! I hope there is something for those latecomers to eat and drink! What is this? Tee! No thanks I think fo "En vir my," Thorin said.
"And raspberry confit and apple tart," the Bifur sê. "And meat pie and cheese," the Bofur sê. "And pork pie and lettuce," the Bombur sê "And cookies and beer and coffee, if you're not around," it's that other dwarf door that door.
"Eat some eggs, there's a good old!" the Gandalf shouted behind him, while the hobbit followed the spens. "And just bring out that cold chicken and chickens!"
"It seems like he knows as much about the inside of my penis as he does." "myself!" the Mr. Baggins moaning, what a very confused feeli the beginning is a miracle or a bad miserable adventure, it never happened
get back into your house. That time when he took all those bottles and skottelgoed and messes and forks and glasses and plates and spoo large skink board, it has become warm, and red in that face, and irritated. "Confuse and confuse this dwarf!" he said it out loud. "Why "Come on and lend a hand?" Look, there was Balin and Dwalin standing by that galley door, and Fili and Kili behind them, and in front o I could just put that skink board and a few small tables in that sitting room and sit it all out now.
Gandalf sat at the head of that group with those thirteen dwarfs around:
and Bilbo sat on a chair by the fire and chatted with a drink (his appetite had been quite taken away), and I tried as if it was all pe plain and smooth not an adventure. That dwarf ate and ate, and
talked and talked, and that time it started. Ultimately the shell was pushed back, and Bilbo attempted to collect the plate and glass. "Ek take on you will always be happy vir aandete?" he said it in his most polite way. unpressy pitches.
"Of course!" the Thorin sê. "And after that. We won't be busy until late, and we have to make music first. Now we have to clean up!" Th that good. There they all go, without having to venture to the skinkborde, but columns from the borde, each with a bottle of bo-op, wit behind everyone, barely squeaking with fear: "please be careful!" and "Please, don't bother! I can help you." But that dwarf first sang Cut that glass and crack that plate!
Blunt that knife and bend that vurke! This is what Bilbo Baggins hates- Break those bottles and burn that cork! Sny that rag and kick that fat!

 Throw that milk on that rumen floor! Loose those legs on that bedroom mat! Spat die wyn op elke deur!
Throw that kroeë into a boiling container; Pound them up with a pounding pole;
And when you're done, if only one thing is whole, Send everyone down that corridor to roll! This is what Bilbo Baggins hates!
So, fresh! look good with that plate!
And of course don't do any of those scary things here, and everything is quickly and safely packed away, while that hobbit was turning hulle was busy doing. Then we went back to the house and Thorin stood on it with his feet
that fender smelled like a pyp. He blew the biggest smoke ring, and wherever he said he was going, it happened on that watch on that ho ceiling; but wherever this went, it was not quick enough to escape from Gandalf.
Pop! he sent out a smaller smoke ring from his short clay pipe through each of Thorin's. Then Gandalf's smoke ring would turn green
and come back to sway over that wizard's head. He already had a cloud of holiness over him, and in that cloud it makes this him look st towery. Bilbo stood still and looked - he was sweet with smoke rings - and then he blushed and thought how proud he was yesterday of th smoke ring that he sent with that wind over Die Heuwel.
"Now vir bietjie musiek!" sê Thorin. "Bring out that instrument!"
Kili and Fili ran hard after a long run and brought back small violins; Dori, Nori and Ori bring the whistle inside their jacket; Bombur it to bring a drum from that hall before the sky; Bifur and Bofur also went out, and came back with a clarinette, some hush betw Dwalin and Balin said: "Spare me, let me release mine into that sidewalk!" "Just bring 'mine together with you!'" Thorin said. Hull, he beautiful golden harp, and then Thorin strikes this, the music begins
once, so skielik and soft that Bilbo forgets everything else, and is carried away to a dark land under strange moons, far from That Wat from sy hobbit-gat under Die Heuwel.
That darkness entered that room through that small window, which made it on that side of Die Heuwel; that fiery flickering - this was A the continued playing, while Gandalf's shadow blew against that wall. The darkness filled the entire room, and the fire died, and the s deep places of their ancient home; and this is as much a fragment of your song, as this can be all your song without all your music.
Far from those cold misty mountains After deep dungeons and old caves We must leave before dawn To souk that pale enchanted gold.
That dwarf of old made the mighty tower spell, While hammers were ringing bells in case it In deep places, where dark things sleep, In caves under those hills.
Vir ancient king and Elvish lord There is baie glittering goue skat Let it be formed and begged, and let it all be imprisoned
To crawl away in precious stones on that hilt of that sword. The whole harness was tied to a silver necklace That blossoming star, hanging from the crown, That dragon fire, in twisted thread
Let the light of the moon and sun mingle. Far away over those cold misty mountains Na diep duikers en ou grotte
We must leave before dawn,
To claim our long forgotten gold.
Cups wat hulle there vir hulself carved out it And harpe of gold; where no one mines There the whole long song rang, and many a song
It is singing without being heard by man or by everyone else. That pine tree roars on that height, That moaned in that night.
That fire was red, this the flaming spread; Those booms were soos torches with light burning. That bell rang in that valley
And the man looked up with a pale face; That dragon's anger is fiercer as fire
The shrouds and house lay down brittlely. That mountain smelled it under that moon; That dwarf, may he hear the steps of that doom.

Let it escape quickly after that star-crossing fall Under your feet, under that moon.
Far from those misty mountains grim, After deep dungeons and dark caves, We must leave before dawn, To wish us harpe and gold from him!
While all you know, it is that hobbit, that love for beautiful things made by hand, feeling and cunning and magic that moves him, a fie love, that desire of that dwarf's heart. Then something Tookish woke up within him, and he wanted to go and see that big mountain, and pine tree and that waterfall, and explore that cave, and soon get a sword

instead of a kierie. He looked out of that window. That star was
in a dark place bo that tree. He thought about that dwarf's jewel in the dark cave. Skielike in that forest on the other side That Wate plundering drake who settles on your quiet Heuwel and sets all this on fire. Hy the howling; and quick-witted he was simply Mr. Baggins Under-Heuwel, once again.
He claimed to have risen. He had less than half a mind to go get that lamp,
and more like a half day to give up and crawl away behind that beer keg in that cellar, and not come out again until all those people a I always look at him with what shines in that dark. "Where are you going?" sê Thorin, in a tone that this evidently proves to be both h "What about a bit of a lie?" Bilbo denied the question.
"We love that dark," all that dwarf sê. "Dark vir dark sake! There is baie ure voor dagbreek."
"Of course!" Bilbo said and hastily sat down. He misses that chair. and sit in that fender and stomp that poker and dig with one blow. begin.
"Gandalf, dwarf and Mister Baggins! We are together in that house meeting
from our friend and fellow enemy, this extremely excellent and daring hobbit - may her hair never fall out in this tone! all praise to ale!-" Hy it pouseer vir asem and vir 'n polite remark from that hobbit, but
that compliment was completely lost on poor Bilbo Baggins, which was too bad
She protested the fact that he was called audacious and the worst of all fellow human beings, although not a sound came out, he was so the entered into:
"We are meeting to discuss our plans, methods, means, policies and equipment."
Shortly before dawn we will begin our long journey, a journey from which some of us, or perhaps all of us (except our friends
counselor, that ingenious magician Gandalf) may never return. This is a solemn look. Our goal is, I assume, well known to us all. To th Baggins, and maybe one or two of those younger midgets (ek dink ek
it should be fair to mention Kili and Fili, for example), that precise situation at that glance may need a brief clarification-" This was Thorin's style. He was an important dwarf. If he had been admitted, he would probably have stayed there until he was out
Breathe, without telling anyone something that was not already known. But he is rude, interrupt. Poor Bilbo couldn't bear this any long dwarf jumped up and stomped over that table. Gandalf's blou lies lit on the point of his tower staff, and in his firework glow that poo could be seen how he kneeled on that kaggelrug, as if a jellie melted some wax. Then he falls flat on the floor and continuously shouts could come from him for a long time. Then take it all and take it out
that toad on that living room sofa with a drink on his elbow, and how he went back after his dark activity.
"Excited little guy," Gandalf said as they sat down again. "Cry a strange step, but he is one of the best, one of those best - so much If you have ever seen a dragon in a pinch, you will realize that this was it
Sleg's poetic expression applies to any hobbit, even to Ou Neem se grandgrootjie Bullroarer, which was so great (vir 'n hobbit perd. Hy that Groen Velde, and the king Golfimbul's head was chopped off with a wood club. This is the hundred meter door that sailed and descen invented at the same time.
In the meantime, Bullroarer was a more courageous descendant, however
revive in that sitting room. After a nap and a drink, he sneaked nervously through the door of the sitting room. This is what he hears, "Hmm!" (or someone snores more or less like that). "Will he do, will you do
think? This is all well and good for Gandalf to talk to this cruel hobbit, but a scream there in a look of excitement would be enough t

wake up that dragon and all your relatives and kill us all. I think so
it sounded more like fear and excitement! Anyway, if this wasn't the sign on that door, I would have definitely come to the wrong house As soon as I clapped it on that little guy, floated a bit and blew on that mat, I had no doubts. He looks more like a grocer than a bur Then turn Mr. Baggins handles that and goes in. That Took side it
used to. He has the clear feeling that without bed and breakfast he would come to drink fiercely. As for that little one floating on th fierce. Afterwards, the Baggins part regretted what he had done and said it to himself: "Bilbo, you were a fool; you walked into the co "Give me," he said, "as my words hear what you say." I don't pretend to understand what you're talking about, or what you're saying. to burglars, but I think it is right to glow" (this is what he called it
on your dignity) "that you think is not good nie. I tell you wisely. I don't have any signs on my door - this was painted a week ago -, that door step, I had my doubts. But this is the right one. Sê vir my wat
You want this to be done, and I will try this, if I have to walk to the East from here
Oos and veg toe those wild Wereworms in that Last Wasteland. I once had a great-great-great-uncle, Bullroarer Took, and-" "Yes, yes, bu And I tell you there is a mark on this door - which is an ordinary one in that trade, or was before. Burglar wants a good job, good exc reasonable reward, that is how this is usually read. You can be an expert
Skattehunter instead of Burglar if you want. Some of them do this. This is already the same around us. Gandalf told us that a man of th here on Wednesday-teetyd."
"Of course there's a mark there," Gandalf said. "I thought this was there myself. Because you have good speeches. You asked me to find ekspedisie, and ek het mnr. Baggins chooses. Let anyone choose the wrong man or the wrong house, and you can stop at thirteen and all t luck what you want, or go back after that gray of coal."
He was so angry with his frown that the dwarf crouched behind him in his chair; and then Bilbo tried to open his mouth to ask a questio frowning after looking at him and extending his bosom eyebrow, until Bilbo closed his mouth and stopped with a click. "Dis reg," the Ga argument. Ek the mr. Baggins chooses and this should be enough for everyone
yy. As ek sê he is a burglar, he is a burglar, or he will be when that time comes. There is more in him as what you say, and a lot more the only idea of homself. You may (moontlik) still be alive to thank me. Well Bilbo, my son, get that lamp and let us lie on it for a b On that table in the position of a large lamp with a red shade, there is a piece of parchment, barely even a map.
"This was made by Thror, your grandfather, Thorin," he said in response to that dwarf's excited question. "This is a plan from that Ber "I don't see that this will help us much," Thorin said in disappointment. after a peek. "I remember that mountain well enough and that this. And I know where Mirkwood is, and that Withered Heath where that great Drake cultivated."
"There's a dragon in red marked on that mountain," the Balin said, "but this should be easy enough to find him under there if we ever g "There is a point that you didn't notice," it said, "and this is that secret entrance. You see that rune on the west side, and that han what next from the other runes? This marks a hidden doorway after the Lower Sale." (Look at that map at the beginning of this book, and "This may have been a secret once," Thorin said, "but how do we know this? Is this still a secret? Old Smaug has lived there long enoug there is nothing to know about that cave."
"He may-but he can't do this for years and won't use it for years." "Why?" "Because this is too small. 'That door is five feet high and three feet wide
'on height' is that rune, but Smaug couldn't crawl into a hole that size, not even when he was a young dragon, certainly not after he d of that dwarf and man of Dale."
"This seems like a big hole for me," Bilbo squeaks (who had no experience with Drake and Slegs from Hobbit-Gate). Hy the excited feelin

and interested again, so that he forgets to keep his mouth shut. He was fond of playing cards, and in system it was a big one of those sy favorite walks marked on it in red ink. "How could such a big door be kept secret from the outside world, except for that dragon?" h He was just a little hobbit, you must remember.
"In my own way," Gandalf said. "But in some way that hid a laundry, we don't know how to go without seeing it. I guess there is a door soos that side of that mountain. Dis die ordinary dwarf se method-ek think

dis reg, nè?"
"Completely right," Thorin said.
"Also," Gandalf continued, "I forgot to call that together with that map a key, a small and peculiar key. Here is this!" it was given b hanging around your neck and under your neck. "Now things are starting to get started
hopeful. Here die nuus change our lives for the better. So far we have none
clear idea what to do. We thought we would go east, as quietly and as freshly as we could, to Die Lange Meer. Then the trouble would be "A long time ago, if I know anything about that fine Ox," Gandalf interrupted.
"We can go up from there along that Running River," Thorin continued without looking at the day, "and so to those ruins of Dale-that ol there, under the shadow of that Mountain. But none of us like that idea of the Front Fence. That river flows straight from there throug that South of that Mountain, and from there comes that dragon too-far too often, tensy his habits change it."
"This wouldn't be good," said the magician, "without a mighty
Kryger, even a hero. I'll try to find one; but warriors are trying to kill one and another in a distant country, and in this situation simply impossible to find. Sword in this part is usually blunt, and byle word vir boome use, and shielded as wiegies or skottelgoedcove burglary-veral look at the existence of a sydeur remember it.
And here is our little Bilbo Baggins, that burglar, that chosen and approved burglar. So let's go ahead and make plans." "Very well then," Thorin said, "as that burglary expert gives us
a few ideas or proposals." He turned it to Bilbo with mocking politeness. "First of all, I would like to know a little more about thing always confused and a little bit confused inside, but so far always determined to deal with things. "I mean about that gold and that dr how did it get there, and to whom does it belong, and so on and beyond." "See me!" said Thorin, "isn't it a card? and you don't hear ou "Tog, I want all this clearly and plainly," he said stubbornly,
to attract your business manner (usually reserved for people who try to borrow money from them), and to do their best to appear wise an to know about risks, outgoings from each pocket, time required and compensation, and so on", by which he means: "What am I going to get "Oh, good," Thorin said. "Long ago in my oupa Thror se tyd
our family was expelled from that far North and returned with all their wealth and all their tools to this mountain on that map. This w door my distant ancestor, Thrain die Oue, but now the hull gemyn and hull the tonnels gray and hull the bigger sale and bigger work sho May I find a good amount of gold and also a large number of jewels. In any case, everyone became extremely rich and famous, and was my King again under that Mountain, and treat it with great respect
mortal men, what is common in that South, and gradually spread it after that Running River until through that valley which becomes the that cheerful village of Dale there in that building. King, guide our forge, and reward even the least skillful click. Father's sou beg us to take your sons as professional apprentices, and pay us generously, everywhere
in food supplies, which we never bother to grow or find ourselves.
All in all, this was a good day for us, and the poorest of us had the money to spend and borrow, and the leisure to make beautiful thin sale it became full of armor and jewels and crafts and cups, and that play thing That mark of Dale was that wonder of the North.
"No doubt this was what that dragon brought it. Drake steals gold
and jewele, you know, of man and elwe and dwarf, wherever he can find him; and let them guard their spoils so long as they live (which in fact forever, unless they are killed), and never a copper ring
this. Indeed, Hull Skaars knows a good piece of work from a bad one, although Hull usually has a good idea of the current market value; make something for yourself, don't first loosen a bit of your own armor, don't repair it. There was a dragon in that North in that day, being killed, and all that general spillage and destruction which drake causes evil after worse. There was a particularly greedy, stron bose worm named Smaug. One day he will fly in and come
south. The first we heard of it was a noise like a hurricane from the North, and that pine tree on that mountain cracked and cracked in wind. Some of those dwarfs that happened to be outside (luckily I was one

- a good adventurous sound in that day, always wandering around, and this saved my life there that day) - well, from afar we saw that d and when he reached that forest, the whole thing went up in flames. That's when it always happened, those bells rang in Dale and those running out of the great gate; but since that dragon vir hulle mentioned.
No one goes that way, don't escape. That river rose in steam and in a mass it fell Dale, and in that mass that dragon came towards him warriors - that usual unfortunate story, this was all too common in that day.
Then he went back and sneaked into the front gate and drove out of that sale, and lane, and barrels, alleys, cellars, mansion and gange After that there was no more dwarf living there, and he took it all
wealth vir homself. True, because this is the Drake way, he accumulated this
everything in a big heap far inside, and sleep on it like a bed. Later he got used to crawling out of that big gate and coming quickly people, girls everywhere, to eat, until Dale was devastated, and all those people were dead or gone. I don't know for sure what's going "Those few of us who were well looted, wept and wept, and cursed the Smaug; and there we were unexpectedly assisted by my father and
my oupa with scorched beard. Let it be grim, but let it be sê sê ami. Let me ask how you can get away with it, it must be my tongue, an It left us, and we had to earn our living expenses as well as we could. in that country, often enough so low blacksmith work or even co Well, if I allow it, we had a good bit of relaxation and this is not so bad - here it is Thorin caressing that gold chain around his ne to get this back, and to bring to our cursed house after Smaug-as we can. "I'm often more surprised about my dad and my dad's escape.
I see now that you had to have a private system about what you just knew about it. But apparently they made a card, and I would like to Gandalf let this come into that hand, and how come it not after me, that rightful heir."
"I didn't 'get this in that hand', I got this," the magician said. "Your oupa Thror, remember, was killed in that mine of Moria Azog die Kabouter."
"Curse your name, yes," Thorin said.
"And Thrain, your father, left on the twenty-first of April
a hundred years ago last Thursday, and has never been seen by you since -" "True, true," Thorin said.
"Well, your father gave me this to give to you; and if I choose the right time and way to wear this ear, you can now blame me, If I made the effort to find you, I couldn't remember your dad.
your own name if he gives me that quote, and he never tells me yours; So everyone in general should be praised and thanked! Here is thi "I don't understand," Thorin said, and Bilbo felt the same way he would like to. That clarification is not the same as this clarificati to sy seun vir safety before he went after that mine of Moria. Your father left to try his luck with that card after your grandpa was m and an adventure of an unpleasant nature that he had, but he never got near that mountain. I don't know how he got there, but I found i

prisoner in those dungeons of that Nekromanser."
"What are you doing there?" Thorin asked with a shudder, and all those dwarves moved.
"Moenie around nie. I was busy inventing things, as usual; and a nasty, dangerous thing this was. Even me, Gandalf, the net-net escaped it barely forgets everything except that card and that key."
"Pay us the lankal those gnomes of Moria," Thorin said; "We have to think about that Nekromanser."
"Don't be absurd! He is an enemy far from being gathered together from all those dwarfs, if only he could be gathered together again fr remote corner of the world. The one thing your dad wanted was for you to read that card and use that key. That dragon and that mountain "Hear, hear!" the Bilbo sê, and this accidentally said out loud.
"Hear what?" The whole thing happened quickly after his turn, and he was so amazed that he replied: "Listen to what I said!" "What is this?" the whole prayer.
"Well, I guess you have to go and look around."
After all, there is that Sydeur, and Drake needs to sleep sometimes, ek
suppose. If you sit on that drum long enough, I dare to bet you will think of something. And well, don't you know, I think we're talkin

enough for one night, if you understand what I mean. What about bedtime, and early beginnings, and all that? I'll give you a good break burglar? And isn't this your job to sit on that drum, and not even talk about going inside that door? But I agree on bed and breakfast. my ham, when I start on my journey: don't fry, don't poach, and mind you, don't break it."
After all the other people have eaten, order it without any hassle
Please (I'm so annoyed at Bilbo), everyone has already gotten up. That hobbit is to find a place for everyone, and it already fills the it was important not to make the effort to get up early and otherwise you wouldn't have to cook a miserable breakfast. That Tookishness quite certain that he would soon go on some journey.
As he lay in that bed, he could always hear Thorin humming past him in that best bedroom:
Far from those cold misty mountains, after deep dungeons and old caves We must leave before dawn, To find our long-forgotten gold.
Bilbo went to sleep with this, and this made his home an uncomfortable dream. This was long after dawn when he woke up. ROASTED SKAAPVLEIS
Bilbo jumped up and put on his dressing gown and entered the dining room. Because he didn't see anyone, but all those signs of a large hot water bottle in that galley. Almost every pot and pan he owns, matches or uses. Washing the dishes was such a painstaking job that being forced to believe that the party from last year was not part of his bad habits, as he rather hoped. He was indeed rightly sorry i I think that all of you have gone without him, and without having to make the effort to wake him up ("but without a thank you" he think I couldn't help but feel just a little bit disappointed. That feeling surprises him. "Don't be a fool, Bilbo Baggins!" het hy vir homse Drake and all that extravagance in your old age!" Then he put on an apron, lit a fire, boiled water and cooked vegetables. Then he had that son it was skyn; and that front door was open, letting in a warm spring breeze. Bilbo whistles the loud beginning and forgets the Well, he was just sitting down for a nice little second breakfast in that dining room by that open window, when Gandalf stepped in.
"My dear buddy," he said, "when are you coming? What
from an early beginning? -and here you are eating breakfast, or whatever
call this, at half past ten! Hulle the vir you that message cap delivered, because hulle could not wag."
"Whatever messenger?" poor mr. Baggins is completely bewildered. "Great Elephant!" sê Gandalf, "you are smooth not yourself." More than that, I've never dusted off that rag rak!"
"What to do with this? I've had enough of washing with skottelgoed." vir fourteen!" "If you dusted off that rag, you would just find this."
"under that clock," the Gandalf wrote a note in Bilbo's hand (written, of course, on his own note paper). Dit is wat hy gelees het:
"Thorin and Kompanjie to Burglar Bilbo greetings! For your freedom" our sincere thanks, and for your offer of professional help, grateful acceptance. Conditions: cash upon delivery, up to and including a maximum of one fourteenth of that total profit (if any); all some borrowedness; Funeral costs must be paid by us or our representatives if an error arises and the matter cannot otherwise be arrang "Please allow us to do this unnecessarily to upset your esteemed peace
have proceeded to make the necessary preparations, and will meet you, respected person, at the Green Dragon Inn, Bywater, promptly at 1 "It is our honor to be happy" Yours deepest
Thorin & Kie
"This leaves you just ten minutes. You have to run," Gandalf said. "But-," Bilbo hissed. "No time for that," said the wizard. "But-," Bilbo said again.
"There's no time for that either! Let's go!"
Until the end of his day, Bilbo could never remember how he found this out of himself, without a hat, or a kierie, or some money, or an what he usually takes it when he goes out; he has his second breakfast half-path clear and completely unwashed face, he keys in G and r

that big Meul, ear side That Water, and then about a mile or more. He was very bloated when he arrived at Bywater at the stroke of elev "Bravo!" the Balin gesê what stood at that inn door and looked out the vir hom.
Just come, all that other one comes around that corner of that path of that one
village. Hulle was on a pony, and every pony was thrown around with all kinds of luggage, parcels and accessories. There was a nice lit "Get up, you two, and away we go!" the Thorin sê.
"I'm terribly sorry," Bilbo said, "but I came without my hat, and I left my handkerchief behind, and I didn't have any money. Please don't let me know until after 10:45, to be precise."
"Don't be precise," the Dwalin said, "and don't worry about it! You will have to come without a towel and a whole bunch of other things before you get to the end of that journey. As for a hat, I have an extra cap and coat in my luggage."
So it all begins, once trotting away from that inn
ogling just before May, on blazed ponies; and Bilbo has a dark green hood (even weather-stained) and a dark green cloak, like Dwalin's. What sy dad Bungo from hom would think about it, I don't dare think about it. Syne
The only consolation was that he could not be seen by a dwarf, since he did not have a beard. Don't wait long enough for Gandalf to sho beautiful on a white background. He brings together the two handkerchiefs,
and Bilbo se pyp and tobacco. So after that we kept the party going
Have fun, and tell your stories or sing songs while you read it all day long, except of course when you stop it. Here it doesn't quite so often as what Bilbo would have wanted, but always at the beginning he felt that the adventure was not so smooth, but not so bad.
At first we went to hobbit country, a beautiful, respectable area of land inhabited by orderly people, with good food, an inn or two, a land where people talk strangely and sing songs that Bilbo never heard before. Well, I have arrived far into that One Same Land, where people have left, there is no place to stay, and things have gotten worse and worse. Not far ahead, it was gloomy, cloudy, all the more Our castle was with a big appearance, as if its door were a godless building. Everything was gloomy, because that day it was

nasty twist. Usually this was so good as May can be, can be, even in happy stories, but now this was cold and wet. In that One Same Lan "To think this will soon be Junie!" Bilbo grumbled as he continued to pee. behind the other in a bay muddy path. This was after dinner torrential rain, and this was the case all day long; sy cut it in sy
oh, your cloak was full of water; that pony was tired and stumbling
cliff; the other was too grumpy to talk. "And I'm sure they are in those dreary clothes and in that kossakke," Bilbo mused. "Difficulty Burglary and everything related to it! I wish I was home in my nice hole. by that fire, with that cauldron that is just beginning!" Thi Yet the dwarf ran without turning around or taking any notice of the hobbit. Behind those gray clouds, the sun disappeared
off, because this is the beginning of darkness and let us descend into a deep valley with a river at the bottom. The wind rose, and wil river, ear current with those deer, it flowed down those hills and into mountains in the north.
This was barely even after all. That wind it that
gray clouds, and a swirling moon above those hills between those far-flung skys. Then stop hull, and Thorin the slightly muttering ear said, "and where will we get a sad place to sleep on?" Not until then Did you even notice that Gandalf was missing? So far he has come together with you, without ever knowing whether he was in that adventure or whether you were exposed to the whip for a while. He ate th "It would have been the most useful one as a rope maker," Dori groaned. and Nori (what that hobbit sees for real food, food and often). Hulle ultimately decides that Hulle should be the camp where Hulle was.
Let them pull after a lump of trees, and although this was sooner under them, that one the wind blew the deer off the blare, and the drip, drip, was quite irritating.
Apparently that disaster also ended up in that fire. Dwarf can't
fire hardly any place from hardly anything, no wind or no wind; but he couldn't do this that night, not even Oin and Gloin, how special Then grab one of those ponies for nothing and run away. He climbs in
that river before he could catch him; and before he could get rid of him

once again Fili and Kili barely drowned, and all that baggage he carried was washed away from him. Of course this was usually kosher, a There it was all sad and wet sitting and mumbling, while Oin and Gloin
I continued to try to light the fire and fight for it. Bilbo was heartbroken, which reflected that the adventure was not just ponieritt Balin, who was always his lookout man, said: "There's a light ear
there!" There was a hedgerow with trees on it, fairly partially covered.
From that dark mass of trees you could now see a light sky, a red, easy light, just as this could be a fire or flickering torches. Let's take a quick look at it, let's just start.
the "no" gesture and some the "yes" gesture. Some of the things you said can just go and look, and something was better than that, less that night.
Other words: "Here, that part is not too well known, and is too close to that mountain. Travelers now and then often come here. That ol the king's rant here around the audience, and that less sensible "As you approach it, the less difficulty you will likely find." Some the gesture: "After all, there are fourteen of us." Another shouted: "Where is Gandalf?" This comment is to be repeated again and again the worse ash ever crashed, and Oin and Gloin the beginning bakslei.
This settles the matter. "For us there is a burglar among us," the hush sê; and
so the whole running away and the ponies (with all necessary and appropriate care) started in that direction. Let it come to that hill Let's go up that hill; but there was no proper path to be seen there, so that it could lead to a house or a place; and do what he could dratting), while you were in that pitch-dark door, it was gone. It looked like it was red and clear through the tree trunk, not far ahe "Now this is the burglar's turn," the hush hush, and Bilbo means. "You must go and find out everything about it, and what this is for, Please come back if all is well. If not, come back if you can! If not, whore! twice as a barn owl and once as a screech owl, and we wil Bilbo had to leave before he could explain that he couldn't even honk
once upon a time some kind of owl, just as little as some other kind of bat fly. But at least hobbits can move silently in that forest, this, and Bilbo more than once sniffed at what he "all here" called the "dwarf rocket," so they all entered into it, although I don't s that kavalkade exceeded it by two feet. As for Bilbo, I just stepped closer to that red one, I assume not even a wesel sou a mustache b this. So, of course, he went right after that fire - because fire was this - without anyone sturgeon. And this is what he saw.
Three large people sit around a large beech fire. Roast the skaapvleis on a long wood spit and drain the sous with the fingers. There w troll. Clearly a troll. Even Bilbo, despite his beskutte lewe, could see this: from that big, heavy face of your body, and your size, a mode glad nie, glad nie.
"Skaapvleis yesterday, skaapvleis today, and oh no, if this isn't the same, "More skaapvleis again," it was one of those troll gestures "Never had a flickering bit of human flesh long enough for us," it's a second thought. "Whatever that wretched William thinks of bringi trot over William's elbow, which was busy swallowing his cup.
William choked it. "Shut up!" the hy so gou as moontlik gesê. "Jy
I can't expect that people will always have to stay here just to stay with you and Bert. You are a village and a half between you, let Berge. How much more do you want? And that time is gone,
when you 'thank you Bill' sou sê for a nice piece of fatty valley-skaapvleis
so what this is." He took a big bite of a scallop steak that he was about to braai, and wiped the sylippe off to symou.
Yes, I'm afraid troll will get up soon, even the one with just one everyone. After hearing all this, Bilbo had to do something
one time. Or he must have gone back quietly and warned his friend that there were three fairly large trolls at the same time in a bad m try a fried dwarf, or even a pony, for a change; otherwise he would have had to do this, it was a pretty good, quick burglary. A truly sou at this stage that troll is a sucker for picking it - this is hardly always
that trouble was, if you can recover it, the skaapvleis was cut off that spit,

the one who steals beer and runs away without even touching it. Others, more practical, but with less professional pride, would have st dagger in everyone before everyone else observe this. Then the night could be happy.
Bilbo knew this. He read about many things that he had never seen or finished before. He was both shocked and disgusted; he homself des a hundred miles away, and yet somehow he could not get back to Thorin and Kompanjie with his hands empty. He allowed it and wept
that shadow orphan. Of those fresh burglary proceedings he heard about
It was even more difficult to pick that trolley, so in the end he sneaked behind a tree just behind William. Bert and Tom left after that barrel. William was busy having another drink.
Then Bilbo mustered up courage and sat down with William's hand huge bag. There was a purse in there, as big as Bilbo's bag. "Ha!"
he thought, while he was warmed up, about his current work, while he explained this verse, "here is a beginning!"
This was! Trolle these fairs are disasters, and this one was no exception. "'Eer, 'oo is jy?" it makes this squeak when it leaves that that tree.
"Sjoe, Bert, look what's going on!" sê William.

"What is this?" let the other one come a little closer. "Lumme, as I know! What are you?"
"Bilbo Baggins, an ant-a hobbit," poor Bilbo hissed, moving his whole body, and wondering how to make an owl noise before he strangled "A Burrahobbit?" asking for the whole thing to be scared. Trolle is diligent with that recording, and is cautious about anything nuuts "What the hell is a burrahobbit going to do with my sak anyway?" he asked Willem.
"And can you cook?" Tom asked.
"You can try," Bert said as he lifted a sosation stick.
"He wouldn't be more than a mouthful," William said, which already had a lovely appearance, "not until he was skinned and deboned." "Be "tert," the Bert sê. "Here you are, is there anything sneaking in from your kind?
"here that forest here, you nasty little bunny," he said as he followed that hobbit's hairy feet; and he added it to that tone and skuk "Yes, baby," Bilbo said, before he remembers not to leave his friends. "No, no, no, no no," he said immediately afterwards.
"What do you mean?" sê Bert while he is holding on to hers. here that time.
"What the hell," Bilbo said as he gasped. "And please don't tell me to cook, kind gentleman!"
I am a good cook myself, and cook better than what I cook, if you see what I mean. I will cook beautifully for you, a perfectly beautif "Poor little scoundrel," William said. He's already experienced it so much.
as far as he could hold; he also drank beer. "Poor little scoundrel! Let him go!" "Not until he knows what he means by good and smooth," Bert said. "Ek
I don't want my throat to be cut while I'm not sleeping! Keep that tone in that fire until he talks!"
"I won't say this," William said. "In any case, he's captured." "You're a fat fool, William," said Bert, "as I said before and."
"En jy's 'n lomp mens!"
"And I won't take this away from you, Bill Huggins," says Bert, and puts his finger in William's eye.
Then there was a beautiful riot. Bilbo had just enough sense to let Bert drop the man on the ground, to get out of the way of his feet, entirely true and applicable, especially in a loud voice. You were both wrapped in each other's arms, and barely in that fire role, whi This would have been the time for Bilbo to leave. But your poor little one's foot was completely crushed in Bert's big paw, and he had Reg in that means of that battle the Balin showed up. That dwarf heard from a distance, and after a little while Bilbo said to come bac it lies as still as it could. Skaars the Tom Balin see entrance
That one seems like he's giving a terrified howl. Trolle can easily admire that bare face of a dwarf (uncooked). Bert and Bill immediat sak, Tom, gou!" the whole gesture sê. For Balin, what is more surprising
All this commotion was Bilbo, he knew what was happening, a bag was in his head, and he was down.

"There's something more to come," Tom said, "or I'm completely wrong. Not easy and smooth," he said. "No burrahobbits, but baie van hul "I think you're right," Bert said, "and we'll just have to get out of that position."
And so do it all. With sackcloth in your hand, you use it to get some skaapvleis and other loot, you carry it in those skaduwees. So ev and Nori and Ori all in a heap, and Oin and Gloin and Bifur and Bofur and Bombur heaped uncomfortably near that fire.
"This will teach you all," Tom said; for Bifur and Bombur have given the bay
difficulty, and it is such a wise thing to do, so dwarfed when it is pushed into a corner.
Thor came last and he was not unexpectedly caught. He expects nastiness, and does not need to see his friends out of trouble
since that thing was not completely correct. He stood outside the shadow in each other's way and said: "What's all the trouble here? Wh my mense oor?"
"Dis troll!" Bilbo fell from behind a tree. Hulle forgets the whole thing about him. "Hull, crawl away into that bush with some juice," "Oh! is hulle?" sê Thorin, and he jumps forward after that fire, before
hulle could jump on hom. He grabbed a large branch that was completely on one side of the fire; and Bert got that point in his eye befo vir a jerkkie from that geveg. Bilbo did it right. He grabbed Tom's leg
- as good as he could do, this was like a young tree trunk - but he was sent to turn in the top of a few bushes, and Tom put that spark Thorin se gesig.
The Troll
Tom broke the branch in the teeth before, and lost one of the front ones.
This makes him cry, I can tell you. But just at that moment William came closer from behind and threw a smack over Thorin's head and in And that's how the fight ended. Hulle was already in a nice soaking wet state: just tied up. in trouble, with three angry trolls (and t remember) sit by hulle and try of hulle hulle must braai
stadig, or kap hulle fyn and cook hulle, or sit just a vir a on hulle and press hulle in jellie vas; and Bilbo in a forest, with his cl This was just when Gandalf returned. But no one saw it. That troll the sopas decides to braai that dwarf now and eat him later - this w Bert's idea, and after some arguments everything went along with it.
"This won't help you to braai, this will take the whole night," a voice said. Bert gedink this was William s'n. "Don't start that argument all over again, Bill," he said, "otherwise it will take the whole night."
"Who stry?" William said, what a thought, this was Bert talking a bit. "Jy is," het Bert gesê.
"You're a liar," William said; and so the argument starts all over again. In the end he decided to cut and cook everything. So let's ca "This doesn't help us to boil it! It's not water for us, and it's a long path after that "Good," it was a voice. Bert and William were "Shut up!" the hull gesê, "otherwise we would never do this. And you can do that water yourself, if you sê even more."
"Shut up!" sê Tom, how funny, this was William's voice. "Who else is trying besides you, I would like to know." "You're a bully," William said. "Stew yourself!" the Tom thing.
And so the argument starts all over again, and it continues this warmer as ever,
until he finally decides to sit a vir on that bag and flatten it, and cook it next time. "Who should we sit on first?" sê that voice.
"You should rather sit on that last one first," said Bert, whose eye was damaged by Thorin. Hy the moaning Tom talks. "Don't talk to yourself!" sê Tom. "But if you want to sit on that last one, sit on him. What is he?"
"The one with the yellow stocking," Bert said.
"Nonsense, that one with that gray stocking," said Willem's voice. "I'm sure it was yellow," Bert said. "This was yellow," William said.
"Then why did you say this was gray?" Bert asked. "I'll never do this. Tom said it."
"I can never do this!" the Tom thing. "This was you." "Two toes one, so shut up!" the Bert thing. "Who are you talking to?" William asked.
"Stop it!" the Tom and Bert together. "That night I touched, and

That daybreak comes early. Come let's go!
"May that day break take you always, and be a cliff for you!" it sounded like a voice like William's. But this wasn't. Because just at

heuwel, and there was a tremendous chattering in that branch. William never talked because he turned it into a cliff when he bent it; a soos klippe while hulle na hom looked at it. And there they stand until this day, completely alone, with their feelings sitting there; underground for daybreak, or hull go back after that good from that mountain
of which you are made, and never move again. This is what happens to Bert and Tom and William.
"Excellent!" Gandalf sits as he steps out from behind a tree and helps Bilbo climb down from a forest. Then Bilbo understands it. This that magician's voice that makes that troll bicker and make noise, until it comes to an end.
The next thing was to loosen that bag and let that dwarf out. Hulle was barely stunned, and was irritated: Hulle did not enjoy it There I live and listen to that troll, make plans to braai and flatten and crush it. Hulle was absolutely perfect for Bilbo
what happened to him twice before he was satisfied.
"Now it's time to practice with pinching and picking," he said. Bombur, "please let us have fire and kos!" "And this is exactly what you don't get from there that you would get without a
"Anyway, you idiot," Gandalf said. "Whatever the case, you're wasting time. Don't you realize that those troll people have to dig into Hull the shopping around and find that brand of trolls that clipstewels have gone through those trees. Let the spore on that hill follo a hidden door between the hull and a large sliding door leading to a cave. But
You couldn't format this, you didn't print it all, while Gandalf didn't try to make fresh claims. "Will this be any good?" Bilbo asked for everything to begin.
and evil. "I found this on that ground where that troll who had bakleiery had it." He carved it into a large key, although William undo and secret. Fortunately, this had to happen in case it turned into a cliff.
"Why on earth didn't you mention this before?" shouted out loudly. Gandalf grabbed this and stuck it in that keyhole. Then the sliding with a big thrust, and all the way inside. There were bones on that floor and a bad smell in that room; but there was a lot of food tog carefree on the ground and on that ground, among a pile of loot of all kinds, from copper buttons to a jar full of gold coins in a corn a variety of different makes, shapes and sizes. Two of them attract attention everywhere because of their beautiful skedes and jewel-ad Gandalf and Thorin each took one of these; and Bilbo a knife in a leather sheath. This would be like a small knife for a troll, but This was such a good short sword for that hobbit.
"Here, that looks like a good blade," said the stringer, as he half-pulled it out and looked curiously at it. "Hulle was not made by an ear hulle, let us know more ear hulle."
"Come on, get out of here, get rid of that nasty smell!" the Fili community. Come on, hello
pot with coins, and some food that was untouched and ready to eat, also a barrel of beer that was still full. Teen that time the whole and because they were all hungry, they did not pull their noses up because they did not cry out of that trolley with spens. All their s had the bread and cheese, and fresh beer, and bacon to roast in the coals of that fire.
Then all sleep, because all night was ruined; and don't worry about it anymore until that afternoon. Let all your glory be raised, and that trail along that river, and place a large number of tower spells in front of them, just in case they ever had the chance to come b done, climbed the hull again and ran on that path again after the East.
"Where did you go, if I may ask?" Thorin lived with Gandalf while they were together. "To look forward," he said.
"And what does it bring back to you?" "Agterkyk," he said. "Exactly!" sê Thorin; "but can you be more direct?"
"I'm going to continue exploring our path. This will soon become dangerous and difficult. I was also anxious about replenishing our sma "Where is this?" the Bilbo question.

"Moenie don't interrupt!" the Gandalf sê. "You'll be there in a few days,
if we are happy, and invent everything because of it. Well, that's it, the two of us meet Elrond's people. Hull the rush for fear of th Hull what happened to me that three of them came down from that mountain
and let it settle in that forest, not far from that path: let it be afraid always away from that district, and let it turn to the stran "I immediately had the feeling that I was being sought back. When I looked behind me,
saw a fire in the distance and then ran. So now you know. Please be more careful next time, otherwise you won't come here!" "Thank you!" the Thorin sê. A SHORT RUSSIAN
Never mind singing or telling stories that day, even if it happened again
improve; not the next day, not the day after that. At the beginning I felt that danger was not far away on either side. Hull it camped hulle perde had more to eat as hulle; because there was plenty of grass there, but there wasn't much in all of it, even with some of th troll. One day the hulle a river pierced by a wye, a place full of that noise of cliffs and foam. The outer edge of the river was steep Come on, let's go, while you're on the road, let's see that the big mountain is marching near the bay. This was already the same or jus there was a lot of sonlig on the brown side, and behind the snowy skin the point of the snow was shining.
"Is this That Mountain?" Bilbo asked in a solemn voice while he then looked. with round oë. He's never seen anything so big like it bef somehow, before our Wilderland can reach beyond it. And this is a large part of a path even from the other side of Hull to that Same Mo waar Smaug op ons skat lê."
"O!" Bilbo said, and at that moment he felt more tired than ever before. remember how this used to feel. He agrees again with ease chair before that fire in sy favorite sitting room in sy hobbit-hole, and from that cauldron sing. Not since that last time!
Well it's Gandalf that toad jelly. "We mustn't miss that path, otherwise we will be ready." because," he said. "We need it for one thin This is also necessary to tackle the Misty Mountains with a straight path, otherwise you will get lost there and have to come back and start again (if you ever come back).
Hulle asked him where he was going, and he replied: "You are
come to the very edge of that Wilderness, as some of you know. Away from us is that beautiful valley of Rivendell where Elrond lives in that Last Pleasant House. I sent a message to my friend, and we are expected."
This sounded nice and reassuring, but it didn't get there yet, and it wasn't that easy to find that last nice house in Berge. Since the to the foot of that nearest mountain, a wide land the color of heather and crumbling rock, with swirls and stripes of grass-green and m Morning it is gone, noon it is dawn; but in all that silent wasteland there was no sign of any dwelling. Hull it became anxious, becaus Berge. Hull it came to unexpected valley, narrow with steep sides,
how skilfully they made it by their feet, and how amazed they looked to see trees under them and water running at the bottom. There was The shell could barely spring up, but it was deep with a waterfall in it. There was dark ground through which a person could not jump o was swamps, some of them completely green, pleasant places to look at, with bright and long flowering growth; but what a pony walking t it would never come back again.
This was indeed a beautiful country from that drift to those mountains as you would ever travel. Bilbo was amazed. That was the only pa marked with white klippe, some of which were small, and the other half
cover with moss or heather. All in all, this was a nice steady activity that follows a trail, even guided by Gandalf, which the path se Sy heads and beards the waving back and forth while he sighs after that
cliff, and let it follow the sy guidance, but let it not come closer to the end of the same way that the search begins that day, it fai

this will happen at the same time or soon. There was some flutter around there, and it has become dull, because it hasn't come up yet. steep drop into the ground so skielike that Gandalf barely managed to walk down that slope.
"Here this is finally!" him shouting, and the other crowding around him

the ear looked at that edge. Hulle seen a valley far below. Hulle could do that
voice of speedy water in a rocky bed below; that smell of tree was in that lug; and there was a lounge on the side of the valley on the Bilbo never forgets how he shouted and shouted in that skemer
that steep path after that secret valley of Rivendell. That makes the growth warmer than it comes later, and that smell of that pine tr the sy nose and that pony's neck stomped. Your mind has risen and gone. Let that tree turn into beech and oak, and there was one comfortable feeling in that skemer. The last green grass barely disappeared, but in the end an opening opened not far from the banks of "Hmmm! This smells so good!" Bilbo thought, and he looked up at that star. Let it burn bright and blue. Just then came an outburst of s O! Wat doen jy?
En waargaat gaan jy?
Jou ponieë het beschoen nodig!
The river flows!
O! tra-la-la-lally
 down here in that valley!
O! Wat soek jy,
And where do you make it? Those gays stink, That bannocks bin! O! vibrate-lil-lil-lollipop that valley is cheerful, ha! haha! O! Waargaat gaan jy?
With a beard what a swing?
No know, no know
What bring Mister Baggins And Balin and Dwalin off in the valley in June
ha! ha!
O! Sal jy bly,
Of gaan jy vlieg?
Jou ponieë dwaal af!
That day-ly man is ready to die! To fly would be folly, To be happy would be merry And listen and hear
Until the end of that dark after our tune ha! ha!
So the holle in that loud shouting and singing; and quite usin, ek
dare to say you think this. Not that you don't care; You would always be all the more happy if you said this. Hulle was of course elwe. the glimpse of your shelter soos that darkness deepens it. However, he was sweet wherever he met the hustle and bustle; but he was also don't go that way with all your ears. Even an orderly dwarf like Thorin and his friends dink hulle is foolish (which is a very foolish get irritated with hulle. For some elwe terg hulle and lay vir hulle, and mostly to hul bore.
"Well, well!" sê a voice. "Just look! Bilbo, that hobbit on a pony, my dear! Isn't this wonderful!" "Mees verstummend wonderlik!"
Then let's go away with one more song that I wrote down completely. Finally one, a tall young man, from that one tree and bow to Gandalf and vir Thorin. "Welcome to that valley!" it he said.
"Thank you!" the Thorin just grumpy hissing; but Gandalf was already driven from his path and under the elwe, and scourges were merry w "You are a bit out of your path," it said to the eleven: "this is what it means, if you are on the path to the only path to the water a bridge. Are you going to sing happily and together with us, or are you going to take it in stride? It is being prepared there," he said As much as he was, Bilbo would like to have a nap. Elvish sang.
is not something to miss, in June under those stars, not if you are around you. He would also like to have a few private words with thi people what his name and everything about him seems to be known, although he
never seen before. Thinking about your opinion about your adventure may be interesting. Elwe knows everything and is wonderful human be what concerns among the people of that land, as swiftly as water flows, or

faster.
But that dwarf was always as gou as moontlik toe vir aandete, and
didn't want to. Hull had dealt with it all the time, he had been a jellyfish, until he had been put on a good path and so finally to th until that son was on that snow far up there all day. There was slegs 'n
narrow bridge of cliff without a parapet, so narrow that a pony could easily make this step; and therefore he had to go, steadily and f oewer, and let us sing a cheerful song while that group performed it. "Don't dip your beard in that foam, dad!" the whole thing written "wet this."
"Sensible Bilbo, don't eat all those cookies!" the shouting. "He's too fat to get to the keygate yet!"
"Quiet, quiet! Good people! and good day!" Gandalf said, what happened last. "Valley the ore, and some elwe the ear-happy tongue. Good And so the whole thing finally arrived at the Last Gesellige Huis and this discovery was blown wide open.
Now this is a strange thing, but it's a good thing to do and what to do
it is good to learn, let me tell you about it, and not much to listen to; while things can cause discomfort, palpitations and even grue A good story, and this certainly requires some good storytelling. May you stay in a good home for at least fourteen days, and you may f sou hom without problems back after sy hobbitgat take it. Tog. There is little to tell about their stay there.
The boss of that house was an elf friend - one of those people who se
fathers, in those strange stories the beginning of that history came about, that war of those bunch of gnomes and that elwe and that fi he was the ruler of the North from his ancestors, and Elrond, master of that house, was his head.
He was as noble and beautiful in appearance as an elf lord, as strong as a warrior,
as wise as a warlock, so venerable as a king of dwarfs, and so friendly as somer. He appears in both stories, but he plays a role in Bi A great adventure is only a small one, although important, as you see, as
we will one day reach the end of it. Your house was perfect, whether you liked cooking, or sleeping, or working, or telling stories, or best, or a pleasant mixture of hull almal. Bose thinge it didn't come there in the valley.
I wish I had the time to tell you a few of those stories, or one or two of those songs that you hear in that house. All in all, those p as well as their bruises, their moods and their hopes. Their bag was full
with food and supplies, which is light to carry, but strong enough to carry through the mountain pass. Your plan is improved with that It was time for Midsummer, and everyone had to deal with that early son again at Midsummer.

Elrond knew everything about runes of every kind. That day it was after that
he said: "Here, he is not troll-making. Hulle is his value, his value is his value, his value is his value, his value is his
Wes, my family. Hulle was made in Gondolin because of the Goblin war. All of it had to come from a dragon's skat or gnome's loot, becau Gnomes are destroying that city in a long time. This, Thorin, that runic name Orcrist, that Goblin rift in that ancient language of Gon famous lem. This, Gandalf, was Glamdring, Vyandhamer what that king of Gondolin once did. Keep it safe!
"Where did that troll guy come from, wonder?" sê Thorin while he looks at his syne. sword with new interest. "I can't sê nie," the Elrond said, "but a person can stop you from trolling
other plunderers plundered, or came after the remains of the old plunder in some strongholds in those mountains. Including the audience treasured of old to be found in that deserted cave of the mine of Moria, ever since that dwarf-and-goblin war."
In Thor's ear these words pondered. "I will keep this sword here with honor," he said. "May this gou gnomes gorge again!" "A wish that will soon be fulfilled in that mountain!" the Elrond sê. "But show me your card!"
He took this and then stared for a long time, and he shook his head; for if he did not do this, it would not be completely approved of all your cruel wickedness, and he is saddened to remember the ruin of that city, Dale and its cheerful bells, and those burnt banks of Run. That moon was skyned in a clear silwer crystal. Hy it that
card and that white has been skyed there. "What is this?" it he said. "There's moon letters here, along that plain rune which is sê 'fi

door and three may pass each other.'"
"What is moon letters?" asked the hobbit with great excitement. He was crazy about that, so I told you about it before; and he also had "Moon letters are rune letters, but you can't see them," the Elrond saying, "not if you look at them. You can only see them when they s must have been a moon of the same shape and season as was written on that day. That dwarf invented it all and wrote it with silver penn "What sê hulle?" asking Gandalf and Thorin together, somewhat shocked, perhaps even Elrond had to have invented this first, although in There wasn't an opportunity there before, and there wouldn't be any other chance until goodness knows when.
"Stand by that gray cliff when that lyster knocks," read Elrond, "and
that setting son with that last lie of Durin se Dag will on that keyhole skyn." "Durin, Durin!" the Thorin sê. "He was that father of t oldest race of Dwarves, that Longbeard, and my first ancestor: I am my heir."
"Then what is Durin se Dag?" the Elrond asked.
"That first day of that dwarf New Year," the Thorin sê, "is as always known as that first day of that last moon of that autumn to that We always call this Durin se Dag when the last moon of that autumn and that sun is
together in that lug. But I fear that this will not help us much, because it will prevent us from having that skill in these days to tu "This has yet to be seen," Gandalf said. "Is there any skryf work there?"
"Nobody at this door here, no," Elrond said, and he gave the card back to Thorin; and then went to the hull after that water to see tha sing op die midsomeraand.
That next eyed was a midsome ray so beautiful and vars soos
could be dreamed: blue clouds and never a cloud, and that something danced on that water. Now let's go in the midst of farewell songs a You must follow those Misty Mountains to the land beyond. OOR HEUWEL AND UNDER HEUWEL
There was a lot of water after that heaps of jelly, and everything was fine ear hull. But most of that shit was deception and deception and jelly
not to no end or to bad ends; and most of that past was due to evil tainted things and frightening danger. That dwarf and that hobbit, wise counsel of Elrond and that knowledge and memory of Gandalf, the right path after that right pass.
Long after you climbed out of that valley and the Last One left Myle behind Homely House, you kept going up and up and up. This was
a difficult path and a dangerous path, a winding road and a lonely and a long one. Now you could look back at that land and see what yo you know, Bilbo knows there is a land of safe and comfortable things, and that little hobbit hole. He moved. It has become bitterly col snow, and it went between their doors (which was fortunate), or their heads (which was sad). That night was desolate and cold, and bles don't you dare sing or talk too loud, because that eggo's was ominous, and that
silence apparently does not like to be broken, except for the noise of water and the howl of the wind and the cracking of a cliff. "That summer is beginning to break," Bilbo said, "and haymaking is underway and in full swing. Hulle sal oes and
swartbessie, before we even start on the other side, here's a course." And the other one had gloomy thoughts, although
Until then, let it be sent to Elrond in that great hope of a midsomer, all the cheerful talk earring the doorway of that mountain, and secret door in that Same Mountain, perhaps that very next last moon of Autumn - "and perhaps this will be Durin's Day" the hull happene Gandalf shook his head and nothing happened. Dwarf was not yet verby nie so vir baie jare, but Gandalf was, and he knew how angry and danger that it has grown and flourished in that Wilderness, since that drake drove the people of that land, and those gnomes spread it dangerous adventure at the Edge of the Wilderness; and Gandalf was a wise enough wizard to know this.
He knew that something unexpected could happen, and he took this chance for hope that all without fearful adventure for that great fort

no. All was well, until one day a thunderstorm hit them - more like a thunderstorm, a thunderclap. You know how wonderful and right big thunderstorm can be in that country and in a river valley; veral by
tye when two great thunderstorms meet and collide. Even more chilly is thunder and stormy weather in those mountains at night when stor of Oos and Wes and make war. That stubborn splinter on that peak, and rock moves, and great crashing chasm that lurches and rolls tumble into every cave and hollow; and that darkness is filled with deafening noise and skies.
Bilbo has never seen or imagined anything like this. Hulle was high
up in a good place, with a terrible fall into a dull valley on one side of Hull. There the hulle vir die nag took shelter under a hangi He gelled it under a cloud and moved from head to head. Let him lurk
in that deafening flash he saw that the cliff-like cliff was out of that valley, and the cliffs were throwing each other around like a and throw them down into that darkness where they crush them between them
boom far below, or shatter into small pieces with a bang. Then come a wind and a deer, and that wind blows the deer and the deer in eve direction, so that a hanging rock is not slippery and does not protect the area. If you made it to the door week and your pony stood on from time to time there was hope among them, and some of them neighed with fear. Hulle could hear that huge oral lag and skree mountain "This won't be any good!" the Thorin sê. "If we don't get blown off, or drown, or get hit by a nasty blow, we'll be summed up by some g The mountain path
"Well, if you know of a better place, take us there!" Gandalf said, what a grumpy feeling it was, and that giant was far from happy himself.
The end of their argument was that Fili and Kili sent them to the souk after a better search. They had the best job, and because they w nothing so don't worry, if you want to find something (or so Thorin will send you that young dwarf). You usually find something wheneve This isn't always exactly what you wanted. This therefore proves eligibility.
Would that Fili and Kili crawled back, while salutations to that rock in that
wind. "We found it a sad cave," the hushed conversation, "not far around the next corner; and Pony and all could enter." "Are you examining this dough?" what that roper knew, the cave in that mountain was certainly uninhabited.

"Yes, yes!" it happened to you, even though you always knew that you couldn't be, it wasn't long because of that; hope you got it back don't go far back."
This is of course the dangerous part of the cave: you don't know how far they might go back, or where a passage behind it might lead, o what's going on in there for you. But now Fili and Kili seem fine now
enough. Then everyone got up and got ready to move. That wind, the blowing and that thunderstorm were always growling, and they had an and bring ponies together. Still, it wasn't far to go, and shortly before long we came across a large rock that protruded into that pat found a low arc in that side of that mountain. There was just enough room to come in, that pony door was busy, once everything was unpa dismissed. While you went under that arch, it was good to hear that wind and the deer outside instead of everything around you, and to and all your rocks. But that roper doesn't take any risks. He lit the tower staff and did it that day in Bilbo's dining room, which was remember, and you can explore the entire cave from end to end.
This is quite similar, but not too big and not secretive. This is a dry floor and a few comfortable corners. On that one side there was in your nosey chatter. Oin and Gloin wanted to light a fire with them
door to dry their clothes, but Gandalf wouldn't hear of it. Then spread all your skin wet, thrown out on the floor, and take the dry st let's all make it easy, let's puff out a pipe and blow a smoke ring, let some Gandalf change it into a different color and dance
bo by die dak to entertain hulle. Shut up the talk and talk, and forget about that storm, and discuss what everyone would do with their (thank you for saying this, which at that glance doesn't seem so immature); and so it will be easy to get that sleep. And this was the This turned out to be a good thing that little Bilbo brought it
with all due respect, after all. Because, somehow, he couldn't get to sleep that long, while he slept, he had a bad dream. He dreamed t

That crack in that wall at the back of that cave became bigger and bigger and opened up more and more, and he was very scared, but he c anything besides lie and look. Then he dreamed that the floor of that cave was, come along, and he fell down the gegly-beginning, goodn know where to.
Then he wakes up with a terrible start, and finds that part of his dream was true. A crack opened it up in the back of that cave, and w already a long way. He was just about time to see the last of those ponies
star what disappears in it. Of course it gave a loud scream, just like a hobbit can give, which is surprising considering its size. Those gnomes jumped out, big gnomes, big ugly gnomes, bad gnomes, before you could break and block. There was six of each dwarf, at lea door that cracked before you could find tinder and flint. But not Gandalf. Bilbo shouted that he had done so much good. This woke him u He cracked it with one blow, and Bilbo and that dwarf were on top of them
wrong side of that! Where was Gandalf? It's even more scary, even those gnomes
had any idea, and those gnomes didn't dare to invent it. Hulle grabbed Bilbo and that dwarf and hulle excited. This was deep, deep, dar Slegs gnomes that live in the heart of those mountains, can see through it. That gangway there was crossed and closed in all directions those gnomes knew the path to help, just like you did after that nearest post office;
and that path had already gone downhill, and this was terribly stuffy. Those gnomes were baie rof, and the merciless squeezing, and gig the chirping voice of the song; and Bilbo was even more unhappy than that troll added to his tone. He wishes it again and
again vir sy nice clear hobbit hole. Not since that last time.
Well, it's a mess there for everyone to see. Those gnomes
start singing, or cracking, and only stop with the blow of your flat feet on that cliff, and skud your prisoners too. Clap! Clap! That black crack!
Grab, grab! Snatch, catch!
And off to Goblin City Go, my son!
Crash, crash! Crush, crush!
Hammer and tongs! Hammer and gongs! Pound, pound, deep underground! Ho, ho! my kêrel!
Swish, clap! Click, crack!
Hit and hit! Too bad and blah! Work, work! Moenie don't you dare back down, While Gnomes kwyl, and Gnomes lay, Round and round far underground
Onder, my seun!
This sounds like a scary sound. That wall resounds with that clap, clap! and crush it, crush it! and to that ugly banter of all your ho as quick as what Hull could do for Hull; and more than one of those dwarfs, there was already something to do with that whining and whi large cave.
This was lit by a large red fire in the middle, and torches along that wall, and this was full of gnomes. Hull all the chatting and sta the clapping of hands to that dwarf (with poor little Bilbo behind)
and next to that swepe) the run-in came, while those gnome drivers were howling and clapping their swepe behind them. That pony was alr curled up in a corner; and because all that baggage and parcels were broken, and the gnomes used the doors, and the gnomes used the doo I'm afraid this was the last thing you ever saw from those excellent little ones, including a cheerful, sturdy little white boy to whom Gandalf, you are sure you did not ski on those mountain paths. Because gnomes eat pears and ponies and donkies (and other more despicab just think about it. Those gnomes have their hands behind them
back and tie them up in a lyn, and drag them to the far end of that cave with little Bilbo, which is at the end of that row.
There in that shadow on a large cliff sat a huge gnome with a gigantic head, and armed gnomes stood around him as that byle wore
and that bent sword had some use. Now gnomes are cruel, wicked and malicious. Hulle doesn't make beautiful things, but Hulle can grab t when they make that effort, even though they are usually unclean and dirty.
Hammers, byle, sword, dagger, pikke, tange, and also instruments
torture, let them make amends, or ask other people to make prisoners and slaves according to their design, what must work until they di

lig. This is not unlikely that some of those machines invented what has shocked the world since then, all those ingenious devices to gr A number of people at the same time, surrounded by wheels and enjins and explosions, always rejoice, and no longer with their own handi could help; but in that day and in that wilderness things have not progressed
(as it is mentioned) so far. Let it not be universally hated, no more as if it were universally hated, and everywhere orderly and prosperous; in some parts the bose dwarfe even made alliances with
hull. But it may have been a special grudge against Thorin's people, as a result of that war of which you heard, but which did not ente herethat story; and in any case, you don't care about gnomes who you catch, so long as this is a clever and secretive thing to do, and "Dwarf, and this!" I pulled one of those dryers and pulled Bilbo's chain
that he had his front ear on his knees. "We found the whole thing where we found the skin in our front, the sidewalk.
"What do you mean by that?" sê that Great Goblin as he turns after Thorin. "I don't guarantee anything good! I spy on my people's priva Eck! Diewe, I shouldn't be surprised to hear that! Murderers and friends of Elwe, not unbelieveable! Come! What are you doing?"
"Thorin that dwarf to you!" he replied - this was just a polite nothing. "Of those things that you suspect and imagine, we had no idea gnomes in any way whatsoever." This was true enough! "Um!" sê that Great Gnome. "So sê y! Can I ask what you were doing in those mounta

where were you going? Trouens, I would like to know everything about you. Not that this will do you any good, Thorin Oakenshield, I kno "We were traveling to visit our family, our cousins and niggies,
and first, second and third cousins and niggies, and that other descendant of our oupas, who live on the east side of here who works ga Berge," it said to Thorin, without quite knowing what to say at the same time, when that precise truth was clearly not good.
"He's a liar, oh, he's a great one!" it was said by one of those directors. "Very few of us humans are happy in that cave, but we're he wesens to get under; and everyone is as dead as they are cliffs. Also the hy no
It makes this clear!" It was that sword that Thorin carried out, that sword, protruding, that came out of that Trolle's place.
That Great Goblin gave it a very frightening outburst of rage, then he looked at it, and as a soldier it gnashed its teeth, hit it with Let me recognize that sword at once. This killed a hundred gnomes in one time, until that skone elwe of Gondolin chased it or swept it for your wall. Call it this Orcrist, Goblin shotgun, but that one
gnomes simply call this Byter. Let this be hated and hated even more by some who do this. "Killers and Elf Friends!" it screamed the Great Gnome. "Strike everyone to death!"
Beat everyone! Bye hull! Greetings to you! Take you away after dark, a gate full of snakes, and never let you see that light again!" He He jumped down from his seat and charged at Thorin with his mouth open. Just at that moment, everything in that cave went out, and that Those screams and whimpers, crackles, shivers and chatter; howling, growling and cursing; screams and moans, what the result was, was f together physically it could not be compared with that. That spark burned the gate in those gnomes, and that smoke just fell off that r each other and roll in hope on that floor, biting and shaking and baking as if everything has become moldy.
Like a sword flashing in your face. Bilbo saw that Great Goblin go this way, while he stood dumb in the midst of his fury. Hy it fell dead, and that gnome soldier quickly fled from that sword, screaming in that darkness.
That sword went back to hell. "Follow my gou!" it sent a voice. wild and silent; and before Bilbo understood what was happening, he was trot again, as quickly as he could trot, at the end of that lyn, down more dark corridor with the screams of that gnome's eel that beca "Faster, quicker!" it said that voice. "Those torches will be lit again soon." "Half a minute!" the Dori passed, which was behind Bilbo orderly guy. Hy it that hobbit so good as moontlik on sy skouers lets skarrel
could with her hand tied, and then all the way run away, with a latch-latch of chains, and many a stumble, dragging her entire husk alo

it must have been right in the heart of that mountain.
Please light Gandalf's tower staff. Of course this was Gandalf; but just barely Hulle was too busy asking how he got there. He drew out his sword again,
and again it happens naturally in that dark flash. This it burned with a fury, what this made it glitter as if there were gnomes there; who killed that great lord of that cave. This won't cause any problems by releasing those gnome chains and all those prisoners.
so gou as moontlik. Here that sword's name was Glamdring that Vyandhamer, if you remember. Those gnomes called this net Beater, and thi Byter if moontlik. Orcrist was also saved; for Gandalf also combines this and this from one of those
terrified wait. Gandalf thinks about most of these things; and although he couldn't do everything, he could do it with friends in a nic "Are we always here?" the he gesê and sy sword with 'n
bend. "Let me see: one-dis Thorin; two, three, four, five, six, sewe, eight, nine, ten, eleven; where's Fili and Kili? Here's all! twel no idea exactly where we are, and hordes of angry gnomes just behind us! Let's go!
Went to hustle. Gandalf was completely right: if only he started to hear gnome noises and scary screams far behind in that hallway, if the whole faster as ever steered, and since poor Bilbo could immediately go half way so quickly - because dwarf can roll along at a tre when he had to, he took this in turn to carry him on his way. Still, gnomes go faster than dwarfs, and here those gnomes knew the path what he could do, that dwarf heard those howls and howls
the closer. You could even hear the flapping of that gnome's feet, baie, baievoete, just around that last corner. That wink red torches could be seen behind them in that barrel, what their consequence; and may it become deadly.
"Why, oh why does the ek ever leave my hobbit hole!" poor mr. Baggins gesê stomps up and down on Bombur's back.
"Why, oh why did I ever see a wretched little hobbit on a skat "jag!" poor Bombur, who was fat, stumbled along, sweating and sweating what drips in your heat and fear in your nose.
At this point Gandalf fell behind, and Thorin together with him. Hull the turned skerp corner. "Take turns!" he screamed. "Draw your sw There was nothing else to do; and those gnomes can't handle this. Hull the rushing around that corner in full shouting, and found a Gob Vyandhamer, how cold and clear the sky was in your astonished oë.
The one who dropped the torches and gave a scream before he was killed. The one behind it screamed even louder and jumped back and stom This will take quite a long time before any of them dare to turn around that corner.
Then that time it happened to that dwarf again, a long, long path further into those dark barrels of those gnomes' kingdom. Come on, th Let your torches be extended and your eyes put on, and let your hand be chosen by your keenest runners with the sharpest ears and oe. H forward, so swiftly as wesels in that darkness, and with scarcely any noise more like bats.
That's why it's still Bilbo, still that dwarf, even Gandalf's audience
hull come. Hulle het hulle nie gesien nie. But all those gnomes have seen how quietly they ran behind, because Gandalf is the tower sta stupid to help that dwarf while you took on it. Skielike was Dori, well behind with Bilbo,
from behind in that dark grip. Hy the scream and case; and that hobbit rolled off his feet into that blackness, stamped his head on har I don't remember anything anymore.
MYSTERIES IN THE DARK
When Bilbo prepares it, he is more surprised if he does this; because this was just so dark with all due respect. No one was near him. He couldn't hear anything, couldn't see anything, and he couldn't feel anything except the cliff on the floor.
Slowly he got up and felt all four until he reached the wall of the barrel; but he couldn't find anything, even more:
nothing whatsoever, no sign of gnomes, no sign of dwarfs. His head was swimming, and he was not sure of even that direction in which he go in case he does. He was as good as he could run and crawl
With a good feeling, until your hand meets something like a small ring, it feels like it is made of cold metal on the floor of the barr career, but he did not know this. He could hardly imagine sitting in that ring without it; this is certainly not of any special use in It didn't go much further, but it was sitting on that cold floor and giving myself a earful

to utter misery for a long time. He thought about himself, braai bacon and eggs in his own galley at that house - because he could feel within that this was high time for some meal; but this just made him more miserable.
He couldn't think of anything to do; and he couldn't imagine what would happen; or why he is behind; or come, as he is behind, that gnomes the hom nie gevang nie; or even why your head was so sad. He learned that truth silently, out of sight and from memory, in a ver hoek vir 'n lang rukkie.
After a while, the hy na sy pyp feeling. This wasn't bad, and this was something. Then he felt after the bag, and there was tobacco in and this was something more. Then he felt like firewood and he couldn't find anything, and this crushed the whole heap. Just as well vi hom, if he agreed to it, he agreed to it. God knows what that lighting of firewood and that smell of tobacco could do to him
out of the dark gate into that scary place. That look crushes his ever-so-feeling. But you can always feel yourself around

firewood, what your hand on the handle of your little sword comes, that little dagger that he gets from that troll, and this he complet Now he pulled this off. This made it pale and dull for her eyes. "So this is an Elvish lem too," he thinks, "and gnomes are not even cl But somehow he was comforted. This was quite wonderful to say
lem made in Gondolin because of that gnome-earloë of which so many songs have been made; and he also noticed that such weapons made a g on gnomes a bit skielik on hull came it.
"Go back?" the hy thinking. "No good no! Go forward? Immediately! Go forward? The only thing to do! Let us go!" Then he climbs up and r and she knows everything about fitting and pitching.
Now Bilbo was a fresher in what is called an old place. But you have to remember this was not quite so styf hom soos this vir my or vir you. Hobbits are not exactly like ordinary people; and as hull after all
gate is a nice cheerful place and is properly ventilated, completely different from those gnomes' barrels, everyone is more and more us and they didn't easily lose their direction in the underground when they lost control of the recovery of that stamp. Hull baie can also quietly, and easily crawl away, and miraculously recover from a fall and bruise, and may it be a fund of wisdom and wisdom, which man u I wouldn't like to be in mnr. It wouldn't have been Baggin's place, all those
the same. That barrel is the same or this is not the end of it. All he knew was that this had always been going on fairly steadily and bump and a twist or two. There was something going on every time after that side
Now and then, he knew it through that glint of his sword, or could feel it
your hand on that wall. He takes no notice of this, except to pass by hastily for fear of gnomes or half-imagined dark things that come He entered into it, on and off; and he still hears no sound of anything except the occasional buzzing of a bat in his ear, which initia further.
Skielik, without any warning, he trotted into that water with a splash! Ag no! This was freezing. This is the man skerp and short drawn was like a pool in that toad, or that edge of an underground stream
it's that corridor, or that edge of a deep dark underground lake. That sword was blown into flame. He stopped it, and he could hear it listen loudly, drops drip-drip-drop from an unseen roof into the water below; but there was no other kind of sound there.
"So this is a pool or a lake, and not an underground river," he thought. He didn't dare to wade out into that darkness. He couldn't swi just in the heart of Berge: fish whose fathers swam in it, goodness knows just how many years ago, and never swam out again, while they oë the growing bigger and bigger and bigger of trying to see in that blackness; There are also other things that are more slimy than fi up in that dark. Some of these caves also date back after their beginnings to centuries before those gnomes, some of them just widened Deep down here in that dark water, old Gollum was just a small, slimy creature. I don't know where he came from, nor who or what he was

Gollum was so dark, so was that darkness, except for two large round ones that were pale in appearance. He had a small boat, and he row big feet that hang over that side, but never a ripple he makes. No he no.
He said it with a pale light-hearted oe after blind fish, what he gripped with her long fingers, so quick to think. He also liked meat.
He thought that gnome was good if he could get this; but he worries that he never invented him. He just strangled it from behind, if it only some place near that edge of that water, as he crept about it.
They did it this bay, because they had a feeling that something unpleasant was happening there, under the roots of that mountain. Hull on that lake come, let all the long articulated tonsels devour it, and all
felt that he could not go any further; So the path ended there in that direction, and there was no reason to go there unless the Great yet that gnome, still that fish, it came back.
End the Gollum on a slimy rock island in the middle of that lake. He now held Bilbo from afar with what turned out to be such a telesco Gollum climbed into his boat and skied away from that island, while Bilbo sat on that edge, completely confused and at the end of his p sy mind. Skielike the Gollum showed up and whispers and hisses:
"Show us and splash us, my precious one! I think this is a wonderful feast; by
at least a nice snack what this would make for us, Gollum!" And when he met Gollum, he made a scary swallowing sound in his throat. Thi name, although he always called it 'my precious'.
That hobbit barely jumped out of his skin until the hiss came into his ear, and he saw a skielik that turned out to be sticking out aft "Who are you?" the he gesê and sy dagger extended in front of him. "What is he, my precious?" whisper Gollum (what always with
himself by never having anyone else to talk to). This is what he had to find out, because he was not right to be hungry at that moment, nervous; otherwise he would first grab it and then whisper it. "Ek is Mister Bilbo Baggins. Ek it that dwarf lost and ek it that one wizard, and I don't know where I am; and I don't want to, I don't know, if I can just get away."
"What's in his hand?" it asked Gollum while he looked at that sword, which he did not love at all. "A Swaard, a man that came from Gondolin!" "Sssss" the Gollum sê,
and it became quite polite. "Sjoe, you sit here and lash out with it, my precious. I love this, jokers do this, don't you?" He was anxi he was good to eat, and as if Gollum were really hungry. Raaisels was all he could think of. To ask for help, and sometimes to ask for was the only game he ever played with other clever creatures that sat in his gate long, long ago, before he lost all his friends and dr mountains.
"Very well," Bilbo said, eager to agree, until he found out more about that creature, whether he was completely alone, or whether he wa or hunger, and whether he was a friend of those gnomes.
"Ask me first," he said, because he didn't have time to pick up a quilt. Come on Gollum:
What roots it has so that no one sees it, is like a tree, Up, up go this,
And yet this never grows?
"Maklik!" the Bilbo sê. "Berg, take it."
"Make this easy? This must be a competition with us, my precious!"
If my skat ask and don't answer this, eat us this, my skat. As requested. us, and we don't answer, then we do what we want, right? This "Good!" Bilbo shouted, without daring to be cold, and barely shaking his mouth to think of ideas about what could save him from eating. Thirty white perde on a red heuwel, Before they get that champion's cap,
Then stamp hulle, Then hulle stand still.
This was all he could think of asking - that idea of food was quite common in those days. This was also quite an old one, and Gollum kn "Kastaiings, kastaiings," the hy hisses. "Tande! tande! my precious; but it's just us!" Then he asked the second one:
Voiceless cry this,

Toothless flutter, Toothless byte, Toothless mumble.
"A Halwe uncle look!" Bilbo exclaimed, which continues to eat the ear with uncomfortable thoughts. Fortunately, he heard something simi before, and when he regains his mind, he thinks about that answer. "Wind, wind of course," he said, and he was so happy that he immedia "This will confuse that nasty little underground creature," he thought: an eye in a blue eyes

It's an eye in a green face. "There that eye is the same here that eye" That first eye is the thing, "But in a lonely place
Nie in 'n hoë plek nie."
"Ss, ss, ss," Gollum shouted. He was already long, long underground, and forgot about that kind of thing here. But just now Bilbo is st I hope that wretch wouldn't be able to answer, remembering the Gollum suggestion from ages and ages and ages before, when he and I
Ouma in a hole in an oower by a river, "Sss, sss, my preciousness," he said. "Son on those daisies means this, do this."
But here, this ordinary, mundane, everyday sort of nonsense was tiring. vir hom. The whole man also reminds us of when he was less toge skelm and mean, and this puts him out of his temper. What's more, let him make him hungry; So this time it's a little bit more difficul This cannot be seen, this cannot be felt, this cannot be heard, this cannot be heard, this cannot be used, this cannot be heard.
This lies behind the stars and under the hills, And the gate that fills this. This come first and follow after, End that lewe, kill that lag.
Unfortunately, Gollum already heard Bilbo from that kind of thing; and that answer was in any case oral om hom. "Dark!" it didn't matte A box without a skarniere, key or lid, Tog is the gold skat hidden inside,
he asked for time to get used to it until he could think of a really difficult one. This is it
think of a terribly easy chestnut, although he doesn't usually ask for it or say it. But this was a nasty poser like Gollum. Hy het vir always the hy didn't answer; h the whispering and proclaiming.
After a while Bilbo became impatient. "Well, what is this?" it he said. "That answer is not a kettle of boiling water, as you apparentl "Give us a chance; let this give us a chance, my precious-ss-ss." "Well," said Bilbo after giving him a long chance, "what do you think But like Gollum, remember that he long ago stole it from his nest, and sit under that riverbank and teach you Ouma, teach you
ouma to suig-"Eggs!" the hy hiss. "This is eggs!" Then he asked: Living without breath, So cold was that death; Never thresh, never drink, Everything in pos never sound.
He also thought about it in turn, this was a terribly easy one, because he always thought about that answer. But he couldn't remember a better at that uncle look, he was so shocked by that egg question. All the same, this was a poser for poor Bilbo, who could never help turn this so easily to wink, you can easily sit by that house
little one who is in danger of being eaten to disturb your thoughts. Bilbo sat down and squeaked once or twice in his throat, but there After a nap, Gollum with plesier vir homself begins hissing: "Is this tasty, "My precious? Is this juicy? Is this deliciously crunchy?" lurk out of that darkness after Bilbo.
"A Halwe omblik," the hobbit claimed. "I guess it just gives you a good long look ." "This must make hare, hare!" the Gollum sê and begin from sy
boat on that shore to reach Bilbo. But when he put his long, webbed foot into that water, a fish jumped out and fell onto Bilbo's tone. "Agh!" the hy gesê, "this is cold and clammy!" - and so the hy shouting. "Fish!" fish!" he exclaimed. "Dis fish!"
Gollum was terribly disappointed; but Bilbo asked for another drink as quickly as he could, so that Gollum had to climb back into his b think.
None of it rested on one leg, two legs of it sat on three legs, four legs of some. This was not the right time for this mess, but Bilbo was hasty.

Gollum would have struggled to finish this if he were to do this
another time. So if this was the case, it wasn't that difficult to talk about fish, just like that, and after that it was easy. "Fish o on a chair, that cat is the one" is of course that answer, and Gollum
it gave this gold. When he thought that time had come to ask and criticize something difficult. This is what he said: Here this thing devours all things:
Voëls, diere, bome, blomme;
Knaag yster, byt staal;
Grind hard klippe to flour;
Kill the king, destroy the city, And knock down the mountain.
Poor Bilbo, sitting in that dark and thinking about all those scary names of all those giants and monsters he ever heard stories about, bang, and this is sleg vir Denke. Gollum the beginning to get out of sy
boat. He clattered into that water and rowed after that river; Bilbo could see
it came to him. You tongue the same or stick it in your mouth; he wanted to shout: "Give me more time! Give me time!" But all this it came out with a skielike scream:
"Time! Time!"
Bilbo was saved by sheer luck. Because of course this was the answer. Gollum was once again disappointed; and now he has become angry, and also tired of that game. This indeed made him hungry. Here that time
He never went back after that boat. He went to sit next to Bilbo in the dark. This makes the hobbit uncomfortable and his mind distract "This must ask us a question, my precious, yes, yes, yes. Just like one." more questions to answer, yes, yes," Gollum said.
But Bilbo simply couldn't think of any questions with that nasty wet, cold thing sitting next to him and tight and stinging him. Hy tig homself, hy the homself pinched; he still couldn't think of anything. "Ask us! ask us!" the Gollum sê.
Bilbo the homself squeezed and homself clapped; he gave it to his little one to grasp the sword; he evens with his other hand in his po ring what he counted in that hallway and forget it.
"What's in my pocket?" he said it out loud. He was busy with
himself, but Gollum thought it was a mess, and he was terribly disturbed.
"Don't retaliate! Don't retaliate!" the hy hiss. "Don't apologize, my skat, don't ask us. What's the point in your nasty little bastard Bilbo saw what was happening and had nothing better to ask, responding to his question, "What's in my pocket?" he shouted louder. "Ssss," Gollum hissed. "This should give us three raaiskote, my precious items, three raaiskote."
"Alright then! Take a swing!" the Bilbo sê. "Handses!" the Gollum sê. "Wrong," Bilbo said, luckily his hand just pulled it out again. "Ray again!" "Ssss," Gollum was more upset than ever said. Hy it to all those
things he keeps in his own pocket: fish bone, gnome teeth, wet skull, a
piece of bat wing, a skerp clip to skewer your tusk on, and other nasty things. He tries it, I think some other people in their trouble "Knife!" he finally said it.
"Wrong!" the Bilbo sê, how quickly it was lost. "Last turn!"
Now Gollum was in a much worse condition when Bilbo asked him about the egg question. He hissed and sputtered and his body was rocked b the squirming; but he never dares to waste his last shot. "Come!" the Bilbo sê. "Ek wag!" He tries to sound brave
cheerful, but he was not sure how the match would end, whether Gollum would win or not. "Tyd is verby!" het hy gesê.
"Tou, or nothing!" the Gollum was shouted, which was not entirely correct, but did not work in two rounds at the same time.
"Both wrong," Bilbo baie verlig exclaimed; and he immediately jumped up on his feet, sat his back on the nearest wall and stretched out

to that. But he didn't feel like he could trust this slimy thing to keep any promises. a pinch. Any verse king would be good enough to That last question was not a real question according to that ancient law.
But at least Gollum didn't attack him right away. He could see that
sword in Bilbo's hand. Hy the silence, claims and whispers. Finally Bilbo couldn't wait any longer. "Well?" it he said. "What about your promise? I want to go. You have to show me that path."
"That's it for us, skat? Give that nasty little Baggins the way out,

yes, yes. But what does this mean, right? Not too much, precious, but not nothing. Ag no! Gollum!"
"Don't worry about you," Bilbo said. "A Promise is a Promise." "Cross is this, impatient, precious," Gollum hissed. "But this has to ha this must be done. We can't rush into those barrels in such a hurry. We must go and get things first, yes, things to help us."
"Well, make gou!" sê Bilbo, please go away to think of Gollum.
He thinks he just made a verse king and doesn't mean to come back. What's the Gollum talk about? What useful thing could he exclude?
that dark lake? But he was wrong. Gollum wanted to come back. He was angry now and hungry. And he was a miserable, miserable creature, hy het already 'n plan hebben.
Not far away was the island, of which Bilbo knew nothing, and in it
In his hiding place he kept a few miserable pieces of junk, and a beautiful thing, beautiful, wonderful. He had a ring, a gold ring, a "My birthday gift!" the he vir homself whispering, so he often did it. in that endless dark day. "This is what we want, yes; this is wh He wanted this because this was a mag ring, and if you were to leave that ring on your finger you were unsignable; You could be slegs i seen, and then slowly through you skaduwee, and this would be assertive and dull.
"My birthday gift! This came to me on my birthday, my darling." So he always lived with himself. But who knows how Gollum got it Nowadays, centuries ago, in those old days, this ring was still widely spread in the world? Perhaps even that Master could do something Gollum started this behavior until he could make it; and then he said this in one
skkie along sy vel, until this hom grieves it; and now he usually hid it in a hole in that rock on his island, and always went back to sometimes he was attracted to this when he could not bear to be deprived of it any longer, or when he was very, very hungry and tired o crawl through the dark hallway to the souk after lost gnomes. He may even venture into the place where those torches were lit and let h smart; for he would be safe. Oh yes, completely safe. No one would touch him, no, a person would touch him, until he had his fingers on He still had a leg or two to gnaw, but he wanted something a little more subtle. "Completely safe, yes," he whispers to himself. "We wi This is what was in your bosom's little mind when he slipped away
Bilbo's side, and back after the boat clapped, and left in the dark. Bilbo
he thought about it to the last of his audience. He always mentions it just a little bit; because he has no idea how to invent sy path He almost heard a scream. This sent a shiver down your spine. Gollum the cursing and crying in that darkness, not far away according to searching in vain.
"Where is this? Where is this?" the Bilbo hom hear howl. "Lost is this, my
Precious, lost, lost! Curse us and crush us, my precious is lost!" "What do you make?" Bilbo shouted. "What did you lose?" "We shouldn't ask for this," Gollum shouted. "Nie sy besigheid nie, no, Gollum! Dis lostt, gollum, gollum, gollum."
"Well, I do too," Bilbo exclaimed, "and I want to get lost. And I play it that way, and you do it belowe. So come together! Come and le "Go with your soekery!" As wretched as Gollum though it may sound, Bilbo
could not find much compassion in his heart, and he had the feeling that something Gollum wanted so badly that this could be something het hy geskree.
"No, not yet, darling!" Gollum replied. "We must go away afterwards, dis lost, Gollum." "But you never answered my last question, and you answered it below," he said. Bilbo.
"Never do anything!" the Gollum sê. Then suddenly out of that darkness came a sharp hiss. "What is this in sy sakke? Tell us this. This As far as Bilbo knew, there was no specific reason why he shouldn't,
tell. Gollum said it was quicker than before and jumped to a crowbar; Of course, because Gollum was the eternal long ear who worried ab that this is stealing. But Bilbo was irritated by the delay. After all, he does
it is used to competition, reasonably justified, but a terrible risk. "The answer would be, don't give me a shout," he said. "But this was not a fair question," Gollum said. "Nie 'n ryesel nie, skat, no."
"Oh well, if this is an ordinary question," Bilbo replied, "then it is a first question. What have you lost? This is for me!" "What the heck is this?" That sound the louder hissing and
skerper, and when he looked afterwards, Bilbo, to his dismay, was now two small

ligpunte what lurks after him. So, behind him, Gollum's thoughts grew, those who lay with him burned it with a dull flame. "What did you lose?" Bilbo persevered.
But now what lay in Gollum had become a green fire, and this was coming quickly. Gollum was in his boat again, rowing wildly back after that dark kiss; and such a rage of loss and fear was in her heart that no more fear could be felt by him.
Bilbo couldn't understand what that miserable creature had done, but he saw that everything was fine, and that Gollum wanted to kill hi Over time he turned around and ran blindly back into that dark corridor through which he came, while he stayed close to that wall and f "What the heck is this?" He hears that loud hissing behind him,
and that splash when Gollum jumps off his boat. "What the ek, wonder ek?" het hy het hy vir homself gesê while hy hyg and stumble. He i That hissing was near behind him. He now turned it around and saw Gollum
soos small green lamp as you come up that slope. Scared, he tried to run faster, but he skied like a hook in the floor and fell flat wi In an instant Gollum was upon him. But before Bilbo could do anything,
sy asem get back, homself count, or sy swaard swaai, Gollum passed away, without taking notice of him, curse and whisper while he runs.
What could this mean? Gollum could see in that darkness. Bilbo could do that
the sky looks a bit pale, even from the back. Painfully, he got up and placed the sword in the skede, which now glows dully again, bye See the consequence. There was nothing else to do. This didn't help. crawl back down after Gollum's water. Perhaps if he followed it, Gollum may not have thought of this as a means of escape. "Curse this! curse this! curse this!" hiss Gollum. "Curse those Baggins! This precious. If he found this, yes, he had to. My birthday gift."
Bilbo perked up his ears. He finally starts to kill himself. Hy
the smooth rush and so close to what he said, it came behind Gollum, which was always moving quickly, don't look back, but turn your he Bilbo could see from that dull glimmer that wall.
"My birthday gift! Curse this! How it lost us this, my skat? Yes,
This is this. It came over here to us, that nasty young person turned the pager over there. This is this. Curse this! This has slipped eternity! This is gone, Gollum."
Skielike the Gollum sit down and start crying, whistling and gurgling
sound verkriclick to listen. Bilbo held still and himself was pressed flat against that barrel wall. After a while the Gollum stops cry

it's like he had an argument with himself.
"This doesn't help you go back, no, no. We don't remember everything." that place we visited. And this doesn't help. Die Baggins dit di "We don't know, precious, just don't know. We can't know until we find it." nasty creature and push this. But he doesn't know what he c do, right? This will keep this in mind. You don't know this and you can't do this
go far. This is what the human being lost, that nasty naughty thing. There is no way out of this. This is how it happened."
"This is how it is, yes, but this is cunning. This is not what this means. This is not what this means in itself. This knows. This know know a way out, yes. Finish after that back door. After that back door, this is this." "Those gnomes will catch this. This can't be so Precious gift, then gnomes will get this, Gollum! Hulle sal find this, hulle sal find out what this does. We will never be safe again, "Come on, stop talking, skat, and get gou. Like that Baggins
We're going to go soon, we have to go and take a look. To go! Not far now. Go ahead!" Gollum stood up with a jump and took a big step a Bilbo ran behind him, always feeling good, although his greatest fear was that he would stumble, fall and fall with a loud noise. Your of hope and wonder. This is as if the ring he had was a magical ring: this made it unsuitable to you! He naturally listens to such thin story; but it was difficult to believe that he may have found it by chance.
This was always there: Gollum with her clearly passed over the man, like a yard on that one side.
Hulle entered into it, Gollum fluttering forward, hissing and cursing; Bilbo behind him so that a hobbit can go. If it all came to pass "One left, yeah. One right, yeah. Two right, yeah, yeah. Two left, yeah, yeah."

And so on and on.
As the count grew, it became more rapid, and he said the beginning became touchy and weepy; for he left the water further and further b get scared. Gnomes may have been around there, and he lost the system. In the end he held it still at a small opening, on his left side "Sewe regs, yes. Ses left, yes!" the hy whisper. "Dis this. Dis that path after the back door, yes. Here is that hallway!"
He peered into it and shrank back. "But we don't dare go in, darling, no, we don't dare. Gnomes under there. Baie gnomes. We smell ever "What should we do? Curse everyone and crush them! We have to get out of here, skat, wait 'n bietjie and look."
So everything stood completely still. After all, Gollum gave Bilbo a way out, but Bilbo couldn't get in! There Gollum sat, bowed into that opening, and it gleamed coldly in your head while he blew it from side to side between your knees.
Bilbo it quieter as a mouse sneaking away from that wall; but Gollum
it immediately died down and snorted, and it turned green. Hy the saggies hissed but menacingly. He could not see that hobbit, but now and he had the other sense that that darkness conceals it: hearing and
smell. He looked as if he were crouching all over, with his flat hands stretched out over the floor, and his head sticking out, his nos Just a black shadow in that glitter of his own body, Bilbo could see or feel that he was stretched like a bowstring, made together by a Bilbo barely stopped breathing and became stiff himself. He was desperate. He must get away from this terrible darkness while he gets s out, kill this. This was meant to kill him. No, not a justified claim. He was now unsignable.
Gollum had no sword. Gollum didn't actually threaten to kill him, or even try. And he was miserable, alone, lost. A Skielike concept, n lamentation mixed with horror, the welling up in Bilbo's heart: a glimpse of endless unnoticed life without relief or hope for improvem stealthily and whispering. All those thoughts here disappeared in the flash of a second.
He moved. And then in another flash, as if he had jumped up with his new strength and determination.
Not a big jump over a man, but a jump into that darkness. Reguit ear Gollum s'n. head the jump, her foot forward and three in that leg; It knows this, the he net-net lack that she skedel on that lower arch of that corridor.
Gollum the hump throws and grabs at that hobbit earfly
hom, but too late: let her hand it in that it doesn't break, and Bilbo get it right
with her strong feet, she rushed into that new barrel with great speed. He didn't turn around to see what Gollum was doing. There was a first, when this stopped. It seemed like a blood-curdling scream, filled with hatred and despair. Gollum was defeated. He dare not vent lost it: her prey lost it, and also lost the only thing he ever cared about, her precious one. Who brought Bilbo's heart to his mouth, On. Well, now dull, but menacingly, that voice came from behind: "Thief, thief, thief! Baggins! Us hate this, us hate this, us ever hat Then there was silence. But this is also threateningly similar to Bilbo. "As gnomes it is so close that he will use it," he thinks, "th the screaming and cursing audience. Now be careful, otherwise this path will lead you to worse things."
The hallway was low and rough. This wasn't too difficult since that hobbit, except he, despite all sorrow, again his poor tone stamped it,
fresh ones, on nasty jagged cliffs in that floor. "'n Bietjie low for gnomes, by at least for those great ones," the Bilbo thought, wit hul hande barely op die grond.
If that corridor had veered downwards a bit, start going up again, and
After a while it was a steep climb. This slows Bilbo down. But in the end I stopped that slope, turned around a corner and descended ag there, at the bottom of a short slope, he saw what lies around another filtered corner - a glimpse of it. Not red, not like fire or lan kind of bumpy. Then Bilbo starts running.
As quickly as he could move, he scurried around that last turn and quickly came straight into an open space where he lay, after all tha time in that darkness, it's blindingly bright. In the end, this was just like a leak from a sonskyn door into a doorway, where there is be open.
Bilbo blinked, and then he saw those gnomes: gnomes in full armor with drawn swords, what was just inside that door and this cap with a big oë, and let the corridor keep what it leads there. Hulle was awake, alert, ready for anything.
Let him see what he used to see as what he saw before. Yes, hello to him. Whether this was an accident, or a last trick of that ring be

A pang of fear and loss, even a sting of Gollum's misery, Bilbo suffers, and forgets even to draw his sword and puts his hand in his ba And there was that ring always, in her left pocket, and it was on her finger.
Those gnomes stopped working shortly afterwards. Hulle could not see any sign of hom nie. He disappeared. Thank you for shouting twice "Get back into that hallway!" some shouting.
"Over here!" some shouting. "Over that way!" the other screamed. "Pasop vir die door," the captain roared. Whistle blowing, weapons cla chattering, gnomes, cursing and cursing and running back and forth and falling over each other and getting angry. There was a terrified Bilbo was terribly frightened, but he had the sense to understand what was happening and to sneak some liquor behind a large barrel to that gnome, and so come out of that path and avoid being trapped, trampled to death, or caught in the door.
"I have to get out of that door, I have to get out of that door!" it he kept.
homself, but this was long before he dared to try this. Back then this was just a scary game of blind man's shithole. That place was fu around, and as the poor little hobbit dodges it this way and that way, it is hit on the ear by a gnome, which could not make any differ After four scurries away, she slipped between the captain's legs just in time, got up and ran to that door.
This was still open, but a gnome could barely push it far. Bilbo was struggling, but he couldn't move. He's trying to get the door to c pressure and pressure, and he vasgesit! This was shocking. Sy tied the lock on the edge of that door and that door handle. He could see in that open lug: there were a few trappies that ended in a valley between the mountains; it could have come behind a cloud and it look As if one of those gnomes shouted inside: "There's a skaduwee by that door. Something's outside!"

Bilbo's heart jumped into his mouth. He gave it a frightening squirm. Knoppe erupted in all directions. He was ready, with a checked co sy nice copper buttons on that drum.
Of course the whole thing came behind him, honking and hello, and
hunt between those trees. But you don't love that son: this makes your legs wobbly and your head dizzy. Hulle couldn't fight Bilbo with out that son bly; so it would have all gone back, grumbling and cursing awaited at that door. Bilbo escapes.
FROM THE BRAAIPAN INTO THE FIRE
Bilbo escaped from those gnomes, but he didn't know where he was. He lost his hood, cloak, coat, pony, sy bude and sy friends. He conti Bilbo's ear turned to his path, and he looked back. When he looked towards the front and could see the nearer slopes and lowlands and p "Good heavens!" he exclaimed. "This seems as if I settled with the other person." side of that Misty Mountain, straight to the edge of and oh, whither will Gandalf and that dwarf come? I'm just hoping for siestog, you're not still there in the back of those gnomes!"
He wandered further and further, from that little hoee valley, around that edge of it, and away from that hang further; but just a very it grew within him. He is more surprised whether he did not have to, well he did
that magic ring, to go back into those scary, scary tunnels and to souk after your friends. He just decides that this was his duty, tha turn around - and be miserable as he feels about it - let him hear his voice.
Hy the silence and listening. This doesn't sound like gnomes; so he can see the sneaking in forward. He was on a rocky path that winds rock wall on that left side; on the other side it skimmed the ground and there was a valley under the surface of the path that hung ove He crawled even closer and skied between two large human beings, his head with a red hood on: this was something Balin was looking forw the clapping and shouting of joy, but he did not. He kept putting on that ring for fear of meeting something unexpected and unpleasant, "I'm going to give everyone a surprise," he thought while he was in that room
forest on the edge of that valley. Gandalf was busy trying to fight that dwarf. Hulle discuss everything that happens with Hulle in tho more curious and debate what he should do now. That dwarf was grumbling, and Gandalf leaves the matter that they could continue their j to find out whether he was alive or dead, and without trying to save him.
"After all, he is my friend," the wizard said, "and not a bad guy.

feel responsible for hom. I wish you didn't lose it."
That dwarf wanted to know why he was ever brought, why
he couldn't stay with his friends and come together with them, and why didn't that wizard choose someone with more sense. "He was more difficulty as usual," it was a conversation. "If we now have to go back through those horrible tunnels to search for him, and then drag Gandalf the evil replied: "I bring him home, and I don't bring anything that is of no use. Either you help me find him, or I go and hel Goen en laat hom val, Dori?"
"You will let it fall," the Dori said, "as a gnome skies
it's your legs from behind in that dark grip, stumbled over your feet, and hit you in the back! "Then why don't you add it up again?"
"Good heavens! Can you ask? Gnomes, what in that dark veg and byt,
Almal fall ear lyke and hit each other! You barely cut it
off my head with Glamdring, and Thorin the here and there stabbing oral together with Orcrist. Skielik it you one of your dazzling flash, and we saw those gnomes running back and screaming. You 'follow' the shout 'Ek almal!' and it always had to be done. Our thought always had it. There was no time to count, as you well know, until us
I ran from the door across the fence, from that lowest door, and as far away as here. And here's us-without that burglar, ve hom!" "And here's that burglar!" Sit Bilbo while he is in the middle of that shell, and get rid of that ring.
Seen my, how sweet it is! Please shout with surprise
pleasure. Gandalf was as surprised as some of them, but probably more satisfied than all the others. Hy the Balin shout and him tell wh Thinking about a lookout man that people so willingly let walk into without warning. This is a fact that Bilbo's reputation has increas to trade with that dwarf next. If you still doubt that he really was a first-class burglar, despite Gandalf's words, you no longer doub Balin was that confused tit from almal; but all in all, this was a very clever bit of work.
Indeed, Bilbo was so pleased with all his praise that he just giggled it in and saw nothing in the ear of that ring; and then hulle hom how he did this, he said: "Oh, just sneaking up, you know, be safe and quiet."
"Well, this is the first time a mouse even sneaked by." and quietly under my nose and not touching," the Balin gesture, "and I "take my "Balin to your servant," he said.
"Your servant, Mr. Baggins," Bilbo said.
Then he wanted to know everything about his adventure after he lost it
hom, and he's going to sit and tell hulle everything except about that finding
of that ring ("nie nou net nie" the hy gedink). Hulle was everywhere interested in that clutter competition, and the baie appreciative beskrywing van Gollum.
"And then I couldn't think of anyone else to ask him what to do next
"my," Bilbo concluded; "To the end I ask 'what's in my pocket?' And he couldn't turn in three tries. Then he asked: 'What of your promi But he came after me to kill me, and I ran and fell, and he missed me in such darkness. Come on, let's talk to him, because he's talkin I think rightly about that way out, and so he chooses afterwards. And then
He sat in that entrance, and I couldn't avoid it. Then I jumped in his ear and escaped and ran to the gate." "What about that wagte?" the whole prayer. "Wasn't there any nie there?"
"Oh yes! Baie van hulle; but if I avoid hulle. If it is stuck in that door, what
"I just had a crack at it, and I lost my buttocks," he said with sadness as he looked after his clothes. "But I made it out okay and he That dwarf looked at the man with complete respect as he talked, avoiding the ear, Gollum's ear jumps and the door presses, as if
This was not difficult or worrying.
"What happened to you?" the Gandalf lying down. "Mr. Baggins, it's more like what you're doing." He saw Bilbo a strange look from under woody brow, while he said this, and the hobbit was more surprised or he talked about that part of his story that he uttered.
When he asked him to ask, because if Gandalf clarified this already because of the dwarf, Bilbo had not yet heard this. He wanted to kn That magician, in order to express that truth, never neglects to clarify his cleverness. more than once, so now he vir Bilbo gesê who w well aware of the presence of many gnomes in that part of that mountain. But your main gate used to come out on another pass, one that Apparently people have given up courage to go that way, and those gnomes had to

It has now been opened up to us on the pass that the dwarf took, relatively recently, because it has been relatively safe so far.
"I have to see if I can find a more or less orderly giant to block this." again," Gandalf said, "otherwise there will be no escape from As soon as Gandalf Bilbo screams he hears it, he realizes what is happening
the happening. In that flash those gnomes killed what he grabbed, he squeezed it inside that crack, just then hooked it. He followed th "A little petty activity, this was," he said. "Hit and go!"
But of course Gandalf is a special study of tricks with fire and light (even that hobbit never forgets those magical fireworks). That r

except that Gandalf knew everything about that back door, including those gnomes called the bottom gate where Bilbo lost it. By the way was well known to anyone familiar with this part of that
mountains; but this is what it took for a roper to keep his head in those barrels and guide him in that right direction.
"Hulle made the fence there a lot of joints," he said, "partly as an escape route, as he needed it; partly as a way out after that coun ever managed to block this. Hulle will then guard this doubled," he said.
All the others suffered too. After all, may it have lost a lot, but may it have killed that Great Goblin and a large number of others, always escaped, so it can be said that you have had the best of them so far.
But that roper shouted holily to holly. "We have to come now
Agreed, now we are somewhat equipped," he said. "Hull will be behind us in hundreds when the night comes; and those shadow orphans are Hulle can smell our footsteps hours and hours after we are gone.
Must be miles away for Skemer. There will be a little moon, if this remains beautiful, and this is happy. Not that anyone cares much ab "min lig to steer with."
"Oh yes!" he said it in response to more questions from that hobbit. "Jy
lost pace with time in gnome barrels. Today is Thursday, and this was Monday morning or Tuesday morning that is our prisoner. We're gon myle and myle, and come straight down from the heart of that mountain,
and now on the other side it is quite a short path. But we are not at the point where it will take us; it's too far north for us, and the rather uncomfortable land in front of that door. And we are always quite high on it. Come let's go!
"I'm really hungry," Bilbo groaned, almost aware that he hadn't eaten it since that last night. Just
Think of it like a hobbit! My stomach felt completely empty and loose and my stomach was already shaky, now that excitement was gone. "I can't do anything else," Gandalf said, "if you want to go back and those gnomes would like to give you your pony and your luggage ba "No thanks!" the Bilbo sê.
"Okay then, we just have to pull on our seatbelts and get on
will be made worse, and this will be even worse than for nothing, not ourselves."
While everyone was doing it, Bilbo was looking from side to side for something to eat; but that blackberry was still in bloom, and of c nope, not even hawthorn berries. He had a bit of chatter and drank from a small mountain stream that the toad had made, and he had the Hulle kept going on and on. That rowwe pathjie it disappears. That forest, and that long grass between those rocks, that whole royal pe that sweetie and that sage and that marjoram, and that yellow rock-pink always disappear, and the husk itself is on a steep slope fallen cliff, those remains of a land clearing. When you start to leave here, let everything and small clips roll away from your feet; gly and roll; Then a lump of rock is broken and shaken off,
crashes with dust and noise. Shortly before long, the entire slope
hulle and under hulle it was like or hulle to that movement, and hulle it slipped away, all crowded together, in a terrible confusion o plate en klippe.
This was the tree at the bottom that saved it. Hulle it toe the edge of a climbing forest of pine tree what stood here right on that mo from that deeper darker forest of that valley below. Some are vasgegryp die stamme en swaai huelleven in laer takke, some (including th hobbit) crawling behind a tree to find shelter under that rock. God that danger was gone, he could have stopped it, and that last blind listen while the largest of those distorted cliffs jump and spin between those ferns and those pine roots far below.

"Well, this is already getting us started," Gandalf said; "and even gnomes tracking us down will be a task to get here quietly." "I dare bet," the Bombur grumble; "but you won't find it difficult to send anything to our heads." That dwarf (and Bilbo) was feel far from happy, and the ear is hurting and hurting my feet and bruised.
"Nonsense! We're going to exit the path of that slide here." We must be quick! Look after that lie!
That son was long behind that mountain. That shadowy woman was already on the ground floor, although far away through those trees and e You could always see that black top that grew a little later
lay on those plains beyond. Let it be as quick as if you were stumbling, you could step on and climb down that steep slope of a pine fo steady southward. Sometimes the hull door 'n see of experiences bumped with long blare what right bo that hobbit's head sticking out; s while that forest darkness grew darker and that forest silence became deeper. There was no wind there that day to even bring a breath i "Should we move on?" it was so dark that he could see Thorin's beard passing by him, and so quiet that he
That dwarf could hear a loud sound when he breathed. "My tone is already bruised and bent, and my legs ache, and my stomach sway so leë sak."
"One step further," Gandalf said.
After what seemed like a century further, it skied through an opening where no trees could grow. The moon was up and the sky was clear This always somehow seemed like a nice place, although there was nothing wrong to see there.
Soon you hear a howl coming down that hill, a long shuddering howl. This has been answered by another way after regs and a lot further after all; near the door of another one not far away on the left side. This was how the moon howled, how come together!
There was no wolwe what near mnr. Baggins didn't know the noise at that house, but he knew it there. This was often enough in his descr it imitated this to scare him. To do this in that forest under that
moon was too much vir Bilbo. Even magic rings aren't much use there. wolwe-veral toe die bose troppe what under that skaduwee of geleef that gnome-infested mountain, on the Edge of that Wilderness on that border of that unknown. Wolwe of that kind smell skerper as gnomes "What should we do, what should we do!" he exclaimed. "Escapes of gnomes after "get caught if they don't want to be caught!" he said, a situations.
"Climb up that tree quickly!" call Gandalf; and all your running after that tree at the edge of that open, except for the souk after th you can row; and may you rise as high as you could ever trust. You would see it (from a safe distance) if you saw it
that dwarf who sits in that tree with hul gave birth to some dependency, soos
Old here it has become silly and playing that is all the fun. Fili and Kili lived on a huge larch and a huge cherry tree. Dori, Nori, O Oin and Gloin were more comfortable in a large pine with straw
branch, which protrudes intermittently like the bacon from a wheel. Bifur, Bofur,
Bombur and Thorin were in another one. Dwalin and Balin are together
tall, slender pine tree with only a few branches and trying to find a place to sit and enjoy the greenness of that greenest branch. Gan like the other one, it found a tree that they couldn't climb into, a large pine tree that stood on the edge of that one. He was complet And Bilbo? He couldn't climb any trees, and he was kicking around
from tribe to tribe, soos a hare that lost it and a dog behind it this.
"You leave that burglar behind again!" sê Nori vir Dori while you are watching. "I can't always carry burglars on my back," Dori said, "He will be eaten if we don't do anything," Thorin said, because there was crying all around him, the closer he got. "Dori!" the hy sho Dori was the lowest on that meanest tree, "be quick and give Mr. Baggins a hand!
Dori was a truly orderly old woman, despite her grumbling. Poor Bilbo
I couldn't reach my hand, even if I climbed it after the lowest branch and it reached my arm as far as the moon left. So Dori finally c Just at that moment, she started to cry and started to cry. Almal

There were literally hundreds of people there who looked at it. Dori still doesn't let Bilbo give up. He mentioned it until he was in t takke, and then he himself jumps into that branch. Just in time!
A wolf cut his cloak when he blew it up, and barely hit him. In one glance there was a whole bunch of people around that tree screaming But even those wild Wargs (because those forests wolwe ear that Edge of the Wild (are mentioned) cannot climb. For a time, everyone was This was warm and not windy. Boom is not easy to sit in any time; but in that cold and that wind, with wool all around
wag around you, you can be completely miserable places.
This one that opened in that ring of boome was apparently a meeting place of those wolwe. More and more the usual entrance. Hull it wai it went to every tree that anyone was in. May you also guard it here, while all the remains (hundreds and hundreds, this is the same) g understand this. Bilbo didn't, but this sounded loud and clear to him, and as if all his talk had gone to his ears, cruel and evil thin all those Wargs in that circle would always answer together, and all their fearful noise would hardly make that hobbit fall from the tr I will tell you what Gandalf heard, although Bilbo does not understand it. Those Wargs and those gnomes often helped each other with a Gnomes, they usually don't venture far from their mountains, they will be driven away and go to their homes, or march after the war (which I'm glad it happened recently). But in that
Sometimes they all went on raids, all over the place to get food or salad
to work vir hulle. Then the wargs often cry for help and the loot together with them. Sometimes the hull on wolwe gery soos people on p Well, this looks like a big gnome attack that was finally planned. Those Wargs came to meet those gnomes and those gnomes were late.
That speech was undoubtedly what killed that Great Goblin, and caused all that excitement by that dwarf and Bilbo and that warlock, who In spite of the danger from this far country, a brave man recently made his way back there from that South, tree cut off, and
bou vir hulleself place to live in between that more pleasant forest in that valley and along those river banks. There was baie van hul was brave and well armed, and even those wargs did not dare to attack as there was a bay, or in that clear day. But now the whole plan with the help of those gnomes to get snags at some of the nearest villages, get there. If his plan had been executed, that would have b no one was there the next day; All would have been killed, except for those few gnomes from those who lived there, and were carried bac This was a scary talk to listen to, not just as a result of those brave woodcutters and their women and children, but also because of t what now Gandalf and his friends threaten it. That Wargs was angry and
Surprised to find you here in your last meeting place. Hulle de dink, hulle was friend of those woodcutters, and they came to spy on th and those who wished for a terrifying battle had to sail instead to catch their prisoners and devour people, waking up quickly from the I had no intention of leaving and those people didn't climb into that tree too late. escape, at least not for those eyes. And long befo can boom climb, or hull cut off.
Now you can understand why Gandalf, while he listens to all his growls
screaming, he started to become terribly afraid, no matter how much of a wizard he was, and to feel that he was in a bad place, and sti couldn't do much, just got stuck in a huge tree with wool all around on the ground underneath. Hy it is that large pine bulb of that br tree. Then he lights a fire with bright blue fire and throws it away with a whoosh between the circle of the woolweed. This struck him in red, another in green. Hulle bars on that ground in that middle of that
circle and it went off in colored sparks and smoke. A special big one-hit that head wolf on that nose, and he jumped ten feet into that running around and around that circle and even biting and snapping on the other side in anger and fear.
That dwarf and Bilbo, the shouting and cheering. That wolwe's anger
it was scary to see, and the riot that you made, it filled the whole forest.
Wolwe is always afraid of fire, but this was quite frightening
ominous fire. If a spark landed in its jacket, it was stuck and burned in its shell, and when it was quickly rolled around, it was alwa

Orally, it opened its ears and rolled its ears to extinguish that spark on its road, while it was burning, running around and howling and others to set it on fire, until their own friends chase it away, and let it run away, crying and wailing and scrambling for water. "What's all the commotion in that forest today?" ask the Lord of the Eagle.
He sat, black in that moony, bo-on a single peak of it
rock on the eastern edge of that mountain. "Ek hear wolwe se voiceme! Is that gnome on that skunk in that forest?"
He whipped it up into that bag, and immediately took two of hers from that one
rocks on either side jumped up to follow him. Shroud it in that twirling and looking away at that ring of those Wargs, a small group fa Lord of that Eagle of that Misty Mountain, had the oë what could look after that
son what no more cut nie, and could see a hare a mile below on that ground even move in that moony. So, even though he couldn't see tha flash of fire, and hear those howls and groans rising dully from afar
under him. He could also see the glint of that moon on gnomes' spears and helmets, while long lines of those wicked people crawled down Arende is not friendly at all. Some is cowardly and cruel. But that ancient race of that northern mountain was the greatest of all feel because they did not eat such creatures), they struck each other and they drove away screaming back to their caves, and they stopped wh doing. Those gnomes hated that eagle and feared it all, but could not find a place to sit or drive it from that mountain.
Last night that Lord of that Eagle was filled with curiosity to know what
was on foot; and let him fly away from that mountain, and circle round and round his whole coming off, off, off after that ring of those wolwe and that meeting place of those gnomes.
A very good thing too! Scary things happened down there.
They knew what had happened to that fire and they had to flee quickly, this had happened to different places that had been set on fire. Berge had been living there for quite some time. yellowing experiences,
fallen branches, deeply piled pine needles, and dead trees here and there, gold was on fire. All around it the Wargs fire burst forth. But that wolf didn't expect it, that tree didn't leave. Delusional and evil, everyone jumped and cried for that tribe, and cursed that scary language, with your tongue a bit of slouch, and your oe that shines so red and bright as those flames.
When skiing, gnomes came running, shouting. Hull the dinking and fighting
was going on with those woodworkers; but hey, let's do some work, it happens, it happens. Some of them finally sit down and have a drin they were stabbed and they skagte teen they were beaten. Gnomes are not
afraid of fire, and he had a plan that was most amusing.
Party it all those wolwe in a trop bymekaargekry. Party the boat and bush around that tree trunk. And there was running around and stam Don't put out the fire next to the tree where that dwarf was. There the fire fed the hull with blare and dead branches and ferings. Wha prevented from spreading outside; but this gradually crept in until the running fire leaked into the fuel that had been piled up under gnomes dancing around and around in a circle with people around a midsummer fire. Outside that ring of dancing warriors with spears and bye it leaves those wolwe at a respectful distance, shut up and talk. He could hear those gnomes starting a scary song:
Fifteen feelings in five pine trees, all hail has blown in a fiery breeze!
But, you clever little souls, you didn't have any trouble!
Oh, what should we do with those snarky little things? Braai it live, or boil it in a pot;

braai hulle, cook hulle and eat hulle warm?
Then everyone stopped and shouted: "Fly away, little birds! Fly away as you can! Come down, little birds, otherwise you will be roasted "Go away! seuntjies!" Gandalf replied. "This is not time for feeling good. Even naughty girls who play with fire will be punished." He Hull though he was natural, wizard though he was. But let's not pay attention, and let's keep it apprehended.
Brand, brand boom en varing! Scratch and scald! A sniffing torch

To light up that night with our joy, Yes!
Bake and roast hulle, braai and braai hulle! until it bears flame and becomes glassy; until her smell and skin crack, fat melts, and bene black in cinder lê
under that sky!
So sal dwarves dier,
and light up that night for our joy, Yay! Ja-harri-hei!
Yeeeees!
And with that, Yes hi!, that flame was under Gandalf's tree. In one
look at this after the other spread it. That bass set it on fire, that bottom branch cracked.
Then Gandalf climbs to the top of the tree. That skiy prag
it suddenly flashed out of his tower staff, while he was preparing it to jump off between the spear of those gnomes. This would have be end of him, although he probably would have killed both of them, as he did so, a defiant beam crashed down. But he never jumped.
Just at that moment the Lord of the Eagle descended from above, grabbed him in his arms and was gone.
There was a howl of anger and surprise from those gnomes. Out loud the Lord of the Eagle, with whom Gandalf was talking. Give that back great feelings that were with him, and how great black shadow was when it descended. They wanted the chatter and gnashing of obeisance; in vain. Ears heed the eagle's flying; that dark whistling sound of your knocking wing
the whole toe hit the floor or the whole thing drifted far away; Thank you for that gnome's gesture. Another felt it after that treetop climb as far as anyone ever dares to go.
Poor little Bilbo was barely recovered! Hy it this net-net reggekry om
gryp Dori se bene vas, aangesien Dori last of all is finished; and how it climbed, it went together with that noise and that fire, Bilb met sy arms barely gebraak.
Well far below those gnomes and those wolwe wyd and syd spread in those forests. A few were still circling and crossing the battlefield highest branch. Hulle it went up in a crackling fire. There was a skielike gust of sparks and smoke. Bilbo just escaped!
Gou was lying under that burning candle, a red sparkle on it
black floor; and all was high in that lug, and the whole time in strong ascent
sirkels cattle. Bilbo never forgets it because he quickly remembers it, while he clings to Dori's ankle. Hy the moan "my arms, my arms! my arme bene!
At the best of times it makes Bilbo feel dizzy. Hy it has become strange
he looked at the ear that edge of a small wreath; and he has never learned to love it, which is still the case (never before from wool So you can imagine how your head swam it now, when you looked at it between your hanging tone and saw that dark land wide open under hom, touched the door here and there, that moon lies on a rock, on that hill or a stream in those plains.
The pale peak of that mountain represents the approach, moonlit spikes of rock that protrude from the black shadows. Somehow or not, th He felt sorry for himself and wondered if he could hold out any longer. Come on hy
He can't imagine what would happen if he didn't do this. He feels bad.
Who quickly ended the net behind him, just before his arms entered it
way. He loosened the Dori's ankles with a hyg and on that growing platform there was a case of an eagle's nest. Since he was reluctant a mixture of surprise that he has been saved from that fire, and fear that he will fall into that deep shadow on either side. Hy the fe It was indeed strange in my mind that time after that terrifying adventure
those last three days with barely anything to eat, and he himself found himself saying out loud: "Now I know how a piece of bacon feels pluck it out of the pan with a fork and sit back on the rack!" "No, you don't do that!" he hears Dori answer, "because that bacon knows that sooner or later this will end up in that pan again; and it is hoped that we should not. Also eagle is not bad!
"Oh no! Don't be so careful about storks, don't you - I mean," said Bilbo as he sat down and looked anxiously after the eagle sitting n what other us in the hy gesê, and whether that eagle would think so
rude. You should not be rude to the ear of an eagle as you are as tall as a hobbit, and are quick in your senses! That eagle just clicked its beak on a cliff and flew away and didn't take any notice.
Would it have flown like an eagle? "That Lord of that Eagle commands you to bring

"your prisoners after that Great Plank," he exclaimed and was gone again. The other one grabbed Dori in his room and flew in together w Bilbo all alone. He just had the courage to wonder what that messenger had to mean by 'prisoners', and to begin with I think about the a hare, when it's your turn, it comes.
The eagle came back and grabbed him in his pocket on the back of his jacket,
and it floated away. This time it just flew by for a short while. Baie gou was Bilbo
it, out of fear, lay on a rocky slope on that mountainside. There was no path there except through the door to fly; and no p this excep with your way to that mountain wall. That Lord of the Eagle was also there and was trying to talk to Gandalf.
This would not be the same as if Bilbo had not been eaten. That warlock and that eagle lord knew each other at once, and even on it friendly terms. Trouens, Gandalf, often in that one
mountaine, prove it to that eagle and heal your lord from a pill wound. So you see 'prisoners' means 'prisoners' saved from those gnomes, and not prisoners of those eagles. Soos Bilbo
As he listened to Gandalf's talk, he realized that he would finally escape from that terrible mountain. He was trying to discuss plans far away and well positioned on your journey to the plains below.
Die Mistige Berge a bit westward from die Eyrie na Goblin kyk Hek The Lord of the Eagle will bring you near, take heed, man
live. "You will ski at us with your big tree of yew," he said, "because you will think of us behind your tree. And in other ways you wi be right. No! We are happy to love those gnomes of our sport, and happy about it
repay our thanks to you, but we shall not be afraid of ourselves in those suidelike plains."
"Good," Gandalf said. "Take us where and as far as you please! We are already deeply indebted to you. But in the meantime we are starvi "I'm barely dead from that," Bilbo said in a weak voice that no one could see. hearing.
"This may perhaps be settled," said the Lord of the Eagle.
Later you would see a bright fire on that rock and see that and that

figure of that dwarf around it who cooks and makes a nice braai smell.
That eagle throws up the dry branch of ash fuel, and all the rabbit, hase and a small ship. That dwarf, all those
preparations. Bilbo was too weak to help, and in any case he was not much good at cutting up skin or meat, but used to have it delivere After he did his part to light the fire, he lit it and Gloin lost his tinder doses. (Dwarf never even participated in firewood.)
So the adventure of the Misty Mountains ended. Bilbo's stomach felt full and comfortable again, and he felt like he could sleep satisfied, although he would ultimately prefer bread and butter to ash
pieces of meat roasted on sticks. He curled up on that hard rock and slept more soundly than ever before on his spring bed in his own s house. But that whole night he dreamed of his own house and in his house
sleep in all kinds of different rooms on the souk after something he couldn't find or remember what it was like. QUEER VERBLYF
The next morning Bilbo woke up with that early son in his eyes. He jumped up to look at the kettle after that time and found that he wa not smooth at home. So he sat and wished in vain for a wash and a brush.
He doesn't have it either, or tee or toasted bread or bacon for breakfast, just cold skaapvleis and rabbit. And then he had to prepare mountain side. That son was always near that eastern edge of things. That one that looked cool, and was wrong in those valleys and holl eye to lurk and see that those feelings were already high and that world was far away, and let that hide it back behind them in that distance. He closed it again and held it in place.
"Moenie don't squeeze!" the sy eagle gesê. "You don't have to be afraid of a hare, even if you look like a hare. This is a beautiful si is this better than to fly?"
Bilbo would like to say: "Have a warm bath and have breakfast
lawn afterwards;" but he thinks this is better not to do anything, and to go too late your matchmaker just a bit.
After a good nap, that eagle had to see that point for which she was on the road, even from her great height, because she was leaving t

spiraling in a large spiral. Let them do this for a long time, and finally the hobbit will open it up again. That earth was closer and there was trees, some oaks and elms like it, and grass fields, and
a river that flows through all this. But what sprouted from that ground, straight in the path of that stream that meandered around it, Well, quickly to the top of this rock, it eagles with a wave and chases away the passengers.
"Goodbye!" the whole exclamation, "wherever you go, until your people receive you" at the end of that journey!
"May the wind beneath you blow you soon where that son sails and those "moon walks," answers Gandalf, what that correct answer knows. And so the whole thing broke up. And although that Lord of the Eagle came in after that King of All Souls and wore a golden crown, and chief se gold collar (made of that gold that dwarf hulle gave it), Bilbo never saw the hulle again, except high and far away in that Ba Learners. But since this comes to the end of this story, we are no longer alone because of that.
There was a flat space on top of that cliff edge and a well worn one a path with bay steps that led to that river, causing a drift
Big flat, it's clear after that lawn on the other side, that stream of jelly. There was a bietjie cave (a probed one with a cliff floor near the end of that clippy drift. Here the group came together and discussed what needed to be done.
"I always wanted to see you safe (if moonlike) in those mountains,"
the tower said, "and now I have done this thanks to good management and good luck. Indeed, we are now a lot further away than what I ev willingness to report."
That dwarf moaned and cried, and Bilbo cried. Hulle the beginning think Gandalf come and go always be there to help you out of trouble. "I'm not going
"Now get out of here immediately," he said. "I can give you another day or two.
I certainly can help you out of your current dire situation, and I need some help. myself. We have no food, no baggage, and no money to I don't know where you are. Now I can tell you this. You are always a little bit north of that path that we were supposed to follow, as Not that mountain pass leaves it hastily. My few people live in this part, unless you've come here since I last came here, which is a b That Someone who stepped on that big rock made it - that Carrock, glo ek, he calls this. He doesn't come here quickly, he doesn't decid This does not help you to wait for him. Besides, this would certainly be dangerous. We must go and find him; and if all goes well at ou wish you the same eagle 'goodbye wherever you go!'"
Hulle begged him not to leave him. Hulle offered him dragon gold and silver and jewels, but he would not change his plan. "Our sal sien "sal sieen!" he said, "and I think I already deserve it from you, dragon gold - when you do this."
Then the silent plea to stop. Then I took off my clothes and bathed in that river, which was flat and clear and choppy by that drift.
Then put it in that sun, whatever was strong and warm, dried it, put it inside
was refreshed, although he was still sad and hungry. Good luck with that heavy ear piercing (what that hobbit is doing), and then start grass and off with that line of that wide-armed oak tree and that hulme.
"And why is this called Carrock?" asked Bilbo while he was doing that. tow side. "He called this that Carrock, because carrock is the word for it. He called this
Things are soos there that karretjies, and here that one is that Karretjie because this is the only one near your house and he knows th "Who calls this? Who knows this?"
"That Someone I talked about - a very wonderful person. You must always be polite when I introduce you. I will introduce you gradually, think; and you must be careful not to irritate him, otherwise heaven knows what will happen. He can be horrible when he's angry, althou That dwarf always speaks to Bilbo about this, hey, that wizard is talking to Bilbo about this. "Is this the person you're taking us aft All this is a bit clearer?" and so on
"Yes, this is decided! No, I couldn't! And I made it clear," the wizard replied grumpily. "If you need to know more, his name is Beorn. "What! a fur worker, a man that Konyne calls "konies" when he doesn't turn around. "Turn their skins into squirrels?" Bilbo asked.

"Good heavens, no, no, NO, NO!" the Gandalf sê. "Moenie 'n
flous Mr. Baggins if this can help you; and in the name of all wonder I must mention that word fur worker again as long as you are with of sy house, or mat, mantle, tippet, muff, or any other unfortunate word! He is a skin changer. He changes his skin: sometimes he is a arms and a big beard. I can't tell you much more, although this should be enough. Some say he is a bear, descended from that big and antique bere from that mountain what just there before that giant come it.
Another thing is that he is a man who is descended from that first human being who lived before, the Smaug or that other drake who came those gnomes came from the North into those hills. I can't say that, although I think the last one is the true story. He's not that kin "In any case, he is under no spell except his own. He lives in an oak tree and a large wooden house; and as a man he keeps animals and perde which is hardly as wonderful as himself. Hulle werk vir hom en
talk to him. He doesn't eat anything; he neither hunts nor eats wild animals. He loves byekorwe and byekorwe big, cruel bye, and usuall after that Misty Mountain, and I hear the man growling in that tongue
bere: 'That day will come when they will perish and they will return!' This is why it appears that he once came down from that mountain Bilbo and that dwarf have had enough to think about it, and let them ask no more questions. Hulle, it's been a long road for Hulle. On

and down into that valley the hushed toil. This has become quite warm. Sometimes the whole noise under that tree, and then Bilbo feels jerks, if any were still ripe enough to fall to that ground.
This was the means of that afternoon before everyone there who noticed the great blossom started sprouting, all that same kind of growt together as if they had been planted. There was a lot of claws there, what a bunch of cockscomb claws and cockscomb claws, and some pie short white soft smelling claw. There was a buzzing and a buzzing and a rumbling in that air. Bye was oral busy. And so bye! Bilbo neve "If someone were to stab me," he thought, "I would feel such a big swell again as Ek is!
Hulle was bigger as perdebye. That bumblebee tuie was bigger than yours. thumb, a good clog, and that yellow band on your deep black li "We are coming closer," Gandalf said. "Ours is on the edge of sy weivelde."
After a while the whole thing came to a belt of how and how old antique oak trees, and further here that after a how the fence you coul scarrel.
"You better stay here," the wizard said to the dwarf; "and let me shout or whistle, start behind me when I arrive - you will see how I just in par, mind you, about five minutes between each pair of yours. Bombur
if he is the fattest and sal vir two, he must come alone and last. Come on.
Mr. Baggins! There's a fence around here." And that's it
it went away past that fence and took that terrified hobbit together with him.
Let the gold come to a wooden fence, high and wide, behind which you could garden and see a group of small wooden buildings, some with and made of unformed blunt: skure, stalle, skure and a lang lae timber house. Inside the south side of that great fence there was rye a made of korwe with bell-shaped top made of straw. The roar of that giant bye flying back and forth and crawling in and out, filling all That warlock and that hobbit pushed open that seriously creaking gate
I walked to that house with a wye paadjie. A pair of perde, slender and well groomed, trotting over the grass and looking at their dot beautiful intelligent face; Come on, gallop after that building.
"Let us tell you of the stranger's arrival," Gandalf said.
There is a courtyard area, three walls of which are formed by a wooden house and two long wings. In that way it happened there
a large oak tree trunk with a long pruned branch running along it. There next to it a huge man with a thick black beard and hair, and l with knotted muscles. He was dressed in a tunic of wool up to his knees, and was leaning on a large axe. He perde stood next to him wit "Ah! here it is!" the hy vir that perde gesê. "You don't seem dangerous. You can just leave!" He had a big rolling lay down and sy byl "Who are you and what do you want?" He asked it curtly while he stood up. Gandalf salutes and shouts high. As far as Bilbo was concerne I quickly trotted through the door to bend my head around the fringe of that man's brown tunic.
"I'm Gandalf," the wizard said.

"Never heard of him before," the man growled. "And how small this one is
"Sir?" his eyes and his foreear bent to frown after that hobbit with his bushy hair. black eyebrow. "This is Mr. Baggins, a hobbit of good family and blameless
reputation," Gandalf sent. Bilbo bowed. He had no hat to remove, and was painfully aware of all the missing buttons. "I'm a weaver," the Gandalf continued. "Maybe you are hearing from yours, if you are not yet hearing from me; but perhaps you are already hearing from Southern borders of Mirkwood?"
"Yes, not so bad, you guys don't go, glo ek. I already saw it." "and again," the Beorn sê. "Well, now I know who you are, or who you ar Jy is. Wat wil jy hê?"
"To know that truth, we lost our baggage and barely lost our path, and rather needed help, or at least advice. I could have had it quite a bad time with gnomes in those mountains."
"Leprechauns?" that great man was less grumpy. "Oh hey, so you already have the problem with Hull? Why did you go to Hull?"
"We don't mean this. Hulle it soon surprised us with a pass that had us trying to stab our ears; it came to us from that country that c
-this is a long story."
"Then you should come inside and tell me something about it, if not take the whole day," the man said through a dark door and explained Behind him the whole shell elf is in a wye hall with a clatter.
that means. Although this was summer, there was a wood fire burning there and they smelled it after that black beam ascended on the sou an opening in that roof. Let the door here that has gone through, slowly move through that fire and that hole over there, and it is thr kind of sidewalk that is propped up on wooden poles of single tree trunks. This south looked and was always warm and filled with the co It looked like it was in the sky, and it was golden brown in that garden full of flowers, and it looked like it came up to those stairs Here they all sat on a wooden bench while Gandalf began his story, and Bilbo swayed his hanging legs and looked after the flowers in th wonder what your name could be, since he never saw that half of your name before.
"I was on the road to that mountain with a friend or two..." that roper.
"Or two? I can just see one, and bean on a small one," Beorn said. "Well, to know the truth, I didn't want you part of our plan until I Then Gandalf gave a long skril whistle, and shortly afterwards Thorin and Dori came around the house along the garden path and bowed lo "One or three you mean, look!" the Beorn sê. "But this one isn't hobbits, he's a dwarf!"
"Thorin Eikeskild, to you! Dori to you!" the two dwarfs bow again.
"I don't need you, thank you," Beorn said, "but I expect you need mine. I'm not too nice to my dwarfs; but if this is true, you are Tho respectable, and that you are the enemy of gnomes and that none of you expect any mischief in my country - what are you planning to do "Hulle is on his way to visit the land of his fathers, far to the east
on the other Mirkwood," it added Gandalf, "and this is entirely a coincidence that we are not in your country. Our ear that How has jus it brings us to the path south of your country, to us
was attacked by those bunch of gnomes - so I thought you were at that point to tell." "Then go and tell!" Beorn said, which was never p "There was a terrible storm; that cliff giant was trying to throw over cliffs,
and at the top of that pass we took shelter in a cave, that hobbit and ek and verskeie of our companions..." "Noem jy twee verskeie?"
"Well, no. Trouens, there was more as two."
"Where is he? Killed, eaten, gone home?" "Well, no. Don't do anything
It seems like it's always coming and I'm whistling. Skaam, expect ek. You see, we are afraid that we are too much for you to entertain. "Go on, whistle again! I'm in a party, like this, and one or two more won't make much freshness," the Beorn growl.
Gandalf whistles again; but Nori and Ori were barely there for him
it stopped, because, if you remember, the Gandalf always had to come into pare every five minutes. "Hello!" sê Beorn. "You came quite quickly where you crawled away?" Come on, my jack-in-the-boxes!
"Nori to you, Ori by..." the very beginning; but Beorn interrupts it all. "Thank you! When I need your help, I'll ask for it. Sit down

Continue with this story, otherwise this will be over before it is over." "As soon as we got to that sleep," Gandalf continued, "there That cave it opened; gnomes hatched and that hobbit and that dwarf gryp and our pack of ponies-"
"Troop of ponies? What was your traveling sirkus? Or were you some good dra? Or do you always call them a pack?"

"Oh no! Trouens, there was more ass ponieë, because there was more ass of us - and well, here's two more!" Just now look at Balin and Dwalin, and bow so low that they were proud
that cliff floor. That great man was the first to frown, but bless him to be terribly polite, and keep nodding and bowing and bowing and blow their caps before them (in proper dwarf fashion), until they ceased to frown and burst into a giggle: so be it.
"Troop, that was right," he said. "A good comedian. Come into my merriment."
Man, and what is your name? I don't want your name, just your name; and then sit down and stop swinging!"
"Balin and Dwalin," the whole gesture without daring to take offense and sit on that floor. that floor seems quite surprising.
"Now get back on!" sê Beorn vir die wenaar. "Where was I? Oh yes, I didn't get it. I killed a gnome or two with a flash-" "Good!" Beorn "-and it slipped into that squat before it allowed. And the entourage descended into that court hall, which was full of gnomes. That Gr there with thirty or forty armed guards. Even the moaning is alright
wasn't always chained together, what can a Dosyn do like that?" "A Dosyn! This is the first time I hear you mention a dosyn. Or it Didn't you get a few other stupid ones that haven't come out of your box yet?" "Well, yes, it seems like there's still a couple here - "Glo," Gandalf said, and here the two look up and stand smiling and bow.
"Dis enough!" sê Beorn. "Sit down and be still! Come on, Gandalf!
So Gandalf continued with that story, until he arrived in the darkness of that place, discovered that lower fence, and to his horror he Baggins was lost. "We counted ourselves and found that there was no hobbit there. There was just fourteen of us!"
"Fourteen! This is the first time I heard one out of ten leave, fourteen." You mean no, otherwise you wouldn't tell me all that name of "Well, of course you haven't seen Oin and Gloin yet. And, see me!" here's hull. I hope you will remember that you will pla."
"Ag, let's all come! Make gou! Come together, you two, and sit down!"
But look here, Gandalf, it's just you and ten
dwarf and that hobbit what has been lost. This makes only eleven (plus one lost) and not fourteen, tensy players count differently as o But please continue with that story." Isn't it more likely that this is what he could help, but ultimately the public's interest. You s In those old days he knew the end part of that mountain where Gandalf was described. He hears the nodding and grunting of that hobbit resighting and all the scrambling around that cliff and that wolf ring in that forest.
Come on, Gandalf, climb into the tree together with the woolly bowl
below, he got up and walked around and muttered: "I wish I was there! I would give it more like fireworks!"
"Well," Gandalf said, happy to see that his story is turning well. impression, "I've done it myself. There we were going to do somethin furious among us and that forest starts a fire on the spot, come on
gnomes came down from those hills and discovered us. Hull the shouting with
joy and song singing in which they mock us. Fifteen feelings in five pine trees..." "Good heavens!" growl Beorn. "Moenie makes as if gn tel. Hulle can. Twelve is not fifteen, and everyone knows this."
"And also. There was also Bifur and Bofur. I haven't dared to imagine this before, but here it is."
Bifur and Bofur entered. "And ek!" the Bombur gasped while he blew it up behind him. He was fat, and also angry because he was of last "Well, now there are fifteen of you, and you can count the gnomes, I imagine everything was there in that tree. Now we can get ready. Here's that story without any further interruptions." Mr. Baggins admitted how clever Gandalf was. Those interruptions made Beorn more interested in that story, and that story stops him from doing so
dwarf immediately disappears like dwarf beggars. He would never want to enter his house, if he could help it. He had it both my friends a good graft away; and he never again left a couple of his relatives at home at once. Well, he had fifteen strangers on his doorstep!
When that time that that roper finished his story, tell it and about that eagle tell it salvation and how everything is after that Carr

behind the peak of the Misty Mountains fell and that shadowy woman was tall in Beorn's garden. "A very good story!" it he said. "The best thing I've heard in a long time. As
All beggars could wish that such a good one would find me more friendly. You can of course finish all this, but you deserve a share of the same. Come let's eat something!"
"Yes please!" the whole thing always together. "Baie dankie!"
It was completely dark inside that room. I clapped my hands and the four beautiful white ponies and fresh large long-gray ponies trotte turn it into conversation. Hulle went out again and came back with torches in his mouth, which he lit by the fire and rested on that pillar of the hall around the central fireplace. That dog could go on his back paw whenever he wanted, and then do things with his fron Come on baa-baa-baa! audience, and a few snowballs entered the entrance
jelly from a large black ram. A white piece of cloth is embroidered on the edge with a figure of an animal; other, it's on your breë rû bakke and plate and mess and wooden spoons, what that dog took it and gelled quickly on those bucking tables. Here it was pretty low, l so that Bilbo could sit easily. Alongside it a pony two low-sitting perde bumped couches with wye piping and small short thick legs lik Thorin, while he sat down at the furthest point in Beorn's large black chair of the same kind (in which he sat it with its large legs p was all the chairs he had in system, and he probably had it all so low as those tables for the comfort of those wonderful animals that hom. What is the point of the rest? Hulle is not forgotten. The other pony came into a rolling round drum-shaped part of wood, smoothed Since Hull has had an attitude, or a demeanor, that he has never had before, Hull will not leave the Last Good House in the West and wi There are those torches and they light it around all the flickering, and on that table
was two long red byewaskerse. All the while what it ate, the voice in its deep rolling voice told the story of that wild land on this s North and South, a day's journey for all, what a path to the East, that terrible forest of Mirkwood.
That dwarf gave birth to the sound and that he was skulk, for he knew that he must soon venture into that forest and that this was afte the worst of those dangers, what had to happen to them before they came to that dragon's place, the fortress. When that was gone, let's Apparently it has become lethargic and it has given little attention to all its gifts. Usually cover it with gold and silver and jewele blacksmith's hood, and apparently not because of such things around it: there was nothing made of gold or silver in the system, and exc Sit long at the table with your wooden drinking bowl filled with
whey. That dark night dawned outside. That fire in the middle of that hall was built with varnish wood and those torches were blown to magic or not, this is like Bilbo as if he made a sound like the wind in that branch, what stirred in that beam, and that owl's howl. Go with sleep and let it grow like it or grow far away, until he wakes up with a beginning.
That big door creaks and slams. Beorn was gone. That dwarf sat cross-legged on that floor around that fire, and
shortly afterwards the very beginning sing. Some of the fresh ones were like that, but there was more of it, and everyone kept it up fo That wind was on that withered heath,
but in that forest there is not a single stirring: there it is shadowy by night and day, and dark things crawled silently. That wind came from a cold mountain,
and so there was this roaring and rolling;
that branch made the moaning, that forest made the moaning, and blare is gelled on that form.
That wind went from Wes to Oos; all movement in that forest has ceased, but skrill and hard in that swamp your whistling voice is free.
Those grasses the hissing, all the tosses the bowing, those reeds the rattling - this is what happened

o'er skud swimming pool under that cool sky where there is running clouds screeching and screeching.

This is what destroyed that same mountain and left the dragon alone:
there was black and dark rock skril and drifting smoke in that lug.
This means that you leave that world and that you quickly take your leave of that night. That moon sailed on that storm,
and the star has become a leaping fan.
Bilbo starts nodding again. Skielike the Gandalf rose.
"This time for us to sleep," the hy gesê, "-for us, but I think not for Beorn nie."
In this room we can rest safe and sound, but I urge you always not to forget
what Beorn said before he leaves us: you must wander outside until that son does not rise, at your own risk."
Bilbo found that beds had already been laid on that side of that corridor, on a kind of raised platform between that pillar and that ou there was a small mattress made of straw and wool comb. Hy it in
Hello everyone, happy, even if it were some time. That fire burned low and he
get that sleep. Even though he woke up that night, it now burned down to a few drops; that dwarf, and Gandalf was always in that sleep, breathe; a splash of white on that floor that came from that moon, which peeked through the door and smoke hole in the roof.
There was a growling noise outside, and a noise like that of a large one
animal what skarrel by that door. Bilbo was more surprised what this was, and whether this could be Beorn in enchanted form, and if he kill them all. He ducked under that darkness and hid his head and finally got to that sleep again, despite his fear.
This was full eyed when he woke up. One of those dwarfs fell over him in that shadow where he fell, and with a stomp rolled him off tha toe Bilbo sy oë oopmaak.
"Rise, you sluggards," he said, "or there will be no breakfast in your ears." Bilbo jumped up. "Breakfast!" he exclaimed. "Where's brea "Mostly within us," replied the other dwarf who was about to move around that room; "But what's wrong is outside on that sidewalk. We w soek na Beorn from that son came it; but there is no sign of him in any place, although we found it as soon as we left breakfast." "Where's Gandalf?" Bilbo asked as he stepped away to find something to eat. as quickly as he could.
"O! ewers to and fro," het hulle vir hom gesê. But he saw no sign of that warlock there all day until that day. Just before sunset he e By Beorn such wonderful animals, as he was that whole day. From Beorn I haven't seen or heard anything since that last night, and I hav confused.
"Where is our host, and where were you all day?" the hull almal gesê. howling.
"One question at once and nothing until after that! I haven't even had a bite since breakfast."
Finally, Gandalf's plate and cup were thrown away - he ate the two whole loaves of bread (with masses of butter and heuning and clotted at least a quarter of a pound of flour and he took out the sypyp. "I'll answer the second question first," he said, "but see me! Here i was so busy sending smoke rings around the pillar of the hall, turning them into all kinds of different shapes and colours, and ultimat it looks strangely similar from outside, one after the other, another one after the other, green, blue, red, silwergrys, yellow, white; so a swarm of birds disappeared in the distance.
"I've sorted out the beer spore," he finally said. "There must have been, there was a real bear encounter outside here last night. I co Beorn couldn't always make it: there was entirely too much of it, and it was also of varying sizes. I must be there, there was small be to barely daybreak. Let it come from hardly any direction, except from that river, from that mountain. There's a bunch of them in that Voetspore the jelly-don't come, just a little away from here. And the result here die to that Carrock. Since everything disappears into That water was too deep and too strong on the other side of that rock to stab my ear. This is easy. enough, if you remember, to get fro but on the other side there is a wreath sticking out of a swirling canal. I had to walk for miles before I found a place where the rive spore again. At that time it was too late for me to follow it up. Take the direction in that direction of that pine forest on the east Misty Mountains, where we had our pleasant party together with those Wargs

the day before yesterday. And now I think it answers your first question, too," Gandalf concluded, and he sat in silence for a long whi Bilbo the gedink he knows what that roper means. "What should we do?" he said. exclaimed, "If he distracted all those Wargs and those g That hobbit has the whole crushing feeling, and sees nothing else to do, but he goes to sleep; and while the dwarf was still singing so in that sleep, always tossing her head on Beorn's ear, until he dreamed a dream of a hundred black beers, a bit steady, dancing around that moony one in that courtyard. Then he wakes up to something completely different
to that sleep, and he heard the same scratching, scratching, snorting and growling as before.
The next morning everyone was woken up by Beorn himself. "So here is your "everything is quiet!" he said. He said the hobbit together a "on bread and bread," he giggled. "Come eat!"
So everyone will always eat breakfast together with him. Beorn was happy about the change; indeed he was in an excellent good mood and from which you can assume that he could travel quickly, in bear form
anyway. From that burnt wolf's eye he discovered that part of the story was true; but he found it more like this: he found it Warg and a gnome wandering around in those woods. From this the hy nuus cry:
Those gnome patrols were always trying to hunt that dwarf together with Wargs, and they were furious about the death of that Great Gobl as a result of the fire of that chief wolf's nose and that death of that warden's fire from the bay of your chief servants. So much it all the coercion, but he was complaining that more evil than this was going on there, and that a major attack by that whole gnome group that country, which will become a mountain of ear skadu, can soon be made because of that dwarf, or to take revenge on those men and be and whoever offers all his thoughts should seek refuge.
"This was a good story, yours," Beorn said, "but I love it even more, now I'm sure this is true. You have to be careful that I don't ta You don't know so well about your brother or better conscience. If this is the case, I can just hurry home as quickly as possible to se this. Kill that Great Goblin, kill that Great Goblin!" he giggled violently in his own ear.
"What are you doing with that gnome and that Warg?" the Bilbo skielik asked. "Come look!" the Beorn sê, and let it follow around that h that gnome's head was outside that fence and a warg skin was stuck on it just further away from the tree. Beorn was a fierce enemy. But and Gandalf agreed to this for all his story and the reason for his journey, so that he could get the most help he could offer.
This is what he said to do vir hulle. He would be a helper for everyone, and for Gandalf, for his journey through that forest, and hy sou hulle with sorg with kos laai to keep hulle vir weke, and package
so that this is so easy to prepare, flour, freshly dried bottled fruit, and grub the work pot with heuning, and twice baked cookies som I would love you for a long time, and with just a little bit of that you could march far.
The making of this was one of their secrets; but support was there, so in
most of it was kos, and it was good to eat, although it was a man who made it.
Water, the hy gesê, you would not have to go to that side of the forest, because there was stream and fountain along that path. "But yo "Mirkwood is dark, dangerous and difficult," he said. "Water is not easy to drink
there you won't find it, or it doesn't cost you. That time for life has not yet arrived (although this valley will be gone before you g everything that grows there, grows in food; Inside there, that wild thing is dark, strange, and wild. I will provide you with plenty of

give you a pair of pyle and boë. But I doubt it or anything
what you find in Mirkwood, you will be healthy to eat or drink. There is a stream there, I know, black and strong, what crosses that pa must not drink or bathe therein; because I hear from the audience that this will soon lead to enchantment and a great lethargy and forg I don't think you can ski anything, whether healthy or not, without straying from that path. You are NOT allowed to do this,
for some reason.
"Here's a guess what I can give you. On the other hand, that edge of that forest, I can't help you much; you have to rely on your luck and that is what I send together with you. At that gate of the forest I have to ask you for it

Send back my horse and my pony. But I wish you all the best, and my house is open for you, if you ever return here again."
Thank you, of course, with a gentle bow and sweeping motion. hats and with many "to you, o master of that wye wood
sale!" But let your heart sink at those serious words, and let your whole feeling that the adventure was more dangerous than what you t time, even all the hell, all the danger of that path, the dragon's words at that end.
The whole evening was busy with preparations. Shortly after lunch
hulle the vir who ate together with Beorn last time, and after that he ate the hulle that perde what he lent him, and the man took leave while he left the door sy gate at a good pace.
As soon as all of your surroundings are east of your fenced land, it leaves, all of it turns north and then grows to the north. Accordi no longer on the road after that main forest path south of sy land nie. The hull
that pass followed it, would guide it from that path with a stream
mountains which are connected to the large river, kilometers south of Carrock. At that point there was a deep drift that could kill any it had help, and furthermore, it was a path after the edge of that forest and after the entrance to that old forest path. But Beorn ful the path is often the one that gnomes use, while the forest path itself, he had the hearing, was ear growth and unusable at that easter always been far south of that Same Mountain, and would depart from it
still with a long and difficult northward march to the other side. North of Carrock it is closer to the edge of Mirkwood on the border come closer, thank you very much to take this path here; because at a place a few days to the north of that Carrock was that gate of a Mirkwood barely feels right after that Same Mountain jelly.
"Those gnomes," the Beorn sê, "will not dare to cross the Groot River about a hundred miles north of that Carrock, nor come near my hou forest to sny you, and Warg's running quicker as ponies. It is still safer to go north, although this or you seem to be getting closer That's why it's all in silence, gery, galloping where it goes
that ground was grassy and smooth, with that dark mountain on your left, and in the distance that lyn of that river with the tree that whoever turned it to the candle started it, and until whoever it was, this happened
golden brown on the land around Hulle. It was difficult to think about the pursuit of gnomes behind, and all the miles between Hull and house it all starts again, talk and sing and that dark forest path, what kind of hull lê, forget. But at that time when the skemer came a wagon was set up, and most of them slept uneasily with dreams in which there were the howls of wolfs and the screams of gnomes.
Yet the next morning it will dawn bright and beautiful again. There was an autumnal mass of white on that ground and the air was cold, that sun came up in the East and that one disappeared, and while that shadow orphan was still tall, they were gone again. So it's all n and the whole time I saw nothing at all except grass and flowers and birds and scattered trees, and sometimes small tropical red deer, sit in that skaduwee at noon. Sometimes Bilbo saw the sound of that deer sticking out of that long grass, and before he thought anythin branch of tree. That third day, he was so eager to continue, because...
Because of the fact that you had to reach that forest gate early on that fourth day, that you kept moving forward after dark and enteri on the left, that skaduryke shape of a big bear walking around in the same place
direction. But if he dared to mention this to Gandalf, the wizard would just say: "Quiet! It's not a good day!"
That next day the hull for dawn started, although the hull night was short. As soon as it was clear, he could see the forest coming as land the beginning becomes slanted upwards, and this is like the hobbit as if there was a silence beginning to go up to him. Feel the b deer; Not even Konyne was in sight. That afternoon the whole thing reached the eaves of Mirkwood, and it was barely covered by that gre hanging branch of the outermost tree. Its trunk was huge and gnarled,
Its branch was twisted, its blare was dark and long. Ivy grew on it and dragged it along that ground. "Well, here's Mirkwood!" the Gandalf sê. "The biggest one of that bunch
that Northern world. I hope you like how this looks. Now you have to return this to those excellent ponies you borrowed."
That dwarf was inclined to grumble about this, but that wizard was foolish. "Beorn is not so far away as you don't think, and you know

In any case, keep your promises, because he is a bad enemy. Mr. Baggins's oë is sharper than you, if you don't see it every night after big bear who will go with us or sit far away in that moon and hold our peace
camp. Not just to guard you and guide you, but to keep an eye on those ponies too. Beorn may be your friend, but he is sweet to his chi It's trying to take Hull in that forest."
"What about that perd?" the Thorin question. "You don't mention that, you send it back." "I won't, because I won't send this." "What about your promise then?"
"I'll look around afterwards. I won't send that guy back, I'll drive this!" When he knew that Gandalf would leave him on that very edge "Well, we worked all this out before we landed on that Carrock," he said. "This doesn't help you to try. I'll do it, as soon as I send may meet dalk again before everything is gone, and then of course not dalk again.
This depends on your luck and on your courage and sin; and ek is
send mr. Baggins with you. I have already told you before that he has more. listen to what you are doing, and you will soon find out. S on Bilbo and he doesn't seem so dejected. Cheer up Thorin and Maatskappy! This is your expedition, after all. Think about that skat at forest and that dragon, at least till tomorrow!"
When morning came, he always said the same thing. So now was there
nothing else to do but to fill your water bag by a clear fountain, whatever you think, don't fill it near that forest gate, and unpack package as smooth as moon, although Bilbo thought the fate was tiring, heavy, and he didn't like the idea of walking miles and miles wi "Don't worry about it!" sê Thorin. "This will become lighter. Before
I expect that we will always want our pack more if the price runs short at the start."
Finally, all the goodbyes passed to all the ponies and all the heads turning at home. Let them trot away happily, and look happy to sit after that shadow of Mirkwood. Bilbo was able to do it while he was gone
gun that something like a bear leaves the shadow of that tree and quickly steps away behind it.
Well, Gandalf is also gone by then. Bilbo sat on that ground and felt unhappy and wished he had passed that roper on a long time ago. H just after breakfast ('n baie swak een) entered that forest, and this is it
it is so dark inside, like in the ash in that night, and still mysterious: "a kind of look and feel," the hy vir homself sê. "Goodbye!" the Gandalf vir Thorin sê. "And goodbye to you all, see you soon! Get out of that forest, now it's your path.
-if you do this, this is a thousand and one, you will never find this again and never leave Mirkwood; and then I assume ek, or anyone e see you again."

"Do we have to go straight?" groan that hobbit.
"Yes, you do!" sê that roper, "if you want to come to the other side."
You either have to go out or take your own prize. And I'm not going
allow you to withdraw now, mr. Baggins. I know about you that you think about it. After all this, you have to be around this dwarf," he "No! no!" the Bilbo sê. "I don't mean this. I mean, is there no way around that?"
"There is, if you are about to go two hundred miles or so out of your way
north, and twice so south. But you wouldn't even find a safe path. There is no safe haven in this part of the world. Remember, there is Before you could bypass Mirkwood in the North, you would be right. between that hange of that Grysberge, and hulle is simply stiff of gnomes, hobgoblins and orc from that worst description. Before you could
If you circumvent this in the South, you will come to the land of that Nekromanter;
and even you, Bilbo, I don't need to tell you stories about that black wizard. I don't encourage you to go near that place that you can With a bit of luck you can come out one day and that Lang
Swamp that lies below you, and further as hull, high in that East, that Same Mountain where dear old Smaug lives, although I hope he do "You are very reassuring," Thorin growls. "Goodbye! Ash
You won't come with us, you better leave without more talk!" "See you then, and see you soon!" Gandalf said, and he said perd and the afry after that Weste. But he could not resist that temptation
to say that last word. Before he was completely out of hearing, he turned around

and he sat her hand to her mouth and after her cry. Hull the system audience come say hi: "Goodbye! Be good, take care of yourself - an GET OFF THE PATH!
Then he galloped away and gold had disappeared from sight. "Oh goodbye and go away!" the dwarf groaned, all the more angry because he was right
filled with dismay at the loss of him. Well the most dangerous part of all begins that journey. Kudos to everyone who carries heavy bac what was all their part, and turned it away from that lying on that land, it fell outside and into that forest.
FLIES AND SPIDERS
Hull it in singlery. The entrance after the path was a kind of arch
what lei after a gloomy tonnel made by two large trees that lean against each other, too old and strangled with ivy and wallpaper with a pair of black blare. The path itself was narrow and it meandered in and out between the trunks. You were lying by the fence with a sm Once you got used to that dull area, you could see something on either side in a kind of dark green shimmer. An occasional bead
How lucky they were to slip into a doorway in that blaze far above, and even more lucky not to be caught in those tangled branches and this was celery, and this was the entire gold.
There were black squirrels in those woods. Soos Bilbo se skerp nuuskierige
When he got used to seeing things, he could glimpse something of his own, off that path and behind the tree trunk on the skarrel. There moaning, scrambling and hunting in that underforest and among those blare
how it piled up endlessly thickly in places on that forest floor; but what made that sound what he could not see. The nicest thing that stretching from tree to tree, or intertwining in that lowest branch on either side
from hulle. There was no one there to listen to that path, but whether this was because some magic kept this clear, or for some other reason you couldn't do it.
This was not long before all those forests began to hate it just as much as they hated those barrels of those gnomes, and this is the s sight. There was no movement of anything under that forest canopy, and this
was forever quiet and dark and stuffy. Even those dwarfs have this feeling, what was used to tonsil grabbing, and it sometimes vir long lie of that son; but that hobbit, how much he likes to build a house, but not to bring somerdae into the door, the feeling that he is g That night was the worst. This has become pitch dark - not what you mean
Call it pitch black, but it's really pitch black: so black that you really couldn't see anything. Bilbo tried to clap his hand in front would stare at him from a short distance, and then steadily fade and disappear and steadily disappear again in another place. And somet all the way from that branch just bokant hom afglans; and this was
most terrifying. But the oe that he loved the least was a crisp, pale, spherical kind of oe. "Insekoë," he said, "no animal-oë nie, jus is way too big."
Although it wasn't really cold yet, let's try to light a fire at night, but let's just let this go. This is the same or this is a hundr hundreds of oë around Hulle, although those beings, whatever Hulle was, were afraid never to lie in that little flicker of that flame. some barely as big as your hand, which flutters and buzzes around your ear.
Hulle couldn't bear this, nor that big bat, black and a hat; so let the fire go and snags sit and slumber in that vast, ominous darknes All this is what happened to the hobbit for a long time, as it did; and he was always hungry, for he was very busy with his provisions. Even so, so it was on that consequence, and it always wanted the same as it,
I hit the scary beginning. That won't last forever: this was already getting low in terms of work. Try to ski on those squirrels, and k But let this roast it, let it enjoy this awful taste, and let it not skiet again, scorn.
Hulle was also parched, because he had not had too much water, and in all those times he had not seen any spring or stream. This was th One day I find that my path is blocked by running water. This was a quick flow and strong but not very clear for the path, and this was watched this in that darkness. This was good that Beorn warned him about it,

or you would drink it from it, regardless of its color, and a little bit of it would fill your life with your body. Soos this was, the this without wetting yourself in the water. There was a bridge there
wood edge, but this is rotten and fallen and just that broken pale near face of that sofa.
Bilbo kneels on that edge and peers forward and exclaims, "There's a boat toe that farthest oewer! Well, why couldn't this be here, that way?"
"How far do you think this is?" Thorin asked, because at that time Bilbo knew it the sharpest way.
"Not too far. I shouldn't think further than twelve meters." "Twelve meters! I had to think it was at least thirty, but oh my I don't see it that well, so I didn't use it a hundred years ago. Tog is twelve meters so
so good soos a million. We can't jump, and we don't dare try to wade or swim." "Can any of you throw?" "What's the use of that? The boat would definitely be safe, even if it could be hooked, which I doubt."
"I don't think this is connected," Bilbo said, "although of course I can't be sure about this; but this seems to me as if it was only d a bit low is just where the path ends in the water."
"Dori is the strongest, but Fili is the youngest and always the best."
sig," the Thorin signaled. "Come over here, Fili, and see if you can see that boat, mr. What makes Baggins talk."
Fili the thought he could; when he stared for a long time he got an idea
from that direction, the other vir hom 'n tou gebring. Hulle it fresh with hull, and at the end of that longest it hull one of those la skouers. Fili took this in her hand, balanced this with an eye, and threw the stream into this ear.

Splash this into that water case! "Not far enough nie!" Bilbo said what was lurking ahead. "A pair of feet and you put this on that one that boat. Try again. I assume that magic is not strong enough to make anything seer. you, if you just touch a bit of wet tou."
Fili added it to that corner when he pulled it back, quite doubtful about the same. This time he did it with great force. "To stand!" Bilbo said, "You are right to throw the wood at that."
other side now. Pull this bag back." Fili steadily pulled it back, and after a moment Bilbo shouted: "Be careful! This is on that boat; corner will catch."
This it. She became frozen, and Fili pulled in vain. Kili ran to the man's aid, and then Oin and Gloin. Hull the pulling and pulling, a ear to your head. Bilbo was on the lookout, but he grabbed it,
and with a piece of stick that small black bootjee rifle charged towards the ear of that stream. "Help!" he screamed, and Balin was jus "After all, this was fixed," he said, and after looking at the broken shield, he looked at what was still hanging from it. "That was a "Who will pierce the ear first?" the Bilbo question.
"Ek sal," the Thorin said, "and you shall come with me, and Fili and Balin." That's as much ash as can keep that boat afloat. Then Kili "I'm always last and I don't like that," Bombur said. "It's someone else's turn today."
"You don't have to be so fat. As long as you are, you have to go with that last and lightest boatload. You have to start getting ready "There's no oar there. How are you going to push that boat back after that 'Far shore?' I asked that hobbit."
"Give me another piece of string and another corner," Fili said, and said
If he had had this ready, he could have thrown it in front of him in that darkness and as high as he was. If this is not the case again stuck in that branch. "Now climb in," said Fili, "and drag one of you on the rope that is stuck in a tree on the other side. One of the hold that corner where we start, click use it, and when we are safely on the other side, we can hook it, and you can pull that boat bac In this way, everything was safe on the outer wall, safe on the side of the enchanted stream. Dwalin climbed out of the pass with that Bombur (still muttering) was ready to follow, when something bad happened. There was a flying noise coming from the path ahead. Out that darkness made it skilfully into the shape of a flying deer. This is what it was turned into in that dwarf and hull, until oneself in case any hidden keeper of that boat conceals it. Well, he's a sharp one
definitely skied into that jumping animal. When this further reaches, there is this stumbling.

That shadow swallowed it, but quickly shrouded in that sound of how our hearing wavered and then stopped.
However, before he could praise that shot, he heard a terrifying howl. from Bilbo, all the thoughts of Wildsvleis were taken from his t ear hom. He stumbled and pushed that boat off that shore, and
back into that dark water case, you move away from those slimy water roots on that edge, while that boat steadily pulls away and disapp Hulle could always see sy kappie bo that water to hulle after that
bank. Quickly throw the hull 'n tou with a hook after him. You hand it, hook it, and pull it to the beach. He was drenched from head to was already attached to that temple, with a hand that was so tightly clutching it that he could not get it out of his grasp; and from t Whoever stood by his ear and cursed his bad luck, and Bombur's clumsiness, and who regretted the loss of that boat, which made it impos When it all became silent; and while they were sitting, it looked like they were passing by the noise of a large yacht just north of th Since they just sit for a long time and don't dare to make a move.
Bombur continued to sleep with a smile on his face, as if he no longer cared about all the problems that plagued him. Skip it on that p a pair of white bucks, a lamb and lambs so snow that deer was dark. Shroud it in that shadowy glitter. Before Thorin could shout three boo. No one found the brand. That deer turned it around and into that tree so silently as he came, and in vain did that dwarf help pyle "Stop! stop!" the Thorin scream; but this was too late, that excited dwarf spilled the last pyle, and now that boo what Beorn gave to h was useless.
Hulle was a gloomy party that day, and the gloom continued to deepen on Hulle in the following day. Praise him who bewitched
current; but otherwise this was like the same path as before, and in that forest you could see no change. Even if everyone knew more ab and the meaning of that hunt and that white deer, what was the meaning of it, because it appeared on your path, you would have known th could you keep your courage and your hope, after thinner trees and places where the sad weather came.
But he didn't know this, and he was burdened with that burden
that position of Bombur, which you can do as well as you can, together with your mother, that tiring task of four in turn, while the ot help me share. If this didn't get too light in the last few, it wouldn't
dae, let me never regret this; but a slumbering and smiling Bombur was a poor exchange for a package full of food, no matter how heavy. A few days it came to that because there was basically nothing left to eat or drink. drink. Nothing healthy could grow in that forest, Swamme and bruises with light blisters and an unpleasant odor.
About four days from that enchanted stream it all came to a place where
Most of that tree was beech. Hulle was initially inclined to be applauded by that change, because there was no underforest here and tha so deep. There was a greenish glow around him, and at some point he could see an entjie on either side of that path. Still, it just lie skemersal. There was a breeze and a rustling of wind, but this was a heartbreaking sound. A few blare rustles to remind you that outsid That autumn has arrived. Wrap it between those dead, blare leaves, countless other trees, which were driven by those trees of that toad The constant sleep and hustle and bustle became tired. Sometimes the entire audience was shocked. Sometimes there was also a ringing in lay was that lay of beautiful voice not of gnomes nie, and that was sang
beautiful, but this sounded strange and ominous, and everyone was not comforted, rather, it hurriedly moved on from there on with the courage that hull heard it. Two days later I found the whole path downhill, and shortly before long
Hull was in a valley barely completely filled with a mighty growth of oak trees. "Isn't there an end to this cursed forest?" the Thorin around. The only way is to choose the highest tree that hangs over that toad."
Of course the "someone" means Bilbo. Let him choose, because in order to be of any use the climber must have his head on the strongest

Poor Mr. Baggins has never had much practice climbing a tree, but let's hang it in the lowest branch of a huge oak tree and see what gr straighten out in that path, and he must go up as fast as the moon. He is the one who punches each other with many a blow in the eye; h and the dirty old bas of that larger branch; more than once he died and himself was just in prison; and finally, after a terrible strug there was spider's head in that tree, and how he was going to get down again (except by falling).
Finally the hy sy head above the roof of blare protruded, and then the hy
found the spider head right. But Hull was like a normal-sized little one, and Hulle was behind those scoenlappers. Bilbo se oë was bare couldn't answer, just hug and wink. Who could see it clearly,
and it took a long time before he could endure this. When he could, he saw everything around him, a see of dark green, here and there w "Pers Keizer", a scoenlapper that loved the top of the oak tree, but here it wasn't smooth at all, it was a dark, velvety black without He watched those "Swart Keisers" for a long time and enjoyed that feeling
of that breeze in her hair and on her face; but in the end that dwarf's howl, what simply impatient stomping under it,
remind him of his ultimate activity. This was not good. Stare as much as he may, he could not see an end to that boom and that blare in heart, how relieved is the touch of that son and that feeling of that one

wind, the sinking back into the tone: there was no food to go back to. After all, if I tell you, you weren't far from the edge of that a big tank, and he couldn't expect to see how far that forest would go. He did not see this, and he climbed down in despair. He finally "These forests continue forever and ever and ever in all directions!"
What should we do? And what a help it is to send a hobbit!" Let the howling, as if it were your own fault. Let it not go around the ear That night, everyone ate the very last bits and crumbs; and next thing you woke up, the first thing you noticed was that you were still here and there a drop of it dripped heavily on the forest floor. This
it just reminds you that you were also thirsty and thirsty, without anything to relieve you: you can't stand a terrible door under a gi That only ounce of comfort that was there, the unexpected arrival of Bombur.
He woke up skilfully and decided to sit down and his head scratched. He couldn't figure out where he was or why he felt so hungry; beca there that May-eyed long joint. The last thing he remembers was that
party at that hobbit's house, and hulle had a big problem with being late, stroll around and tell the story of all the many adventures When he hears that there is nothing to eat there, he sits down and weeps, because
He felt weak and shaky in his legs. "Why did I ever wake up!" he exclaimed. "I had a wonderful dream. I dreamed and I walked into one A forest barely above this one, just lit with torches on that tree and lamps, some of the branches were blowing and fire was burning on A great feast was taking place in that hallway, in that hallway forever. A Forest King was there with a crown of blue, and there was a describe the things that were there to eat and drink."
"You don't have to try," Thorin said. "Trouens, if you can't talk about something else, you should just remain silent. We're already ir with you this is how it is. If you didn't wake up, we would have to see you in your own ear having an idiotic dream in that forest; You short common land."
There was nothing left to do except to tighten those belts more easily, and let's just pack up and move on that job without any great hope of ever reaching that end before I die
fell down and died of hunger. This is what I did there all day long, I went slowly and was able to; while Bombur continues to cry that him and that he wanted to go and sleep.
"No, you don't have to!" the whole thing. "Let you both take part, let us carry you far enough."

Yet he decided to go one step further and threw himself down on that ground. "Go on if you must," he said. "I'm just going here and sleep and dream of kos, if I cannot find this in any other way. I hope I never wake up again."
At that moment Balin, who was a step ahead, exclaimed:
"What was this? Even the thought was a flicker of light in that forest."
Let's look at it all the time, and look away, it's like this, let's see a red sparkle in that darkness; then another one and another on Bombur got up and hurriedly walked over, without caring whether they were trolls or gnomes. That position was in front of Hull and to t until they were finally like that, it was clear that torches and fire burned under that tree, but a whole lot away from their trail. "This seems like my dream is coming true," Bombur gasped as he puffed it. behind. He wanted to run straight into the woods after that l But the other one has those warnings from that roper and that Beorn.
"A festive meal would be of no use if we never come back from it," he said. Thorin.
"But we certainly won't live much longer without a feast," he said to Bombur and Bilbo heartily in agreement. Hull it for that purpose. back and forth for a long time, until they finally agreed to send out a pair of spies to crawl near that one and find out more about it hull. But then we couldn't agree on anyone who needed to be sent: no one was the same or afraid to run the risk of getting lost and nev In the end, despite warnings, the decision was made without hunger, because Bombur was kept on to describe all the good things that had sy dream, in that forest fairy; so everyone leaves that path and enters that forest together.
After a lot of crawling and crawling, I looked around
trunk and looked into an open area where a few trees have been cut off and the ground leveled. There were some people there, eleven-eig dress in green and brown and sit on the sawn rings of that cut-off tree in a large circle. There was a fire in the middle of it and the attached to some of those trees around; but that most beautiful sight of all: all the eating and drinking and cheerful conversation.
The smell of that roasted meat was so enticing that, without having to venture to consult each other, each of us stood up and scurried The first time I opened it, I stepped inside, and then all that light came out as if the door had to work hard.
Someone shot a fire and it disappeared into a fire pit of glittering sparks. Hulle was lost in a completely loose darkness and Hulle co find each other, at least not for a long time. After a stumbling panic attack in that darkness, a blunt fall, a boom crashed, and Screams and shouts until they definitely wake up everything in that forest
Myl, in the end I managed to put myself together in a bond and count myself by touch. Teen that time forgets the whole thing of course whatever direction that path led, and they were always hopelessly lost, at least until they woke up.
There was nothing else to go to where you are
wash; Don't even dare to sit on that ground for fear of being kidnapped again. But let it not last long, and Bilbo, who had grown increasingly lethargic, said it in a harsh whisper to Dori, whose turn it was to look first: "That light one comes out of that ear again, and there is more ash ever from there."
Hulle always jumped up. There, indeed, not far away, were dozens of flickering lights, and those voices and those sounds were very clea Let it sneak up on you gradually, in a single line, each one a little to the rear of the one in front. As you come near, Thorin says: " time! No one is allowed to get up from their hiding place until they are gone. Ek sal mr. Baggins only send first to talk to Hulle. Hul Van Hulle?' the Bilbo moaning) - and in any case I hope he won't do anything, not quite like tenoor hom."
Come on to the edge of that circle of light bowl, the whole Bilbo was bumped
skiable from the back. Before he had time to put on his ring, he stumbled forward into the full flame of those fires and torches. This all that light came back on and there was complete darkness.
If it was difficult to put them together before, it was much worse this time. And you simply couldn't find that hobbit. Count it every are you?" and other things of that nature, but there was no answer. Hulle was just about to give up courage and allow Dori to come to h pure happiness. In that dark he heard what he thought was a stump, case, and he found it
This was that hobbit that was stuck to that temple, curled up. This took some time to wake him up, and when he was awake, he was not at "I had such a wonderful dream," he grumbled, "all because of that

most delicious treat."
"Good heavens! He's gone so far Bombur," the hushed message. "Moenie vir us sê ear drome. Dream-etes is not good nie, and we can't shar "Hulle is the best thing I could ever find in this miserable place," he murmured, as he walked past that dwarf, he read it and tried to When that night must have become old, Kili watched it come and wake it up again and say it:
"There's a rough mooring glow not far away in the early 1900s
torches and fire had been lit skielik and the door tower could have been lit. And listen to that song and that harpe!"
After lying for a while and listening, he found that he could not resist the desire to go closer and try to get help again. Hulle it ro party goers saw a forest king sitting with a crown of blue on his goue hare, baie like Bombur, that figure in his dream describes it. T let people bake from hand to hand and ear with fire, and some play the harp and sing. Her bright hair was content with

flowery; green and white gemstones glittered on their krae and their belts; and
their face and their song were filled with gaiety. That song was loud and clear and resolute, and Thorin entered between them.
Dead silence that descended into that medium of a word. It's all extinguished. That fire burst into black smoke. Ashes and cinders were dwarf, and that forest is again filled with shouts and screams.
Bilbo found the man in that round (so he thought about it) and
shout and shout: "Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, Gloin, Fili, Kili, Bombur, Bifur, Bofur, Dwalin, Balin, Thorin Oakenshield," while he could not thrown in). But the other person's cry became louder and more deafening, and although after a moment it turned into screams and cries,
This was one of the most miserable moments. But he it gou sy
remember that there is no use in trying to do anything until that day comes with something it is no small thing, and completely useless no hope of any breakfast to bring him by. So he himself will sit with you back to a tree, and don't start with your distant thoughts be and eggs and toast and butter, he feels something about him. Something like a very sticky toutjie was on her left hand, and then
He tried to move it and found that he was already in the same position well, so that when he got up he fell over.
Then that big spider's head was trying to tie him up while he slumbered, it came from behind him and came after him. He could do just t oë, but he could feel his hairy legs while this horrible thing to get excited about him all the time. This was fortunate that he came t over time. Soon he would no longer be able to move. Soos this was, it hy
a desperate fight before he is released. He knocked that creature off with his hands
-this is trying to poison him to keep him still, so that little spider head does to flee-until he remembers his sword and pulls it out. jumped back, and he had time to let go. After that it was syne
turn to attack. That spider's head was obviously not used to things like that, it didn't stick to its eyes, otherwise it would have cha this before this could disappear and this with the sword straight into that oë stab. When it became this joke and jumped and danced and There was that usual dull gray from that forest day around him
it came to fruition. That spider's head passed dead past him, and sy sword
was spotted black. Somehow kill that giant spider's head, all alone in that dark without the help of that warlock or that dwarf or of anyone else, it's a big difference for mr. Baggins made. He felt like a different person, and was fiercer and braver in spite of an emp wiped the sy sword on the grass and placed it back in the syskede.
"I will give you a name," he said, "and I will call you Sting." Then he leaves to explore. That forest was grim and silent, but apparen Bilbo felt that this was unsafe to skate, and he stood there for a long time. wonder in what direction he walks, and in what direction Let's go first to see that dwarf.
"Oh! why don't we remember Beorn's advice and Gandalf's!" the hy
the clapping. "What a mess we have now! Us! I wish this was us: this is so bad to be completely alone."
In the end, it was as good as moonlike crying for the clues from which the cry for help came that night - and through luck (he was born

with a good part of it) it is more or less straight, as you see.
After he decides it, he is as smart as moontlik sneaks along. Hobbits is smart with silence, everywhere in bosse, so I have already tol Bilbo also put it on before he started it. Therefore spider head the hom is not seen or hearing is not coming.
He is still gradually choosing his path
place of dear black skaduwee for him, black even in that forest, soos a piece at noon that has never been gone. As he came closer,
He saw that this was made by a spider's head, one behind and one ear, and together with another. He also saw that there was a spider's with fear that all hom would discover. He looked behind a tree
a group of hulle vir 'n rukkie, and then in that silence and stillness of that wood he realizes that here these hideous creatures are t another. His voice was a kind of thin crackle and hiss, but he could
Depending on those words, what difference does it make? Praise the talk of that dwarf!
"This was a hard fight, but the effort turned into a battle." "What a nasty thick skin you must be making, but I bet there's some good "Yes, you will eat well if you hang something out of it," it was a different gesture.
"Don't hang up too long," the third message said. "Hulle is not so fat soos hulle nie." may be. I haven't been too well fed lately." "Kill everyone, sê ek," hisses a fourth; "Now kill them and hang them to death in a pinch."
"Hulle is now dead, I guarantee," the first one said. "That's not right. I just saw it, what a loser. I have to go, I'm just coming bac A wonderful sleep. I will tell you."
With this one of those fat spider heads ran along a rope until it came to a dosyn, the ropes hanging in a row on a branch. Bilbo was no that he saw it all the time that he was in that shadow for the first time, hanging around a dwarf's foot that protrudes from the bottom After that fattest of these bunnies, it went to that spider's head - "This poor old Bombur, "Ek bet," Bilbo thought - and pinched that there was a muffled scream inside, and a tone it sprang up and that spider's head was straight and hard. There was always lewe in Bombu that head of a weak football, and that angry spider's head the waste from that branch, catch himself just in time with his own thread. The other one pays the bill. "You were completely right," the hull gesê, "that meat live and eat!"
"I'll put an end to this soon," hisses that angry spider head as he climbs back onto that branch.
Bilbo saw that moment when he had to do something. Hy
couldn't get that animal up and he didn't have anything to ski with; but look at what he saw that there was a cliff in this place like after a very sad little watercourse. Bilbo was a pretty good chance
with a clip, and this does not take the man long to find a nice smooth egg-shaped one that fits comfortably in his hand. As he practice after things, until rabbits and squirrels, and even their feelings, come out of their path, as quickly as they are repulsive as their b rollerball, cones and other silent games of the point-and-throw variety - indeed he could do many things, except blow smoke rings, ask crafts and cooking, which I haven't had time to tell you about yet. There's no time there now. While he klippe add it up, that spider h and soon he would be dead. At that moment the Bilbo throw. That cliff
the spider's head crashed on that head, and this, the unconscious waste from that tree, fell to the ground, with everything curled up. The next cliff there is a big web hissing and the toue breaking, and the spider's head that is in the middle of it, dead, take it away. dwarf for a rukkie, I can tell you. Hulle couldn't see Bilbo, but he could make a good turn in the direction from which that cliff came Quickly, the hobbit will come and wave against all its running, and throw its long thread in all directions, until it snares full like However, Bilbo could sneak away to another place. That idea came to him to lead that angry spider further and further away from that dwarf, as he could; to make them nervous, excited and angry at the same time.
When it was about fifty, it left the place where it stood before, it was still rocky after that throwing, and it stopped after somethin dancing between those trees, he starts singing a song to make them angry and always bring them behind them, and also to hear that dwarf Dit is wat hy gesing het:
Old fat spider, spin into a tree! You fat spider can't see me! Attercop! Attercop!

Sal jy nie ophou nie,
Stop your spin and soek me?

Ou Tomnoddy, heel groot lyf,
Ou Tomnoddy can't spy on me! Attercop! Attercop! Af val jy!
You will never overtake me in your tree!
Not that it's good, maybe not, but then you have to remember that he had to
this self-assessment, based on the insight of a mildly uncomfortable look. This means doing what he wanted to do in any way. While he w In fact, all those spider heads arrived in that place behind them: some ran after that ground, others ran along that branch, blew from he expects. Hulle was terribly angry. Completely away from that cliff
No spider has ever liked being called Attercop, and Tomnoddy is of course offensive to anyone.
Bilbo was scrambling around in a different place, but fresh from that spider head it was running away after a chilling point in that op spinning web around all those spaces between that tree trunk. Guess that hobbit would be a prisoner in a thick fence around him - at le purring insect the Bilbo's courage scratched together and a new song began:
Lazy Lob and crazy Cob
weave web to wind up my web.
Ek is better than other meat,
but you still can't find me! Here it is, you naughty fly; jy is vet en lui.
You can't catch me, even if you try, in your spinnery mold.
With this he turned around and found that the last space between two trees was covered with a web - but fortunately not a proper web, j from tribe to tribe. Sy small sword came true. He called it that thread door to pieces and sang the beginning.
That spider's head saw that sword, although I don't suppose it knew what it was, and immediately it chased the whole lump of it behind along that ground and that branch, hairy paw that blows, cutters and spinners blow, oë that jumps out, full of foam and anger. Hulle de forest until Bilbo has gone as far as he dared. Then quieter as a mouse he steals it back.
He didn't have the time to know before that spider-head was disgusted. and returning to the tree where that dwarf hangs. In that one
In the meantime he had to save his life. The worst part of that work was to stand on that long branch where the ropes hung. I don't acc If this doesn't happen, luckily a spider's head doesn't let it hang, it won't hang
off; with that help, although this was held on his hand and made him feel better, he scurried about to meet an old-fashioned, big, fat- behind to guard those prisoners, and was trying to squeeze them to see
which was the juiciest thing to eat. This was the idea of starting that feast while the other one was away, but Mr. Baggins was hasty, I knew what happened, this sy angel feeling and death rolled off that branch.
Bilbo's next task was to lose a dwarf. What should he do? If he hung it toutjie wat hom, that wretched dwarf would be crammed after tha ground a good entjie. Curve along that branch (what all those
poor dwarf dance and hang soos ryp fruit) he reaches that first bondel. "Fili or Kili," he thought about that point of a blue kappie wh bo. "Very true, Fili," he thought, with the tip of his long nose sticking out a bit
that winding wire. He leaned on this reggekry door to cut off most of that strong, sticky thread that tied it around him, and sometimes and a battle through which most of Fili came to the fore. Bilbo is afraid of the final meal
that look of him showing how his stiff arms and legs are jerking while he dances on that spider's head under his armpits, just like one Somehow Fili got onto that branch, and then it was hy sy
the best to help that hobbit, although he felt sick and unwell from the spider's head poison, and from the wound most of that night and round and round with your nose to breathe. Let him take this long to get that animal good from his eyes and eyebrows, and as regards hi had to cut most of them off. Well, between all of them, first a dwarf comes up, and then another, and they free themselves. None of the Breathe smoothly nie (long nose is sometimes useful, see) and for some it was more poisonous.
In this way the entire Kili, Bifur, Bofur, Dori and Nori were saved. Poor old Bombur was so exhausted - he was the fattest and was cons pinched and stabbed - that he just rolled off that branch and splashed on it, fell on the ground, luckily on blare, and lay there. But

dwarf, what hangs on the tip of that branch, that spider's head begins to come back, more full of anger than ever before.
Bilbo immediately went to the end of the branch next to the tree trunk and held it back, which had crawled up a bit. Hy it sy ring take saved the Fili and forgot to put it on again, so now it all starts again:
"Now let us see you, you nasty little creature! We will eat you and leave. Hang your legs and skin on a tree. Oh no! It's an angel, isn We will always die, and then hang our heads away for a day or two."
While this was on that corridor, the other one was on that other side of that one those prisoners, and sny on that wire with their messe. Soon everything would be over
free, although it was not clear what would happen next. That spider's head was quite easily caught last night, but this was unconscious Bombur on that floor, and the man is tied again and he is dragged away. Hy the screams and after that spider's head cut down for him. H quickly, and he carried the scurrying and rubbish in that tree right into the middle of that one on that ground. The small sword was so away from steke vir hulle. How this skied back and forth! This was the sound of joy as he shouted it after all. A Halfdosyn was killed the Bombur after Bilbo ear face.
"Come off! Come off!" it was written by the dwarf on that branch.
"Moenie there stay happy and you won't get caught!" For he sees the spider's head swarm up that neighboring tree, and creep along the b the dwarf.
Apart from that dwarf scurrying or jumping or falling, eleven all in one
hope, that most of you claim and less use on your bene. There was all of them in the end, twelve of all of them, including poor old Bom on either side door sy cousin Bifur, and sy brother Bofur; and Bilbo was dancing round and blowing with sy angel; and a hundred bad spi Then the fight begins. Some of those dwarfs had the messe, and some the cane, and all of them could come to blows; and Bilbo had the el Time and time again that spider's head has been knocked off, and everyone is gone
made to death. But this couldn't last long. Bilbo was barely exhausted; Only four of those dwarfs could stand tall, and soon everyone w weave your web around your body again from tree to tree.
In the end, Bilbo could think of no plan other than letting the dwarf in on Sy's secret. He was quite sorry about that, but this couldn "I'm going to disappear," he said. "I will take off that spider head, as I will
can; and you must move together happily and in that intended direction. After the one on the left, this is more or less the path after the elf fires."
This was difficult for you to understand, with your dizzy head,
and the shouting, and the banging of sticks, and the throwing of cliffs; but
Finally the Bilbo feeling he could no longer delay, that spider's head, the hull circle is getting closer. He put on the skielik sy rin surprise of that dwarf, he disappeared.
I wish the sound of "Lui Lob" and "Attercop" came from there
those boom regs gone. This is what upsets that spider head. Hulle stopped progressing, and some left in the direction of that voice. "A

the whole thing was so angry that the whole thing lost its mind. Come on Balin, what this concept means,
Bilbo's plan, better as it is, it's an attack. That dwarf crowds together in a knot, and sends a shower of cliffs, some hush, after tha and it stopped skiing.
Desperately hoping that Bilbo is not captured, it happened to that dwarf. Not fast enough. Hulle was sick and tired, and Hulle couldn't Everything went better than a limp and a wobble, although the spider's head was short behind him. Well, then you had to turn around and wesens what hull overtook it; and there was already a pair of spider heads in that tree, let's throw down a long sticky thread.
Things happened again, Bilbo skied again,
and unexpectedly rushed from that side towards that astonished spider's head. "On! Go on!" he screamed. "I'll do that stitching!"
And he it. He skied it back and forth, cut after a spider's head thread, cut his legs after all his legs and stabbed him as he came too the terrifying cursed hiss; but despite being terrified by Sting,
and don't worry too much, now that this has come back. So curse you, let your prey move away steadily but surely. This was a really sca activity, and this the same or this hour take. But in the end, just when Bilbo felt that he couldn't hold his hand over a single hold a this ended, and there was no further consequence, but we returned disappointed after dark

colony.
That dwarf noticed that when he came to the edge of a ring it was true elf fire. Whether this was one of those, what did you see? the previous day could not have happened. But this is as if there was good magic there
being in such places that those spider heads don't like. In any case, here the tree was greener, and the branch was less thick and mena a chance to rest and breathe.
There it all happened for a while, snoring and breathing. But let's hope it all starts asking for it. Hulle had to deal with that whole just clarify, and I am so interested in finding out about that ring
That's all for a while, you can forget your problems. Balin, in particular, insisted on telling that Gollum story all over again, with ring in its right place. But after a while it starts to go deaf, and then other questions are asked. Where was your life, and where was and where was there any food there, and what would you do next? Here he asked what his ear and ears asked, and this was something from Thank you for being right or hoping to get that answer. From which you can see that you have your opinion about Mr. Baggins baie change to have great respect for him (so Gandalf said he would). Indeed, let him rightly expect that he will come up with a wonderful plan to it would soon all be dead if it weren't for that hobbit; and hello
thank you again hom baie. Some of them even got up and apologize for them, bow the ground before them, although they fell over with tha back on my feet, come for a nap. To know that truth about that
disappearing the mind ear Bilbo smooth not reduce not; because you see that he had some good sense, as well as luck and a magical ring I feel there was something of a brave adventurer about himself, after that everything, although he would feel even braver if there was But there was nothing there, absolutely nothing; and none of them were fit to go after anything, or to go after that lost path. That lo Another idea might arise in Bilbo's head. He sat in front of him and stared
from hom by that endless tree; and after a while everything became quiet again. All except Balin. Long after the other one stops, it ta He keeps muttering and giggling for himself.
"Gollum! Well, I'm done! So that's how he sneaked up on me, didn't you? Well, I know! You just sneaked up quietly, Mr. Baggins? Knope o I got to that sleep, and there was complete silence for a long time. Skied the Dwalin one eye and looked around after all.
"Where is Thorin?" he asked.
This was one hell of a cook. Of course there were thirteen Van Hulle, twelve dwarfs and that hobbit. Where was Thorin after all? Hulle nag; and there we must first let go of our hulle vir, too weak and tired to stand or take a turn to watch.
Thorin was quicker than a prisoner. You remember.
How did Bilbo hit a block on that temple while he's falling into a circle?
The next time it was Thorin who had stepped forward a little, and as soon as he entered the situation, it became an enchanted cliff. Al Nag, all your screams, you caught that spider's head and tied it up, and all those sounds of the next day swept it away from its unhear Bos-elwe came after him, bound him and ran away.
The people celebrating were of course Bos-elwe. This one is not wicked.
people. If it's all a mistake, this is suspicious for a stranger. Although its strength was strong, even in that case it was worthless. Elwe van de Weste, and was more dangerous and less wise. Vir die most of Hulle (together with their scattered family in the Heuwels and was a descendant of that ancient lineage that never followed Feeë in that Wes. That's where Ligelwe and Diepelwe and Seelwe went and lived for a long time, and became smarter and wiser and more learned, and invented all the magic and the most cunning art in which to m wonderful things, before some came back to that Wye Wêreld. In that Wye Wêreld the Bos-elwe in that skemer of our Son and Moon number, but it is that star who is most loved; and let it wander around in that great forest, what growth it has grown high in the land that is forest, from which they could sometimes escape to hunt, or to ride and run through that open land door, moony or starry; and after the In a large cave a few kilometers within the edge of Mirkwood on the eastern side of it, there was the greatest king of all time. For sy it was a river that flowed from those heights of the forest and flowed in and out

that swamp at the foot of that wooded land. Here is that large cave, from which numerous smaller ones were made on all sides, twisting more wholesome than any gnome's dwelling, and not so deep or so dangerous. Trouens, that subject of that king, usually in that
oop forest, and had the house or hut on that ground and in that branch. That beech tree was your favorite tree. That king's cave was hi enemy.
This was also the dungeon of your prisoners. So the hustle and bustle to that cave
Thorin didn't mind, because he didn't like him, and he thought he was an enemy. Had a hell of a war with some of those dwarfs in those what the hell to blame for that, what the hell to blame for stealing it. This is just not fair to say that that dwarf should give it to thank you, because that elf king negotiates with you to form sy rou gold
and silver, and afterwards antler to give them their payment. If that elf king had a weakness, this was vir skatte, veral vir si gemsto I haven't had such a big chat yet as the other elf-here of old. Also, let people not mine or work metal or jewelry, nor do they deal mu with those who cultivate that earth. All this was well known to every dwarf, though
Thorin's family had nothing to do with that old man I didn't talk about. by. As a result, Thorin was angry about his treatment of him the entire tower spell was taken away from him and he came to his senses; and he was also determined that not a word of gold or jewel w That king looked sternly at Thorin when he came before him, and asked for him. But Thorin just wished he was hungry.
"Why do you and your people try three times to attack my people by themselves?" cheerfulness?" the king asked. "Don't attack us," answers Thorin; "we came to beg, for we were hungry."
"Where is your friend now, and what are they doing?"
"I don't know, but I expect to die of hunger in that forest." "What are you doing in those woods?" "In the souk there was food and drink, because we were dying of hunger."
"But what did it bring you into that forest anyway?" it bade that king. Then Thorin closed his mouth and didn't want to say another wor "Good!" it that king said. "Take him away and keep him safe until he feels inclined to tell that truth, even if he waits a hundred year

Then put on your belt and put it in one of those inner caves with a strong wooden door, and leave. Hulle het hom kos gegee en
drink, good for both, if not good, not good; because Bos-elwe was not a gnome, and was reasonably well-mannered even in the face of his the whole prison. That giant spider's head was the only living thing that showed no mercy to anyone.
There in that king's dungeon poor Thorin lay; and after he experienced his gratitude for bread and meat and water, he began to wonder she has become unhappy friends. This was not long before he discovered; but this belongs to the next chapter and the beginning of it another adventure in which that hobbit once again shows his usefulness. VATE OUTSIDE CONNECTION
That day after the fight with that spider-head, Bilbo and that dwarf made a last desperate attempt to find a way out before they all di it is lit by many torches, the jumping around them, like hundreds of red stars.
Jumping out of the Bos-elwe with your boë and spear and that dwarf shouting to stop.
There was no mention of any incident. Even if that dwarf wasn't in
such a situation that you were finally happy to become a prisoner, you little mess, the only weapons you had, it would have been of no of that elwe what a sensitive eye could touch in that darkness. So let's just stop dying and go sit and wait, except for Bilbo, what yo and it quickly swung after a side. Therefore, come on that elwe die
dwarf in a long row, one behind the other, and let's count, let's never find that hobbit or count it.
Let the man not hear or feel how he is quickly trotting behind him, while he does not let the prisoners in the forest lie in wait. Ever with sy oë he could not see where they were going, and still he
In any case, others know where to start. Bilbo had done everything he could do to keep up with those torches, because that Elwe let tha as quick as what he could do, as sharp and as he was able to do. The king commands you to make haste. If only those torches were up, an bridge what ear that river after that king's door jelly it. That water flows darkly

and quick and strong under; and at the farthest point was a gate for them
that mouth of a large cave that runs into that side of a steep slope, cover it with trees. Since the big beech rain came to that oewer, was in that stream.
On that bridge they knocked all their prisoners, but Bilbo cried
the back side. He doesn't like that cave mouth appearance, and he doesn't even make the decision to leave his friends, just in time to who cut that last elwe, before that great gate of that king behind them, closed it with a cleat.
Inside, the gange was lit with red torchlight, and the eleven guards
Singing as you march along that winding, crossing and resounding calm. This one wasn't even the one from that gnome town; hull was smal from that leaning cliff the Elwekoning sat on a chair made of cut wood. On that head was a crown of berries and red blare, because that it held a carved staff of oak. That Elwekoning gate.
Those prisoners are brought before him; and although he looked grim afterwards hulle, he ordered his man to loosen hulle, because hulle was frayed and tired.
"Boon, no toue is necessary here," he said. "There is no escape from my magical door for those who once enter." Long and longing, he asked that dwarf ear for his deed,
and where he went and where he came from; but he is the less nuus of all Thorin's cry. Hulle was sullen and angry and did not even pret "What are we to do, O king?" the Balin, what the eldest eargebly asked. "Is
This is a crime to be lost in that forest, to be hungry and thirsty, to be a prisoner by a spider's head? Is that spiderhead your pet o make you angry?"
Of course, that's the worst question the king ever asked, and he
answer: "This is a crime to wander around in my kingdom without permission. Do you forget that you were in my kingdom and that path use Have you not followed and frightened my people three times in that forest?
wake up that spider head with your commotion and noise? After all that commotion you made, it is right to know what brings you here, an Now for my sake, I will always keep you in that trunk until you learn how to do it!"
Then he orders that each of those dwarfs be placed in a separate room
food and drink are given, but they are not allowed to enter your little one's door
prison, until at least one of them was willing to tell him everything he wanted to know. But he didn't tell them that Thorin was also a This was Bilbo who invented this.
Poor Mr. Baggins - this was a tiring long time because he spent all that time in that place, alone, and always crawling away, never dar to sleep, even hiding away in the darkest and remotest corner he could find. There's something to do when he starts wandering around th head, sou from time to time outry to hunt, or after other sake in that
forest and in that country after the East. Come on, if Bilbo was free, he would could just slip behind Hull; although this was a dangerous thing to do.
More than once, he was barely in that door when all his toes collided.
until the last eleven passed away; he did not dare to march among them, because of sy skaduwee (completely thin and shaky as this was i fear of being lost and discovered. And when he did go out, what?
wasn't really prepared, he didn't do anything right. He didn't want to leave that dwarf, and indeed he didn't know where to go in that couldn't keep up all the time with that jag-elwe that was out of his mind, so he never discovered that spawn from that forest, and was miserable in that forest, afraid of losing himself, until an opportunity presents itself to him again. He was also without hunger, beca there was no one at the table at the table.
"I'm also a burglar who can't get away, but has to continue miserably." "breaking into that same house day after day," he thought. "Thi and the saddest part of all this miserable, wearisome, uncomfortable adventure! I wish I was back in my hobbit hole with my warm cluck skyn!" He also often wished that he could receive a message of help sent to that wizard, but of course this was completely impossible; that if anything had to be done, this door Mr. Baggins had to do what he had to do, alone and without help.
Finally, after a week or two of living that creeping kind of life here, he took care of that wait and retinue and took every chance he managed to find out where every dwarf was arrested. He found all twelve of them in different parts of that palace, and after a while he about baie good. What a surprise one day it was to hear some of this

he waited for a while to talk and to hear that there was also another dwarf in that trunk, in a particularly dark place. Hy the natural Thorin; and after a while he found that his shoulder was straight. Ultimately, after that, he managed to find that place when no one wa Thorin was too wretched to be angry any longer with his misfortune, and I thought it would be a good start to tell that king all about Bilbo se stemmetjie by sy keyhole. He could skaars sy ore glo. Gou
However, he decided that he could not be wrong, and he agreed
after that door and had a long whispered conversation with that hobbit on the other side.
So Bilbo could secretly take Thorin's message to everyone
of that other captive dwarf, and tell them that Thorin was their head
also in that throne nearby, and that no one may reveal his dedication to him
that king, not yet, and not until Thorin gives that word. For Thorin's heart heard again how that hobbit and his companion saved it fro

spider head, and was once again determined not to sell him separately
belowe to that king of a share in that skat, until all hope of escape in any other way disappears; until that remarkable Mr. Unsatisfac I'm glad I didn't manage to think of something smart.
The other dwarf let the whole thing come together, let that message be known. Hull all the time, your share in that skat (you're a bit All of you, in spite of your plight and that ever-unsought dragon) would seriously like that Bos-elwe to claim a share of it, and all o Bilbo. You see exactly what Gandalf said would happen. Perhaps this part of her was reason to leave and leave Hull.
However, Bilbo does not have such a hopeful feeling that he does not exist. He does not like to be completely dependent on the door, an hand. But this was useless: it seemed that all the dark distance of Mirkwood had fallen between them. He sit and drink and drink, until but no bright idea, don't come on. An unsignable ring was a nice thing, but this wasn't much good under fourteen. But of course, if you One day, while he was sniffing around and wandering around, Bilbo was at bay
interesting thing: that big gate was not the only entrance after that cave. A stream flowed under part of the lowest part of that palac of which the head mouth is made. Where is this underground watercourse?
it came out of that hillside, there was a water gate. There that rocky roof comes off the near surface of that stream, and from it a po could easily be thrown into that riverbed to prevent anyone from getting in or out. But the portcullis was often open for traffic
went out and entered the water gate. If anyone got in there, he would be in a dark, rowwe tonnel, it would be a bit deep in that
heart of that hill; but at a point where it went under the cave door, the roof was cut away and covered with a large oak trapdoor. Here up into those king's cellars. There it stood, and stood, and stood; for that Bos-elwe, and everywhere his king, was very sweet vir
wyn, although no vine cane grow in that part. That wine, and other goods, had been brought from far away, from their family in that Sou vine of Manne in a distant land.
Crawling behind one of the largest ones, Bilbo discovered the trapdoor
and their custom, and shelter there, listening to the talk of the king's servants, he learned how that wine and other goods came up wit after that Long Lake. This is like a village of Manne always flourishing there, built on brûe far in that water ash protection against look at that dragon from that mountain. Van Meerstad who vate
was raised with the Bosrivier. Often their net was tied together in a large raft and rowed up that stream with a pole or rowing toe; so When the barrel was empty, the empty door threw the trapdoor,
it opened that water gate, and it floated on that stream, floating along it, until its door was carried along that stream to a place fa There they all gathered and tied up and drifted back to Laketown,
it was near that point where the Forest River flowed into the Lake.
Within a little while Bilbo sat and heard the sound of the water gate, and it became more strange
if this could be used for the escape of his friend, and ultimately for him that desperate start of a plan.
That note is taken after those prisoners. That wait was
step away from the gange and take that flash together with all of you
leaves everything in darkness. Come on, Bilbo commands the king's butler to the head of that guard, good day.
"Come now with me," he said, "and taste the new wine that has just been made." come in. I will be working hard today on those cellars o

wood, so let us first have something to drink to help with that work."
"Baie good," the head of that waiter settled. "I'll try it together with you, and
see if this is going on at the king's table. There's a banquet there today and I wouldn't do this to send poor people off!
When he heard this, Bilbo was in complete commotion, because he saw that he was lucky. hom and he immediately had a chance to try their two cubits, until they entered a small cellar and sat by a table, on which two large jars had been placed. You drank and lay from the v cheerful. Happiness of an unusual nature happened to Bilbo. This must have been strong enough to make a wood-elf lethargic; but here th It was nice that the head nodded his head when he put it down on the table
and get that sleep. That butler kept talking and he himself was lying down without seeing this, but he also had his head after that table, and he got to sleep and snored past his friend. Go ahead to that hobbit. Guess he didn't have any keys that captain, but Bilbo t the heavy feeling in your arms, and your heart was often in your mouth
to his regret, because he couldn't keep those keys from making a hard latch and latch every now and then, which makes him move complete First the Balin door was closed and it closed again as soon as the dwarf was outside. Balin was astonished, as much as you can imagine; because of that.
"No time now!" it said to that hobbit. "Follow me! We must always keep going
together we don't run the risk of becoming crazy. All of us must escape or nothing, and this is our last chance. If this is found out, Will you next place, with chains on your hands and feet too, I expect. Moenie stry, there's a good guy!
When he went from door to door until his followers grew to twelve, none of them were happy, with that dark one, and with
get a long prison sentence. Bilbo's heart beats every time as one of each toe stamps, or groans or whispers in that darkness. "Pull thi "Dwarf rocket!" the hy vir homself gesê. But everything went well, and I didn't have any encounters with it. wait. Well, there was a bi there that night, and in that sale there. Almost all the king's people were cheerful.
Finally, after some struggling, the whole thing arrived at Thorin's dungeon, far below in a deep place and fortunately not far from tho "Upon my word!" Thorin asked Bilbo to whisper it to come
exclaims and adds to his friend, "Gandalf told the truth, as usual! What a beautiful burglar you make, it seems, when that time comes. Bilbo saw that the time had come to clarify his idea as far as he could; but he wasn't sure how that dwarf would accept this. Sy vrese was completely justified, because they did not keep it this smooth, and the beginning sounded loud in spite of their danger.
"We shall be bruised and crushed, and drowned, for...
for sure!" the hushed murmur. "You think it's a sensible idea when you get those keys in that hand. This is a bad idea!"
"Good!" Bilbo's voice was dejected and also rather irritated. "Come." back to you nice selle, and I will always close you again, and yo Will I ever get those keys in that hand again, even if I feel inclined to try."
This was too much vir hulle, and hulle it calmed down. Ultimately, from
Of course you had to do just what Bilbo suggested, because this was clearly impossible for you to try to find your path after that best hobbit, down into those lowest cellars the hushed crawling. Hulle went door to door where that captain and that butler could always be with a smile on his face. That wyn of Dorwinion brings deep and sweet dreams. There would be a different expression on that face
that next day, all Bilbo, before he had gone any further, sneaked in and good-naturedly placed the keys back on his belt. "This will spare him from the difficulty he is in for," Mr. Baggins sê.
vir homself. "He was not a bad old man, and very orderly towards those prisoners. This will always confuse us. I think we had some stro Go out there, that closed door and disappear. Damn! We need to act quickly if this has to happen!"
Balin has been appointed to keep that watch and that butler cap and to give warning as all the rudder. That's what happened to the adja There was little time to lose. Shortly before long, as Bilbo knew, a few elwe were there under orders to come down and help that butler

door that door in that stream. This is where it already worked
rye in the middle of that floor what was waiting to be repelled. Some of them were wynvate, and here they were not of much use, since t

at the end it was opened without much noise, and it could not be easily opened or reattached. But among them there was something else, for other goods, butter, apples and all kinds of things after that king's palace.
I found the gold thirteen with enough room for a dwarf in each. Trouens. some of them were too spacious, and while they were climbing i Bilbo had to try to find sprinkles and other things to pack everything as easily as possible. could become director in a short time. Fi Thorin caused both trouble, and the twisting and turning and twisting in his bath, and the grumbling of a big dog in a small kennel; wh it made a big fuss about her luggate and suffocated him, even for it
sy lid was on. Bilbo did what he could to make the hole in that side of the barrel, and to fasten all those lids as securely as possibl Now he was alone again, busy running around and doing the final finishing touches on the packaging, and hoping in hope that his plan wo This was not easy to do. Slegs 'n a minute or two after Balin se
The lid was put on, because there was that sound of voices coming and that flickering of. A number of us entered those cellars lying an sing pieces of song. Enjoyed a cheerful feast in one of those sales afterward and was determined to return as soon as possible.
"Where is ou Galion, that butler?" it's a question. "I'm not done with it yet
tables from. He should be here now to tell us what needs to be done." "I'll be angry if that old coach is late," it's another story. "I "Ha, ha!" come an exclamation. "Here's that old bastard with his head on a pitcher!" He held a small feast for himself and his friend,
Galion was not happy about being sked or woken up, much less being told off. "You're always late," he grumbles. "Here I venture venture among these, while you drink and be merry and forget
your take. No wonder if I don't get to sleep because of tiredness!" "No wonder," the hull said, "if that clarification is in progress in a jar! Come give us a taste of your sleeping drink before we fall asleep!
No need to wake up that key holder over there. He had his share, judging by that occurrence. this." Then we all had a round of drinks and became very cheerful.
But don't let them completely lose their minds. "Save us, Galion!" some exclaimed, "You started your feast early and confused your mind full of shit here instead of that life, if there's anything wrong with that." "Get on with that work!" growls the butler. "There's noth feeling of weight in an empty throwing pot in your arms. Here is the one that goes and no other does. Let's do it now!"
"Baie good, baie good," he replied while he said it after that
opening. "This will be on your head, if that king is full of botterpotte and his best wine is thrown into that river so that the desola Roll-roll-roll-roll,
rol-rol-rol in die gat af!
Hey ho! Splash plump!
Off you go, off you go!
So the whole thing rang while first one barrel and then another, after that dark rumbling, opened and was pushed a few feet into that c Some were quite empty, some were just caught with a dwarf
everyone; but let it all descend, one after the other, with many a collision and a thump, dully on the one below, in that water, crashi toe that wall of that barrel, toe collide with each other and float away with that current.
It was just at that moment that Bilbo discovered this weakling
point in your plan. Very likely you saw this a little while ago and it was right there with you; but I assume you wouldn't do half as w there was someone to wrap it up, even if there was a chance! This is the same as if he had decided to lose his friends this time (almos and must remain forever as a permanent burglar in that elf cave. Because even if he could escape straight away through that fairest gat it's more surprising what happens on earth to all of you without him; because he doesn't
had time to tell that dwarf everything he learned, or what he intended to do, as soon as he got out of that forest. While all these thoughts passed through here, it was elwe
I'll happily sing a song around that river door. Some have already gone to pull up the toue that pulled up the portcullis at the water

so that the barrel could be thrown out as soon as everything was completely dry. Down into that swift, dark stream you go Back to the land you once knew! Leave that deep sale and cave,
Loose those northern mountains steep, Where the forest is wide and dull
Bow in skaduwee gray and grim! Float on as that world of trees, Out in that whispering breeze, Beyond those rushes, beyond those reeds, Out of that lake and pool in that night! Follow, follow star what jump
On the cold and steep heavens;
Turn around when dawn comes ear land, Ear rapids, ear sand, South away! and South away!
Soek die sonlig en die dag,
Back to that meadow, back to that meadow, Where those cows and ox meadow!
Back after gardens on those hills Where those bessie swell and fill Under sonlig, under day! South away! and South away!
Down into that swift, dark stream you go back to the land you once knew! Now that very last barrel has rolled past that door! In despair and
Without knowing what to do, poor little Bilbo grabbed this and was hit on the edge with it. In that water it happened, splash! in that He came up again, sniffling and clinging to the wood, there was a rot, but
Despite all his efforts, he was unable to climb up. Every time he tries, he turns around and goes back into hiding. This was really emp it looked like a cork had dried. Even if his ear was full of water, he could hear
that Elwe always sings in that cellar over there. Then it skied off that trap door with a thump and let it get away. He was in that dar dry in clear water, completely alone - because you cannot kindly pack what everything is in a container.
You could see a gray cloud in front of him in that darkness. He heard the creaking of that water gate that was being dragged up, and he A bobbing and stamping mass of people was rushing and bustling around under that arched door and out into that open stream. He could do Went out from under the hanging branch of the tree on either side of the oewer.
Bilbo is more curious about what that dwarf feels and whether there is any free water there
was trying to climb into his baddens. Some of those who floated along him in that bath, the gloom it was quite low in that water, and h dwarves inside.
"I really hope I did enough to cover those lids!" he was thinking, but shortly before long he was too concerned about himself to rememb he succeeded in keeping his head out of the water, but he felt the cold, and he was more concerned about whether he would die from it b chance to let go and try to swim after that oewer.
That happiness turns smoothly: that swirling stream that behaves
Freshly, it came ashore at one point and there it suddenly became attached to a hidden root. Come on Bilbo uses that ability to skarrel toe that side of you walk while this toe is a different hold. A drowned rotten creature crawled on it and lay spread out around it balance as good as he could. That breeze was cold but better than that water, and he hoped he wouldn't roll away again until it all beg again.
Shortly before long the barrel broke loose again and twisted and turned

down with that stream, and out into that main stream. When he found this completely so
difficult to hold on to as he feared it; but he somehow managed to do this, even though it was unfortunately inconvenient. Fortunately it was a good big one and because it was quite leaky, it sent a small amount of water. Still, this was a good thing to try, without a b stiebeuels, a round-pen pony, that's always what I think about on that grass.
In this way the mr. Baggins finally came to a place where the tree was on either side of that one

hand it has become thinner. He could see that light between them. That dark river soon opened up, and this is the main water of it that Forest River flows so hastily from that king's great door. There was a dull layer of water, no longer ear shadow, and on sy gly On that surface there were dancing and broken reflections of clouds and stars.
Then the rushing water of the Forest River swept away the entire scourge
vate and kuipe away after that northern oower, in which this area has eaten away at the bay. This had a cliff-like oower under a hangin eastern end of the door a small protruding promontory of hard rock. On that flat river, most of it was stranded, although a few toes st pier.
There were people looking out over those oews. Let it be quickly hooked and all that contents are thrown together into that flat water, Let the whole thing be counted, let it be tied together and let it be loosed until it looks.
Poor dwarf! Bilbo wasn't bad for that. He walked out of the way and stepped ashore and sneaked over to a few huts that he could see nea that waterfront. He no longer thought twice about adding a portion if he had the chance, he was obliged to do this for so long, and he There is no need to tell you much about your adventure there that night, because now we are approaching the end of that eastward journe and greatest adventure, so we must continue. Of course help from sy
magic ring with which he initially clicked, it got away, but it is ultimately lost due to his wet footsteps and the trail of drops he l or sit down; and he also started sobbing, and wherever he tried to crawl away, he was discovered by that terrifying explosion of his su there was a good riot in that village along that riverbank; but Bilbo quickly left the forest with a loaf of bread and a bottle of wine pie that doesn't belong to him, it doesn't belong to him. He had to leave the rest of that night wet at the door as he was and far from It got late and the lug was cold.
He woke up again with a particularly hard sneeze. This was already gray-looking, and there was a cheerful commotion underneath the rive trying to make a raft, and that raft-elwe would soon send it away down that stream after Meerstad. Bilbo sneezes again. He was no more drip, but he has the oral cold feeling. He climbed down so quickly and quickly and it was just a matter of time to get out of the crowd without being noticed in that general commotion. Fortunately, there was no son there at the time to throw an uncomfortable shadow, and There was a tremendous blast of pale. That elwe what was in it
that flat water heaves and bumps. They simply combined it with creaks and complaints.
"That's a tough question!" some grumbling. "Your life is too deep - some of here is never empty. If you come ashore in the daytime, we "No time now!" that raft man cried out. "Punch away!" And it is gone at last, from the start, slowly, until it is gone, that rocky poin as we stood to fend it off with force, and more and more swiftly as we caught that main stream and sailed away, down to
the lake.
Let it escape from that king's dungeons and go through the forest, but whether it is alive or dead remains to be seen. A WARM WELCOME
That day it became lighter and warmer so they drifted further. After a while the river turned around a steep slope of land on your left boom it ended. Then Bilbo saw a sign:
Let the land open up around him, filled with the waters of that river
it broke up and wandered around in a hundred winding paths, or it stayed still in swamps and ponds, tedious with islands on all sides; cloud, there it looms that Mountain! My nearest neighbor in that Northeast and that tumbling land that connects it to you, could not se Mountain! Bilbo has come a long way and through adventure to see this, and now he doesn't like the idea of avoiding it.
While he listened to the talk of that smooth man and put those pieces together, it lost some of his understanding, and he realized that never to see this at all, even from that distance. So gloomy this was a prison sentence and unpleasant as this position was (not to men poor dwarf among him, he was more happy than what he had
ranting. That conversation had come and gone because of all that trading

and the growth of the traffic on that river, so that the spawn from the East after Mirkwood disappeared or fell into disuse; and the bi that Meermanne and that Bos-elwe for the preservation of the Bosrivier
and the care of that bank. Since that country, the bay has changed since then, which was a dwarf in that mountain, just what most peopl slegs remember as a baie skaduryke tradition. Turn it into a change
recent years, and since that last year what Gandalf has received from you. May the floods and rushes be great, and let the waters that was an earthquake or two (which some were inclined to attribute to that dragon - which was a courtly click after him referred to with a wyer on either side. May the vanish, and many a horseman and swerwer
Also, please try to find that lost ear. That elf path door that wood what that dwarf on Beorn's advice, it came
a doubtful and little used point on the eastern edge of that forest; slegs die rivier het nie meer 'n veilige pad vanaf die rande van M deur die Hout-elwe se koning.
So you saw Bilbo finally come up with the only path that was the only one
Good. This could have been a bit of a comfort for Mr. Baggins what was moving on that barrel, if he knew that now from this Gandalf far and that he had great fear, and that he was in the process of completing his other activity (which does not occur in this story) and pr All he knew was that the river was forever on and on and on like it, and he was hungry, and had a nasty cold in his nose, and it wasn't the way that Berg vir hom frown and hom threaten soos this the more it came closer. After a while, however, the river took a more south That mountain withdrew again, and finally, late in that day, the river grew rocky, the river as walking water in a deep and
swift tide, and let it wash forth with great speed.
That son suffered this with another sweep after the East turn. forest river flowed into the Lange Meer. Since this had a wye mouth with clippy wreath-like gate on either side of which the feet were stacked with shingles. Long Lake! Bilbo never thought that any water that could seem so big. This was so far that the exposed walls were small and far away, but this was so long that the northern point, which Berg, couldn't be seen easily. Slegs off that map Bilbo knew that up there, where that star of that Wain already skittered it, that
The river running from Dale drained into that lake and with the Bos River filled with deep water, what a large, deep rocky valley. At t waterfall and the hasty run away to unknown lands. In that silent time In that lug, the sound of that waterfall could be heard as a dis Not far from the mouth of the Bos River was that strange village he
Elwe hears talking in those king's cellars. This is not on that oewer building, although there were a few huts and buildings there, but surface of that lake, beskerm toe that whirlwind of that incoming river through a rocky promontory that forms a calm bay. Made a big br wood, follow the path where there is a beige building on a large pile of forest trees
timber village, not a village of Elwe, but of men, how daring it is to live here under the shadow of that distant dragon mountain. Hull do something with that great river that came up from the South and avoid that fall after their village; but in that great day of old, w there was a smooth boat on those waters, and some was filled with gold and some with warriors in armor, and there was war and deed what

just happened to be a legend. That rotting heap of a larger village could always be seen along those estuaries that sink in water in a But man do not remember that, although some still sing old songs of those dwarf kings of that Mountain, Thror and Thrain of that race o and of the coming of that Dragon, and of the fall of that lord of Dale. Some also say that Thror and Thrain will return one day and wil flow into the river, through the mountain gate, and all that land would be filled with new sang and new lay. But here this pleasant leg As soon as that raft came into view, the boat was rowed away from that pile
of that village, and hear those raft drivers' cries. Toe is thrown and oar is pulled, and gou is that raft from that stream of that one Forest river and towed away because of the rocky cliffs in that small one
bay of Lake-town. There was this vassgemeer not far from the kissable head of that great bridge. Soon the man will come up from that Su of that barrel away, and others would fill it with goods that would bring it to be taken back up that stream to that Bos-elwese house.
Hulle would have been surprised if he could see anything

it happened during that kiss, after he was gone and the shadow of that night happened. First a barrel was stolen from Bilbo and after t oewer and opgemaak. A groan came from within, and a bad, unfortunate dwarf came out. Wet straw was in your beard, dragged; he was so sa bruised and beaten, he could stand flat or flat
water to moan on that beach. He had a starving and wild appearance like a dog that has been chained up in a kennel for a week and forgo was Thorin, but you could only do this on your own chain and on that one
that color of sy well dirty and worn sky blue cap with sy dowwe silwer
kvass It took a while before he even politely pointed out that hobbit. "Well, are you alive or are you dead?" Bilbo asked very grumpily Maybe he forgets that he has at least one more good meal
that dwarf, and also the use of her arms and legs, not to mention a greater allowance. "Are you still in that throne, or are you free? and if you want to continue with this simple adventure - after all, this is yours and not mine - you better clap your arms and your leg Thorin of course saw this, so after a few more groans he got up and helped the hobbit as well as he could. In that darkness
While you were wandering around in that cold water, you had a difficult and unpleasant task to find water that was right. Knock outside it about ses dwarfe find out what could answer. Here it is unpacked and
helped ashore where they sat or murmured and moaned; Hull was so soaked and bruised and cramped that Hull could barely realize that Hul be free or quite grateful for that.
Dwalin and Balin were two of the unluckiest ones, and this was not a good thing, not asking for anyone to help. Bifur and Bofur were le but I just let it go and didn't want to do anything. Fili and Kili, which, however, was junk (vir dwarfe) and was also neatly packaged Sprinkle it into a smaller container, it comes out more or less shiny, with just a bruise or two and a stiffness that takes away some g "I hope I never smell that apple smell again!" the Fili community. "My bath was full of it. To smell apples forever when you can move a is koud en siek van die honger is waansinnig. I can eat anything in that world, right now, but not an apple!"
With the willing help of Fili and Kili, Thorin and Bilbo eventually discover the remains of that buddy and get to the bottom of it. Poo Bombur was in that sleep or senseless; Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin and Gloin were completely soft and the net was half-physically identical; A "Well! Here's us!" the Thorin sê. "En ek veronderstel ons behoort dankie te sê ons sterre en Mnr. Baggins. Ek is seker hy het die reg o again to your service, mr. Baggins. We will undoubtedly feel quite grateful when we are nourished and restored. In the meantime, what's "I suggest Lake City," Bilbo said. "What else is there?"
Of course, nothing else could be imagined; so the other face becomes Thorin and Fili and Kili and that hobbit it went past that kiss af bridge. There was something to be expected about that point, but let's not stop there
Nice job, because this has been so long since there was any need for work. Except. Every now and then the river tolls were friends with Bos-elwe. Other people were far away; and some of those younger people in that village openly doubt the existence of any dragon in that the laughter of the greybeard and gamers what happened to them that they saw
what in your young fly in that mouth. Since this is the case, it is not surprising that he expected drinking and feasting by a fire in hear the noise of that dwarf's unpacking or the footsteps of those four scouts. Thorin Oakenshield was greatly surprised
stepped through the door.
"Who are you and what do you want?" all the shouts and after all the feet and bag after weapons jumped. "Thorin seun of Thrain seun of Thror King beneath that Mountain!" it that
dwarf in a loud voice, and he said the same, despite her checked clothes and drawn hood. That gold glittered on her neck and waist; sy dark and deep. "I've come back. I want to see the Master of your village!"
Then there was tremendous excitement. From that more foolish running
from that hut as well as you it is expected that that mountain will turn gold in that night and all the waters of that lake will immedi "And who is hulle?" the hy asked after Fili and Kili and Bilbo clearly. "Those sons of my father's dogter," replied Thorin, "Fili and K Wes."
"If you come in peace, put down your weapons!" it was said by the captain.
"It's nothing to us," Thorin said, and this was true enough: hell messe, it's because the woods-elwe take from you, and also that great

Bilbo had the short sword, so he usually put it away, but he didn't get anything from it. "We don't need any weapons, what a return aft old. We couldn't eat so much either. Take us after your master!" "He is at the banquet," the captain said.
"Then all the more reason to take us after him," Fili, who was, burst out. impatient with this ceremony. "We are exhausted and starving our long path and our sick comrade. Now get going and don't let us say any more words, otherwise it will mean something to you, master. "Then follow me," the captain said, and with his men around him, his jelly, his ear, that bridge, that fence and in that market square village. This was a clear circle of silent water, surrounding the door with the top pillar where the larger house is located, and the d pedal and learn what to do after going off the surface of that lake. From a big one
they saw the bay and there the sound of the baie voice came. walked past the door and stood in that position and looked at the tables f with people.
"Ek is Thorin, seun of Thrain, seun of Thror, King beneath that Mountain! Ek
"return!" Thorin shouted from that door in a loud voice, in front of that captain. could anything.
Always jumped up. That Master of that village said it out loud
chair. But no one stood up with greater surprise than that raft man from that elwe who was sitting at the bottom of that hall. Please p At that master's table they shouted out loudly:
"Here, these are prisoners of our king, why escape, the wandering dwarf wanders around, which no good account of her self could get, sn "Is this true?" asked that Master. Well, hey, this is far away
more true than that return of that King under that Mountain, if any such person ever existed.
"This is true that we were unlawfully deceived by Elwekoning and taken prisoner without cause while we were traveling back to our own c Thorin replied. "But the lock or key may not hinder those gardens that are being talked about. This village is not in that Bos-elwe se When that Master cried and looked from one after another.
Elwekoning was very powerful in that part and that Master did not want any
enemy with him, and he also does not think much of your song, and gives you ideas for trade and tolls, for customs and gold, to what cu

However, Other had a different opinion, and the matter was handled promptly. without him. That nuus the soos fire of that door of that That quay was full of hasty feet. Some begin to sing songs of our songs in the ear of the return of that King under that Mountain; that Wasn't Thror's little boy not Thror himself coming back? He didn't make that effort. hull smooth nie. Another song starts playing and t more.
That King under that mountain, That King of the cut cliff, That lord of silwer fountaine Sal till sy reg come!
Sy kroon sal gehandhaaf word,
Sy harp will be tense again, Sy sale will resound gold
 Some revivals are made of songs from yesteryear. That forest will blow away En gras onder die son;
Syria will flow freely and the river will flow freely.
That stream will flow with joy, That mere will skyn and burn,
All heartache perishes and heartache By the Mountain King's return!
So the hull sounding, or baie so, just there was more of it, and there was baie cheering as well as that music of harpe and viol mixed with that. Indeed, such excitement was not yet known in that village, not in memory of that eldest oupa. That Bos-elwe self
the beginning was a miracle and even became frightening. Who did not know of course how Thorin escaped, and who began to think that his it was a serious mistake. As far as that Master is concerned, he saw that there was nothing there, nothing else for it than to answer t to pretend that he thought Thorin was what he said. So he gave him a big chair and Fili and Kili sat next to him in a place of honor.
Even Bilbo has been given a place to sit at that table, and no explanation of where he entered it - no song, even in that obscure way -
Shortly afterwards the other dwarf entered the middle of that village scene of stunned entusiasm. Hulle has always been doctored and fed

housed and spoiled in that most pleasant and satisfying way. big house was given to Thorin and sy geselskap; boats and rowers
is for his constitution; and skares sit outside and sing songs all day long, or cheer like any dwarf as much as your nose knows it. Some of those songs were old; but some of them were completely useless and the talk was full of confidence about the skiesy death of th through that Master and let it not please that dwarf especially, but in the meantime, let your baie be satisfied and let it quickly bec weather. Within a week he had indeed made a complete recovery, in good condition, with his straight colour, with combed and trimmed bea treë. Thorin looked and walked as if his kingdom had already been regained and Smaug swallowed up in small pieces.
Come on, so he said, that dwarf has a good feeling about that little one
That hobbit is getting stronger every day. There was no more moaning or grumbling. Let him drink health, and let him pat him on the bac especially cheerful. He doesn't forget the sight of that Mountain, nor the thought of that dragon, and he almost had a boiling cold. Vi The speech at the banquet was limited to "Thag you very buch."
In the meantime, the Bos-elwe sailed back up the Bos River
asked for help, and there was great excitement in that king's palace. I never heard what happened to that head of that guard and that b Of course, nothing ever happened to the keys or the barrel while that dwarf
it remained in Meerstad, and Bilbo was careful never to become unusable. Tog, I bet, is more ranting than what was known, although no d Baggins kept it somewhat of a mystery. In any case, that king knew that dwarf was sending, or he remembered it, and he sent it to himse "Good! We'll see you! No skat will come back to Mirkwood." without saying anything about it. But I expect that everyone will
always come to a bad end, and all your justice!" In any case, he did not believe in dwarf what veg and drake soos Smaug kill, and he st suspected attempted burglary or something like that - which shows that he's
wise elf and wiser as that man from that village, although not entirely right, as we will eventually see. He sent the sysioene after th so far north after that mountain as what they would go, and the story.
At the end of two weeks Thorin starts thinking about leaving. While that enthusiasm still remained in that village, it was time to ask that mountain.
That Master was surprised and a little scared that first time;
and it is more surprising that Thorin was actually a descendant of that old man. He never thought that that dwarf would finally dare to Smaug approach, but the glow that all your impostors was what sooner or later would be discovered and cast out. He was wrong. Thorin wa rightly the little support of that King under that Mountain, and there is no one who knows what a dwarf will dare and do for revenge or But that Master was smooth, not a pity to let him go. Hulle was expensive. to keep it, and when it arrives it turns into a long holiday "He welcome you!" the hy thinking. "Decide, O Thorin, Thrain se seun, Thror se "Seun!" was what he said. "You must make your own demand old talk. Whatever help we may give, let us be yours, and our trust in you will be grateful when your kingdom is regained."
Such a day, although that autumn was already far behind that bowl and that bindweed
cold, and blare the swift case, three large boats leaving Lake-town, chatting with rowers, dwarf, mr. Baggins, and baie stock. Perde an ponieë was sent by detour to meet Hull by Hul
designated landing spot. That Master and your councilor gave the whole order from the grand staircase of the city hall a little after t People are shouting on that quay and out of windows. Let that white oar dip it and splash it, and sail it northwards onto that lake on ON THAT DRIP
Within two days everyone had rowed up Long Lake and sailed out into that River, and now everyone could see that One Same Mountain towering grim and high for hull. That current was strong and hush-hush going on
steady. At the end of the third day, a few kilometers upstream, we entered the hull after the left or western shore and disembarked. He use what is sent to meet hulle. Hulle what he could get on those ponies and that rest is in a pile under a tent, but none of those men that mountain.

"At least not until those songs become true!" the whole thing. This was easier to look at in that Dragon and less easy to look at in Th was late and empty. Then it left your guidance and quickly ran downhill. that river and that kissing lake, although the night is alread On.
Let it be a cold and united night and your mind. That next day Hulle left again. Balin and Bilbo are behind the house, each with a diff steady path, because there was no good one there. Let it turn northward, straight away from that River, which runs, and all the closer spur of that mountain which has stretched southwards towards Hull.
This was an exhausting journey, and a quiet and unremarkable one. There was no sound or song or sound of harp, and what pride and hope in your heart stirred by that sing of old songs by that lake it died away a bit into a plodding gloom. May you know that you are nearin journey, and that this could be a terrible ending. The land around it is gloomy and barren, although once upon a time, as Thorin told i Nice. There was little grass there, and shortly before long there was no forest or tree, and just broken and black stumps to speak of, May it come with the destruction of that Dragon, and may it come with the decline of that year.
May you always reach that edge of that Mountain without encountering any danger or any sign of that Dragon other than that wilderness h hoer bo hulle. Hulle the first camp on the west side of that
great southern spur, which ended in a height called Ravenhill. On it there was an old wagpos; but don't dare climb this yet, it was too

Before they go to the western end of that mountain, visit them
hidden door, on which all your hopes rest, Thorin sent out a reconnaissance expedition to explore the land after the Suide where the Fr Gate it stood. Here we aim to choose Balin and Fili and Kili, and with
went to Bilbo. May it be shrouded in that gray and silent wreath after that foot march from Ravenhill. There that river, after this a r Valley, turning from that Mountain on the path to that Lake, flowing, quick and raspy. The river was barren and rocky, high and steep a Bay rocks, you could see in the Wye valley what the shadows of the Berg se arms are, those gray ruins of antique houses, towers and wal "There is everything that belongs to Dale," the Balin said. "That berg se hange was green with forest and the whole sheltered valley ri That's when the bell in that village rang." He was both heartbroken and grim as he said this: he was one of Thorin's companions on that came.
Don't dare to follow that river much further after that Gate;
but it continued as that end of that southern spur, until its hiding place could reveal it behind a rock and that dark, cavernous openi large wreath wall between the arms of that Mountain. From there the waters of the Running River spring; and from it also a steam and a every now and then a black and ominous crow. The only sound was the sound of the clipping water, and every now and then that loud crack "Come back to us!" it he said. "We can't do anything good here! And I don't like those dark feelings here, I seem to be a spy of those The front gate.
"That dragon is still alive and is in that sale under that mountain - or "I'll forget about that smoke," the hobbit said.
"This does not prove this," the Balin sê said, "although I have no doubt that you are not right. But he may be away for a while, or he that mountain hang waits, and I always expect smoke and steam
If you come out of that gate, all that sale inside must be filled with him, it smells bad."
With such gloomy thoughts, always followed by a croaking crow, hey, hey, hey, he had to make the path back after that camp. Once upon a That winter, that pleasant time was the same now that it was years ago. Hulle was alone in that dangerous wasteland with no hope of fur Not one of them has had much of a bad ear.
Well, strange to see that mr. Baggins more like the other one had it. He would often borrow Thorin's map and then stare, pondering over valley in that South where the gate of that river stood, and walled with laer

foothills of that Mountain. Two of these extend westward from the main mass in a long, steep slope that continues downwards after that plain. On this west side there were fewer signs of that dragon's marauding feet, and there was grass for their ponies. From here western camp, all day in the earskadu door wreath and wall until the sun begins to sink after the forest, day after day the whole of th easy toe up that mountainside. If that card were true, it would be quite high
That wreath at the point of that valley must represent that secret door. Day after day they returned without success after their return But in the end, everyone unexpectedly found what they were looking for. Fili and Kili and that hobbit went back into that valley one da between those tumbling rocks by your suidelike corner. After lunch, crawling behind a large cliff, which only stood as a pillar, Bilbo that dwarf found the trace of a path, often lost, often rediscovered, what wandered after the head of that southern path and ultimately Mountain. While you were looking away, you were seeing that you were on that wreath at the top of that valley and it was looking down a Silently, clinging to that rock wall on your right side, all gone in a single row
along that rock edge, until that wall opened, and the house found itself in a small bay with a steep wall, grass-covered floor, quiet a not even from further away, because this was so small that it was just a dark crack like it and nothing more. This was not a cave and w on the inside there was a flat wall, which in the lower part, near the ground, was as smooth and correct as a cutter's work, but withou be seen. There was no sign of post or lintel or drum nie, nor of bolt or bolt or keyhole; Still, there's no doubt in my mind that you w What about the hitting on that, what about the subsequent bumping and bumping, what about this begging to move, what about the fragment Finally, exhausted, everyone had to rest on the grass at their feet, and then at the beginning they had to descend a long climb.
There was excitement in that camp that day. The next day the whole thing is prepared to move again. Slegs Bofur and Bombur afterwards ponies and such supplies that they bring together from that river. The other one went down that valley and up that useful path, and so and it was breathless, with a fall of a hundred and fifty feet along it onto a cliff below; but each of them wound a good coil of rope There they set up their third camp and everything they needed was picked up under their clothes. Hulle was able to follow that same pat bring down one of those more active dwarfs, such as Kili, to exchange some nuus
soos was there, or to take a share in that wagon below, while Bofur was dragged to that whore's camp. Bombur didn't want to come on, ei path.
"I'm too fat for this flying walk," he said. "I should get dizzy and step on my beard, and then you would be thirteen again. And that k toue is too thin for my weight." Fortunately for him this was not true, because you will see.
In the meantime, some of them explored the opening on the other side and found a path that led all the way to that mountain; but kudos I didn't dare venture too far in that direction, and this wasn't much use in that either. Out there there is silence, do not interrupt in that cliff gate. Let the saggie talk and never shout or sing, because there is danger of it brewing in every rock. The other person that door had no further success. Hulle was too eager for Hulle to care about runes or those moon letters, but without Russia try to fi That door was hidden right in that smooth rock wall. Hull it
Bring picks and tools of all kinds from Laketown, and start trying to use them here. But when you hit that cliff, its handles splinter My work, all of it clearly seen, was not good and that magic was of no use to me.
the door made here; and may they also be frightened by that resounding noise. Found Bilbo playing that drum, monotonous and tiring there
Of course it wasn't really a drum, but let it cover that little grassy space between that wall and the opening of that "drum" in fun, remember Bilbo's words long ago at that unexpected party in his hobbithole, when he said he could sit on that drum until he did somethi it became gloomy and gloomy.
Your mood has risen with the discovery of that toad, but now it is in your soul; and yet you didn't want to give up courage and leave.
That hobbit was no longer much brighter than that dwarf. He would do this
nothing else but to sit with your back against that rock wall and stare westward through that opening, through that wreath, through tha

Mirkwood, and beyond that distance where he sometimes thought he could glimpse that Misty Mountain small and far away. When he asked th "If you had to sit and think on that drum, it would be my job, not just to go inside, so I would sit and think." But I'm scared
I don't think much about that work, but about the other side, that bare lê verte, that quiet Western Land and that Heuwel and sy hobbit A big gray crinkle it in the middle of that grass and he stared gloomy
to that or that big snail shell. This is the same as Hulle that small enclosed bay with a symmetry of cool rock, and there was the Bay slow and sticky as it crawls along its side.
"More early that last week of that autumn," Thorin said one day. "And winter come after autumn," the Bifur sê. "And next year after tha "this," the Dwalin sê, "and we shall bear growth until all that wreath hangs down after that valley before anything happens here. What us? Given that he is an unsatisfactory ring, and a particularly excellent artist should be, well, I start to think he will go from that Close the gate and spy on things!
Bilbo told this audience - that dwarf was on that rock just across the fence where he was sitting - and "Good Grace!" he thinks, "so th

to get them out of their troubles, at least since that wizard has been gone. What else am I going to do? I couldn't have known that som eventually happen to me. I don't think I can get through that unfortunate valley again, and as far as that steaming gate is concerned! That night he was miserable and had little sleep. That next day the dwarf wandered off in different directions; some was
While you exercise those ponies, some wander around that mountainside. All that day Bilbo was gloomy in that grassy bay to the west thr wait for something. "Maybe that roper will come back today," he thought.
When he lifts his head, he can see a glimpse of that distant forest. Sooo that one When we turned west, there was a yellow sky on the distant roof, as if that
it was that last one that turned out to be a blare prisoner. Did he like that orange ball from that son, see that plane from sy oë. He pale and flou was a thin new moon on the edge of the Earth.
At that moment, a crack cracked behind his audience. There on that gray cliff in the grass was an enormous lyster, barely coal black, w I can clearly understand Bilbo. He forgets all danger and stands on that edge. and the dwarf shouting, screaming and fanning. The one w the ear that rock tumbled and as quickly as hulle could along that lysie na hom, and wonder what was wrong on earth; the other screamed who all went up (except Bombur, of course: he slept).
Bilbo quickly clarified. May it all become quiet: that hobbit standing by that gray cliff, and that dwarf with a waving beard watching That'll happen sooner or later, and I hope it does. This turned into a belt of red cloud and dissipation. That dwarf moaned, but still it barely stood motionless. That moontjie it after that horison gesak.
That day has dawned. Come on, skielick, come all the hope that was the lowest, a red and a Sonbeam, it escaped like a finger through a rock wall. That old Lyster, what a great place to sit and look at it with
bead-like oe and head that is bent to one side, giving it a skittle-like vibration. There was a loud crack. A rock broke off that wall Quickly, say that that chance will fade away, that dwarf after that rock and pressure - in vain.
"That key! That key!" Bilbo exclaimed. "Where is Thorin?" Thorin jumped up hastily.
"That key!" the Bilbo screamed. "That key went with that card! Now try this." while there is still time!"
Then Thorin step closer and pull the key on your chain from your shoes
neck. He sat this toe that hole. Dit het gepas en dit het gedraai! Snap! That shine had gone out, that sun had gone out, that moon had Well, the whole thing just bumped into each other, and gradually broke into part of that rock wall. For a long time it cracked and beca three breaths is around, and blowing in steadily without a sound. This was as if darkness were a vapor from that hole in that mountains INTERNAL INFORMATION
For a long time the dwarf stood in front of that door in the dark and debated, until Thorin finally spoke:
"Now this is the time for our dear Mr. Baggins, what a good companion on our long path, and a hobbit full of courage.

and a resource that is sufficient for its size, and if this is the case, it is good luck that the normal allowance can exceed it - now who carries out his deeds for which he is confined in our Maatskappy; Now is the time to earn your reward."
You are familiar with Thorin's style by important borrowed, so be it no more of that for you, even though he kept it ashes for a lot longer
this. This was certainly an important opportunity, but Bilbo felt impatient. Now he was also completely familiar with Thorin, and he kn ry by.
"As you mean, you think it is my job to first enter that secret passage, O Thorin Thrain seun Eikenskild, may your beard grow even long the grumpy saying, "sê this immediately and you do this! I can't. I can already get it out of two spills, what was scarce in that origi that I think I am already due a reward. But the third time you pay for everything.' So my dad always said it, and I don't think I will This is the beginning of trusting my happiness more in that old day
I mean last spring before he leaves his own house, but this is the same for a long time
-"but in any case I think I'll go lurk right away and find out about this behind my back. Who will come with me now?" He didn't expect a choir of volunteers, so he wasn't disappointed.
Fili and Kili stood awkwardly together and on one leg, but the other one
it made no pretext for sacrifice, except for ou Balin, that lookout man, who was quite sweet to that hobbit. He said he would at least maybe also one of those toads, ready to summon help if necessary.
The most that can be said about that dwarf is this: you intended to pay Bilbo thank you very much for your service; all my respects for nasty work for you, and don't let that poor little guy do this as he would; but you will always do it to get him out of that difficulty If he got involved in it, he would have had any specific reason to be grateful in that case of that troll at the beginning of his adven vir hom. There is this: dwarfs are not heroes, but calculated people with a good idea of the value of money; some is difficult and trea fairly bad lump; some are not, but are orderly enough people like Thorin and Maatskappy, if you do not expect too much.
The star behind him came in a pale lung full of black streaks, crawled towards that hobbit door, that enchanted door, and into that Mountain. This was as easy as what he expected. This was no gnome entrance, or cave of rough woodland elwe. This was a corridor made by that pinnacle of your wealth and skill: straight with a ruler, smooth floor and smooth, going with a gentle, never-changing slope immed far end in that darkness below.
After a nap the Balin vir Bilbo "Good luck!" sê and stopped where he
I could always see the dull outline of that door, and I could just hear the rustle of that other person's whispering voice. outside. Then put on that hobbit ring and warn the eggs to turn around
more like a hobbit, take care not to make a sound, he creeps away without a sound, away, away in that dark. He gestured with fear, but was dull and grim. He was already a completely different hobbit than the one who had come a long way from Bag-End without a handkerchie I haven't had a handkerchief for years. He put the sy dagger in the sy skede, pulled the sy belt stywer and put it on.
"Now you're in it after all, Bilbo Baggins," he said. "You were there that day at that party and your foot was in it, and now you are gotta pull this off and pay for it! Ag no, what a fool I was and am!" he said, the least evil part of him. "I was absolutely of no use up and find that this animal barrel was my own porch to that house!"
Of course he never woke up, but kept going on and on until all signs of that door behind it disappeared. He was completely alone. Gou h This is the warm start. "Is this some kind of glow you see?" "Come right over there?" the hy thinking.
This was. As he went forward, it grew and grew, until there was no more doubt. because of that. This was a red, but it became redder an Well, no doubt warm in that barrel. Vapor drops on it and drifts away
hom and hy the beginning sweet. It also starts to knock in your ears, kind of
of drinks there is the sound of a big pot galloping on the fire, mixed with a rumbling sound of a giant cat purring. This led to that u red glow for him.
It was at this point that Bilbo stopped it. It was from there
bravest thing he ever did. The unfortunate things that happened next were nothing compared to that. He fought that real battle in that only, before he ever saw that terrible danger, what happened to him. In any case, after a short silence he will do it; and you can imag barrel, an opening of approximately the same size and shape as that door above.
That hobbit's little head lurks there. For him there is that large lower cellar or dungeon hall of that ancient dwarf from Berg's root.

there was a great glow rising from the near side of that rock floor. That glow from Smaug!
There he lay, a great red-gold dragon, clinging to that sleep; a boom came from your jaw and nostril, and clouds of smoke, but your fir sleep. Under him, under all his limbs and his great rolled star, and around him on all sides, which stretches out that unsightly floor, countless heaps of precious things, forged and unworked gold, precious stones and jewels, and silver flecked with red in that red light Smaug the gel, with great caress like an immeasurable bat, partially turning on one side, so that the hobbit could cover its underside expensive bed. Behind him, the nearest wall could be vaguely seen, armored skirt, helmets and byle, sword and spear which hang; and in there stood a large jar and barrel, filled with a wealth that could not be harvested.
It is not easy to say that Bilbo's breath has been taken away. There is no word to express your surprise, since man's language is what wonderful. Bilbo has heard it told and sing about dragonity before, but that prag, that voluptuousness, that glory of such a skat has n from dwarf; and he barely forgets the motionless stare of that fearful guard, during the gold prize and counting.
He stared like it for what an age, before he barely wanted to pull it. stealing it from the shadow of that doorway, skating from that f threat even in your sleep. He grabbed a large cup with two handles, as heavy as he could carry it, and cast a fearful eye upward. Smear It's a mess, that rumbling of your snork changes its tone.
Come on Bilbo quickly. But that dragon has not woken up, not yet, but the fussing in another dream of avarice and violence, which is th while that little hobbit toiled back into that long barrel. Her heart was beating and a more choral expression was in her ass when he l but he always took the cup and his main thought was: "I can do this! This will be all wise. 'More like a grocer than a burglar' indeed! don't hear about that anymore."
He doesn't either. Balin was glad to see that hobbit again, and as glad as he was surprised. He counted Bilbo up and carried him out that open lug. This was noon and the clouds covered the star, but Bilbo listened with his breath, breathed his breath and enjoyed the f again in that lung, and suddenly noticed that dwarf's excitement, or how he praised him and patted him on the back and he and all he families vir geslagte what come to sy his.
That dwarf was always busy carrying that cup from hand to hand and talking, looking forward to the recovery of her treasure, and then s rumbling woke up in that mountain below as if this was an old volcano that decided to start erupting again. That door behind hulle
is barely pulled out, and blocked with a clip to close, but on that one
long ago those fearful eggs came, from far away in those depths, from a roar and a trampling that caused the ground beneath them to mov When that dwarf felt all his joy and all his self-assured spog from a forgotten moment before and he shrunk in fear. Smaug would still taken into account. This is not good to let a living dragon not calculate from you, if you live near him. Drake the valley not much wor all your wealth, but you know this if a real is owned down to an ounce, for a long time afterwards; and Smaug was no exception. He expe to a slumber, and from a slumber to wawyd awake. There was a strange breath of air in the cave. Could there be any pull out of that lit he felt very happy about that, even though it was so small, and now he stared back and wondered why he never blocked it. Recently the h He half imagines that he heard those dull sounds of a knocking sound from far away, that it had come from there after the sound. Hy the sy neck to sniff. Then he misses that face!
Diewe! Fire! Murder! Something like that hasn't happened since he got to that mountain that first time! Your anger is unacceptable - th Only recently seen when rich people enjoy a little more of the ashes that they can enjoy, or have lost something that their country has If fire erupted, it smelled, it shook those mountain roots. In vain he poked his head into that small hole, and then his length rolled and on to the front gate.
To hunt that whole mountain until he catches that thief and kills him
and being trampled upon was her only memory. He came out of that gate, that water rose in wild whistling steam, and he floated into tha

settled on that mountaintop in a spout of green and scarlet flames. That one Dwarf the fearful back of her quick hearing, and let her crouch
that wall of that lawn terrace cowers under the rock, hoping somehow to escape that fearsome oe of that hunting dragon.
It would have been killed all the time, if it wasn't for Bilbo once again. "Quick! Snappy!" he gasped. "That door! That barrel! This is Excited by these words, everyone was about to crawl into that barrel when Bifur exclaimed: "My cousins and niggies! Bombur and Bofur-us Hull forgets, Hull is down in that valley!"
"They will be killed, and all our ponies, and all our provisions will be lost," the other groaned. "We can't do anything."
"Nonsense!" regain Thorin's spirit and dignity. "We can't leave, you guys. Climb in, Mr. Baggins and Balin, and you two, Fili and Kili, This was probably the worst thing ever that anyone had done.
Frightening sound of Smaug's fury it echoes in those crinkly hollows; At a glance it can flare up or fly around and find it there, near that dangerous edge of the wreath, what was wild about it
toue. Bofur it came up, and all was becoming safe. Bombur it came up, puffing and blowing while that toue cracked, and all was still sa A sobbing sound is hearing. It's a shame that the point of the parking spot has been touched. That dragon came.
If they had had enough time to fly back to that barrel, while they were moving in and dragging their ropes, when Smaug came storming fr mountainsides with flames, and they beat their great wings with a sound like a roaring wind. Sy warm breath it that shrinks the grass i the door that creaks a bit, his face, ingry and his head scratching while he crawls away.
Flickering fire the jumping and black rock shadows the dancing. When darkness fell he passed away again. Those ponies screamed out of f and the game galloped away. That dragon blew and turned to follow after him, and was gone.
"This will be the end of our poor animal!" the Thorin sê. "Niks kan ontsnap Smaug sodra hy dit sien. Hier is ons en hier sal ons moet b This was not a pleasant day! Let it crawl further into that barrel, and let it move and cry, even though it was hot and stuffy, until d It turned out that the creak came from that door. Every now and then door that
Nightly you could hear the roar of that flying dragon growing and then passing away and fading away as it chased around and around that He heard the noise from that pony, and from that spore of that camp, what he had discovered that man from that river and that lake came climbed that mountainside from that valley where those ponies were
to stand; but that door withstood the sy searching eye, and that little bay with the wall carved out the sy fiercest flame. Long ago th and to gather our strength. He would not forget or forgive that theft, not if a thousand years turned it into a smoldering cliff, but h wag. Steadily and silently he crawled back after syleplek and sy oë half done. When that dawn comes, it takes that dwarf's fear away. I and that there was no point in giving up his quest. Hulle couldn't get away either. just now, Thorin explained it. Their pony was lost You should take a quick nap before Smaug and you relax
enough vir hulle to dare to tackle that long path on foot. Fortunately, they saved enough of their supplies to last them a while. Hulle debated for a long time about what should be done, but he couldn't think of anything, a way to get rid of Smaug - which is still planne, so Bilbo was inclined to explain. Then, if the nature of man is somewhat spoiled, the very beginning is ready for that hobbit a "What else do you think a burglar should do?" asked Bilbo evil. "Ek
I wasn't trying to kill Drake, this is military work, but to steal skat. I made the best start I could. You expect me to trot back with ready, I think I may dalk 'n sê hê. You had to bring five hundred
burglars not a not. Certainly this reflects great credit on you, Oupa, but
You can't imagine that you'll ever explain the unsettling size of Syria to me. I would have wanted to spend a hundred years doing all t times so great, and Smaug so mak soos 'n hare."

Then of course the dwarf begged for a fresh king. "What do you do then? "What do you suggest we do, Mr. Baggins?" Thorin asked politely skat. This of course depends entirely on a new turn of luck

to get rid of Smaug. Getting rid of Drake is not easy in my mind, but I will do my best to think about it. Personally it seems smooth, I wish I was back safely at that house."
"Don't worry about that! What should we do today?"
"Well, if you really want my advice, then there is nothing else we can do
happy where us is. No doubt Bedags can crawl us out safely enough to take that lug. Perhaps one or two may soon be chosen to return aft Almal should be well inside that barrel.
"Now I'll make you an offer. I'll steal my ring and steal it." this afternoon-then, if ever Smaug should sleep-and look what he is planning. Maybe something will turn up. 'Every worm it sy weak place,'
So my dad always said it, although I'm sure this wasn't from personal experience."
Of course the dwarf eagerly accepts that offer. Let's already start to respect little Bilbo. Now he is the true leader in your adventur When he comes, he has prepared another journey into that mountain. He doesn't
This happened of course, but it wasn't so bad that he more or less knew what was wrong with him. If he knew more about Drake and his cu I was more scared and less hopeful about catching one here.
He saw it when he started it, but it was so dark that night in that barrel. It lies from that door, barely there, the gold fades when i off. It was so quiet that smoke could burn on a light breeze
this happened to him, and he was inclined to feel a little proud of himself when he
came closer to that bottom door. Suddenly the faintest glow could be seen there. "Ou Smaug is tired and sleepy," he thought. "He can't Keep half an eye open while you sleep, as you are eighty-nine. Smaug it certainly resembles that sleep, barely dead and dark, with a fa away from that entrance again. He was just about to step out onto that floor when he saw a skielike thin and penetrating red beam under that drooping eyelid of Smaug's left eye. He just pretended to be asleep! He was while he was blocking that barrel entrance! Bilbo hurr that happiness of sy ring. Then the Smaug talked.
"Well, thief! I smell you and I feel your pain. I hear your breath. Come together! Help yourself again, there is enough and enough for But Bilbo was not entirely unlearned in dragon hearing like this, and as Smaug it was so easy to hope to get closer to him that he was "No thanks, O Smaug that Unsaglike!" he replied. "I just didn't know what to do. I just wanted to look after you
see if your work was so big so those stories were. I don't really care." "Are you doing this now?" it flattered the dragon somewhat, ev nie 'n woord daar glo nie.
"Truly, songs and stories are completely lacking in that effectiveness, O Smaug, who is 'The Greatest and Greatest of Disaster,' Bilbo "You have a beautiful manner for a thief and a liar," the dragon said. "You seem familiar with my name, but I don't remember that I did "You may indeed! I come from under that hill, and under those hills, and in the ear of those hills, it's a nice jelly to me. And throug "So I can do this well," the Smaug said, "but this is your common name."
"Ek is that guide finder, that web snyer, that gadfly. I am chosen for that lucky number." "Beautiful titles!" it spotted that dragon. "But happy numbers are not always good."
"He is exactly what your friends begged and drowned and pulled out
empty again from that water. I came from that end of a bag, but not a bag went to my ear."
"Here, that doesn't sound so believable," Smaug scoffed. "Ek is that friend of bear and that gas of eagle. Ek is Ringwenner and Geluksd This is of course the way to talk to Drake if you don't want to be public. your right name (which is wise), and don't want to make you bluntly weiering (which is also baie wys). No dragon can resist that fascination
of rambling chatter and having to waste time trying to understand it. There was baie here what Smaug glad didn't understand (although I I think he understands enough, and he giggles within his bose.
"Ek het so gedink yesterday," the hy vir homself smiled. "Meermanne, some nasty ones

plan of that miserable bath-handling Meermanne, or else it's an akkedis. I haven't been like that for a century and a century; but I wi "Very well, O Barrel Rider!" he said it out loud. "Maybe that was your pony's name; and maybe not, although this was cool enough. You c Unheard of, but you didn't get it completely right. Let me tell you what the ponies ate last night and I will catch and eat all the oth that excellent meal I will give you some advice for your sake: what to do with dwarfs anymore, if you can help!"
"Dwarf!" Bilbo said in feigned surprise. "Moenie don't talk to me!" the Smaug. "I don't know the smell (and taste) of a dwarf pony bett Bad ending if you go with such friends, Thief Barrel Rider. I don't care about you
go back and get this away from me." But he didn't tell Bilbo that there was a smell that he couldn't make out, hobbit smell; this was c sy experience and the man great confused.
"I assume you received a fair price for that cup last night?" he continued. "Come on, eh? Nothing at all! Well, this is just like that. Suppose you sneak around outside, and your job is to do all those dangerous things and get what you can when I don't look at you? And y get a fair share? Don't you hate this! If you come away from it alive, you will be happy."
Bilbo is starting to feel really uncomfortable. When Smaug se
A wandering eye, what in that shadowy souk, the ear flashes, he
the movement, and an inexplicable desire grabbed the man to rush out and
homself publicly and tell that whole truth to Smaug. Besides, he was in a serious situation and was in danger of coming under that drag talked again.
"You don't know everything, O Smaug that Mighty One," he said. "Not gold not just bringing us here."
"Ha! Ha! You acknowledge that 'us'," the Smaug shouted. "How come you're not 'us', not fourteen" and that's it, Mr. Lucky Number? I'm g "I don't know if this has already occurred to you, even if you could steal it
gold bietjie vir bietjie - a matter of a hundred years or so - could this not be kry nie Baie ver? Not much use on that mountainside, r See me! Have you ever thought about those catches? A fourteenth part, I suppose, or something like that, that was the term, right? But Smack the laugh out loud. He had a wicked and cunning heart, and he was not far from the system, although he suspects that the Lake man in that village on that coast which in sy young was called Esgaroth. You'll be fine with this, but poor Bilbo was quite surprised.
So far, all your thoughts and energies have been focused on that
Berg and find that entrance. He never bothered to wonder how that shit was going to be removed, never decided how any part of it whatever falls until it falls, will be completely returned to Bag-End Onder-Heuwel.
Well, a bad suspicion is starting to grow in your mind, that dwarf
does this person also forget that important point, or do you have to pay for it all the time? This is the effect of some dragon talk on inexperienced. Bilbo must of course have been on his guard; but Smaug had quite an overwhelming personality.
"Ek sê vir jelle," he said, in an attempt to be loyal to his friends and keep them pointed in their direction, "because that gold was l ear and under the hill, through wave and wind, through Revenge. Surely, O Smaug, those immeasurable riches, you must realize that your some bitter enemy?"
When Smaug rightly fell - a shattering sound as Bilbo scrabbled on that floor, while that dwarf crowded far away in that barrel and the

"Revenge!" it snores, and it lies away from the floor. up to that ceiling soos skarlakenrooi weatherly. "Revenge! That King under that is dead and where is her family who dare to take revenge? Girion, Lord of Dale, is dead, and my people have eaten a wolf under hood, an Is this really what this dares to do to get close to me? I kill where I want and no one dares. resist. Even those warriors of old were "Thief in that Skaduwees!" the hy cheering. "My armor is as tenfold shield, my tooth is a sword, my strong spear, that sword of mine is let out a hurricane, and let me breathe death!"
"I still understand," Bilbo said with a terrified squeak, "that Drake was below, far in that region of that-eh- chest; but undoubtedly it strengthens someone to think about it."
That dragon stopped spog curtly. "Your attitude is
"outdated," the Hy barks. "Ek is fully armored with ysterskubbe

and hard gemstone. No lem can't knock my door."
"I could do this," Bilbo said. "Truly, you can't be there
it is the equivalent of Lord Smaug who found the Impenetrable. Watter prag vir besit 'n underbaadjie van fyn diamante!
"Yes, this is indeed simple and wonderful," Smaug said, absurdly satisfied. He didn't know that that hobbit had already caught a glimps strange undercovering during your previous visit, and the moaning for a further explanation for your own reasons. That dragon rolled ov "Wat sê jy erop?"
"Blindingly wonderful! Perfect! Flawless! Astonishing!" Bilbo exclaimed aloud, but what he thought inside was: "You fool! Why, there's After he saw that Mr. Baggin's only idea was to get away. "Well, I mustn't hold back Your Greatness any longer," he said, "or keep you of much needed rest. Pony catch a bite, glo ek, after one
long start. And burglars too," he added a gesture of dismissal as he shot it back and fled the barrel.
This was an unfortunate comment, because that dragon spouted tremendous flame
behind him, and though he hurried up that slope, he didn't get close enough to be comfortable before Smaug's nasty head was hit. toe that opening behind. Fortunately, that whole head and jaw wasn't possible
impression, but that nostril sent out the fire and vapor to pursue him, and he was scarcely overcome, and he stumbled blindly on in gre with Smaug, but you made a mistake in that end, bringing him to a better understanding.
"Should never live drake lag nie, Bilbo, you fool!" it happened to him, and this later became a favorite saying of him and turned into "Isn't close to that adventure yet," he added, and this was quite true.
That afternoon it became time for him to come out again
the stumbles and flounders on that 'drumple'. That dwarf the hom bygebring, and the sy burnt as well as moontlik treat; but this was a before her hair on the back of her head and her heel grows properly again:
this was all down to the skin scratching and frizzing. Meanwhile
my friends did their best to cheer him up; and everyone was eager to hear the story, everywhere to know how that dragon made such a ter and how Bilbo escapes it.
But the hobbit was troubled and uneasy, and he found it difficult to get anything out of him. After he thought about it, he was well regretted some of the things he said to that dragon, and was not eager to repeat them. That old woman sat on a nearby rock with her hea Bilbo was in a mood: he added a cliff and threw this after that lyster, which just fluttered to one side and came back.
"Wear that feel!" Bilbo shouted grumpily. "I glo he listen, and I don't love sy prevent nie." "Let him go!" the Thorin sê. "That lysters is good and friendly-
This is indeed a beautiful old feeling, and is perhaps the last surviving legacy of that ancient race that lived around here, in the ha Oupa. Hulle was a long-lived and magical race, and this is even possible
one of them pointed out what happened a few hundred years or more ago. That Manne van Dale had that trick to get her language, and the custom of many messengers to fly after the Manne van die Meer and elsewhere."
"Well, he might as well take it to Lake-town, if this is what he does."
is behind," Bilbo said; "although I don't suppose there is any human ear there, there is that problem with spray language." "Why what's happening?" that dwarf cried out. "Continue with your story!"
So tell Bilbo everything he could remember, and he admit that he
a bad feeling that that dragon is making too much of it, adding to that camp and those ponies. "I'm sure he knows we're from Laketown and had help from there; and I have a terrible feeling that her next move may be in that direction. I still wish this never happened Barrel Rider; This would leave even a blind rabbit in this part thinking about that Meermanne.
"Well, well! This cannot be helped, and this is difficult not to slip into. Don't talk to a dragon, or so it will always listen," Balin thing in any case, and it came to that house, and this is more than what most of them can have had some words with people like Smaug. T I still remember that bald guy in that old Wurm se diamond underbaadjie."
This has changed the conversation, and it is already a beginning to discuss dragon killing - historical, doubtful and specific - and th what a blessing it achieves. That general view was that vang

A Dragon, what sleep was not so easy as this did not sound, and that attempt to hold on to something like that sleep was more likely to away. And all the time the idle talk and the shadows grew longer, Bilbo became more and more unhappy and his ominous feeling grew.
In the end he interrupted everything. "We are definitely unsafe here," he said. it said, "and I don't see that point to sit here. That This is in my bones that this place will be attacked again. Smaug now knows how I got rid of it, and you can trust him to find out wher the other side of that barrel. He will break this whole side of that mountain to pieces, if necessary, to stop our entrance, and if we "You're baie gloomy, Mr. Baggins!" the Thorin sê. "Why it Smaug nie
that bottom point blocked, if he is so eager to hold us out? He didn't hear it, or we had to hear it." "I don't know, I don't know - because at first he wanted to try it
me again, I accept it, and maybe because he is waiting until afterward, or because he doesn't want to damage his bedroom if he can help one look now, and our only hope is to be sent into that barrel and that door."
He took it so seriously that that dwarf finally did it when he said it,
Although you delay the closing of the door - this is the same after a desperate plan, because no human knew whether or how you could op who wanted to be locked up in a place from which the only way out led
Because that dragon's place was not one that anyone liked. Everything was also relatively quiet, both outside and in that barrel. So si it was not far from that half-open door and lashed.
That conversation happened after that dragon spoke to that dwarf. Bilbo
He never wishes he would listen, or at least that he could be completely sure that that dwarf was absolutely honest with him, let him e It's easy not to think about what might happen after that skat
is used to. "We know this would be a desperate undertaking," Thorin said, "and we always know it; and I always think that when we get u fourteenth, as soon as we have something to divide it. It's a shame if you are concerned about transport, and I recognize that the prob It has not become less wild with the passage of time, rather that it has been exposed - but we will do everything in our power to help From there the conversation went over that big skate itself and over the things that Thorin and Balin remember. Let it be more wounding

there unharmed in that room below: the spear that was made by those teachers
of that great King Bladorthin (lankal death), each had a thrice-forged head and its head was encrusted with cunning gold, but its body deliver or pay; skilde made vir wargers lankal dead; that large gold cup from Thror, two-handed, hammered and carved with feelers and blomme of which the oë and crown blare were of jewel; armor-plated, gilded and silver-plated and impenetrable; that necklace of Girion, made before, because this was made of pure silver to the strength and strength of triple steel. But the most beautiful of all was that die Arkensteen van Thrain.
"That Arkenstone! That Arkenstone!" the Thorin in that dark murmur, half dream with her on her knees. "This was indeed a globe with a a thousand phases; This is what the sky looked like, like silver in that fire, like water in that sun, like snow under that star, like But that bewitched lust of that skat was Bilbo's rubbish.
Through all the conversation he just half listened to all of them. He next to that door with an ear turning for any beginning of a soun was attentive to eggo's other side, that dwarf's mumbling, to the only whisper of a movement from far below.
That darkness has become deeper and it has become more and more uncomfortable. "Close that door!" He begged, "I fear that dragon in my Something in the system gives that dwarf an uneasy feeling.
Gradually shook off the Thorin dream and got up and that
clip what that door holds. Then the whole thing hit it, and this with one
a crash and a clatter. There was no trace of a keyhole on the inside of the ear. Hulle was enclosed in that Berg! And not a moment too early. Hulle the scars 'n ent descended.
that barrel and keep that side of that mountain, the collapse of it will happen

battering ram made from forest oak trees and the door blew loudly. That rock
the drone, the wall, the cracking and the roof falling on your head. What would happen if that door was still open, I don't like that. think. Let it run further into that barrel, glad to live still, while it was behind it, out of the hearing of the roar and rumbling of rock to pieces, wall and wreath with that hint of sy
big star, to your small faraway campsite, that scorched grass, that limestone, that snail-covered wall, that nu lysie, and everything disappear into a mixture of fynproewers, and a torrent of splintered cliffs falls over the ear that wreath in that valley.
Smaug leaves the syllêplace in silence, quietly drifts into that lug, and
heavy and steady in that dark darkness a monstrous crow, drifting downwind from that mountain, in the hope of being caught unawares something or someone there, and to spy that outlet after that hallway
what that thief use it. This was that outburst of his anger when he couldn't find anyone and couldn't see anything, even where he was s After he gets rid of his anger in this way, he feels better and he thinks in his heart that he will not be upset from that side again. In the meantime he had to take further revenge. "Barrel Rider!" the hy snore.
"It came from your foot from that water's edge and you came onto that water without a doubt. I don't know your smell, but if you are no King under the mountain!
He got up in fire and went south to that Running River. NIE TUIS NIE
Meanwhile, the dwarf sat in darkness, and total silence settled around her. Minus all the eating and all the minutiae talking. Hulle co passage of time; and let the voice of the candle move, because of the whispering of it
voice it in that barrel reverberation and rustling. As all slumber it, all silently awakened, darkness and silence that continues unint I dare say, if this were the case, if you were suffocated and became bewildered by lack of light, you could no longer bear this. Hulle welcomed the dragon's return from below. In that silence the hush
fear of some devious trickery on his part, but he couldn't stay there forever.
Thorin the talk: "Let us try that door!" it he said. "I must feel that wind on my face or die. I think I would rather be crushed by Sma oop ashes to suffocate in this!" Then the dwarf got up and felt back to where that door was. But thank you for finding that the stronge that barrel was crushed and blocked with broken rock. Yet that key, that magic that once belonged to it, would one day open that door a "We're screwed!" the silent moaning. "This is the end. We will die here."
But somehow, just when that dwarf was at his most desperate, Bilbo had a strange feeling of relief in his heart, as if a heavy weight h sy onderbaadjie.
"Come, come!" it he said. "'Solank there is life, there is hope!' so my dad always said, and 'Third time pays for everything.' I went b On the other hand, I will risk a third visit when I am no longer sure. In any case, the only way out is over. And I think this time you i."
In desperation they agreed, and Thorin was the first to move forward to Bilbo's side. "Now be careful!" whisper that hobbit, "and as silently as you can
be! There should be no Smaug at the bottom there, but there should be on the other side. Don't worry about us taking any unnecessary ri Off, off the hull gone. Of course, that dwarf could not compare to that hobbit in true silence, and all the noise and noise
bickering which is appallingly amplified; but although every now and then
Bilbo again stood still and listened in fear, not a sound beneath the stirring. that bottom, as far as he could judge, Bilbo put on his forward. But he didn't need this: that darkness was complete, and everyone was always unseen, ring or no ring. Well, that's how black t unexpectedly, your hand is in that lug, you stumble forward and roll head by head into that hole!
Because he and his sister lay on the floor below and did not dare to get up, or even to breathe. But nothing, it doesn't move. There wa
-tensy, soos this vir hom like it, when he finally lays his head on his head, there
was a pale white shimmer, bo hom and far away in that darkness. But this was definitely not a spark of dragonfire, although that wormy place, and that taste of steam was on your tongue.
Ultimately, Mr. Baggins cannot endure this any longer. "Confuse you, Smaug, "You worm!" he squeaked loudly. "Stop crawling away, you pl lie down, and then eat me, if you can catch me!
Dowwe egged the door on that strange conversation, but there was no answer. Bilbo got up and found that he didn't know how to turn it i

by that house today (or today, or whatever this is), glo ek. If Oin and Gloin haven't lost their tinder doses, maybe it can make us a b "Lie down!" he exclaimed. "Can anyone take a nap?"
The dwarf was of course quite shocked when Bilbo heard it
that trap with a stomp into that corridor, and let it sit huddled just where he had let it go at the end of that barrel. "Sh! sh!" hear the whole hissing sound; and although this
That hobbit helped him find out where he was, taking it a little while before he could get anything else out of him. But in the end, Bi it on that floor start stomp and bo-op sy head "lie down!" geskree
with a shrill voice the Thorin toadgegees, and Oin and Gloin are sent back after all their bonds on that barrel.
After a while it was a sparkling glint of your return, Oin with a small pine torch burning in his hand, and Gloin with a bundle of othe under your arm. Bilbo trotted quickly to the door and took the torch; but he could not persuade that dwarf to set the other on fire or not yet. Soos Thorin just clarified it, it was mr. Baggins remains an extremely competent burglar and investigator. If he wanted to ris saak. Hulle sou in die tonnel wag vir sy rapport. So the hull near that door and looked.

Cover that small dark shape of that hobbit ear that floor you saw at the beginning of your small lie held up. Every now and then, while enough, let it catch a shimmer and a clang when he stumbled a few times on the thing. He has become smaller while he wandered away in t this is the beginning of dancing in that lug ascent. Bilbo was busy with that big pile of skates. Would he have stood up and continued it stood still for a moment and stooped; but let's not know that reason.
This was that Arkenstone, that Heart of that Mountain. So the Bilbo shouting
from Thorin's writing; but indeed there could not be two such gems, even in such a wonderful castle, even in that whole world. Always a This gradually grew into a small ball of dull light. Now as he came closer, it was tinged with a flickering sparkle of pale color on th and it shatters because of its staggering lie. Ultimately he looked back on it and regained the system. That great jewel appeared befor your inner lie, and tog, cut and shaped by that dwarf, what was it
it grabbed this long joint from the heart of that mountain, this it all that light take what happened on it and this turns into ten tho glitter of that rainbow.
Like Bilbo's arm, he went there, pulled on the door by his enchantment.
little hand did not want to do this, because this was a large and heavy gemstone; but he was happy to accept this and put it in his dee "Now I am indeed a burglar!" the hy thinking. "But I definitely have to give up on that dwarf because of that. Since the sex could choo egg share; and I think I would choose this if all those rest take it!" He always had the same uncomfortable feeling that he chose and a It was not right to include this wonderful jewel here, and that is where the difficulty would come from.
Now he's done it again. He climbed on the other side of that great hill, and the spark of his torch disappeared from the sign of those walk around the floor of that hall.
He kept it going until he came to that large door on that side of the ear, and there it was a breath of fresh air for him, but it barel The dull beginning of the journey into the darkness. And always there was no sign or sound of Smaugnie. He just wanted to turn around a A black figure approached him and he noticed it in his ear. Hy the squeaking and starting, stumbling and falling backwards. Sy torch th and it went out!
"Just like a bat, take it and hope!" it happened miserably. "But what is it again?" What should I do? What is Oos, Suid, Noord or Wes?" "Thorin! Balin! Oin! Gloin! Fili! Kili!" he exclaimed so loudly as the moon sounded - this was a thin sound in that deep darkness. "Tha Someone come see me and help me!" Because that look means the whole thing will fail.
Silently, the dwarf screamed in the audience, although the only word they could catch was "help!"
"What is happening on earth or below?" the Thorin sê. "Don't touch that dragon, otherwise he wouldn't stop, don't beep."
Let's talk about it for a moment or two, and there was still no dragon sound, no smooth sound, except Bilbo's faraway voice. "Come on, "another lie or two!" the Thorin command. "It looks like we have to go and help us burglar."
"This is about our turn to help," the Balin said, "and I am quite willing to go." In any case, I expect this to be safe for the first t

A few more torches were lit, and then everyone crawled out and walked along that wall as quickly as the moon did. This wasn't long befo Thanks Bilbo himself, a little after he came back. He understands it quickly disappears and returns as soon as he sees that sparkle of "Just like a bat and a fallen torch, nothing worse!" he said in response. ask for help. Although everyone was happy, they were inclined grumpy because you were not afraid of anything; but I don't know what it would mean if he told it in that look of that Arkenstone. That naked floating glimpse of skatte what he caught while he was gone, it reignited all that fire of his dwarfish heart; and then that one The heart of a dwarf, even that most respectable one, wakes up through gold and through jewel, he becomes quickly brave, and he may bec That dwarf indeed didn't need any more encouragement. Almal was now eager to explore that house while he had the chance, and was prepar torch; and while you look at one side and then at another, you forget fear and self-esteem. Hull the talking out loud and shouting afte Hull the old skatte from that heap or that wall and this in that lie, caress and finger hull.
Fili and Kili were hardly in a cheerful mood, and they still found their baie goue harpe, with silver clasp, hanging there, and they to hull; and to be magical (and also untouched by that dragon, how much it had (minus interest in music) you were always set. That dark ro more practicalities: collect all the precious things and fill them with empty water, and let what you could not carry with a breath fal not the least among these not; but he always looked from side to side for something he couldn't find. This was that Arkenstone; but he Well, take the dwarf pos and weapons off that wall, and
arm the shell elf. Thorin, indeed, looked like a royal, dressed in a coat of gilded rings, with an ax with a silver handle in a go "Mr. Throw off your old coat and put on this one!"
With that he put on Bilbo a small armored coat, made to resemble a few young human elf princes. This was made of silver steel, what the together with it it became a belt of pearls and crystals. A light helmet of shaped leather, reinforced with hoops of steel, and around white gem, is placed on that hobbit's head.
"I feel wonderful," he thought; "but I expect it seems rather absurd." How everyone lay on that Heuwel by that house! I still wish ther Still the mr. Baggins is more fond of that enchantment.
about that skat as what those midgets do. Long before that dwarf was tired, he examined that skatte, got tired of it and sat on that fl and the nervous beginning wonder what the end of it all would be. "I would give a whole bunch of these precious cups," he said, "for a "Thorin!" he cried out loud. "What's next? We're armed, but what good will this do?" Was there ever before any armor against Smaug that That skat hasn't been recovered yet. Our souk is not gold yet, but a way of escape; and we tested our luck too long!"
"You talk that truth!" answer Thorin and regain your senses. "Let us go! I will let you go. Not in a thousand years will I see those wo here, that palace." Let him call the other one, and let him come together, and with his torches, let him break his door, that gaping door, not without many a look back of longing.
Cover your shimmering clothes with your cloaks again
Your shining helmets with your worn-out caps, and a row of little ones walking behind Thorin, a row of little ones lying still in that Although all the old ornaments had decayed or been destroyed, and although everything was dirty and dull with the comings and goings of kick, and turn, and descend with a resounding sound, and turn again, and climb more steps, and still more steps again. Here it was slip from that leaning rock wide and beautiful; and up, up, the dwarf has gone, and
Let it not be a sign of any sign of any life, but the skelm skaduwees which hastened away as the approach of the torches fluttered in t However, that trappe was not vir hobbit-bene made nie, and Bilbo was
that feeling that he could no longer cope with, let's just jump to that roof high and far beyond the reach of his torch. A white glint Before it lay dull, the big door came, some twisting, it hung on its hinge and half burned.
"This is that great chamber of Thror," Thorin said; "that hall of feast and of that council. The Front Gate is not far away." Hulle the door that destroyed room gone. There was rotten tables there;

it would be the other way around, charred and rotting. Skedels and bones were on that floor between jugs and buckets and there was no d further on at that end there is a sound of water in your ear, and that gray is increasingly skilfully more full.
"There is that birth of that Running River," Thorin said. "From here, this hare after that Gate. Let us follow this!"
The boiling water flowed out of a dark opening in a rock wall, and
this is the flow, swirling in a well channel, cut and straight and deep
door that deviousness of ancient trade. Along this cliff-paved path, we walked past each other quite often. Quickly along this the hull

day. In front of it a hoe bow verrys, which always contained that fragment of that old time wisely carved work, wearing away and splint misty son, the syllable lies between the arms of that mountain, and shines of gold on the pavement by the drum.
A swirling wind of bats, which, through their smoking torches, wakes up from their sleep and is heard by their swimming; while your for those waters scurried wildly after falling out and skimming after that valley. Hull it turned out to be torches thrown on that ground a "Well!" sê Bilbo, "I never dare to look out of that door." And I never dare to be so happy to see that sun again and that wind on me. B This was. A bitter easterly wind blew with a threat of approaching winter.
This the ear and around those arms of that Mountain in that valley, and
sucked between those rocks. After your long time in those rushing depths of that dragon ghost cave, let it happen in that son.
Bilbo quickly realized that he was not just tired, but also hungry
indeed. "This seems like it is late-looking," he said, "and therefore I assume this is more or less breakfast - if there is any breakfa that Smaug's front door is the safest place for a meal. Let's go somewhere where we can sit quietly!"
"Totally right!" the Balin event. "And I think I know where we should go: we belong after that old lookout at that southwestern corner Mountain."
"How far is this?" asked that hobbit.
"Five o'clock, I think. This is going to be rough. That toad
from that Gate along the left side of that stream this whole seems to have broken up. But look at that! That river meander skies past D destroyed village. At that stage there was once a bridge with some steep steps that went up to the right, and so on to a path that runs There is (or was) a path that leaves that path and climbs up to that pole. also a difficult climb, even if the old guy is still there." "Ah no!" it that hobbit grumbles. "More steps and more climbs without breakfast! I wonder how many breakfasts and other meals we miss i Trouens, two nights and that day in between passed away (en
not completely without kos not) that dragon smashed that magic door to pieces, but Bilbo completely lost count, and this could have bee nagte vir sover hy kon sê.
"Come, come!" the Thorin lying gesê-sy mind the beginning styg
again, and he rattled those precious stones in your bag. "Moenie, my, don't call the palace a nasty hole! You wait until this is cleane "This won't happen until Smaug is dead," Bilbo said dejectedly. "In the meantime, where is he? I'll give you a good breakfast to know. Don't be on that mountain and look after us!"
That idea shocked the dwarf immensely, and he quickly concluded that Bilbo and Balin were right. "We have to get out of here," Dori said. "I feel like oo on the back of my head."
"This is a cold, lonely place," Bombur said. "There may be some drink there, but there is no sign of any food. A dragon would always be There was no path under that rock wall, except for the toil between that cliff on the left side of that river, and that emptiness and d that has been talked about, the entire country has been found to have fallen, and most of that cliff was just like a rock in that flat, Great effort, and found those ancient stairs, and how to climb to shore.
After you walked for a short while, you followed that old path, and shortly before long through a deep valley, you remained sheltered b such a breakfast as what you could, mainly staples and water. (If you wish
I don't know what cram is, I just can't respond to it; but this is ridiculous, holds indefinitely well, is expected to be sustainable,

cold exercise. This is the door that Meermanne made for a long time.)
Then I got into it again; and now the path turns west and leaves that river, and that great sky of that southward mountain spur
the closer you get. Finally reaching the hull that hill path. This was a steep climb, and all the steady plodding behind each other, un Afternoon it's all up and running and the winter sun is coming down to the West.
Here we found a flat spot without a wall on three sides, but with a rock wall behind the northern door in which there was an opening wi There that door was a wide distance from East and South and West.
"Here," the Balin said, "in that old time it always awaited us,
and the door behind it led to a rock-cut room that was made here as a waiting room. There were fresh places like this around that mount there was little need for vigilance in that day of our prosperity, and that vigilance has been made too easy - otherwise we would
I had more warning about the coming of that dragon, and things could have been different. Now we can just crawl away here for a little can see without being seen."
"Not much use, if we have been seen here," it said to Dori, who was always looking up after that mountain peak, as if he dared to see S "We'll have to take our chances," Thorin said. "We can't go any further today."
"Hear, hear!" Bilbo cried out and threw him down on that ground.
In that rock room there would have been room for about a hundred, and There was a small room further away, more away from that cold outside.
This was completely late; This is the same or even wild animals, do not use it at all. that day of Smaug's ruler. As it laid down all i throw yourself down immediately and get to sleep, but the other one sits near the outer door and discusses their plan. In all their tal to one thing: where was Smaug? Hulle it was looked and there was nothing there, and Oos was nothing there, and in that Suide there was dragon, but there was a gathering of bae creatures. Then the whole thing was looked at
and more wounding; but you were no closer to understanding it until that first cold star came to your knowledge. FIRE AND WATER
Well, if you want that dwarf to hear from Smaug, you must go
Back after that moment he smashed that door to pieces and flew away in anger, two days before.
That man from that lake village of Esgaroth was usually indoors, because the breeze was from the black East and cold, but a few walked and look, if you like to do it, how that star looks out from that one
smooth throat of that more soos hule in that lug to make it. From their village, that One Same Mountain was usually shielded by the low North. You could only see that peak in clear weather, and you could see the view of it, for this was ominous and gloomy even in that vi It's flickering again this way; It glows briefly when touched and fades away. "Look!" it's a thing. "It's light again! Last night it st there."
"Perhaps the King under that Mountain forged gold," it was another story.
"This has happened a long time since he went North. This is the time that those songs begin to prove themselves again."
"Watter king?" asked another in a grim voice. "If this is not it, this is the plundering fire of that Dragon, the only king under that ever known."
"You always predict gloomy things!" it said to the other. "Anything from high tide to poisoned fish. Think of something cheerful!" Then a large cloud appeared in that low point in those hills and the northern point of the lake turned golden brown. "That King under t Mountain!" the whole cry went up, and the windows went up and the feet had been hurried.
There was once again tremendous excitement and enthusiasm. But that grim voice ran after that Master. "That dragon come, or ek "Ek is a fool!" he exclaimed. "Cut off that brue! To those weapons! To those weapons!"
Then the warning trumpet skielick blew, and this is it
rocky oews. That rejoicing ceases, and that joy turns to fear. So this was that the dragon did not find it completely unprepared.

Shortly before long the speed was so great that it was like a spark of fire, which stormed after it and became bigger and brighter, and I don't even doubt that the silliest thing that those prophecies went wrong is. Still had some time. Every vessel in that city was full

after that land is cast down and destroyed, before that roar of Smaug s'n
that terrifying approach has become loud, and that more like red fire under that terrifying beating of your wings. In the midst of scre bridge was gone, and the enemy was on an island in deep water too
deep and dark and cool vir sy taste. If he dived into it, a vapor and a steam would rise enough to cover the whole land with a mass; bu Roaring the ear that returned the village. A whole lot of dark pyle jumped up and cracked and rattled on the skubbe and jewele, and all ever imagine it, it was similar to those sights that you saw. With the twittering of that boo and the shouting of that trumpet, the dra until he was blind and mad from it. No one dares to say this to teen hom te veg nie vir baie eeue; and you wouldn't dare dare to say th a man with a grim voice (Bard was his name), running back and forth, urging those archers and that Master to order them to reach that l Fire it out of that dragon's kake jump. He's a jerk high in that one
lug bo hulle what the whole lake is bright; Those trees along those oews smelled like copper and blood with jumping shadows of dense bl Then he returned from that storm, reckless in his own way
anger, without turning your skubberige kante after your enemy, just short of setting your village on fire.
Fire it off the grass roof and wooden beams while he rushed it down and around and around again, although everything was soaked with wa before he comes. Once again water has been thrown around by a hundred hands
A Spark clears it up. That dragon turned it back. A sweep of it will star and the roof of the Great House will crumble and crush. Flame jumped high in that night. Another dive and another, and another house
and then another jump that burns and falls; and it never bothered Smaug or made him look like a fly from that swamp.
Mans already jumped into that water on all sides. Vroue and Kinders are crammed into that market pool in a fully loaded boat. Weapons h articulated is that old song of cheerfulness that comes from that dwarf singing. Well man, it's your name swearing. That Master himself gilded boat, in the hope of rowing away in that confusion and saving himself. Soon that entire village will be deserted and burned down This was that dragon's hope. Hulle was always able to climb as long as he was around. There he could have a nice hunt, or he could stop save the day from starving. Let him try to get to land and he should be ready. Soon he will set all the forests on fire and every field meadow. In fact, he enjoys the sport of village bait more than he enjoys anything at all over the years.
But there was always a group of archers who held their ground among them
that burning house. Their captain was Bard, with a grim voice and a grim face,
Whoever his friends accuse him of is that he has foreplay and poisoned him, even though he knows his value and courage. He was a descen of Girion, Lord of Dale, let his wife and child escape through them
Running River from that long-articulated ruin. Well, he skied with a large taksus bow, until all but one pyle was exhausted. That flame metgeselle leaves the hom. He was tense that last time. Skielike out of that dark the slightly after dark fluttering. Hy the beginning
-but this was like an old lyster. Don't be afraid to sit down and sit on this by yourself
the hom nuus gebring. He was surprised to discover that he could understand that language, because he was from that Dales race. "Wag! Wag!" it is this vir hom gesê. "That moon come on. Suck that hole
from that left breast while he flies and turns!" And while Bard poses it
in amazement this man told the story of times in that mountain and of everything that this had. Then Bard draw the bowstring to the ear. That dragon the return,
fly low, and when he comes, the moon rose on that eastern kiss and sy great winged silver. "Pyl!" sê that archer. "Black pyl! I made it to the end."
You have never disappointed me and I always get it back. Ek you from me. my father and he from old. If you ever come out of that forge king under that mountain, go now and sail well!"
That dragon once again descended, and when he turned around
the diving into your stomach, glistening white with sparkling fire of precious stones in that moon - but not in one place. That big bow foreleg is thrown wide. In it the barb, stem and feather disappear,
she was so quick. With a scream some man made it deaf, boom cut it off and split the cliff, Smaug skied it into that lug, turned over a in ruins from top to bottom.
It's the case full on that village. Sy last pained it to crumble into sparks

gledes. The one that has more of an impact. A great steam rose up, white in the skiesy darkness under the moon. There was a hissing, a And this was the end of Smaug and Esgaroth, but not of Bard.
The waxing moon made it rise even faster and the wind became hard and cold.
This is what white misses in bending pillars and hasty clouds, twisting and gery
this after that Weste to scatter that swamp in fresh flenters ear before Mirkwood. Then that baie bote could be seen darkly on that sur from that lake, and down through that wind, the voice of those people of Esgaroth come into the ear of their lost village and good and that village at least escapes alive; Let all their forests and fells and grazed and beasts and most of their bones remain unharmed; and Let it come together in sad skares on those western shores, say in that cold wind, and your first complaints and anger were at those Master, what that village so gou leaves it, while some were still willing to defend it.
"He has a good understanding of sake-veral sy eie sake,"
some mutter, "but he's no good if something serious doesn't happen!" And
Kudos to Bard's courage and his last mighty shot. "If only he had not killed it yet," the hull almal sê, "would make us a king. Bard, t And in the middle of their conversation a tall figure emerged
skaduwees. He was drenched with water, his ears were wet, his eyes were swollen, and he was lying brightly in his eyes.
"Bard is not lost!" he exclaimed. "He dived from Esgaroth until that enemy was slain. Ek is Bard, of that lyn of Girion; Ek is the slay "Girion was lord of Dale, not king of Esgaroth," he said. "In Laketown we are still masters from those elders and we cannot endure that After your own kingdom Dale is now free from your bravery, and nothing hinders you
sy return. And anyone who wants this can go with him, if he prefers that cold cliff under the shadow of that mountain after the green w Those wyses will be happy here and hope to rebuild our village, and to enjoy this peace and wealth again in time."
"Ours is King Bard!" the people close to him wrote in response. "We've had enough of those old men and those money counters!" And People further away accept that cry: "Up with that Boogskutter, and down with Geldsakke," until that cry echoes along that kiss.
"I'm that last man that Bard will underestimate the Archer," the Master said. fresh (because Bard was close to him). "He did it today prominent place in that role of those benefactors of our village; and he is worthy of both imperishable songs. But why, O man?" - and h she got up and talked loudly and clearly - "Why are you crying?
blame? Vir watter skuld should be dismissed? Who raised that dragon from heaven? sy sleep, can I ask? Whoever receives from our kingdom and it makes us think that our songs can become true? Who paid attention to our play and our pleasant imagination? What kind of gold do orphans?"
As you can see, it does not destroy the Master's position. That consequence

from your words, that person at that glance forgot their idea of the whole, a new king, and their angry thoughts towards Thorin and sy scourge. Wild and bitter words were written from both sides; and some
of those who used to sing those old songs that loudest, are now heard loudly shouting that that dwarf that dragon has incited it purposefully!
"Foolish!" sê Bard. "Why spill words and wrath on that unfortunate one wesens? No doubt it all perished in fire before Smaug came after us."
Then, while he was still talking, that thought came into his heart
that legendary skat from that mountain, which was silent without anyone walking, and it was almost silent. He would think of that Maste Finally he spoke again: "This is not the time for bad words, Master, or
for the cause of important plans for change. There is work to be done. I always serve you - although after a while I will think of you with all that My sal volg."
Then he steps away to help organize the camp and care for the sick and wounded. But that Master frowned after his back while he was gon tensy this was to shout loudly that mans vir hom must bring fire and kos.
Well, where Bard has gone, the hy talk soos fire between them
people regarding that disgusting skat that was unguarded. Man the talk of that compensation vir al hulle skade what hulle soon will get

wealth ear and ears to buy rich things from the South; and
This encourages everyone in their plight. This was good, for that night was bitter and miserable. Skulings could be achieved without an
a) and there was min kos (even that Master failed). It got sick from wet and cold and heartache that night, and then it died, what happ escape unscathed from that ruined village; and in that day what happened there was a lot of sickness and great hunger.
In the meantime, let the Bard take charge and arrange things as he pleases, though
always in that Master's name, and he had a difficult task to govern that people and prepare for their protection and housing. Probably of course it perished in that winter, what now after that autumn hustle and bustle,
if help was not at hand, it was not. But help it come quickly; because Bard it at once
Quick messengers sent down the river to that Forest to ask for help from that King from Elwe of the Forest, and here those messengers a to that move, though it came only that third day after the fall of Smaug.
That Elwekoning receives the news from his own messengers and from
they feel what they loved and already knew what happened to them. Baie great was indeed that uproar among all things what on the border of the Destruction of that Dragon, just it. That lug
was filled with swirling swarms, and all their swift-flying messengers flew here and there over that lug. Bo, the border of that Forest whistling, howling and whistling. Far ear Mirkwood the word spread: "Smaug is dead!" Blare the rustling and scratching is bright. Even Elwekoning the forward gery, which now spreads westward after that pine forest of that Misty Mountain; Beorn it this in your wood house Gnomes were in their cave by council.
"This will be the last thing we hear from Thorin Oakenshield, I fear," he said. that king. "He'd better do it to keep my gas happy. Thi bad wind, yet," he added, "which bloweth no man any good." For he also never forgets the legend of the kingdom of Thror. So it was that messengers found him well while he marched with bae spearmen and archers; and crow it loudly, together, because all the thoughts that w But that king, when he received that prayer from Bard, he had pity, because he was the lord of a good and friendly people; so he turns first straight to that mountain, now he hurried down that river
that Long Lake. He didn't have enough blunt or smooth vir sy gasheer, and hulle
was forced to take that more steady path on foot; but he sent ahead a large supply of goods with water. Elwe is always lying on her fee This bay lived on that procession and that treacherous land between the Forest and the Lake, their speed was fast. Slegs five days afte death of that dragon, the whole thing came to those oewers and after looking at those ruins of that village. Their welcome was good, as his Master was ready to make some agreement for the future in exchange for Elwekoning's help.
Your plan is well done. With those wives and children, those old people
and those unskilled ones, that Master it behind; and together with him there were a few skilled and skilled men; and let the shell itse baie hutte along that beach as winter approaches; and also
Under that Master's guidance, the planning of a new village has begun, a more sustainable and larger design even as before, but not in Let the north whore drawn on that kiss; always after all there is a fear of that water where that dragon resided. He would never return amid the ruined heap of that old city. But minus this dare to stab that accursed toad's ear, and none dare to dive into that pretended precious stones some of sy rotting carcass case it.
But all those armed men who were still capable, and most of them
Elwekoning's position prepared to march north to that mountain. This was so that within eleven days after the demise of that city, that THAT COLLECTION OF THOSE CLOUDS
Now we return to Bilbo and that dwarf. All that night they were watching, but when the dawn broke, they heard no sign or saw no danger. it flew in from that South; and that crow still crows and cries around that mountain up there.
"Something strange is happening," Thorin said. "That time has passed away during that autumn walk; and this is something that always li I feel like a fight was going on!"
Bilbo said skiely: "There's that old Lyster again!" he exclaimed. "He looks like he's escaping, let Smaug crush that mountainside, but

Sure enough that old Lyster was there, and as Bilbo saw it, he flew after all, go and sit on a cliff nearby. Then the fluttering flutter
and sing; then he tilted his head to one side, as if he wanted to listen; and again the hy singing, and again the hy listening.
"Ek glo hy try to tell us something," the Balin sê; "but I can't follow that speech of stupid people, this is very quick and difficult. "Nie baie good nie," the Bilbo said (true, he couldn't make anything smooth about it); "but that old man seems very excited."
"I just wish he was a raven!" the Balin event.
"Ek het gedink you don't like hulle nie! You baie skaam vir hulle same, when we came here before." "This was crow! And boonop nasty, delayed wesens, and
also rude. You definitely had to hear that ugly name and then you shouted at us. But that raw is different. There used to be a lot of f hulle en die mense van Thror; and may it bring us often secret pleasure, and reward us with such bright things as we desire to have in houses.
"May you live for many years, and let your memory be long, and let you give
give your wisdom to your children. The bay under that crow on that rock looked like I was a dwarf. Here, that last height, was once cal please wait no longer here."
Speak to the plain talker who gives old Lyster a loud cry, and it immediately flies away.
"You don't understand us, but since you feel you understand us, I am "sure," the Balin saying. "Shut up and watch what happens!" Shortly before long there was a fluttering of wings, and it returned; and together with him we came to feel a very tired old man. He be "O Thorin seun of Thrain, and Balin seun of Fundin," he croaked (and Bilbo could understand what he said, for he used the common langua

no language nie). "Ek is Roäc, son of Carc. Carc is dead, but he was healthy once you knew him. This is a hundred years and fifty-three always that king that was of old. Most of my people are abroad, because there is great news in the South - some are times of joy for yo sal nie so goed dink nie.
"Look! those feelings come together again after that Berg and after
Dale of Suid and Oos and Wes, for they spread the word that Smaug is dead!" "Dead! Dead?" the dwarf screamed. "Death! Then we were in
unnecessary fear - and that skat is ours!" Hulle always jumped up and started playing around with joy.
"Yes, dead," the Roäc gestured. "That lyster, may she never fall, it saw him die, and we can trust her words. He saw him in that battle man of Esgaroth, the third night from now on, with the rising of that moon."
It took a while before Thorin could silence that dwarf
and listen to that raven se nuus. Finally, he tells the whole story of the battle he tackled:
"So much for joy, Thorin Oakenshield. You can go back after your journey." in safety; all that skat is joune-vir that uncle look. But b what comes together here along those feelings. That nuus of that death of that keeper has already gone far and wide, and that legend of not lost in that story over the years; Baie is eager for a share of that loot. A whole bunch of elwe is already on the road, and aasvoe every hope for a fight and battle. By that more mumble man that hul
sorrow is due to that dwarf; for they are helpless and let them die, and Smaug destroy their village. I also think about finding compen your skat, whether you are alive or dead.
"Your own wisdom must determine your course; but thirteen is minus
remnant of the great people of Durin that once lived here, and now has spread far. If you listen to my advice, you will not trust that of that Meermanne, but rather he what that dragon skied it with his bow. Bard is
he, of that race of Dale, of that lyn of Girion; he is a grim man but true. We would see peace again among dwarfs and humans and others long desolation; but this may cost you dearly in gold. Ek the talk."
Then Thorin burst out in anger: "Thank you, Roäc Carc seun. Jy
and your people will not be forgotten. But none of our gold shall we take, nor shall it be violently carried away while we live. If you even more thanks, bring us news of something closer. I also want to beg
you, if any of you are still young and strong of wings, that you would send messengers to our family in those mountains of the North, b

and ooze, and tell us about our plight. But go especially after my cousin Dain in those Ysterheuwels, because he has well-armed people here that place. Sê vir hom that he must make!"
"I won't say whether this advice is good or bad," Roäc croaked, "but I will do what can be done." Then he flies away steadily. "Back to that Berg!" Thorin exclaimed. "We lost the least time."
"And min cost to use!" Bilbo exclaimed, always practical for that point. In any case, he felt that that adventure, in the end, was over most of you share of those profits because of the peaceful settlement of this.
"Back after that Mountain!" the dwarf exclaimed as if he didn't hear it, nie hom; so he had to go back with them.
Since you have already heard about some of those events, you will see that that dwarf had it for a few more days. May you explore that articulated broken and blocked door Smaug, and no sign of hulle the ear still nie. So now let's start working hard to strengthen that m a new path, make what leads from it. Tools hood could be found in abundance
those miners and quarryers and farmers of old use it; and with such work that dwarf was always very skilled.
While you work, it will continually bring nuus to that crow. In this way let you hear that the Elwe King deviated after that Lake, and it had a breathing space. Even better, hail the hearing that three of your ponies escaped and wandered wildly along the oewers of that River, not far from where the rest of your face is not. So while the other continued with their work, Fili and Kili were sent, by a rav Hulle was away for four days, and at that time he knew that the affiliated teachers of that Meermense and that Elwe were rushing after But now your hope was greater; because you've had it for a few weeks, of course, and you were tired of it; but being packed is better t square-shaped cliffs gel dry, but thick and high, around the opening. There was a gate in that wall where everyone could see (or ski),
Entrance. Climb in or out with leather, and take good care of it
toue. Because of the unfolding of that current, there is a small lae arch design under that new wall; but near that entrance it is hull fall that caused that flow after Dale. That approach to that Gate was just like a moonwalk, without having to swim, along a narrow edge Regs as a person from that wall look out. Those ponies had a lot of trouble after that bopunt of that trappe bokant that old bridge bro All my orders to return to their masters and all sent back riderless after that Suide.
Since it was a late night and it was a skielike bay, there was a lot of fire and torches away south into Dale for everyone. "Praise the coming!" shout Balin. "And your camp is very big. Hulle
under the cover of skemer, it came from that river along both estuaries in that valley."
That dwarf didn't sleep that night. That eye was still pale when Hulle saw it arrive. Looking at the hull from behind the wall Come on, come on after that valley and climb steadily. Shortly before long the hull
could see that both men of that lake were armed as if for war and Elven archers were under their command. In the end it was the front o rocks and trees that overlook the waterfall; and their surprise was great
to see that pool in front of you and that gate that is blocked with a wall of cut-down cliff.
While they stood and said and talked one after the other, Thorin's greetings: "Who are you?" he shouted in a loud, loud voice, "as if i jy begeer?"
But anyway, no answer. Some quickly turned it around, and the other
After you stare at that Gate for a while and defend yourself, you follow it.
That day the camp was far from the river, right between the arms of that mountain. Let that rock resound with voice and song,
So you can't do this without doing it. There was also the sound of elwe harpe and soet music; and as it echoed, it sounded as if the co Then Bilbo longs to escape from that dark fortress and go down
connects with that merriment and celebration with that fire. Some of the younger dwarfs were also deeply moved, and all the murmurs tha otherwise it turned out and that all of you would welcome these people as friends; but Thorin the frown.

Let the dwarf himself bring harpe and instruments before his eyes recover that skat and make music to calm your mind; but hey
That song was not such an Elvish song, and was just like that song, what the hell it was like long ago in Bilbo's little hobbit hole. Under that Mountain dark and high That King the after sysaal came!
Your enemy is dead, that worm of fear, And so your enemy will always fall.
The sword is sharp, the spear is long, the arrow is sharp, the gate is strong; That heart is brave that looks after gold; That dwarf won't do anything wrong anymore.
That dwarf of old made the mighty tower spell, While hammers were ringing bells in case it In deep places, where dark things sleep, In caves under those hills.
The whole harness was tied to a silver necklace

That lies of stars, on the crown hangs the whole, That dragon fire, of twisted wire
That melody of harpe is something to wring. That mountain throne has once again been set free! O erring people, heed that call! Come gou! Come gou! about that wasteland!
That king of friends and family is in need. Now call to our ears those cold mountains, 'Kom terug na die ou grotte'!
Here at that gate the king walked,
Sy hande is rich in precious stones and gold. That king came after sysaal Under that mountain dark and high.
That Worm of Fear is slain and dead, And so shall our enemy fall!
Here that song it appears to please Thorin, and he smiles and grows happily again; and he began to calculate that distance after those as soon as that message will reach him. But Bilbo's heart is the same, both with that song and that talk: it sounds far too warlike.
The next morning, a group of spearmen saw that river and marched on that valley. Hull it that green banner
that Elweking and that blue banner of that Lake, and all the way to the right, stood before that wall by that Gate.
Again Thorin hulle greeted with a loud voice: "Who are you, what come
armed for war to the gate of Thorin seun of Thrain, King under that Mountain?" This is what he answered that time.
A tall man stood at the front, dark of hair and a grim countenance, and he cried out: "Greetings, Thorin! Why do you enclose yourself i Not yet enemies, and we are happy that you live in our hope. It's coming to us
don't expect to find anyone here who doesn't live; "Tog is what we have met, matter for a negotiation and a council." "Who are you, and why are you talking?"
"Ek is Bard, and by my hand that dragon was slain and you were destroyed. Isn't this a matter that doesn't affect you? Boonop is ek by descendant of that heir of Girion van Dale, and in you skat is baie van gemeng that wealth of sy sale and village, which of old Smaug s what can we talk about? Furthermore, in the last instance, Smaug destroys the dwellings of that man of Esgarot, and I am always that se heartache and misery of your people. May it help you in your distress and in your distress, recompense it has so far brought you only y Well, this was beautiful and true words, though proud and grim in expression; and
Bilbo thought that Thorin would immediately recognize what justice was in store. Of course he didn't expect anyone to remember that thi what a mess on your face, that dragon's weak place, discover it; and this was just like that
yes, because no one ever does this. But he also does not take into account who may have some gold on which a dragon long broods, nor do For a long time that past, what Thorin did in that skatkis doorstep, and the lust of it was heavy on him. Even though he's talking abou he had an eye for other wonderful things that happened there, why his memory of that labor and that pain was complicated
sy ras.
"You put your worst thing last and in the most important place," Thorin said. replied. "No man has any claim on the treasure of my peop Shame what this steals from us, it also robs the man of his life or house. That skat was not syne that sy bose dade should not be reimb that price of that good and that help that we receive from that Lake-man
I will pay promptly at the due time. But nothing will give us, not even a loaf of bread

was, under threat of violence. While an armed warrior stands before us, your enemy and whom we hate. "It is my intention to ask for a share of your inheritance
pay to our family, if you find that skate unattended and killing us." "It's a fair question," Bard answers. "But you're not dead, and w what a friend it was to a person in need. And my other demands remain unanswered."
"I will not negotiate, even if I say it, with armed men at my gate. Glad not with those people of that Elwe King, which I remember with It has no place in this debate. Now go away before our pyle fly! And if you talk to my son again, first send that Elvish scholar after where it belongs, and then return, lay your arms down in front of you and approach that drum."
"That Elwekoning is my friend, and he is his people
"I am in dire need, although you have no claim on him, except for friendship," the Bard replied. "We will give you time to repent your wisdom before our return!" When he left and returned to that camp. Before the turn of the hour was over, those standard-bearers returne "In that name of Esgaroth and that Forest," it exclaimed, "talk to us with Thorin Thrain se seun Oakenshield, what homself that King am Berg, and our request that he give due consideration to the claim that has been submitted,
or as our enemy is declared. At least he will give a twelfth portion of that treasure to Bard, as that dragon slayer and as that heir o From that part Bard himself will contribute to the help of Esgaroth; but if Thorin would have that friendship and honor from that land Then Thorin grabbed a horn bow and shot a arrow after that speaker. hit it in the shield and claim vassit there.
"If this is your answer," he shouted back, "I explain that Mountain to you. You will not depart from it until you
side for a ceasefire and a negotiation. We will not give us weapons for you, but we will give you your gold. You can eat this if you wa That means those messengers leave quickly, and that dwarf is left behind because of that. So grim did Thorin become, that even everythi wish, the other person would not dare to find fault with him; but indeed
most of them agree or share their opinion - except maybe you know Bombur and Fili and Kili. Bilbo, of course, likes that whole twist sake. He's already had enough of that mountain, and inside it wasn't smooth, but it wasn't to his taste.
"That whole place still stinks," the hy vir homself grumble, "and this makes me feel bad. And that cream is just starting to get stuck


                                                                                                                                                     this in eve of gold on sigself, and vir my this is priceless. There that cliff of all that skatte Ek call this vir myself, and Ek will take revenge hold this back."
Bilbo heard those words here and he became scared and more wondering what would happen if that cliff was found - twisted and worn in an trinket what he uses as a kiss. Yet he didn't talk about it, because as soon as the tiredness of that day became worse, it was the begi in sy klein kop kom.
Things have been going on for quite some time now, until that crow brought the news that Dain and more than five hundred dwarfs, hurrie Ysterheuwels, was now within about two days' march of Dale, coming from the North-East.
"But you cannot reach that mountain unnoticed," the Roäc gesê, "and I fear
so that there will be no war in that valley. I don't mind this advice as well. Although they are a grim people, they will certainly not hurriedly behind him. How will you be fed without the friendliness and goodwill of the country around you? That cat will probably kill But Thorin was not moved. "Winter and snow are bad for both men and women
elwe," it he said, "and you may find your home in that wasteland difficult for bear. With my friends behind Hulle and that winter on Hu perhaps I was in a sad mood to negotiate with." That's why Bilbo decided. That lug was black and moonless.
As soon as this whole thing was dark, he went to a corner of an inner room inside the gate and pulled a rope out of the cord, and also

wait for a blow.
"This is terribly cold!" the Bombur community. "I wish we could make a fire here." So let everyone in that camp do it!"

"This is warm enough inside," Bilbo said.
"I dare bet; but I'm bound here until midnight," that fat dwarf grumbles. "A shameful thing altogether. Not that I dare to do this with "Nie so styf soos my bene nie," Bilbo said. "Ek is tired from trappe and klippe gange. Ek sou baie gee vir die gras by my tone."
"I'll never forget that feeling of a strong drink in my throat," and a good night's sleep after a good night's sleep!" "I can't give you this while the siege is going on."
But this is Lanklaas that I will look at it, and I will take your turn with you, if you soos. There is no sleep in me today." "You're a good guy, Mr. Baggins, and I'll graciously accept your offer."
If there is anything to notice, wake me up first! I'm not far away, that inner room on the left." "Go ahead!" the Bilbo sê. "I'll wake you up at midnight, and you can wake up the next car."
As soon as Bombur was gone, Bilbo's ring was put on, it was fastened, his ear fell off the wall and was gone. Hy it about five o'clock dreamed what he had to do); and everyone else was busy with Thorin. This was unlikely that anyone, even Fili or Kili, would get out of This was quite dark, and that path after a while, when he left that pass, he made a path and climbed down to the lowest course of that water, if he should go to that camp, if he wanted. The bed of that stream was flat there but already wide, and this in that dark, dry p on a round cliff and fell into that cold water with a splash. He screamed out the candle on that ear-sided oewer, claiming and proclaim Elwe in that darkness with bright lanterns and shouting after the cause of that noise.
"That wasn't a fish!" it's a thing. "There's a spy around here. Put your little one away!"
He will help him more than us, as this strange little creature has been sent to be his servant."
"Servant, indeed!" snore Bilbo; and in the midst of her he snored a loud sneeze, and the two of us immediately gathered together after "Come on, let's get started!" it he said. "Ek is here if you want me!" and he slipped off the ring and jumped out from behind a rock. Let him snipe sharply, despite his surprise. "Who are you? Is you? You're that dwarf hobbit? What do you do? How did you get so far?" "Wait us?" asking each one one after the other.
"Ek is Mr. Bilbo Baggins," he replied, "companion of Thorin, as you
wants to know. I know your king well, although he may not do this, but I don't know me to look after him. But Bard will remember me, an I want to see everywhere."
"Indeed!" the hull gesê, "and what may your activity be?"
"Whatever this is, this is my egg, my good one. But if you ever want to cry
back to your own forest from here, that cold, joyless place," he replied, claiming, "you will take my gold next to a fire, where I can then you will let me talk to you like crazy. It lasts an hour or two."
So it happened that about two hours after escaping from that Gate, Bilbo sat next to a warm fire in front of a large tent, and
as it also sat and stared curiously at him, both that Elf King and that Bard. A hobbit in Elven armor, partly dressed in old blacks, wa "You know right," Bilbo said in his best way,
"Things are impossible. Personally, I am tired of the whole affair. I wish I was back in the West in my own home, where people are more But I have an interest in this matter - a fourteenth part, to be precise, according to a letter, which I am happy to keep." He signed out of a bag in my ou baadjie (what he always did in front of sy pos), crumpled and loose, Thorin's letter that was under that peeing h "A Share in that profit, mind you," he continued. "Ek is aware of that."
Personally, I am more than willing to consider all your claims carefully, and deduct what is right from that total before I submit my o However, you do not know Thorin Oakenshield so well. I offer you, he is quite ready to sit on a pile of gold and starve, as long as you "Well, leave him alone!" the Bard sê. "Such a fool deserves to die of hunger." "Very well," Bilbo said. "I understand your point of vie

That winter is fast approaching. Shortly before long you will snow and something no, and stock will be difficult even for everyone, imagine me. Also there
there would be other problems. Aren't you Dain's yet, and that dwarf of hearing, not those Ysterheuwels?" "It's us, long ago; but what is he going to do with us?" he asked. that king.
"I think so. I see and understand what you don't know."
Dain, I can tell you, is now less than two days away, and at least five hundred grim dwarfs together with him - a whole pair of them ha experience in that terrible dwarf and gnome war, of which you have no doubt heard. There could be serious difficulties when they arrive "threaten us?" the Bard grimly asked.
"My dear Bard!" squeak Bilbo. "Don't be so hasty! I've never been able to achieve anything like that, people! I'm trying to avoid all d Now I'm going to make you an offer!! "Let us hear this!" the whole thing.
"You can see this!" it he said. "This is this!" and he threw away that Arkenstone, and that packaging.
That Elwekoning himself, who had been accustomed to wonderful things and beauty, stood up in amazement. Even Bard looked at this surpri for holly in a net woven of that glitter of bright stars. "This is that Arkenstone of Thrain," the Bilbo sê, "that Heart of that Mountain; and this is also the heart of Thorin. He appreciates this very much
gold. I give this to you. This will help you with your negotiation." Come on Bilbo, not without a shudder, not without a look of longin "But how is this yours to give?" he finally asked with an attempt.
"Oh well!" the hobbit said uncomfortably. "That's not exactly it; but, well, okay
I'm willing to let all my statements stand, don't you know? I may be a burglar or something like that: personally I'm never right about That Elf King looked at Bilbo with new amazement. "Bilbo Baggins!" it he said. gesê. "You are more likely to wear that armor of an elf how much more beautiful it is. But I wonder if Thorin Oakenshield will see this. Ek the more knowledge of dwarfs in general as you maybe. I invite you to stay with us, and here you will be honored. and three times welcome."
"Thank you, I'm sure," Bilbo said with a bow. "But I don't know, I don't think I should leave my friends like that, after everything we together. And here's how to wake up Bombur at midnight too! It must be done right, and quickly."
Nothing hulle could do, sou hom nie; That's why an escort is advisable hom, and as he went, both the king and Bard saluted him with honor. Soos
He went to the door of that camp, an old man, turned towards him in a dark cloak, got up from a tent door where he was sitting and came "Well done! Mr. Baggins!" he said and clapped Bilbo on the back. "There's always more to you than anyone expects!" This was Gandalf.
That first time in Baie Dae, Bilbo was really happy. But there was no time for all the questions he wanted to ask at the moment.
"All in due time!" the Gandalf sê. "Things nearer the end." well, tensy ek is wrong. There is an unpleasant time just for you; but keep Confused but cheerful, Bilbo hurried on. He went to a safe drift and to that sad one, and when he separated from that elwe he took it a This was well before noon when he again climbed up to this place
always where he did this. He loosened it and put it away, and then he sat on that wall and was anxiously wondering what would happen ne At noon he woke Bombur; and then himself in turn curled up in his corner, without listening to that old dwarf's thanks (how he feels (the skaars earn) He was fond of that sleep and forgot all his worries until it dawned. Actually, he dreamed of eggs and bacon.
THE CLOUD BURSTS
That next day the trumpet sounded early in that camp. Gou had just seen a runner there as he hurriedly walked along that path. At a dis Now the time has come, and for the sake of change.
"This will Dain be!" Thorin sighed when he heard this. "Hulle sal kry het

wind of sy comes. Let the thoughts change this whole mind! Sê vir hulle to come without numbers and without weapons, and Ek sal hear," messenger.
At noon the banners of the Forest and the Lake Gesien were brought forth again. A group of twenty approached. By that

at the beginning of that path the entire sword and spear were dropped and arrived at that Gate. Was that dwarf surprised to see that un The hood is a strong box made of star-bonded wood.
"Greetings Thorin!" the Bard sê. "Are you still of the same opinion?" "My thoughts don't change with the rise and fall of a few sons,"
Thorin replied. "Have you come to ask me an idle question? Until that elf host doesn't leave, so don't ask me! Until then, you're in va "Isn't there anything you wouldn't pay any of your gold for?" "Nothing to offer you or your friends."
"What about Thrain's Arkenstone?" it he said, and at that same glance
That old man opened that kiss and held up that jewel. It lies springing from her hand, clear and white in her eyes. Then Thorin was struck dumb with surprise and confusion. Nobody talked the long way.
Thorin finally broke that silence, and his voice was thick with anger. "There that cliff was my father's, and is mine," he said. "Why? buy my egg?" But he was astonished and he added: "But how did you come to have that heirloom from my house if such a question is necess question from diewe?"
"We are not that we are not," the Bard replied. "Your egg will return to us in return for our egg." "How did you get that?" Thorin shouted in increasing anger.
"Ek het dit vir hulle gegee!" the Bilbo squeaking, what lurking behind that wall, now disappear in a terrified fear.
"Yy! Yy!" exclaimed Thorin, as he turned to him and grabbed him with his hand. both hands. "You wretched hobbit! You low-class burglar! "By that beard of Durin! I wish I had Gandalf here! Curse him for your choice! May your beard wither! As for you, I will follow you aft rock!" he exclaimed, lifting Bilbo into his arms.
"Bly! Your wish is granted!" sê a voice. That old man with that kis, throw away his hair and cloak. "Here's Gandalf! And not too gou ni lyk. If you don't love my Burglar, please don't harm him. Sit him down and listen to what he says!"
"You're always in the league!" sê Thorin while he drops Bilbo on that mountain. wall. "Never again will I do anything with any magician "Liewe my! Liewe my!" the Bilbo sê. "I'm sure this is all very uncomfortable. You remember that I said that I thought I would choose th Descendant of rotten, indeed! Is this all those services of you and your family? what is belowe, Thorin? Accept that I may take my shar "Ek sal," Thorin said grimly. "And I will let you go with that - and may never meet us again!" Then he turns around and talks to that w Buy that Arkensteen, that skat from my house. I'll give a damn for that.
fourteenth part of that skat in silwer and gold, and sit that precious opsy; but this will be the reward of the promised portion of thi enough, I have no doubts. Take him, if you want, he must live; and no friend cap. of mine go together with hom.
"Now go after your friends!" the hy vir Bilbo gesê, "otherwise I will throw you away."
"What about that gold and silwer?" the Bilbo question. "This will follow afterwards, as soon as it can be done," he said. "Dismount!" "Until then, keep us on the cliff," the Bard exclaimed.
"You don't make such a beautiful figure as King under that 'Mountain,'" Gandalf said. "But things can still change."
"Hulle may indeed," Thorin said. And already, so strong was the confusion of that skat on him, it was more surprising if this door that With Dain's help, he would not recover that Arkenstone and keep that share back. of that reward.
And so Bilbo flew off that wall and left the room
nothing for all your trouble, except for the armor that Thorin already gave him. More like one of those dwarfs, the feeling of shame an "Goodbye!" exclaimed hy vir hulle. "We may now meet as friends again." "Go away!" shout Thorin. "It's poss on you, what's going on
my people, and is too good for you. This is not possible due to the pyle door drill; but if you must not be hasty, I will sting your wr "Nie so hasty nie!" the Bard sê. "We will give you more. At noon, we will return and see if you can take that part of that skat and bri that cliff must be settled. If this is done without deception, then we will

departure, and that elf-learner will return to that Forest. In the meantime, see you soon!
With that, everything went back after that camp; but Thorin sent the messenger through Roäk, told Dain what happened, and ordered him t speed.
It passed away that day and that night. That next day the wind had changed, and the air was dark and gloomy. That eye was still early w audience in that camp. Runners entered to report that a crowd of dwarves were skying around the eastern spur of that Mountain and the r Dale. Then it came. He chased the door, and so on
come gouer ear hulle as what hulle expect it. Each of your humans was dressed in steel armor that hung down to your knees, and your leg strong vir hul length, but most of this was even strong vir dwarfe. In
in that case the whole sword was a two-handed blow; but each of you also has a short sword on your back and a round shield that hangs o Yster and Hull had been fighting with Yster, and their face was grim.
Trumpet the man and all clamor to arms. Shortly before long, that dwarf could
can be seen as they climb a large pass up that valley. Let it rest between that river and that eastern spur; only a few persevered alon getting close to that camp; and there all their weapons were laid down and held up
your hand as a sign of peace. Bard went out to meet him, and went with him to Bilbo.
"We have been sent from Dain, who sent from Nain," the whole gesture has been said. "We are following our family in that mountain, let that kingdom of old is revived. But who are you who sit in that plain as enemy?
for defended walls?" This, of course, in that polite and somewhat old-fashioned language of such a borrowed city, simply means: "You do mean to move between that Mountain and that loop of that river; for that narrow land there is not strongly guarded there.
Bard would of course be reluctant to allow that dwarf to go straight to that mountain. He was determined to wait until that gold and si would be done if that fortress were once manned with such a large and warlike scourge. Hull it a large stock of stock combination; beca dwarf can take care of dra, and almost all of our people
Despite their rapid advance, they also carried their weapons in large numbers. They would have to endure a punishment for a long time, You could also build and guard another fence, so that those preachers would have to surround that entire mountain; and for that you did This was exactly their plan in effect (for those raven messengers had been at odds between Thorin and Dain); but because of that look t hul bore. Bard immediately sent messengers to that Gate; but do not regard the finding as gold or payment. Pyle came out as soon as he and let it be hurried back in dismay. Everything was in turmoil in that camp, as if vir geveg; because that dwarf of Dain is advancing "Foolish!" the Bard banter, "to get under that Berg's arm!"
They do not understand war on that ground, whatever they may already know. in mine. There are now many of our archers and spearmen hidi you will die soon. Let us attack from both sides before we are fully equipped!"
But that Elwe king said: "Let me delay before I start this war for gold here." That dwarf cannot kill us, unless we wish, or do anythin Advantage in numbers will be enough, if this must ultimately come to an unhappy situation."
But he counted it without that dwarf. That one knows that one
Arkenstone was in the hands of those professors, burned in their ideas; Also thank you for the dismay of Bard and his friends and the d

Skielike, without a signal, the hull quietly jumped forward to attack. Boë the tapping and pyle the whistling; that thing was at that p Even more skielike it is a darkness falling with terrifying speed!
Black cloud the ear that lug rush. Winter thunder rolled on a wild wind, roaring and rumbling in that mountain, and turned it upside do under that thunderstorm another blackness could be seen swirling towards the front; but
That it did not come with that wind, that it came from the north, like a great cloud of birds, so thick that no light could be seen bet "Halt!" it exclaimed Gandalf, how skiily it disappeared and stood alone, with a raised arm, between that advancing dwarf and those wait hull. "Stop!" it shouted with a voice like thunder, and it ignited the flame

with a flash it disappeared. "Fear the ear you always come! Ag, this it Come faster than what I shout. Those Goblins are after you! Bol
* of those
That north bowl, O Dain! who killed your father in Moria. Touch! that bat is bo sy learn soos a see from locusts. Hulle ry on Wolwe and Surprise and confusion in all circumstances. Just like Gandalf
it talked, it increased darkness. That dwarf kept quiet and stared at that lug. Elwe cried out in a loud voice. "Come!" shout Gandalf. "There is still time for advice. Let Dain, son of Nain, come after us!"
So the battle begins that no one expects; and this is the Battle of Five Learners, and this was baie verskriklik. On one side was that So this worked out. Since the fall of that Great Goblin of the Misty Mountains, the hatred of the race for that dwarf has been stirred fury. Messengers went back and forth between all the cities and colonies
and fortresses; because whoever decides to get used to that ruler of the North.
Let the nuus be gathered in a secret way; and in all those mountains there
was a forging and an armament. Let all our marching and coming together through hill and valley, always through the barrel or under dar great mountain Gundabad of the North, where their capital was, a formidable army was ready to fall unexpectedly in time of storm
about that Suide. When I heard of Smaug's death, there was joy in my heart; and let it shine night after night through the mountain rus and so in the end it came quickly from the North on Dain's heel. Not even that crow knew about it until it came to that broken land, wh How much Gandalf knew cannot be said, but this is clear that he did not know. it expects that skiing attack.
This is the plan he consulted with that Elwekoning and
Bard; and with Dain, because that dwarf lord now joined it by hulle: those Goblins were the enemy of allmal, and with hulle koms all ot the only hope was for those gnomes in that valley between the arms of that Mountain; and hulself to man those large foothills that are oos. Still, this would be dangerous if those gnomes were in sufficient numbers to overrun the mountain itself, and also to attack from above; but there was no time to make any other plan, or to call for any help.
Would that thunder have passed and rolled away to the south-east; but that bat cloud flew into the ear, that sky flew from that mountai "After that Mountain!" shout Bard. "After that Mountain! Leave us while there's still time!"
On that Southern spur, in its lower slope and in that rock at its feet, that Elwe was established; on that eastern spur there was man a it turned around the point of that spur and rushed into Dale. This was that fiercest wolf rider, and already their screams and howls we A pair of brave men have been harnessed before them to offer a sky of resistance, and before they do so they retreat and quickly flee o Gandalf the hope, that gnome learned it behind that resisting assembly vanguard, and now it flowed into that valley in anger, rushing w countless, black and red, and all that arrived was a tidal wave of anger and disorder. This was a terrifying incident. That most terrib and the one he hated most at the time - this wanted sê this was that one
one of which he was the proudest, and of which he was most fond to remember for a long time afterwards, although he was entirely unimpo asked lazily in that eagerness, and disappeared from view, if not from all danger.
A magical ring of that kind is not a complete protection in a gnome attack, it does not stop that flying pyle and wild spike; but this out of that toad, and this prevents your head from being specially chosen by a Veeghou by a gnome-sword sweeper.
That elwe was the first to attack it. Your hatred for those gnomes is cold. and bitter. As it speared and swathed it in that darkness w a shower of pyle, and each one the flicker as it quickly the ashes with burning fire. Behind that pyle, a thousand of their spiesmanne The scream was deafening. That rock was stained black with goblin blood.
Just when the gnomes recovered from that attack and the elf attack stopped, a deep throaty roar came up from the ear of that valley. With cries of "Moria!" and "Dain, Dain!" that dwarf from those Ysterheuwels stormed into the other side, with her cocky waving; and alo Those men from that lake came with a long time.
Panic the ear that Goblins come; and even turn around to face this now

attack, which again attacked with new numbers. Already baie van
those gnomes flew back down that river to escape from that bait trap; and let all of you turn and turn and die dead and those injured. Earning it almost equal to an exclamation on those heights above.
Gnomes climbed down that mountain from the other side and were already on that hanging bank at the gate, and another streamed down reckless, insouciant to the one who is screaming from the ring and abyss, it is necessary to attack that spore from above. Anyone from defenders had too little time to block that path. That victory is now lost hope. Hulle it slegs that first attack of that black getty. That day has arrived. Those gnomes came together again in that valley. There was a crowd of Wargs who had come ravenously and together of enormous size with steel sword. Would the working darkness enter a stormy lug; while that great bat is still attached to the heads a veg to defend that Eastern spur, and then steadily give back; and that elf-lord was at a distance around his king on that southern arm,
Soon there was a great shout, and from that gate came a trumpet
call. Praise Thorin for forgetting! Part of that wall, move the lever, the case outward with a blow into that pool. From that King jump and sy metgeselle the hom entourage. Hood and cloak were gone; hull was
in shining armor, and red it lies out of thy wake. In that darkness that Great Dwarf, the gleam was gold in a starry fire.
Klippe has been thrown down by those gnomes up there from above; but hey
the hold, jumping to the foot of that waterfall and rushing forward to sweep. Wolf and rider, for all intents and purposes, or quickly. "To me! To me! Elwe and Mense! To me! O my family!" he cried out, and sy voice the movement was like a hearing in that valley.
Off, insouciant ear of order, all that dwarf of Dain has rushed to his aid. Also, that Meermanne didn't come down, because Bard couldn' those gnomes in that valley have been met again; and all was piled up in hope until Dale was dark and hideous with all his body. That W spread and Thorin it right teen Bolg se lyfwag ingery. But he couldn't get through his ranks.
Already behind him between those gnome-does the baie men and baie yellow dwarfs, and many a beautiful elf who had to live happily for a in that forest. And as that valley became wider, it started to become more and more advanced. Syne number was too small. Sy flanke was attack, and they are forced into a large ring, confronted on all sides, engulfed by gnomes and hoping to return after that attack. That from Bolg the howling came when they came and stormed into their ranks as we went to sandkranes. Their friends couldn't help them, beca The attack from that mountain has now been redoubled, and both sides have been steadily defeated.
Bilbo looked at it with misery after all this. He took the position at Ravenhill among those Elwe - partly because there was more chanc escape from that point, and partly (with that more Tokish part of your thoughts) because if he were in a last desperate position, he wo entirely to defend that Elwe king. Gandalf was also there, I suppose, and it was sitting
on that ground as if in deep thought, trying to prepare, I assume, a final explosion of magic for that end.

This isn't far away either. "This will not be long anymore," Bilbo thought, "until those gnomes enter that Gate, and we are all beaten beaten down and taken prisoner. This is right enough to make a person cry, after everything a person has done. I would rather have old skat, as that here, these mean creatures, this is what they say, and poor old Bombur,
and Balin and Fili and Kili and all the rest come to a bad end; and Bard
also, and that Meermanne and that cheerful elwe. Misery my! I have heard the song of baie lambslae, and I still understand that defeat This seems awkward, not to mention alarming. I wish I was good out there. of them."
Those clouds are the wind blowing, and a red sunset is blowing in the West.
When Bilbo saw that skilful glint in that darkness, he looked around. He cried a big cry: he saw what made her heart jump, dark, small "That Eagle! That Eagle!" he screamed. "That Eagle come!"
Bilbo said he was wrong. That eagle came down
wind, reel after reel, in such a leather as what of all that collection must have been the genesis of that North.
"That Eagle! that Eagle!" Bilbo exclaimed as he danced and his arms blew. If Elwe couldn't see him, he couldn't see him. Good luck with howl, and this the ear that valley resounds. Baie was amazed at how it looked,

although nothing could be seen except those plain sights of that Berg. "That Eagle!" Bilbo cried out again, but at that moment it was a disaster
It was thrown from above, it hit her head heavily, and he fell with one blow and didn't remember it anymore. THAT RETURN JOURNEY
When Bilbo came to himself, he was literally alone. He got it right on his feet. that flat cliff of Ravenhill, and no one was near. A c burned with fire.
"Well, wonder what happened?" the hy vir homself gesê. "Anyway, ek
I am not yet one of those fallen heroes; but I guess there's still plenty of time for that!"
He sat up the pain. He looked at it in that valley and saw no life. gnomes. After a while, when his head cleared up, he thought he coul still camp in that plain an entjie away; and there was an arrival and departure around that Gate? Dwarge was busy removing that wall. B Everything was dead quiet. There was no calling voice and no eggo of a song. I wonder if this was in that lug.
"You win, take it!" he is sitting while he is feeling his head. "Well, this seems like a bit of a somber event." He was immediately aware of a man who was coming up and coming after him.
"Hi there!" he shouted with an assertive voice. "Hi there! Watter nuus?"
"What voice is this talking between those cliffs?" asked that man while he was faltering. and lurk around him not far from where Bilbo Please remember Bilbo's ring! "Well, I'm done!" it he said. "Here, inadequacy is a disadvantage. Otherwise, that's for sure
it was a warm and comfortable night in that bed!
"Dis ek, Bilbo Baggins, companion of Thorin!" he hurriedly exclaimed to take that ring away.
"It's good that I found you!" the man shouted as he stepped forward. "You are needed and we are longing for you. You would have been it count among those dead, what is good, if not Gandalf that wizard
the sound of having your voice heard in this place. I was sent to look here for the last time. Are you very happy?"
"I think a nasty stomp on that head," Bilbo said. "But it's a helmet and a hard skull. I still feel bad and my legs are so sore." "I'll take you to that camp in that valley soon," it said to that man, and his legs were added up.
That man was quick and sure on his feet. This wasn't long before Bilbo wasn't. settled in front of a tent in Dale; and there stood Gand less unscathed in all that doctrine.
When Gandalf saw Bilbo, he was glad. "Baggins!" he exclaimed.
"Well, I never will! After all, physically - I'm happy! Even the beginning is a wonder or even your happiness will help you! It's a sca disastrous. But other things can happen. Come!" he said more seriously. "You are being called," and he called the hobbit and took him i Sy hallmarked armor and carved ax had been thrown onto that floor. He looked at it while Bilbo passed by him.
"Goodbye, good thief," he said. "I'm going to go after that journey of going to sit with my fathers, until that world becomes a new one from you, and I will take back my words and deeds at that Gate."
Bilbo kneeling on one knee, full of heartache. "Farewell, King among those
"Mountain!" it he said. "This is a bitter adventure, if it must end like this; and no mountain of gold can settle this. Still, I am hap Danger-this was more as what some Baggins deserve."
"No!" sê Thorin. "There is more good in you than what you know, child
of that friendly West. A bit of courage and a bit of wisdom, mixed in degree.
If more of us kos, cheerfulness and sang bo accumulated gold appreciate it, sou this be a happier world. But heartache or joy, I have to leave this now. Goodbye!"
Then Bilbo turned away, and he went alone, and sat alone, turning to him
in a swamp, and, whether you understand it or not, he howled until her eyes were red and her voice was hoarse. He was a friendly soul.
Long before he had the heart to make a joke again. "A mercy," he said
ultimately vir homself, "that I woke up, I woke up. I wish Thorin is alive, but I'm glad we parted in friendship. You're a fool, Bilbo and you made a big mess of that activity with that cliff; and there was a fight, despite all your attempts to buy peace and quiet, but Everything that happened after he was mute, Bilbo invented it later; but this gave him more heartache and joy, and he was now tired of I am sorry for that journey back home. However, this was a bit of a joke

slow down, so in the meantime I'll tell you something about what happened. That Eagle
I was long behind the scenes when those gnomes met; Because of your vigilance, that movement in that mountain could not be completely s that wind speeds away in the nick of time. This was what those gnomes came down from that mountainside, throw all your ear wreaths, or they were thrown down, screaming and confused, under their enemy. This was not long before they liberated the Same Mountain, and every But even with those Eagles, he was always in that minority. In that last hour Beorn himself revealed it - no one knew how or from where alone, and in bear form; and he was barely huge in his anger.
That roar of the system was like drum and gun; and he wanted to throw it
and gnomes from your path as well as straws and vere. He hit it on the back of his head, and there was a clap of thunder that broke the and stand still around their here on a low, round hill. Come on Beorn
the crouch and Thorin cheered, what with a spear door drill case it, and drill him out of that battle.
Quickly he returned, and his wrath was doubled, so that nothing could stand him, and no weapon could kill him. Hy it that lyfwag, and the Bolg itself pulled down and crushed him. Then dismay
it on those Goblins case and cover it up quickly in all directions. But let us all leave the enemy with the coming of our new hope, and prevent most of Hull from escaping where Hull could. Hull the baie drive away from hulle in that Running River, and those who are south the last refugee perished, while those who came close to the Bos-elwe kingdom were killed there, or went to die deep in that trackless May the North perish on that day, and may the mountains have peace for the rest of the year.
That win was more important for that night; but that pursuit was

still on foot when Bilbo returned after that camp; and no one was in that valley to rescue those most seriously injured. "Where is that Eagle?" he asked Gandalf there while he was watching in warm weather.
"Some of them are on the hunt," the roper said, "but most of them have gone back after their departure. Hulle didn't want to stay here, ogging. Dain the hul chief with gold crown and friend's hood rifle forever together with hulle."
"It's a shame. I mean, I would like to see you again," Bilbo said. sleepy; "Maybe I'll be on my way home to see you. I assume I'll be g "As soon as you want," the roper said.
This was just a few days before Bilbo's proper departure. Hull it buried. Thorin deep beneath that Mountain, and Bard that Arkenstone on his chest.
"Leave this there until that Mountain falls!" it he said. "May this good thing bring happiness to all those who live hereafter!"
On his grave the Elf king belongs to Orcrist, that Elven sword is what
is taken into captivity by Thorin. There it is said in songs that this radiance always comes closer in that dark ash enemy, and that dw don't be surprised. Since Dain, that son of Nain, now takes her place of residence, and he becomes King under that Mountain, and in tim Thorin, ten the eargebly. Fili and Kili are the case, while they defend it with a shield. and position, because he was their mother's o with Dain; because Dain dealt well with sy skat.
There was of course no longer any question of the distribution of that skat in such shares as had been planned, to Balin and Dwalin, an and Ori, and Oin and Gloin, and Bifur and Bofur and Bombur-or to
Bilbo. Yet a fourteenth part of all that silver and gold, wrought and unworked, was given to Bard; because Dain said: "We will receive Even a fourteenth part of wealth was exceedingly great, greater than this
of a mortal king. From there the Bard sent baie gold to that Master of Lake-town; and he freely rewards his followers and friends. that Elweking it is he who gave emerald from Girion, such jewel as he loved it most, which Dain returned to him.
Vir Bilbo het hy gesê: "Here that skat is just as much yours as mine, although
Our agreement cannot stand alone, as there is so much of a claim to win and defend it. Still, even if you were prepared to make all you I wish that those words of Thorin, for which he was sorry, were not proven true: that we must give you love. I will reward you with ryk of all."
"That's cool of you," Bilbo said. "But this is ultimately enlightenment for me. How are these things going on earth, if all those who c

I don't know along that path. And I don't know what I should do. With that I come to that house. I'm sure this is better in your hands. and the other with gold, as much as a strong pony can carry. "This will be as much as I can control," he said.
Finally the time has come for him to say goodbye to his friends. "See you soon, Balin!" he said; "and see you soon, Dwalin; and see you Gloin, Bifur, Bofur and Bombur! May your beard never grow thin!" And as he turned around that mountain, he added: "Farewell Thorin Eike Then bow that dwarf low before your Gate, but let it be fastened in your throat. "Goodbye and strength, wherever you go!" the Balin fin those parties will indeed be wonderful!"
"If you ever pass by my place," Bilbo said, "Don't you dare knock! Tee is four o'clock; but some of you are welcome for a while!" Toe draai hy weg.
That elf-learner was on the march; and although this unfortunately reduced it, it was still happy there, because now the northern world That dragon was dead, and those gnomes were overthrown, and everyone looked forward to it after that winter after a spring of joy.
Gandalf and Bilbo behind that Elwekoning gery, and past them walked Beorn, once again in man form, and he sang the bill and with a loud on that path. So I kept it on until it was close to the border of Mirkwood, north of the place where the Forest River ended. Come on thank you for keeping quiet, because that warlock and Bilbo didn't want to go into that forest, not even
Although the king orders you to spend a little time in your sale. Hulle intended to go along that edge of that forest, and around that lê between this and that beginning of the Grysberge. This was a long one
happy toad, but now that those gnomes had been crushed, it would be safer to cover their ashes with those terrible toads under that tre also going soon.
"Farewell! O Elweking!" the Gandalf sê. "May that green forest be cheerful, while the world is still young! And may all you people be c become the most needed and least expected! The more carefully you look at my sales, the better I will be satisfied!"
"I beg you," Bilbo staggered and stood on one foot, "for it."
accept this gift!" and he gave it a necklace of silver and pearls, which Dain gave him with his own hands.
"What way will I earn it, O hobbit?" asked that king. "Well, uh, I'm thinking about it, don't you know," Bilbo suddenly said, confused, uh, a bit of a refund should be made for your, uh, gas freedom. I even mean a Burglar's feelings. I drank the best of your wine and ate of your bread."
"I'll take your gift, O Bilbo, the Manjifique!" it seriously said to that king. "And I call you elf friend and sent. May your skaduwee Then turn that lane after the Forest, and Bilbo begins his long path. path to home.
He had some hardship and adventure before he returned. That Wilderness was always that Wild One, and there were many other things in it hom, and Beorn vir 'n a large part of that toad-and he was never in great danger
weather. In any case, during that winter Gandalf and Bilbo all came back along both sides of the Forest, after the door of Beorn's hous there both of them had a little sleep. Kersgety was warm and cheerful there;
and men came from far and wide to celebrate at Beorn's command. Those gnomes from the Misty Mountains were now small and scared, and lo deepest gate that Hull could find; and those Wargs disappeared from them
wish that man might go out without fear. Let it indeed become a great chief in that region, and let it rule a country between that moun of sy lyn those who had the courage to take bear form, and some were grim man and sledge, but most of them were like Beorn at heart, al Now peace come to the ear of the edge of the Wilderness.
This was spring, and a beautiful spring with sunny weather and a clear sun
Bilbo and Gandalf finally separated from Beorn, and although he longed for the house, Bilbo regretfully left, after the beauty of the g was no less wonderful in that spring than in that high summer.
Ultimately, it ascends that long path and reaches the final pass where those gnomes captured it before. But if you come to that climax, vast land. There behind me was Mirkwood, blue in the distance, and dark green on the closer edge, even in that spring. Far away was tha

unmelted was shiny pale.
"So come snow after fire, and even drake the end!" he said Bilbo, and he turned his back on adventure. That Tookish part was bad, and that Baggins is getting stronger every day. "I just wish to be in my own armchair!" it he said.
THE FINAL PHASE
This was on the First of May that the two finally returned to that edge of the valley of Rivendell, where the Last (or the First) Holy This was happening again, all the ponies were tired, they were all over the place
the baggy behavior; and I always needed some rest. While you are on that steep path, Bilbo still hears the elwe in that tree, as if you it hasn't stopped since he left; and as soon as those riders come down, they burst into song in the later part of that forest, of the s The dragon is withered,
Sy bene is now crumpled; Sy armor is gebewe, Sy prag is humiliation!

Though the sword shall wax, And the throne and crown shall perish
With strength that man trusts and wealth that he cherishes, Here the grass still grows, And the blare waves still blow, That white water flows, And everyone still sings Come! Tra-la-la-lally!
 Come back to that valley! That star is much brighter, as a gem without measure, that moon is much whiter As silwer in skat;
Die vuur skyn meer
Op die haard in die skemer
If gold is what I'm used to, how come I'm walking around? Oh! Tra-la-la-lally
 Come back to the Valley.
O! Waargaat gaan jy,
So late with that return?
The river flows,
Die sterre brand almal!
O! Where to so beguiling,
So heartbroken and so somber?
Here eleven and eleven girl
Well welcome those weary ones With Tra-la-la-lally Come back after that Valley, Tra-la-la-lally
Fa-la-la-lally Fa-la!
When the elwe of that valley came out, all hail and all jelly
ear that water after that house of Elrond. There was a hearty welcome for them, and there they were eager to listen to the story of the sleepy. He knew most of that story, because he was involved in it, and he himself told the story about it to the magician on the way ho Beorn; but every now and then he would open an eye and listen when a part of that story that he didn't know yet came in.
It was in this way that he found out where Gandalf had gone; for he heeded the words of that warlock to Elrond. This was as if Gandalf "Soon," Gandalf said, "the Forest will grow somewhat
more healthy. The North will be free from that horror for many years, I hope. Yet I wish he would be banished from that world!" "This will be good indeed," Elrond said; "but I fear that this will not happen in this era of that world, or since then."
When the story of their journey was told, there was another story, and
more stories, stories from a long time ago, and stories of new things, and stories of no good, until Bilbo's head falls forward on his gemaklik in 'n hoekie.
He woke up and found himself in a white bed, and the door sky was in an open window. Below that the bay was loud and clear banks of the stream.
Sing almal, merry, sing almal together!

That wind is in that treetop, that wind is in that heath; That star is in bloom, that moon is in bloom, And bright are those windows of that Nag in her tower. Dance all your merrily, dance together all the time!
Sag is that grass, and let that foot be a spring! That river is silwer, that skaduwees is flowing; Happy May is the time, and cheer for Sing us now saggies, and dream let us weave! Let him fall asleep and let us loose there!
That swerwer sleep. Now say sy kissing! Lullaby! Lullaby! Els and Wilger!
Don't suck anymore, Denne, until that wind of that morning! Autumn moon! Dark may that country be! Quiet! Quiet! Oak, Ash and Doring!
Be still, all waters, until the break of dawn!
"Why, Merry People!" sê Bilbo while he looks out. "What time is this with that moon?" Is this? Your lullaby would wake up a drunken gno the whole replied with a smile. "This is nearing dawn, and you are it
been asleep since the beginning of that night. More, perhaps, you will be cured of fatigue."
"A little sleep will make a great healing in that house of Elrond," he said; "but I'll take all that healing I can get. Have a good nig with that he went back to bed and slept until late.
Tiredness left the man in that house, and he had the best of merriment, joking and dancing, early and late, with the elwe of that valle home. So after a week he separated from Elrond and gave it to him
such little gifts as what he would accept, the he together with Gandalf gonery.
Even when everyone leaves that valley, the lug in the West darkens before them, and the wind and deer rise up to meet them.
"Vrolik is Meityd!" Bilbo passed away while the deer saw it beaten. "But our back is after legends and we come home. I assume this is t taste of it."
"There's a long path before that door," Gandalf said. "But this is that last toad," Bilbo said.
May it come to that river, what that extreme edge of that border area, what did you notice from that Wild One, and after that drift und remember. That water was thick with the melt of that snow
that approaching summer and with those day-long roe deer; but cover the ear piercing with With difficulty and pressure, it happened at that last stage of their journey.
This was the same as it was before, except that it was custom-made
smaller and quieter; There was no troll here that time either. At every point on that path Bilbo remembers that event and those words f it was more than ten the same, so of course he quickly noticed that the place where the pony fell into the river, and he turned it off their nasty adventure with Tom and Bert and Bill.
Not far from that path, I found all that troll's gold, which I had buried, always hidden and untouched. "Enough for my time," Bilbo said to him, may he have dug it up. "You better take that barrel, Gandalf. I dare you, you can find a use for it."
"Indeed I can!" it was said by that roper. "But share and share equally! You may think that you need more than what you expect."
So the whole thing was put in gold and hurled on that pony, which was
smooth not satisfied about that not. After that, their progress was more rapid, as most of that time had passed. But that land was gree appreciate that hobbit with satisfaction. He wiped the sign with a red handkerchief - no! not one of them
Live it up, he here who borrowed one from Elrond - because now it was June that brought that summer, and the weather was clear and warm When all things come to an end, even this story, the day finally dawned in the sig of that land where Bilbo was born and raised,
where the forms of that land and of that boome vir hom were so well known as they were in hand and tone. When he got up, he could see h distance, and he stopped it quickly and said: Power always turns on,
Over rock and under tree,
By the way, that son never saw it, by the way that he never saw it; Ear snow through winter gesaai,
And through that cheerful flower of Junie, Ear grass and ear cliff,

 And under the mountains in the moon. Pea always go on
Under cloud and under star,
Still the feet wandered around a bit, left

 Finally turn to that distant house. Oh, what fire and sword it looked like And horror in that Cliff sale
In the end I looked at that green wave And boom, what a hell of a lankal k and.
Gandalf looked after him. "My dear Bilbo!" it he said. "Something is that



"Seen my! What are we wearing?" he exclaimed. There was a great commotion
and people of all kinds, respectable and irreverent, were crowded around that door, and went in and out of it-not until they laid their dully, Bilbo noticed it with annoyance.
If he was amazed, you were even more amazed. He came back.
in that means of an auction! There was a large book of knowledge in black and red hung on that fence, what explains that on Junie that and Burrowes sou die besittings van wyle Bilbo Baggins per auction sale Esquire, of Bag-End, Underhill, Hobbiton. Sales start at ten o' is not uncommon at auctions). Bilbo's cousins, the Sackville-Bagginses, were actually trying to measure their rooms to see if their fur Too bad I think that assumption is wrong.
The return of Mr. Bilbo Baggins it caused quite a commotion, both under that Heuwel and in front of that Heuwel, and in front of that W as a nine-day long miracle. That regskil indeed lasted for years. This was a very long time before mr. To acknowledge Baggins in action weather. Those people who especially got good winning copies at that Sale got it, it was very impressive; and in the end Bilbo had to b disappeared and was never found again. Personally he suspects that
Sackville Bagginses. For his part, he never acknowledged that the returned Baggins was sincere, and he was never on friendly terms with Indeed, Bilbo felt that he lost more than just spoons - he simply lost reputation. This is true that he always remained an elf friend a niggies on that Tak side, but even they are not encouraged in their friendship by their older people.
It's a pity that he doesn't care about it. He was very satisfied; and that sound of that kettle on sy fireherd was always more musical even in that quiet day for that unexpected party. Sy swaard the he hung ear that kaggelrak. Your armor was arranged on a stand in that (until he loaned this to a museum). Gold and silver are the greatest gifts, both useful and extravagant - which is to a certain extent big secret, because he uses it this way when unpleasant visitors come.
Hy the beginning poetry skryf and that elwe visit; and although baie
shaking their heads and touching their heads and shouting: "Poor old Baggins!" and although little of his story was glowing, he remaine A few years later, an autumn evening, Bilbo was sitting in her study
In my memoirs he thought of calling him "There and Back Again", a Hobbit's Holiday" because there was a man at that door. This was Gand and a dwarf; and that dwarf was ultimately Balin.
"Come in! Come in!" Bilbo said, and he went to sit in that chair. by that fire. As Balin noted that Mr. Baggins se underbaadjie more wa extensive (and had the right gold button), Bilbo also noticed that Balin's beard was an inch longer, and his jewel-studded belt was of Naturally, they start talking to each other, and Bilbo asks how things went in that country of that mountain. This is the same or hulle going well. Bard rebuilt that village in Dale and men came together to him from Meer and Suid and Wes, and that whole valley
farmed again and became rich, and that wasteland was now filled with food
and flowers in that spring and fruit and celebration in that autumn. And Meerstad is recovering and was more prosperous than ever befor up and down that Running River; and there was friendship in that part between elwe and dwarf and man.
Die Saal by Bag-End home by B.Baggins Esquire
That old Master had a bad end. Bard gave his home gold for the help of that Merhuman, but of that kind that is easy to catch
such a disease he fell under that dragon disease and took most of that gold and with it quickly, and died of hunger in that wasteland,

"That new Master is of that wiser kind," the Balin said, "and is highly sought after, because, of course, he gets most of that credit f "Then the prophecy of that old song turned out to be true, after a "mode!" Bilbo said.
"Of course!" the Gandalf sê. "And how come you don't prove where?" You certainly don't believe that prophecy, because you had a hand in your adventure and escape is through pure happiness management, just around you
only advantage? You are a very good person, mr. Baggins, and I'm very kind of you for that; but you're just a little guy in a big world "Thank you!" Bilbo was lying down, holding the tobacco jar in his hands.




