Latin	English?	

Minas Tirith

Pippin looked out from the shelter of Gandalf's cloak. He wondered if he was awake or still sleeping, still in the swift-moving dream i There had been the first ride at terrible speed without a halt, and then in the dawn he had seen a pale gleam of gold, and they had com A light kindled in the sky, a blaze of yellow fire behind dark barriers Pippin cowered back, afraid for a moment, wondering into what d Where are we, Gandalf? he asked.
In the realm of Gondor, the wizard answered. The land of Anórien is still passing by.
There was a silence again for a while. Then, what is that? cried Pippin suddenly, clutching at Gandalf's cloak. Look! Fire, red fire! A For answer Gandalf cried aloud to his horse. On, Shadowfax! We must hasten. Time is short. See! The beacons of Gondor are alight, calli But Shadowfax paused in his stride, slowing to a walk, and then he lifted up his head and leaned. And out of the darkness the answering Pippin became drowsy again and paid little attention to Gandalf telling him of the customs of Gondor, and how the Lord of the City had Sleep again, and do not be afraid! said Gandalf. For you are not going like Frodo to Mordor, but to Minas Tirith, and there you will be You do not comfort me, said Pippin, but nevertheless sleep crept over him. The last thing that he remembered before he fell into deep s Pippin woke to the sound of voices. Another day of hiding and a night of journey had fleeted by. It was twilight: the cold dawn was at Yea truly, we know you, Mithrandir, said the leader of the men, and you know the pass-words of the Seven Gates and are free to go forwa I will vouch for him before the seat of Denethor, said Gandalf. And as for valor, that cannot be computed by stature. He has passed thr Man? said Ingold dubiously; and the others laughed.
Man! cried Pippin, now thoroughly roused. Man! Indeed not! I am a hobbit and no more valuable than I am a man, save perhaps now and aga Many a doer of great deeds might say no more, said Ingold. But what is a hobbit?
A Halfling, answered Gandalf. Nay, not the one that was spoken of, he added seeing the wonder in the men's faces. Not he, yet one of hi Yes, and one who journeyed with him, said Pippin. And Boromir of your City was with us, and he saved me in the snows of the North, and Peace! said Gandalf. The news of that grief should have been told first to the father.
It has been guessed already, said Ingold; for there have been strange portents here of late. But pass on now quickly! For the Lord of M Hobbit, said Pippin. Little service can I offer to your lord, but what I can do, I would do, remembering Boromir the brave.
Fare thee well! said Ingold; and the men made way for Shadow fax, and he passed through a narrow gate in the wall. May you bring good c Because I come rarely but when my help is needed, answered Gandalf. And as for counsel, to you I would say that you are over-late in re The work will be finished this evening, said Ingold. This is the last portion of the wall to be put in defence: the least open to attac Yes, they will eat. But they have fought many battles at your back. This road and no road looks towards safety any longer. Be vigilant! Gandalf passed now into the wide land beyond the Rammas Echor. So the men of Gondor called the out wall that they had built with great The townlands were rich, with wide tilth and many orchards, and homesteads there were with oast and garner, fold and byre, and many ril Now after Gandalf had ridden for some time the light of day grew in the sky, and Pippin roused himself and looked up. To his left lay a Even as Pippin gazed in wonder the walls passed from looming gray to white, blushing faintly in the dawn; and suddenly the sun climbed So Gandalf and Peregrin rode to the Great Gate of the Men of Gondor at the rising of the sun, and its iron doors rolled back before the Mithrandir! Mithrandir! he cried. Now we know that the storm is indeed night!
It is upon you, said Gandalf. I have ridden on its wings. Let me pass! I must come to your Lord Denethor, while his stewardship lasts. Then men fell back before the command of his voice and questioned him no further, though they gazed in wonder at the hobbit that sat be For the fashion of Minas Tirith was such that it was built on seven levels, each delved into the hill, and about each was set a wall, a A strong citadel it was indeed, and not to be taken by a host of enemies, if there were any within that could hold weapons; unless some Pippin gazed in growing wonder at the great stone city, vast and more splendid than anything that he had dreamed of; greater and strong At last they came out of shadow to the seventh gate, and the warm sun that shone down beyond the river, as Frodo walked in the glades o The Guards of the gate were robed in black, and their helms were of strange shape, high-crowned, with long cheek-guards close-fitting t Already it seemed that word of their coming had gone before them: and at once they were admitted, silently, and without question. Quick Pippin glanced at it as he hurried after Gandalf. It looked mournful, he thought, and he wondered why the dead tree was left in this pl Seven stars and seven stones and one white tree.
The words that Gandalf had murmured came back into his mind. And then he found himself at the doors of the great hall beneath the gleam They walked down a paved passage, long and empty, and as they went Gandalf spoke softly to Pippin. Be careful of your words, Master Per Why not? What is wrong with Strider? Pippin whispered. He meant to come here, didn't he? And he'll be arriving soon himself anyway.
Maybe, maybe, said Gandalf. Though if he comes, it is likely to be in some way that no one expects, not even Denethor. It will be bette Gandalf halted before a tall door of polished metal. See, Master Pippin, there is no time to instruct you now in the history of Gondor; "Kingship?" said Pippin amazed.
Yes, said Gandalf. If you have walked all these days with closed ears and mind asleep, wake up now! He knocked on the door.
The door was opened, but no one could be seen to open it. Pippin looked into a great hall. It was lit by deep windows in the wide aisle Suddenly Pippin was reminded of the hewn rocks of Argonath, and awe fell on him, as he looked down that avenue of kings long dead. At t Hail, Lord and Steward of Minas Tirith, Denethor son of Ecthelion! I am come with counsel and tidings in this dark hour.
Then the old man looked up. Pippin saw his carved face with its proud bones and skin like ivory, and the long curved nose between the d It is, said Gandalf. One of the twains. The other is with Théoden of Rohan and may come hereafter. Halflings they are, as you see, yet Yet a Halfling still, said Denethor grimly, and little love do I bear the name, since those accursed words came to trouble our counsels He would have gone, said Gandalf. Be not unjust in your grief! Boromir claimed the errand and would not suffer anyone else to have it. I have received this, said Denethor, and laying down his rod he lifted from his lap the thing that he had been gazing at. In each hand That is the horn that Boromir always wore! cried Pippin.
Verily, said Denethor. And in my turn I bore it, and so did each eldest son of our house, far back into the vanished years before the f Thirteen, thirteen days, Pippin faltered. Yes, I think that would be so. Yes, I stood beside him, as he blew the horn. But no help came So, said Denethor, looking keenly at Pippin's face. You were there? Tell me more! Why did no help come? And how did you escape, and yet Pippin flushed and forgot his fear. The mightiest man may be slain by one arrow, he said; and Boromir was pierced by many. When last I Then Pippin looked the old man in the eye, for pride stirred strangely within him, still stung by the scorn and suspicion in that cold A pale smile, like a gleam of cold sun on a winter's evening, passed over the old man's face; but he bent his head and held out his han Pippin lifted it and presented the hilt to him. Whence came this? said Denethor. Many, many years lie on it. Surely this is a blade wro It came out of the mounds that lie on the borders of my country said Pippin. But only evil wights dwell there now, and I will not willi I see that strange tales are woven about you, said Denethor, and once again it is shown that looks may belie the man - or the halfling. Take the hilt, said Gandalf, and speak after the Lord, if you are resolved on this.
"I am," said Pippin.
The old man laid the sword along his lap, and Pippin put his hand to the hilt, and said slowly after Denethor:
Here do I swear fealty and service to Gondor, and to the Lord and Steward of the realm, to speak and to be silent, to do and to let be,

And this I hear, Denethor son of Ecthelion, Lord of Gondor, Steward of the High King, and I will not forget it, nor fail to reward that And now, said Denethor, my first command to you: speak and be not silent! Tell me your full tale, and see that you recall all that you Bring wine and food and seats for the guests, said Denethor, and see that none trouble us for one hour.
It is all that I have to spare, for there is much else to heed, he said to Gandalf. Much of more import, it may seem, and yet to me les And earlier, it is to be hoped, said Gandalf. For I have not ridden hither from Isengard, one hundred and fifty leagues, with the speed It is much to me. But I already know enough of these deeds for my own counsel against the menace of the East. He turned his dark eyes o Denethor looked indeed much more like a great wizard than Gandalf did, more kingly, beautiful, and powerful; and older Yet by a sense o Yes, he said; for though the Stones be lost, they say, still the lords of Gondor have keener sight than lesser men, and many messages c Then men came bearing a chair and a low stool, and one brought a salver with a silver flagon and cups, and white cakes. Pippin sat down Now tell me your tale, my liege, said Denethor, half kindly; half mockingly For the words of one whom my son so befriended will be welc Pippin never forgot that hour in the great hall under the piercing eye of the Lord of Gondor, stabbed ever and anon by his shrewd quest Lead the Lord Mithrandir to the housing prepared for him, said Denethor, and his companion may lodge with him for the present, if he wi And you, my Lord Mithrandir, shall come too, as and when you will. None shall hinder your coming to me at any time, save only in my bri Folly? said Gandalf. Nay, my lord, when you are a dotard you will die. You can use even your grief as a cloak. Do you think that I do n If you understand it, then be content, returned Denethor. Pride would be folly that disdained help and counsel at need; but you deal ou Unless the king should come again? said Gandalf. Well, my lord Steward, it is your task to keep some kingdom still against that event, Gandalf did not look at Pippin or speak a word to him as they went. Their guide brought them from the doors of the hall, and then led t Are you angry with me, Gandalf? he said, as their guide went out and closed the door. I did the best I could.
You did indeed! said Gandalf, laughing suddenly; and he came and stood beside Pippin, putting his arm about the hobbit's shoulders and Indeed you did your best, said the wizard; and I hope that it may be long before you find yourself in such a tight corner again between He is not as other men of this time, Pippin, and whatever be his descent from father to son, by some chance the blood of Westernesse ru Remember that! For you are now sworn to his service. I do not know what put it into your head, or your heart, to do that. But it was we He fell silent and sighed. Well, no need to brood on what tomorrow may bring. For one thing, tomorrow will be certain to bring worse th Gandalf went to the door, and there he turned. I am on Pippin's rod, he said. Do me a favor when you go out. Even before you rest, if y With that Gandalf went out; and as he did so, there came the note of a clear sweet bell ringing in a tower of the citadel. Three stroke After a minute Pippin went to the door and down the stairs and looked about the street. The sun was now shining warm and bright, and th Nine o'clock we'd call it in the Shire, said Pippin aloud to himself. Just the time for a nice breakfast by the open window in spring s Presently he noticed a man, clad in black and white, coming along the narrow street from the center of the citadel towards him. Pippin Are you Peregrine the Halfling? he said. I am told that you have been sworn to the service of the Lord and of the City. Welcome! He hel I am named Beregond son of Baranor. I have no duty this morning, and I have been sent to you to teach you the pass-words, and to tell y Well, said Pippin. I have known of him all my short life, as you might say; and lately I have traveled far with him. But there is much Aragorn? said Beregond. Who is he?
Oh, stammered Pippin, he was a man who went about with us. I think he is in Rohan now.
You have been in Rohan, I hear. There is much that I would ask you of that land also; for we put much of what little hope we have in it Er well, said Pippin, if I may venture to say so, rather a burning question in my mind at present is, well, what about breakfast and al Beregond looked at him gravely. An old campaigner, I see, he said. They say that men who go warring afield look ever to the next hope o Well, yes, to speak in courtesy, yes, said Pippin. But no more than a cup of wine and a white cake or two by the kindness of your lord; Beregond laughed. At the table small men may do the greater deeds, we say. But you have broken your fast as well as any man in the Cita Eat! We will walk a little and then go find us some refreshment, and eat and drink on the battlement, and survey the fair morning.
One moment! said Pippin, blushing. Greed, or hunger by your courtesy, put it out of my mind. But Gandalf, Mithrandir as you call him, a "Hobbit?" said Beregond.
That is what we call ourselves, said Pippin.
I am glad to learn it, said Beregond, for now I may say that strange accents do not mar fair speech, and hobbits are a fair-spoken folk Pippin found that Shadowfax had been well housed and tended. For in the sixth circle, outside the walls of the citadel, there were some Shadowfax whinnied as Pippin entered the stable and turned his head. Good morning! said Pippin. Gandalf will come as soon as he may. He Shadowfax tossed his head and stamped. But he allowed Beregond to handle his head gently and stroke his great flanks.
He looks as if he were spoiling for a race, and not newly come from a great journey, said Beregond. How strong and proud he is! Where i None is rich and fair enough for him, said Pippin. He will have none. If he will consent to bear you, bear you he does; and if not, wel Shadowfax lifted up his head and leaned, so that the stable shook, and they covered their ears. Then they took their leave, seeing that And now for our manger, said Beregond, and he led Pippin back to the citadel, and so to a door in the north side of the great tower. Th This is the storehouse and buttery of my company of the Guard. said Beregond. Greetings, Targon! he called through the hatch. It is ear They got there bread, and butter, and cheese and apples: the last of the winter store, wrinkled but sound and sweet; and a leather flag They ate and drank; and they talked now of Gondor and its ways and customs, now of the Shire and the strange countries that Pippin had I will not hide from you, Master Peregrin, said Beregond, that to us you look almost as one of our children, a lad of nine summers or s I do, said Pippin. Although you are not far wrong. I am still little more than a boy in the reckoning of my own people, and it will be The sun was now climbing, and the mists in the valley below had been drawn up. The last of them were floating away, just overhead, as w Pippin could see all the Pelennor laid out before him, dotted into the distance with farmsteads and little walls, barns and byres, but That is the road to the valleys of Tumladen and Lossarnach, and the mountain-villages, and then on to Lebennin, said Beregond. There go They fell silent for a while. Pippin gazed anxiously eastward, as if at any moment he might see thousands of orcs pouring over the fiel It was a city, said Beregond, the chief city of Gondor, of which this was only a fortress. For that is the ruin of Osgiliath on either The Black Riders? said Pippin, opening his eyes, and they were wide and dark with an old fear re-awakened.
Yes, they were black, said Beregond, and I see that you know something of them, though you have not spoken of them in any of your tales I know of them, said Pippin softly, but I will not speak of them now, so near, so near. He broke off and raised his eyes above the Rive So near to Mordor? said Beregond quietly. Yes, there it lies. We seldom name it; but we have dwelt ever in sight of that shadow: someti When? said Pippin. Do you have a guess? For I saw the beacons last night and the errand-riders; and Gandalf said that it was a sign tha Only because everything is now ready, said Beregond. It is but the deep breath before the plunge.
But why were the beacons lit last night?
It is too late to send for aid when you are already besieged, replied Beregond. But I do not know the counsel of the Lord and his capta But if you would know what I think set the beacons ablaze, it was the news that came yesterday out of Lebennin. There is a great fleet And yet - he paused and stood up, and looked round, north, east, and south - the doings at Isengard should warn us that we are caught n Yet, Master Peregrin, we have this honor: ever we bear the brunt of the chief hatred of the Dark Lord, for that hatred comes down out o Pippin did not answer. He looked at the great walls, and the towers and brave banners, and the sun in the high sky, and then at the gat What was that? asked Beregond. You also felt something?
Yes, muttered Pippin. It is the sign of our fall, and the shadow of doom, a Fell Rider of the air.
Yes, the shadow of doom, said Beregond. I fear that Minas Tirith shall fall. Night count. The very warmth of my blood seems stolen away For a time they sat together with bowed heads and did not speak. Then suddenly Pippin looked up and saw that the sun was still shining Rightly said! cried Beregond, rising and striding to and fro. Nay, though all things must come utterly to an end in time, Gondor shall

All the same, I wish it was over for good or ill. said Pippin. I am no warrior at all and dislike any thought of battle; but waiting on Ah, there you lay your finger on the sore that many feel! said Beregond. But things may change when Faramir returns. He is bold, more b Pippin looked at him: tall and proud and noble, as all the men that he had yet seen in that land; and with a glitter in his eye as he t So they talked until the sun reached its height, and suddenly the noon-bells were rung, and there was a stir in the citadel; for all sa Will you come with me? said Beregond. You may join my mess for this day. I do not know to what company you will be assigned; or the Lor I shall be glad to come, said Pippin. I am lonely, to tell you the truth. I left my best friend behind in Rohan, and I have had no one Nay, nay, Beregond laughed, I am no captain. Neither office nor rank nor lordship have I, being but a plain man of arms of the Third Co Then it is far beyond me, said Pippin. Take me back to our room, and if Gandalf is not there, I will go where you like - as your guest. Gandalf was not in the lodging and had sent no message; so Pippin went with Beregond and was made known to the men of the Third Company Though Pippin had regretfully to destroy this hopeful tale, he could not be rid of his new rank, only fitting, men thought, to one befr At length Beregond rose. Farewell for this time! he said. I have duty now till sundown, as have all the others here, I think. But if yo He went out, and soon after all the others followed. The day was still fine, although it was growing hazy, and it was hot for March, ev People stared much as he passed. To his face men were gravely courteous, saluting him after the manner of Gondor with bowed head and ha He came at last by arched streets and many fair alleys and pavements to the lowest and widest circle, and there he was directed to the Greetings! said the lad. Where do you come from? You are a stranger in the City.
I was, said Pippin; but they say I have become a man of Gondor.
Oh eat! said the lad. Then we are all men here. But how old are you, and what is your name? I am ten years already, and shall soon be f Which question shall I answer first? said Pippin. My father farms the lands round Whitwell near Tuckborough in the Shire. I am nearly t Twenty-nine! said the lad and whistled. Why, you are quite old! As old as my uncle Iorlas. Still, he added hopefully, I wager I could s "Maybe you could, if I let you," said Pippin with a laugh. And maybe I could do the same to you: we know some wrestling tricks in my li No! Pippin laughed. Don't believe what strangers say of themselves either! I am not a fighter. But it would be polite in any case for t The boy drew himself up proudly. I am Bergil son of Beregond of the Guards, he said.
So I thought, said Pippin, for you look like your father. I know him and he sent me to find you.
Then why did you not say so at once? said Bergil, and suddenly a look of dismay came over his face. Do not tell me that he has changed His message is less bad than that, if not good. said Pippin. He says that if you would prefer it to standing me on my head, you might s Bergil clapped his hands, and laughed with relief. All is well, he cried. Come then! We were soon going to the Gate to look on. We will What is happening there?
The Captains of the Outlands are expected up the South Road at sundown. Come with us and you will see.
Bergil proved a good comrade, the best company Pippin had had since he parted from Merry, and soon they were laughing and talking gaily That is good! said Bergil. We boys are no longer allowed to pass the Gate without an elder. Now we shall see better.
Beyond the Gate there was a crowd of men along the verge of the road and of the great paved space into which all the ways to Minas Tiri Pippin and Bergil edged their way forward to the front of the crowd, and waited. Horns sounded at some distance, and the noise of cheer Forlong! Forlong! Pippin heard men calling. What do they say? he asked.
Forlong has come, Bergil answered; old Forlong the Fat, the Lord of Lossarnach. That is where my grandmother lives. Hurrah! Here he is. Leading the line there came walking a big thick-limbed horse, and on it sat a man of broad shoulders and huge girth, but old and gray-b Forlong! he shouted. True heart, true friend! Forlong! But when the men of Lossarnach had passed they muttered: So few! Two hundred, wh And so the companies came and were hailed and cheered and passed through the Gate, men of the Outlands marching to defend the City of G And that was all, less than three thousand fully told. I would eat more. Their cries and the tramp of their feet passed into the city a Pippin looked up, and it seemed to him that the sky had grown ashen-grey, as if a vast dust and smoke hung above them, and light came d So it will, if I have not returned before the sundown-bells, said Bergil. Eat! There goes the trumpet for the closing of the Gate.
Hand in hand they went back into the City, the last to pass the Gate before it was shut; and as they reached the Lampwrights Street all Farewell for this time, said Bergil. Take my greetings to my father, and thank him for the company that he sent. Come again soon, I beg They parted and Pippin hurried back towards the citadel. It seemed a long way, and he grew hot and very hungry; and night closed down s Can you find your way? said Beregond at the door of the small hall, on the north side of the citadel, where they had sat. It is a black The lodging was dark, save for a little lantern set on the table. Gandalf was not there. Gloom settled still more heavily on Pippin. He In the night he was awakened by a light, and he saw that Gandalf had come and was pacing to and fro in the room beyond the curtain of t Hullo! said Pippin, poking his head round the curtain. I thought you had forgotten all about me. I am glad to see you back. It has been But the night will be too short, said Gandalf. I have come back here, for I must have a little peace, alone. You should sleep, in a bed


The Passing of the Gray Company

Gandalf was gone, and the thudding hoofs of Shadowfax were lost in the night, when Merry came back to Aragorn. He had only a light bund So four of the Company still remain, said Aragorn. We will ride on together. But we shall not go alone, as I thought. The king is now d And then whither? said Legolas.
I cannot say yet, Aragorn answered. As for the king, he will go to the muster that he commanded at Edoras, four nights from now. And th I for one! cried Legolas. And Gimli with him! said the Dwarf.
Well, for myself, said Aragorn, it is dark before me. I must go down also to Minas Tirith, but I do not yet see the road. An hour long Don't leave me behind! said Merry. I have not been of much use yet; but I don't want to be laid aside, like baggage to be called for wh Yes, said Aragorn, and your road lies with him, I think, Merry. But do not look for mirth at the ending. It will be long, I fear, ere T Soon all were ready to depart: twenty-four horses, with Gimli behind Legolas, and Merry in front of Aragorn. Presently they were riding My lord, he said to the king, there are horsemen behind us. As we crossed the fords I thought that I heard them. Now we are sure. They Théoden at once called a halt. The Riders turned about and seized their spears. Aragorn dismounted and set Merry on the ground, and dra The sinking moon was obscured by a great sailing cloud, but suddenly it rode out clear again. Then they all heard the sound of hoofs, a When they were some fifty paces off, Éomer cried in a loud voice: Halt! Stop! Who laughs in Rohan?
The pursuers brought their steeds to a sudden stand. A silence followed: and then in the moonlight, a horseman could be seen dismountin Rohan? Rohan did you say? That is a glad word. We seek that land in haste from long afar.
You have found it, said Éomer. When you crossed the fords yonder you entered it. But it is the realm of Théoden the King. None ride her Halbarad Dúnadan, Ranger of the North I am, cried the man. We seek one Aragorn son of Arathorn, and we heard that he was in Rohan.
And you have found him too! cried Aragorn. Giving his reins to Merry, he ran forward and embraced the newcomer. Halbara! he said. Of al Merry breathed a sigh of relief. He had thought that this was some last trick of Saruman's, to waylay the king while he had only a few All is well, said Aragorn, turning back. Here are some of my own kin from the far land where I dwelt. But why they come, and how many t I have thirty with me, said Halbarad. That is all of our kindred that could be gathered in haste; but the brethren Elladan and Elrohir But I did not summon you, said Aragorn, save only in wish. My thoughts have often turned to you, and rarely more than tonight; yet I ha Théoden was indeed glad of the news. It is well! he said. If these kinsmen be in any way like to yourself, my lord Aragorn, thirty such Then the Riders set out again, and Aragorn for a while rode with the Dúnedain; and when they had spoken of tidings in the North and in I bring word to you from my father: The days are short. If thou art in haste, remember the Paths of the Dead.

Always my days have seemed to me too short to achieve my desire, answered Aragorn. But great indeed will be my haste ere I take that ro That will soon be seen, said Elrohir. But let us speak no more of these things upon the open road!
And Aragorn said to Halbarad: What is that that you bear, kinsman? For he saw that instead of a spear he bore a tall staff, as it were It is a gift that I bring you from the Lady of Rivendell, answered Halbarad. She wrought it in secret, and long was the making. But she And Aragorn said: Now I know what you bear. Bear it still for me a while! And he turned and looked away to the North under the great st The night was old and the East gray when they rode up at last from Deeping-coomb and came back to the Hornburg. There they were to lie Merry slept until he was roused by Legolas and Gimli. The Sun is high, said Legolas. All others are up and doing. Come, Master Sluggard There was a battle here three nights ago, said Gimli, and here Legolas and I played a game that I won only by a single orc. Come and se Nay! There is no time, said the Elf. Do not spoil the wonder with haste! I have given you my word to return hither with you, if a day o Merry got up and yawned. These few hours sleep had not been nearly enough; he was tired and rather dismal. He missed Pippin, and felt t In a high chamber of the Burg, said Legolas. He has neither rested nor slept, I think. He went thither some hours ago, saying that he m They are a strange company, these newcomers, said Gimli. Stout men and lordly they are, and the Riders of Rohan look almost as boys bes But even as Aragorn they are courteous, if they break their silence. said Legolas. And have you marked the brothers Elladan and Elrohir Why have they eaten? Have you heard? asked Merry. He had now dressed, and he flung his gray cloak about his shoulders; and the three pa They answered a summons, as you heard, said Gimli. Word came to Rivendell, they say: Aragorn has need of his kindred. Let the Dúnedain Nay, Galadriel, said Legolas. Did she not speak through Gandalf of the ride of the Gray Company from the North?
Yes, you have it, said Gimli. The Lady of the Wood! She read many hearts and desires. Now why didn't we wish for some of our own kinsfo Legolas stood before the gate and turned his bright eyes away north and east, and his fair face was troubled. I do not think that anyon For a while the three companions walked together, speaking of this and that turn of the battle, and they went down from the broken gate The king was already there, and as soon as they entered he called for Merry and had a seat set for him at his side. It is not as I woul May 1? said Merry, surprised and delighted. That would be splendid! He had never felt more grateful for any kindness in words. I am afr I doubt it not, said the king. I have had a good hill-pony made ready for you. He will bear you as swift as any horse by the roads that There are no great weapon-hoards here, lord. answered Éomer. Perhaps a light helm might be found to fit him; but we have no mail or swo I have a sword, said Merry, climbing from his seat, and drawing from its black sheath his small bright blade. Filled suddenly with love Gladly will I take it, said the king; and laying his long old hands upon the brown hair of the hobbit; he blessed him Rise now, Meriado As a father you shall be to me, said Merry.
For a little while, said Théoden.
They talked then together as they ate, until presently Éomer spoke. It is near the hour that we set for our going, lord, he said. Shall We will make ready to ride, said Théoden; but let word be sent to the Lord Aragorn that the hour is night.
The king with his guard and Merry at his side passed down from the gate of the Burg to where the Riders were assembling on the green. M A little apart the Rangers sat, silent, in an ordered company, armed with spear and bow and sword. They were clad in cloaks of dark gra The king mounted his horse, Snowman, and Merry sat beside him on his pony: Stybba was his name. Presently Éomer came out from the gate, I am troubled in mind, lord, he said, standing by the king's horse. I have heard strange words, and I see new perils far off. I have la It is now a full hour past noon, said Éomer. Before the night of the third day from now we should come to the Hold. The Moon will then Aragorn was silent for a moment. Three days, he murmured, and the muster of Rohan will only be begun. But I see that it cannot now be h The Paths of the Dead! said Théoden, and trembled. Why do you speak of them? Éomer turned and gazed at Aragorn, and it seemed to Merry Wings! Aragorn my friend! said Éomer. I had hoped that we should ride to war together; but if you seek the Paths of the Dead, then our That road I will take, nevertheless, said Aragorn. But I say to you, Éomer, that in battle we may yet meet again, though all the hosts You will do as you will, my lord Aragorn, said Théoden. It is your doom, perhaps, to tread strange paths that others do not. This parti Farewell, lord! said Aragorn. Ride to great renown! Farewell, Merry! I leave you in good hands, better than we hoped when we hunted the Good-bye! said Merry. He could find no more to say. He felt very small, and he was puzzled and depressed by all these gloomy words. Mor Now Théoden spoke to Éomer, and he lifted up his hand and cried aloud, and with that word the Riders set forth. They rode over the Dike There go three that I love, and the smallest not the least, he said. He knows not to what end he laughs; yet if he knew, he would still A little people, but of great worth are the Shire-folk, said Halbarad. Little do they know of our long labor for the safekeeping of the And now our fates are woven together, said Aragorn. And yet, wings! here we must part. Well, I must eat a little, and then we also must Together they went back into the Burg; yet for some time Aragorn sat silent at the table in the hall, and the others waited for him to A struggle somewhat grimmer for my part than the battle of the Hornburg, answered Aragorn. I have looked in the Stone of Orthanc, my fr You have looked into that accursed stone of wizardry! exclaimed Gimli with fear and astonishment in his face. Did you say aught to him? You forget to whom you speak, said Aragorn sternly, and his eyes glinted. Did I not openly proclaim my title before the doors of Edoras He drew a deep breath. It was a bitter struggle, and the weariness is slow to pass. I spoke no word to him, and in the end I wrenched t But he wields great dominion, nevertheless, said Gimli; and now he will strike more swiftly.
The hasty stroke goes oft astray, said Aragorn. We must press our Enemy, and no longer wait upon him for the move. See my friends, when Then lost it must be, said Gimli. For what help is there to send thither, and how could it come there in time?
I have no help to send, therefore I must go myself, said Aragorn. But there is only one way through the mountains that will bring me to The Paths of the Dead! said Gimli. It is a fell name; and little to the liking to the Men of Rohan, as I saw. Can the living use such a The living have never used that road since the coming of the Rohirrim, said Aragorn, for it is closed to them. But in this dark hour th And what may be the words of the seer? said Legolas.
"Thus spoke Malbeth the Seer, in the days of Arvedui, last king at Fornost, said Aragorn:
Over the land there lies a long shadow, westward reaching wings of darkness.
The Tower trembles; to the tombs of kings doom approaches. The Dead awake;
for the hour is come for the oathbreakers; at the Stone of Erech they shall stand again and hear there a horn in the hills ringing. Whose shall the horn be? Who shall call them from the prey twilight, the forgotten people? The heir of him to whom the oath they swore.
From the North shall he come, need shall drive him:
he shall pass the Door to the Paths of the Dead.
Dark ways doubtless, said Gimli, but no darker than these staves are to me.
If you would understand them better, then I bid you come with me, said Aragorn; for that way I now shall take. But I do not go gladly; I will go with you even on the Paths of the Dead, and to whatever end they may lead, said Gimli.
I also will come, said Legolas, for I do not fear the Dead.
I hope that the forgotten people will not have forgotten how to fight, said Gimli; for otherwise I see not why we should trouble them. That we shall know if ever we come to Erech, said Aragorn. But the oath that they broke was to fight against Sauron, and they must figh Then Isildur said to their king: "Thou shalt be the last king. And if the West prove mightier than thy Black Master, this curse I lay u

He stood up. Eat! he cried, and drew his sword, and it flashed in the twilight hall of the Burg. To the Stone of Erech! I seek the Path Legolas and Gimli made no answer, but they rose and followed Aragorn from the hall. On the green there waited, still and silent, the ho And while Théoden went by slow paths in the hills, the Gray Company passed swiftly over the plain, and on the next day in the afternoon The Lady Éowyn greeted them and was glad of their coming; for no mightier men had she seen than the Dúnedain and the fair sons of Elron But at last she said: Lords, you are weary and shall now go to your beds with such ease as can be contrived in haste. But tomorrow fair But Aragorn said: Nay, lady, be not troubled for us! If we may lie here tonight and break our fast tomorrow, it will be enough. For I r She smiled on him and said: Then it was kindly done, lord, to ride so many miles out of your way to bring tidings to Éowyn, and to spea Indeed no man would count such a journey wasted, said Aragorn; and yet, lady, I could not have come hither, if it were not that the roa And she answered as one that likes not what is said: "Then, lord, you are astray; for out of Harrowdale no road runs east or south; and Nay, lady, said he, I am not astray; for I walked in this land ere you were born to grace it. There is a road out of this valley, and t Then she stared at him as one who is stricken, and her face blanched, and for a long time she spoke no more, while all sat silent. But, They may suffer me to pass, said Aragorn; but at least I will venture it. No other road will serve.
But this is madness, she said. For here are men of renown and prowess, whom you should not take into the shadows, but should lead to wa It is not madness, lady, he answered; for I go on a path appointed. But those who follow me do so of their free will; and if they wish Then they said no more, and they ate in silence; but her eyes were ever upon Aragorn, and the others saw that she was in great torment But as Aragorn came to the booth where he was to lodge with Legolas and Gimli, and his companions had gone in. there came the Lady Éowy Aragorn, she said, why will you go on this deadly road?
Because I must, he said. Only so can I see any hope of doing my part in the war against Sauron. I do not choose paths of peril, Éowyn. For a while she was silent, as if pondering what this might mean. Then suddenly she laid her hand on his arm. You are a stern lord and Your duty is with your people, he answered.
Too often have I heard of duty, she cried. But am I not of the House of Eorl, a shieldmaiden and not a dry-nurse? I have waited on falt Few may do that with honor, he answered. But as for you, lady: did you not accept the charge to govern the people until their lord's re Shall I always be chosen? she said bitterly. Shall I always be left behind when the Riders depart, to mind the house while they win ren A time may come soon, said he, when none will return. Then there will be need of valor without renown, for none shall remember the deed And she answered: All your words are but to say: you are a woman, and your part is in the house. But when the men have died in battle a What do you fear, lady? he asked.
A cage, she said. To stay behind bars, until use and old age accept them, and all chance of doing great deeds is gone beyond recall or And yet you counseled me not to adventure on the road that I had chosen, because it is dangerous?
So one may counsel another, she said. Yet I do not bid you flee from peril, but to ride to battle where your sword may win renown and v Nor would I, he said. Therefore I say to you, lady: Stay! For you have no errand to the South.
Neither have those others who go with thee. They go only because they would not be parted from thee - because they love thee. Then she When the light of day was come into the sky but the sun was not yet risen above the high ridges in the East, Aragorn made ready to depa Then it seemed to Gimli and Legolas who were nearby that she wept, and in one so stern and proud that seemed the more grievous. But she I will, he said.
Then wilt thou not let me ride with this company, as I have asked?
I will not, lady, he said. For that I could not grant without leave of the king and of your brother; and they will not return until tom Then she fell on her knees, saying: I beg thee!
Nay, lady, he said, and taking her by the hand he raised her. Then he kissed her hand, and sprang into the saddle, and rode away, and d But Éowyn stood still as a figure carved in stone, her hands clenched at her sides, and she watched them until they passed into the sha And some said: They are Elvish wights. Let them go where they belong, into the dark places, and never return. The times are evil enough The light was still gray as they rode, for the sun had not yet climbed over the black ridges of the Haunted Mountain before them. A dre My blood runs chill, said Gimli, but the others were silent, and his voice fell dead on the dank fir-needles at his feet. The horses wo The company halted, and there was not a heart among them that did not quail, unless it were the heart of Legolas of the Elves, for whom This is an evil door, said Halbarad, and my death lies beyond it. I will give to pass it nevertheless; but no horse will enter.
But we must go in, and therefore the horses must go too, said Aragorn. For if ever we come through this darkness, many leagues lie beyo Then Aragorn led the way, and such was the strength of his will in that hour that all the Dúnedain and their horses followed him. And i His knees shook, and he was wroth with himself. Here is a thing unheard of! he said. An Elf will go underground and a Dwarf will not! W Aragorn had brought torches from Dunharrow, and now he went ahead bearing one aloft; and Elladan with another went at the rear, and Gim Nothing assailed the company nor withstood their passage, and yet steadily fear grew on the Dwarf as he went on: most of all because he So time unreckoned passed, until Gimli saw a sight that he was ever afterwards loath to recall. The road was wide, as far as he could j Does he feel no fear? muttered the Dwarf. In any other cave Gimli Glóin's son would have been the first to run to the gleam of gold. Bu Nevertheless he drew near, and saw Aragorn kneeling, while Elladan held aloft both torches. Before him were the bones of a mighty man. Aragorn did not touch him, but after gazing silently for a while he rose and sighed. Hither shall the flowers of simbelmyn come never u For that is not my errand! he cried, turning back and speaking to the whispering darkness behind. Keep your hoards and your secrets hid There was no answer, unless it were an utter silence more dreadful than the whispers before; and then a chill blast came in which the t Suddenly he heard the tinkle of water, a sound hard and clear as a stone falling into a dream of dark shadow. Light grew, and lo! the c The Company now mounted again, and Gimli returned to Legolas. They rode in file, and evening came on and a deep blue dusk; and still fe The Dead are following, said Legolas. I see shapes of Men and of horses, and pale banners like shreds of cloud, and spears like winter- Yes, the Dead ride behind. They have been summoned, said Elladan.
The company came at last out of the ravine, as suddenly as it had issued from a crack in a wall; and there lay the uplands of a great f Where in the Middle-earth are we? said Gimli; and Elladan answered: We have descended from the uprising of the Morthond, the long chill The Morthond Vale made a great bay that beat up against the sheer southern faces of the mountains. Its steep slopes were grass-grown; b Then without turning Aragorn cried aloud so that all could hear: Friends, forget your weariness! Laugh now, laugh! We must come to the Lights went out in house and hamlet as they came, and doors were shut, and folk that were afield cried in terror and ran wild like hunt Bells were ringing far below, and all men fled before the face of Aragorn; but the Gray Company in their haste rode like hunters, until Long had the terror of the Dead lain upon that hill and upon the empty fields about it. For upon the top stood a black stone, round as To that Stone the Company came and halted in the dead of night. Then Elrohir gave to Aragorn a silver horn, and he blew upon it and it Oathbreakers, why have ye come?
And a voice was heard out of the night that answered him, as if from far away:
To fulfill our oath and have peace.
Then Aragorn said: The hour is come at last. Now I go to Pelargir upon Anduin, and ye shall come after me. And when all this land is cl And with that he bade Halbarad unfurl the great standard which he had brought; and behold! it was black, and if there was any device up But when the dawn came, cold and pale, Aragorn rose at once, and he led the Company forth upon the journey of greatest haste and wearin They passed Tarlang's Neck and came into Lamedon; and the Shadow Host pressed behind and fear went on before them, until they came to C


The Muster of Rohan

Now all roads were running together to the East to meet the coming of war and the onset of the Shadow. And even as Pippin stood at the Day was waning. In the last rays of the sun the Riders cast long pointed shadows that went on before them. Darkness had already crept b All day far below them a leaping stream had run down from the high pass behind, cleaving its narrow way between pine-clad walls; and no Merry looked out in wonder upon this strange country, of which he had heard many tales upon their long road. It was a skyless world, in He was very tired, for although they had ridden slowly, they had ridden with very little rest. Hour after hour for nearly three weary d All the same he had been lonely, and never more so than now at the day's end. He wondered where in all this strange world Pippin had go Harrowdale at last! said Éomer. Our journey is almost at an end. They halted. The paths out of the narrow gorge fell steeply. Only a gl This journey is over, perhaps, said Théoden, but I have far yet to go. Last night the moon was full, and in the morning I shall ride to But if you would take my counsel, said Éomer in a low voice, you would then return hither, until the war is over, lost or won.
Théoden smiled. Nay, my son, for so I will call you, speak not the soft words of Wormtongue in my old ears! He drew himself up and look In the deepening dusk they came down into the valley. Here the Snowbourn flowed near to the western walls of the dale, and soon the pat Then one blew a long call on a horn. It echoed in the valley. Other horns answered it, and lights shone out across the river.
And suddenly there rose a great chorus of trumpets from high above, sounding from some hollow place, as it seemed, that gathered their So the King of the Mark came back victorious out of the West to Dunharrow beneath the feet of the White Mountains. There he found the r At dawn three days ago, lord, he said. Shadowfax came like a wind out of the West to Edoras, and Gandalf brought tidings of your victor The winged Shadow? said Théoden. We saw it also, but that was in the dead of night before Gandalf left us.
Maybe, lord, said Dúnhere. Yet the same, or another like to it, a flying darkness in the shape of a monstrous bird, passed over Edoras It is well, said Théoden. I will ride now to the Hold, and there before I go to rest I will meet the marshals and captains. Let them co The road now led eastward straight across the valley, which was at that point little more than half a mile in width. Flats and meads of On all the level spaces there was a great concourse of men. Some thronged to the roadside, hailing the king and the riders from the Wes Merry wondered how many Riders there were. He could not guess their number in the gathering gloom, but it looked to him like a great ar After a while he looked back and found that he had already climbed some hundreds of feet above the valley, but still far below he could At last the king's company came to a sharp brink, and the climbing road passed into a cutting between walls of rock, and so went up a s Such was the dark Dunharrow, the work of long-forgotten men. Their name was lost and no song or legend remembered it. For what purpose Merry stared at the lines of marching stones: they were worn and black; some were leaning, some were fallen, some cracked or broken; th As they drew near Merry saw that the rider was a woman with long braided hair gleaming in the twilight, yet she wore a helm and was cla Hail, Lord of the Mark! she cried. My heart is glad at your return.
And you, Éowyn, said Théoden, is all well with you?
All is well, she answered; yet it seemed to Merry that her voice belied her, and he would have thought that she had been weeping, if th So Aragorn has come then, said Éomer. Is he still here?
No, he is gone, said Éowyn turning away and looking at the dark mountains against the East and South. Whither did he go? asked Éomer.
I don't know, she answered. He came at night, and rode away yesterday morning, for the Sun had climbed over the mountain-tops. He is go You are grieved, daughter, said Théoden. What has happened? Tell me, did he speak of that road? He pointed away along the darkening lin Yes, lord, said Éowyn. And he has passed into the shadows from which none have returned. I could not dissuade him. He is gone.
Then our paths are sundered, said Éomer. He is lost. We must ride without him, and our hope dwindles.
Slowly they passed through the short heath and upland grass, speaking no more, until they came to the king's pavilion. There Merry foun The Paths of the Dead, he muttered to himself. The Paths of the Dead? What does all this mean? They have all left me now. They have all In the midst of these gloomy thoughts he suddenly remembered that he was very hungry, and he got up to go and see if anyone else in thi In the inner part of the pavilion was a small space, curtained off with embroidered hangings, and strewn with skins: and there at a sma Come, Master Meriadoc! he said. You shall not stand. You shall sit beside me, as long as I remain in my own lands, and lighten my heart Room was made for the hobbit at the king's left hand, but no one called for any such. There was indeed little speech, and they ate and Twice now, lord, I have heard of the Paths of the Dead, he said. What are they? And where has Strider, I mean the Lord Aragorn where ha The king sighed, but no one answered, until at last Éomer spoke. We do not know, and our hearts are heavy, he said. But as for the Path No man knows, said Théoden: yet ancient legend, now seldom spoken, has somewhat to report. If these old tales speak true that have come Folk say that Dead Men out of the Dark Years guard the way and will suffer no living man to come to their hidden halls; but at times th Yet it is said in Harrowdale, said Éowyn in a low voice. that in the moonless nights but little while ago a great host in strange array Then why has Aragorn gone that way? asked Merry. Don't you know anything that would explain it?
Unless he has spoken words to you as his friend that we have not heard, said Éomer, none now in the land of the living can tell his pur Greatly changed he seemed to me since I saw him first in the king's house, said Éowyn: grimmer, older. Fey I thought him, and like one Perhaps he was called, said Théoden; and my heart tells me that I shall not see him again. Yet he is a kingly man of high destiny. And Then they stopped and looked at him and saw that he lived still; but he did not look at them. The way is shut, his voice said again It And when will that time be? said Baldor. But no answer did he ever get. For the old man died in that hour and fell upon his face; and n But how shall a man discover whether that time be come or not, save by daring the Door? said Éomer. And that way I would not go though He paused, for at that moment there was a noise outside, a man's voice crying the name of Théoden, and the challenge of the guard.
Presently the captain of the Guard thrust aside the curtain. A man is here, lord, he said, an errand-rider of Gondor. He wishes to come Let him come! said Théoden.
A tall man entered, and Merry choked back a cry; for a moment it seemed to him that Boromir was alive again and had returned. Then he s He sank on one knee and presented the arrow to Théoden. Hail Lord of the Rohirrim, friend of Gondor! he said. Hirgon I am, errand-rider The Red Arrow! said Théoden, holding it, as one who receives a summons long expected and yet dreadful when it comes. His hand trembled. That is best known to yourself, lord, said Hirgon. But ere long it may well come to pass that Minas Tirith is surrounded, and unless yo But he knows that we are a people who fight rather upon horseback and in the open, and that we are also a scattered people and time is What the Lord Denethor may know or guess of all these things I cannot say, answered Hirgon. But indeed our case is desperate. My lord d Dark tidings, said Théoden, yet not all unguessed. But say to Denethor that even if Rohan himself felt no danger, still we would come t But we will speak no longer counsels of prudence. We will eat. The weapon take was set for the morrow. When all is ordered we will set A week! said Hirgon. If it must be so, it must. But you are like to find only ruined walls in seven days from now, unless other help un At least we will do that, said Théoden. But I myself am new-come from battle and long journey, and I will now go to rest. Tarry here th With that the king stood up, and they all rose. Go now each to your rest. he said, and slept well. And you, Master Meriadoc, I need no I will be ready, said Merry, even if you bid me ride with you on the Paths of the Dead.
Speak not words of omen! said the king. For there may be more roads than one that could bear that name. But I did not say that I would I won't be left behind, to be called for on return! said Merry. I won't be left, I won't. And repeating this over and over again to him He was awakened by a man shaking him. Wake up, wake up. Master Holbytla! he cried; and at length Merry came out of deep dreams and sat What is the matter? he asked.
The king calls for you.
But the Sun has not risen, yet, said Merry.
No, and will not rise to-day, Master Holbytla. Nor ever again, one would think under this cloud. But time does not stand still, though

Flinging on some clothes, Merry looked outside. The world was darkening. The very air seemed brown, and all things about were black and Merry saw many folk standing, looking up and muttering: all their faces were gray and sad, and some were afraid. With a sinking heart h It comes from Mordor, lord, he said. It began last night at sunset. From the hills in the Eastfold of your realm I saw it rise and cree For a while the king sat silent. At last he spoke. So we come to it in the end, he said: the great battle of our time, in which many th We have very great store long prepared, answered Hirgon. Ride now as light and as swift as you may!
Then call the heralds, Éomer, said Théoden. Let the Riders be marshalled!
Éomer went out, and presently the trumpets rang in the Hold and were answered by many others from below; but their voices no longer sou The king turned to Merry. I am going to war, Master Meriadoc, he said. In a little while I shall take the road. I release you from my s But, but, lord, Merry stammered, I offered you my sword. I do not want to be parted from you like this, Théoden King. And as all my fri But we ride on horses tall and swift, said Théoden; and great though your heart be, you cannot ride on such beasts.
Then tie me on to the back of one, or let me hang on a stirrup, or something, said Merry. It is a long way to run; but run I shall, if Théoden smiled. Rather than that I would bear you with me on Snowmane, he said. But at least you shall ride with me to Edoras and look Then Éowyn rose up. Come now, Meriadoc! she said. I will show you the gear that I have prepared for you. They went out together. This r Now she led Merry to a booth among the lodges of the king's guard and there an armorer brought out to her a small helm, and a round shi No mail have we to fit you, said Éowyn, nor any time for the forging of such a hauberk; but here is also a stout jerkin of leather, a b Merry bowed, and the lady showed him the shield, which was like the shield that had been given to Gimli, and it bore on it the device o So it was that amid a gathering gloom the King of the Mark made ready to lead all his Riders on the eastward road. Hearts were heavy an Two swift hours passed, and now the king sat upon his white horse, glimmering in the half light. Proud and tall he seemed, though the h There on the wide flats beside the noisy river were marshalled in many companies well nigh five and fifty hundreds of Riders fully arme On down the gray road they went beside the Snowbourn rushing on its stones; through the hamlets of Underharrow and Upbourn, where many From dark Dunharrow in the dim morning
with thane and captain rode Thengel's son:
to Edoras he came, the ancient halls of the Mark-wardens mist-enshrouded; golden timbers were mantled in gloom.
Farewell he bade to his free people
hearth and high-seat, and the hallowed places, where long he had feasted ere the light faded. Forth rode the king, fear behind him,
fate before him Fealty kept him;
oaths he had taken, all fulfilled them. Forth rode Théoden. Five nights and days east and onward rode the Eorlingas
through Folde and Fenmarch and the Firienwood, six thousand spears to Sunlending,
Mundburg the mighty under Mindolluin, Sea-kings city in the South-kingdom foe-beleaguered, fire-encircled.
Doom drove them on. Darkness took them Horse and horseman; hoofbeats away
sank into silence: so the songs tell us.
It was indeed in deepening gloom that the king came to Edoras, although it was then but noon by the hour. There he halted only a short This is no journey for such steeds as Stybba, as I have told you said Théoden. And in such a battle as we think to make on the fields o As for that, who can tell? answered Merry. But why, lord, did you receive me as sword-tain, if not to stay by your side? And I would no I received you for your safe-keeping, answered Théoden; and also to do as I might bid. None of my Riders can bear you as a burden. If t Merry bowed and went away unhappily, and stared at the lines of horsemen. Already the companies were preparing to start: men were tight Where will wants not, a way opens, so we say, he whispered; and so I have found myself. Merry looked up and saw that it was the young R "I do," said Merry.
Then you shall go with me, said the Rider. I will bear you before me, under my cloak until we are far afield, and this darkness is stil Thank you indeed! said Merry. Thank you, sir, although I do not know your name.
Do you not? said the Rider softly. Then call me Dernhelm.
Thus it came to pass that when the king set out, before Dernhelm sat Meriadoc the hobbit, and the great gray steed Windfola made little On into the shadow they rode. In the willow-thickets where Snowbourn flowed into Entwash, twelve leagues east of Edoras, they encamped Ride on! Ride on! cried Éomer. Too late now to turn aside. The fens of Entwash must guard our flank. Haste now we need. Ride on!
And so King Théoden departed from his own realm, and mile by mile the long road wound away, and the beacon hills marched past: Calenhad


The Siege of Gondor

Pippin was roused by Gandalf. Candles were lit in their chamber, for only a dim twilight came through the windows; the air was heavy as What is the time? said Pippin, yawning.
Past the second hour, said Gandalf. Time to get up and make yourself presentable. You are summoned to the Lord of the City to learn you And will he provide breakfast?
No! I have provided it: all that you will get till noon. Food is now doled out by order.
Pippin looked ruefully at the small loaf and (he thought) very inadequate pat of butter which was set out for him, besides a cup of thi You know quite well, said Gandalf. To keep you out of mischief; and if you do not like being here, you can remember that you brought it Before long he was walking with Gandalf once more down the cold corridor to the door of the Tower Hall. There Denethor sat in a gray gl Well, Master Pilgrim, I hope that you used yesterday to your profit, and to your liking? Though I fear that the board is barer in this Pippin had an uncomfortable feeling that most of what he had said or done was somehow known to the Lord of the City, and much was guess What would you do in my service?
I thought, sir, that you would tell me my duties.
I will, when I learn what you are fit for, said Denethor. But that I shall learn soonest, maybe, if I keep you beside me. The esquire o Yes, said Pippin. Well, yes, well enough for my own people. But we have no songs fit for great halls and evil times, lord. We seldom si And why should such songs be unfit for my halls, or for such hours as these? We who have lived long under the Shadow may surely listen Pippin's heart sank. He did not relish the idea of singing any song of the Shire to the Lord of Minas Tirith, certainly not the comic o Presently Denethor waved to Pippin and dismissed him again for a while. Go to the armories of the Citadel, he said, and get you there t It was as he said; and Pippin soon found himself arrayed in strange garments, all of black and silver. He had a small hauberk, its ring

It was dark and dim all day. From the sunless dawn until evening the heavy shadow had deepened, and all hearts in the City were oppress About the eleventh hour, released at last for a while from service. Pippin came out and went in search of food and drink to cheer his h It was the sunset-hour, but the great pall had now stretched far into the West, and only as it sank at last into the Sea did the Sun es Already it seemed years to Pippin since he had sat there before, in some half-forgotten time when he had still been a hobbit, a light-h In some other time and place Pippin might have been pleased with his new array, but he knew now that he was taking part in no play; he Are you tired of this day? said Beregond.
Yes, said Pippin, very: tired out with idleness and waiting. I have kicked my heels at the door of my master's chamber for many slow ho Nay, said Beregond, this is no weather of the world. This is some device of his malice; some broil of smoke from the Mountain of Fire t Yes, said Pippin, Gandalf, too, is anxious. He was disappointed. I think, not to find Faramir here. And where has he got to himself? He Suddenly as they talked they were struck dumb, frozen as it were to listening stones. Pippin cowered down with his hands pressed to his At last Beregond spoke with an effort. They have come! he said. Take courage and look! There are fell things below.
Reluctantly Pippin climbed on to the seat and looked out over the wall. The Pelennor lay dim beneath him, fading away to the scarcely g Black Riders! muttered Pippin. Black Riders of the air! But see, Beregond! he cried. They are looking for something, surely? See how th Another long screech rose and fell, and he threw himself back again from the wall, panting like a hunted animal. Faint and seemingly re Faramir! The Lord Faramir! It is these calls! cried Beregond. Brave heart! But how can he win to the Gate, if these foul hell-hawks hav With that Beregond sprang away and ran off into the gloom. Ashamed of his terror, while Beregond of the Guard thought first of the capt Gandalf! he cried. Gandalf! He always turns up when things are darkest. Go on! Go on, White Rider! Gandalf, Gandalf! he shouted wildly, But now the dark swooping shadows were aware of the newcomer. One wheeled towards him; but it seemed to Pippin that he raised his hand, Pippin watched, and he saw the horseman and the White Rider meet and halt, waiting for those on foot. Men now hurried out to them from It was not long before a clamor was heard in the streets leading up from the outer circles, and there was much cheering and crying of t Pippin pressed forward as they passed under the lamp beneath the gate-arch, and when he saw the pale face of Faramir he caught his brea Faramir! he cried aloud with the others. Faramir! And Faramir catching his strange voice among the clamor of the men of the City, turne Whence come you? he said. A halfling, and in the livery of the Tower! When...?
But with that Gandalf stepped to his side and spoke. He came with me from the land of the Halflings, he said. He came with me. But let So at length they came to the private chamber of the Lord of the City. There deep seats were set about a brazier of charcoal; and wine When Faramir had taken white bread and drunk a draft of wine, he sat upon a low chair at his father's left hand. Removed a little upon Then suddenly Faramir looked at Pippin. But now we come to strange matters, he said. For this is not the first halfling that I have see At that Gandalf sat up and gripped the arms of his chair; but he said nothing, and with a look stopped the exclamation on Pippin's lips As his story was unfolded of his meeting with Frodo and his servant and of the events at Henneth Annûn, Pippin became aware that Gandal Cirith Ungol? Morgul Goodbye? he said. The time, Faramir, the time? When did you part with them? When would they reach that accursed va I parted with them in the morning two days ago, said Faramir. It is fifteen leagues thence to the vale of the Morgulduin, if they went Gandalf paced the floor. The morning of two days ago, night on three days of journey! How far is the place where you parted?
Some twenty-five leagues as a bird flies, answered Faramir. But I could not eat more swiftly. Yestereve I lay at Cair Andros, the long He? cried Denethor, and his eyes flashed suddenly. Why do you ask? The men were under your command. Or do you ask for my judgment on al My son, your father is old but not yet dotard. I can see and hear, as was my wont; and little of what you have half said or left unsaid If what I have done displeases you, my father, said Faramir quietly, I wish I had known your counsel before the burden of so weighty a Would that have availed to change your judgment? said Denethor. You would still have done just so, I deem. I know you well. Ever your d So be it, said Faramir.
So be it! cried Denethor. But not with your death only, Lord Faramir: with the death also of your father, and of all your people, whom Do you wish then, said Faramir, that our places had been exchanged?
Yes, I wish that indeed, said Denethor. For Boromir was loyal to me and no wizard's pupil. He would have remembered his father's need, For a moment Faramir's restraint gave way. I would ask you, my father, to remember why it was that I, not he, was in Ithilien. On one o Stir not the bitterness in the cup that I mixed for myself, said Denethor. Have I not tasted it now many nights upon my tongue forebodi Comfort yourself! said Gandalf. In no case would Boromir have brought it to you. He is dead, and died well; may he sleep in peace! Yet The face of Denethor set hard and cold. You found Boromir less fit to your hand, did you not? he said softly. But I who was his father What then is your wisdom? said Gandalf.
Enough to perceive that there are two follies to avoid. To use this thing is dangerous. At this hour, to send it into the hands of a wi And the Lord Denethor what would he have done?
Neither. But most certainly not for any argument would he have set this thing at a hazard beyond all but a fool's hope, risking our utt You think, as is your wont, my lord, of Gondor only, said Gandalf. Yet there are other men and other lives, and time still to be. And f And where will other men look for help, if Gondor falls? answered Denethor. If I had this thing now in the deep vaults of this citadel, Nevertheless I do not trust you, said Gandalf. Had I done so, I could have sent this thing hitherto to your keeping and spared myself a For a moment the eyes of Denethor glowed again as he faced Gandalf, and Pippin felt once more the strain between their wills; but now a If I had! If you had! he said. Such words and ifs are vain. It has gone into the Shadow, and only time will show what doom awaits it an It is not strong, said Faramir. I have sent the company of Ithilien to strengthen it, as I have said.
Not enough, I give, said Denethor. It is there that the first blow will fall. They will have need of some stout captain there.
There and elsewhere in many places, said Faramir, and sighed. Alas for my brother, whom I too loved! he rose May I have your leave, fat You are weary, I see, said Denethor. You have ridden fast and far, and under shadows of evil in the air, I am told.
Let us not speak of that! said Faramir.
Then we will not, said Denethor. Go now and rest as you may. Tomorrow's need will be sterner.
All now took leave of the Lord of the City and went to rest while they still could. Outside there was a starless blackness as Gandalf w Tell me, he said, is there any hope? For Frodo, I mean; or at least mostly for Frodo.
Gandalf puts his hand on Pippin's head. There never was much hope, he answered. Just a fool's hope, as I have been told. And when I hea Gandalf stood for a moment in thought. Maybe, he muttered. Maybe even your foolishness helped, my lad. Let me see: some five days ago n But, said Pippin.
But what? said Gandalf. Only one but I will allow tonight.
Gollum, said Pippin. How on earth could they be going about with him, even following him? And I could see that Faramir did not like the I cannot answer that now, said Gandalf. Yet my heart guessed that Frodo and Gollum would meet before the end. For good, or for evil. Bu The next day came with a morning like a brown dusk, and the hearts of men, lifted for a while by the return of Faramir, sank low again. And now Faramir was gone again. They gave him no rest, some murmured. The Lord drives his son too hard, and now he must do the duty of In truth Faramir did not go by his own choosing. But the Lord of the City was master of his Council, and he was in no mood that day to Yet, said Denethor, we should not lightly abandon the outer defences, the Rammas made with so great a labour. And the Enemy must pay de That was but a trial, said Faramir. Today we may make the Enemy pay ten times our loss at the passage and yet rue the exchange. For he And what of Cair Andros? said the Prince. That, too, must be held, if Osgiliath is defended. Let us not forget the danger on our left. Much must be risked in war, said Denethor. Cair Andros is manned and no more can be sent so far. But I will not yield the River and the Then all were silent, but at length Faramir said: I do not oppose your will, sire. Since you are robbed of Boromir, I will go and do wh I do so, said Denethor.

Then farewell! said Faramir. But if I should return, think better of me! That depends on the manner of your return, said Denethor.
Gandalf it was that last spoke to Faramir ere he rode east. Do not throw your life away rashly or in bitterness, he said. You will be n So now the Lord Faramir had gone forth again, and had taken with him such strength of men as were willing to go or could be spared. On Yes, he will come, said Gandalf, even if he comes too late. But think! At best the Red Arrow cannot have reached him more than two days It was night again when the news came. A man rode in haste from the fords, saying that a host had issued from Minas Morgul and was alre With those ill-boding words the third day closed since Pippin came to Minas Tirith. Few went to rest, for little hope had any now that The next day, although the darkness had reached its fullness and grew no deeper, it weighed heavier on men's hearts, and a great dread If he wins back at all across the Pelennor, his enemies will be on his heels, said the messenger. They have paid dearly for the crossin Then I am needed there more than here, said Gandalf, and rode off at once, and the glimmer of him faded soon from sight. And all that n The bells of day had scarcely rung out again, a mockery in the unlightened darkness, when far away he saw fires spring up, across in th They have taken the wall! he cried. They are blasting breaches in it. They are coming!
Where is Faramir? cried Beregond in dismay. Say not that he has fallen!
It was Gandalf that brought the first tidings. With a handful of horsemen he came in the middle morning, riding as escort to a line of Is Faramir coming? he asked.
No, said Gandalf. But he still lived when I left him. Yet he is resolved to remain with the rearguard, lest the retreat over the Pelenn Not - the Dark Lord? cried Pippin, forgetting his place in his terror.
Denethor laughed bitterly. Nay, not yet, Master Peregrine! He will not come save only to triumph over me when all is won. He uses other He stood up and threw open his long black cloak, and behold! he was clad in mail beneath, and girt with a long sword, great-hilted in a Yet now under the Lord of Barad-dûr the most fell of all his captains is already master of your outer walls, said Gandalf. King of Angm Then, Mithrandir, you had a foe to match you, said Denethor. For myself, I have long known who is the chief captain of the hosts of the Pippin trembled, fearing that Gandalf would be stung to sudden wrath, but his fear was unnecessary. It might be so, Gandalf answered so Nay, I came rather to guard the hurt men that can yet be healed; for the Rammas is breached far and wide, and soon the host of Morgul w And we also have few. Now would the coming of Rohan be in the nick of time, said Denethor.
We are likely to see other newcomers first, said Gandalf. Fugitives from Cair Andros have already reached us. The isle has fallen. Anot Some have accused you, Mithrandir, of delighting to bear ill news, said Denethor, but to me this is no longer news: it was known to mw Time passed. At length watchers on the walls could see the retreat of the out-companies. Small bands of weary and often wounded men cam The enemy, men murmured. The dike is down. Here they come pouring through the breaches! And they carry torches, it seems. Where are our It drew now to evening by the hour, and the light was so dim that even far-sighted men upon the Citadel could discern little clearly ou The watchers held their breath. Faramir must be there, they said. He can govern man and beast. He will make it yet.
Now the main retreat was scarcely two furlongs distant. Out of the gloom behind a small company of horsemen galloped, all that was left The retreat became a rout. Already men were breaking away, flying wild and witless here and there, flinging away their weapons, crying And then a trumpet rang from the Citadel, and Denethor at last released the sortie. Drawn up within the shadow of the Gate and under th Amroth for Gondor! they cried. Amroth to Faramir!
Like thunder they broke upon the enemy on either flank of the retreat; but one rider outran them all, swift as the wind in the grass: S The Nazgûl screeched and swept away, for their Captain had not yet come to challenge the white fire of his foe. The hosts of Morgul int But Denethor did not permit them to go far. Although the enemy was checked, and for the moment driven back, great forces were flowing i Last of all he came. These men passed in. The mounted knights returned, and at their rear the banner of Dol Amroth, and the Prince. And Faramir! Faramir! cried men, weeping in the streets. But he did not answer, and they bore him away up the winding road to the Citadel a The Prince Imrahil brought Faramir to the White Tower, and he said: Your son has returned, lord, after great deeds, and he told all tha So now at last the City was besieged, enclosed in a ring of enemies. The Rammas was broken, and all the Pelennor abandoned to the Enemy There is no news of the Rohirrim, he said. Rohan will not come now. Or if they come, it will not avail us. The new host that we had tid The Gate was shut. All night watchmen on the walls heard the rumor of the enemy that roamed outside, burning field and tree, and hewing Busy as ants hurrying orcs were digging, digging lines of deep trenches in a huge ring, just out of bowshot from the walls; and as the At first men laughed and did not greatly fear such devices. For the main wall of the City was of great height and marvelous thickness, Nay, they said, not if the Nameless One himself should come, not even he could enter here while we yet live. But some answered: While w But the engines did not waste a shot upon the indomitable wall. It was no brigand or orc-chieftain that ordered the assault upon the Lo Soon there was great danger of fire behind the wall, and all who could be spared were busy quelling the flames that sprang up in many p In vain men shook their fists at the pitiless foes that swarmed before the Gate. Curses they heeded not, nor understood the tongues of The Nazgûl came again, and as their Dark Lord now grew and put forth his strength, so their voices, which uttered only his will and his During all this black day Faramir lay upon his bed in the chamber of the White Tower, wandering in a desperate fever; dying someone sai No hours so dark had Pippin known, not even in the clutches of the Uruk-hai. It was his duty to wait upon the Lord, and wait he did, fo Do not weep, lord, he stammered. Perhaps he will get well. Have you asked Gandalf?
Comfort me not with wizards! said Denethor. The fool's hope has failed. The Enemy has found it, and now his power waxes; he sees our ve I sent my son forth, unthanked, unblessed, out into needless peril, and here he lies with poison in his veins. Nay, nay, whatever may n Men came to the door crying for the Lord of the City. Nay, I will not come down, he said. I must stay beside my son. He might still spe So it was that Gandalf took command of the last defense of the City of Gondor. Wherever he came men's hearts would lift again, and the And yet - when they had gone, the shadows closed on men again, and their hearts went cold, and the valor of Gondor withered into ash. A Far behind the battle the river had been swiftly bridged, and all day more force and gear of war had poured across. Now at last in the Messengers came again to the chamber in the White Tower, and Pippin let them enter, for they were urgent. Denethor turned his head slow The first circle of the City is burning, lord, they said. What are your commands? You are still the Lord and Steward. Not all will foll Why? Why do the fools fly? said Denethor. Better to burn sooner than later, for we must burn. Go back to your bonfire! And I? I will go The messengers without bow or answer turned and fled.
Now Denethor stood up and released the fevered hand of Faramir that he had held. He is burning, already burning, he said sadly. The hou Farewell! he said. Farewell, Peregrine son of Paladin! Your service has been short, and now it is drawing to an end. I release you from I will not say farewell, my lord, said Pippin kneeling. And then suddenly hobbit-like once more, he stood up and looked the old man in Do as you will, Master Halfling, said Denethor. But my life is broken. Send for my servants! He turned back to Faramir.
Pippin left him and called for the servants, and they came: six men of the household, strong and fair; yet they trembled at the summons Out from the White Tower they walked, as if to a funeral, out into the darkness, where the overhanging cloud was lit beneath with flick All was silent, save for the rumor of war in the City down below, and they heard the water dripping sadly from the dead branches into t A porter sat in a little house beside the way, and with fear in his eyes he came forth bearing a lantern in his hand. At the Lord's com There Pippin, staring uneasily about him, saw that he was in a wide vaulted chamber, draped as it were with the great shadows that the Here we will wait, he said. But send not for the embalmers. Bring us wood quickly to burn, and lay it all about us, and beneath; and po By your leave, lord! said Pippin and turned and fled in terror from the deathly house. Poor Faramir! he thought I must find Gandalf. Po At the door he turned to one of the servants who had remained on guard there. Your master is not himself, he said. Go slowly! Bring no Who is the master of Minas Tirith? the man answered. The Lord Denethor or the Gray Wanderer?
The Gray Wanderer or no one, it would seem, said Pippin, and he sped back and up the winding way as swiftly as his feet would carry him

Whither do you run, Master Peregrine? he cried. To find Mithrandir, Pippin answered.
The Lord's errands are urgent and should not be hindered by me, said Beregond; but tell me quickly, if you may: what goes forward? Wher Yes, said Pippin, to the Silent Street.
Beregond bowed his head to hide his tears. They said that he was dying, he sighed, and now he is dead.
No, said Pippin, not yet. And even now his death might be prevented, I think. But the Lord of the City, Beregond, has fallen before his Then you must go down to the battle.
I know The Lord has given me leave. But, Beregond, if you can, do something to stop any dreadful thing happening.
The Lord does not permit those who wear the black and silver to leave their post for any reason, save at his own command.
Well, you must choose between orders and the life of Faramir, said Pippin. And as for orders, I think you have a madman to deal with, n He ran on, down, down towards the outer city. Men flying back from the burning passed him, and some seeing his livery turned and shoute Ever since the middle of the night the great assault had gone on. The drums rolled. To the north and to the south company upon company The drums rolled louder. The fire leaped up. Great engines crawled across the field; and in the midst was a huge ram, great as a forest But about the Gate resistance still was stout, and there the knights of Dol Amroth and the hardest of the garrison stood at bay. Shot a Grond crawled on. Upon its housing no fire would catch; and though now and again some great beast that hauled it would go mad and sprea Grond crawled on. The drums rolled wildly. Over the hills of Slain a hideous shape appeared: a horseman, tall, hooded, cloaked in black The drums rolled and rattled. With a vast rush Grond was hurled forward by huge hands. It reached the Gate. It swung. A deep boom rumbl Then the Black Captain rose in his stirrups and cried aloud in a dreadful voice, speaking in some forgotten tongue words of power and t Thrice he cried. Thrice the great ram boomed. And suddenly upon the last stroke the Gate of Gondor broke. As if stricken by some blasti In rode the Lord of the Nazgûl. A great black shape against the fires beyond he loomed up, grown to a vast menace of despair. In rode t All save one. There waiting, silent and still in the space before the Gate, sat Gandalf upon Shadowfax: Shadowfax who alone among the f You cannot enter here, said Gandalf, and the huge shadow halted. Go back to the abyss prepared for you! Go back! Fall into the nothingn The Black Rider flung back his hood, and behold! he had a royal crown; and yet upon no visible head was it set. The red fires shone bet Old fool! he said. Old fool! This is my hour. Do you not know Death when you see it? Die now and curse in vain! And with that he lifted Gandalf did not move. And in that very moment, away behind in some courtyard of the City, a cock crowed. Shrill and clear he crowed, re And as if in answer there came from far away another note. Horns, horns, horns. In dark Mindolluin's sides they dimly echoed. Great hor


The Ride of the Rohirrim

It was dark and Merry could see nothing as he lay on the ground rolled in a blanket; yet though the night was airless and windless, all He could not see them, but he knew that all round him were the companies of the Rohirrim. He could smell the horses in the dark, and co Tired as he was Merry could not sleep. He had ridden now for four days on end, and the ever-deepening gloom had slowly weighed down his Merry wanted somebody to talk to, and he thought of Pippin. But that only increased his restlessness. Poor Pippin, shut up in the great A tall figure loomed up and stumbled over him, cursing the tree-roots. He recognized the voice of the Marshal, Elfhelm.
I am not a tree-root, Sir, he said, nor a bag, but a bruised hobbit. The least you can do in amends is to tell me what is afoot. Anything that can keep so in this devil's mirk, answered Elfhelm. But my lord sends word that we must set ourselves in readiness: order Is the enemy coming then? asked Merry anxiously. Are those their drums? I began to think I was imagining them, as no one else seemed to Nay, nay, said Elfhelm, the enemy is on the road not in the hills. You hear the Woses, the Wild Men of the Woods: here they talk togeth Merry did not like this talk of wild men and poisoned darts, but quite apart from that a great weight of dread was upon him. Waiting wa Presently he came to an open space where a small tent had been set up for the king under a great tree. A large lantern, covered above, There was a silence as Merry crept nearer, and then the Wild Man began to speak, in answer to some question, it seemed. His voice was d No, father of Horse-men, he said, we do not fight. Hunt only. Kill gorgûn in woods, hate orc-folk. You hate gorgûn too. We help as we c But our need is for aid in battle, said Éomer. How will you and your people help us?
Bring news, said the Wild Man. We look out from the hills. We climb the big mountain and look down. Stone-city is shut. Fire burns ther How do you know that? said Éomer.
The old man's flat face and dark eyes showed nothing, but his voice was sullen with displeasure. Wild men are wild, free, but not child Wings! he speaks all too shrewdly, said Théoden. And our scouts say that they have cast trenches and stakes across the road. We cannot And yet we need great haste, said Éomer. Mundburg is on fire!
Let Ghân-buri-Ghân finish! said the Wild Man. He knows more than one road. He will lead you by road where no pits are, no gorgûn walk, Eomer and the king spoke together in their own tongue. At length Théoden turned to the Wild Man. We will accept your offer, he said. Fo Dead men are not friends to living men, and give them no gifts, said the Wild Man. But if you live after the Darkness, then leave Wild So be it! said Théoden.
How long will it take to pass by the enemy and come back to the road? asked Éomer. We must go at foot-pace, if you guide us; and I doub Wild Men go quick on their feet, said Ghan. Way is wide for four horses in Stonewain Valley yonder, he waved his hand southwards; but n Then we must allow at least seven hours for the leaders, said Éomer; but we must reckon rather on some ten hours for all. Things unfore Who knows? said Théoden. All is night now.
It is all dark, but it is not all night. said Ghan. When Sun comes we feel her, even when she is hidden. Already she climbs over the Ea Then we must set out as soon as may be, said Éomer. Even so we cannot hope to come to Gondor's aid today.
Merry waited to hear no more, but slipped away to get ready for the summons to the march. This was the last stage before the battle. It All went well that day, and they had no sight or sound of the enemy waiting to waylay them. The Wild Men had put out a screen of wary h The leading company was halted, and as those behind filed up out of the trough of the Stonewain Valley they spread out and passed to ca No good to send Horse-men, he said. Wild Men have already seen all that can be seen in the bad air. They will come soon and speak to me The captains came; and then out of the trees crept warily other púkel-shapes so like old Ghân that Merry could hardly tell them apart. Presently Ghan turned to the king. Wild Men say many things he said. First, be wary! Still many men in camp beyond Dîn, an hour's walk Good news! cried Éomer. Even in this gloom hope gleams again. Our Enemy's devices oft serve us in spite of them. The accursed darkness Once again I thank you, Ghân-buri-Ghân of the woods, said Théoden. Good fortune go with you for tidings and for guidance!
Kill the gorgon! Kill orc-folk! No other words please Wild Men answered Ghan. Drive away bad air and darkness with bright iron!
To do these things we have ridden far, said the king, and we shall attempt them. But what we shall achieve only tomorrow will show. Ghân-buri-Ghân squatted down and touched the earth with his horny brow in token of farewell. Then he got up as if to depart. But sudden The wind is changing! he cried, and with that, in a twinkling as it seemed, he and his fellows had vanished into the glooms, never to b We need no further guidance, said Elfhelm; for there are riders in the host who have ridden down to Mundburg in days of peace. I for on Then since we must look for fell deeds and the need of all our strength, said Éomer, I counsel that we rest now, and set out hence by n To this the king assented, and the captains departed. But soon Elfhelm returned. The scouts have found naught to report beyond the gray Well? said Éomer. What of it?
This, lord: they were errand-riders of Gondor; Hirgon was one perhaps. At least his hand still clasped the Red Arrow, but his head was Wings! said Théoden. Then Denethor has heard no news of our riding and will despair of our coming.

Need brooks no delay, yet late is better than never, said Éomer. And mayhap in this time shall the old saw be proved truer than ever be It was night. On either side of the road the host of Rohan was moving silently. Now the road passing about the skirts of Mindolluin tur The king rode in the midst of the leading company, his household-men about him. Elfhelm's éored came next; and now Merry noticed that D There are great fires, lord, said one. The City is all set about with flame, and the field is full of foes. But all seem drawn off to t Do you remember the Wild Man's words, lord? said another. I live upon the open Wold in days of peace; Wídfara is my name, and to me als If you speak truly, Wídfara, then may you live beyond this day in years of blessedness! said Théoden. He turned to the men of his house Now is the hour come, Riders of the Mark, sons of Eorl! Foes and fire are before you, and your homes far behind. Yet, though you fight Men clashed spear upon shield.
Éomer, my son! You lead the first éored, said Théoden; and it shall go behind the king's banner in the centre. Elfhelm, lead your compa The leading company rode off as swiftly as they could, for it was still deep dark, whatever change Wídfara might forebode. Merry was ri It was no more than a league to where the outer walls had stood. They soon reached them; too soon for Merry Wild cries broke out, and t Merry peered from behind Dernhelm's back. Far away, perhaps ten miles or more, there was a great burning, but between it and the Riders Now silently the host of Rohan moved forward into the field of Gondor, pouring in slowly but steadily, like the rising tide through bre After a while the king led his men away somewhat eastward, to come between the fires of the siege and the outer fields. Still they were Then suddenly Merry felt it at last, beyond doubt: a change. Wind was in his face! The light was glimmering. Far, far away, in the Sout But at that same moment there was a flash, as if lightning had sprung from the earth beneath the City. For a searing second it stood da At that sound the bent shape of the king sprang suddenly erect. Tall and proud he seemed again; and rising in his stirrups he cried in Rise, rise, Riders of Théoden!
Fell deeds awake: fire and slaughter!
spear shall be shaken, shield be splintered, a sword-day, a red day, ere the sun rises!
Ride now, ride now! Ride to Gondor!
With that he seized a great horn from Guthlaf his banner-bearer, and he blew such a blast upon it that it burst asunder. And straightwa Ride now, ride now! Ride to Gondor!
Suddenly the king cried to Snowman and the horse sprang away. Behind him his banner blew in the wind, a white horse upon a field of gre


The Battle of the Pelennor Fields

But it was no orc-chieftain or brigand that led the assault upon Gondor. The darkness was breaking too soon, before the date that his M Théoden King of the Mark had reached the road from the Gate to the River, and he turned towards the City that was now less than a mile Then Théoden was aware of him, and would not wait for his onset, but crying to Snowmane he charged headlong to greet him. Great was the But lo! suddenly in the midst of the glory of the king his golden shield was dimmed. The new morning was blotted from the sky. Dark fel To me! To me! cried Théoden. Up Eorlingas! Fear no darkness! But Snowmane wild with terror stood up on high, fighting with the air, and The great shadow descended like a falling cloud. And behold! it was a winged creature: if bird, then greater than all other birds, and Upon it sat a shape, black-mantled, huge and threatening. A crown of steel he bore, but between rim and robe naught was there to see, s But Théoden was not utterly forsaken. The knights of his house lay slain about him, or else mastered by the madness of their steeds wer King's man! King's man! his heart cried within him. You must stay by him. As a father you shall be to me, you said. But his will made n Then out of the blackness in his mind he thought that he heard Dernhelm speaking; yet now the voice seemed strange, recalling some othe Begone, foul dwimmerlaik, lord of carrion! Leave the dead in peace!
A cold voice answered: Come not between the Nazgûl and his prey! Or he will not slay thee in thy turn. He will bear thee away to the ho A sword rang as it was drawn. Do what you will; but I will hinder it, if I may.
Hinder me? Thou fool. No living man may hinder me!
Then Merry heard of all sounds in that hour the strangest. It seemed that Dernhelm laughed, and the clear voice was like the ring of st The winged creature screamed at her, but the Ringwraith made no answer, and was silent, as if in sudden doubt. Very amazement for a mom Éowyn it was, and Dernhelm also. For into Merry's mind flashed the memory of the face that he saw at the riding from Dunharrow: the fac The face of their enemy was not turned towards him, but still he hardly dared to move, dreading lest the deadly eyes should fall on him Suddenly the great beast beat its hideous wings, and the wind of them was foul. Again it leaped into the air, and then swiftly fell dow Still she did not blench: maiden of the Rohirrim, child of kings, slender but as a steel-blade, fair but terrible. A swift stroke she d Out of the wreck rose the Black Rider, tall and threatening, towering above her. With a cry of hatred that stung the very ears like ven But suddenly he too stumbled forward with a cry of bitter pain, and his stroke went wide, driving into the ground. Merry's sword had st Éowyn! Éowyn! cried Merry. Then tottering, struggling up, with her last strength she drove her sword between crown and mantle, as the g And there stood Meriadoc the hobbit in the midst of the slain, blinking like an owl in the daylight, for tears blinded him; and through Then Merry stooped and lifted his hand to kiss it, and lo! Théoden opened his eyes, and they were clear, and he spoke in a quiet voice Farewell, Master Holbytla! he said. My body is broken. I go to my fathers. And even in their mighty company I shall not now be ashamed. Merry could not speak, but wept anew. Forgive me, lord, he said at last, if I broke your command, and yet have done no more in your ser The old king smiled. Grieve not! It is forgiven. A great heart will not be denied. Live now in blessedness; and when you are at peace w Lord, lord, began Merry brokenly, she is-'; but at that moment there was a great clamor, and all about them horns and trumpets were blo New forces of the enemy were hastening up the road from the River; and from under the walls came the legions of Morgul; and from the so For a moment the thought flitted through Merry's mind: Where is Gandalf? Is he not here? Could he not have saved the king and Éowyn? Bu Then one of the knights took the king's banner from the hand of Guthlaf the banner-bearer who lay dead, and he lifted it up. Slowly Thé Hail, King of the Mark! he said. Ride now to victory! Bid Éowyn farewell! And so he died, and knew not that Éowyn lay near him. And tho But Éomer said to them:
Mourn not too much! Mighty was the fallen meet was his ending When his mound is raised women then shall weep. War now calls us!
Yet he himself wept as he spoke. Let these knights remain here, he said; and bear his body in honor from the field, lest the battle rid Éowyn, Éowyn! he cried at last: Éowyn, how come you here? What madness or devilry is this? Death, death, death! Death take us all!
Then without taking counsel or waiting for the approach of the men of the City, he spurred headlong back to the front of the great host And with that the host began to move. But the Rohirrim sang no more. Death they cried with one voice loud and terrible, and gathering s And still Meriadoc the hobbit stood there blinking through his tears and no one spoke to him, indeed none seemed to heed him. He brushe So passed the sword of the Barrow-downs, work of Westernesse. But glad would he have been to know his fate who wrought it slowly long a Men now raised the king, and laying cloaks upon spear-truncheons they made shift to bear him away towards the City; and others lifted É Faithful servant yet master's bane
Lightfoot's foal, Swift Snowman.
Green and long grew the grass on Snowmane's Howe, but ever black and bare was the ground where the beast was burned.
Now slowly and sadly Merry walked beside the bearers, and he gave no more heed to the battle. He was weary and full of pain, and his li

What burden do you bear, Men of Rohan? he cried.
Théoden King, they answered. He is dead. But Éomer King now rides in the battle: he with the white crest in the wind.
Then the prince went from his horse, and knelt by the bier in honor of the king and his great onset; and he wept. And rising he looked Nay! One only, they answered. The Lady Éowyn is she, sister of Éomer; and we knew naught of her riding until this hour, and greatly we Then the prince seeing her beauty, though her face was pale and cold, touched her hand as he bent to look more closely on her. Men of R Haste now is needed, he said, and he sent one riding back swiftly to the City to bring aid. But he bowing low to the fallen, bade them And now the fighting waxed furious on the fields of the Pelennor; and the din of arms rose upon high, with the crying of men and the ne Not too soon came their aid to the Rohirrim; for fortune had turned against Éomer, and his fury had betrayed him. The great wrath of hi It was even as the day thus began to turn against Gondor and their hope wavered that a new cry went up in the City, it being then midmo For Anduin, from the bend at the Harlond, so flowed that from the City men could look down it lengthwise for some leagues, and the far- The Corsairs of Umbar! he shouted. The Corsairs of Umbar! Look! The Corsairs of Umbar are coming! So Belfalas is taken, and the Ethir, And some without order, for none could he found to command them in the City, ran to the bells and tolled the alarm; and some blew the t The Rohirrim indeed had no need of news or alarm. All too well they could see for themselves the black sails. For Éomer was now scarcel Stern now was Éomer's mood, and his mind clear again. He let blow the horns to rally all men to his banner that could come thither; for Out of doubt, out of darkness until the day's rising
I came singing in the sun, sword unsheathing. To hope's end I rode and to heart's breaking:
Now for wrath, now for ruin and a red nightfall!
These staves he spoke, yet he laughed as he said them. For once more lust of battle was upon him; and he was still unscathed, and he wa And then wonder took him, and a great joy; and he cast his sword up in the sunlight and sang as he caught it. And all eyes followed his Thus came Aragorn son of Arathorn, Elessar, Isildur's heir, out of the Paths of the Dead, borne upon a wind from the Sea to the kingdom East rode the knights of Dol Amroth driving the enemy before them: troll-men and Variags and orcs that hated the sunlight. South strode And so at length Éomer and Aragorn met in the midst of the battle, and they leaned on their swords and looked at one another and were g Thus we meet again, though all the hosts of Mordor lay between us, said Aragorn. Did I not say so at the Hornburg?
So you spoke, said Éomer, but hope oft deceives, and I did not know then that you were a man foresighted. Yet twice blessed is help unl Then let us avenge it, ere we speak of it! said Aragorn, and they rode back to battle together.
Hard fighting and long labor they had still; for the Southrons were bold men and grim, and fierce in despair; and the Easterlings were Then the Sun went at last behind Mindolluin and filled all the sky with a great burning, so that the hills and the mountains were dyed Aragorn and Éomer and Imrahil rode back towards the Gate of the City, and they were now weary beyond joy or sorrow. These three were un We heard of the horns in the hills ringing,
the swords shining in the South-kingdom. Steeds went striding to the Stoningland as wind in the morning. War was kindled. There Théoden fell, Thengling mighty,
to these golden halls and green pastures in the Northern fields never returning, high lord of the host Harding and Guthlaf Dúnhere and Déorwine, doughty Grimbold, Herefara and Herubrand, Horn and Fastred, fought and fell there in a far country:
in the Mounds of Mundburg under mold they lie with their league-fellows, lords of Gondor.
Neither Hirluin the Fair to the hills by the sea, nor Forlong the old to the flowering vales
ever, to Arnach, to his own country returned in triumph; nor the tall bowmen Derufin and Duilin, to their dark waters, meres of Morthond under mountain-shadows. Death in the morning and at day's end lords took and lowly. Long now they sleep under grass in Gondor by the Great River. Gray now as tears, gleaming silver,
red then it rolled, roaring water:
foam dyed with blood flamed at sunset; as beacons mountains burned at evening; red fell the dew on Rammas Echor.


The Pyre of Denethor

When the dark shadow at the Gate withdrew Gandalf still sat motionless. But Pippin rose to his feet, as if a great weight had been lift Gandalf, Gandalf! cried Pippin, and Shadowfax halted.
What are you doing here? said Gandalf. Is it not a law in the City that those who wear the black and silver must stay in the Citadel, u He has, said Pippin. He sent me away. But I am frightened. Something terrible may happen up there. The Lord is out of his mind, I think Gandalf looked through the gaping Gate, and already on the fields he heard the gathering sound of battle. He clenched his hand. I must But Faramir! cried Pippin. He is not dead, and they will burn him alive, if someone does not stop them.
Burn him again? said Gandalf. What is this guy? Be quick!
Denethor has gone to the Tombs, said Pippin, and he has taken Faramir, and he says we are all to burn, and he will not wait, and they a Perhaps I can, said Gandalf; but if I do, then others will die, I fear. Well, I must come, since no other help can reach him. But evil Then having made up his mind he acted swiftly; and catching up Pippin and setting him before him, he turned Shadowfax with a word. Up t They met the Prince Imrahil, and he called to them: Whither now, Mithrandir? The Rohirrim are fighting on the fields of Gondor! We must You will need every man and more, said Gandalf. Make all haste. I will come when I can. But I have an errand to the Lord Denethor that They passed on; and as they climbed and drew near to the Citadel they felt the wind blowing in their faces, and they caught the glimmer Darkness is passing, said Gandalf, but it still lies heavy on this City.
At the gate of the Citadel they found no guard. Then Beregond has gone, said Pippin more hopefully. They turned away and hurried along Work of the Enemy! said Gandalf. Such deeds he loves: friend at war with friend; loyalty divided in confusion of hearts. Now he dismoun They passed the Door and walked on down the steep winding road. Light was growing, and the tall columns and carved figures beside the w

Suddenly the silence was broken, and they heard below them cries and the ringing of swords: such sounds as had not been heard in the ha Stay! Stay! cried Gandalf, springing forward to the stone stair before the door. Stay this madness!
For there were the servants of Denethor with swords and torches in their hands; but alone in the porch upon the topmost step stood Bere Even as Gandalf and Pippin ran forward, they heard from within the house of the dead the voice of Denethor crying: Haste, haste! Do as But Gandalf sprang up the steps, and the men fell back from him and covered their eyes; for his coming was like the coming of a white l What is this, my lord? said the wizard. The houses of the dead are no places for the living. And why do men fight here in the Hallows w Since when has the Lord of Gondor been answerable to thee? said Denethor. Or may I not command my own servants?
You may, said Gandalf. But others may contest your will, when it is turned to madness and evil. Where is your son, Faramir?
He lies within, said Denethor, burning, already burning. They have set a fire in their flesh. But soon all shall be burned. The West ha Then Gandalf seeing the madness that was upon him feared that he had already done some evil deed, and he thrust forward, with Beregond Denethor began as one waking from a trance, and the flame died in his eyes, and he wept; and he said: Do not take my son from me! He ca He calls, said Gandalf, but you cannot come to him yet. For he must seek healing on the threshold of death, and perhaps find it not. Wh He will not wake again, said Denethor. The battle is in vain. Why should we wish to live longer? Why should we not go to death side by Authority is not given to you, Steward of Gondor, to order the hour of your death, answered Gandalf. And only the heathen kings, under Eat! said Gandalf. We are needed. There is much that you can yet do.
Then suddenly Denethor laughed. He stood up tall and proud again, and stepping swiftly back to the table he lifted from it the pillow o Pride and despair! he cried. Didst thou think that the eyes of the White Tower were blind? Nay, I have seen more than thou knowest, Gra Such counsels will make the Enemy's victory certain indeed, said Gandalf.
Hope on then! laughed Denethor. Do I not know thee, Mithrandir? Thy hope is to rule in my stead, to stand behind every throne, north, s But I say to thee, Gandalf Mithrandir, I will not be thy tool! I am Steward of the House of Anárion. I will not step down to be the dot What then would you have, said Gandalf, if your will could have its way?
I would have things as they were in all the days of my life, answered Denethor, and in the days of my longfathers before me: to be the To me it would not seem that a Steward who faithfully surrenders his charge is diminished in love or in honor, said Gandalf. And at lea At those words Denethor's eyes flamed again, and taking the Stone under his arm he drew a knife and strode towards the bier. But Berego So! cried Denethor. Thou hadst already stolen half my son's love. Now thou stealest the hearts of my knights also, so that they rob me Come hither! he cried to his servants. Come, if you are not all refreshed! Then two of them ran up the steps to him. Swiftly he snatche Then Denethor leaped upon the table, and standing there wreathed in fire and smoke he took up the staff of his stewardship that lay at Gandalf in grief and horror turned his face away and closed the door. For a while he stood in thought, silent upon the threshold, while So passed Denethor, son of Ecthelion, said Gandalf: Then he turned to Beregond and the Lord's servants that stood there aghast. And so Bear away from this unhappy place your comrades who have fallen. And we will bear Faramir, Steward of Gondor, to a place where he can s Then Gandalf and Beregond taking up the bier bore it away towards the Houses of Healing, while behind them walked Pippin with downcast At length they came back to the Steward's Door, and Beregond looked with grief at the porter. This deed I shall ever regret, he said; b The Prince of Dol Amroth is in command in the absence of the Lord, said Gandalf; but since he is not here, I must take this upon myself Now at last they passed into the high circles of the City, and in the light of morning they went their way towards the Houses of Healin But even as Gandalf and his companions came carrying the bier to the main door of the Houses, they heard a great cry that went up from But Gandalf's face was grave and sad, and bidding Beregond and Pippin to take Faramir into the Houses of Healing, he went up on to the They looked at him, and for a while he was silent. At last he spoke. My friends, he said, and all you people of this city and of the We Although the Stewards deemed that it was a secret kept only by themselves, long ago I guessed that here in the White Tower, one at leas Now I understand what seemed so strange to me! said Pippin, shuddering at these memories as he spoke. The Lord went away from the room It was in the very hour that Faramir was brought to the Tower that many of us saw a strange light in the topmost chamber, said Beregond Wings! then I have guessed correctly, said Gandalf. Thus the will of Sauron entered into Minas Tirith; and thus I have been delayed her Now I must go down to meet those who come. I have seen a sight upon the field that is very grievous to my heart, and greater sorrow may With that he turned away and went with Pippin down towards the lower city. And even as they hastened on their way the wind brought a gr


The Houses of Healing

A mist was in Merry's eyes of tears and weariness when they drew near the ruined Gate of Minas Tirith. He gave little heed to the wreck Already men were laboring to clear a way through the jetsam of battle; and now out of the Gate came some bearing litters. Gently they l So Théoden and Éowyn came to the City of Gondor, and all who saw them bared their heads and bowed; and they passed through the ashes an Slowly the lights of the torches in front of him flickered and went out, and he was walking in a darkness; and he thought: This is a tu Well, Merry! Thank goodness I have found you!
He looked up and the mist before his eyes cleared a little. There was Pippin! They were face to face in a narrow lane, and but for them Where is the king? he said. And Éowyn? Then he stumbled and sat down on a doorstep and began to weep again.
They have gone up into the Citadel, said Pippin. I think you must have fallen asleep on your feet and taken the wrong turning. When we No, said Merry. Well, no, I don't think so. But I can't use my right arm, Pippin, not since I stabbed him. And my sword burned all away Pippin's face was anxious. Well, you had better come with me as quickly as you can, he said. I wish I could carry you. You are not fit It's not always a misfortune being overlooked, said Merry. I was overlooked just now by - no, no, I can't speak of it. Help me, Pippin! Lean on me, merry lad! said Pippin. Come now! Foot by foot. It's not far.
Are you going to bury me? said Merry.
No, indeed! said Pippin, trying to sound cheerful, though his heart was wrung with fear and pity. No, we are going to the Houses of Hea They turned out of the lane that ran between tall houses and the outer wall of the fourth circle, and they regained the main street cli I'll never get him there, thought Pippin. Is there no one to help me? I can't leave him here. Just then to his surprise a boy came runn Hullo, Bergil! he called Where are you going? Glad to see you again, and still alive!
I am running errands for the Healers, said Bergil. I cannot stay.
Don't! said Pippin. But tell them up there that I have a sick hobbit, a perian mind you, come from the battle-field. I don't think he c I'd better wait here, thought Pippin. So he let Merry sink gently down on to the pavement in a patch of sunlight, and then he sat down It was not long before Gandalf himself came in search of them. He stooped over Merry and caressed his brow; then he lifted him carefull So at last Faramir and Éowyn and Meriadoc were laid in beds in the Houses of Healing; and there they were tended well. For though all l Gandalf went from one to the other full of care, and he was told all that the watchers could hear. And so the day passed, while the gre Then an old wife, Ioreth, the eldest of the women who served in that house, looking on the fair face of Faramir, wept, for all the peop And Gandalf, who stood by, said: Men may long remember your words, Ioreth! For there is hope in them. Perhaps a king has indeed returne I have been too busy with this and that to heed all the crying and shouting, she answered. All I hope is that those murdering devils do Then Gandalf went out in haste, and already the fire in the sky was burning out, and the smoldering hills were fading, while ash-grey e Now as the sun went down Aragorn and Éomer and Imrahil drew near the City with their captains and knights; and when they came before th Behold the Sun setting in a great fire! It is a sign of the end and fall of many things, and a change in the tides of the world. But th But Éomer said: Already you have raised the banner of the Kings and displayed the tokens of Elendil's House. Will you suffer these to b

No, said Aragorn. But I deem the time unripe; and I have no mind for strife except with our Enemy and his servants.
And the Prince Imrahil said. Your words, lord, are wise, if one who is a kinsman of the Lord Denethor may counsel you in this matter. H Not a beggar, said Aragorn. Say a captain of the Rangers, who are unused to cities and houses of stone. And he commanded that his banne Then the Prince Imrahil and Éomer of Rohan left him and passed through the City and the tumult of the people, and mounted to the Citade When they had stood silent for a time beside the king, Imrahil said: Where is the Steward? And where also is Mithrandir?
And one of the guards answered: The Steward of Gondor is in the Houses of Healing.
But Éomer said: Where is the Lady Éowyn, my sister; for surely she should be lying beside the king, and in no less honour? Where have t And Imrahil said: But the Lady Éowyn was still living when they bore her hither. Did you not know?
Then hope unseen-for came so suddenly to Éomer's heart, and with it the bite of care and fear renewed, that he said no more, but turned And Gandalf answered: She lies within and is not dead, but is near death. But the Lord Faramir was wounded by an evil dart, as you have But Imrahil said: So victory is shorn of gladness, and it is bitterly bought, if both Gondor and Rohan are in one day bereft of their l And the cloaked man spoke and said: He is come. And they saw as he stepped into the light of the lantern by the door that it was Aragor Then Gandalf said: Let us not stay at the door, for the time is urgent. Let us enter! For it is only in the coming of Aragorn that any Then Aragorn entered first and the others followed. And there at the door were two guards in the livery of the Citadel: one tall, but t Strider! How splendid! Do you know, I guessed it was you in the black ships. But they were all shouting corsairs and would not listen t Aragorn laughed, and took the hobbit by the hand. Well met indeed! he said. But there is no time yet for such travelers.
But Imrahil said to Éomer: Is it thus that we speak to our kings? Yet maybe he will wear his crown in some other name!
And Aragorn hearing him, turned and said: Verily, for in the high tongue of old I am Elessar, the Elfstone, and Envinyatar, the Renewer And with that they passed into the House; and as they went towards the rooms where the sick were tended Gandalf told of the deeds of Éo Aragorn went first to Faramir, and then to the Lady Éowyn, and last to Merry. When he had looked on the faces of the sick and seen thei And Éomer seeing that he was sorrowful and weary said: First you must rest, surely, and at least eat a little?
But Aragorn answered: Nay, for these three, and most soon for Faramir, time is running out. All speed is needed. Then he called to Ioreth and he said: You have store in this House of the herbs of healing?
Yes, lord, she answered; but not enough, I reckon, for all that will need them. But I am sure I do not know where we shall find more; f I will judge that when I see, said Aragorn. One thing also is the short time for speech. Do you have athelas?
I do not know, I am sure, lord, she answered, at least not by that name. I will go and ask of the herb-master; he knows all the old nam It is also called kingsfoil, said Aragorn; and perhaps you know it by that name, for so the country-folk call it in these latter days. Wholesome verily, said Aragorn. And now, dame, if you love the Lord Faramir, run as quick as your tongue and get me kingsfoil, if there And if not, said Gandalf, I will ride to Lossarnach with Ioreth behind me, and she shall take me to the woods, but not to her sisters. When Ioreth was gone, Aragorn bathed the other women to make water hot. Then he took Faramir's hand in his, and laid the other hand upo He is nearly spent, said Aragorn turning to Gandalf. But this comes not from the wound. See! that is healing. Had he been smitten by so I drew it forth, said Imrahil, and staunched the wound. But I did not keep the arrow, for we had much to do. It was, as I remember, jus Weariness, grief for his father's mood, a wound, and over all the Black Breath, said Aragorn. He is a man of staunch will, for already Thereupon the herb-master entered. Your lordship asked for kingsfoil, as the rustics name it, he said; or athelas in the noble tongue, I do so, said Aragorn, and I care not whether you say now asa aranion or kingsfoil, so long as you have some.
Your pardon lord! said the man. I see you are a lore-master, not merely a captain of war. But wings! sir, we do not keep this thing in When the black breath blows
and death's shadow grows and all the lights pass,
Come, you athletes! Come, you athletes! Life to the dying
In the king's hand lies!
It is but a doggrel, I fear, garbled in the memory of old wives. Its meaning I leave to your judgment, if indeed it has any. But old fo Then in the name of the king, go and find some old man of less lore and more wisdom who keeps some in his house! cried Gandalf.
Now Aragorn knelt beside Faramir, and held a hand upon his brow. And those who watched felt that some great struggle was going on. For And at last Bergil came running in, and he bore six leaves in a cloth. It is kingsfoil, Sir, he said; but not fresh, I fear. It must ha But Aragorn smiled. It will serve, he said. The worst is now over. Stay and be comforted! Then taking two leaves, he laid them on his h Well now! Who would have believed it? said Ioreth to a woman that stood beside her. The weed is better than I thought. It reminds me of Suddenly Faramir stirred, and he opened his eyes, and he looked at Aragorn who bent over him; and a light of knowledge and love was kin Walk no more in the shadows, but awake! said Aragorn. You are tired. Rest a while, and take food, and be ready when I return.
I will, lord, said Faramir. For who would lie idle when the king has returned?
Farewell then for a while! said Aragorn. I must go to others who need me. And he left the chamber with Gandalf and Imrahil; but Beregon King! Did you hear that? What did I say? The hands of a healer, I said. And soon the word had gone out from the House that the king had But Aragorn came to Éowyn, and he said: Here there is a grievous hurt and a heavy blow. The arm that was broken has been tended with du Wings! For she was pitted against a foe beyond the strength of her mind or body. And those who will take a weapon to such an enemy must I marvel that you should ask me, lord, he answered. For I hold you blameless in this matter, as in all else; yet I knew not that Éowyn, My friend, said Gandalf, you had horses, and deeds of arms, and the free fields; but she, born in the body of a maid, had a spirit and Do you think that Wormtongue had poison only for Théoden's ears? Dotard! What is the house of Eorl but a thatched barn where brigands d Then Éomer was silent, and looked on his sister, as if pondering anew all the days of their past life together. But Aragorn said: I saw I have, perhaps, the power to heal her body, and to recall her from the dark valley. But to what she will awake: hope, or forgetfulness Then Aragorn stooped and looked into her face, and it was indeed white as a lily, cold as frost, and hard as graven stone. But he bent Éowyn Éomund's daughter, awake! For your enemy has passed away!
She did not stir, but now she began again to breathe deeply, so that her breast rose and fell beneath the white linen of the sheet. Onc Then, whether Aragorn had indeed some forgotten power of Westernesse, or whether it was but his words of the Lady Éowyn that wrought on Awake, Éowyn, Lady of Rohan! said Aragorn again, and he took her right hand in his and felt it warm with life returning. Awake! The sha Éowyn, Éowyn! cried Eomer amid his tears. But she opened her eyes and said: Éomer! What joy is this? For they said that you were slain. Not long, my sister, said Éomer. But think no more on it!
 I am strangely tired, she said. I must rest a little. But tell me, what of the Lord of the Mark? Wings! Do not tell me that that was a He is dead, said Éomer, but he bade me say farewell to Éowyn dearer than daughter. He lies now in great honor in the Citadel of Gondor. That is grievous, she said. And yet it is good beyond all that I dared hope in the dark days, when it seemed that the House of Eorl was He lies nearby in this House, and I will go to him, said Gandalf. Éomer shall stay here for a while. But do not speak yet of war or woe To health? said Éowyn. It may be so. At least while there is an empty saddle of some fallen Rider that I can fill, and there are deeds Gandalf and Pippin came to Merry's room, and there they found Aragorn standing by the bed. Poor old Merry! cried Pippin, and he ran to Do not be afraid, said Aragorn. I came in time, and I have called him back. He is weary now, and grieved, and he has taken a hurt like Then Aragorn laid his hand on Merry's head, and passing his hand gently through the brown curls, he touched the eyelids, and called him I am hungry. What is the time?
Past supper-time now, said Pippin; though I dare say I could bring you something, if they will let me.

They will indeed, said Gandalf. And anything else that this Rider of Rohan may desire, if it can be found in Minas Tirith, where his na Good! said Merry. Then I would like supper first, and after that a pipe. But that clouded his face. No, not a pipe. I don't think I'll "Why not?" said Pippin.
Well, answered Merry slowly. He is dead. It has brought it all back to me. He said he was sorry he had never had a chance of talking he Smoke then, and think of him! said Aragorn. For he was a gentle heart and a great king and kept his oaths; and he rose out of the shado Merry smiled. Well then, he said, if Strider will provide what is needed, I will smoke and think. I had some of Saruman's best in my pa Master Meriadoc, said Aragorn, if you think that I have passed through the mountains and the realm of Gondor with fire and sword to bri Merry seized his hand and kissed it. I am terribly sorry, he said. Go at once! Ever since that night at Bree we have been a nuisance to I know that well, or I would not deal with you in the same way said Aragorn. May the Shire live for ever unwithered! And kissing Merry Pippin remained behind. Was there ever any one like him? he said. Except Gandalf, of course. I think they must be related. My dear ass, No, said Merry. I can't. Not yet, at any rate. But at least, Pippin, we can now see them, and honor them. It is best to love first what Aragorn and Gandalf went now to the Warden of the Houses of Healing, and they counseled him that Faramir and Éowyn should remain there The Lady Éowyn, said Aragorn, will wish soon to rise and depart; but she should not be permitted to do so, if you can in any way restra As for Faramir, said Gandalf, he must soon learn that his father is dead. But the full tale of the madness of Denethor should not be to And the other perian Meriadoc who is under my care, what of him? said the Warden.
It is likely that he will be fit to rise tomorrow, for a short while, said Aragorn. Let him do so, if he wishes. He may walk a little i They are a remarkable race, said the Warden, nodding his head. Very tough in the fiber, I give.
At the doors of the Houses many were already gathered to see Aragorn, and they followed after him; and when at last he had supped, men And when he could labor no more, he cast his cloak about him, and slipped out of the City, and went to his tent just before dawn and sl


The Last Debate

The morning came after the day of battle, and it was fair with light clouds and the wind turning westward. Legolas and Gimli were early It is good to learn that they are still alive, said Gimli; for they cost us great pains in our march over Rohan, and I would not have s Together the Elf and the Dwarf entered Minas Tirith, and the folk that saw them pass marveled to see such companions; for Legolas was f There is some good stone-work here, he said as he looked at the walls; but also some that is less good, and the streets could be better They need more gardens, said Legolas. The houses are dead, and there is too little here that grows and is happy. If Aragorn comes into At length they came to the Prince Imrahil, and Legolas looked at him and bowed low; for he saw that here indeed was one who had elven-b So it is said in the lore of my land, said the Prince; yet never has one of the fair folk been seen there for years beyond count. And I I am one of the Nine Companions who set out with Mithrandir from Imladris, said Legolas and with this Dwarf, my friend, I came with the You will find them in the Houses of Healing, and I will lead you thither, said Imrahil.
It will be enough if you send one to guide us, lord, said Legolas. For Aragorn sends this message to you. He does not wish to enter the We will come, said Imrahil; and they parted with courteous words.
That is a fair lord and a great captain of men, said Legolas. If Gondor has such men still in these days of fading, great must have bee And doubtless the good stone-work is the older and was wrought in the first building, said Gimli. It is ever so with the things that Me Yet seldom do they fail of their seed, said Legolas. And that will lie in the dust and rot to spring up again in times and places unsee And yet come to naught in the end but might-have-beens, I guess, said the Dwarf.
To that the Elves know not the answer, said Legolas.
With that the servant of the Prince came and led them to the Houses of Healing; and there they found their friends in the garden, and t And now Legolas fell silent, while the others talked, and he looked out against the sun, and as he gazed he saw white sea-birds beating Look! he cried. Gulls! They are flying far inland. A wonder they are to me and a trouble to my heart. Never in all my life had I met th Say not so! said Gimli. There are countless things still to see in Middle-earth, and great works to do. But if all the fair folk take t Dull and dreary indeed! said Merry: You must not go to the Havens, Legolas. There will always be some folk, big or little, and even a f Don't be so gloomy! cried Pippin. The Sun is shining, and here we are together for a day or two at least. I want to hear more about you The Sun may shine here, said Gimli, but there are memories of that road that I do not wish to recall out of the darkness. Had I known w The Paths of the Dead? said Pippin. I heard Aragorn say that and I wondered what he could mean. Won't you tell us some more?
Not willingly, said Gimli. For upon that road I was put to shame: Gimli Glóin's son, who had deemed himself more tough than Men, and ha And by the love of him also, said Legolas. For all those who come to know him come to love him after his own fashion, even the cold mai Wings! I had a heart only for myself, said Gimli. Nay! I will not speak of that journey.
He fell silent; but Pippin and Merry were so eager for news that at last Legolas said: I will tell you enough for your peace; for I fel Swiftly then he told of the haunted road under the mountains, and the dark tryst at Erech, and the great ride thence, ninety leagues an At his command they fell back. "Even the shades of Men are obedient to his will," I thought. "They may serve his needs yet!"
One day of light we rode, and then came the day without dawn, and still we rode on, and Ciril and Ringlo we crossed; and on the third d "But Pelargir the Heir of Isildur will have need of you," he said.
Thus we crossed over Gilrain, driving the allies of Mordor in rout before us; and then we rested a while. But soon Aragorn arose, sayin Legolas paused and sighed, and turning his eyes southward softly he sang:
Silver flow the streams from Celos to Erui In the green fields of Lebennin!
The grass grows tall there. In the wind from the sea The white lilies sway,
And the golden bells are shaken of mallos and alfirin In the green fields of Lebennin,
In the wind from the Sea!
Green are those fields in the songs of my people; but they were dark then, gray wastes in the blackness before us. And over the wide la Then I thought in my heart that we drew near to the Sea; for wide was the water in the darkness, and innumerable sea-birds cried on its For my part I heeded them not, said Gimli; for we came then at last upon battle in earnest. There at Pelargir lay the main fleet of Umb But Aragorn halted and cried with a great voice: "Now come! By the Black Stone I call you! "And suddenly the Shadow Host that had hung To every ship they came that was drawn up, and then they passed over the water to those that were anchored; and all the mariners were f Ere that dark day ended none of the enemy were left to resist us all were drowned, or were flying south in the hope to find their own l Strange indeed, said Legolas. In that hour I looked on Aragorn and thought how great and terrible a Lord he might have become in the st Beyond the eyes of the Dwarves are such foretellings, said Gimli. But mighty indeed was Aragorn that day. Lo! all the black fleet was i
 "Hear now the words of the Heir of Isildur! Your oath is fulfilled. Go back and trouble not the valleys ever again! Depart and be at r And thereupon the King of the Dead stood out before the host and broke his spear and cast it down. Then he bowed low and turned away; a That night we rested while others labored. For there were many captives set free, and many slaves released who had been folk of Gondor And that is near the end of our tale. For during that evening and night many ships were made ready and manned; and in the morning the f
"It is forty leagues and two from Pelargir to the landings at the Harlond," he said. "Yet to the Harlond we must come tomorrow or fail

The oars were now wielded by free men, and they labored manfully; yet slowly we passed up the Great River, for we strove against its st "Up with your beard, Durin's son! " he said. "For thus is it spoken: Oft hope is born, when all is forlorn." But what hope he saw from But at midnight hope was indeed born anew. Sea-crafty men of the Ethir gazing southward spoke of a change coming with a fresh wind from Follow what may, great deeds are not diminished in worth, said Legolas. Great deed was the riding of the Paths of the Dead, and great i And that may well befall, said Gimli. For the faces of Aragorn and Gandalf are grave. Much I wonder what counsels they are taking in th
And I for the people of the Great Wood, said Legolas, and for the love of the Lord of the White Tree.
Then the companions fell silent, but a while they sat there in the high place, each busy with his own thoughts, while the captains deba When the Prince Imrahil had parted from Legolas and Gimli, at once he sent for Éomer; and he went down with him from the City, and they My lords, said Gandalf, listen to the words of the Steward of Gondor before he died: You may triumph on the fields of the Pelennor for The Stones of Seeing do not lie, and not even the Lord of Barad-dûr can make them do so. He can, maybe, by his will choose what things Hardly has our strength sufficed to beat off the first great assault. The next will be greater. This war then is without final hope, as Then you would have us retreat to Minas Tirith, or Dol Amroth, or to Dunharrow, and there sit like children on sand-castles when the ti That would be no new counsel, said Gandalf. Have you not done this and a little more in all the days of Denethor? But no! I said this w Concerning this thing, my lords, you now all know enough for the understanding of our plight, and of Sauron's. If he regains it, your v Other evils there are that may come; for Sauron is himself but a servant or emissary. Yet it is not our part to master all the tides of Now Sauron knows all this, and he knows that this precious thing which he lost has been found again; but he does not yet know where it I did so ere I rode from the Hornburg, answered Aragorn. I deemed that the time was ripe, and that the Stone had come to me for just su But how is this? asked Éomer. All is vain, you say, if he has the Ring. Why should he think it not vain to assail us, if we have it?
He is not yet sure, said Gandalf, and he has not built up his power by waiting until his enemies are secure, as we have done. Also we c He is watching. He sees much and hears much. These Nazgûl are still abroad. They passed over this field at sunrise, though few of the w His doubt will be growing, even as we speak here. His Eye is now straining towards us, blind almost to all else that is moving. So we m As Aragorn has begun, so we must go on. We must push Sauron to his last throw. We must call out his hidden strength, so that he shall e We must walk open-eyed into that trap, with courage, but little hope for ourselves. For, my lords, it may well prove that we ourselves They were silent for a while. At length Aragorn spoke. As I have begun, so I will go on. We come now to the very brink, where hope and Then said Elrohir: From the North we came with this purpose, and from Elrond our father we brought this very counsel. We will not turn As for myself, said Éomer, I have little knowledge of these deep matters; but I need it not. This I know, and it is enough, that as my As for me, said Imrahil, the Lord Aragorn I hold to be my liege-lord, whether he claims it or no. His wish is to give me a command. I w That is true, said Gandalf. I do not counsel you to leave the City all unmanned. Indeed the force that we lead east need not be great e All are weary, and very many have wounds light or grievous, said Éomer, and we have suffered much loss of our horses, and that is ill t We have not only to reckon with those who fought on this field said Aragorn. New strength is on the way from the southern fiefs, now th The Gate is destroyed, said Imrahil, and where now is the skill to rebuild it and set it up anew?
In Erebor in the Kingdom of Dáin there is such skill, said Aragorn; and if all our hopes do not perish, then in time I will send Gimli This then was the end of the debate of the lords: that they should set forth on the second morning from that day with seven thousand, i And when they had reckoned up all their strength and taken thought for the journeys they should make and the roads they should choose, Surely, he cried, this is the greatest jest in all the history of Gondor: that we should ride with seven thousand, scarcely as many as No, he will try to trap the fly and take the sting, said Gandalf. And there are names among us that are worth more than a thousand mail Neither shall we, said Aragorn. If this be jest, then it is too bitter for laughter. Nay, it is the last move in a great jeopardy, and


The Black Gate Opens

Two days later the army of the West was all assembled on the Pelennor. The host of Orcs and Easterlings had turned back out of Anórien, Legolas and Gimli were to ride again together in the company of Aragorn and Gandalf, who went in the van with the Dúnedain and the sons You are not fit for such a journey, said Aragorn. But do not be ashamed. If you do no more in this war, you have already earned great h And so despondently Merry now stood and watched the mustering of the army. Bergil was with him, and he also was downcast; for his fathe At last the trumpets rang and the army began to move. Troop by troop, and company by company, they wheeled and went off eastward. And l As if recalled by his mood of despair, the pain in his arm returned, and he felt weak and old, and the sunlight seemed thin. He was rou Come, Master Perian! said the lad. You are still in pain, I see. I will help you back to the Healers. But do not fear! They will come b At noon the army came to Osgiliath. There all the workers and craftsmen that could be spared were busy. Some were strengthening the fer The vanguard passed on through the ruins of Old Gondor, and over the wide River, and on up the long straight road that in the high days But the horsemen pressed on and in the evening they came to the Cross-roads and the great ring of trees, and all was silent. No sign of Then Aragorn set trumpeters at each of the four roads that ran into the ring of trees, and they blew a great fanfare, and the heralds c Now in their debate some had counseled that Minas Morgul should first be assailed, and if they might take it, it should be utterly dest But against this Gandalf had spoken urgently, because of the evil that dwelt in the valley, where the minds of living men would turn to It was dark and lifeless; for the Orcs and lesser creatures of Mordor that had dwelt there had been destroyed in battle, and the Nazgûl The day after, being the third day since they set out from Minas Tirith, the army began its northward march along the road. It was some Ever and anon Gandalf let blow the trumpets, and the heralds would cry: "The Lords of Gondor are come! Let all leave this land or yield Nevertheless, although they marched in seeming peace, the hearts of all the army, from the highest to the lowest, were downcast, and wi But the victory did little to hearten the captains. It is but a feint, said Aragorn; and its chief purpose, I deem, was rather to draw So time and the hopeless journey wore away. Upon the fourth day from the Cross-roads and the sixth from Minas Tirith they came at last Aragorn looked at them, and there was pity in his eyes rather than wrath; for these were young men from Rohan, from Westfold far away, Go! said Aragorn. But keep what honor you may, and do not run! And there is a task which you may attempt and so be not wholly ashamed. Then some being ashamed by his mercy overcame their fear and went on, and the others took new hope, hearing of a manful deed within the They advanced now slowly, expecting at every hour some answer to their challenge, and they drew together, since it was but a waste of m It grew cold. As morning came the wind began to stir again, but now it came from the North, and soon it freshened to a rising breeze. A The two vast iron doors of the Black Gate under its frowning arch were quickly closed. Upon the battlement nothing could be seen. All w No choice was left them but to play their part to its end. Therefore Aragorn now set the host in such array as could best be contrived; They came within cry of the Morannon, and unfurled the banner, and blew upon their trumpets; and the heralds stood out and sent their v Come forward! they cried. Let the Lord of the Black Land come forth! Justice shall be done upon him. For wrongfully he has made war upo There was a long silence, and from wall and gate no cry or sound was heard in answer. But Sauron had already laid his plans, and he had At its head there rode a tall and evil shape, mounted upon a black horse, if horse it was; for it was huge and hideous, and its face wa He it was that now rode out, and with him came only a small company of black-harnessed soldiery, and a single banner, black but bearing Is there anyone in this rout with authority to treat with me? he asked. Or indeed with wit to understand me? Not thou at least! he mock Aragorn said naught in answer, but he took the other's eye and held it, and for a moment they strove thus; but soon, though Aragorn did Where such laws hold, said Gandalf, it is also the custom for ambassadors to use less insolence. But no one has threatened you. You hav So! said the Messenger. Then thou art the spokesman, old greybeard? Have we not heard of thee at times, and of thy wanderings, ever hat The Messenger put these aside, and there to the wonder and dismay of all the Captains he held up first the short sword that Sam had car

Silence! said Gandalf sternly, thrusting him back; but the Messenger laughed aloud.
So you have yet another of these imps with you! he cried. What use you find in them I cannot guess; but to send them as spies into Mord I do not wish to deny them, said Gandalf. Indeed, I know them all and all their history, and in spite of your scorn, foul Mouth of Saur Dwarf-coat, elf-cloak, blade of the downfallen West, and spy from the little rat-land of the Shire-nay; do not start! We know it well - No one answered him; but he saw their faces gray with fear and the horror in their eyes, and he laughed again, for it seemed to him tha Name the terms, said Gandalf steadily, but those nearby saw the anguish in his face, and now he seemed an old and wizened man, crushed, These are the terms, said the Messenger, and smiled as he eyed them one by one. The rabble of Gondor and its deluded allies shall withd Looking into the Messenger's eyes they read his thoughts. He was to be that lieutenant, and gather all that remained of the West under But Gandalf said: This is much to demand for the delivery of one servant: that your Master should receive in exchange what he must else It seemed then to Gandalf, intent, watching him as a man engaged in fencing with a deadly foe, that for the taking of a breath the Mess Do not bandy words in your insolence with the Mouth of Sauron! he cried. Surety you crave! Sauron gives none. If you sue for his clemen These we will take! said Gandalf suddenly. He cast aside his cloak and a white light shone forth like a sword in that black place. Befo Then the Messenger of Mordor laughed no more. His face was twisted with amazement and anger to the likeness of some wild beast that, as Drums rolled and fires leapt up. The great doors of the Black Gate swung back wide. Out of it streamed a great host as swiftly as swirl The Captains mounted again and rode back, and from the host of Mordor there went up a jeering yell. Dust rose smothering the air, as fr Little time was left to Aragorn for the ordering of his battle. Upon the one hill he stood with Gandalf, and there fair and desperate w The wind blew, and the trumpets sang, and arrows whined; but the sun now climbing towards the South was veiled in the reeks of Mordor, Pippin had bowed crushed with horror when he heard Gandalf reject the terms and doom Frodo to the torment of the Tower; but he had mast I wish Merry was here, he heard himself saying, and quick thoughts raced through his mind, even as he watched the enemy come charging t He drew his sword and looked at it, and the intertwining shapes of red and gold; and the flowing characters of Númenor glinted like fir Then even as he thought these things the first assault crashed into them. The orcs hindered by the wonders that lay before the hills ha Then Pippin stabbed upwards, and the written blade of Westernesse pierced through the hide and went deep into the vitals of the troll, So it ends as I guessed it would, his thought said, even as it fluttered away; and it laughed a little within him ere it fled, almost g The Eagles are coming! The Eagles are coming!
For one moment more Pippin's thought hovered. Bilbo! he said. But no! That came in such a long, long time ago. This is my tale, and it


Book VI



The Tower of Cirith Ungol

Sam roused himself painfully from the ground. For a moment he wondered where he was, and then all the misery and despair returned to hi Far within he could hear faintly the voices of clamoring mouths, but soon they stopped or passed out of hearing, and all was still. His The perishing is more likely, and will be a lot easier anyway, he said grimly to himself, as he sheathed Sting and turned from the braz I wonder if they think of us at all, he said, and what is happening to them all away there. He waved his hand vaguely in the air before He came back at last to the stone door of the orc-passage, and still unable to discover the catch or bolt that held it, he scrambled ov All was ominously quiet. The light was no more than that of dusk at a dark day's end. The vast vapors that arose in Mordor and went str Sam looked up towards the orc-tower, and suddenly from its narrow windows lights stared out like small red eyes. He wondered if they we There he halted and sat down. For the moment he could drive himself no further. He felt that if once he went beyond the crown of the pa As before, Sam found that his hearing was sharpened, but that to his sight the things of this world seemed thin and vague. The rocky wa Sam shuddered and tried to force himself to move. There was plainly some devilry going on. Perhaps in spite of all orders the cruelty o He ran forward to the climbing path, and over it. But once the road turned left and plunged steeply down. Sam had crossed into Mordor. He took off the Ring, moved it may be by some deep premonition of danger, though to himself he thought only that he wished to see more Hard and cruel and bitter was the land that met his gaze. Before his feet the highest ridge of the Ephel Dúath fell steeply in great cl Sam was looking at Orodruin, the Mountain of Fire. Ever and anon the furnaces far below its ashen cone would grow hot and with a great In that dreadful light Sam stood aghast, for now, looking to his left, he could see the Tower of Cirith Ungol in all its strength. The As he gazed at it suddenly Sam understood, almost with a shock, that this stronghold had been built not to keep enemies out of Mordor, Only too clearly Sam saw how hopeless it would be for him to creep down under those many-eyed walls and pass the watchful gate. And eve His thought turned to the Ring, but there was no comfort there, only dread and danger. No sooner had he come in sight of Mount Doom, bu In that hour of trial it was the love of his master that helped most to hold him firm; but also deep down in him lived still unconquere And anyway all these notions are only a trick, he said to himself. He'd spot me and cow me, before I could so much as shout out. He'd s He was not really in any doubt. He knew that he must go down to the gate and not linger any more. With a shrug of his shoulders, as if Sam was about half way down the path when out of the dark gateway into the red glow there came two orcs running. They did not turn towa He crept on; and as he went he wondered how many orcs lived in the Tower with Shagrat, and how many Gorbag had, and what they were quar Come on, you miserable sluggard! Sam cried to himself. ``Now for it! He drew Sting and ran towards the open gate. But just as he was ab They were like great figures seated upon thrones. Each had three joined bodies, and three heads facing outward, and inward, and across Hardening his will Sam thrust forward once again, and halted with a jerk, staggering as if from a blow upon his breast and head. Then g He sprang past them; but even as he did so, thrusting the phial back into his bosom, he was aware, as plainly as if a bar of steel had That's done! said Sam. ``Now I've rung the front-door bell! Well, come on somebody! he cried. ``Tell Captain Shagrat that the great Elf There was no answer. Sam strode forward. Sting glittered blue in his hand. The courtyard lay in deep shadow, but he could see that the Two liveries Sam noticed, one marked by the Red Eye, the other by a Moon disfigured with a ghastly face of death; but he did not stop t A wide and echoing passage led back from the door towards the mountain-side. It was dimly lit with torches flaring in brackets on the w It'll be near the back, I guess, Sam muttered. ``The whole Tower climbs backwards-like. And anyway I'd better follow these lights.
He advanced down the passage, but slowly now, each step more reluctant. Terror was beginning to grip him again. There was no sound save He had passed beyond the torchlight, almost to a great arched door at the end of the passage, the inner side of the under gate, as he r His will was too weak and slow to restrain his hand. It dragged at the chain and clutched the Ring. But Sam did not put it on; for even For a moment the orc crouched, and then with a hideous yelp of fear it turned and fled back as it had come. Never was any dog more hear
``Yes! The Elf-warrior is loose! he cried. I'm coming. Just you show me the way up, or I'll skin you!
But the orc was in his own haunts, nimble and well-fed. Sam was a stranger, hungry and tired. The stairs were high and steep and windin Sam plodded on. He felt that he was on the right road, and his spirits had risen a good deal. He thrust the Ring away and tightened his And with that he stopped, brought up hard, as if he had hit his head against the stone wall. The full meaning of what he had said struc Up, up he went. It was dark save for an occasional torch flaring at a turn, or beside some opening that led into the higher levels of t All at once, when he felt that he could pump out no more breath, nor force his knees to bend again, the stairs ended. He stood still. T But at first Sam did not listen; he took a pace out of the eastward door and looked about. But once he saw that up here the fighting ha
``You won't go again, you say? Curse you, Snaga, you little maggot! If you think I'm so damaged that it's safe to flout me, you're mist

``They won't come, not before you're dead anyway,' answered Snaga surly. I've told you twice that Gorbag's swine got to the gate first, Then you must go. I must stay here anyway. But I'm hurt. The Black Pits take that filthy rebel Gorbag! Shagrat's voice trailed off into
``I'm not going down those stairs again, growled Snaga, ``be you captain or no. Narrator! Keep your hands off your knife, or I'll put a That's enough from you, snarled Shagrat. ``I had my orders. It was Gorbag who started it, trying to pinch that pretty shirt.
``Well, you put him back up, being so high and mighty. And he had more sense than you anyway. He told you more than once that the most
``So that's it, is it? ye lled Shagrat You'll do this, and you'll not do that? And when he does come, you'll bolt and leave me? No, you Out of the turret-door the smaller orc came flying. Behind him came Shagrat, a large orc with long arms that, as he ran crouching, reac As far as Sam could see, Shagrat hunted Snaga round the roof, until ducking and eluding him the smaller orc with a yelp darted back int Suddenly, as Shagrat was stooped over the battlement, his back to the roof-top, Sam to his amazement saw that one of the sprawling bodi
``Got you, Gorbag! he cried. Not quite dead, eh? Well, I'll finish my job now. He sprang on to the fallen body, and stamped and trample Sam had no time to think. He might have slipped out of the other door, but hardly without being seen; and he could not have played hide Sam ran after him, cursing, but he did not go far. Soon the thought of Frodo returned to him, and he remembered that the other orc had Away below Shagrat went leaping down the stairs and out over the court and through the gate, bearing his precious burden. If Sam could Softly Sam began to climb. He came to the guttering torch, fixed above a door on his left that faced a window-slit looking out westward
``A dead end,'' muttered Sam; and after all my climb! This cannot be the top of the tower. But what can I do now?
He ran back to the lower storey and tried the door. It would not move. He ran up again, and sweat began to trickle down his face. He fe At last, weary and feeling finally defeated, he sat on a step below the level of the passage-floor and bowed his head into his hands. I His voice sounded thin and quavering in the cold dark tower: the voice of a forlorn and weary hobbit that no listening orc could possib In the western lands beneath the Sun
the flowers may rise in Spring, the trees may bud, the waters run, the merry finches sing.
Or there maybe a cloudless night and swaying beeches bear
the Elven-stars as jewels white amidst their branching hair.
Though here at the journey's end I lie buried deep in darkness,
beyond all towers strong and high, beyond all mountains steep,
above all shadows rides the Sun and Stars for ever dwell:
I will not say the Day is done nor bid the Stars farewell.
``Beyond all towers strong and high, he began again, and then he stopped short. He thought that he had heard a faint voice answering hi Ho la! You up there, you dunghill rat! Stop your squeaking, or I'll come and deal with you. D'you hear?
There was no answer.
All right, growled Snaga. ``But I'll come and have a look at you all the same, and see what you're up to.
The hinges creaked again, and Sam, now peering over the corner of the passage-threshold, saw a flicker of light in an open doorway, and
``You lie quiet, or you'll pay for it! You've not got long to live in peace, I guess; but if you don't want the fun to begin right now, But that rage blazed in Sam's heart to a sudden fury. He sprang up, ran, and went up the ladder like a cat. His head came out in the mi With a cry Sam leapt across the floor, Sting in hand. The orc wheeled round, but before it could make a move Sam slashed his whip-hand He was naked, lying as if in a swoon on a heap of filthy rags: his arm was flung up, shielding his head, and across his side there ran
``Frodo! Mr. Frodo, my dear! cried Sam, tears almost blinding him. ``It's Sam, I've come! He half lifted his master and hugged him to h Am I still dreaming? he muttered. ``But the other dreams were horrible.
``You're not dreaming at all, Master,'' said Sam. ``It's real. It's me. I've eaten
``I can hardly believe it,'' said Frodo, clutching him. ``There was an orc with a whip, and then it turns into Sam! Then I wasn't dream It was indeed, Mr. Frodo I'd given up hope, almost. I couldn't find you.
Well, you have now, Sam, dear Sam, said Frodo, and he lay back in Sam's gentle arms, closing his eyes, like a child at rest when night- Sam felt that he could be like that in endless happiness; but it was not allowed. It was not enough for him to find his master, he had Frodo sighed and sat up. ``Where are we? How did I get here? he asked.
There's no time for tales until we get somewhere else, Mr. Frodo, said Sam. ``But you're in the top of that tower you and I saw from aw
``Only that? said Frodo. ``It seems weeks. You must tell me all about it, if we get a chance. Something hit me, didn't it? And I fell i
``You won't, if you talk about them, Mr. Frodo, said Sam. And if we don't want to see them again, the sooner we get going the better. C
``Yes, I can walk,'' said Frodo, getting up slowly. I am not hurting Sam. Only I feel very tired, and I've a pain here. He put his hand
``That's better! he said, these spirits rising a little. ``I did not dare to move when I was left alone, or one of the guards came. Unt
``Yes, they quarreled, seemingly,'' said Sam. There must have been a couple of hundred of the dirty creatures in this place. A bit of a
``They've taken everything, Sam,'' said Frodo. ``Everything I had. Do you understand? Everything! He cowered on the floor again with bo
``No, not everything, Mr. Frodo And it hasn't failed, not yet. I took it, Mr. Frodo, begging your pardon. And I've kept it safe. It's r
``You've got it? gasped Frodo. ``You've got it here? Sam, you're a marvel! Then quickly and strangely his tone changed. ``Give it to me All right, Mr. Frodo, said Sam, rather startled. Here it is! Slowly he drew the Ring out and passed the chain over his head. ``But you'
``No, no! cried Frodo, snatching the Ring and chain from Sam's hands. ``No you won't, you thief! He panted, staring at Sam with eyes wi O Sam! cried Frodo. ``What have I said? What have I done? Forgive me! After all you have done It is the horrible power of the Ring. I w That's all right, Mr. Frodo, said Sam, rubbing his sleeve across his eyes. ``I understand. But I can still help, can't I? I've got to g Sam unclasped his gray cloak and threw it about Frodo's shoulders. Then unslinging his pack he laid it on the floor. He drew Sting from
``Take care, Sam! said Frodo. ``And be quick! There may be orcs still alive, lurking in wait.
I've got to chance it, said Sam. He stepped to the trap-door and slipped down the ladder. In a minute his head reappeared. He threw a l
``There's something that might be useful,'' he said. He's dead: the one that whipped you. Broke his neck, it seems, in his haste. Now y Frodo sat for a while and shivered, dreadful fears chasing one another through his mind. Then he got up, drew the gray elven-cloak abou It was not very long, though fear made it seem an hour at least, before he heard Sam's voice calling softly from below: Elbereth, Elber
``Quick now. Mr. Frodo! he said. ``I've had a bit of a search to find anything small enough for the likes of us. We'll have to make do. He opened the bundle. Frodo looked in disgust at the contents, but there was nothing for it: he had to put the things on, or go naked.
``The Morgul-stuff, Gorbag's gear, was a better fit and better made, said Sam; ``but it wouldn't do, I guess, to go carrying these toke What about you, Sam? said Frodo. ``Aren't we going to match?
``Well, Mr. Frodo, I've been thinking, said Sam. I'd best not leave any of my stuff behind, and we can't destroy it. And I can't wear o He knelt down and carefully folded his elven-cloak. It went into a surprisingly small roll. This he put into his pack that lay on the f I can't go all the way at a run, Sam, said Frodo with a wry smile. I hope you've made inquiries about inns along the road? Or have you

``Save me, but so I had! said Sam. He whistled in dismay. Bless me, Mr. Frodo, but you've gone and made me that hungry and thirsty! I d
``No, they eat and drink, Sam. The Shadow that bred them can only mock, it cannot make: not real new things of its own. I don't think i
``Well, things are a bit better than you think,'' said Frodo. I have had a bit of luck while you were away. Indeed they did not take ev
``Well, there's no more to be said,'' said Sam. ``We've got enough to start on. But the water's going to be a bad business. But come Mr Not till you've had a mouthful, Sam, said Frodo. ``I won't budge. Here, take this elven-cake, and drink that last drop in your bottle! At last they began. Down the ladder they climbed, and then Sam took it and laid it in the passage beside the huddled body of the fallen Down the great stairway they plodded. The high chamber of the turret behind, where they had met again, seemed almost homely: they were At length they came to the door upon the outer court, and they halted. Even from where they stood they felt the malice of the Watchers Frodo had no strength for such a battle. He sank to the ground. ``I can't go on, Sam,'' he murmured. ``I'm going to faint. I don't know
``I do, Mr. Frodo Hold up now! It's the gate. There's some devilry there. But I got through, and I'm going to get out. It cannot be mor Sam drew out the elven-glass of Galadriel again. As if to do honor to his hardihood, and to grace with splendor his faithful brown hobb Gilthoniel, from Elbereth! Sam cried. For, why he did not know, his thoughts sprang back suddenly to the Elves in the Shire, and the so Aiya elenion calima! cried Frodo once again behind him.
The will of the Watchers was broken with a suddenness like the snapping of a heart, and Frodo and Sam stumbled forward. Then they ran.


The Land of Shadow

Sam had just enough wits left to thrust the phial back into his breast. Run, Mr. Frodo! he cried. No, not that way! There's a sheer dro Down the road from the gate they fled. At fifty paces, with a swift bend round a jutting bastion of the cliff, it took them out of sigh In terror they stumbled on. Soon the road bent sharply eastward again and exposed them for a dreadful moment to the view from the Tower This won't do, Sam, said Frodo. If we were real orcs, we ought to be dashing back to the Tower, not running away. The first enemy we me But we can't, said Sam, not without wings.
The eastern faces of the Ephel Dúath were sheer, falling in cliff and precipice to the black trough that lay between them and the inner Quick, Sam! Over we go! cried Frodo. They scrambled on to the low parapet of the bridge. Fortunately there was no longer any dreadful d Well, here goes, Mr. Frodo, said Sam. Good-bye!
He let go. Frodo followed. And even as they fell they heard the rush of horsemen sweeping over the bridge and the rattle of orc-feet ru When the sound of hoof and foot had passed he ventured a whisper. Bless me, Mr. Frodo, but I didn't know as anything grew in Mordor! Bu Orc-mail doesn't keep these thorns out, said Frodo. Not even a leather jerkin is any good.
They had a struggle to get out of the thicket. The thorns and briars were as tough as wire and as clinging as claws. Their cloaks were Now down we go, Sam, Frodo whispered. Down into the valley quickly, and then turn northward, as soon as ever we can.
Day was coming again in the world outside, and far beyond the glooms of Mordor the Sun was climbing over the eastern rim of Middle-eart At length they stopped, and sat side by side, their backs against a boulder. Both were sweating. If Shagrat himself was to offer me a g Don't say such things! said Frodo. It only makes it worse. Then he stretched himself out, dizzy and weary, and he spoke no more for a w Sam scrambled to his feet. Well I never! he said. I must have dropped off. It's a long time, Mr. Frodo, since I had a proper sleep, and Frodo now led the way, northward as near as he could guess, among the stones and boulders lying thick at the bottom of the great ravine It's no good, Sam, he said. I can't manage it. This mail-shirt, I mean. Not in my present state. Even my mithril-coat seemed heavy when But we may have some to do, said Sam. And there are knives and stray arrows. That Gollum isn't dead, for one thing. I don't like to thi Look here, Sam dear lad, said Frodo: I am tired, weary, I haven't a hope left. But I have to go on trying to get to the Mountain, as lo Don't talk about it, Mr. Frodo Bless you! I'd carry you on my back, if I could. Let it go then!
Frodo laid aside his cloak and took off the orc-mail and flung it away. He shivered a little. What I really need is something warm, he You can have my cloak, Mr. Frodo, said Sam. He unslung his pack and took out the elven-cloak. How's this, Mr. Frodo? he said. You wrap Frodo took the cloak and fastened the brooch. That's better! he said. I feel much lighter. I can go on now. But this blind darkness see There now, Mr. Frodo, it's you that's talking of water this time! said Sam. If only the Lady could see us or hear us, I'd say to her: " They started off again. They had not gone far when Frodo paused. There's a Black Rider over us, he said. I can feel it. We had better k Crouched under a great boulder they sat facing back westward and did not speak for some time. Then Frodo breathed a sigh of relief. It' Look at it, Mr. Frodo! said Sam. Look at it! The wind has changed. Something's happening. He's not having it all his own way. His darkn It was the morning of the fifteenth of March, and over the Vale of Anduin the Sun was rising above the eastern shadow, and the south-we As Frodo and Sam stood and gazed, the rim of light spread all along the line of the Ephel Dúath, and then they saw a shape, moving at a What did I tell you? Something's happening! cried Sam. "The war's going well," said Shagrat; but Gorbag he wasn't so sure. And he was r Well no, not much, Sam, Frodo sighed. That's away beyond the mountains. We're going east not west. And I'm so tired. And the Ring is so Sam's quick spirits sank again at once. He looked at his master anxiously, and he took his hand. Come, Mr. Frodo! he said. I've got one Sharing a wafer of lembas, and munching it as best they could with their parched mouths. Frodo and Sam plodded on. The light, though no It was dangerous for the hobbits to use such a path, but they needed speed, and Frodo felt that he could not face the toil of scramblin The light grew no stronger, for Orodruin was still belching forth a great smoke that, beaten upwards by the opposing airs, mounted high Sam sprang towards it. If ever I see the Lady again, I will tell her! he cried. Light and now water! Then he stopped. Let me drink firs All right, but there's room enough for two.
I didn't mean that, said Sam. I mean: if it's poisonous, or something that will show its badness quickly, well, better me than you, mas I give But I think we'll trust our luck together, Sam; or our blessing. Still, be careful now, if it's very cold!
The water was cool but not icy, and it had an unpleasant taste, at once bitter and oily, or so they would have said at home. Here it se This is where we turn aside, Sam, said Frodo. And we must turn east. He sighed as he looked at the gloomy ridges across the valley. I h The river-bed was now some way below the path. They scrambled down to it, and began to cross it. To their surprise they came upon dark Orc-gear's no good, said Sam, waving his arms. I wish I'd got an orc's hide!
At last Frodo could go no further. They had climbed up a narrow shelving ravine, but they still had a long way to go before they could There they sat and made such a meal as they could. Keeping back the precious lembas for the evil days ahead, they ate half of what rema Now you go to sleep first, Mr. Frodo, he said. It's getting dark again. I reckon this day is nearly over.
Frodo sighed and was asleep almost before the words were spoken. Sam struggled with his own weariness, and he took Frodo's hand; and th They woke together, hand in hand. Sam was almost fresh, ready for another day; but Frodo sighed. His sleep had been uneasy, full of dre After much wandering and searching they found a way that they could climb, and with a last hundred feet of clawing scramble they were u Still far away, forty miles at least, they saw Mount Doom, its feet founded in ashen ruin, its huge cone rising to a great height, wher Frodo and Sam gazed out in mingled loathing and wonder at this hateful land. Between them and the smoking mountain, and about it north I don't like the look of things at all, said Sam. Pretty hopeless, I call it - saving that where there's such a lot of folk there must Neither he nor Frodo knew anything of the great slave-worked fields away south in this wide realm, beyond the smoke of the Mountain by Well! Sam went on. Whatever they have to eat and drink, we cannot get it. There is no way down that I can see. And we could not cross a Still we shall have to try, said Frodo. It's no worse than I expected. I never hoped to get across. I can't see any hope of it now. But I guess what it'll be like, said Sam. Where it's narrower the Orcs and Men will just be packed closer. You'll see, Mr. Frodo
I dare say I shall, if we ever get so far, said Frodo and turned away.

They soon found that it was impossible to make their way along the crest of the Morgai, or anywhere along its higher levels, pathless a They went two or three miles further, and the orc-hold was hidden from sight behind them; but they had hardly begun to breathe more fre Hardly twenty paces from where the hobbits lurked the small orc stopped. Narrator! it snarled. I'm going home. It pointed across the va Not much use are you, you little snufflers? said the big orc. I reckon eyes are better than your snotty noses.
Then what have you seen with them? snarled the other. Garn! You don't even know what you're looking for.
Whose blame is that? said the soldier. Not mine. That comes from Higher Up. First they say it's a great Elf in bright armour, then it's Ar! said the tracker. They've lost their heads, that's what it is. And some of the bosses are going to lose their skins too, I guess, i Who says there's bad news? shouted the soldier.
Who says there isn't?
That's cursed rebel-talk, and I'll stick you, if you don't shut it down, see?
All right, all right! said the tracker. I'll say no more and go on thinking. But what's the black sneak got to do with it all? That gob I don't know. Nothing, maybe. But he's up to no good, nosing around, I'll wager. Curse him! No sooner had he slipped us and run off tha Well, I hope they get him and put him through it, growled the tracker. He messed up the scent back there, pinching that cast-off mail-s It saved his life anyway, said the soldier. Why, before I knew he was wanted I shot him, as neat as neat, at fifty paces right in the b Garn! You missed him, said the tracker. First you shoot wild, then you run too slow, and then you send for the poor trackers. I've had You come back, shouted the soldier, or I'll report you!
Who to? Not to your precious Shagrat. He won't be captain any more.
I'll give your name and number to the Nazgûl, said the soldier lowering his voice to a hiss. One of them is in charge at the Tower now. The other halted, and his voice was full of fear and rage. You cursed peaching sneakthief! he yelled. You can't do your job, and you ca The big orc, spear in hand, leapt after him. But the tracker, springing behind a stone, put an arrow in his eye as he ran up, and he fe For a while the hobbits sat in silence. At length Sam stirred. Well I call that neat as neat, he said. If this nice friendliness would Quietly, Sam, Frodo whispered. There may be others about. We have evidently had a very narrow escape, and the hunt was hotter on our tr There was another long silence. Sam broke it again, but with a whisper this time. Did you hear what they said about that gobbler, Mr. F Yes, I remember. And I wondered how you knew, said Frodo. Come now! I think we had better not move out from here again, until it has go I'll try, said Sam, but when I think of that Stinker I get so hot I could shout.
There the hobbits sat under the cover of the thorny bush, while the drear light of Mordor faded slowly into a deep and starless night; Well, I suppose we must be going on again, he said. I wonder how long it will be before we really are caught and all the toiling and th It was difficult and dangerous moving in the night in the pathless land; but slowly and with much stumbling the two hobbits toiled on h Begging your pardon, Mr. Frodo, he said, but have you any idea how far there is still to go?
No, not any clear notion, Sam, Frodo answered. In Rivendell before I set out I was shown a map of Mordor that was made before the Enemy Sam sighed. That's just as I feared, he said. Well, to say nothing of water, we've got to eat less, Mr. Frodo, or else move a bit quick I'll try and be a bit quicker, Sam, said Frodo, drawing a deep breath. Come on then! Let's start another march!
It was not yet quite dark again. They plodded along, on into the night. The hours passed in a weary stumbling trudge with a few brief h Slowly the light grew, until it was clearer than it had yet been. A strong wind from the West was now driving the smoke of Mordor from A few miles north, high up in the angle where the western spur branched away from the main range, stood the old castle of Durthang, now To the hobbits as they looked out it seemed that all their journey north had been useless. The plain to their right was dim and smoky, We have come to a dead end, Sam, said Frodo. If we go on, we shall only come up to that orc-tower, but the only road to take is that ro Then we must take the road, Mr. Frodo, said Sam. We must take it and chance our luck, if there is any luck in Mordor. We might as well All right, Sam, said Frodo. Lead me! As long as you've got any hope left. Mine is gone. But I can't dash, Sam. I'll just plod along aft Before you start any more plodding, you need sleep and food, Mr. Frodo Come and take what you can get of them!
He gave Frodo water and an additional wafer of the waybread, and he made a pillow of his cloak for his master's head. Frodo was too wea Sam crept out, and flitting from stone to stone with more than hobbit-care, he went down to the water-course, and then followed it for Sam tasted the water, and it seemed good enough. Then he drank deeply, refilled the bottle, and turned to go back. At that moment he ca Well, luck did not let me down, muttered Sam, but that was a near thing! Isn't it enough to have orcs by the thousand without that stin That Gollum's about again, I'm afraid, Mr. Frodo, he said. At least, if it wasn't him, then there are two of him. I went away to find s Bless you, Sam! said Frodo. Lie down and take your proper turn! But I'd rather have Gollum than orcs. At any rate he won't give us away But he might do a bit of robbery and murder on his own, growled Sam. Keep your eyes open, Mr. Frodo! There's a bottle full of water. Dr The light was fading when he woke. Frodo sat propped against the rock behind, but he had fallen asleep. The water-bottle was empty. The Mordor-dark had returned, and the watch-fires on the heights burned fierce and red, when the hobbits set out again on the most dangerou After doing some twelve miles, they halted. A short way back the road had bent a little northward and the stretch that they had passed I feared it, Sam, said Frodo. We have trusted to luck, and it has failed us. We're trapped. He looked wildly up at the frowning wall, w It seems so, said Sam. Well, we can but wait and see. And with that he sat down beside Frodo under the shadow of the cliff.
They did not have to wait long. The orcs were going at a great pace. Those in the foremost files bore torches. On they came, red flames If only they are in a hurry and will let a couple of tired soldiers alone and pass on! he thought
And so it seemed that they would. The leading orcs came loping along, panting, holding their heads down. They were a gang of the smalle Come on, you slugs! he cried. This is no time for slouching. He took a step towards them, and even in the gloom he recognized the devic They struggled to their feet, and keeping bent, limping like footsore soldiers, they shuffled back towards the rear of the line. No, no It was hard enough for poor Sam, tired as he was; but for Frodo it was a torment, and soon a nightmare. He set his teeth and tried to s There now! he laughed, flicking at their legs. Where there's a whip there's a will, my slugs. Hold up! I'd give you a nice freshener no They had gone some miles, and the road was at last running down a long slope into the plain, when Frodo's strength began to give out an Then just as he was putting his hand to the hilt of his sword, there came an unexpected relief. They were out on the plain now and draw Dazed as he was with pain and weariness, Sam woke up, grasped quickly at his chance, and threw himself to the ground, dragging Frodo do They lay still for a while. It was too dark to seek for cover, if indeed there was any to find; but Sam felt that they ought at least t Come on, Mr. Frodo! he whispered. One more crawl, and then you can lie still.
With a last despairing effort Frodo raised himself on his hands, and struggled on for maybe twenty yards. Then he pitched down into a s


Mount Doom

Sam put his ragged orc-cloak under his master's head, and covered them both with the gray robe of Lórien; and as he did so his thoughts Sam took a sip of water, but pressed Frodo to drink, and when his master had recovered a little he gave him a whole wafer of their prec In the morning a gray light came again, for in the high regions the West Wind still blew, but down on the stones behind the fences of t Sam tried to guess the distances and to decide what way they ought to take. It looks every step of fifty miles, he muttered gloomily st So that was the job I felt I had to do when I started, thought Sam: to help Mr. Frodo to the last step and then die with him? Well, if But even as hope died in Sam, or seemed to die, it was turned to a new strength. Sam's plain hobbit-face grew stern, almost grim, as th With a new sense of responsibility he brought his eyes back to the ground near at hand, studying the next move. As the light grew a lit Thinking of all these things Sam went back to his master. He had no need to rouse him. Frodo was lying on his back with his eyes open,

I can manage it, said Frodo. I must
Once more they started, crawling from hollow to hollow, flitting behind such cover as they could find, but moving always in a slant tow The hobbits had gone a few weary soldiers when they halted. Frodo seemed nearly spent. Sam saw that he could not go much further in thi I'm going back on to the road while the light lasts, Mr. Frodo, he said. Trust to luck again! It nearly failed us last time, but it did He was taking a far greater risk than he knew; but Frodo was too much occupied with his burden and with the struggle in his mind to deb So the desperate journey went on, as the Ring went south and the banners of the kings rode north. For the hobbits each day, each mile. There came at last a dreadful nightfall; and even as the Captains of the West drew near to the end of the living lands, the two wandere Now as the blackness of night returned Frodo sat, his head between his knees, his arms hanging wearily to the ground where his hands la Water, water! muttered Sam. He had stinted himself, and in his parched mouth his tongue seemed thick and swollen; but for all his care At last wearied with his cares Sam drowsed, leaving the morrow till it came; he could do no more. Dream and waking mingled uneasily. He The hateful night passed slowly and reluctantly. Such daylight as followed was dim; for here as the Mountain drew near the air was ever Wake up, Master! he said. Time for another start.
As if roused by a sudden bell, Frodo rose quickly, and stood up and looked away southwards; but when his eyes beheld the Mountain and t I can't manage it, Sam, he said. It is such a weight to carry, such a weight.
Sam knew before he spoke, that it was vain, and that such words might do more harm than good, but in his pity he could not keep silent. A wild light came into Frodo's eyes. Stand away! Don't touch me! he cried. It is mine, I say. Be off! His hand strayed to his sword-hil Sam nodded. I understand, he said. But I've been thinking, Mr. Frodo, there's other things we might do without. Why not lighten the loa Frodo looked again towards the Mountain. No, he said, we don't need much on that road. And at its end nothing. Picking up his orc-shiel There, I'll be an orc no more, he cried, and I'll bear no weapon fair or foul. Let them take me, if they will!
Sam did likewise, and put aside his orc-gear; and he took out all the things in his pack. Somehow each of them had become dear to him, Do you remember that bit of rabbit, Mr. Frodo? he said. And our place under the warm bank in Captain Faramir's country, the day I saw a No, I am afraid not, Sam, said Frodo. At least, I know that such things happened, but I cannot see them. No taste of food, no feel of w Sam went to him and kissed his hand. Then the sooner we're rid of it, the sooner to rest, he said haltingly, finding no better words to He came back to Frodo, and then of his elven-rope he cut a short piece to serve his master as a girdle and bind the gray cloak close ab Now at last they turned their faces to the Mountain and set out, thinking no more of concealment, bending their weariness and failing w That day it seemed to Sam that his master had found some new strength, more than could be explained by the small lightening of the load At their last halt he sank down and said: I'm thirsty, Sam, and did not speak again. Sam gave him a mouthful of water; only one more mo He could not sleep and he held a debate with himself. Well, come now, we've done better than you hoped, he said sturdily. Began well an Don't be a fool, Sam Gamgee, came an answer in his own voice. He won't go another day like that, if he moves at all. And you can't go o I can go on a good way though, and I will.
Where to?
To the Mountain, of course.
But what then, Sam Gamgee, what then? When you get there, what are you going to do? He won't be able to do anything for himself.
To his dismay Sam realized that he had not got an answer to this. He had no clear idea at all. Frodo had not spoken much to him of his There you are! came the answer. It's all quite useless. He said so himself. You are the fool, going on hoping and toiling. You could ha I'll get there, if I leave everything but my bones behind, said Sam. And I'll carry Mr. Frodo up myself, if it breaks my back and heart At that moment Sam felt a tremor in the ground beneath him, and he heard or felt a deep remote rumble as of thunder imprisoned under th The last stage of their journey to Orodruin came, and it was a torment greater than Sam had ever thought that he could bear. He was in The Mountain crept up ever nearer, until, if they lifted their heavy heads, it filled all their sight, looming vast before them: a huge With a gasp Frodo threw himself on the ground. Sam sat by him. To his surprise he felt tired but lighter, and his head seemed clear aga But when would it come? The night seemed endless and timeless, minute after minute falling dead and adding up to no passing hour, bring I didn't ought to have left my blanket behind, muttered Sam; and lying down he tried to comfort Frodo with his arms and body. Then slee Now for it! Now for the last gasp! said Sam as he struggled to his feet. He bent over Frodo, rousing him gently. Frodo groaned; but wit Sam looked at him and wept in his heart, but no tears came to his dry and stinging eyes. I said I'd carry him, if he broke my back, he Come, Mr. Frodo! he cried. I can't carry it for you, but I can carry you and it as well. So up you go! Come on, Mr. Frodo dear! Sam wil As Frodo clung upon his back, arms loosely about his neck, legs clasped firmly under his arms, Sam staggered to his feet; and then to h They had reached the Mountain's foot on its northern side, and a little to the westward; there its long gray slopes, though broken, wer Frodo opened his eyes and drew a breath. It was easier to breathe up here above the reeks that coiled and drifted down below. Thank you I don't know, said Sam, because I don't know where we're going.
He looked back, and then he looked up; and he was amazed to see how far his last effort had brought him. The Mountain standing ominousl Sam could not see the course immediately above him, where it was lowest, for a steep slope went up from where he stood; but he guessed The path was not put there for the purposes of Sam. He did not know it, but he was looking at Sauron's Road from Barad-dûr to the Samma Sam drew a deep breath. There was a path, but how he was to get up the slope to it he did not know. First he must ease his aching back. I'll crawl, Sam, he gasped.
So foot by foot, like small gray insects, they crept up the slope. They came to the path and found that it was broad, paved with broken Sam knelt by him. Faint, almost inaudibly, he heard Frodo whispering: Help me, Sam! Help me, Sam! Hold my hand! I can't stop it. Sam to Again he lifted Frodo and drew his hands down to his own breast. letting his master's legs dangle. Then he bowed his head and struggled A sudden weight smote him and he crashed forward, tearing the backs of his hands that still clasped his master's. Then he knew what had Wicked master! it hissed. Wicked master cheats us; cheats Sméagol, gollum. He mustn't go that way. He musstn't hurt Preciouss. Give it With a violent heave Sam rose up. But once he drew his sword; but he could do nothing. Gollum and Frodo were locked together. Gollum wa Down, down! he gasped, clutching his hand to his breast, so that beneath the cover of his leather shirt he clasped the Ring. Down you c Then suddenly, as before under the eaves of the Emyn Muil, Sam saw these two rivals with another vision. A crouching shape, scarcely mo Begone, and trouble me no more! If you touch me ever again, you shall be cast yourself into the Fire of Doom.
The crouching shape backed away, terror in its blinking eyes, and yet at the same time insatiable despair.
Then the vision passed and Sam saw Frodo standing, hand on breast, his breath coming in great gasps, and Gollum at his feet, resting on Look out! cried Sam. He'll spring! He stepped forward, brandishing his sword. Quick, Master! he gasped. Go on! Go on! No time to lose. Frodo looked at him as if at one now far away. Yes, I must go on, he said. Farewell, Sam! This is the end at last. On Mount Doom doom s Now! said Sam. At last I can deal with you! He leaped forward with drawn blade ready for battle. But Gollum did not spring. He fell fla Don't kill us, he cried. Don't hurt us with nasty cruel steel! Let us live, yes, live just a little longer. Lost lost! We're lost. And Sam's hand waved. His mind was hot with wrath and the memory of evil. It would be just to slay this treacherous, murderous creature, ju Oh, curse you, you stinking thing! he said. Go away! Be off! I don't trust you, not as far as I could kick you; but be off Or I shall h Gollum got up on all fours, and backed away for several paces, and then he turned, and as Sam aimed a kick at him he fled away down the The path climbed on. Soon it bent again and. with a last eastward course passed in a cutting along the face of the cone and came to the Sam came to the gaping mouth and peered in. It was dark and hot, and a deep rumbling shook the air. Frodo! Master! he called There was At first he could see nothing. In his great need he drew out once more the phial of Galadriel, but it was pale and cold in his tremblin The light sprang up again, and there on the brink of the chasm, at the very Crack of Doom, stood Frodo, black against the glare, tense, Master! cried Sam.

Then Frodo stirred and spoke with a clear voice, indeed with a voice clearer and more powerful than Sam had ever heard him use, and it I have come, he said. But I do not choose now to do what I came to do. I will not do this deed. The Ring is mine! And suddenly, as he p Something struck Sam violently in the back, his legs were knocked from under him and he was flung aside, striking his head against the And far away, as Frodo put on the Ring and claimed it for his own, even in Sammath Naur the very heart of his realm, the Power in Barad From all his policies and webs of fear and treachery, from all his stratagems and wars his mind shook free; and throughout his realm a Sam got up. He was dazed, and blood streaming from his head dripped into his eyes. He groped forward, and then he saw a strange and ter The fires below awoke in anger, the red light blazed, and all the cavern was filled with a great glare and heat. Suddenly Sam saw Gollu Precious, precious, precious! Gollum cried. My Precious! O my Precious! And with that, even as his eyes were lifted up to gloat on his There was a roar and a great confusion of noise. Fire leaped up and licked the roof. The throbbing grew to a great tumult, and the Moun A brief vision he had of a swirling cloud, and in the midst of it towers and battlements, tall as hills, founded upon a mighty mountain Well, this is the end, Sam Gamgee, said a voice by his side. And there was Frodo, pale and worn, and yet himself again; and in his eyes Master! cried Sam. and fell upon his knees. In all that ruin of the world for the moment he felt only joy, great joy. The burden was go Your poor hand! he said. And I have nothing to bind it with, or comfort it. I would have spared him a whole hand of mine rather. But he Yes, said Frodo. But do you remember Gandalf's words: Even Gollum may have something yet to do? But for him, Sam, I could not have dest


The Field of Cormallen

All about the hills the hosts of Mordor raged. The Captains of the West were foundering in a gathering sea. The sun gleamed red, and un As if to his eyes some sudden vision had been given, Gandalf stirred; and he turned, looking back north where the skies were pale and c There came Gwaihir the Windlord, and Landroval his brother, greatest of all the Eagles of the North, mightiest of the descendants of ol But the Nazgûl turned and fled, and vanished into Mordor's shadows, hearing a sudden terrible call out of the Dark Tower; and even at t Then all the Captains of the West cried aloud, for their hearts were filled with a new hope in the midst of darkness. Out from the bele Stand, Men of the West! Stand and wait! This is the hour of doom.
And even as he spoke the earth rocked beneath their feet. Then rising swiftly up, far above the Towers of the Black Gate, high above th The realm of Sauron is ended! said Gandalf. The Ring-bearer has fulfilled his Quest. And as the Captains gazed south to the Land of Mor The captains bowed their heads; and when they looked up again, behold! their enemies were flying and the power of Mordor was scattering Then Gandalf, leaving all such matters of battle and command to Aragorn and the other lords, stood upon the hill-top and called; and do Twice you have borne me, Gwaihir my friend, said Gandalf. Thrice shall pay for all, if you are willing. You will not find me a burden m I would bear you, answered Gwaihir, whither you will, even if you were made of stone.
Then come, and let your brother go with us, and some other of your people who is most swift! For we have need of speed greater than any The North Wind blows, but we shall outfly it, said Gwaihir. And he lifted up Gandalf and sped away south, and with him went Landroval, I am glad that you are here with me, said Frodo. Here at the end of all things, Sam.
Yes, I am with you, Master, said Sam, laying Frodo's wounded hand gently to his breast. And you're with me. And the journey's finished. Perhaps not, Sam, said Frodo; but it's like things are in the world. Hopes fail. An end count. We have only a little time to wait now. Well, Master, we could at least go further from this dangerous place here, from this Crack of Doom, if that's its name. Now couldn't we Very well, Sam. If you wish to go, I'll come, said Frodo; and they rose and went slowly down the winding road; and even as they passed Frodo and Sam could go no further. Their last strength of mind and body was swiftly ebbing. They had reached a low ashen hill piled at They stood now; and Sam still holding his master's hand caressed it. He sighed. What a tale we have been in, Mr. Frodo, haven't we? he But even while he spoke so, to keep fear away until the very last, his eyes still strayed north, north into the eye of the wind, to whe And so it was that Gwaihir saw them with his keen far-seeing eyes, as down the wild wind he came, and daring the great peril of the ski Side by side they lay; and down swept Gwaihir, and down came Landroval and Meneldor the swift; and in a dream, not knowing what fate ha When Sam awoke, he found that he was lying on some soft bed, but over him gently swayed wide beechen boughs, and through their young le He remembered that smell: the fragrance of Ithilien. Bless me! he mused. How long have I been asleep? For the scent had borne him back Full memory flooded back, and Sam cried aloud: It wasn't a dream! Then where are we?
And a voice spoke softly behind: In the land of Ithilien, and in the keeping of the King; and he awaits you. With that Gandalf stood be But Sam lay back, and stared with open mouth, and for a moment, between bewilderment and great joy, he could not answer. At last he gas A great Shadow has departed, said Gandalf, and then he laughed and the sound was like music, or like water in a parched land; and as he How do I feel? he cried. Well, I don't know how to say it. I feel, I feel - he waved his arms in the air - I feel like spring after win Yes, I am all right otherwise, said Frodo, sitting up and laughing in his turn. I fell asleep again waiting for you, Sam, you sleepyhea Noon? said Sam, trying to calculate. Noon of what day?
The fourteenth of the New Year, said Gandalf; or if you like, the eighth day of April in the Shire reckoning. But in Gondor the New Yea The King? said Sam. What king, and who is he?
The King of Gondor and Lord of the Western Lands, said Gandalf and he has taken back all his ancient realm. He will ride soon to his cr What shall we wear? said Sam; for all he could see was the old and tattered clothes that they had journeyed in, lying folded on the gro The clothes that you wore on your way to Mordor, said Gandalf. Even the orc-rags that you bore in the black land; Frodo, shall be prese Then he held out his hands to them, and they saw that one shone with light. What have you got there? cried Frodo. Can it be?
Yes, I have brought your two treasures. They were found on Sam when you were rescued. The Lady Galadriel's gifts: your glass, Frodo, an When they were washed and clothed, and had eaten a light meal, the Hobbits followed Gandalf. They stepped out of the beech-grove in whi As they came to the opening in the wood, they were surprised to see knights in bright mail and tall guards in silver and black standing Long live the Halflings! Praise them with great praise!
Cuio i Pheriain anann! Aglar'ni Pheriannath! Praise them with great praise, Frodo and Samwise! Daur a Berhael, Conin en Annun! Eglerio!
Praise them!
Eglerio!
Be happy, be happy! Andave laituvalmet! Praise them!
Cormacolindor, a laita tárienne!
Praise them! The Ring-bearers, praise them with great praise!
And so the red blood blushing in their faces and their eyes shining with wonder, Frodo and Sam went forward and saw that amidst the cla Frodo ran to meet him, and Sam followed close behind. Well, if that isn't the crown of all! he said. Strider, or I'm still asleep!
Yes, Sam, Strider, said Aragorn. It is a long way, is it not, from Bree, where did you not like the look of me? A long way for us all b And then to Sam's surprise and utter confusion he bowed his knee before them; and taking them by the hand, Frodo upon his right and Sam Praise them with great praise!
And when the glad shout had swelled up and died away again, to Sam's final and complete satisfaction and pure joy, a minstrel of Gondor Lo! lords and knights and men of valor unashamed, kings and princes, and fair people of Gondor, and Riders of Rohan, and ye sons of Elr

And when Sam heard that he laughed aloud for sheer delight, and he stood up and cried: O great glory and splendor! And all my wishes ha And all the host laughed and wept, and in the midst of their merriment and tears the clear voice of the minstrel rose like silver and g And at the last, as the Sun fell from the noon and the shadows of the trees lengthened, he ended. Praise them with great praise! he sai Frodo and Sam were led apart and brought to a tent, and there their old flock was taken off, but folded and set aside with honor; and c I do not wish for any sword, said Frodo.
Tonight at least you should wear one, said Gandalf.
Then Frodo took the small sword that had belonged to Sam, and had been laid at his side in Cirith Ungol. Sting I gave to you Sam, he sa No, master! Mr. Bilbo gave it to you, and it goes with his silver coat; he would not wish anyone else to wear it now.
Frodo gave way; and Gandalf, as if he were their squire, knelt and girt the sword-belts about them, and then rising he set circlets of But when, after the Standing Silence, wine was brought there came in two esquires to serve the kings; or so they seemed to be: one was Why, look Mr. Frodo! Look here! Well, if it isn't Pippin. Mr. Peregrin Took I should say, and Mr. Merry! How they have grown! Bless me! There are indeed, said Pippin, turning towards him. And we'll begin telling them, as soon as this feast is ended. In the meantime you c At last the happy day ended; and when the Sun was gone and the round Moon rode slowly above the mists of Anduin and flickered through t Orcs, and talking trees, and leagues of grass, and galloping riders. and glittering caves, and white towers and golden halls, and battl That you certainly are not, said Gimli. But what did I say? Mortals cannot go drinking drafts and expect no more to come of them than o Ent-draughts? said Sam. There you go about Ents again; but what they are beats me. Why, it will take weeks before we get all these thin Weeks indeed, said Pippin. And then Frodo will have to be locked up in a tower in Minas Tirith and write it all down. Otherwise he will At length Gandalf rose. The hands of the King are hands of healing, dear friends, he said. But you went to the very brink of death ere And not only Sam and Frodo here, said Gimli, but you too, Pippin. I love you, if only because of the pains you have cost me, which I sh And I, said Legolas, shall walk in the woods of this fair land, which is rest enough. In days to come, if my Elven-lord allows, some of To the Sea, to the Sea! The white gulls are crying
The wind is blowing, and the white foam is flying. West, west away, the round sun is falling.
Gray ship, gray ship, do you hear them calling. The voices of my people that have gone before me? I will leave, I will leave the woods that bore me; For our days are ending and our years failing.
I will pass the wide waters lonely sailing. Long are the waves on the Last Shore falling, Sweet are the voices in the Lost Isle calling,
In Eressëa, in Elvenhome that no man can discover, Where the leaves fall not: land of my people for ever! And so singing Legolas went away down the hill.
Then the others also departed, and Frodo and Sam went to their beds and slept. And in the morning they rose again in hope and peace; an Well, one cannot be everywhere at once, I suppose, he said. But I missed a lot, seemingly.
In the meantime the host made ready for the return to Min as Tirith. The weary rested and the hurt were healed. For some had labored an But at the last when the month of May was drawing near the Captains of the West set out again; and they went aboard ship with all their And there in the midst of the fields they set up their pavilions and awaited the morning; for it was the Eve of May, and the King would


The Steward and the King

Over the city of Gondor doubt and great dread had hung. Fair weather and clear sun had seemed but a mockery to men whose days held litt When the Captains were but two days gone, the Lady Éowyn bade the women who tended her to bring her raiment, and she would not be gains Sir, she said, I am in great unrest, and I cannot lie longer in sloth.
Lady, he answered, you are not yet healed, and I was commanded to tend you with special care. You should not have risen from your bed f I am healed, she said, healed at least in body, save my left arm only, and that is at ease. But I shall sicken anew, if there is naught There are no tidings, said the Warden, save that the Lords have ridden to Morgul Vale; and men say that the new captain out of the Nort It needs but one foe to breed a war, not two, Master Warden, answered Éowyn. And those who have not swords can still die upon them. Wou The Warden looked at her. Tall she stood there, her eyes bright in her white face, her hand clenched as she turned and gazed out of his Is there no deed to do? she said. Who commands in this City?
I do not rightly know, he answered. Such things are not my care. There is a marshal over the Riders of Rohan; and the Lord Húrin, I am Where can I find him?
In this house, lady. He was sorely hurt, but is now set again on the road to health. But I do not know Will you not bring me to him? Then you will know.
The Lord Faramir was walking alone in the garden of the Houses of Healing, and the sunlight warmed him, and he felt life run new in his My lord, said the Warden, here is the Lady Éowyn of Rohan. She rode with the king and was sorely hurt, and dwells now in my keeping. Bu Do not misunderstand him, lord, said Éowyn. It is not lack of care that grieves me. No houses could be fairer, for those who desire to At a sign from Faramir, the Warden bowed and departed. What would you have me do, lady? said Faramir. I also am a prisoner of the heale What do you wish? he said again. If it lies in my power, I will do it.
I would have you command this Warden, and bid him let me go, she said; but though her words were still proud, her heart faltered, and f I myself am in the Warden's keeping, answered Faramir. Nor have I yet taken up my authority in the City. But had I done so, I should st But I don't stop healing, she said. I wish to ride to war like my brother Éomer, or better like Théoden the king, for he died and has b It is too late, lady, to follow the Captains, even if you had the strength, said Faramir. But death in battle may come to us all yet, w She did not answer, but as he looked at her it seemed to him that something in her softened, as though a bitter frost were yielding at Faramir smiled, though his heart was filled with pity. Does your window not look eastward? he said. That can be amended. In this I will Then she raised her head and looked him in the eyes again; and a color came in her pale face. How should I ease your care, my lord? she Would you have my plain answer? he said.
I would.
Then, Éowyn of Rohan, I say to you that you are beautiful. In the valleys of our hills there are flowers fair and bright, and maidens f Wings, not me, lord! she said. Shadow lies on me still. Look not to me for healing! I am a shieldmaiden and my hand is ungentle. But I When he returned to his chamber he called for the Warden, and heard all that he could tell of the Lady of Rohan.
But I doubt not, lord, said the Warden, that you would learn more from the Halfling that is with us; for he was in the riding of the ki And so Merry was sent to Faramir, and while that day lasted they talked long together, and Faramir learned much, more even than Merry p But in the morning, as Faramir came from the Houses, he saw her, as she stood upon the walls; and she was clad all in white, and gleame And so the fifth day came since the Lady Éowyn went first to Faramir; and they stood now together once more upon the walls of the City They were clad in warm clothing and heavy cloaks, and over all the Lady Éowyn wore a great blue mantle of the color of deep summer-nigh

But she now shivered beneath the starry mantle, and she looked northward, above the gray hither lands, into the eye of the cold wind wh What do you look for, Éowyn? said Faramir.
Does not the Black Gate lie yonder? said she. And must he not now be come thither? It is seven days since he rode away.
Seven days, said Faramir. But think not ill of me, if I say to you: they have brought me both a joy and a pain that I never thought to Lose what you have found, lord? she answered; but she looked at him gravely and her eyes were kind. I know not what in these days you h Yes, we wait for the stroke of doom, said Faramir. And they said no more; and it seemed to them as they stood upon the wall that the wi And as they stood thus, their hands met and clasped, though they did not know it. And still they waited for they knew not what. Then pr It reminds me of Númenor, said Faramir, and wondered to hear himself speak.
"Of Númenor?" said Éowyn.
Yes, said Faramir, of the land of Westernesse that founded and of the great dark wave climbing over the green lands and above the hills Then you think that the Darkness is coming? said Éowyn. Darkness Inescapable? And suddenly she drew close to him.
No, said Faramir, looking into her face. It was but a picture in the mind. I do not know what is happening. The reason of my waking min And so they stood on the walls of the City of Gondor, and a great wind rose and blew, and their hair, raven and golden, streamed out mi And before the Sun had fallen far from the noon out of the East there came a great Eagle flying, and he bore tidings beyond hope from t Sing now, ye people of the Tower of Anor,
for the Realm of Sauron is ended for ever, and the Dark Tower is thrown down.
Sing and rejoice, ye people of the Tower of Guard, for your watch hath not been in vain
and the Black Gate is broken,
and your King hath passed through, and he is victorious.
Sing and be glad, all ye children of the West, for your King shall come again
and he shall dwell among you all the days of your life.
And the Tree that was withered shall be renewed, and he shall plant it in the high places,
and the City shall be blessed.
Sing, all you people!
And the people sang in all the ways of the City.
The days that followed were golden, and Spring and Summer joined and made revel together in the fields of Gondor. And tidings now came And Éowyn did not go, though her brother sent word begging her to come to the field of Cormallen. And Faramir wondered at this, but he Then Faramir came and sought her, and once more they stood on the walls together; and he said to her: Éowyn, why do you tarry here, and And she said: Do you not know?
But he answered: Two reasons there may be, but which is true, I do not know. And she said: I do not wish to play at riddles. Speak plainer!
Then if you will have it so, lady, he said: you do not go, because only your brother called for you, and to look on the Lord Aragorn, E I wished to be loved by another, she answered. But I leave no man's pity.
That I know, he said. You desired to have the love of the Lord Aragorn. Because he was high and powerful, and you wished to have renown And Éowyn looked at Faramir long and steadily; and Faramir said: Do not scorn pity that is the gift of a gentle heart, Éowyn! But I do Then the heart of Éowyn changed, or else at last she understood it. And suddenly her winter passed, and the sun shone on her.
I stand in Minas Anor, the Tower of the Sun, she said; and behold the Shadow has departed! I will be a shieldmaiden no longer, nor live Then Faramir laughed merrily. That is well, he said; for I am not a king. Yet I will wed with the White Lady of Rohan, if it be her wil Then must I leave my own people, man of Gondor? she said. And would you have your proud folk say of you: "There goes a lord who tamed a I would, said Faramir. And he took her in his arms and kissed her under the sunlit sky, and he cared not that they stood high upon the And to the Warden of the Houses Faramir said: Here is the Lady Éowyn of Rohan, and now she is healed.
And the Warden said: Then I release her from my charge and bid her farewell, and may she never suffer hurt nor sickness again. I commen But Éowyn said: Yet now that I have leave to depart, I would remain. For this House has become to me of all dwellings the most blessed. All things were now made ready in the City; and there was great concourse of people, for the tidings had gone out into all parts of Gon At last an evening came when from the walls the pavilions could be seen upon the field, and all night lights were burning as men watche Now the Captains of the West led their host towards the City, and the people saw them advance in line upon line, flashing and glinting So now there was a wide space before the walls of Minas Tirith, and it was hemmed in upon all sides by the knights and the soldiers of Nay, cousin! they are not boys, said Ioreth to her kinswoman from Imloth Melui, who stood beside her. Those are Periain, out of the far But Ioreth was not permitted to continue the instruction of her kinswoman from the country, for a single trumpet rang, and a dead silen Faramir met Aragorn in the midst of those there assembled, and he knelt, and said: The last Steward of Gondor begs leave to surrender h Then Faramir stood up and spoke in a clear voice: Men of Gondor hear now the Steward of this Realm! Behold! one has come to claim the k And all the host and all the people cried yea with one voice.
And Ioreth said to her kinswoman: This is just a ceremony such as we have in the City, cousin; for he has already entered, as I was tel Men of Gondor, the loremasters tell that it was the custom of old that the king should receive the crown from his father ere he died; o Then the guards stepped forward, and Faramir opened the casket, and he held up an ancient crown. It was shaped like the helms of the Gu Then Aragorn took the crown and held it up and said:
And Eärello Endorenna utúlien. Sinome maruvan ar Hildinyar tenn Ambar-metta!
And those were the words that Elendil spoke when he came up out of the Sea on the wings of the wind: Out of the Great Sea to Middle-ear Then to the wonder of many Aragorn did not put the crown upon his head, but gave it back to Faramir, and said: By the labor and valor o Then Frodo came forward and took the crown from Faramir and bore it to Gandalf; and Aragorn knelt, and Gandalf set the White Crown upon Now come the days of the King, and may they be blessed while the thrones of the Valar endure!
But when Aragorn arose all that beheld him gazed in silence, for it seemed to them that he was revealed to them now for the first time. Behold the King!
And at that moment all the trumpets were blown, and the King Elessar went forth and came to the barrier, and Húrin of the Keys thrust i In his time the City was made more fair than it had ever been, even in the days of its first glory; and it was filled with trees and wi In the days that followed his crowning the King sat on his throne in the Hall of the Kings and pronounced his judgments. And embassies And the King said to Beregond: Beregond, by your sword blood was spilled in the Hallows, where that is forbidden. Also you left your po All penalty is remitted for your valor in battle, and still more because all that you did was for the love of the Lord Faramir. Neverth Then the blood left Beregond's face, and he was stricken to the heart and bowed his head. But the King said:
So it must be, for you are appointed to the White Company, the Guard of Faramir, Prince of Ithilien, and you shall be its captain and d And then Beregond, perceiving the mercy and justice of the King, was glad, and kneeling kissed his hand, and departed in joy and conten

For, said he, Minas Ithil in Morgul Vale shall be utterly destroyed, and though it may in time to come be made clean, no man may dwell And last of all Aragorn greeted Éomer of Rohan, and they embraced, and Aragorn said: Between us there can be no word of giving or takin And Éomer answered: Since the day when you rose before me out of the green grass of the downs I have loved you, and that love shall not And Éowyn said to Faramir: Now I must go back to my own land and look on it once more, and help my brother in his labour; but when one So the glad days passed; and on the eighth day of May the Riders of Rohan made ready, and rode off by the North-way, and with them went The hobbits still remained in Minas Tirith, with Legolas and Gimli; for Aragorn was loth for the fellowship to be dissolved. At last al In those days the Companions of the Ring dwelt together in a fair house with Gandalf, and they went to and fro as they wished. And Frod As for Bilbo, said Gandalf, he is waiting for the same day, and he knows what keeps you. And as for the passing of the days, it is now Pippin, said Frodo, didn't you say that Gandalf was less close than of old? He was weary of his labors then, I think. Now he is recover And Gandalf said: Many folk like to know beforehand what is to be set on the table; but those who have labored to prepare the feast lik There came a day when Gandalf could not be found, and the Companions wondered what was going forward. But Gandalf took Aragorn out of t And Gandalf said: This is your realm, and the heart of the greater realm that shall be. The Third Age of the world is ended, and the ne I know it well, dear friend, said Aragorn; but I would still have your counsel.
Not for long now, said Gandalf. The Third Age was my age. I was the Enemy of Sauron; and my work is finished. I shall go soon. The burd But I shall die, said Aragorn. For I am a mortal man, and though being what I am and of the race of the West unmingled, I shall have li Turn your face from the green world, and look where all seems barren and cold! said Gandalf.
Then Aragorn turned. and there was a stony slope behind him running down from the skirts of the snow; and as he looked he was aware tha Then Aragorn cried: Yé! take advantage! I have found it! Lo! here is a scion of the Eldest of Trees! But how do you eat it here? For it And Gandalf coming looked at it, and said: Verily this is a sapling of the line of Nimloth the fair; and that was a seedling of Galathi Then Aragorn laid his hand gently to the sapling, and lo! it seemed to hold only lightly to the earth, and it was removed without hurt; The sign has been given, said Aragorn, and the day is not far off. And he set watchmen upon the walls.
It was the day before Midsummer when messengers came from Amon Din to the City, and they said that there was a riding of fair folk out Upon the very Eve of Midsummer, when the sky was blue as sapphire and white stars opened in the East, but the West was still golden and And Frodo when he saw her come glimmering in the evening, with stars on her brow and a sweet fragrance about her, was moved with great Then the King welcomed his guests, and they alighted; and Elrond surrendered the sceptre, and laid the hand of his daughter in the hand


Many Partings

When the days of rejoicing were over at last the Companions thought of returning to their own homes. And Frodo went to the King as he w I know what you have come to say, Frodo: you wish to return to your own home. Well, dearest friend, the tree grows best in the land of It is true that I wish to go back to the Shire, said Frodo. But first I must go to Rivendell. For if there could be anything wanting in Do you wonder at that, Ring-bearer? said Arwen. For you know the power of that thing which is now destroyed; and all that was done by t Then I beg leave to depart soon, said Frodo.
In seven days we will go, said Aragorn. For we shall ride with you far on the road, even as far as the country of Rohan. In three days But the Queen Arwen said: A gift I will give you. For I am the daughter of Elrond. I shall not go with him now when he departs to the H And she took a white gem like a star that lay upon her breast hanging upon a silver chain, and she set the chain about Frodo's neck. Wh In three days, as the King had said, Éomer of Rohan came riding to the City, and with him came an Éored of the fairest knights of the M Nay, lord, said Gimli, but I can speedily fetch it, if there be need.
You shall judge, said Éomer. For there are certain rash words concerning the Lady in the Golden Wood that lie still between us. And now Well, lord, said Gimli, and what say you now?
Wings! said Éomer. I will not say that she is the fairest lady that lives. Then I must go for my axe, said Gimli.
But first I will plead this excuse, said Éomer. Had I seen her in another company, I would have said all that you could wish. But now I Then Gimli bowed low. Nay, you are excused for my part, lord, he said. You have chosen the Evening; but my love is given to the Morning At last the day of departure came, and a great and fair company made ready to ride north from the City. Then the kings of Gondor and Ro For the other Companions steeds were furnished according to their stature; and Frodo and Samwise rode at Aragorn's side, and Gandalf ro In that riding went also Queen Arwen, and Celeborn and Galadriel with their people, and Elrond and his sons; and the princes of Dol Amr Without haste and at peace they passed into Anórien, and they came to the Gray Wood under Amon Din; and there they heard a sound as of Behold the King Elessar is come! The Forest of Drúadan he gives to Ghân-buri-ghân and to his people, to be their own for ever; and here Then the drums rolled loudly, and were silent.
At length after fifteen days of journey the wain of King Théoden passed through the green fields of Rohan and came to Edoras; and there Then the Riders of the King's House upon white horses rode round about the barrow and sang together a song of Théoden Thengel's son tha Out of doubt, out of darkness, to the day's rising
he rode singing in the sun, sword unsheathing. Hope he rekindled, and in hope ended;
over death, over dread, over doom lifted out of loss, out of life, unto long glory.
But Merry stood at the foot of the green mound, and he wept, and when the song was ended he rose and cried: Théoden King, Théoden King! Farewell! As a father you were to me. for a little while. Farewell!
When the burial was over and the weeping of women was stilled, and Théoden was left at last alone in his barrow, then the folk gathered Then a minstrel and loremaster stood up and named all the names of the Lords of the Mark in their order: Eorl the Young; and Brego buil At the last when the feast drew to an end Éomer arose and said: Now this is the funeral feast of Théoden the King; but I will speak ere And Faramir and Éowyn stood forth and set hand in hand; and all there drank to them and were glad. Thus, said Éomer, is the friendship No niggard are you, Éomer, said Aragorn, to give thus to Gondor the fairest thing in your realm!
Then Éowyn looked into the eyes of Aragorn, and she said: Wish me joy, my liege-lord and healer!
And he answered: I have wished thee joy ever since first I saw thee. It heals my heart to see you now in bliss.
When the feast was over, those who were to go took leave of King Éomer. Aragorn and his knights, and the people of Lórien and of Rivend At the last before the guests set oat Éomer and Éowyn came to Merry, and they said: Farewell now, Meriadoc of the Shire and Holdwine of And Éomer said: Kings of old would have laden you with gifts that a wain could not bear for your deeds upon the fields of Mundburg; and Then Éowyn gave to Merry an ancient horn, small but cunningly wrought all of fair silver with a baldric of green; and wrights had engra This is an heirloom of our house, said Éowyn. It was made by the Dwarves, and came from the hoard of Scatha the Worm. Eorl the Young br Then Merry took the horn, for it could not be refused, and he kissed Éowyn's hand; and they embraced him, and so they parted for that t Now the guests were ready, and they drank the stirrup-cup, and with great praise and friendship they departed, and came at length to He From Deeping-coomb they rode to Isengard, and saw how the Ents had busied themselves. All the stone-circle had been thrown down and rem For a while the travelers sat where once the old gates of Isengard had stood, and there were now two tall trees like sentinels at the b Welcome to the Treegarth of Orthanc! he said. I knew that you were coming, but I was at work up the valley; there is still much to be d

Well, come now! he said. You have proved mightiest, and all your labors have gone well. Where now would you be going? And why do you co To see how your work goes, my friend, said Gandalf, and to thank you for your aid in all that has been achieved.
Hoom, well, that is fair enough, said Treebeard; for to be sure the Ents have played their part. And not only in dealing with that, hoo And these same foul creatures were more than surprised to meet us out on the Wold, for they had not heard of us before; though that mig We know it well, said Aragorn, and never shall it be forgotten in Minas Tirith or in Edoras.
Never is too long a word even for me, said Treebeard. Not while your kingdoms last, you mean; but they will have to last long indeed to The New Age begins, said Gandalf, and in this age it may well prove that the kingdoms of Men shall outlast you, Fangorn my friend. But Treebeard gave Gandalf a long look, a most cunning look, Merry thought. Ah! he said. I thought you would come to that. Weary of Orthanc Then why did he stay to listen? Did you go into Orthanc? asked Gandalf.
Hoom, no, not into Orthanc! said Treebeard. But he came to his window and listened, because he could not get news in any other way, and l observe, my good Fangorn, said Gandalf, that with great care you say dwelt, was, grew. What about it? Is he dead?
No, not dead, so far as I know, said Treebeard. But he is gone. Yes, he is gone seven days. I let him go. There was little left of him You may be right, said Gandalf; but this snake had still one tooth left, I think. He had the poison of his voice, and I guess that he p That will be seen later, said Aragorn. But I will give to Ents all this valley to do with as they will, so long as they keep a watch up It is locked, said Treebeard. I made Saruman lock it and give me the keys. Quickbeam has them.
Quickbeam bowed like a tree bending in the wind and handed to Aragorn two great black keys of intricate shape, joined by a ring of stee Treebeard's face became sad. Forests may grow, he said. Woods may spread. But not Ents. There are no Entings.
Yet perhaps there is now more hope in your search, said Aragorn. Lands will lie open to you eastward that have long been closed.
But Treebeard shook his head and said: It is far to go. And there are too many Men there in these days. But I am forgetting my manners! But all save Legolas said that they must now take their leave and depart, either south or west. Come, Gimli! said Legolas. Now by Fango Here then at last comes the ending of the Fellowship of the Ring, said Aragorn. Yet I hope that ere long you will return to my land wit We will come, if our own lords allow it, said Gimli. Well, farewell. my hobbits! You should come safely to your own homes now, and I sh Then Treebeard said farewell to each of them in turn, and he bowed three times slowly and with great reverence to Celeborn and Galadrie And Celeborn said: I do not know, Eldest. But Galadriel said: Not in Middle-earth, nor until the lands that lie under the wave are lift Last of all Merry and Pippin said good-bye to the old Ent, and he grew gayer as he looked at them. Well, my merry folk, he said, will y Indeed we will, they said, and he took them aside into the shade of one of the trees, and there they saw that a great stone jar had bee Well, good-bye! he said. And don't forget that if you hear any news of the Entwives in your land, you will send word to me. Then he wav The travelers now rode with more speed, and they made their way towards the Gap of Rohan; and Aragorn took leave of them at last close I wish we could have a Stone that we could see all our friends in, said Pippin, and that we could speak to them from far away!
Only one now remains that you could use, answered Aragorn for you would not wish to see what the Stone of Minas Tirith would show you. Then Aragorn took leave of Celeborn and Galadriel; and the Lady said to him: Elfstone, through darkness you have come to your hope, and But Celeborn said: Kinsman, farewell! May your doom be other than mine, and your treasure remain with you to the end!
With that they parted, and it was then the time of sunset; and when after a while they turned and looked back, they saw the King of the Soon the dwindling company, following the Isen, turned west and rode through the Gap into the waste lands beyond, and then they turned On the sixth day since their parting from the King they journeyed through a wood climbing down from the hills at the feet of the Misty Well Saruman! said Gandalf. Where are you going?
What is that to you? he answered. Will you still order my goings, and are you not content with my ruin?
You know the answers, said Gandalf: no and no. But in any case the time of my labors now draws to an end. The King has taken on the bur Then all the more reason to have left sooner, said Saruman; for I desire neither of him. Indeed if you wish for an answer to your first Then once more you are going the wrong way, said Gandalf, and I see no hope in your journey. But will you scorn our help? For we offer To me? said Saruman. Nay, pray do not smile at me! I prefer your frowns. And as for the Lady here, I do not trust her: she always hated Saruman, said Galadriel, we have other errands and other cares that seem to us more urgent than hunting for you. Say rather that you ar If it be truly the last, I am glad, said Saruman; for I shall be spared the trouble of refusing it again. All my hopes are ruined, but For a moment his eyes kindled. Go! he said. I did not spend long studying on these matters for naught. You have doomed yourselves, and Get up, you idiot! he shouted to the other beggar, who had sat down on the ground; and he struck him with his staff. Turn about! If the The beggar turned and slouched past whimpering: Poor old Gríma! Poor old Gríma! Always beaten and cursed. How I hate him! I wish I coul Then leave him! said Gandalf.
But Wormtongue only shot a glance of his bleared eyes full of terror at Gandalf, and then shuffled quickly past behind Saruman. As the So you have come to gloat too, have you, my urchins? he said. You don't care what a beggar lacks, do you? For you have all you want, fo I would, if I had any, said Frodo.
You can have what I have got left, said Merry, if you will wait a moment. He got down and searched in the bag at his saddle. Then he ha Mine, mine, yes and dearly bought! cried Saruman, clutching at the pouch. This is only a repayment in tokens; for you took more, I'll b Thank you! said Merry. In that case I will have my pouch back, which is not yours and has traveled far with me. Wrap the weed in a rag One thief deserves another, said Saruman, and turned his back on Merry, and kicked Wormtongue, and went away towards the wood.
Well, I like that! said Pippin. Thief indeed! What of our claim for waylaying, wounding, and orc-dragging us through Rohan?
Ah! said Sam. And bought he said. How, I wonder? And I didn't like the sound of what he said about the Southfarthing. It's time we got I'm sure it is, said Frodo. But we cannot go any quicker, if we are to see Bilbo. I am going to Rivendell first, whatever happens.
Yes, I think you had better do that, said Gandalf. But wings for Saruman! I fear nothing more can be made of him. He has withered altog Next day they went on into northern Dunland, where no men now dwelt, though it was a green and pleasant country. September came in with So they passed into Eregion, and at last a fair morning dawned, shimmering above gleaming mists; and looking from their camp on a low h Here now for seven days they tarried, for the time was at hand for another parting which they were loth to make. Soon Celeborn and Gala But at length all was said, and they parted again for a while, until it was time for the Three Rings to pass away. Quickly fading into Sam turned away and sighed: I wish I was going back to Lórien!
At last one evening they came over the high moors, suddenly as to travelers it always seemed, to the brink of the deep valley of Rivend First of all, before they had eaten or washed or even shed their cloaks, the hobbits went in search of Bilbo. They found him all alone He opened his eyes and looked up as they came in. Hoo, hoo! he said. So you've come back? And tomorrow's my birthday, too. How clever o After the celebration of Bilbo's birthday the four hobbits stayed in Rivendell for some days, and they sat much with their old friend, The only part that seemed really to rouse him and hold his attention was the account of the crowning and marriage of Aragorn. I was inv When nearly a fortnight had passed Frodo looked out of his window and saw that there had been a frost in the night, and the cobwebs wer Well, Mr. Frodo, we've been far and seen a deal, and yet I don't think we've found a better place than this. There's something of every Yes, something of everything, Sam, except the Sea, Frodo had answered; and he repeated it now to himself: Except the Sea.
That day Frodo spoke to Elrond, and it was agreed that they should leave the next morning. To their delight Gandalf said: I think I sha In the evening they went to say good-bye to Bilbo. Well, if you must go, you must, he said. I am sorry. I shall miss you. It is nice ju To Sam he gave a little bag of gold. Almost the last drop of the Smaug vintage, he said. May come in useful, if you think of getting ma I have nothing much to give to you young fellows, he said to Merry and Pippin, except good advice. And when he had given them a fair sa But if you want to beat the Old Took, said Pippin, I don't see why we shouldn't try and beat the Bullroarer.
Bilbo laughed, and he produced out of a pocket two beautiful pipes with pearl mouth-pieces and bound with fine-wrought silver. Think of

I have lost it, Bilbo dear, said Frodo. I got rid of it, you know.
What a pity! said Bilbo. I should have liked to see it again. But no, how silly of me! That's what you went for, wasn't it: to get rid I evidently came back by much too straight a road from my trip. I think Gandalf might have shown me round a bit. But then the auction w The Road goes on and on.
Out of the door where it began. Now far ahead the road has gone Let others follow it who can!
Let them begin a new journey, But I at last with weary feet
Will turn towards the lighted inn, My evening-rest and sleep to meet.
And as Bilbo murmured the last words his head dropped on his chest and he slept soundly.
The evening deepened in the room, and the firelight burned brighter; and they looked at Bilbo as he slept and saw that his face was smi I don't think, Mr. Frodo, that he's done much writing while we've been away. He won't ever write our story now.
At that Bilbo opened an eye, almost as if he had heard. Then he roused himself. You see, I am getting so sleepy, he said. And when I ha Of course I'll do it! said Frodo. And of course I'll come back soon: it won't be dangerous any more. There is a real king now and he wi Thank you, my dear fellow! said Bilbo. That really is a very great relief to my mind. And with that he fell fast asleep again.
The next day Gandalf and the hobbits took leave of Bilbo in his room, for it was cold out of doors; and then they said farewell to Elro As Frodo stood upon the threshold, Elrond wished him a fair journey, and blessed him, and he said:
I think, Frodo, that perhaps you will not need to come back, unless you come very soon. For about this time of the year, when the leave These words no one else heard, and Frodo kept them to himself.


Homeward Bound

At last the hobbits had their faces turned towards home. They were eager now to see the Shire again; but at first they rode only slowly Are you in pain, Frodo? said Gandalf quietly as he rode by Frodo's side.
Well, yes I am, said Frodo. It is my shoulder. The wound aches, and the memory of darkness is heavy on me. It was a year ago today. Wings! there are some wounds that cannot be wholly cured, said Gandalf.
I fear it may be so with me, said Frodo. There is no real going back. Though I may come to the Shire, it will not seem the same; for I Gandalf did not answer.
By the end of the next day the pain and discomfort had passed, and Frodo was merry again, as merry as if he did not remember the blackn So it was that near the end of a wild and wet evening in the last days of October the five travelers rode up the climbing road and came When they had called many times, at last the Gate-keeper came out, and they saw that he carried a great cudgel. He looked at them with Come on in! he said, unlocking the gate. We won't stay for news out here in the cold and the wet, a ruffianly evening. But old Barley w And there you'll hear later all that we say, and more, laughed Gandalf. How is Harry?
The Gate-keeper scowled. Gone, he said. But you'd best ask Barliman. Good evening!
Good evening to you! they said, and passed through; and then they noticed that behind the hedge at the road-side a long low hut had bee Do you think you killed him with that apple, Sam? said Pippin.
I'm not so hopeful, Mr. Pippin, said Sam. But I'd like to know what became of that poor pony. He's been on my mind many a time and the At last they came to The Prancing Pony, and that at least looked outwardly unchanged; and there were lights behind the red curtains in Mr. Butterbur! Master! he shouted. They've come back!
Oh have they? I'll learn them, came Butterbur's voice, and out he came with a rush, and he had a club in his hand. But when he saw who Nob, you woolly-pated ninny! he cried. Can't you give old friends their names? You shouldn't go scaring me like that, with times as the Mr. Butterbur had at any rate not changed his manner of talking, and still seemed to live in his old breathless bustle. And yet there w He led them down the passage to the parlor that they had used on that strange night more than a year ago; and they followed him, a litt As they expected Mr. Butterbur came to the parlor after supper to see if all had been to their liking. As indeed it had: no change for That is just what we should like, too, said Gandalf. We are not tired. We have been taking things easy. We were wet, cold and hungry, b Well, if you'd called for anything else, I'd have been happier, said Butterbur. That's just a thing that we're short of, seeing how we' When he came back he brought them enough to last them for a day or two, a wad of uncut leaves. Southlinch, he said, and the best we hav They put him in a large chair by the wood-fire, and Gandalf sat on the other side of the hearth, and the hobbits in low chairs between But he did say much on his own account. Things were far from well, he would say. Business was not even fair, it was downright bad. No o I will indeed, said Gandalf. How many?
Three and two, said Butterbur, referring to the big folk and the little. There was poor Mat Heathertoes, and Rowlie Appledore, and litt And now they're gone for robbers and live outside, hiding in the woods beyond Archet, and out in the wilds north-away. It's like a bit Well, no one troubled us, said Pippin, and we came along slowly, and kept no watch. We thought we'd left all trouble behind us.
Ah, that you haven't, Master, more's the pity, said Butterbur. But it's no wonder they left you alone. They wouldn't go for armed folk, Then the hobbits suddenly realized that people had looked at them with amazement not out of surprise at their return so much as in wond Gandalf laughed. Well, well, he said, if they are afraid of just five of us, then we have met worse enemies on our travels. But at any How long will that be? said Butterbur. I'll not deny we should be glad to have you about for a bit. You see, we're not used to such tro I expect it has, said Gandalf. Nearly all countries have been disturbed these days, very disturbed. But cheer up, Barliman! You have be Then the Greenway will be opened again, and his messengers will come north, and there will be comings and goings, and the evil things w Mr. Butterbur shook his head. If there's a few decent respectable folk on the roads, that won't do no harm, he said. But we don't want You will be let alone, Barliman, said Gandalf. There is room enough for realms between Isen and Greyflood, or along the shore lands sou Up away by Deadmen's Dike? said Butterbur, looking even more doubtful. That's haunted land, they say. None but a robber would go there. The Rangers go there, said Gandalf. Deadmen's Dike, you say. So it has been called for many years; but its right name, Barliman, is For Well, that sounds more hopeful, I'll allow, said Butterbur. And it will be good for business, no doubt. So long as he lets Bree alone. He will, said Gandalf. He knows it and loves it.
Does he now? said Butterbur looking puzzled. Although I'm sure I don't know why he should, sitting in his big chair up in his great cas Ah! said Sam. But he says your beer is always good.
He says?
Of course he does. He's Strider. The chief of the Rangers. Haven't you got that into your head yet?
It went in at last, and Butterbur's face was a study in wonder. The eyes in his broad face grew round, and his mouth opened wide, and h Better times, for Bree at any rate, said Gandalf.
I hope so, I'm sure, said Butterbur. Well, this has been the nicest chat I've had in a month of Mondays. And I'll not deny that I'll sl Now! he said to himself, slapping his forehead. Now what does that remind me of?
Not another letter you've forgotten. I hope, Mr. Butterbur? said Merry.

Now, now, Mr. Brandybuck, don't go reminding me of that! But there, you've broken my thought. Now where was I? We, stables, ah! that wa What! My Bill? cried Sam. Well, I was born lucky, whatever my gaffer may say. There's another wish come true! Where is he? Sam would no The travelers stayed in Bree all the next day, and Mr. Butterbur could not complain of his business next evening at any rate. Curiosity Not yet, he answered. I am going home now to put my notes in order. He promised to deal with the amazing events at Bree, and so give a Then one of the younger folk called for a song. But at that a hush fell, and he was frowned down, and the call was not repeated. Eviden No trouble by day, nor any sound by night, disturbed the peace of Bree while the travelers remained there; but the next morning they go Well, good luck on your road, and good luck on your home-coming! said Mr. Butterbur. I should have warned you before that all is not we They wished him farewell and rode away, and passed through the West-gate and on towards the Shire. Bill the pony was with them, and as I wonder what old Barliman was hinting at, said Frodo.
I can guess some of it, said Sam gloomily. What I saw in the Mirror: trees cut down and all, and my old gaffer turned out of the Row. I And something's wrong with the Southfarthing evidently, said Merry. There is a general shortage of pipe-weed.
Whatever it is, said Pippin, Lotho will be at the bottom of it: you can be sure of that.
Deep in, but not at the bottom, said Gandalf. You have forgotten Saruman. He began to take an interest in the Shire before Mordor did. Well, we've got you with us, said Merry, so things will soon be cleared up.
I am with you at present, said Gandalf, but soon I shall not be. I am not coming to the Shire. You must settle its affairs yourselves; But if you would know, I am turning aside soon. I am going to have a long talk with Bombadil: such a talk as I have not had in all my t In a little while they came to the point on the East Road where they had taken leave of Bombadil; and they hoped and half expected to s They halted and Frodo looked south wistfully. I should dearly like to see the old fellow again, he said. I wonder how he is getting on? As well as ever, you may be sure, said Gandalf. Quite untroubled and I should guess, not much interested in anything that we have done But there aren't any gates, said Merry, not on the Road; you know that quite well. There's the Buckland Gate, of course; but they'll le There weren't any gates, you mean, said Gandalf. I think you will find some now. And you might have more trouble even at the Buckland G He turned Shadowfax off the Road, and the great horse leaped the green dike that here ran beside it; and then at a cry from Gandalf he Well here we are, just the four of us that started out together, said Merry. We have left all the rest behind, one after another. It se Not to me, said Frodo. To me it feels more like falling asleep again.


The Scouring of the Shire

It was after nightfall when, wet and tired, the travelers came at last to the Brandywine, and they found the way barred. At either end They hammered on the outer gate and called, but there was at first no answer; and then to their surprise someone blew a horn, and the l Who's that? Be off! You can't come in: Can't you read the notice: No admittance between sunset and sunrise?
Of course we can't read the notice in the dark. Sam shouted back. And if hobbits of the Shire are to be kept out in the wet on a night At that a window slammed, and a crowd of hobbits with lanterns poured out of the house on the left. They opened the further gate, and s Come along! said Merry, recognizing one of the hobbits. If you don't know me, Hob Hayward, you ought to. I am Merry Brandybuck, and I s Bless me! It's Master Merry, to be sure, and all dressed up for fighting! said old Hob. Why, they said you were dead! Lost in the Old F Then stop gaping at me through the bars, and open the gate! said Merry.
I'm sorry, Master Merry, but we have orders. Whose orders?
The Chief's up at Bag End.
Chief? Chief? Do you mean Mr. Lotto? said Frodo.
I suppose so, Mr. Baggins; but we have to say just "the Chief" nowadays.
Do you indeed! said Frodo. Well, I am glad he has dropped the Baggins at any rate. But it is evidently high time that the family dealt A hush fell on the hobbits beyond the gate. It won't do no good talking that way, said one. He'll get to hear of it. And if you make so We shall wake him up in a way that will surprise him, said Merry. If you mean that your precious Chief has been hiring ruffians out of Merry and Pippin climbed the gate, and the hobbits fled. Another horn sounded. Out of the bigger house on the right a large heavy figur What's all this, he snarled as he came forward. Gate-breaking? You clear out, or I'll break your filthy little necks! Then he stopped, Bill Ferny, said Merry, if you don't open that gate in ten seconds, you'll regret it. I shall set steel to you, if you do not obey. And Bill Ferny flinched and shuffled to the gate and unlocked it. Give me the key! said Merry. But the ruffian flung it at his head and the Neat work, Bill, said Sam, meaning the pony.
So much for your Big Man, said Merry. We'll see the Chief later. In the meantime we want a lodging for the night, and as you seem to ha I am sorry, Mr. Merry, said Hob, but it isn't allowed.
What isn't allowed?
Taking in folk off-hand like and eating extra food, and all that, said Hob.
What's the matter with the place? said Merry. Has it been a bad year, or what? I thought it had been a fine summer and harvest.
Well no, the year's been good enough, said Hob. We grow a lot of food, but we don't really know what becomes of it. It's all these "gat Oh eat! said Pippin, yawning. This is all too tiresome for me tonight. We've got food in our bags. Just give us a room to lie down in. The hobbits at the gate still seemed ill at ease, evidently some rule or other was being broken; but there were no gainsaying four such Well now, what about a smoke, while you tell us what has been happening in the Shire? he said.
There isn't no pipe-weed now, said Hob; at least only for the Chief's men. All the stocks seem to have gone. We do hear that waggon-loa Now you shut up, Hob Hayward! cried several of the others. You know talk about that sort isn't allowed. The Chief will hear of it, and He wouldn't hear naught, if some of you here weren't sneaks, rejoined Hob hotly.
All right, all right! said Sam. "That's quite enough. I don't want to hear no more. No welcome, no beer, no smoke, and a lot of rules a The new Chief evidently had means of getting news. It was a good forty miles from the Bridge to Bag End, but someone made the journey i They had not made any definite plans, but had vaguely thought of going down to Crickhollow together first, and resting there a bit. But As evening fell they were drawing near to Frogmorton, a village right on the Road, about twenty-two miles from the Bridge. There they m What's all this? said Frodo, feeling inclined to laugh.
This is what it is, Mr. Baggins, said the leader of the Shirriffs, a two-feather hobbit: You're arrested for Gate-breaking, and Tearing "And what else?" said Frodo.
That'll do to go on with, said the Shirriff-leader.
I can add some more, if you like it, said Sam. Calling your Chief Names, Wishing to punch his Pimply Face, and Thinking you Shirriffs l There now, Mister, that'll do. It's the Chief's orders that you're to come along quietly. We're going to take you to Bywater and hand y To the discomfiture of the Shirriffs Frodo and his companions all roared with laughter. Don't be absurd! said Frodo. I am going where I Very well, Mr. Baggins, said the leader, pushing the barrier aside. But don't forget I've arrested you.
I won't, said Frodo. Never. But I may forgive you. Now I am not going any further today, so if you'll kindly escort me to The Floating I can't do that, Mr. Baggins. The inn's closed. There's a Shirriff-house at the far end of the village. I'll take you there.
All right, said Frodo. Go on and we'll follow.
Sam had been looking the Shirriffs up and down and had spotted one that he knew. Hey, come here Robin Smallburrow! he called I want a w

With a sheepish glance at his leader, who looked wrathful but did not dare to interfere, Shirriff Smallburrow fell back and walked besi Look here, Cock-robin! said Sam. You're Hobbiton-bred and ought to have more sense, coming a-waylaying Mr. Frodo and all. And what's al They're all closed, said Robin. The Chief does not hold with beer. At least that is how it started. But now I reckon it's his Men that You ought to be ashamed of yourself having anything to do with such nonsense, said Sam. You used to like the inside of an inn better th And so I would be still, Sam, if I could. But don't be hard on me. What can I do? You know how I went for a Shirriff seven years ago, b But you can give it up, stop Shirriffing, if it has stopped being a respectable job, said Sam.
We're not allowed to, said Robin.
If I hear not allowed much more often, said Sam, I'm going to get angry.
Can't say as I'd be sorry to see it, said Robin lowering his voice. If we all got angry together something might be done. But it's thes Then why do you do their work far them? said Sam angrily. Who sent you to Frogmorton?
No one did. We stay here in the big Shirriff-house. We're the First Eastfarthing Troop now. There's hundreds of Shirriffs all told and Ah! So that's how you had news of us, is it?
That's right. We aren't allowed to send by it now, but they use the old Quick Post service, and keep special runners at different point He won't be so eager when Mr. Frodo has finished with him, said Sam.
The Shirriff-house at Frogmorton was as bad as the Bridge-house. It had only one storey, but it had the same narrow windows, and it was It was rather a comic cavalcade that left the village, although the few folk that came out to stand at the get-up of the travelers did The last person they passed was a sturdy old gaffer clipping a hedge. Hoo, hoo! he jeered Now who's arrested who?
Two of the Shirriffs immediately left the party and went towards him. Leader! said Merry. Order your fellows back to their places at on The two hobbits at a sharp word from the leader came back sulkily. Now get on! said Merry, and after that the travelers saw to it that At the Three-Farthing Stone they gave it up. They had done nearly fourteen miles with only one rest at noon. It was now three o'clock. Well, come along in your own time! said Merry. We are going on.
Good-bye, Cock-robin! said Sam. I'll wait for you outside The Green Dragon, if you haven't forgotten where that is. Don't dawdle on the You're breaking arrest, that's what you're doing, said the leader ruefully, and I can't be answerable.
We shall break a good many things yet, and not ask you to answer said Pippin. Good luck to you!
The travelers trotted on, and as the sun began to sink towards the White Downs far away on the western horizon they came to Bywater by Sam was beside himself. I'm going right on, Mr. Frodo! he cried. I'm going to see what's up. I want to find my gaffer.
We ought to find out first what we're in for, Sam, said Merry. I guess that the "Chief" will have a gang of ruffians handy. We had bett But in the village of Bywater all the houses and holes were shut, and no one greeted them. They wondered at this, but they soon discove Like that friend of Bill Ferny's at Bree, said Sam.
Like many that I saw at Isengard, muttered Merry.
The ruffians had clubs in their hands and horns by their belts, but they had no other weapons, as far as could be seen. As the traveler Where d'you think you're going? said one, the largest and most evil-looking of the crew. There is no road for you any further. And wher Coming along nicely, said Merry. A little footsore, perhaps. We promised to wait for them here.
Garn, what did I say? said the ruffian to his companions. I told Sharkey it was no good trusting those little fools. Some of our chaps And what difference would that have made, pray? said Merry. We are not used to footpads in this country, but we know how to deal with t Footpads, eh? said the man: So that's your tone, is it? Change it, or we'll change it for you. You little folk are getting too uppish. And what may that be? said Frodo quietly.
This country wants waking up and setting to rights, said the ruffian, and Sharkey's going to do it; and make it hard, if you drive him Indeed. I am glad to hear of your plans, said Frodo. I am on my way to call on Mr. Lotho, and he may be interested to hear of them too. The ruffian laughed. Lotto! He knows all right. Don't you worry. He'll do what Sharkey says. Because if a Boss gives trouble, we can ch Yes, I see, said Frodo. For one thing, I see that you're behind the times and the news here. Much has happened since you left the South The man stared at him and smiled. A beggar in the wilderness! he mocked. Oh, is he indeed? Swagger it, swagger it, my little cock-a-who This was too much for Pippin. His thoughts went back to the Field of Cormallen, and here was a squint-eyed rascal calling the Ring-bear I am a messenger of the King, he said. You are speaking to the King's friend, and one of the most renowned in all the lands of the West The sword glinted in the setting sun. Merry and Sam drew their swords also and rode up to support Pippin; but Frodo did not move. The r Go! said Merry. If you trouble this village again, you will regret it. The three hobbits came on, and then the ruffians turned and fled Well, we've come back none too soon, said Merry.
Not a day too soon. Perhaps too late, at any rate to save Lotho, said Frodo. Miserable fool, but I am sorry for him. Save Lotto? What do you mean? said Pippin. Destroy him I should say.
I don't think you quite understand things, Pippin, said Frodo. Lotho never meant things to come to this pass. He has been a wicked fool Well I am stunned! said Pippin. Of all the ends to our journey that is the very last I should have thought of: to have to fight half-or Fight? said Frodo. Well, I suppose it may come to that. But remember: there is to be no slaying of hobbits, not even if they have gone But if there are many of these ruffians, said Merry, it will certainly mean fighting. You won't rescue Lotho, or the Shire, just by bei No, said Pippin. It won't be so easy scaring them a second time. They were taken by surprise. You heard that horn-blowing? Evidently th I've got an idea, said Sam. Let's go to old Tom Cotton's down South Lane! He was always a stout fellow. And he has a lot of lads that w No! said Merry. It's no good "getting under cover". That is just what people have been doing, and just what these ruffians like. They w "What?" said Pippin.
Raise the Shire! said Merry. Now! Wake up all our people! They hate all this, you can see: all of them except perhaps one or two rascal Sam, you can make a dash for Cotton's farm, if you like. He's the chief person round here, and the sturdiest. Come on! I am going to bl They rode back to the middle of the village. There Sam turned aside and galloped off down the lane that led south to Cotton's. He had n On, lad! On! he cried. We'll be going back soon.
Then he heard Merry change the note, and up went the Horn-cry of Buckland, shaking the air. Awake! Awake! Fear, Fire, Foes! Awake!
Fire, Foes! Awake!
Behind him Sam heard a hubbub of voices and a great din and slamming of doors. In front of him lights sprang out in the gloaming; dogs Nay! It's not one of them ruffians, Sam heard the farmer say. It's a hobbit by the size of it, but all dressed up queer. Hey! he cried. It's Sam, Sam Gamgee. I've come back.
Farmer Cotton came up close and stared at him in the twilight. Well! he exclaimed. The voice is right, and your face is no worse than i That I ain't! said Sam. Nor Mr. Frodo He's here and his friends. And that's the to-do. They're raising the Shire. We're going to clear Good, good! cried Farmer Cotton. So it's begun at last! I've been itching for trouble all this year, but folks wouldn't help. And I've What about Mrs. Cotton and Rosie? said Sam. It isn't safe yet for them to be left all alone.
My Nibs is with them. But you can go and help him, if you have a mind, said Farmer Cotton with a grin. Then he and his sons ran off tow Sam hurried to the house. By the large round door at the top of the steps from the wide yard stood Mrs. Cotton and Rosie, and Nibs in f It's me! shouted Sam as he trotted up. Sam Gamgee! So don't try prodding me, Nibs. Anyway, I've got a mail-shirt on me.
He jumped down from his pony and went up the steps. They stared at him in silence. Good evening, Mrs. Cotton! he said. Hello Rosie! Hooray, Sam! said Rosie. Where've you been I They said you were dead; but I've been expecting you since the Spring. You haven't hurried "Perhaps not," said Sam, abashed. But I'm hurrying now. We're setting about the ruffians, and I've got to get back to Mr. Frodo But I t

We're keeping nicely, thank you, said Mrs. Cotton. Or should be, if it weren't for these thieving ruffians.
Well, be off with you! said Rosie. If you've been looking after Mr. Frodo all this while, what d'you want to leave him for, as soon as This was too much for Sam. It needed a week's answer, or none. He turned away and mounted his pony. But as he started off, Rosie ran do I think you look fine, Sam, she said. Go on now! But take care of yourself, and come straight back as soon as you have settled the ruff When Sam got back he found the whole village roused. Already, apart from many younger lads, more than a hundred sturdy hobbits were ass Some of the village-folk had lit a large fire, just to enliven things, and also because it was one of the things forbidden by the Chief Sam found Frodo and his friends by the fire talking to old Tom Cotton, while an admiring crowd of Bywater folk stood round and stared. Well, what's the next move? said Farmer Cotton.
I cannot say, said Frodo, until I know more. How many of these ruffians are there?
That's hard to tell, said Cotton. They move about and come and go. There's sometimes fifty of them in their sheds up Hobbiton way; but Hobbiton's not their only place, is it? said Pippin.
No, more's the pity, said Cotton. There's a good few down south in Longbottom and by Sarn Ford, I hear; and some more lurking in the Wo Have they got any weapons? asked Merry.
Whips, knives, and clubs, enough for their dirty work: that's all they've shown so far, said Cotton. But I dare say they've got other g There you are, Frodo! said Merry. I knew we should have to fight. Well, they started the killing.
Not exactly, said Cotton. At least not the shooting. Tooks started that. You see our dad Mr. Peregrin, he's never had no truck with thi Good for the Tooks! cried Pippin. But someone is going to get in again, now. I am off to the Smials. Anyone coming with me to Tuckborou Pippin rode off with half a dozen lads on ponies. See you soon! he cried. It's only fourteen miles or so across the fields. I'll bring All the same, said Frodo to all those who stood near, I wish for no killing; not even of the ruffians, unless it must be done, to preve All right! said Merry. But we shall be having a visit from the Hobbiton gang any time now, I think. They won't come just to talk things Very good, said Frodo. You make the arrangements.
Just then some hobbits, who had been sent out towards Hobbiton, came running in. They're coming! they said. A score or more. But two ha To Waymeet, that'll be, said Cotton, to fetch more of the gang. Well, it's fifteen miles each way. We needn't trouble about them just y Merry hurried off to give orders. Farmer Cotton cleared the street, sending everyone indoors, except the older hobbits who had weapons The hobbits opened the barrier and stood aside. Thank you! the Men jeered. Now run home to bed before you're whipped. Then they marched No one paid any heed to their orders; but as the ruffians passed, they closed in quietly behind and followed them. When the Men reached Who are you, and what do you think you're doing? said the ruffian-leader.
Farmer Cotton looked at him slowly. I was just going to ask you that, he said. This isn't your country, and you're not wanted.
Well, you're wanted anyway, said the leader. We want you. Take him guys! Lockholes for him, and give him something to keep him quiet! The Men took one step forward and stopped short. There rose a roar of voices all round them, and suddenly they were aware that Farmer C Merry stepped forward. We have met before, he said to the leader, and I warned you not to come back here. I warn you again: you are sta The leader looked round. He was trapped. But he was not frightened, not now with a score of his fellows to back him. He knew too little But em lads! he cried. Let them have it!
With a long knife in his left hand and a club in the other he made a rush at the ring, trying to burst out back towards Hobbiton. He ai That was enough for the others. They gave in. Their weapons were taken from them, and they were roped together, and marched off to an e It seems almost too easy after all, doesn't it? said Cotton. I said we could master them. But we needed a call. You came back in the ni There's more to be done still, said Merry. If you're right in your reckoning, we haven't dealt with a tithe of them yet. But it's dark Why not now? said Sam. It's not much more than six o'clock. And I want to see my gaffer. D'you know what's come of him, Mr. Cotton?
He's not too well, and not too bad, Sam, said the farmer. They dug up Bagshot Row, and that was a sad blow to him. He's in one of them Thank'ee indeed, Mr. Cotton, and I'll never forget it, said Sam. But I want to see him. That Boss and that Sharkey, as they spoke of, t All right, Sam, said Cotton. Choose a lad or two, and go and fetch him to my house. You'll not need to go near the old Hobbiton village Sam went off. Merry arranged for look-outs round the village and guards at the barriers during the night. Then he and Frodo went off wi It all began with Pimple, as we call him, said Farmer Cotton; and it began as soon as you'd gone off, Mr. Frodo He'd funny ideas had Pi Of course he started with a lot of property in the Southfarthing which he had from his father; and it seems he'd been selling a lot of Then there was a bit of trouble, but not enough. Old Will the Mayor set off for Bag End to protest, but he never got there. The ruffian Who is this Sharkey? said Merry. I heard one of the ruffians speak of him.
The biggest ruffian of the lot, seemingly, answered Cotton. It was about last harvest, end o September maybe, that we first heard of hi Take Sandyman's mill now. Pimple knocked it down almost as soon as he came to Bag End. Then he brought in a lot of dirty-looking men to That's right! put in Young Tom Why, they even took Pimple's old ma, that Lobelia, and he was fond of her, if no one else was. Some of t
"Where are you a-going?" says she. "To Bag End," they say.
"What for?" she says.
"To put up some sheds for Sharkey," says they. "Who said you could?" says she.
"Sharkey," they say. "So get out o the road, old hagling!"
 "I'll give you Sharkey, you dirty thieving ruffians!" says she, and ups with her umbrella and goes for the leader. nearly twice her si Into the middle of this talk came Sam, bursting in with his gaffer. Old Gamgee did not look much older, but he was a little deafer.
Good evening. Mr. Baggins! he said. Glad indeed I am to see you safe back. But I've a bone to pick with you, in a manner o speaking, if I am very sorry, Mr. Gamgee, said Frodo. But now I've come back, I'll do my best to make amends.
Well, you can't say fairer than that, said the gaffer. Mr. Frodo Baggins is a real gentlehobbit, I always have said, whatever you may t Perfect satisfaction, Mr. Gamgee, said Frodo. Indeed, if you will believe it, he is now one of the most famous people in all the lands, It takes a lot o believing, said the gaffer, though I can see he's been mixing in strange company. What's come of his weskit? I don't h Farmer Cotton's household and all his guests were up early next morning. Nothing had been heard in the night, but more trouble would ce After breakfast a messenger from the Tookland rode in. He was in high spirits. The Thai has raised all our country, he said, and the ne The next news was less good. Merry, who had been out all night, came riding in about ten o'clock. There's a big band about four miles a Ah! This lot won't stay to talk, they'll kill, if they can, said Farmer Cotton. If Tooks don't come sooner, we'd best get behind cover The Tooks did come sooner. Before long they marched in, a hundred strong, from Tuckborough and the Green Hills with Pippin at their hea The ruffians came tramping along the East Road, and without halting turned up the Bywater Road, which ran for some way sloping up betwe Well, you have walked into a trap, said Merry. Your fellows from Hobbiton did the same, and one is dead and the rest are prisoners. Lay But the ruffians could not now be cowed so easily. A few of them obeyed, but were immediately set upon by their fellows. A score or mor They won't get far, said Pippin. All that country is alive with our hunters now.
Behind, the trapped Men in the lane, still about four score, tried to climb the barrier and the banks, and the hobbits were obliged to At last all was over. Nearly seventy of the ruffians lay dead on the field, and a dozen were prisoners. Nineteen hobbits were killed, a Frodo had been in the battle, but he had not drawn his sword, and his chief part had been to prevent the hobbits in their wrath at thei Yes indeed; the sooner the better, said Merry. And don't be too gentle! He is responsible for bringing in these ruffians, and for all t Farmer Cotton collected an escort of some two dozen sturdy hobbits. For it's only a guess that there are no ruffians left at Bag End, h It was one of the saddest hours in their lives. The great chimney rose up before them; and as they drew near the old village across the

As they crossed the bridge and looked up the Hill they gasped. Even Sam's vision in the Mirror had not prepared him for what they saw. They've cut it down! cried Sam. They've cut down the Party Tree! He pointed to where the tree was. had stood under which Bilbo had made A laugh puts an end to them. There was a surly hobbit lounging over the low wall of the mill-yard. He was grim-faced and black-handed. So I see, said Sam. No time for washing, but time for wall-propping. But see here, Master Sandyman, I've a score to pay in this village Ted Sandyman spat over the wall: Garn! he said. You can't touch me. I'm a friend of the Boss's. But he'll touch you all right, if I hav Don't waste any more words on the fool, Sam! said Frodo. I hope there are not many more hobbits that have become like this. It would be You are dirty and insolent, Sandyman, said Merry. And also very much out of your reckoning. We are just going up the Hill to remove you Ted gaped, for at that moment he first caught sight of the escort that at a sign from Merry now marched over the bridge. Dashing back i Save your breath! laughed Merry. I've been better. Then lifting up his silver horn he winded it, and its clear call rang over the Hill; At the top of the lane the party halted, and Frodo and his friends went on; and they came at last to the once beloved place. The garden Where is that miserable Lotho hiding? said Merry. They had searched every room and found no living thing save rats and mice. Shall we t This is worse than Mordor! said Sam. Much worse in a way. It comes home to you, as they say; because it is home, and you remember it be Yes, this is Mordor, said Frodo. Just one of his works. Saruman was doing his work all the time, even when he thought he was working fo Merry looked round in dismay and disgust. Let's get out! he said. If I had known all the mischief he had caused, I should have stuffed No doubt, no doubt! But you did not, and so I am able to welcome you home. There standing at the door was Saruman himself, looking well A sudden light broke on Frodo. Sharkey! he cried.
Saruman laughed. So you have heard the name, have you? All my people used to call me that in Isengard, I believe. A sign of affection, I did not, said Frodo. But I might have guessed. A little mischief in a mean way: Gandalf warned me that you were still capable of it. Quite capable, said Saruman, and more than a little. You made me laugh, you hobbit-lordlings, riding along with all those great people Saruman laughed again. Not he! When his tools have done their task he drops them. But you must go dangling after him, dawdling and talk Well, if that is what you find pleasure in, said Frodo, I pity you. It will be a pleasure of memory only, I fear. Go at once and never The hobbits of the villages had seen Saruman come out of one of the huts, and at once they came crowding up to the door of Bag End. Whe Don't let him go! Kill him! He's a villain and a murderer. Kill him!
Saruman looked round at their hostile faces and smiled. Kill him! he mocked. Kill him, if you think there are enough of you, my brave h The hobbits recoiled. But Frodo said: Do not believe him! He has lost all power, save his voice that can still daunt you and deceive yo Worm! Worm! Saruman called; and out of a nearby hut came Wormtongue, crawling, almost like a dog. To the road again, Worm! said Saruman Saruman turned to go, and Wormtongue shuffled after him. But even as Saruman passed close to Frodo a knife flashed in his hand, and he No, Sam! said Frodo. Do not kill him even now. For he has not hurt me. And in any case I do not wish him to be slain in this evil mood. Saruman rose to his feet, and stared at Frodo. There was a strange look in his eyes of mingled wonder and respect and hatred. You have He walked away, and the hobbits made a lane for him to pass; but their knuckles whitened as they gripped their weapons. Wormtongue hesi Wormtongue! called Frodo. You need not follow him. I know of no evil you have done to me. You can have rest and food here for a while, Wormtongue halted and looked back at him, half prepared to stay. Saruman turned. Not evil? he cackled. Oh no! Even when he sneaks out a Wormtongue cowered down and whimpered: No, no!
Then I will, said Saruman. Worm killed your Chief, poor little fellow, your nice little Boss. Didn't you, Worm? Stabbed him in his slee A look of wild hatred came into Wormtongue's red eyes. You told me to; you made me do it, he hissed.
Saruman laughed. You do what Sharkey says, always, don't you, Worm? Well, now he says: follow! He kicked Wormtongue in the face as he g To the dismay of those that stood by, about the body of Saruman a gray mist gathered, and rising slowly to a great height like smoke fr Frodo looked down at the body with pity and horror, for as he looked it seemed that long years of death were suddenly revealed in it, a And that's the end of that, said Sam. A nasty end, and I wish I needn't have seen it; but it's a good riddance.
And the very last end of the War, I hope, said Merry.
I hope so, said Frodo and sighed. The very last stroke. But to think that it should fall here, at the very door of Bag End! Among all m I shan't call it the end, until we've cleared up the mess, said Sam gloomily. And that'll take a lot of time and work.


The Grey Havens

The clearing up certainly needed a lot of work, but it took less time than Sam had feared. The day after the battle Frodo rode to Miche You would have done better to come with us after all, poor old Fredegar! said Pippin, as they carried him out too weak to walk.
He opened an eye and tried gallantly to smile. Who is this young giant with the loud voice? he whispered. Not little Pippin! What's you Then there was Lobelia. Poor thing, she looked very old and thin when they rescued her from a dark and narrow cell. She insisted on hob When the poor creature died next Spring - she was after all more than a hundred years old - Frodo was surprised and much moved: she had Old Will Whitfoot had been in the Lockholes longer than anyone, and though he had perhaps been treated less harshly than some, he neede Meanwhile the labor of repair went on peacefully, and Sam was kept very busy. Hobbits can work like bees when the mood and the need com One of the first things done in Hobbiton, before even the removal of the new mill, was the clearing of the Hill and Bag End, and the re It's an ill wind that blows nobody no good, as I always say. And All's well as ends Better!
There was some discussion of the name that the new row should be given. Battle Gardens was thought of, or Better Smials. But after a wh The trees were the worst loss and damage, for at Sharkey's bidding they had been cut down recklessly far and wide over the Shire; and S Then suddenly one day, for he had been too busy for weeks to give a thought to his adventures, he remembered the gift of Galadriel. He I wondered when you would think of it, said Frodo. Open it!
Inside it was filled with a gray dust, soft and fine, in the middle of which was a seed, like a small nut with a silver shale. What can Throw it in the air on a breezy day and let it do its work! said Pippin.
"On what?" said Sam.
Choose one spot as a nursery, and see what happens to the plants there, said Merry.
But I'm sure the Lady would not like me to keep it all for my own garden, now so many folk have suffered, said Sam.
Use all the wits and knowledge you have of your own, Sam, said Frodo, and then use the gift to help your work and improve it. And use i So Sam planted saplings in all the places where especially beautiful or beloved trees had been destroyed, and he put a grain of the pre Spring surpassed these wildest hopes. His trees began to sprout and grow, as if time was in a hurry and wished to make one year do for Altogether 1420 in the Shire was a marvelous year. Not only was there wonderful sunshine and delicious rain, in two times and in perfec In the Southfarthing the vines were laden, and the yield of leaf was astonishing; and everywhere there was so much corn that at Harvest Sam stayed at first at the Cottons with Frodo; but when the New Row was ready he went with the Gaffer. In addition to all his other lab It is gone for ever, he said, and now all is dark and empty.
But the fit passed, and when Sam got back on the twenty-fifth, Frodo had recovered, and he said nothing about himself. In the meantime When all was at last ready Frodo said: When are you going to move in and join me, Sam?
Sam looked a bit awkward.
There is no need to come yet, if you don't want to, said Frodo. But you know the Gaffer is close at hand, and he will be very well look It's not that, Mr. Frodo, said Sam, and he went very red.
Well, what is it?

It's Rosie, Rose Cotton, said Sam. It seems she didn't like my going abroad at all, poor lass; but as I had not spoken, she could not s I see, said Frodo: you want to get married, and yet you want to live with me in Bag End too? But my dear Sam, how easy! Get married as And so it was settled. Sam Gamgee married Rose Cotton in the Spring of 1420 (which was also famous for its weddings), and they came and Merry and Pippin lived together for some time at Crickhollow, and there was much coming and going between Buckland and Bag End. The two Frodo and Sam, however, went back to ordinary dress, except that when there was need they both wore long gray cloaks, finely woven and All things now went well, with hope always of becoming still better; and Sam was as busy and as full of delight as even a hobbit could One evening Sam came into the study and found his master looking very strange. He was very pale and his eyes seemed to see things far a What's the matter, Mr. Frodo? said Sam.
I am wounded, he answered, wounded; it will never really heal.
But then he got up, and the turn seemed to pass, and he was quite himself the next day. It was not until afterwards that Sam recalled t Time went on, and 1421 came in. Frodo was ill again in March, but with a great effort he concealed it, for Sam had other things to thin Well, Mr. Frodo, he said. I'm in a bit of a fix. Rose and I had settled to call him Frodo, with your leave; but it's not him, it's her. Well, Sam, said Frodo, what's wrong with the old customs? Choose a flower name like Rose. Half the maidchildren in the Shire are called I suppose you're right, Mr. Frodo, said Sam. I've heard some beautiful names on my travels, but I suppose they're a bit too grand for d Frodo thought for a moment. Well, Sam, what about Elanor, the sun-star, you remember the little golden flower in the grass of Lothlórie You're right again, Mr. Frodo! said Sam delighted. That's what I wanted.
Little Elanor was nearly six months old, and 1421 had passed to its autumn, when Frodo called Sam into the study.
It will be Bilbo's Birthday on Thursday, Sam, he said. And he will pass the Old Took. He will be a hundred and thirty-one! So he will! said Sam. He's a marvel!
Well, Sam, said Frodo. I want you to see Rose and find out if she can spare you, so that you and I can go off together. You can't go fa Well, not very well, Mr. Frodo
Of course not. But never mind. You can see me on my way. Tell Rose that you won't be away very long, not more than a fortnight; and you I wish I could go all the way with you to Rivendell, Mr. Frodo, and see Mr. Bilbo, said Sam. And yet the only place I really want to be Poor Sam! It will feel like that, I am afraid, said Frodo. But you will be healed. You were meant to be solid and whole, and you will b My Diary. My Unexpected Journey. There and Back Again. And What Happened After.
Adventures of Five Hobbits. The Tale of the Great Ring, compiled by Bilbo Baggins from his own observations and the accounts of his fri Here Bilbo's hand ended and Frodo had written:
The Downfall of the
Lord of the Rings and the
Return of the King
(as seen by the Little People; being the memoirs of Bilbo and Frodo of the Shire, supplemented by the accounts of their friends and the Together with extracts from Books of Lore translated by Bilbo in Rivendell.
Why, you have nearly finished it, Mr. Frodo! Sam exclaimed. Well, you have kept at it, I must say. I have quite finished, Sam, said Frodo. The last pages are for you.
On September the twenty-first they set out together, Frodo on the pony that had borne him all the way from Minas Tirith, and was now ca They took the Stock Road over the hills and went towards the Woody End, and they let their ponies walk at their leisure. They camped in If that isn't the very tree you hid behind when the Black Rider first showed up, Mr. Frodo! said Sam pointing to the left. It seems lik It was evening, and the stars were glimmering in the eastern sky as they passed the ruined oak and turned and went on down the hill bet Still round the corner there may wait
A new road or a secret gate;
And though I oft have passed them by, A day will come at last when I
Shall take the hidden paths that run West of the Moon, East of the Sun.
And as if in answer, from down below, coming up the road out of the valley, voices sang:
Oh! Elbereth Gilthoniel! silivren penna miriel
Oh, menel, aglar, Elenath, Gilthoniel, O Elbereth!

We still remember, we who dwell
In this far land beneath the trees The starlight on the Western Seas.
Frodo and Sam halted and sat silent in the soft shadows, until they saw a shimmer as the travelers came towards them.
There was Gildor and many fair Elven folk; and there to Sam's wonder rode Elrond and Galadriel. Elrond wore a mantle of gray and had a Elrond greeted them gravely and graciously, and Galadriel smiled upon them. Well, Master Samwise, she said. I hear and see that you hav Then Bilbo woke up and opened his eyes. Hello, Frodo! he said. Well, I have passed the Old Took today! So that's settled. And now I thi Yes, I am coming, said Frodo. The Ring-bearers should go together.
Where are you going, Master? cried Sam, though at last he understood what was happening. To the Havens, Sam, said Frodo.
And I can't come.
No, Sam. Not yet anyway, not further than the Havens. Although you too were a Ring-bearer, if only for a little while. Your time may co But, said Sam, and tears started in his eyes, I thought you were going to enjoy the Shire, too. for years and years, after all you have So I thought too, once. But I have been too deeply hurt, Sam. I tried to save the Shire, and it has been saved, but not for me. It must Come now, ride with me!
Then Elrond and Galadriel rode on; for the Third Age was over, and the Days of the Rings were passed, and an end was come of the story Though they rode through the midst of the Shire all the evening and all the night, none saw them pass, save the wild creatures; or here As they came to the gates Círdan the Shipwright came forth to greet them. Very tall he was, and his beard was long, and he was gray and Then Círdan led them to the Havens, and there was a white ship lying, and upon the quay beside a great gray horse stood a figure robed But Sam was now sorrowful at heart, and it seemed to him that if the parting would be bitter, more grievous still would be the long roa You tried to give us the slip once before and failed, Frodo. he said. This time you have nearly succeeded, but you have failed again. I Yes, said Gandalf; for it will be better to ride back three together than one alone. Well, here at last, dear friends, on the shores of Then Frodo kissed Merry and Pippin, and last of all Sam, and went aboard; and the sails were drawn up, and the wind blew, and slowly th But to Sam the evening deepened to darkness as he stood at the Haven; and as he looked at the gray sea he saw only a shadow on the wate At last the three companions turned away, and never again looking back they rode slowly homewards; and they spoke no word to one anothe

At last they rode over the downs and took the East Road, and then Merry and Pippin rode on to Buckland; and already they were singing a He drew a deep breath. Well, I'm back, he said.




