

Preface 


The World Book Encyclopedia, a publication of World Book, Inc., was first 
published in 1917 as an 8-volume set. The encyclopedia has been expanded 
many times through the years and now has 22 volumes. Throughout its pub- 
lishing history, World Book has sought new and better ways to serve its read- 
ers. For a brief summary of World Book's development, see the article 
Encyclopedia (History). 


Aims and objectives 


The editorial statt of }\Vor/d Book presents information from the vast reser- 
voir of knowledge in the most accessible and usable form. The editors design 
World Book articles especially to meet the reference and study needs of stu- 
dents in elementary school, junior high school, and high school. World Book 
also serves as a general family reference tool. Librarians, teachers, and the 
general public likewise turn to World Book to satisfy their everyday reference 
needs. 


Authority 


At the heart of World Book's editorial process is its Advisory Board, along 
with its other editorial advisers and consultants. These outstanding scholars 
and specialists include experts in such major academic fields as school ad- 
ministration, area studies, biological sciences, humanities, library science and 
services, physical sciences, and social sciences, as well as specialists in read- 
ability and curriculum development These advisers and consultants are in- 
volved in the planning, production, and ongoing evaluation of }Vorld Book 

World Book engages more than 3,800 scholars and experts as contributors, 
authenticators, reviewers, and consultants. The name of the contributor or re- 
viewer appears at the end of Wor/d Book articles. World Book advisers, con- 
sultants, and contributors are listed in the front of the “A” volume. The publish- 
ers of World Book maintain a large permanent staff of editors, artists, 
researchers, indexers, librarians, and various support personnel. 


Selection of contents 


An ongoing program of research and evaluation provides the editors with 
the data needed to help make decisions on the encyclopedias contents. Two 
aspects of the program are particularly noteworthy: 

The Classroom Research Project provides continuous testing of /Vorld 
Book in about 200 classrooms throughout the United States and Canada. Stu- 
dents use the latest edition of World Book and fill out cards to show what 
they looked up. More than 25,000 cards are analyzed annually, providing the 
editors with current information on the actual patterns of classroom use by 
students. 

Jn addition to the Classroom Research Project, curriculum studies supply 
the editors with information about the topics studied in typical school systems 
for all grades from kindergarten through high school. An ongoing analysis of 
curriculum guides, national and state standards, and textbooks provides infor- 
mation on current, as well as new and emerging, school topics. 

Other research helps shape distinctive features of }t/orld Book For exam- 
ple, a unique research project uncovered data on how children read and in- 
terpret maps. The research findings resulted in principles of design that guide 
the development of !Vor/d Book maps. Many special research studies have 
been carried out under the supervision of members of the World Book Advi- 
sory Board. 


Presentation of information 


World Book is organized so that readers may quickly find the information 
they are seeking. This is achieved through a single alphabetical arrangement 
of articles and entry cross-references, a carefully designed page and article 
format, and a comprehensive, single-volume index 





Preface 


World Book uses a modified unit-letter arrangement of volumes. All entries 
that begin with the letter “A” are found in Volume A and so on throughout 
most of the set. In two instances, a single volume is not large enough to ac- 
commodate all the articles that start with the same letter, and the entries are 
divided between two volumes. 

Most reference questions are answered by referring to Volumes 1 through 
21, where the reader finds either an article or a cross-reference to such an ar- 
ticle. If there is no article or cross-reference, the reader can turn to Volume 
22, the Research Guide, Index. Thus, World Book provides the reader with 
both an extensive system of alphabetically arranged articles and cross- 
references, and a comprehensive, in-depth index. 

All topics are arranged alphabetically, using the word-by-word system. For 
example, Arab League precedes Arabesque, and New Mexico appears be- 
fore Newark. Thousands of cross-references form part of this alphabetical 
arrangement. They guide the reader to a subject or to some information that 
may be a part of another article, or that may appear as an alternate title. See 
and See a/so cross-references are included within many articles. A list of Re- 
lated articles at the end of many World Book articles guides the reader to ad- 
ditional information in the encyclopedia. 

World Book's page format is designed for maximum usefulness. Page num- 
bers and guide words at the top of a page provide rapid access to subjects. 
Within articles, topics and subtopics stand out in boldface center headings 
and boldface side headings. 

World Book's fivefold plan for major articles brings together five basic ele- 
ments: (1) a complete story, (2) visual aids, (3) related articles, (4) an outline, and 
(5) questions. 

1. The complete story gives readers a solid foundation of information about 
a subject. 

2. A wide variety of visual aids clarifies meaning and reinforces learning. 
Photographs, drawings, paintings, maps, diagrams, charts, and graphs make 
information come alive. 

3. A list of related World Book articles encourages readers to broaden their 
study of a subject. 

4. An outline gives readers an overall view of the article and shows the in- 
terrelationship of its units. 

5. Questions help readers review important information in the article. They 
are designed to reinforce understanding of the major areas of a topic. 


Readability 


World Book editors present information in a clear, direct style that meets 
the most exacting standards of readability. The curriculum analysis and class- 
oom research program help the editors design articles to be understandable 
at the age levels where they are most commonly used. Vocabulary is geared 
to the proper age group. For example, the Mouse article was written espe- 
cially for younger children, and Cell was aimed at advanced readers. Many 
long articles are designed to present simpler concepts and reading levels at 
the beginning. These articles build toward more sophisticated concepts and 
reading levels toward the end. The Leaf article is an excellent example of this 
simple-to-more-complex approach. . 

In developing an article, the editor checks its vocabulary against a list of 
about 44,000 words created especially for World Book by its readability con- 
sultants. . 

World Book editors use words that can be understood at the grade level of 
the article, but they use technical terms where needed. Such words are de- 
fined immediately in the article, thus ensuring understanding and helping vo- 
cabulary development !n the Moon article, for example, the section on The 
movements of the moon uses the words elliptical perigee, apogee, synodic 
month, and sidereal month. These words are pri nted in italics. and their 


VI Preface 


_—— = = 


meanings are given in parentheses or defined within the context of the sen- 
tence in which they appear. Similar techniques are used throughout the set to | 
define difficult words and clarify meanings. 

Most major articles have undergone thorough readability analyses by 
World Book's readability consultants and editors. Some of these articles have 
also been tested for comprehension by students at appropriate grade levels. 


Illustrations and maps 


illustrations are combined with text in World Book to achieve the most ef- 
fective communication of information. An illustration is placed close to the 
portion of subject matter that it is designed to clarify, supplement, or comple- 
ment. World Book has more than 27,500 illustrations, over 24,000 in color. 
Many World Book illustrations were created exclusively for the encyclopedia 
by specially commissioned illustrators and photographers. For example, the 
color photographs in the Mineral article were obtained by a specially as- 
signed photographer working with museum experts. Specialists in depicting 
nature subjects have illustrated such articles as Animal, Bird, Flower, Insect, 
Spider, and Tree. 

World Book's treatment of the fine arts is exemplified by the Painting arti- 
cle. This 64-page article features reproductions of about 100 paintings from 
the world’s leading museums and private collections. In addition, numerous 
biographies of noted artists are illustrated with color reproductions of their 
work. 

In illustrating historical articles, World Book uses period art where appro- 
priate. For example, the article United States, History of the, includes more 
than 20 pieces of art by such well-known artists as George Caleb Bingham, 
Currier and Ives, and Benjamin West. Illustrated time lines in such articles as 
Classical music and Medicine help place people and events in historical 
perspective. 

Among the illustrative features of World Book is a Trans-Vision® unit that 
uses transparent color overlays to clarify an important subject. This visual 
technique is used in the Human body article to show both the details and the 


Fine art reproduction Technical diagram 
lusts 
Haw o Gas Turbine th Go gos burdine ipstem compressed ane 1 forced into © combustion chamber ond maed = ef 









ond sfononary blodes direc! the goves through the turbene ond increase thew ipeed Part > h 


System Works spark rgmites the minture and hot goses rush through the turbine spmameg the wheels Wh Od Hight 
b 
bine + power 3 yied to run the ow compressor ‘ 


Commissioned artwork 





Commissioned photography 





) 
) 
| 
) 








Preface VII 


relationships of the human body's major systems. 

World Book has more than 2,200 maps, all of them in color. The publisher 
conducts research that analyzes type size and placement, color, symboliza- 
tion, captioning, scale, and other elements involved in map design. Design 
principles based on such research are incorporated in World Book maps. Ex- 
amples of maps that use these principles are the thematic maps in articles on 
the states, provinces, major countries, and continents. These maps convey ba- 
sic information on such topics as climate, economy, population distribution, 
and historical development. 


Research aids 


Many research aids have been built into World Book These aids facilitate 
the search for information within World Book and assist the reader in finding 
information beyond the encyclopedia. These research aids appear both in the 
alphabetical volumes and in Volume 22, the Research Guide/Index. 

Listings of Related articles at the end of many World Book articles lead the 
reader to additional, related information on the subject. For example, after 
reading the section The Era of Expansion (1831-1870)in the American litera- 
ture article, a reader might want to learn more about Emily Dickinson, Walt 
Whitman, and other poets of the period. The Related articles section at the 
end of the American literature article includes an alphabetical listing of arti- 
cles on the writers of this period. 

The Additional resources heading that follows more than 1,500 articles in 
World Book \eads the user to further reading on the subject. These lists of 
books have been carefully selected—often with the assistance of the experts 
who wrote or reviewed the articles—to represent the most current, balanced 
scholarship. In some instances, the books have been grouped on two levels, 
with Level | books being easier to use than Level I! books. 

An instructional section called A Student Guide to Better Writing, Speaking, 
and Research Skills in Volume 22 gives students practical, easy-to-understand 
guidance in carrying out everyday school assignments. It includes writing tips 
and advice on preparing different types of written reports; advice on prepar- 













Illustrated time line Graphs 
= —_ al 
° ° . ° ° ° = — io Pholerel tprtem and 
Highlights in the history of classical music | Mevwiar Beilom 
The Sumerians played music Western Eyropean come a r\ -— > tndoatey & 
an harplike instruments ta create polyphonic me (s ] Waleng FA eg 3 0 19m 
ii “4 
©) About 3000 8c C) About 500 8c ©) ao 400s © Al iv Mawr Th egn Mt age Senwes 58 
ce a ee es L 4 
The Greeks began to develop Pl , ae 
systems af music theory m fia GRD) merc ee ek Howe 


eae | ame ee tere et een ren te rT 

be 7 
js TG re me tre ete tee pn ety | 
{FF YTE fa ___  hemhtaieathaeeiatelianaatninaaianal : 
an 





Cavemen \ la mtes 


The cithara was an inporant stringed Guido d Arezzo, /eft a) 
wisinaneat of ancient Greece The Greeks developed a revoluiona 
belreved that music played to the chara tation and method af sig 
had a calling elect on listeners AD 1001s 


WAM D ae 
tr summer Mewros chimete s warm mm the central reqaons of 
the country and hot along the coast jul) lemperatures on Aten 
10 ON range from 8&3 w PT F12 wm dt C 


Transparent overlays Thematic map 


Vill 


Preface 


ing and delivering an oral report; and detailed information on using the library 
and tapping other reference sources. 


Revision program 

An encyclopedia must be up to date if it is to serve the best interests of its 
users. A revised edition of World Book is published each year. Each edition re- 
flects up-to-date information and the latest changes in educational viewpoints. 
Every subject area is under continuing surveillance. The annual revision pro- 
gram is never confined to a single area or to certain volumes. Thousands of 
pages are revised or updated each year. 

To keep World Book owners abreast of world events, 7he World Book Year 
Book, an annual supplement, is published each January. The version available 
to libraries and schools is called World Book's Year in Review. Dated for the 
year of issue, the supplement reviews the events of the previous year. It in- 
cludes special articles on a broad spectrum of topics, and it reports major 
news developments, alphabetically listed, to update World Book It also pub- 
lishes a selection of new or revised major articles from the current edition of 
World Book A three-year Cumulative index provides ready access to informa- 
tion in the current and previous two editions of 7he Year Book (Year in 
Review!) 


Physical format 


The high goals of World Book's editorial processes also characterize its 
manufacturing processes. World Book is printed on modern web offset press- 
es, custom-built for the encyclopedia. World Book's presses allow the use of 
color throughout the set. The paper used in World Book is especially manu- 
factured to achieve the best results from color printing. 

The text type used in /VWorld Book—World Book Modern—was created ex- 
Clusively for World Book by Hermann Zapf, an internationally renowned type 
designer. His specifications for the text type have been incorporated into a 
page format that facilitates readability and the search for information. 

World Book's attractive and practical binding materials were selected for 
their durability, dirt resistance, and high scuff resistance. 

Tests at every stage of production during the printing and binding process- 
es are conducted at the press facilities and in World Book's Product Produc- 
tion Department. 


Electronic versions 


The content of The World Book Encyclopedia is also available in online 
versions on a subscription basis. In addition, World Book is available on CD- 
ROM (Compact Disc Read-Only Memory). 


For more information, 

Call: 
1-800-967-5325 

write to: 
World Book Publishing 
233 N. Michigan Avenue 
Chicago, IL 60601 

visit World Books Web site at: 


www.worldbook.com 


Related publications 


Other publications of World Book, Inc., include The World Book Student 
Discovery Encyclopedia, Childcraft—The How and Why Library, The World 
Book Dictionary, The World Book Encyclopedia of Science, Young Scientist, 
The World Book Encyclopedia of People and Places, The World Book Year 
Book, Science Year, and Childeraft Annual. 


The editors 














How to use World Book 


World Book is a tool for learning—a general encyclopedia that tells about 
people, places, things, events, and ideas. It provides accurate information 
that is easy to understand and easy to find. 

You may come to your encyclopedia for ihe answer to a particular ques- 
tion, such as “How high is a badminton net?” or “What is the population of 
Haiti?’ Or you may seek general information for a school assignment. Parents 
and young people, when they plan together for the future, often come to 
World Book to find out about the possibilities in various careers. And, of 
course, many people like simply to explore World Book, letting one topic 
lead them to another. Browsing or skimming through the encyclopedia is an 
enjoyable way to pick up interesting information on many subjects. 

All articles, generally called entries in World Book, are arranged alphabet- 
ically, volume by volume and subject by subject. Included in this alphabeti- 
cal arrangement are also thousands of entry cross-references. Cross-refer- 
ences are explained in detail later in this section. 

All entries that begin with the letter “A” are found in Volume A, everything 
that starts with “B’ is in Volume B, and so on throughout most of the set. In 
some cases, entries that start with two or more consecutive letters of the al- 
phabet are combined in one volume. Or, a single volume may not be large 
enough to hold all the articles that start with the same letter. In such cases, 
entries starting with the same letter are divided between two volumes. For 
example, World Book articles that begin with the letter “C’ are contained in 
two volumes—C to Ch and Ci to Cz. 

In most instances, World Books alphabetical arrangement of articles and 
cross-references will enable you to find the information you are seeking. 
However, if you do not find the information, turn to Volume 22, the Research 
Guide/Index. Its more than 150,000 index entries provide access to the 
wealth of information in World Book. 

Volume 22 also includes an instructional section titled A Student Guide to 
Better Writing, Speaking, and Research Skills. This feature has been de- 
signed to help students assigned a written or oral report. 

For information on using the index, see Volume 22, the Research 
Guide/Index. 


The word-by-word arrangement 


The alphabetical system used in World Book is the same system used in 
arranging a telephone directory and the card catalogs of books in most li- 
braries. This word-by-word arrangement puts entries that have titles begin- 
ning with a short word ahead of titles that have the short word as the first let- 
ters of a longer word. For example, you will find Ant bear and Ant lion 
ahead of Antabuse and Antarctic. Similarly, all place names starting with 
New are together, and they are followed by names that have New as their 
first letters. New Jersey comes before New Mexico, which precedes New 
York. Following them are such entries as Newark and Newfoundland. 

Exceptions to this rule are certain foreign proper names and English 
names of foreign origin that include a preposition or an article. For example, 
De Gaulle is alphabetized as if it were one word because De is a preposi- 
tion. Likewise, El Dorado is alphabetized as one word because El is an arti- 
cle. Biographies of people whose names begin with Mac, such as MacDon- 
ald, are listed alphabetically under Mac. Names that begin with Mc, such as 
McKinley, are listed alphabetically under Mc, following entries beginning 
Ma and Mb. 


Writing, 
Speaking, 
and 
Research 
Skills 





~~ = 


Assigned a written or 
oral report? Turn to A 
Student Guide to Better 
Writing, Speaking, and 
Research Skills in Volume 
22 for advice on how to 
go about it. 


X How to use World Book 


_ Guide words 

At the top of most pages is a 
guide word The purpose of the 
guide word is to help you locate 
quickly the entry you are seeking. 
On a left-hand page, the quide 
word (or words) may be the title 
of the first entry that appears in 
the first column of that page. Or, 
the quide word may be the title 
of an article that is continued 
from a preceding page, if the 
continuation takes up the whole 
first column. On a right-hand 
page, the guide word is the title 
of the last article on that page. 


Let us say your question is: 
“What is a labor movement?” 
First, select the Aev word—the 
most important word—in the 
question: ‘Labor.’ In most cases, 
this word will be the same as the 
entry in World Book So, look for 
Labor in Volume L Start leafing 
through Volume L , noting the 
guide words on the tops of the 


pages. 


Leaf forward until you see 
guide words that begin with 
“Lab,” such as Labor, Depart- 
ment of. If you come upon such 
guide words as Labrador or 
Labyrinth, you know you must 
go back to find the Labor move- 
ment article in its alphabetical 
place. Finding an entry in World 
Book is very much like finding a 
word in a dictionary. 


Entry cross-references 
Thousands of cross-references 
are important aids to finding in- 
formation in World Book There 
are several types of cross-refer- 
ences. The principal type is the 
entry cross-reference. These 
cross-references appear in heavy 
type—the same as article titles— 
and are included in World Books 
alphabetical arrangement. 


Some entry cross-references 
provide you with the titles of top- 
ics that can be found in the set 
under other names. For example, 
in Volume B you will find the en- 
try Benares. See Varanasi. That 
entry directs you to the Varanasi 
article because the city of 
Benares is also known as 
Varanasi. 


Other entry cross-references 
tell you in what section of an arti- 
cle to find current information. If 
you want information about belu- 
gas, you look up that entry in its 
proper alphabetical place in Vol- 
ume B. You will find the entry 
cross-reference: Beluga. See 
Whale (Belugas and narwhals|. 
Then you would turn to the 
Whale article and leaf through it 
until you come to the section en 
titled Belugas and narwhals. 


4 Labor movement ~— 


Labor movement is a term that refers to the efforts of 
workers as a group to improve their economic position. 
The movement cnnsists chiefly of anempts hy labor 


unions to promote the welfare of wage eamers. But politi: 
cal parties and other groups have also played a part in the 
labor movement 

Before the development of labor unions, individual la- 
borers had almost no voice in determining their wages. 
hours. or wnrking conditions. There was a plentiful sup- 


246 Beluga — 


Beluga. See Whale Belugas and narwhals). 

Bemba is a term used to descnbe the language and 
culture of a large ethnic group in Central Africa. The 
Bemba language and culture are both called /cibemba. 
The name for the people who belong to this ethnic 
group is Ababemba. The traditional termtory of the Be- 
mba people, in northern Zambia, is called Ulubemba 

The Bemba language belongs to the Bantu family, 
which includes hundreds of other Afncan languages. 
such as Swahili and Zulu. Bemba is the most widely 
spoken language in Zambia. About 4 million people 
speak Bemba or related dialects as their first language. 
Many other people speak it as a second or third lan 
guage. 

Most Bemba people in rural areas are farmers. They 
grow Cassava, maize, millet, peanuts, sweet potatoes, 
and other crops. Fishing and occasional hunting add to 
their diet. In cities, Bemba people work in a variety of 
professions. Bemba families are matniineal (related 
through the female line), Many Bemba families live as a 
large extended family, in which parents, children, 
grandparents, and other relatives share a home. The ex 
tended family plays a major role in peoples lives, 
providing security and help with farm and household 
chores, 

The Bemba people were once part of the ancient 
Luba Empire in what is now Congo (Kinshasa). They mi- 
grated to northern Zambia in the mid-1600 s. The Bem 
ba Chittmukulu \paramount chief) is the traditional ruler 
within Bemba territory. Today, the Chitimukulu also has 
a strong advisory role within the Zambian national gov- 
ermment Debra Sprtulmk and Alexander Raymond Makasa Kasonde 


See also Bantu; Luba; Zambia. 


Bemelmans, 8£HM uh! muhnz. Ludwig |1898-1962), 
was an Amencan author and artist He became best 
known for his children's books, especially six picture 
books about a young girl in Pans named Madeline. Be 
melmans won the 1954 Caldecott Medal for his charm- 
ing and colorful illustrations for Madeline s Rescue 
(1953). He began the series with Madeline (1939) 

Bemelmans was born in a section of the Tyrol prov- 
ince of Austria now part of Italy, and moved to the 
United States in 1914. He became a US. citizen in 1918. 
Bemelmans also wrote stones and novels for adults. His 
nonfiction for adults includes a humorous autobio- 
graphical account of his expenences in the U.S. Army, 
My War with the United States (1937). A selection of his 
writings was published in 1985, after his death, as Jeli 
Them It Was Wondertul Wil P MAay 
Ben Bella, Ahmed (1919 | was the first president 
of the Republic of Algeria. He helped lead the revolt 
that freed Algena from French mule. He served as prest 
dent from 1963 to 1965, when he was overthrown by 
the army commander Houari Boumedienne. Ben Bella 
was then held prisoner by the Algenan government un- 
til 1980, following Boumedienne s death in 1978. 

Ben Bella was born in Marnia (now Maghnia, Alge 
nia. He served in the French Anny during World War Il 
1939-1945). He later became a leader in the Algerian tr 
dependence movement. In 1949, he led a raid on the 
Oran post office and stole more than 3 million francs to 
help finance the movement The French jailed him, but 
he escaped. In 1954, Ben Bella helped found the Alge 
nan National Liberation Front !FLN). The French recap- 
tured him in 1956. They released him in March 1962 In 


try The union sends men and wnmen called organizers to 
persuade workers to join. 

Most uninns insist on being the sole representative of 
a particular group of employees. They do not want to 
share the pnvilege of representing the workers with any 
other group. This practice is called the principle of exclu- 
sive jurisdiction. The National Labor Relations Board con- 
ducts secret-ballot elections at firms to determine which 
union workers want, if any. 





July, France gave Algena its independence. Ben Bella 
then took control of the country. He was elected presi 
dent in 1963. Kenneth | Perkins 

See also Algeria (Independence). 
Ben-Gurion, behn GOO rh uhn, David (1886-1973), 
served as Israel's first ppme minister after it became in- 
dependent in 1948. He served as prime minister and 
minister of defense from 1948 to 1953 and from 1955 to 
1963. 

Dunng the Suez cnsis of 1956, Ben-Gurion ordered 
the Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip and Sinai Peninsu- 
la. Later, Israeli forces withdrew at the request of the 
United Nations. 

Ben-Gunon was born David Green in Plonsk, Russia 
inow in Poland). He settled in Palestine in 1906. By 1919, 
he was a Zionist leader, working for creation of a Jew 


ish state in Palestine (see Zionism). In 1930, he founded ~~ 


the Mapai (Israel Workers Party). He was a secretary- 
general of the Histadrut (General Federation of Labori 
from 1927 to 1935. 

As chairman of the Executive of the Jewish Agency 
for Palestine from 1935 to 1948, Ben-Gurion directed all 
Jewish affairs in the country. His activities ranged from 
land development and settlement of immigrants to se- 
cret activities against Arabs and the British. Ben-Gunon 
retired in 1963. Elhs Rrvhin 

See also Israel (History), 





¥ 


A Ludwig Bemelmans drawing from his book Madeline s Rescue 
the 1954 Caldecon Medal winner shows Madeline and 11 other Inte 
girts taking thetr daily walk in Pans with their teacher 








@ Cross-references within 

the text 

In addition to the entry cross- 
references, World Book pro- 
vides many cross-references 
within the text of articles and at 
the end of articles. These “see” 
and “see also’ cross-references 
direct you to particular maps, 
charts, pictures, or articles and 
sections of articles for additional 
information on material that you 
have just read. Good examples 
of this kind of cross-reference 
are “see Zionism’ found in the 
Ben-Gurion, David article and 
the See also cross-reference at 
the end of the Ben Bella, 
Ahmed article. 


@ Article headings 

We have told you about find- 
ing articles in World Book. Now, 
look at some of the aids that 
help you find information 
quickly within most of the arti- 
cles. Turn to the Tree article. 
You will notice this long article 
is divided into sections, each 
with its own Aead or heading— 
words in large type that tell you 
what information will be found 
in the section—for example: 


How a tree grows 


Every section has been di- 
vided into subsections, each 
with a subhead or subheading 
in heavy bpe that pinpoints par- 
ticular kinds of information. For 
example, under the heading 
How a tree grows, you will find 
these subheads: How seeds 
sprout into trees; How leaves 
make plant food; How trees 
grow taller; and How trunks 
and branches grow thicker. All 
of these heads and subheads 
lead you to the particular kinds 
of information you might be 
seeking if you did not wish to 
read the entire Tree article. 


Note also that the color dia- 
grams in the article have special 
headings that serve a similar 
purpose, for example: How a 
tree reveals its history. Many 
medium-length and short arti- 
cles in World Book are also di- 
vided into sections that have 
heads and subheads, but of 
course some articles are so 
short that they do not require 
separate sections. 


m Captions 

The illustrations in World 
Book all have captions— special 
text which usually starts with 
heavy type that quickly identifies 
the subject. Captions give infor- 
mation that clarifies or adds to 
the information given in the arti- 
cle. A caption will be found 
close to an illustration. 


@ How a tree reveals its history 


@ Wider rings on the logs lower side 





418 Tree g@ 


Most trees begin life as a seed The young tree that 
develops from this seed ts called a seed/ing After a tree 
reaches a height of 6 feet 11.8 meters) or more and tts 
trunk becomes 1 to 2 inches 12.5 to 5 centimeters) thick, 
itts called a sapling Many trees reach a height of more 
than 100 feet 130 meters!. Some old trees have trunks 
more than 10 feet (3 meters! in diameter 

Trees need great amounts of water. A large apple tree 
in full leaf may absorb 95 gallons (360 liters} from the 
soil daily. Most of the water goes to the leaves. Ona 
sunny summer day, some trees move water up through 
their trunks at the rate of 3 feet (91 centimeters) per min- 
ute. A tree's wood 1s about half water 
@ How seeds sprout into trees. A seed contains parts 
that develop into the trunk and roots of a Iree. It also has 
one or more cotyledons and a supply of plant food. 
After a seed has left the parent tree, it rests for a while 
on the ground. Water, air, and sunshine help the seed 
germinate (begin to grow). The part of the seed that de- 
velops into the trunk points upward toward the sunlight. 
As the seed absorbs water, the root part swells and 
bursts through the seed’s shell. As the root grows, il 
pushes down into the soil. The food stored in the seed 
nourishes the tree. As the root begins to soak up water 
from the soil, the trunk begins to develop leaves. 
WHow leaves make plant food. As a leaf develops. it 
gets sap from the roots. Il also absorbs carbon dioxide 
from the air. The leaf uses the energy of sunlight to 
change the sap and carbon dioxide into sugar, a process 
called photosynthesis. The sugar provides food for the 
trunk, branches, and roots. During photosynthesis, the 
leaves also produce oxygen and release it into the at- 
mosphere. See Leaf (How a leaf makes food). & 

§ How trees grow taller. Trees grow taller only at the 
tips of their trunk and branches. Each year, the tips of 


Most trees in temperale regions 
grow a layer of wood each year. After 
such a tree has been cut down. the 
layers can be seen as rings in the 
trunk. These annual rings reveal the 
tree s lite story. The pine log in this 
drawing has 72 annual rings, showing 
that the tree lived tor 72 years 


Narrow center rings indicate that 
other trees shaded the young tree, 
depnving il of moisture and sunlight 


after the 30th year show that the tree 
was slighily bent in this direction The 
tree then began to grow more wood 
on this side than on the other to keep 
trom talting Most rings after the 38th 
year are wider than the center mngs. 
This indicates that many surrounding 
trees had been removed. giving the 
tree more moisture and sunlight. Dit: 
ferences sn the width of nngs after 
the 38h ring were caused mainly by 
varying amounts of rainfall from year 
to year. 









How to use World Book XI 


B® Swimming 1043 


ject, you can throw a life preserver, a board, or any 
other object that will float and support the swimmer 


@ Swimming kicks and strokes 


Swinniers move thetr legs. feet, arms, and hands in 
certain ways to propel themselves through the water 
easily and quickly. The movements of the legs and leet 
are called kicks These movements combined with 
movements of the arms and hands are called strokes 
The basic kicks. Swimmers use four types of kicks 





RB How a tree grows 


the trunk and of each branch develop a bud The bud 
contains a tiny leafy green stem called a shoot The bud 
is wrapped tn a protective covering of bud scales After 
a period of rest. the buds swell and open. The shoots 
that were inside the buds begin tn grow and so make 
the trunk and branches taller. Another type of bud 
grows on the sides of the trunk and branches. These 
buds contain a shoot that develops into a leaf. bearing 
twig after the bud opens As a twig grows larger, it be- 
comes another branch of the tree. Some tree buds de- 
velop into flowers. Stull others develop into twigs thal 
bear both leaves and flowers. In warm climates, trees 
produce buds frequently during the year or continue to 
grow without forming buds In colder climates. trees 
produce buds only tn the summer. These buds rest in 
winter and open after warm weather arrives in spring 
Trees without branches—cycads, most palms, and 
tree ferns— grow somewhat differently For example. a 
young palm tree does not grow taller for a number ol 
years. Its short trunk thickens and produces more and 
larger leaves each year After the trunk and crown reach 
adult size, the tree begins to grow taller The trunk stays 
about the same thickness for the rest of the tree's life 
® How trunks and branches grow thicker. The trunk 
and branches of a broadleaf or needleleaf tree grow 
thicker as long as the tree lives. The cambium tissue just 
underneath the inner bark causes this thickening It uses 
the sugar produced by the leaves to make new plant tis- 
sue. On its outside, the cambium makes new phloem, or 
inner bark, and on its inside, new xylem, or wood. 
Wood consists largely of ce/fu/ose, a tough substance 
made from sugar. The xylem has two kinds of wood 
sapwood and heartwood The wood nearest the cam: 
bium ts the sapwood It ts living wood and contains the 
tiny pipelines that carry sap. In tropical climates. the 


A Crack develops 
os the log dries. 


Heartwood 


Sapwood 


AV" Marking 
wmdicaies a branch 
grew ot this point, 


Scar indicates 
fre Gomage. 


| YAUMEL | O24 de Bout stem by fore Teeuen 


Xll 


Other research aids 


On this page, a number of special research aids found in World Book are 
shown. If you make good use of them, they will facilitate your search for in- 
formation. Browse through the set and you will find these special features in 
many articles. They have been developed to help you get the most out of 
World Book. 


Facts in brief 


Capital: London 

Official language: English. 

Area: 50,352 sq. mi. (130,410 km’), Greatest distances—north- 
south, about 360 mi. (579 km); east-west, about 270 mi. (435 
km). Coastline—about 1,150 mi. (1,851 km). 

Elevation: Highest—Scafell Pike, 3,210 ft. (978 m) above sea 
level. Lowest—Great Holme Fen, near the River Ouse in 
Cambridgeshire, 9 ft. (2.7 m) below sea level. 











Horse terms 


Bronco, or Bronc, is an untamed Western horse. 

Colt, technically, is a male horse 4 years old or less. However, the 
word colt is often used for any young horse. 

Crossbred means bred from a sire of one breed and a dam of 
another. 

Dam is the mother of a foal. 

Filly is a female horse 4 years old or less. 





—s 








Important dates in Kennedy's life 


1917. (May 29) Born in Brookline, Mass. 

1940 =Graduated from Harvard University. 

1941-1945 = Served in the U.S. Navy during World War II. 
1946 __— Elected to the U.S. House of Representatives. 
1952 _—_— Elected to the U.S. Senate. 

1953 (Sept. 12) Married Jacqueline Lee Bouvier. 














Additional resources 


| Level! 
| Harman, Amanda. South American Monkeys. Benchmark Bks., 1996. 


Sterry, Paul. Monkeys & Apes. 1994. Reprint. Todtri, 1998. 


Level If 

Nowak, Ronald M., ed. Walkers Primates of the World Johns Hopkins, 
1932: 

Rowe, Noel. The Pictorial Guide to the Living Primates. Pogonias, 1996. 

















Related articles. See Literature for children and its list of Re/ated 
articles. See also the following: 





Colonial literature (1608-1764) 


Bay Psalm Book Mather, Cotton 
Bradford, William (1590-1657) Mather, Richard 
Bradstreet, Anne Dudley Poor Richard's Almanac 
Byrd, William, Il Smith, John 
Edwards, Jonathan Taylor, Edward 

| Franklin, Benjamin Wigglesworth, Michael 


Great Awakening 


The revolutionary period (1765-1787) 
Crevecoeur, Michel- Paine, Thomas 
Guillaume Jean de Warren, Mercy Otis 


Facts in brief tables are 
found in state, province, 
country, continent, and 
many other articles. They 
provide information at a 
glance. 


Tables of terms present 
information that defines 
certain words or phrases 
used in discussing spe- 
cialized or highly techni- 
cal topics. 


Tables of important 
dates are included in 
many articles. They pro- 
vide quick reference to 
outstanding events in the 
history of a topic. 


Additional resources at 
the end of over 1,500 arti- 
cles lead to further read- 
ing. Sometimes, books 
are grouped on two lev- 
els, with Level | books 
being easier to use than 
Level Il books. 


Related articles listings 
at the end of many arti- 
cles direct the reader to 
additional, related infor- 
mation in World Book 


SSS te einen. 
et en 





Key to pronunciation 


The World Book Encyclopedia provides 
pronunciation for many unusual or unfa- 
miliar words, either with the article title or 
where the word appears in the text. In the 
pronunciation, the words are divided into 
syllables and respelled according to the 
way each syllable sounds. The syllables 
appear in /ta/ic |etters. For example, here 
is an article title along with the respelled 
pronunciation for it: 


Antibiotic, av tee by AHT ihk 


The syllable that bears the greatest em- 
phasis when the word is spoken appears 
in capital letters (AHT) If the word is long 
enough to have a syllable that receives 
secondary emphasis, that syllable appears 
in small capitals (4) More than one pro- 
nunciation appears for words that have 
several accepted pronunciations in Eng- 
lish, for words that have distinctive pro- 
nunciations in other languages, and for 
names that have distinctive local pronun- 
ciations (such as Arkansas River, AHR 
kuhn saw or ahr KANS zuhs) 

World Book uses a number of diacriti- 
cal marks and special characters to indi- 
cate the correct spellings for many words 
and names in languages other than Eng- 
lish. These marks have various meanings, 
according to the languages in which they 
are used. An acute accent mark (°) over an 
ein a French word indicates that the é is 
pronounced ay. An acute accent mark 
over an ein a Spanish word indicates that 
the syllable containing the é bears the 
main emphasis in the word. The accented 
characters may look difficult, and some of 
them represent sounds that are hard for 
English-speaking people to make. But the 
respelled pronunciation normally makes 
the sounds clear, as in Dvorak, DVAWR 
zhahk, or L6dz, looj or lahdz 

The pronunciation key at the right 
shows how common word sounds are in- 
dicated by diacritical marks in The World 
Book Dictionary and by respelling in The 
World Book Encyclopedia. The key also 
shows examples of the schwa, or unac- 
cented vowel sound. The schwa is repre- 
sented by a. 


mark AstIn 


er 


u 


zh 


Respelling 

hat, map a Alphabet 
age, face ay Asia 
Care, air ali Bareback 
father, far ah Armistice 
child, much ch China 
let, best eh_ Essay 
equal, see, ee Leaf 
machine, city Marine 
term, learn, 
sir, work ur Pearl 
it,pin,hymn ih System 
ice, five, y Ohio 
icon eye Iris 
coat, look k Corn 
hot, rock ah Ottawa 
open, go, oh Rainbow 
grow, Chateau 
tableau 
order, all aw Orchid 

Mall 
oil, voice oy Coinage 
house, out ow Fountain 
say, nice s Spice 
she, sh Motion 
abolition 
cup, butter, uh Study 
flood Blood 
full, put, u—s- Fulbright 
wood Wool 
rule,move, oo Zulu 
food, 
MUSIC yoo Muses 
pleasure zh_ Asia 
about, aneba uh Burma 
taken, purple uh Fiddle 
penci| uh Citizen 
lemon un Lion 
circus uh Cyprus 
labyrinth uh Physique 
curtain uh Mountain 
Egyptian uh Georgia 
section uh Legion 


fabulous 


uh 


XIII 


Example 


AL tuh beht 

AY zhuh 

BAIR bak 

AHR muh stihs 
CHY nuh 

EHS ay 

leef 

muh REEN 


purl 

SIHS tuhm 
oh HY oh 
EYE rihs 
kawmn 

AHT uh wuh 
RAYN boh 
shah TOH 


AWR kihd 
maw! 

KOY nihj 
FOWN tuhn 
spys 

MOH shuhn 


STUHD ee 
bluhd 

FUL bryt 
wul 

ZOO loo 


MYOOZ ehz 
AY zhuh 
BUR muh 
FIHD uAl 
SIHT uh zuhn 
LY uhn 

SY pruhs 

fuh ZEEK 
MOUWN tuhn 
JAWR juh 
LEE juhn 


Anonymous wh NAHN uh muhs 


Contributors and Consultants 


A person whose name appears at the end of an article in The World Book Encyclopedia 
either wrote it originally or became responsible for its accuracy as a critical reviewer of 
the work of another. In preparing The World Book Encyclopedia, the editors also have 
the valued asststance and advice of expert consultants in education, readability, 
cartography, the graphic arts, and other specialized areas of knowledge. 


A 


Aaron, Henry J., Ph.D. Senior Fellow, The Brook- 
ings Institution. 


Abadinsky, Howard, Ph.D. Prof., Saint Xavier 
Univ.. Chicago. 

Abbate, Carolyn, Ph.D. Prof. of Music, 
Princeton Univ. 

Abbott, Carl, Ph.D. Prof. of Urban Studies and 
Planning. Portland State Univ. 

Abbott, Frederick M., J.D; LLM Edward Ball 
Prof. of Law. Florida State Univ. College of Law. 
AbdetKader, Ali Hassan, Ph.D. Prof. of Islamic 
Studies, Columbia Univ 


Abel, Francis L, Ph.D. Distinguished Prof. Emert- 
tus of Pharmacology and Physiology, Univ of 
South Carolina School of Medicine. 


Abeloff, Martin D., M.D. Prof. and Director, 
Johns Hopkins Oncology Center. 


Abels, Richard P., Ph.D. Prof. of History, U.S. 
Naval Academy. 

Abramovitz, Robert H., M.D. Chief Psychiatrist, 
Jewish Board of Family and Children’s Services. 


Abrams, Suzanne R., Ph.D. Principal Research 
Officer, Plant Biotechnology Institute, National 
Research Council of Canada. 


Abu Jaber, Kamel S., Ph.D Prof. of Political 
Science. Jordan Univ. 


Abukhalil, As‘ad, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Political 
Science, California State Univ., Stanislaus. 
Acheson, Donald T., Ph.D. Consultant; former 
Staff Scientist, National Weather Service. 
Acheson, T. W., Ph.D. Former Prof. of History, 
Univ. of New Brunswick. 

Adam, Mohammed M., M.). Journalist Munici- 
pal Reporter, Ottawa (ON) Citizen. 

Adams, Charles J., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Islamic 
Studies, McGill Univ. 

Adams, Clark E., Ph.D. Prof. of Wildlife and 
Fisheries Sciences, Texas A&M Univ. 


Adams, Jack, B.Sc. in Mech. Engineering 
Regional Director for Canada of the National 
Horseshoe Pitchers Association of America. 


Adams, Nicholas, Ph.D. Prof. of Art. 
Vassar College. 


Adams, Richard N., Ph.D. Prof. of Liberal Arts 
Emeritus, Univ. of Texas, Austin. 

Adams, Robert L. A., Ph.D. Former Assoc. Prof. 
of Geography, Univ. of New Hampshire. 

Adams, Russ, B.S. Owner, BarCode-1.com. 
Adamson, }.G., Vice President, AT&T Financial 
Systems. 


Adamson, Jeremy, Ph.D. Curator, Renwick 
Gallery of the National Museum of American Art, 
Smithsonian Institution. 


Addington, Larry H., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
History, The Citadel. 


Addis, Paul Bradley, Ph.D. Prof. of Food Science 
and Nutrition, Univ. of Minnesota, Twin Cities 
Campus. 

Adler, Thomas P., Ph.D. Head, Dept. of English. 
Purdue Univ. 

Africa, Thomas W., Ph.D Former Prof. of 
History, State Univ. of New York, Binghamton. 
Agranoff, Robert, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Public 
and Environmental Aftairs, Indiana Univ. 
Ahearne, Michael, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of Market 
ing. Univ. of Connecticut. 


Ahlschwede, William T., Ph.D. Swine Produc 
tion Consultant, Genetic Advisory Service, Unwv. of 
Tennessee, Martin. 

Ahnert, Frank, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Physical 
Geography. Rhenish-Westphalian Technical Unis 
Ahrens, Richard A., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus, Gradu- 
ate Program in Nutrition, Univ of Maryland 
Aiken, Charles §., Ph.D. Prof of Geography, 
Univ. of Tennessee. Knoxville. 


Alkin, Arthur C., Ph.D Senior Scientist, 


National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 
Goddard Space Flight Center. 

Ainley, David G., Ph.D. Senior Ecologist, H. T. 
Harvey & Associates. 

Ajayi, J.F. Ade, LLD. Emeritus Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Ibadan. 

Akin, Wallace E., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Geography and Geology, Drake Univ. 

Aksan, Virginia H., Ph.D. Chair, Dept of 
History, McMaster Univ. 

Albro, Ward S., Ph.D. Prot. Emeritus of Histnry, 
Texas A&M Univ., Kingsville. 

Alcock, James E., Ph.D. Prof. of Psychology, 
York Univ. 


Alexander, Duane F., M.D. Director, National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development. 
National Institutes of Health. 


Alexander, Thomas G., Ph.D. Prof. of Western 
American History, Brigham Young Univ. 
Alivisatos, Armand Paul, Ph.D. Prof., Dept. of 
Chemistry, Univ. of California, Berkeley. 

Allen, Delmas }., Ph.D. President for Academic 
Affairs, North Georgia College. 

Allen, Garland E., Ph.D Prof of Biology, 
Washington Univ. 

Allen, John L, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 

Univ. of Connecticut. 

Allen, Richard, Ph.D. Minister Responsible for 
International Trade, Government of Ontario. 
Allen, Roger, D.Phil. Prof. of Arabic, Uoiv. of 
Pennsylvania. 

Allen, William Hand, M.S. President, Allen & 
Shariff Corporation. 

Allen, William Sheridan, Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
State Uni. of New York, Buffalo. 

Alley, Phillip W., Ph.D. Prof. of Physics, State 
Uoiv. of New York, Geneseo. 


Allin, Craig W., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science. 
Cornell College. 


Allinson, Gary D., Ph.D. Ellen Boyard Weedon 


Prof. of Modern Japanese History, Univ. of Virginia. 


Allmand, C.T., D.Phil. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Liverpool. 

Almond, Gabriel A., Ph.D. Coauthor, The Strug- 
gle tor Demncracy in Germany. 

Alsop, Fred J., Ul, Ph.D. Prof., Dept of Biological 
Science, East Tennessee State Univ. 

Alten, Stanley R., Ph.D. Prof., Televiston-Radio- 
Film Dept, Newhouse Schnol of Public Communi- 
cations, Syracuse Univ: author, Audio in Media 
Althoff, George T.,B.S. Former Editor, (Decatur, 
IL) Herald & Review. 

Alvares, Norman J., M.E. Fire Engineering 
Consultant, Fire Science Applications. 

Aman, Mohammed M., Ph.D. Dean and Prof., 
School of Information Studies, Univ. of Wisconsin. 
Ambler, Susan H., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Sociology, Maryville College. 

Ambrose, Stephen E., Ph.D. Bnyd Prof. of Histo- 
ry, Director Emeritus of the Eisenhower Center 
Ameriks, Karl, Ph.D. Prof. of Philosophy, Univ. of 
Notre Dame. 

Ammirati, Joe F., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Dept. of 
Botany, Univ. of Washington. 

Ammons, Patty Editor, (Augusta, ME) Aennebec 
Journal 


Andaya, Leonard Y., Ph.D Prof. of History, Univ 
of Hawaii, Honolulu. 

Anderson, Albert G., Ph.D. Research Assoc E. |. 
du Pont de Nemours & Co., Inc. 

Anderson, Barrie, M.D. Prof. of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Director, Fellowship in Gynecologic 
Oncology, Univ. of Inwa Hospitats and Clinics. 
Anderson, Bertin W., Ph.D. President, 
Revegetation and Wildlife Management Center 
Anderson, Carol P., Ph.D Prof. of Chemistry 
and Codirector of Coast Environmental Research 
Facilities, Uoiv. of Connecticut, Avery Point. 


Anderson, Celia Catlett, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
English, Eastern Connecticut State Univ. 


Anderson, Dan R., Ph.D. Prof. of Risk Manage- 
ment and Insurance, Univ. of Wisconsin. 


Anderson, David L, Ph.D. Dean, College of Arts 
and Sciences, Univ. of Indianapolis. 


Anderson, Donald C. Community Relations Di- 
rector, The (Manchester, NH) Union Leader and 
the New Hampshire Sunday News. 


Anderson, Fred W., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Colorado, Boulder. 


Anderson, John F., Ph.D. Director, Connecticut 
Agricultural Experiment Station. 

Anderson, John G., Ph.D. Prof., Univ. of Nevada. 
Anderson, Stannie Writing Coach, Topeka'KS) 
Capital-Journal 


Andrea, David J., MB.A. Chief Economist, CSM 
Worldwide. 

Andreasen, Nancy C.,, M.D., Ph.D. Chair of Psy- 
chiatry, Univ. of lowa Hospitals and Clinics. 
Andrews, Frank C., Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, 
Uoiv. of California, Sama Cruz. 


Andrews, Richard N.L, Ph.D. Prof. of Environ- 
mental Policy, Univ. of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 


Andrews, William L, Ph.D. £. Mayoard Adams 
Prof. of English, Univ. of North Carolina. 

Angel, J. Roger P., D.Phil. Regents Prof., Prof. of 
Astronomy and Optical Sciences, Univ. of Anzona. 


Angell, Carole §., M.Ed Teacher, Fairfax Co. 
Public Schools. 


Angers, Denis, MA. Producer, Canadian Broad- 
casting Corp. 

Antonini, Gustavo A., Ph.D. Prof. of Latin Amen- 
can Studies and Geography, Univ. of Florida. 


Antrim, Zayde G., M.Phil. Ph.D. Candidate, Dept. 
of History, Harvard Univ. 


Appelman, Evan H., Ph.D. Former Senior 
Chemist, Argonne National Laboratory. 
Applebaum, Rhona §S., Ph.D. Executive Vice 
President of Scientific and Regulatory Affairs, 
National Food Processors Association. 
Appleman, Jean, J.D. Attorney and legal author. 
Appleton, Jon H., M.A. Prof. of Music, Dart- 
mouth College. 

Apseloff, Marilyn Fain, M.A. Prof. of English, 
Kent State Univ. 


Archambault, Jo Allyn, Ph.D. Director, Ameri- 
can Indian Program in the National Museum of 
Natural History, Smithsonian Institution. 

Arey, }. Norman, AB. Asst. Sports Editor, The At- 
lanta (GA) Journal and Constitution. 

Argrow, Brian M., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Aerospace 
Engineering Sciences, Univ. of Colorado. 

Ariew, Roger, Ph.D. Prof. of Philosophy, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State Univ. 

Armbruster, David C., Ph.D. President, 
Armbruster Associates Inc., Chemical Consultants 
and Specialty Products. 

Armstrong, Joseph E., Ph.D. Prof. of Botany, 
Illinois State Univ. 

Arndt, Roger E. A., Ph.D. Prof. of Hydromechan- 
ics, Saint Anthony Falls Laboratory. 

Arnold, Eric A., Jr., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 

History, Univ. of Denver. 

Arnold, James D., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Agricul- 
ture, Texas A&M Univ., Kingsville 


Aronow, Wilbert S., M.D. Adjunct Prof. of 
Geriatrics and Adult Development, Mount Sinai 
School of Medicine. 


Aronson, Dan R., Ph.D. Principal Social Scientist, 
World Bank. 


Arreola, Daniel D., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Geography, Arizona State Univ. 


Art, Robert J., Ph.D. Herter Prof. of International 
Relations, Brandeis Univ. 


Asay, Kay H., Ph.D. Research Geneticist, Agricul- 
ture Research Service, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture. 


Ashe, Arthur, B.S. Former tennis champioo. 








Ashe, Arthur J., Il, Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry. 
Univ. of Michigan. 


Ashley, Susan A., Ph.D. William R. Hochman 
Prof. of History, Colorado College. 


Ashton, Dore, MA. Prof. of Art History, 
Cooper Union. 


Ashton, Peter S., Ph.D. Charles Bullard Research 
Prof.; Faculty Fellow. Harvard Institute for Interna- 
tional Development, Harvard Univ. 


Askeland, Donald R., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Metallurgical Engineering, Univ. of Missouri. 
Askin, Ronald G., Ph.D. Prof. of Systems and 
Industrial Engineering, Univ. of Arizona. 

Astin, Helen §., Ph.D. Prof. of Higher Education, 
Univ. of California, Los Angeles. 

Augee, Michael L, Ph.D. Secretary, Linnean So- 
ciety of New South Wales. 


Austic, Richard E., Ph.D. Prof. of Nutrition, Dept 
of Animal Science, Cornell Univ. 


Austin, Daniel F., Ph.D. Book Review Editor, Eco- 


nomic Botany. 


Austin, Max E., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Horticulture, Univ. of Georgia. 


Autry, William O.,BA. Consultant, Anthropolog- 


ical Research Associates. South Bend. 
Avakumovic, Ivan, D.Phil. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of British Columbia. 

Avallone, Linnea M., Ph.D. Prof., Lab. for Atmos- 
pheric and Space Physics, Univ. of Colorado. 
Averett, John E., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Dept. of 
Biology, Georgia Southern Univ. 

Avery, Mary Ellen, M.D. Distinguished Prof. of 
Pediatrics Emerita, Harvard Medical School. 
Axelrod, Steven Gould, Ph.D. Prof. and Chair of 
English, Univ. of California. Riverside. 

Axtell, James, Ph.D. Kenan Prof. of Humanities, 
College of William and Mary. 


Azmeh, Aziz al-, D.Phil. Zayed Prof. of Islamic 
Studies, American Univ. of Beirut. 


B 


Babayan, Kathryn, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of Iranian 
History and Culture, Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 
Bachrach, Bernard §., Ph.D. Prof. of Medieval 
History, Univ. of Minnesota, Twin Cities Campus. 
Saerwald, Thomas J., Ph.D. Program Director, 
Division of Social and Economic Science, National 
Science Foundation. 

Bagchi, Nandalal, Ph.D. Prof. of Medicine, 
Wayne State Univ. 

Bagley, Will, BA. Independent historian; colum- 
nist, The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune. 

Baglole, Harry,BA. Director, Institute of Island 
Studies, Univ. of Prince Edward Island. 

Bagshaw, David A., M.B.A. General Manager, 
W. HH. Bagshaw Co., Inc. 

Bailey, Donald A., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Winnipeg. 

Bailey, George S., Ph.D. Distinguished Prof, 
Dept. of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, 
Oregon State Univ. 

Bailey, Ted E., M.S. Senior Staff Engineer, NTN 
Technical Center, Ann Arbor. 

Bailey, William L. President, Auto-Foto. 


Bain, Carol, MA. Former Archivist, Folklore 
Archives, Indiana Univ., Bloomington. 

Bain, Mary Albertus, AT.CL. Historian; member 
of Dominican Order. 

Baird, John C., Ph.D. Prof. of Psychological and 
Brain Sciences, Dartmouth College. 

Baird, Ronald J., Ed.D. Former Prof. of Industrial 
Education, Eastern Michigan Univ. 

Baker, Alton F., I, B.A. Editor and Publisher, 
The (Eugene, OR) Register-Guard. 

Baker, Jerry Gardening consultant; author, 
Plants Are Like People and The impatient 
Gardener. 

Baker, John F., MA. Editorial Director 
Publishers Weekly. 

Baker, Vaughan B., Ph.D. Prof. and Head, Dept 
of History and Geography, Univ. of Southwestern 
Louisiana. 

Balcer, Jack Martin, Ph.D. Prof. of Ancient 
History, Ohio State Univ. 

Baldrige, Letitia, BA. President, Letitia Baldrige 
Enterpnises, Inc 

Balgooyen, Thomas G., Ph.D. Prot. o! Biological 


Sciences, San Jose State Univ. 

Ball, Samuel, Ph.D. Emeritus Prof., Chief Execu- 
tive Officer, Board of Studies, Victoria, Australia. 
Balonek, Thomas J., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Physics 
and Astronomy, Colgate Univ 

Balph, Martha Hatch, Ph.D. Former Rsch. Assoc. 
Prot., Fisheries and Wildlife, Utah State Univ. 
Banks, Howard Aviation Editor, Forbes. 
Bannatyne, Lesley P., B.A. Author, A Haffoween 


How-To: Costumes, Parties, Decorations and Desti- 
nations. 


Bannon, C. J., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Dept. of Classi- 
cal Studies, Indiana Univ. 


Banuazizi, Ali, Ph.D. Prof. of Cultural Psychology 
and Modern Iranian History, Boston College. 
Baranski, Michael J., Ph.D. Prof. nf Biology, 
Catawba College. 


Baratta, Joseph Preston, Ph.D. Cofounder and 
Codirector, Center for Global Community and 
World Law. 

Rarbash, Jack, MA. Author, The Elements of 
industrial Relations. 

Barbour, Michael G., Ph.D. Prof. of Plant Ecolo- 
gy, Univ. of California, Davis. 

Bard, Allen J., Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, Univ. of 
Texas, Austin. 

Barden, John A., Ph.D. Prof. of Horticulture, 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univ. 
Bardolph, Richard, LLD. Prof. Emeritus of 
History, Univ. of North Carolina, Greensboro. 
Barefoot, Aldos C., Jr., D.F. Emeritus Prof. of 
Wood and Paper Science, North Carolina State 
Univ. 

Barendregt, Rene W., Ph.D. Assoc. Dean, Facul- 
ty of Arts and Science, Univ. of Lethbridge. 

Bark, William C., Ph.D. Former Senior Research 
Fellow, Hoover Institution on War, Revolution, 
and Peace, Stanford Univ. 

Barkan, Elliott Robert, Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
California State Univ., San Bernardino. 


Barker, Fiona, MA. Ph.D. Candidate, Dept. of 
Government, Harvard Univ. 


Barker, Rodney, Ph.D. Reader in Government, 
London School of Economics. 

Barnard, William D., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Histo- 
ry, Univ. of Alabama. 

Barnbaum, Cecilia, Ph.D. Astronomer, Space 
Telescope Science Institute. 

Barnes, Gary M., Ph.D. Prof. of Meteorology, 
Univ. of Hawaii, Honolulu. 

Barnes, Robert D., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Biolo- 
gy, Gettysburg College. 

Barnes, Timothy David, D.Phil. Prof. of Classics, 
Univ. of Toronto. 

Barnett, Jeffrey C., Ph.D. Dean, College of 
Education, Univ. of Wisconsin, Whitewater. 
Barnett, Roger, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, Univ 
of the Pacific. 

Barnhardt, Robert A., Ed.D. Dean, College of 
Textiles, North Carolina State Univ. 

Baron, John H., Ph.D. Prof. of Musicology, 
Tulane Univ. 

Barone, Michael, LLB. Senior Writer, U.S. News 
& World Report magazine. 

Barr, William, M.S. Emeritus Prof. of Geography, 
Univ. of Saskatchewan. 

Barrett, Anthony A., Ph.D. Prof. of Classics, Univ. 
of British Columbia. 

Barrett, Gerald V., Ph.D. Prof.and Head, Dept of 
Psychology. Univ. of Akron. 

Barron, Neil, MLS. Substitute librarian and 
free-lance editor. 

Barron, Randall F., Ph.D. Prof. Ementus of Me- 
chanical Engineering, Louisiana Tech Univ 


Barrow, Bruce B., Ph.D. Consultant in telecom- 
munications; Chair. Metnc Practice Committee, In- 
stitute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. 
Barrows, Robert G., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Histo- 
ry. Indiana Unt at Indianapolis 

Barry, Roger D., Ph.D. Former Prot. and Head. 
Dept. ot Chemistry Northern Michigan Unw. 
Barth, Daniel §., Ph.D Prot. of Neuroscience 
Dept of Psychology, Univ of Colorado Boulder 
Barth, James R., Ph.D. Lowder Eminent Prot. of 
Finance. Auburn Unis 

Bartlett, Charles, BA. President Jefferson Foun: 


Contributors and consultants XV 


dation; winner of Pulitzer Prize for National Re- 
porting, 1956 . 

Bartlett, Richard A., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
History, Florida State Univ. 

Bartley, W. W., II, Ph.D. Former Senior Research 
Fellow, Hoover Institution on War, Revolution, and 
Peace, Stanford Univ. 


Basinger, James F., Ph.D. Prof. of Geological 
Sciences, Univ. of Saskatchewan. 


Baskin, Jerry M., Ph.D. Prof. of Biological Sci- 
ences, Univ. of Kentucky. 

Basofin, Peter, M.LS. Chief Librarian, The Sacra- 
mento (CA) Bee. 

Basri, Gibor, Ph.D. Prof. of Astronomy, Univ. of 
California. 

Bassett, Sharon, Ph.D. Prof. of English, 
California State Univ., Los Angeles. 

Bassett, Thomas J., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Geogra- 
phy, Univ. of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. 
Bassiouni, M. Cherif, LLD. Prof. of Law, DePaul 
Univ. College of Law. 

Basso, Keith H., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology, 
Univ. of New Mexico. 


Bates, Robert H., Ph.D. Eaton Prof. of the Science 
of Government and Faculty Fellow of the Center 
for International Development, Harvard Univ. 
Batra, Subhash K., Ph.D. Director Emeritus, Non- 
wovens Cooperative Research Center, College of 
Textiles, North Carolina State Univ. 


Battenburg, John D., Ph.D. Prof. of English, Cali- 
fornia Polytechnic State Univ. 

Battestin, Martin C., Ph.D. William R. Kenan, Jr., 
Prof. Emeritus of English, Univ. of Virginia. 
Bauer, Brian S., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Dept. of An- 
thropology, Univ. of Illinois at Chicago. 

Bauer, Caroline Feller, Ph.D. Lecturer, author. 
Baugh, John, Ph.D. Prof. of Education and 
Linguistics, Stanford Univ. 

Baughn, W.H., Ph.D. Author, /nternational 
Bankers Handbook 


Bauman, Thomas A., Ph.D. Prof. of Music, 
Program Coordinator for Musicology, and Assoc. 
Dean, The Graduate School, Northwestern Univ. 
Baumgartner, William A., M.D. Cardiac 
Surgeon-in-Charge, Johns Hopkins Hospital. 
Baxevanis, John )., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
East Stroudsburg Univ. 

Baybutt, Richard C., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Dept. of 
Human Nutrition, Kansas State Univ. 


Bayer, Barbara M., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Pharmacology, Georgetown Univ. 


Bayron-Toro, Fernando, |.D. Prof. of Political 
Sciences, Univ. of Puerto Rico, Mayagliez 
Beam, James C. “Jim”, MA. Dir., Political and 
Public Affairs, Lake Charles (LA) American Press. 
Bean, Mark C., President, Match Division, D. D. 
Bean & Sons Co. 

Bean, Pat City Editor, (Ogden, UT) Standard-Ex- 
aminer. 

Beasley, Maurine H., Ph.D. Prof. of Journalism, 
Univ. of Maryland. 

Beaulieu, Robert J.,B.S. Asst. Prof. of Textile De- 


velopment and Marketing, Fashion Institute of 
Technology. 


Beaver, Donald deB., Ph.D. Prof. of History of 
Science, Williams College. 

Bebb, Phillip N., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Ohio Univ. 
Beck, Alan M., Sc.D. Prof. of Animal Ecology. 
Center for the Human-Animal Bond. School of Vet- 
ennary Medicine, Purdue Univ. 

Beck, John H., M.M. Prof. of Percussion, Eastman 
School of Music; Timpanist, Rochester Philhar- 
monic Orchestra. 

Beck, Laurence H., \1.D. Senior Vice President, 
Geisinger Health Svstem: Prof. of Medicine. 
Jefferson Medical College. 

Beck, Robert F., Ph.D Prof. of Naval Architecture 
and Manne Engineering, Univ. of Michigan. 
Becker, Robert A., Ph.D Assoc Prof. of 

Histon: Louisiana State Univ. 

Becker, William H., Ph.D Prot of History, 
George Washington Univ 

Beckett, Jan F. W., Ph.D. Head of School of 
Literature and History, Univ ot Luton. 

Beebe, Ralph K., Ph.D Prof. Emenitus of Histon: 
George Fox Univ 


Beehler, Bruce A1,Ph.D Director Environmen- 


XVI Contributors and consultants 


tal and Natural Resources, Counterpart Interna- 
tional. 

Beem, John K., Ph.D. Prof. of Mathematics, 

Univ. of Missouri, Columbia. 

Beermann, Donald H., Ph.D. Prof. of Animal 
Science and Food Science, Cornell Univ. 

Behler, Deborah A., B.A. Editor in Chief, 
Wildlife Conservation magazine. 

Behrman, Cynthia F., Ph.D. Prof. Emerita of His- 
tory, Wittenberg Univ. 

Beidelman, T.0., D.Phil. Prof. of Anthropology, 
New York Univ. 

Beiswenger, Ronald E,, Ph.D. Prof., Chair, Dept 
of Geography and Recreation, Univ. of Wvoming. 
Beiswenger, Vivian M.,B.S_ Senior Vice Presi- 
dent, U.S. Amateur Ballroom Dancers Assoc. 
Bélanger, Patrice C., Ph.D. Director, Quality 
Assurance, Merck Frosst Canada, Inc. 

Bell, Carolyn Shaw, Ph.D. Katharine Coman 
Prof. of Economics, Emerita. Wellesley College. 
Bellegarde-Smith, Patrick, Ph.D. Prof. of Africol- 
ogy, Univ. of Wisconsin, Milwaukee. 

Belt, Mike, B.S. Staff Writer, Kansas City (KS) 
Kansan. 

Bender, Gerald J., Ph.D. Director and Assoc. 
Proft., Schoo! of International Relations, Univ. of 
Southern California. 

Bender, Ronald, BA. City Editor, Rapid City (SD) 
Journal 

Benedict, Burton, Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology. 
Univ. of California, Berkeley; author, \ten, Women 
and Money in Sevchelles. 

Benford, Gregory, Ph.D. Prof. of Physics, Univ. of 
California, Irvine. 

Benjamin, Gerald, Ph.D. Dean, College of Liher- 
al Arts and Sciences, State Univ of New York, New 
Paltz. 

Benkov, Keith J., M.D. Pediatric Gastroenterolo- 
gist, Mount Sinai School of Medicine. 

Bennett, Albert F., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Dept. of 
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, School of Bio- 
logical Sciences, Univ. of California, Irvine. 
Bennett, Andrew, Ph.D. Asst. Prot. of Govern- 
ment, Georgetown Univ 

Bennett, B.G., Ph.D Secretary, United Nations 
Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic 
Radiation. 

Bennett, Gary F., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Bio- 
chemical Engineering, Univ. of Toledo. 

Bennett, ). Michael, Ed.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Rhetoric, Univ. of Minnesota, Twin Cities Campus. 
Bensman, Joseph, Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
Sociology, City Univ. of New York 

Benson, Barbara E., Ph.D. Executive Director, 
Historical Society of Delaware. 

Benson, Keith R., Ph.D. Prof. of Medical History 
and Ethics, Univ of Washington. 

Bentley, James, D.Phil. Author, Schweitzer The 
Enigma. 

Bentley, Jerry H., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Hawaii, and Editor, journal of tVorld History. 
Bercuson, David Jay, Ph.D. Prof. of History and 
Director, Center for Military and Strategic Studies, 
Univ. of Calgary. 

Berdahl, Robert M., Ph.D. Chancellor, Univ. of 
California, Berkeley. 

Berenbaum, May R., Ph.D. Prof. and Head, Dept. 
of Entomology, Univ. of Illinots. 

Berenbaum, Michael, Ph.D. President and 
Chiet Executive Officer, Survivors of the Shoah 
Visual History Foundation. 

Berg, Darrell Matthews, Ph.D. Visiting Assoc 
Prof. of Music Washington Univ. 

Berger, Melvin, MA. Author, 7he Story of Folk 
Music. 

Berger, Philip A., M.D. Former Prof. of Psychia- 
try, Stanford Univ. School of Medicine. 

Berger, Rainer, Ph.D. Prof of Anthropology Ge- 
ography, and Geophysics, Univ. of Calitornia, Los 
Angeles. 

Berger, Richard E., M.D. Prot. of Urology. Univ 
of Washington. 

Berghahn, Klaus L, DPhil. Director Center for 
German and Eurnpean Studies. Univ. of Wiscon 
sin, Madison. 

Bergholz, Richard C. Former Political Writer 
Los Angeles Times. 


Bergstresser, Paul R., M.D. Prof. and Chairman, 
Dept. of Dermatology, Univ. of Texas Southwest- 
ern Medical Center. 

Berkhofer, Robert F., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Histnry, Univ. of California, Santa Cruz 
Berkowitz, Gerald M., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
English, Northern Illinois Univ. 

Berkowitz, Luci, Ph.D. Prof. Emerita of Classics. 
Univ of California. Irvine. 

Berlin, Michael J.,M.S.J. Assoc. Prof. of 
Journalism, Boston Univ. 

Berman, David R., Ph.D. Prof. of Political 
Science, Arizona State Univ. 

Berman, Russell A., Ph.D. Walter A. Haas Prot. in 
the Humanities, Stanford Univ. 

Bernhard, Winfred E. A., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
Early American History, Univ. of Massachusetts. 
Bernheimer, Martin, MA. Music Critic, Los 
Angeles Times. 

Bernstein, Melvin, Ph.D. Vice President, Arts, 
Sciences, and Technology, Tufts Univ. 

Berst, Charles A., Ph.D. Prof. of English, Univ. of 
California, Los Angeles. 

Bertoldi, GilbertL, M.S. Senior Research Hy- 
drologist Emeritus, U.S. Geological Survey. 
Besch, Henry R,, Jr., Ph.D. Prot. and Chair Dept 
of Pharmacology and Toxicology; Prnt. of Medi- 
cine, Indiana Univ. School of Medicine. 

Betts, Henry B., M.D. Chairman, Rehabilitation 
Institute Foundation. 

Beuerlein, Patricia Librarv Asst, Edmonton (AB) 
Journal 

Bevin, A. Griswold, M.D. Former Prof. of Plastic 
Surgery, Univ. North Carolina School of Medicine. 


Bewley, Joel J.. BA. Reporter, Times of Trenton 
(NJ): Adjunct Prof., Rider Univ. 


Beyers, William B., Ph.D. Prot. of Geography. 
Unt. of Washington. 

Bianchina, Paul General contractor, Spectrum 
Builders, Inc.; author. 

Bicchieri, M.G., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Anthropol- 
ogy, Central Washington Univ. 

Bicha, Karel D., Ph.D. Prof. of History. Marquette 
Univ. 

Bidlack, Richard H., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History 
and Chairman of the Russian Studies Program, 
Washington and Lee Univ. 

Biesenberger, JosephA., Ph.D. President of the 
Polymer Processing Institute and Prof. of Chemical 
Engineering, Stevens Institute of Technology. 
Biggar, Jeanne C., Ph.D. Former Assoc. 

Prof. of Sociology, Univ. of Virginia. 

Bilik, Dorothy S., Ph.D. Former Assoc. Prof., Ger- 
manic and Slavic Languages, Univ. ot Marvland. 
Billington, Ray Allen, Lit.D. Former Senior Re- 
search Assoc . Henry E. Huntington Library. 

Billy, Rich Manager-Editor, The (Flin Flon, MB) 
Reminder. 

Bilocerkowycz, Jaroslaw, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Political Science, Univ. of Dayton. 

Bilstein, Roger E., PhD. Prof. of History. Univ. of 
Houston, Clear Lake. 

Binford, Henry C., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Northwestern Univ. 

Birdsall, Stephen S., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Univ. of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 

Bish, David L, Ph.D. Technical Staff Member 
and Mineralogist, Los Alamns National Laboratory. 
Bishop, Finley C., Ph.D. Former Assoc Prof. of 
Geology. Northwestern Univ. 

Blachman, Morris J., Ph.D. Assoc. Director, Insti- 
tute of International Studies, Univ. South Carolina. 
Black, Charles C. Phenylketonuria ‘PKU! patient 
and consultant. 

Black, Don, BA. Managing Editor, /Pocatello! 
Idaho State journal 

Black, Donald W., M.D. Prof. of Psychiatry, Univ. 
of lowa College of Medicine. 

Blackburn, George L,, M.D. Ph.D. Assoc. Direc: 
tor of Nutrition, §. Daniel Abraham Chair in Nutri- 
tion Medicine. Assoc. Prof. of Surgery, Harvard 
Medical School. 

Blacklow, Neil R., M.D. Chairman, Dept. of Med- 
icine: Richard M. Haidack Distinguished Prof. of 
Medicine. Univ. of Massachusetts Medical School. 


Blackwell, James H. Former Executive Secre- 
tarv, American Saddle Hnrse Breeders Assoc. 


Blackwell, John, Ph.D. Prof. of Macromolecular 
Science, Case Western Reserve Univ. 

Blaese, R. Michael, M.D. President, Molecular 
Pharmaceuticals Division and Chief Scientific Offi- 
cer, Kimeragen, Inc. 

Blasi, Joseph Raphael, Ed.D. Prof., School of 
Management and Labor Relations, Rutgers, the 
State Univ. of New Jersey. 

Blecha, Michael E, B.A. Opinion Page Editor, 
Green Bay(W\) Press-Gazette. 

Blewitt, Richard F.,M.BA. President, Rowan & 
Blewitt, Inc. 


Bliss, Lawrence C., Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of 
Botany, Univ. of Washington. 


Bliss, Michael, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Toronto. 

Bliss, Neil W., Ph.D. Consultant; Former Chief Ge- 
ologist, Alcan International. 

Blomberg, S. Brock, Ph.D. Prof. Dept of Eco- 
nomics, Wellesley College. 

Bloom, Ken Author, American Song: The 
Complete Musical Theatre Companion. 
Bloomfield, Donna J., MA. Sessional Instructor, 
Mount Royal College. 

Bloy, Marjorie, Ph.D. Lecturer in History, Rother- 
ham College of Arts and Technology, England. 
Blue, Todd !., M.A. President/Instructor, Con- 
struction and Civil Technology, Blue Skye Institute. 
Bluestein, Howard B., Ph.D. Prof. of Meteorolo- 
gy, School of Meteorology, Univ. of Oklahoma. 
Blum, John M., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of History, 
Yale Univ.; author, The Republican Roosevelt 
Blum, Kenneth, Ph.D. Director, Laboratory of 
Pharmacogenetics; Prof. of Pharmacology, Univ. of 
Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio. 
Blumberg, Jeffrey B., Ph.D. Prof. of Nutrition, 
School of Nutrition Science and Policy, Tufts Univ. 
Blumhofer, Edith L, Ph.D. Dir., Institute for the 
Study of American Evangelicals, Wheaton College. 


Boardman, Eugene, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Histo- 
ry, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 


Bobango, Gerald J., Ph.D. Attorney at Law. 


Bodman, Andrew R., Ph.D. Chairperson, Dept 
of Geography, Univ. of Vermont. 

Boehm, Robert F., Ph.D. Prof. of Mechanical 
Engineering, Univ. of Utah. 

Boehme, SarahE., MA. Curator, Whitney Gal- 
lery of Western Art, Buffalo Bill Historical Center. 
Bogus, John D., M.S.E. Dept Head, Office of 
Naval Intelligence. 

Bohannan, Paul, D.Phil. Prof. Emeritus of 
Anthropology, Univ. of Southern California. 
Bohren, Craig F., Ph.D. Distinguished Prof. of 
Meteorology, Pennsylvania State Univ. 

Bolch, W. Emmett, Ph.D. Prof. of Environmental 
Engineering, Univ. of Florida. 

Bolen, Eric G., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, Univ. of 
North Carolina, Wilmington. 

Bolen, William H., Ph.D. Business Alumni Prof. 
and Director, Center for Retailing Studies, Georgia 
Southern Univ. 

Bolick, Margaret R., Ph.D. Curator of Botany and 
Assoc. Prof. of Biological Sciences, Univ. of Ne- 
braska. 

Bolin, Frances Schoonmaker, Ed.D. Assoc. Prof. 
of Education, Teachers College, Columbia Univ. 
Bollinger, Paul P., Jr., B.S., Vice President, 
Aviation Client Services, HNTB Corp. 

Bondar, Roberta L, Ph.D. Payload Specialist, 
National Research Council of Canada 

Bonello, Frank J., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Econom- 
ics, Univ. of Notre Dame. 

Bonfante, Larissa, Ph.D. Prof. of Classics, New 
York Univ. 

Bonjean, Charles M., Ph.D. Hngg Prof. of Sociol- 
ogy and Executive Director, Hogg Foundation for 
Mental Health. 

Bonney, Richard E,, Jr., M.P.S. Director, Educa- 
tion and Citizen-Science Programs, Cornell Labo- 
ratory of Ornithology. 

Bonsi, Conrad K., Ph.D. Prof. and Assoc. 
Research Director, George Washington Carver 
Agricultural Experiment Station, Tuskegee Univ. 
Booth, JohnA., Ph.D. Regents Prof. of Political 
Science, Univ of North Texas. 

Borchert, Larry L, Ph.D. Director of Research, 
Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. 





Bordman, Gerald, Ph.D Author, American 
Musical Theatre: A Chronicle and the Oxford 
Companion to American Theatre. 

Boren, Henry C., Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of History, 
Univ. of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 

Borish, Steven M., Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of Anthropol- 
ogy, Swarthmore College. 

Boritt, Gabor S., Ph.D. Fluhrer Prof. nf Civil War 
Studies and Director, Civil War Institute, Gettys- 
burg College. 

Borklund, Elmer W., Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. ot Eng- 
lish, Pennsylvania State Univ. 

Borkowski, Raymond P., Ph.D. Prof. of Chem- 
istry, King’s College. 

Born, Brad S., Ph.D. Asst. Prof. and Chair, English 
Dept, Bethel College. 

Born, George H., Ph.D. Director Coloradn Cen- 
ter for Astrodynamics, Univ. of Coloradn, Boulder. 
Borrowman, Merle L, Ed.D. Former Prof. ni 
Education, Univ. of California, Berkeley. 

Borza, Eugene N., Ph.D. Prof. of Ancient History, 
Pennsylvania State Univ. 

Bostian, Charles W., Ph.D. Prof., Bradley Dept. of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State Univ. 

Boswell, Thomas D., Ph.D. Prof. ot Geography, 
Univ. of Miami. 

Bothwell, Robert, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. nf 
Toronto. 

Bouchard, Constance B., Ph.D. Distinguished 
Prof. of History, Univ. of Akrnn. 

Boucher, Rod C. Education Services Manager, 
The (Hobart, Tasmania, Australia) Mercury. 


Boullata, Joseph 1., Pharm.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Pharmacy Practice, Temple Univ. 


Boulton, Roger, Ph.D. Prof. of Enology, Univ. of 
California, Davis. 

Bourguignon, Erika, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Anthropology, Ohio State Univ. 

Bowden, Henry Warner, Ph.D. Prof. of Religion, 
Rutgers, the State Univ. of New Jersey. 

Bowden, Mark E., B.A. Managing Editor, The 
Cedar Rapids \\A) Gazette. 

Bowen, D. Q., Ph.D. Prof. nf Environmental 
Geoscience, Univ. of Wales, Cardiff. 

Bowen, William A., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Califnrnia State Univ., Narthridge 

Bowers, Douglas E., Ph.D. Chief Historian, U.S. 
Dept. of Agriculture. 

Bowers, Jane Ann Raymond, Ph.D. Former 
Head, Dept. of Foods and Nutrition. Kansas State 
Univ. 

Bowler, Mike, M.S. Education Editor, The (Baltt- 
more) Sun. 

Bowman, Kenneth A., Ph.D. Technical Special: 
ist, Alcoa Laboratories. 

Bowman, Larry W., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Sci- 
ence, Univ. of Connecticut 

Bowman, Mary Lynne, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. Emert- 
tus, School of Natural Resources, Ohio State Univ 
Bowsfield, Hartwell Assoc. Prof. of History 
Emeritus, York Univ. 

Bowyer, Jim L, Ph.D. Director, Forest Products 
Management Development Institute, Univ. of 
Minnesota. 

Boyarsky, Bill, BA. Columnist, Los Angeles 
Times; author, The Rise of Ronald Reagan. 
Boyce, Ronald Reed, Ph.D. Prof. School of So- 
cial and Behavioral Sciences, Seattle Pacific Univ. 
Boyd, Belvel J., M.A. Deputy Editorial Page Edi- 
tor, (Minneapolis, MN) Star Tribune. 

Boyd, Bill Columnist, The Macon (GA) Telegraph. 
Boyd, David R., M.D.,CM. Consultant on 
Emergency Medical Services. 

Boyce, David, Ph.D. Prof. of Transportation and 
Regional Science, Univ. nf Illinois, Chicago. 
Boyer, John W., Ph.D. Martin A. Ryerson Distin- 
guished Service Prof. of History, Univ. nf Chicago 
Boyer, LeRoy T., Ph.D. Prot. of Civil Engineering, 
Univ. of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. 

Boyer, Paul, Ph.D. Prof. nf History, Univ nf Wis- 
consin, Madison. 

Brace, Richard M., Ph.D Former Prot. of History 
Oakland Univ 

Bradeen, Donald W., Ph.D. Former Prof.of — 
Classics and Ancient Histnry Univ of Cincinnati 


Contributors and consultants XVII 


Bradford, James C, Ph.D. Prof. of Histnry, 
Texas A&M Univ. 


Bradley, Harold W., Ph.D. Former Prof. nf 
History, Vanderhilt Univ. 

Bradnock, Robert W., Ph.D. Senior Lecturer, 
Dept. of Geography, King’s College, Londnn. 
Bradsher, Henry S., BJ. Author, foreign affairs 
analyst. 


Brana-Shute, Gary, Ph.D. Senior Consultant, U.S. 
State Dept. 


Branch, William D., Ph.D. Prof. of Agronomy, 
Univ. of Georgia. 


Brand, Charles M., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Histo- 
ry, Bryn Mawr Cnillege. 


Brand, Larry R., M.S.M.E. Principal Technology 
Manager, Building Systems Research, Gas Re- 
search Institute. 

Brand, Osa E., Ph.D. Director of Educational 
Affairs, Association of American Geographers. 
Brasser, T., Drs. Fnrmer Staff Ethnologist, 
National Museum of Man. 

Brau, James E., Ph.D. Prof. and Director, Center 
for High Energy Physics, Univ. of Oregon. 
Brauer, Kinley J., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of History, 
Univ. of Minnesnta, Twin Cittes Campus. 
Braunlich, Carl, D.B.A. Assoc Prof. of Hospitality 
and Tnurism, Purdue Univ. 

Braverman, Alan C., M.D. Assoc. Prot. of Medi- 
cine, Washington Univ. School of Medicine. 
Brearley, Joan McDonald Writer, lecturer, edi- 
tor, consultant, and American Kennel Cluh judge. 
Brecher, Kenneth, Ph.D. Prof. of Astrnnnmy and 
Physics, Boston Univ. 

Breckenridge, Roy M., Ph.D. Assoc. Director, 
Research Geolngist, idaho Geological Survey, 
Univ. of Idaho. 

Breen, Jon, MS. Prof. of English, Rin Hondo 
College. 

Breen, T.H., Ph.D. William Smith Mason Prof., 
Northwestern Univ. 

Brehm, Lawrence P., Ph.D. Staff Physicist, 
International Business Machines Corp. 


Bremer, William W., Ph.D. Former Prot. of Histo- 


ry, Lawrence Univ. 

Bremner, Robert H., Ph.D. Prof. of History 
Emeritus, Ohio State Univ. 

Brendel, Dale, B.J. Executive Editor, The (Inde- 
pendence, MO) Examiner. 

Brennan, Troyen, J.D. Prof. nf Law, Public Health 
and Medicine, Harvard Medical School.School of 
Public Health. 

Brent, Harold Patrick, Ph.D. Prot. of English, 
Baruch College, City Univ. of New York. 

Bretos, Miguel A., Ph.D. Distinguished Prof, 
William Patersnn College. 

Brett, Judith, Ph.D. Reader in Politics, School of 
Social Science, La Trobe Univ. 

Brewer, Bruce A., Ph.D. Former Curator of 
Mammals, Chicagn ZonIngical Snciety 

Brewer, Kelly, BA. Managing Fditor, The Albu- 
querque (NM) Tribune. 

Bridges, Julian C., Ph.D. Prot. and Head, Dept. of 
Sociology, Hardin-Simmons Univ. 

Brief, Richard P., Ph.D Prof. of Statistics and Ac- 
counting. New York Univ. 

Brierley, John S., Ph.D. Prot. of Geography, Univ 
of Manitoba. 

Brieske, Thomas J., Ph.D. Former Prof., Mathe- 
matics and Cnmputer Science. Georgia State Univ 
Briggs, Tony, BA. Managing Editnr Online Serv: 
ices, Daytona Beach |FU News Jnurmal. 

Bright, George W., Ph.D. Pruf. Emeritus ot Math- 
ematics Educatinn, Univ ot Narth Carolina. 
Brimeyer, Jack, B.S. Managing Editor, Peorra {IL 
jnurnal Star. 

Brinkman, John A., Ph.D. Charles H. Switt Distin- 
guished Service Prof. of Mesopotamic History. 
Oriental Institute. Univ of Chicagn 

Britt, Daniel, Ph.D Project Manager Lunar & 
Planetary Lab. Univ of Anznna 

Brittain, James E., Ph.D. Prot. School ot Histnry 
Technology, and Society. Genrgia Institute of 
Technningay. 

Brittin, Helen C, Ph.D. Prot of Fond and Nutn: 
tion. Cnilege ot Human Sciences, Texas Tech Univ 
Brockmann, H. Jane, PhD Prat. Dept ot Zoolo 
qv. Univ ot Florida 


Brodd, Ralph J., Ph.D. Consultant, Broddarp nf 
Nevada, Inc. 

Broder, David S., M.A. National Political Corre- 
spondent, Washington Post; winner of Pulitzer 
Prize for Commentary, 1973. 


Broderick, Carlfred B., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Sn- 
ciology, Univ. uf Southern California. 


Brodman, James W., Ph.D. Prof. of Histnry, Univ. 
of Central Arkansas. 

Brodsky, Arthur R., M.S.J. Senior News Editor, 
Cangressional Quarterly Daily Monitor. 

Brody, David, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Califnrnia, Davis. 

Brody, Jane E,, M.S. Personal Health Cnlumnist, 
The New York Times. 


Bromke, Adam, Ph.D. Prof., Polish Academy 
of Sciences; author, Poland, The Protracted Crisis. 
Bromley, Ray, Ph.D. Prof. Gengraphy and Plan- 
ning, Univ. at Alhany, State Univ. of New York. 


Brooks, John L, I, B.S. Senior Special Agent, 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 


Broome, Richard, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Histnry, 
La Trobe Univ. 

Brosman, Catharine Savage, Ph.D. Gore Prot. of 
French, Emerita, Tulane Univ.; Honorary Research 
Prof., Univ. of Sheffield; Author and Lecturer. 
Broun, Elizabeth, Ph.D. Director, National 
Museum of American Art. 

Brouwer, Mark, BA. Managing Editor, St//water 
(MN) Gazette. 

Brower, Kenneth S., B.S.E. President, Spectrum 
Associates Inc. 

Brown, Alison K., Ph.D. CEO.President, NAVSYS 
Cnrporation, Colorado Springs. 

Brown, Calvin R., Jr., M.D. Assoc. Prof. of Medi- 
cine and Orthopaedic Surgery, Rush-Presbyterian- 
St. Luke's Medical Center, Chicago. 

Brown, Duane, Ph.D. Prof. of Education, Univ. of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 


Brown, Leon Carl, Ph.D. Garrett Prof. of Foreign 
Affairs Emeritus, Princeton Univ. 

Brown, Richard D., Ph.D. Prnf. of History, Univ. 
of Connecticut. 

Brown, Richard D., Ph.D. Chair, Biology Dept. 
Brunswick Community College. 

Brown, Robert Craig, Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of 
Histnry, Univ. of Tnronto. 

Brown, Stephen W., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
West Virginia Institute of Technnlogy. 

Browne, Mark J., Ph.D. Prnf., Univ. of Wisconsin, 
Madison. 

Brubaker, John H., lil, B.A. Editor of the Editorial 
Page and Columnist, Lancaster (PA) New Era. 
Brubaker, Linda B., Ph.D. Prof. of Forest 
Resources, Univ. of Washington. 

Brugger, Robert J., Ph.D. Editor, Man/and His- 
torical Magazine, Maryland Historical Society. 
Brugh, Max, D.V.M.. Ph.D. Former Research Vet- 
erinarian, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture. 

Brumfiel, Elizabeth M., Ph.D. Prof., Chair, Dept. 
nf Anthropology and Sociology, Albinn College. 
Bruning, Donald F., Ph.D. Chair, Curator, Dept. 
of Ornitholngy, Wildlife Cnnservatinn Snciety. 
Buckley, Thomas H., Ph.D. Prof. American His- 
tnry: Assoc. Dean, Graduate School, Univ. nt Tulsa 
Buckner, Phillip, Ph.D. Former Prof. nf History, 
Univ. of New Brunswick 

Buethe, Chris, Ed.D. Prot. of Education Emeritus, 
indiana State Univ., Terre Haute. 

Buftalohead, Priscilla Giddings, MS. Lecturer, 
Cultural Anthropology and Womens Studies. 
Buftalohead, W. Roge-, MA. Intenm Dean, 
institute of American Indian Arts. 


Bugajski, Janusz, MPhil. Director ot East 
European Studies. Center for Strategic and 
International Studies, Washington, DC 
Bullion, John L, Ph.D. Prof. nf History, Unni of 
Missouri, Columbia. 

Bump, Jerome, Ph.D Prot ot English. Uni. of 
Texas. Austin. 

Bumsted, J. M., Ph.D. Prof nf History St johns 
Cnilege Unt of Manitoba. 


Burbelo, Peter, Ph.D Asst Prot ot Oncology 
Georgetown Univ Medical Center 


Burdick, Glenn A., Ph.D Distinguished Prot 
and Dean Ementus College nf Engineenng, Univ 
ot South Flonda 


XVIII 


Burg, B. R., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Arizona State 
Univ. 

Burger, William C., Ph.D. Curator Emeritus of 
Botany, Field Museum of Natural History. 
Burgess, Paul L., Ph.D. Prof. of Economics, 
Arizona State Univ. 

Burich, Raymond L, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Physi- 
ology, Univ. of Missouri School of Medicine. 
Burke, Ronald, Ph.D. Prof. of Philosophy 

and Religion, Univ. of Nebraska. 

Burke, William T., ).S.D. Prof. of Law Emeritus, 
Univ. of Washington. 

Burkholder, JoAnn M., Ph.D Prof, Dept. of 
Botany, North Carolina State Univ. 

Burks, R. V., Ph.D. Author, Dynamics of 
Communism in Eastern Europe. 

Burnett, Adam W., Ph.D Assoc. Prot. of Geogra- 
phy, Colgate Univ. 

Burnett, David, Ph.D. Independent consultant 
and writer. 

Burns, Robin B., Ph.D. Former Prof. of History, 
Bishops Univ. 

Burns, Sarah, Ph.D. Assoc. Prot. of Fine Arts, In- 
diana Univ., Blonmington. 

Burrell, David B., Ph.D. Prof. of Philosophy and 
Theology, Univ. of Notre Dame. 


Burrill, Melinda j., Ph.D. Prof., Coordinator of 
Graduate Studies, Dept. of Animal and Veterinary 
Sciences, California State Polytechnic Univ. 


Burton, john W., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology, 
Connecticut College. 

Burton, Nelson, jr. Announcer, ABC Sports. 
Burtt, Edward H., jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Zoology, 
Ohio Wesleyan Univ. 

Bury, Charles Editor in Chief, The Sherbrooke 
(PQ) Record. 

Busch, A. j., Ph.D. Prof. of History and Dept. 
Chairman, Fort Hays State Univ. 

Busch, August A., It} President and Chairman 
of the Board, Anheuser-Busch Companies, Inc. 
Busch, Marianna A., Ph.D Chair, Dept. of Chem- 
istry and Biochemistry, Baylor Univ. 
Busch-Vishniac, Ilene j., Ph.D Dean, Whiting 
School of Engineering, johns Hopkins Univ. 
Bush, Sargent, jr., Ph.D. John Bascom Prof. of 
English, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Butler, john C., Ph.D. Prof. of Geosciences, 
Univ. of Houston. 

Butt, john B., D.Eng. Farmer Walter P. Murphy 
Prot. of Chemical Engineering, Northwestern Univ. 


Butterfield, Bruce, B.S. President and CEO, The 
Forbes Group; former Vice President, Manufac- 
tured Housing Institute. 

Butts, Thomas, Ph.D. Prof. of Mathematics Edu- 
catinn, Univ. of Texas, Dallas. 

Butts, Virginia, BA. Public relations counsel to 
Marshall Field V. 

Butzer, Karl W., D.Sc. Dickson Centennial Prof. 
of Liberal Arts, Univ. of Texas, Austin. 


Byrnes, Giselle M., Ph.D. Lecturer in New 
Zealand Histnry, Victoria Univ. of Wellington. 


C 


Cady, Edwin H., LittD. Prof. of English, Duke 
Univ. 

Cafruny, Alan W., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Government, Hamilton College. 


Caldarelli, David D., M.D. Prof and Chairman, 
Dept. nf Otolaryngology, Rush-Presbyterian-St. 
Luke's Medical Center, Chicago 


Caldwell, Dan A., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
Pepperdine Unw. 

Caldwell, Robert j.,B.S. Editorial Page Editor, 
The (Portland) Oregonian. 

Cale, Jen Shunatona, B.S. Pawnee author. 
Calhoun, Ralph V., Ph.D. Sr. Vice President, 
Sverdrup Technology, Inc. 

Calinger, Ronald S., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
History, Cathnlic Univ. of America 

Callahan, Sean, B.A. Former Puhlic Relatinns 
Director, US. International Speedskating Assoc. 
Callahan, William R. Feature Columnist, The 
(St. Jnhn's, NF) Evening Telegram. 

Callan, Terrance D., Ph.D. Athenaeum Dean and 
Prof. of Biblical Studies, Athenaeum of Ohin. 
Calvert, john C.M., Ph.D Asst Prof. of History, 


Contributors and consultants 


Creighton Unw. 

Calvert, Monte A., Ph.D. Former Prof. of History, 
Clarkson College of Technology. 

Cameron, Ewen A., Ph.D. Lecturer in Scottish 
History, Univ. of Edinburgh. 

Camilleri, Joseph, Ph.D. Prot. of Politics, 

La Trobe Univ. 

Camp, Roderic A., Ph.D. McKenna Prof. of the 
Pacific Rim, Claremont McKenna College. 


Campanella, Ruth S.,M.D. Asst. Prof. of 
Otolaryngology, Rush-Presbyterian-St. Lukes 
Medical Center, Chicago. 

Campbell, Bernard G., Ph.D. Former Adjunct 
Prof. of Anthropology, Univ. of California, 

Los Angeles. 

Campbell, David J., Ph.D. Prot. of Geography 
and African Studies, Michigan State Univ. 
Campbell, |. C., Ph.D. Senior Lecturer in History, 
Univ. of Canterbury. 

Campbell, James N., M.D. Prof. of Neuro- 
surgery, Johns Hopkins Univ. 

Campbell, Tracy, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Kentucky. 


Cancalon, Elaine D., Ph.D. Prof. of French, 
Florida State Univ. 

Cane, Mark A., Ph.D. Prof. of Earth and Climate 
Science, Columbia Univ. 

Canemaker, john, M.F.A. Film animator; author, 
Treasures of Disney Animation Art 


Cangelosi, V.E., Ph.D. Prof. of Quantitative Meth- 
ods, Dean of the Junior Division, and Director of 
Developmental Education, Louisiana State Univ. 
Cannistraro, Philip V., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Drexel Univ. 

Cannon, Patrick §., MBA. President, EarthRise 
Tethered Balloon Systems and Engineering. 


Cantril, Albert H., Ph.D. Former Fellow, Institute 
of Politics, Harvard Univ. 


Cao, Tian Yu, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of Philosophy, 
Boston Unw. 


Capelli, Gregory M., Assoc. Prof. of Binlogy, Col- 


lege of William and Mary. 


Caplan, Arthur, Ph.D. Director, Center for 
Bioethics, Univ. of Pennsylvania. 

Capps, Walter Holden, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Re- 
ligious Studies, Univ. of California, Santa Barbara. 
Captain, George J. Former Chief, Eastern 
Shawnee. 

Carbo, Toni, Ph.D. Dean and Prof., School of In- 
formation Sciences, Univ. of Pittsburgh. 

Cardona, George, Ph.D. Graduate Group Chair, 
Dept of Linguistics, Univ. of Pennsylvania. 

Carey, George W., Ph.D. Prof. of Government, 
Georgetnwn Univ. 

Carey, james W., Ph.D. CBS Prot. of International 
Journalism, Graduate Schonl of Journalism, Co- 
lumbia Univ. 

Carico, James E., Ph.D. Dean, School of Sci- 
ences, Lynchburg College. 

Caringer, Denise L, B.A. Executive Editor, Home 
Decorating and Design, Better Homes and Gar- 
dens Books. 

Carlin, Norman F., Ph.D. Lecturer on Biology, 
Harvard Univ. 


Carlson, Ann D., D.LS. Prof., Graduate Schnol nf 
Library and Information Science, Dominican Univ. 


Carlson, john, Ph.D. Prof., Dept. nf Agriculture, 
Western Illinois Univ. 

Carlson, W. Bernard, Ph.D. Assne. Prot., Tech- 
nology, Culture, and Communication, Univ. of Vir- 
ginia. 

Carlson, William H., Ph.D. Prnf of Horticulture, 
Michigan State Univ. 

Carlton, Charles, Ph.D. Prof. of History, North 
Carolina State Univ. 

Carlton, james T., Ph.D. Dir., Maritime Studies 
Program, Williams College, Mystic Seaport. 
Carpenter, Kenneth, Ph.D. Palenntologist, Den- 
ver Museum of Natural Histnry. 


Carpenter, Robert H., Ph.D. Former geological 
consultant. 


Carpenter, Thomas P., Ph.D. Prof. of Curriculum 
and Instructinn and Director, Natinnal Center far 
Improving Student Learning and Achievement in 
Mathematics and Science, Univ. of Wiscansin. 


Carr, Anne E., Ph.D. Prof. nf Thenlogy, Univ. nt 
Chicago Divinity School. 


Carr, Dale C., M.A. Chief Music Librarian, Public 
Library, Groningen, Netherlands. 

Carr, Michael H., Ph.D. Geologist, U.S. Geologi- 
cal Survey. 


Carr, Stephen H., Ph.D. Assoc. Dean of Engineer- 
ing, Northwestern Univ. 


Carraway, Kermit L, Ph.D. Prof., Dept. of Cell Br 
ology, Univ. of Miami School of Medicine. 


Carriker, Robert C, Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Gonzaga Univ. 

Carroll, Bob, B.A. Executive Director, Pro 
Football Researchers Association. 

Carroll, Holbert N., Ph.D. Prof. of Political 
Science Emeritus, Univ. of Pittsburgh. 

Carroll, john l, M.D. Prof., Pediatrics and Physi- 
ology; Dir., Pediatric Pulmonary Division, Arkansas 
Children’s Hospital. 

Carroll, Peter N., Ph.D. Author, /t Seemed Like 
Nathing Happened: America in the 1970s. 
Carson, Clayborne, Ph.D. Prof. of History and 
Director, Martin Luther King, Jr., Papers Project, 
Stanford Univ. 


Carson, Culley C., M.D. Prof. and Chairman of. 
Urology, Univ. of North Carolina. 


Carson, Robert B., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Eco- 
nomics and Business, State Univ. of New York, 
Oneonta. 


Carter, Dan T., Ph.D. Education Foundation Prof. 
of History, Univ. of South Carolina. 


Carter, Lisle Carleton, jr., LLB. Attorney at Law. 


Carter, William E., Ph.D. Former Research Geo- 
desist, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin. 


Cartwright, Donald G., Ph.D. Prof. of Geogra- 
phy, Univ. of Western Ontario. 


Case, Karl E., Ph.D. Prof. of Economics, 
Wellesley College. 

Case, William B., Ph.D. Prof. of Physics, 
Grinnell College. 

Caserio, Marjorie C., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Univ. of California, 
San Diego. 


Cashman, Katharine V., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Ge- 
ological Sciences, Univ. of Oregon. 

Caskey, C. Thomas, M.D. Senior Vice President, 
Human Genetics and Vaccines Discovery, Merck 
Research Laboratories. 


Cassara, Catherine, Ph.D Assoc. Prof., Dept of 
Jnurnalism, Bowling Green State Univ. 

Cassell, Carol A., Ph.D. Director, Institute of 
Sexuality Education and Equity. 


Cassidy, David, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Natural 
Science, Hofstra Univ. 

Castellanos, F. Xavier, M.D. Prof. of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry and Director, Institute for 
Pediatric Neuroscience, New York Univ. School of 
Medicine. 

Catanese, Anthony James, Ph.D. President and 
Prof., Florida Atlantic Univ. 

Catania, Peter j., Ph.D. Program Chair, Industrial 
and Petroleum Systems Engineering, Univ. of Regi- 
na. 

Cateforis, David, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of Art History, 
Univ. of Kansas. 

Cates, Ward Mitchell, Ed.D. Prof., College of Ed- 
ucation, Lehigh Univ. 

Cathey, James E., Ph.D. Prof. of Germanic 
Languages and Literatures, Univ. of Massachusetts, 
Amherst; coauthor, Old /celandic. 

Causey, Virginia E., Ph.D. Assoc. Prot., Dept of 
History, Columbus State University. 

Cauvin, Jean-Pierre, Ph.D. Prof. nf French, Univ. 
of Texas. 

Cech, john, Ph.D. Director, Center for the Study 
of Children’s Literature and Media, Univ. of Florida. 
Ceci, Lynn, Ph.D Former Assoc. Prnf., Anthropol- 
ngy, Queen's College, City Univ. of New York. 
Cerulo, Karen A., Ph.D. Prof. nf Sociology, Rut- 
gers, the State Univ. nf New Jersey. 

Cezairliyan, Ared, Ph.D. Former Research Physi- 
cist, National Inst. of Standards and Technology. 
Chalmers, David, Ph.D Distinguished Service 
Prof. of History, Univ. of Florida. 

Chalupnik, James D., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus, Dept 
of Mechanical Engineering, Univ. of Washington. 
Chamberlain, David S., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
English, Univ. of lowa. 


Chambers, Mindy, AB. Political Editor, The 


(Olympia, WA) Olympian. 

Chambers, Mortimer, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
History, Univ. of California, Los Angeles. 
Chambers, William Nisbet, Ph.D. Former Prof. 
of History, Washington Unw. 

Chamblee, Theresa S., M.S. Senior Scientist, 
Corporate Research and Development, The Coca- 
Cola Company. 

Champlin, Charles, AB. Arts Editor Emeritus, 
Los Angeles Times, Author, Hollywood's Revolu- 
tionary Decade. 

Chandler, David P., Ph.D. Prof. of History. 
Monash Univ.; author, A History of Cambodia. 
Chaney, William A., Ph.D. George McKendree 
Steele Prof. of Western Culture, Lawrence Univ. 

, Parris H., Ph.D. Former Director, Center 
for East Asian Studies, Pennsylvania State Univ. 
Channell, David F., Ph.D. Prof. of Historical 
Studies, Univ. of Texas, Dallas. 

man, Graham P., Ph.D. Prof, Dept. of Ge- 
ography, Lancaster Univ. 
Charbonneau, Hubert, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Demography, Univ. of Montreal. 
Charles, C_M., Ph.D. Prof. of Teacher Education, 
San Diego State Univ. 
Charles, Robert W., Ph.D. Group Leader, Univ. 
of California, Los Alamos National Laboratory. 
Charlesworth, J. H., Ph.D. Prof. of New Testa- 
ment Language and Literature; Director, Dead Sea 
Scrolls Project, Princeton Theological Seminary. 
Chase, Philander D., Ph.D. Editor, The Papers of 
George Washington. 
Chatfield, Charles, Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of 
History, Wittenberg Univ. 
Chatterjee, Sankar, Ph.D. Prof. of Geology and 
Curator of Paleontology, Texas Tech Univ. 
Chavarnia, Jesus, Ph.D. Chairman and Publisher, 
Hispanic Business magazine. 
Chege, Michael, Ph.D. Director, Center for 
African Studies, Univ. of Flonda 
Cheng, Richard M. H., F..Mech.E. Prof. Emeritus 
of Mechanical Engineering, Concordia Univ. 
Cherchi, Paolo, Ph.D. Prof. of Italian Literature, 
Univ. of Chicago. 
Cherkauer, Douglas S., Ph.D. Prof. of Geo- 
sciences, Univ. of Wisconsin, Milwaukee. 
Cherny, Robert W., Ph.D. Prof. of History, San 
Francisco State Univ. 
Chertow, Marian R., Ph.D. Dir., Industrial Envi- 
ronmental Management Program, Yale School of 
Forestry and Environmental Studies. 
Chesick, john P., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Chem- 
istry, Haverford College. 
Chikeka, Charles O., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof of Histo- 
ry, Morgan State Univ. 
Child, Jois C, Ph.D. Former Asst. Prof. of Geogra: 
phy, Eastern Washington Univ. 
Childress, Dudley S., Ph.D. Director, Rehab. En- 
gineering peearch Program and Prosthetics Re- 
search Lab., Northwestern Univ. Medical School. 
Childs, William R., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Ohio State Univ. 
Chisholm, James J.,M.S. Engineering Manager. 
Hewlett Packard Co. 
Cho, S. Henry, M.S. Prof. of Karate, St John's 
Univ.; Pres., World Council of Martial Arts, Inc. 
Chow, Kai-wing, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History 
and East Asian Languages and Cultures. Univ. of 
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. 
Christ, Carol Tecla, Ph.D. Prof. of English, Univ. 
of California, Berkeley. 
Christensen, Norman L, jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Ecol- 
ogy , Nicholas School of the Environment and 
Earth Sciences, Duke Univ. 
Christiansen, john B., Ph.D. Prof. of Sociology 
Gallaudet Univ. 
Christianson, Eric Howard, Ph.D. Assoc Prof. of 
History, Univ. of Kentucky. 
Chuman, Dwight, BA). Former Editor Gam 
bling Times magazine. 
Church, Andrew, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
School of the Environment, Univ. of Brighton 
Churchill, james E. Freelance wrier 
Cicale, Annie, MFA. Professional calligrapher 
Clancy, Lou Former Managing Editor The 
Toronto Star. 





Clapp, john M., Ph.D. Prof. of Finance and Real 
Fstate, Univ. of Connecticut. 


Clapp, Stephen, M.Sc. Dean and Violin Faculty 
Member, juilliard School. 


Clark, Alan F., Ph.D. Division Chief, Magnetic 
Technology Division, National Inst. of Standards 
and Technology. 


Clark, C. B., Ph.D. Former Prof. of American 
Indian Studies, California State Univ. 


Clark, Charles E., Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of History, 
Univ. of New Hampshire. 


Clark, Clifford E., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of History; Hul- 
ings Prof. of American Studies, Carleton College. 
Clark, Edward W., Ph.D. Prof. of English, 
Winthrop Univ. 

Clark, J.C. D., Ph.D. Prof.. Hall Center for the Hu- 
manities, Univ. of Kansas. 

Clark, J. Derrell, D.Sc. Former Prof. of Medical 
Microbiology, Univ. of Georgia. 

Clark, Kenneth E., Ph.D. Smuh Richardson 
Senior Scientist, Center for Creative Leadership. 
GClark, Larry V., Ph.D. Asst. Prof., Indiana Univ. 
Clark, Michael P.,BA Reader Advocate, The 
(Jacksonville) Florida Times-Union. 

Clark, Noxy, L., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
California Polytechnic State Univ. 

Clark, Robert E., Ph.D. Former Asst Prof. of 
Geography, Univ. of Northern lowa 


Clark, Robert Sadler, BA President, United 
States Surfing Committee. 


Clark, Scott,BA  Dir., Bonsai Clubs International. 


Clark, Terry Nichols, Ph.D. Prof. of Sociology, 
Univ. of Chicago. 

Clark, Thomas D., Ph.D. Author, A History of 
Kentucky. 

Clark, W. Dennis, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Botany, 
Arizona State Univ. 

Clark, William W., Ph.D. Prof. of Art, Queens 
College and Grad. Center, City Univ. of New York. 
Clauson, Barbara L, M.S. Adjunct Curator, 
Univ. of Kansas Natural History Museum. 
Claybaugh, Charles C,,B.S. Publisher, (Brigham 
City, UT) Box Elder News journal 

Clayton, Lawrence A., Ph.D. Chairman, Dept of 
History, Univ. of Alabama. 

Clayton, Paula J., M.D. Chairman, Depart- 
ment of Psychiatry, Univ. of Minnesota, Twin 
Cities Campus. 

Cleeton, David L., Ph.D. Prof and Chair, Eco- 
nomics Dept, Oberlin College. 

Clemens, Diane Shaver, Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of California, Berkeley. 

Clemens, Paul G. E., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Rutgers. the State Univ. of New Jersey. 

Clemens, Walter C, jr., Ph.D. Prot. of Political 
Science, Boston Univ.; Associate, Harvard Univ. 
Davis Center for Russian Studies. 

Clements, Kendrick A., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of South Carolina. 

Clemmer, Dan O., M.LS. Head Librarian, U.S. 
Dept. of State Library. 

Clendenning, John, Ph.D. Prof. of English, 
California State Univ., Northridge. 

Clerc, Daryl G., Ph.D. Research Scientist, TJ 
Technologies, Inc. 

Cliff, Eugene M., Ph.D. Reynolds Metals Prof. 
Aerospace & Ocean ma ce eae Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State Unn. 

Clifton, Robert G., B.S. Former Managing Direc- 
tor, American Brush Manufacturers Association. 


Cliver, Dean O., Ph.D. Prof., Food Safety, School 
of Veterinary Medicine. Univ. of California Davis. 


Clonts, Howard A., Jr., Ph.D. Director, Environ: 
mental Institute and Water Resaurces Research In- 
stitute, Auburn Univ 

Cloos, Mark, Ph.D. Prof. af Geological Sciences, 
Unn of Texas. Austin 

Clout, Hugh D., Ph.D. Prof. ot Geography Unt 
College London. 

Clum, James A., Ph.D Director Manutactunng 
Engineenng Program. Untw of Detromt Mercy 
Coakley, Timothy N., MA. Capvy Editar, The 
(Schenectady, NY) Daih Gazette 

Coale, Samuel Chase, PhD. Prot af English 
Wheaton College 

Cobb, William E., PhD Prof Emeritus of 


— ee _ TT 





Contributors and consultants XIX 


Economics, West Virginia Graduate College. 
Coble, Harold D., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Crop Sci- 
ence, North Carolina State Univ. 

Cochran, Robert C, Ph.D. Prof. of Animal 
Science, Kansas State Univ. 

Cockroft, Irene, Dip. History. Author, Books of 
the Month. 

Coffman, Edward M., Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of 
History, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Coffman, john Edwin, Ph.D. Former Assoc. Prof 
of Geography, Univ. of Houston. 

Cohen, Daniel, B.).. Writer. 

Cohen, Jacob, MA_ Prof. and Chairman, Dept. of 
Amenican Studies, Brandeis Univ. 


Cohen, Jeremy, Ph.D. Former Assoc Prof. of 
Communication, Stanford Univ. 


Cohen, S. Marc, Ph.D. Prof. of Philosophy, Univ. 
of Washington. 


Cohen, Sarah Blacher, Ph.D. Prof. of English, 
State Univ. of New York, Albany. 


Cohen, Steve, BA. Senior Contributing Editor, 
Ski magazine. 

Cohen, Stuart E., MArch. Architect; Prof. of 
Architecture, Univ. of Illinois, Chicago. 


Cohn, Martin A., M.D. Director, Sleep Disorders 
Center of Southwest Florida, Naples. 

Cohn, Sherman L.,, LLM. Prof. of Law, George- 
town Univ. 

Cole, David E., Ph.D. President, Center for Auto- 
motive Research, The Altarum Institute. 


Cole, Francis T., Ph.D. Former Physicist, Fermi 
National Accelerator Labnratory. 


Cole, Hugh M., Ph.D. Author, The Ardennes 
Campaign. 

Cole, |. W., M.S.J.. Former Dean, Medill School 
of Journalism, Northwestern Univ. 

Cole, Madison B., jr., Ph.D. Former Chief, 
Electron Microscopy Laboratory, Hines Veterans 
Administration Hospital. 

Coleman, Dorothy S.,BA Author, Lenci Dolls, 
coauthor, The Collectors Encyclopedia of Dolls. 


Coleman, Evelyn Jane, MA Coauthor, The 
Collector's Encyclopedia of Dolls. 


Coleman, }. M., Ph.D. Boyd Prof., Coastal Studies 
Institute, Louisiana State Univ. 

Coleman, Kenneth, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
History, Univ. of Georgia. 

Coles, William E., jr., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
English. Univ. of Pittsburgh. 

Colgan, Charles T., }.D. Executive Vice-Presi- 
dent, National Steeplechase Association. 

Collier, Virginia P., Ph.D. Prof. of Bilingual Multi- 
cultural, ESL Education, George Mason Univ. 
Collins, Arlene R., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Microbi- 
ology, State Univ. of New York-Buffalo School of 
Biomedical Sciences. 


Collins, KK, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of English, 
Southern Illinois Univ., Carbondale. 

Collins, Nigel Editor in Chief, London Publishing. 
Cohtoff, Philip, MS\W. Executive Director, The 
Childrens Aid Society. 


Colvin, Howard A., Ph.D. Project Manager, New 
Solutions Polymer and Catalyst Research, 
Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. 

Comanor, William S., Ph.D. Prof. of Economics. 
Univ. of California, Santa Barbara; Prof. of Health 
Services, Univ. of California, Los Angeles. 
Combs, jerald A., Ph.D. Chair and Prof of 
History. San Francisco State Univ 


Commins, Stephen K., Ph.D. Director Global 
Analysis and Policy, World Vision International. 
Concepcion, Anne-Marte, MA. President. 
Seneca Design and Consulting. 

Condon, Richard H., Ph.D. Prof. Ementus nf 
History. Unw. of Maine. Farmington. 


Conger, Clement Ellis, DH. Former Chairman, 
Fine Arts Committee, U.S Dept. nf State 


Conibear, Shirley A.,.\AD.MPH_ President 
Carnow_Conibear & Associates Ltd 

Connelly, Owen, Ph.D. Authar, B/undering to 
Glory: The (Milttary Campaigns nf Napoleon. 
Connelly, Thomas L, Ph.D Farmer Prof. of 
History Unn of South Carolina 

Conniff, Michael L, Ph.D Director Latin Amen- 
can and Canbbean Studies. Univ nf South Flanda 
Connor, Lawrence }., Ph.D. Ovwner and Director 


XX Contributors and consultants 


Beekeeping Education Service, Wicwas Press. 
Connors, Peter G., Ph.D. Principal Museum 
Scientist, Bodega Marine Laboratory, Univ. of 
California, Davis. 

Conover, Mary E., Ph.D. Prof. of Industrial and 
Engineering Technology. Murray State Univ. 
Conrad, Barnaby, Ill, BA Contributing Editor, 
Horizon. 

Conway, John R., Ill, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Biology, Univ. of Scranton. 

Cook, Chris, D.Phil. Director, Modern Archives 
Unit, London School of Economics. 

Cook, Eddie Publisher, Editor in Chief, and 
Managing Director, jazz journal Limited 

Cook, Frederick A., Ph.D. Prot. of Geology and 
Geophysics, Univ. of Calgary. 

Cook, James E., B.S. Columnist, The (Phoenix) 
Anzona Republic. 

Cook, Leon F., M.S.W. Asst. to the President for 
Diversity, Augsburg College. 

Cook, Noble David, Ph.D. Chair and Prof. of Latin 
American History, Florida International Univ. 


Cook, Richard A., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Human 
Nutrition, Univ. of Maine, Orono. 

Cook, Robert B., Ph.D. Prof. and Head, Dept. of 
Geology, Auburn Univ. 

Cook, Robert Francis, Ph.D. Prot. ut French, 
Univ. of Virginia. 

Cook, Theodore F., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Histury, 
William Paterson Univ. 


Cooke, Jacob E., Ph.D. MacCracken Prof. Emen- 
tus of History, Lafayette College. 

Cooksey, D. Kay, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Packaging 
Science Dept, Clemson Unwv. 

Cooke, Roger, Ph.D. Prof. of Mathematics, Univ. 
of Vermont. 

Cooley, Marianne, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of English, 
Univ. of Houstoo. 

Cooper, Abraham, M.S. Assoc. Dean, Simon 
Wiesenthal Center. 

Cooper, Barry, Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
Univ. of Calgary. 

Cooper, Belinda, J.D. Seniur Fellow, World Poli- 
cy Institute. 

Cooper, Leon N., Ph.D. Prof. of Science, Director 
Institute for Brain and Neural Systems, and Brain 
Science Program, Brown Univ., winner of Nobel 
Prize tor Physics, 1972. 

Copeland, James M., MA Executive Secretary, 
National Forensic League. 

Coppa, Frank J., Ph.D. Prof. of History and Direc- 
tor of Doctor of Arts Program in Modern World 
History, St. Johns Univ. 

Coran, Arnold Gerald, M.D. Head, Pediatric 
Surgery, Uoiv. of Michigao Medical School; Sur- 
geoo in Chiet, C S. Mott Childreos Hospital. 
Corbett, Cecil, D.D. Executive Director, Natiooal 
lodian Traioiog and Research Ceoter. 

Corbett, J.D., Ph.D. Distioguished Prof. of 
Chemistry, lowa State Uoiv. 

Corbitt, Mary Kay, Ed.D. Assoc. Prof., Mathemat- 
ics, Valdosta State Univ.: author Plane Geometn: 
Cord, Robert L, Ph.D. Matthews Distioguished 
Uoiv. Prof. aod Prof. of Political Scieoce, Northeast 
ern Uoiv. 

Cordell, Dennis D., Ph.D. Assoc. Prot. of 

History, Southero Methodist Univ., Adjuoct Prof. 
of Demography, Vor. of Montreal. 

Cordes, Joseph J., Ph.D. Prof. of Economics, 
George Washington Uoiv. 

Corliss, John O., Ph.D. Former Prof. and Head, 
Dept uf Zoolngy, Uoiv. of Marylaod, College Park. 
Cornell, Vincent J., Ph.D. Directur, Kiog Fahd 
Middle East Studies Program, Uoiv of Arkaosas. 
Cornwell, Anne Christake, Ph.D) Directur. SIDS 
Research Project and Assoc. Pruf. of Pediatrics, 
Alben Eiosteio College uf Medicine 

Corwin, Nancy A., Ph.D. Former Asst. Prot. ut Art 
History. Kaosas City Art lostitute. 

Cosgrove, John H., Ph.D. Furoer Manager, 
Avtex Fihers, loc 

Costa, Daniel P., Ph.D. Pruf. of Biology, Uov. of 
California, Saota Cruz. 

Costello, Bonnie, PhD. Prof of Eoglish, 

Bostoo Univ. 

Coulter, C Brewster, Ph.D. Former Prot. ot 
Histury. VUoiv. uf Puget Souod. 


Courtenay, William J., Ph.D. Prof. of Medieval 
History, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Covell, Charles V., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, 
Univ. of Louisville. 

Cox, Kevin R., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, Ohio 
State Univ. 

Coxford, Arthur F., Jr., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
Mathematics Education, Univ. of Michigan. 
Coyne, Jerry A., Ph.D. Prof. of Ecology aod 
Evolution, Univ. of Chicago. 

Cracraft, James, Ph.D. Prof. of History and Univ. 
Schnlar, Univ. of Illinois, Chicago. 

Cragan, Janet D., M.D. Pediatrician and medical 
epidemiologist in Atlanta, Ga. 

Craker, Lyle E., Ph.D. Prof. and Head of Plant and 
Soil Sciences, Univ. of Massachusetts, Amherst 
Crane, Robert I., Ph.D. Ford-Maxwell Prot. of 
South Asian History. Syracuse Univ. 

Crawford, Joseph P.,BA Editorial Page Editor, 
The Grand Rapids \M\) Press. 


Crawford, Maria Luisa, Ph.D. Prof. of Geology. 
Bryn Mawr College. 


Crawford, Michael H., M.D. Robert S. Flinn Prot. 


and Chief, Division of Cardiology, Univ. of New 
Mexico Health Sciences Center. 

Crawford, Michael J., Ph.D. Head. Early History 
Branch, Naval Historical Center. 

Crawford, Nicholas C., Ph.D. Prof. and Director, 
Center for Cave and Karst Studies, Western Ken- 
tucky Univ. 

Crawtord-Brown, Douglas John, Ph.D. Prof. 

of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Unw. 
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 


Cray, Ed, BA. Prof., School of Journalism, 
Univ. of Southern California. 


Creech, James, Ph.D. Prof. of French and Italian, 
Miami Univ. 

Creevey, Lucy E., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
Univ. of Connecticut; author Muslim Brother 
hoods and Politics in Senegal. 

Crew, Michael A., Ph.D. Prof. of Economics, 
Graduate School of Management, Rutgers, the 
State Univ. of New Jersey. 

Crispens, Charles G., Jr., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
Biology, Univ. of Alahama, Birmingham. 


Croan, Melvin, Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
Univ. of Wisconsio, Madison. 

Croat, Thomas B., Ph.D. P. A Schulze Curator of 
Botany, Missoun Botanical Garden. 

Croft, W. Bruce, Ph.D. Distinguished Univ. Prof., 
Computer Science, Univ. of Massachusetts. 
Cromie, William J., M.S. Science Medical 
Writer, Harvard News, Harvard Univ. 

Crompton, Paul, BA. Director, Paul H. Cromp- 
ton, Ltd. 

Crone, Anna Lisa, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Slavic 
Languages aod Literatures, Uoiv. of Chicago. 
Cronin, R.E. Editor in Chiet, West Australiao 
Newspapers, Ltd. 


Cronin, Thomas E., Ph.D. President, Whitman 
College. 


Cronon, £. David, Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. and Dean, 


Uoiv. of \Wiscoosio, Madisoo. 


Crossley, William A., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., School 
of Aeronautics aod Astronautics, Purdue Uoiv. 
Crouch, Harold, Ph.D. Seoior Fellow, Political 
aod Social Chaoge, Australiao National Uoiv. 
Crouch, Tom D., Ph.D. Chairmao, Dept. of Aero- 
oautics, Natiooal Air aod Space Museum, Smith- 
sooiao Institution. 

Crouse, James, Ph.D. Former Prot. of Education 
and Sociology, Univ. of Delaware. 

Crovello, Theodore J., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology 
and Deao, Graduate Studies and Research, 
Caliturnia State Univ . Los Angeles. 

Crowcroft, W. Peter, F.LS. Biology Lecturer, 
Uorv. of Texas, Austin. 

Crowe, Michael J., Ph.D. Prof. of History aod 
Philosophy of Scieoce, Uowv. of Notre Dame. 


Croy, Lavoyi., Ph.D. Prof. Ementus uf Agrooomy, 


Oklahoma State Uoiv. 


Cruz, Jesus, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Dept of History. 
Unw. of Delaware 


Crystal, Eric, Ph.D. Coordinator Center tor 
Southeast Asia Studies. 


Cuhhins, Octavia N., M.Ed. Director of 
Education, Marioers Museuo). 


Culbert, T. Patrick, Ph.D. Prof. Ementus uf An- 
thropology, Univ. of Anzona. 

Cullen, Charles T., Ph.D. President and Librarian, 
Newberry Library. 

Cummings, Charles W., M.D. Prof. and Chair- 
man, Dept. of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck 
Surgery, Johns Hopkins Univ. Medical Center. 
Cummings, Jeffrey L, M.D. Prof. of Neurology 
and Psychiatry, Uoiv. of California at Los Angeles. 
Cummings, S.C, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Chem- 
istry, Wright State Univ. 

Cunningham, Frank R., Ph.D. Prof. of English, 
Univ. of South Dakota. 

Cunningham, Noble E., Jr., Ph.D. Curators Prof. 
Emeritus of History, Univ. of Missouri, Columbia. 
Cupp, E. W., Ph.D. Prof. of Entumology, Aubum 
Univ. 

Cupp, Melanie Johns, Pharm.D. Clinical Asst 
Prof., West Virginia University School of Pharmacy. 
Curran, Claude W., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Southern Oregon Univ. 

Curran, Lawrence §., B.S. Former Assoc. Facul- 
ty, Fire and Rescue Training Institute, Univ. of Mis- 
souri, Columbia. 


Curran, Ronald T., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of English, 
Univ. of Pittsburgh. 

Current, Richard N., LH.D. Prof. Emeritus of His- 
tory, Univ. of North Carolina, Greensboro. 

Curtis, James C, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Delaware. 


Curtis, L Perry, Jr., D.Phil. (Oxon) Prof. of Histo- 
ry, Brown Univ. 


Cyr, Arthur 1, Ph.D. Distinguished Prof., Political 
Economy and World Business; Dir., International 
Political Ecooomy Program, Carthage College. 


D 


Dagg, Anne Innis, Ph.D. Academic Adviser, 
Independent Studies, Univ. of Waterloo. 
Dahlinger, Fred, Jr., B.S. Director of Collections 
and Research, Robert L Parkinson Library and 
Research Center, Circus World Museum. 
Dahlsten, Donald L, Ph.D. Prot. and Assoc. 
Dean, Center for Biological Control, Univ. ot Call- 
fornia, Berkeley. 

Dakan, Olga Former Vice President, Dog World. 
Dalrymple, G. Brent, Ph.D. Dean, College of 
Oceanic & Atmospheric Sciences, Oregon State 
Univ. 

Dalzell, Robert F., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Williams College. 

Dalziel, lan W. D., Ph.D. Senior Rsch. Scientist, 
Assoc. Dir., Univ. of Texas Institute for Geophysics; 
Prof. of Geological Sciences, Univ. of Texas, Austin. 


D’Amato, Anthony, Ph.D. Prof. of Law. North- 
western Uoiv. Law School. 


DaMatta, Roberto, Ph.D. Edmuod P. Juyce, 
CSC, Prof. of Aothropology, Uoiv. of Notre Dame. 
Daniell, Jere, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Dartmouth 
College. 

Daniels, George H., Ph.D. Former Chair. Dept of 
History, Uoiv of South Alabama. 

Danker, George J., BA. Vice Pres., Chief Tech: 
oological Officer, Akro Fireguard Products, loc. 
Danziger, Sheldon H., Ph.D. Prof. of Sucial Work 
and Public Policy, Univ. of Michigan. 

D'Arcy, William G., Ph.D. Seoior Curator 
Missouri Botanical Gardeo. 

Darvick, Herman, M.S. Author, Collecting 
Autographs. 

Das, Mihir K., Ph.D. M.E. Assoc. Dean of 
Eogineering, California State Univ. 


Dattwyler, Raymond J.,M.D_ Dir. Lyme Disease 
Ceoter, State Uorv. of New York. Stooy Bruok 


Daub, Edward E., Ph.D. Prot. Ementus of 
Eogineeriog, Uoiv. of Wiscoosio, Madisoo. 
Dauben, Joseph W., Ph.D. Prof. of History and 
the History of Science, City Uoiv of New York 
Dauphin, Roma, MA. Dean of Faculty of Arts 
aod Prof. of Ecooomics, Univ. of Sherbrooke. 
Davenport, Ronald R.,LLM_ Chairman, 
Sheridan Broadcastiog Corp. 

Davidson, Bonnie J. Former Techoical Commit- 
tee member, lotematiooal f ederatioo of 
Trampoline and Tumbling. 


Davidson, Roger H., Ph.D. Prof of Govt. aod Polt- 
tics Emeritus, Univ. of Marylaod, College Park 


Davidson, William V., Ph.D. Chair, Dept. of Geo- 
grapy-Anthropology, Louisiana State Univ. 
DavidsomArmmott, Robin G. D., Ph.D. Prof. of 
Geography, Univ. of Guelph. 

Davies, Fred T., jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Horticultural 
Sciences and Molecular and Environmental Plant 
Sciences, Texas A&M Univ. 


Davis, Allen F., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Temple 
Univ. 

Davis, Audrey B., Ph.D. Former Curator of 
Medical Sciences, National Museum of American 
History, Smithsonian Institution. 

Davis, Car! L, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Stephen F. 
Austin State Univ. 

Davis, Carolyne Kahle, Ph.D. Former Interna- 
tional Health Care Adviser, Ernst & Young. 
Davis, Clark, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of History, Califor- 
nia State Univ., Fullerton. 

Davis, David Brion, LittD. Dir., Gilder Lehrman 
Center for the Study of Slavery, Resistance, and 
Abolition, Yale Univ. 

Davis, Dick, Ph.D. Prof. of Persian, Ohio State 
Univ. 

Davis, James N., M.D. Prof. and Chairman of 
Neurology, State Univ. of New York, Stony Brook. 


Davis, John A., D.Phil. Emiliana Pasca Noether 
Chair in Italian History, Univ. of Connecticut. 
Davis, Joseph A., B.S. Former Editor, Concept 
Omega Corp. 

Davis, Lee, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of Anthropology, 
Univ. of Nebraska, Lincoln. 

Davis, PaulE., B.S. Former Manager, Tin 
Research Institute, Inc., Palo Alto, Calif. 

Davis, Raymond E,, Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, 
Univ. of Texas, Austin. 

Davis, Richard L, Ph.D. Prof. of History and East 
Asian Studies, Brown Univ. 


Davis, Richard S., Ph.D. Head, Mass Section, 
International Bureau of Weights and Measures. 
Davis, Richard W., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Wash- 
ington Univ. 

Davis, Stephen M., Ph.D. Senior Analyst, 
Investor Responsibility Research Center. 

Day, Janet, MA Deputy Managing Editor, The 
Denver Post. 

Dean, Dennis R., Ph.D. Former Prof. of English 
and Humanities, Univ. of Wisconsin, Parkside. 
Dean, James A., B.A. Senior Copy Editor, Battle 
Creek (MI) Enquirer. 

Dean, Richard H., M.D. Senior Vice President 
for Health Affairs, Wake Forest Univ. and Director, 
Wake Forest Univ. Baptist Medical Center. 

Dean, Walter E., Jr., Ph.D. Geologist, U.S. Geo- 
logical Survey. 

DeAndrea, Francis T.,BA. Public relations con- 
sultant. 

DeAngelis, Martin, BA. Columnist, The Press of 
Atlantic City (NJ). 

DeBusk, F.L, M.D. Prof. of Pediatrics, Univ. of 
Florida. 

Decalo, Samuel, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Political 
Science, Univ. of Florida. 

Decker, Hannah §S., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Houston. 

Deer, Ada E, MA. Former Asst. Secretary for In- 
dian Affairs, Dept. of the Intenor. 

Deese, David A., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
Boston College. 

Degler, Cari N., Ph.D. Winner of Pulitzer Prize for 
History, 1972. 

De Hertogh, August A., Ph.D. Prof. of Hnrticul- 
tural Science, North Carolina State Univ. 

Deibe!, Richard L,BA. Former Business Editor, 
Laredo {T™) News. 

Deitzer, Gerald F., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Horticul: 
ture, Univ. of Maryland. 

De Jong, James A., Th.D. President. Calvin Theo 
logical Seminary. 


De Jong, Mayke, Ph.D. Prof. of Medieval History 
Univ. of Utrecht. 
DeLancey, Mark W., Ph.D. Prof. of Government 


and International Studies, Univ. uf South Carolina. 
DeLaria, Giacomo A., M.D. Head of Cardiac 
Surgery, Scripps Clinic and Research Foundatinn. 
DeLay, Dorothy, LH.D. Starling Prof of Vielin 
Juilliard School and Univ. nf Cincinnati. Fellow 
Royal College of Music, London. 





Deliyannis, Deborah Mauskopf, Ph.D. Lecturer, 
Dept. of Art History, Indiana Univ., Bloomington. 
Delpar, Heten, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Alabama. 


DeMallie, Raymond J., Ph.D. Prof, American In- 
dian Studies Research Institute, Indiana Univ. 


Demars, Stanford E., Ph.D. Prof. and Director of 
Geography, Rhode Island College. 


DeMasse, Richard J. Regional Manager, Coats 
American. 


Demers, Raymond, M.D. Prof. of Family Medi- 
cine, Wayne State Univ. 


Demko, George J., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Dartmouth College. 


Dempewolff, Richard F., B.S. Science writer; 
former Editor, Science Digest 


Dempsey, Kristi H., B.S. Editor, Scottsdale (AZ) 
Tribune. 


De Nault, Kenneth J., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Geology, Univ. of Northern lowa. 

Denkin, Nathan M., Ph.D. Distinguished Mem- 
ber of Technical Staff, Lucent Technologies, Inc. 
Denton, Melinda F., Ph.D. Former Curator of the 
Herbarium, Univ. of Washington. 

Denton, Tommy, M.P.A. Former Senior Editorial 
Writer, Columnist, Fort Worth (™) Star Telegram. 
Deresiewicz, William, Ph.D. Dance critic. 
Derman, Gordon H., M.D. Asst. Prof. of Plastic 
Surgery and Hand Surgery, Rush Medical College, 
Rusn-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center. 
Demburg, Thomas F., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
Economics, American Univ. 


Désilets, Andrée, Ph.D. Prof. Ementus of History, 
Univ. of Sherbrooke. 


De Simone, Daniel V., }.D. Consultant; former 
Exec. Dir., Amer. Assn. of Engineering Societies. 
Destler, |. M., Ph.D. Prof., School of Public 
Affairs, Univ. of Maryland. 


Dethloff, Henry C, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Histnry, 
Texas A&M Univ. 


Dettman, Matthew A.,M.S. Assoc. Prof., Dept. 
of Civil Engineering, Western Kentucky Univ. 


De Turk, William, M.Mus. Archivist, The Guild 
of Carillonneurs in North America. 

Devlin, J. Paul, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Chemistry, 
Oklahoma State Univ. 

de Vries, Jan, Ph.D. Prof. of History and Ecnnom- 
ics, Univ. of California, Berkeley. 

DeVries, Marvin F., Ph.D. Prof., Mechanical En- 
gineering Dept, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 
Dewald, William G., Ph.D. Former Director of 
Research, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
Dewdney, A. K., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Computer 
Science, Univ. of Western Ontano. 

Dial, Adolph L, LH.D. Former Chairman, Dept. 
of American Indian Studies, Pembroke State Univ. 
Diamond, Jay, MA. Prof. of Marketing, Retailing, 
and Fashion, Nassau Community College. 
Diamond, Norma, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Anthropology, Univ. of Michigan. 

Dickinson, John A., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair of 
History, Universite de Montreal. 

Dickson, James S., Ph.D. Chair, Dept. of Microbi- 
ology. lowa State Univ. 

Biehl, Paul B., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. and Directnr 
The Nonfiction Writing Program, Univ. of lowa. 
Diehl, Stephen J., M.S. Prof. nf Photography, 
Rochester Institute of Technology. 

Dienes, Leslie, Ph.D. Prof. nf Geography Univ. of 
Kansas. 

Dietrich, Steve E, MA. Historian. United States 
Army Center of Military History. 

Diet, John L, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography. Univ. of 
Northem Colorado. 

Dieu, Nguyen Thi, Ph.D. Assoe Prof. nt Histon 
Temple Unt. 

Dillard, Dudley, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Eeanom- 
ics, Univ of Maryland. College Park 

Dilsaver, Steven C., M.D. Prof. of Psychiatry 

and Behavioral Sciences, Univ nf Texas School 

of Medicine. Directnr and Coordinator nf Re- 
search, Harris Cnuntv Psychiatne Center, Houston. 
DiMichele, William A., Ph.D Research Paleon- 


tologist and Curator of Paleobotany National Mu: 
seum nf Natural Histery. Snuthsonian Instttation. 


Dine, Michael, PhD Prot nt Physics. Univ of Cal 


Contributors and consultants XxXI 


ifomia, Santa Cruz 

Dinsmore, James J., Ph.D. Prof. of Animal Ecolo- 
gy, lowa State Univ. 

Diosady, Levente L, Ph.D. Prnf. of Food Engi- 
neering, Univ. of Toronto. 


DiPaolo, Carolyn M., BA. Managing Editor, The 
(Ft. Wayne, IN) News-Sentinel 


Dippie, Brian W., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Victoria. 

Dirks, Richard A., Ph.D. Assoc. Director, Joint 
Office for Science Support, Natinnal Center for 
Atmospheric Research. 

Dirlik, Arif, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Duke Univ. 
Dirr, Michael A., Ph.D. Prof. of Horticulture, 
Univ. of Georgia. 


DiTallo, Cynthia J., B.A. Former Manager, 
Executive Communication, Otis Elevator Co. 


Diver, Stephen G., M.S. Technical Specialist, 
Appropriate Technology Transfer for Rural Areas. 


Dixon, Robert G., Jr., J.D. Former Daniel Noyes 
Kirby Prof. of Law, Washington Univ. 


Dmochowski, Roger R., M.D. Asst. Prof. of 
Urology, Univ. of Tennessee, Memphis. 
Dmowski, W. Paul, M.D., Ph.D. Prof., Rush Med- 
ical College, Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical 
Center, Cnicago; Director, Endometriosis Institute. 


Dobelle, William H., Ph.D. Chairman, Dobelle In- 
Stitute. 


Dobris, Joel C, LLB. Prof. of Law, School of Law, 
Univ. of California, Davis. 


Dobyns, Henry F., Ph.D. Author, Zhe Pima- 
Maricopa. 


Dodds, Gordon B., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Portland State Univ. 

Dodge, Richard E., Ph.D. Dean and Prof., Nova 
Southeastern Univ. Oceanographic Center. 


Dodge, Stephen C., Ph.D. Griswold Distin- 
guished Prof. of History, Millikin Univ. 


Dodson, Peter, Ph.D. Prof. of Earth and Environ- 
mental Science, Univ. of Pennsylvania. 

Doedens, Robert J., Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, 
Univ. of California, Irvine. 

Doenges, Norman A,, Ph.D. Prof. of Classics, 
Dartmouth College. 

Doerr, Paul W., Ph.D. Asst Prof., Dept. of History, 
Acadia Univ. 

Doherty, Carroll J., MA. Staff Writer, Congres- 
sional Quarterly. 

Doherty, Donna K., BA. Editor, Jennis. 

Dolan, James M., Ph.D. Director of Collections, 
Zoological Society of San Diego. 

Dolbear, Geoffrey E, Ph.D. President, G. E. Dol- 
bear and Associates. 

Domer, Dennis, Ph.D. Prof. of Architecture. Col- 
lege of Architecture, Univ. of Kentucky. 

Domjan, Laszlo K.,B.). Night News Editor, Saint 
Louis (MO) Post Dispatch. 

Donald, David Herbert, Ph.D. Charles Warren 
Prof. of Amencan History, Harvard Univ.; winner of 
Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography, 
1961 and 1988. 

Donnelly, John Patrick, Ph.D. Prof. nf Histnry. 
Marquette Univ. 


Donner, Fred M., Ph.D. Prof. of Near Eastern Lan- 
guages and Civilizations. The Oriental Institute, 
Univ. nf Chicago. 

Donoghue, Edmund R., M.D. Chief Mecical 
Examiner Conk County. Illinnis. 

Donovan, Dianne, MA. Literary Editor Chicago 
Tribune 

Donovan, Jane,BA. Free-lance writer 
Donovan, William P., Ph.D. Prot. Emeritus, 
Classics Dept, Macalester College. 

Doolittle, William E, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. and 
Chair Dept. nf Geography, Univ of Texas Austin. 
Doreen, Dale D., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof, Decision 
Sciences and Management Infnrmatinn Systems 
Concordia Univ 

Dorjahn, Vernon Robert, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus 
of Anthropology Unt ot Oregon 

Dorman, Gary Jay, Ph.D Senior Vice President 
National Econenic Research Associates. Inc 
Dormon, James H., Ph.D Prof Emeritus. Histon 
and Amencan Studies Unt of Southwestem 
Lousiana 


Doty,R.G., PhD Curator National Nunusmatic 


XXII Contributors and consultants 


Collection, Smithsonian Institution. 


Dougan, Michael B., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Arkansas State Univ. 


Doumato, Eleanor Abdella, Ph.D. Adjunct Prof., 
Watson Inst for International Studies, Brown Univ. 
Dowlin, Kenneth E., M.P.A. City Librarian, San 
Francisco Public Library. 

Downhower, Jerry F., Ph.D. Prof. of Zoology, 
Ohio State Univ. 

Downs, Timothy, BA Editor in Chief, 7riath/ete. 


Dowse, Robert E., Ph.D. Prof. of Politics, Univ. of 
Western Australia. 

Doyle, Daryl J., Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, Ketter- 
ing Univ. 

Doyle, Jeffrey Scott, B.S. Firearms Examiner, 
Kentucky State Police. 

Drake, Frank D., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus, Astrono- 
my and Astrophysics, Univ. of Calif., Santa Cruz. 


Draper, Grenville, Ph.D. Prof. of Geology, 
Florida International Univ. 


Drescher, Seymour, Ph.D. Univ. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Pittsburgh. 


Drotman, D. Peter, M.D.,M.P.H. Senior Medical 
Officer, National Center for Infectious Diseases, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Druesedow, Jean L, AM. Director, Kent State 
Univ. Museum. 

Druker, Brian J.,M.D. Prof. of Medicine, Oregon 
Health and Science Univ. 

Drury, George H., MA. Writer, Rai/ Travel 
Guidebooks. 


Dubois, Andre, Ph.D. Rsch. Prof. of Medicine, 
Uniformed Services Univ. of the Health Sciences. 
Dudley, Theodore R., Ph.D. Lead Scientist and 
Research Botanist, U.S. National Arboretum. 

Duff, Patrick, M.D. Prof. and Residency Program 
Director, Univ. of Florida College of Medicine. 
Duffey, Bernard, PhD. Former Prof. of English, 
Duke Univ. 

Dumaine, Deborah President, Better Communi- 
cations; author, Write to the Top. 

Dumas, Emest C., B.J. Asst. Prof. of Mass Com- 
munication, Univ. of Central Arkansas. 

Dumenil, Lynn, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Occidental College. 

Dundes, Alan, Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology and 
Folklore, Univ. of California, Berkeley. 

Dunlap, Kent, LLM. Principal Legal Adviser, 
Copyright Office, Library of Congress. 

Dunleavy, Janet Egleson, Ph.D. Prof. Emerita of 
English and Comparative Literature, Univ. of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee. 

Dunn, Richard J., Ph.D. Prof. of English, Univ. of 
Washington. 

DuPont, Robert L, M.D. President, Institute for 
Behavior and Health, Inc. 

Durant, Jack D., Ph.D. Former Prof. of English, 
North Carolina State Univ. 

Duren, Stephen, Ph.D. Equine Nutritionist, Ken- 
tucky Equine Research. 

Durocher, Claudette, B.A. Editorial Page Editor, 
The (Nashua, NH) Jelegraph. 

Dutcher, Janice Phillips, M.D. Prof. of Medicine, 
Assoc. Dir. for Clinical Affairs, Our Lady of Mercy 
Med. Ctr., Comprehensive Cancer Ctr. 

Dwyer, Johanna T., D.Sc. Prof. of Medicine and 
Community Health, Tufts Univ. Schools of Medi- 
cine and Nutrition. 

Dybas, Cheryl Lyn, MA. Free-lance science jour- 
nalist 

Dykstra, Daniel J., S.J.D. Former Prof. of Law, 
Univ. of California, Davis. 


E 


Earle, Rosalie, B.S. Managing Editor, The 
Charleston (WV) Gazette. 

Easby, Rebecca Jeffrey, Ph.D. Asst. Prof., Trinity 
College. 

Eastman, Joel Webb, Ph.D. Former Prof. of His- 
tory, Univ. of Southern Maine. 

Eaton, George W., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus, Univ. of 
British Columbia. 


Eaton, William J.,M.S.J. Curator, the Bumpy 
Program at the Univ. of Maryland; winner o 
Pulitzer Prize for National Reporting, 1970. 


Eaves, Peter J.,O.N.C Chem. Technical Director, 


WRS Film and Video Laboratory. 


Ebersole, Lynn A., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Dept. of Bi- 
ological Sciences, Northern Kentucky Univ. 


Ebert, Andrew G., Ph.D. Executive Director, 
International Food Additives Council. 

Ebert, Roger, B.S. Film Critic, Chicago Sun- 
Times; winner of Pulitzer Prize for Criticism, 1975. 
Eck, Paul, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Horticulture, Rut- 
gers, the State Univ. of New Jersey. 

Ecke, Paul, tll, M.S. M.B.A. Chief Executive 
Officer, Paul Ecke Ranch. 

Eckert, Carter J., Ph.D. Prof., Dept. of East Asian 
Languages and Civilizations, Harvard Univ. 
Eckman, James R., M.D. Prof. of Hematology- 
Oncology and Director of Georgia Sickle Cell Cen- 
ter, Emory Univ. School of Medicine. 

Eckstein, Arthur M., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Maryland. 

Eddy, William P., B.S. Feature Sections Editor, 
Lincoln (NE) Journal Star. 

Edelman, Jerome P. Shorthand Production 
Manager and Platewriter, McGraw-Hill Book Co. 
Edgerton, Samuel Y., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Art 
History, Williams College. 

Edmonds, Richard Louis, Ph.D. Senior Lecturer 
and Editor, The China Quarterly, SOAS, Univ. of 
London. 

Edmunds, R. David, Ph.D. Watson Prof. of Amer- 
ican History, Univ. of Texas, Dallas. 

Edwards, M.U., Ph.D. President Emeritus, St 
Olaf College. 

Edwards, Paul N., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. , School of 
Information, Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 
Edwards, R. Wayne, Ed.D. Former Director of 
Athletics and Assoc. Vice Chancellor, Univ. of 
Massachusetts, Lowell. 

Edwards, Richard A., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Theology, Marquette Univ. 

Egan, Clifford L, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Houston. 

Egerton, Douglas R., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Le 
Moyne College. 

3 ea Claude A., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
Education, Univ. of Michigan. 

Ehinger, John, MA. Editorial Page Editor, The 
Huntsville (AL) Times. 


Ehrick, Christine, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Northern lowa. 


Eichhorn, Donald H., D.Ed. Former Superinten- 
dent, Lewisburg (PA) Area Schools. 


Eidt, Robert C., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Geography 
and Dir., State Soils Lab., Univ. of Wisconsin. 
Eifrig, David E., M.D. Prof. and Chairman, Dept 
of Ophthalmology, Univ. of North Carolina. 
Eilers, H. Peter, Ph.D. Prof., Dept. of Earth Sci- 
ence, Willamette Univ. 

Eils, Larry M., M.P.H. Director, Health, Safety, 
and Technical Standards, National Automatic 
Merchandising Association. 

Einstein, Herbert H., Dipl. Ing. ETH Prof. of 
Civil Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 

Ekirch, Arthur A., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
History, State Univ. of New York, Albany. 

Ela, Patrick H., M.B.A. Chair, Board of Trustees, 
Craft and Folk Art Museum, Los Angeles. 


Elbow, Gary S., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, Texas 
Tech Univ. 

Elder, E. Rozanne, Ph.D. Director, Institute of 
Cistercian Studies, Western Michigan Univ. 


Eldredge, Charles C, Ph.D. Hall Distinguished 
Prof. of American Art, Univ. of Kansas. 


Ellenbogen, Rudolph, M.S. Curator of Rare 
Books, Columbia Univ. 

Ellerbach, Susan, B.S. Managing Editor, Tu/sa 
(OK) World. 

Elliot, James L, Ph.D. Prof., Dept. of Earth, At- 
mospheric, and Planetary Sciences, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. 

Elliott, James Robert, Il, AB. Past President, 
Orders and Medals Society of America. 

Ellis, Elizabeth Garrity, Ph.D. Former Asst. Prof. 
of Art History, Southern Methodist Univ. 

Ellis, Mark A. City Editor, The Columbus (OH) 
Dispatch. 

Ellis, Richard E., Ph.D. Prof. of History, State Univ. 
of New York, Buffalo. 


Ellison, Herbert J., Ph.D. Prof. of Russian History, 
Jackson School of International Studies, Univ. of 
Washington. 

Ellison, William L, Jr., MA. Deputy Managing 
Editor, The (Louisville, KY) Courier-Journal. 
Ellwood, Robert §., Jr., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Re- 
ligion, Univ. of Southern California. 

Elmore, Barbara, BA. Managing Editor, Waco 
(TX) Tribune-Herald. 

Elmstrom, Gary W., Ph.D. Plant Breeder, Sun- 
seeds. 


Elrod, Linda Henry, J.D. Distinguished Prof. of 
Law, Washburn Unw. School of Law. 


Elson, Mary, B.A. Deputy Metropolitan Editor, 
Chicago Tribune. 

Embry, Patrick S. “Pat” Editor, Middle Ten- 
nessee Community Newspapers. 

Emery, Michael, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Journal: 
ism, California State Univ., Northridge. 

Emy, Hugh V., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Politics, 
Monash Univ. 

Enderle, John D., Ph.D. Director and Prof. of Bio- 
medical Engineering, Univ. of Connecticut, Storrs. 
Engel, Toby R.,M.D. Prof. of Medicine, Univ. of 
Texas. 

Engels, Donald, Ph.D. Former Asst Prof. of 
History, Wellesley College. 

English, John, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Waterloo. 

6 par Peter C., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Pediatrics 
and of History, Duke Univ. 

Engst, Elaine D., M.A. Archivist, Cornell Univ. 
Enlow, Harold L. Woodcarver and author, 
Patterns for Wood Carving. 

Epps, Helen H., Ph.D. Prof. of Textile Science, 
Univ. of Georgia. 

Epstein, Cynthia Fuchs, Ph.D. Distinguished 
Prof. of Sociology, Graduate Center, City Univ. of 
New York 

Epstein, William H., Ph.D. Prof. of English, Univ. 
of Arizona. 

Erickson, Erling A., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Histo- 
ry, Univ. of the Pacific. 

Erickson, H. T., Ph.D. Prof. of Horticulture, 
Purdue Univ. 

Erickson, Stephen A., Ph.D. E. Wilson Lyon Prof. 
of Humanities and Chairman, Philosophy Dept, 
Pomona College. 

Ernst, Carl H., Ph.D. Distinguished Prof. of Biolo- 
gy, George Mason Univ. 

Eschman, Donald F., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Geology, Univ. of Michigan. 

Eschmeyer, William N., Ph.D. Senior Curator, 
Dept of Ichthyology, Calif. Academy of Sciences. 
Esenwein, George R., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof of Histo- 
ry, Univ. of Florida 

Esler, William C.,B.A. Editor in Chief, Quick Print 
Products. 

Essex, Randy, BA. Journalist, Des Moines, IA. 
Evans, Larry,BA. Five-time U.S. chess champion; 
author, Chess: Beginner to Expert. 

Evans, Simon M., Ph.D. Former Assoc. Prof. of 
Geography, Memorial Univ. of Newfoundland. 
Eve, Raymond A., Ph.D. Prof. of Sociology, Univ. 
of Texas, Arlington. 

Everett, Cathy Carrithers Special Projects 
Editor, Yurna(AZ) Daily Sun. 

Everson, Jeff M., Ph.D. Editor in Chief, Planet 
Muscle Magazine. 

Evert, Chris Tennis champion. 

Eves, Howard W., Ph.D. Distinguished Visiting 
Prof. of Mathematics, Univ. of Central Florida. 


Ewing, Rodney C., Ph.D. Prof., Nuclear Engineer- 
ing and Radiological Sciences and Adjunct Prof., 
Geological Sciences, Univ. of Michigan. 

Exline, Christopher H., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair- 
man, Dept. of Geography, Univ. of Nevada, Reno. 
Eybel, Carl E., M.D. Senior Attending Asst Prof., 
Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center. 


Eyman, Alice Page, M.A. Director and Prof., 
Univ. of Delaware Laboratory Preschool, College 
of Human Resources, Univ. of Delaware. 


Eyster, Linda S., Ph.D. Teacher, Milton Academy. 
F 
Faber, Betty Lane, Ph.D. Staff Scientist, Liberty 





fe 


— 


Science Center. 


Faber, Sandra M., Ph.D. Prof. of Astronomy, Lick 
Observatory, Univ. of California, Santa Cruz 
Fabian, Carol, M.D. Prof. of Medicine, Division 
of Clinical Oncology, and Breast Program Director, 
Kansas Univ. Cancer Center. 

Facemire, Charles F., Ph.D. Former Environmen- 
tal Toxicologist, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 
Fagan, Brian M., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology, 
Univ. of California, Santa Barbara. 

Fagan, Julie M., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Animal 
Science, Rutgers, the State Univ. of New Jersey. 
Fagin, Stephen, BA Asst Sunday Editor, The 
Day Publishing Co. 

Fain, Stephen M., Ed.D. Prof. of Education, 
Florida international Univ. 

Falk, Nancy E. Auer, Ph.D. Prof. of Religion, 
Western Michigan Univ. 

Fall, Bernard B., Ph.D. Author, The Two Vier- 
Nams. 

Falta, Ronald W., Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of Earth Sci- 
ences, Clemson Univ. 

Fandy, Mamoun H., Ph.D. Prof., Center for Con- 
temporary Arab Studies, Georgetown Univ. 
Fangmeier, Delmar D., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Agricultural and Biosystems Engineering, Univ. of 
Arizona. 

Fantham, Elaine, Ph.D. Giger Prof. of Latin Emeri- 
ta, Dept. of Classics, Princeton Univ. 


Farkas, Daniel F., Ph.D. Prof. and Head, Dept of 
Food Science and Technology, Oregon State Univ. 
Farley, Fred, BA. Unlimited Hydroplane 
Historian, American Power Boat Association. 
Farnham, Dale E., Ph.D. Prof. of Agronomy, lowa 
State Univ. 

Farr,D.M.L, D.Phil. Prof. Emeritus of History, 
Carleton Univ. 


Farr, Roger, Ed.D. Chancellor's Prof. and Dir. of 
the Center for Innovation in Assessment, Smith 
Research Center, Indiana Univ., Bloomington. 


Farrell, john T., Ph.D. Former Prof. of History, 
Catholic Univ. of America. 

Farrell, Joseph N., BA. Columnist, Reading (PA) 
Eagle/Reading Times. 

Farrell, Michael, BA. Managing Editor, The 
(Covington) Kentucky Post 

Farwell, Sherry O., Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, 
Univ. of idaho. 

Faulk, Odie B., Ph.D. Former Prof. of History, 
Northeastern State Univ. 

Fawcett, John, MA. Asst. Archivist for Presiden- 
tial Libraries, Natl. Archives and Records Admin. 
Fay, Matthew M.,M.S. Scientist, T/} Technolo- 
gies, Inc. 

Feagin, Joe R., Ph.D. Graduate Research Prof. of 
Sociology, Univ. of Florida. 

Feather, Leonard Author, The Encyclopedia of 
Jazz. 

Feder, Robert, B.S. Television and Radio 
Columnist, Chicago Sun-Times. 

Feduccia, Alan, Ph.D. Prof. and Chairman, Dept 
of Biology, Univ. of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 
Fee, Elizabeth, Ph.D. Chief, History of Medicine 
Division, National Library of Medicine. 

Fehl, Pamela J., B.A. Director, Graphic Artists 
Guild of New York 

Fehrs, Don, Ph.D. Senior Investment Officer, 
Cornell Univ. 

Feig!, Dorothy M., Ph.D. Vice President, Dean of 
Faculty, Prof. of Chemistry, Saint Marys College. 
Feinberg, Gerald, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Physics, 
Columbia Univ. 

Feinberg, Jack, Ph.D.Phys. Prof., Physics Dept, 
Univ. of Southern California. 

Feinstein, MyronE., MBA. Former Director, 
Lever Brothers Co. 

Feldman, Gary J., Ph.D. Frank B. Baird, Jr., Prof. of 
Science, Harvard Univ. 

Feldman, Richard M., M.D. Chairman. Dept of 
Emergency Medicine, Illinois Masonic Med. Ctr 
Felkenes, George T., Dr.Crim. Prof. Emeritus of 
Criminal Justice, Claremont Graduate Univ. 
Felson, Nancy, Ph.D. Prof. of Classics, Univ. of 
Georgia. 


Fenwick, Lynda Beck, J.D. Attorney and author 
of Should the Children Pray? 


Contributors and consultants 


Feretic, Eileen, BA. Former Editor in Chief, Be- 
yond Computing magazine. 

Ferguson, John C, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Biology 
and Marine Science, Eckerd College. 


Ferguson, R. Brian, Ph.D. Prof. of Sociology and 
Anthropology, Rutgers, the State Univ. of New Jer- 
sey, Newark 


Fernandez, James W., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropolo- 


ay, Univ. of Chicago. 


Fermea, Elizabeth Wamock, BA. Prof. Emeritus 
of English and Middle Eastern Studies, Univ. of 
Texas, Austin. 


Ferrara, Ronald J., Ed.D. Prof., Dept of Aero- 
space, Middle Tennessee State Univ. 


Ferrell, Keith Free-lance science writer; former 
Editor, OMN/ magazine. 


Ferrell, Ray E., jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Geology, 
Louisiana State Univ. 


Ferrell, Robert H., Ph.D. Distinguished Prof. of 
History, Indiana Univ., Bloomington. 

Ferrill, Arther, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Washington. 


Fetter, Bruce, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee. 


Field, Bruce F., Ph.D. Acting Assoc. Director, 
FEEL, Natl. Inst. of Standards and Technology. 


Fields, Clark L, Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, Univ. of 
Northern Colorado. 


Fienberg, Stephen E., Ph.D. Prof. of Statistics 
and Social Science, Carnegie-Mellon Univ. 
Fierman, William, Ph.D. Director, Inner Asian 
and Uralic National Resource Center, Indiana Univ. 
Filler, Louis, Ph.D. Former historian, lexicograph- 
er, and editor. 

Filosa, Gary Fairmont R., ll, Ph.D. President, 
international Surfing Committee (ISC). 
Finckenauer, James O., Ph.D. Director, Interna- 
tional Center, National Institute of Justice. 

Findlay, Raymond D., Ph.D. Director, Engineer- 
ing and Management, McMaster Univ. 


Fin , judith, Ph.D. Former Prof. of History, 
Dalhousie Univ. 

Fink, Peter E., M.Div. Prof. of Liturgical Theology, 
Weston Jesuit School of Theology. 

Finke, Wayne H., Ph.D. Asst Prof. of Modern 
Languages, Baruch College. 

Finn, Bernard §., Ph.D. Curator, National Muse- 
um of American History. 

Finn, John W., M.D. Executive Medical Director, 
Hospice of Michigan. 

Finnegan, Gregory Allan, Ph.D. Assoc. Librarian 
for Public Services and Head of Reference in the 
Tozzer Library, Harvard Univ. 

Finney, Ben, Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology, Univ. of 
Hawaii. 

Firmage, Edwin B., S.J.D. Samuel D. Thurman 
Prof. of Law, Univ. of Utah College of Law. 

Firpo, Meri, Ph.D. Research Geneticist, Univ. of 
California, San Francisco. 

Fischer, J.R., Ph.D. Dean’Director, South Caroli- 
na Agriculture and Forestry Research System, 
Clemson Univ. 

Fischer, John E., Ph.D. Prof. of Materials Science, 
Univ. of Pennsylvania. 

Fischer, Stanley, Ph.D. First Deputy Managing 
Director, International Monetary Fund. 


Fisher, Bart, B.S. Coordinator of Athletic 
Development, Central Connecticut State Univ. 
Fisher, Edwin B., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Psychology, 
Medicine, and Pediatrics; Director, Center for 
Health Behavior Research, Washington Univ. 
Fisher, James F., Ph.D. Prof., Chairman, Dept of 
Sociology and Anthropology, Carleton College. 
Fisher, Louis, Ph.D. Senior Specialist in Separa- 
tion of Powers, Congressional Research Service, 
Library of Congress. 

Fisher, Michael H., Ph.D. Prot. of History, Obertin 
College. 

Fisher, Sydney N., Ph.D. Author The Middle 
fast A History 

Fisher, Terri D., Ph.D. Assoc Prof of Psychology. 
Ohio State Univ. Mansfield 

Fiss, Owen Mt, LLB Sterling Prof. of Law. Yale 
Univ 

Fitz, Earl E., PhD 
and Comparative Literature. Van 
Fitzgerald, Alan, BA Communications consul- 


Prof. of Fosuguess Spanish, 
erbilt Univ 


XXIII 


tant, Alan Fitzgerald & Associates. 

Fitzgerald, Ed Author, 7he Ballplayer. 
Fitzgerald, F. Patrick, MAT. Prof. of Geogra- 
phy/History, Univ. of Alaska Southeast. 
Fitzpatrick, Jim, BA. Executive Director, Interna- 
tional Assoc. of Skateboard Companies. 


Fitzpatrick, John W., Ph.D. Director, Laboratory 
of Ornithology, Cornell Univ. 


Fixico, Donald L, Ph.D. Director, Center for In- 
digenous Nations Studies, Univ. of Kansas. 


Fleischner, Jeannette E., Ed.D. Former Prof. of 
Special Ed., Teachers College, Columbia Univ. 


Fieishman, Avrom, Ph.D. Prof. of English, Johns 
Hopkins Univ. 

Fieming, Henry P., Ph.D. Research Leader, Prof,, 
Dept of Food Science, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture. 
Flick, George J., Jr., Ph.D. University Distin- 
guished Prof., Food Science and Technology, Vir- 
ginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univ. 

Flick, Reinhard E., Ph.D. Oceanographer, Rsch. 
Assoc., Scripps institution of Oceanography. 
Fiint, Harrison L, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Horti- 
culture, Purdue Univ. 


Flores, Dan L, Ph.D. Hammond Prof. of Western 
History, Univ. of Montana. 


Flynn, Michael S., Ph.D. Assoc. Director, Office 
for the Study of Automotive Transportation, Univ. 
of Michigan Transportation Research Institute. 
Flynn, Thomas P. Vice President of Communica 
tions, (Rochester, NY) Democrat and Chronicle. 
Fogarty, Gerald P., S.T.M. Prof. of Religious 
Studies and History, Univ. of Virginia 

Fost, Daniel Mark, Ph.D. Executive Vice Chan- 
cellor and Provost, Louisiana State Univ. 
Fogelson, Raymond D., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthro- 
pology and Psychology, Univ. of Chicago. 

Foley, William E., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Central 
Missouri State Univ. 


Foner, Eric, Ph.D. DeWitt Clinton Prof. of History, 
Columbia Univ. 

Fontaine, Carole R., Ph.D. Prof. of Hebrew 
Scriptures, Andover Newton Theological School. 


Fontana, Lynn A., Ph.D. President, Thoughtful 
Technologies, LLC 

Foody, James J., M.D. Assoc. Prof., Clinical Med- 
icine; Assoc. Section Chief, Clinical Affairs Section 
of General Internal Medicine, Univ. of Chicago. 
Forbes, Glenn, M.D. Prof. and Chairman of 
Radiology, Mayo Clinic. 

Forcey, Charles B., Ph.D. Prof. of History Emeri- 
tus, Binghamton Univ. 


Forcey, LindaR., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., School of 
General Studies, State Univ. of New York. 
Binghamton. 

Ford, Franklin L,_LH.D. McLean Prof. of Ancient 
and Modern History Emeritus, Harvard Univ. 
Ford, John K.B., Ph.D. Research Zoologist, 
Vancouver Aquarium. 

Ford, Norman L, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Biology, 
Saint John’s Univ. 

Forester, DonC., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, Towson 
Univ. 

Forman, james D., LLB. Attorney and author. 


Forsman, Eric, Ph.D. Research Wildlife Biologist, 
U.S. Forest Service. 

Foss, Clive, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Massachusetts, Boston. 

Foster, David E., Ph.D. Prof., Engine Research 
Center, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Foster, David William, Ph.D. Regents Prof. of 
Spanish, Interdisciplinary Humanities, and 
Women's Studies, Arizona State Univ. 

Foster, john Elgin, Ph.D. Former Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Alberta. 


Foster, Stephen C., Ph.D Prof. of Ant History, 
Univ. of lowa. 

Fowler, Catherine S., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropolo- 
gy, Univ. of Nevada. Reno. 

Fowler, Don D., Ph.D. Prof. of Historic Preserva- 
tion and Anthropology. Univ of Nevada. Reno. 
Fowler, Loretta, Ph.D Prof. of Anthropology 
Indiana Univ . Bloomington. 

Fowler, William Morgan, Jr. Ph.D. Director, 
The Massachusetts Histoncal Society 


Fox, Eleanor AL, LLB. Prof. of Law New York 
Uni. School ot Law 


XXIV Contributors and consultants 


Fox, Marye Anne, Ph.D. Waggoner Chair in 
Chemistry, Univ. of Texas, Austin. 


Fox, Michael W.,D.Sc. Senior Scholar, Bioethics, 
Humane Society of the United States. 

Fox, Stephen, Ph.D. Historian. 

Frances, Allen, M.D. Prof. of Psychiatry, Duke 
Univ. Medical School. 

Francko, David A., Ph.D. Prof. and Chairman, 
Dept of Botany, Miami Univ. 

Frank, Elizabeth §.,MA_ Curator of Large 
Mammals, Milwaukee County Zoo. 

Frankel, Richard B., Ph.D. Prof. of Physics. 
California Polytechnic State Univ. 

Franklin, James L, M.D. Assoc. Prof. of Medi- 
cine, Rush-Presbyterian- St. Luke's Medical Center. 
Franklin, William L, Ph.D. Mammalian Wildlife 
Ecologist, lowa State Univ 

Fraser, Graham, MA_ Parlimentary Correspond- 
ent, The Toronto, Canada) Globe and Mail 
Fratkin, Elliot, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. and Chair, Dept 
of Anthropology, Smith College. 

Fraze, Kathleen M.,B.S. Copy Desk Chief, Akron 
(OH) Beacon journal. 

Frazier, Gregory, MA. Executive Director, 
AudioVision Inc. 

Freas, Samuel James, Ed.D. President, Interna- 
tional Swimming Hall of Fame. 

Frederic, Paul B., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, Univ 
of Maine, Farmington. 

Fredrickson, Leigh H., Ph.D. Rucker Prof. of 


Fisheries and Wildlife and Director, Gaylord 
Memorial Laboratory, Univ. of Missoun, Columbia 
Freedman, David Noel, Th.B. Arthur F. Thurnau 
Prof. of Biblical Studies, Univ of Michigan. 
Freedman, Wendy, Ph.D. Astronomer, Observa- 
tories of the Carnegie Institution ot Washington. 
Freehling, William W., Ph.D. Singletary Prof. of 
the Humanities, Univ. of Kentucky. 

Freeman, john G., MA Assoc. Prof. of Journal- 
ism, Univ. of Florida. 

Freidel, Frank, Ph.D. Author, The Splendid Little 
War. 

Friederich, Werner P., Ph.D. Former Kenan Prof. 
of German and Comparative Literature, Univ. of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 

Friedman, Ann, Ph.D. Education Specialist, 

J. Paul Getty Museum. 

Fritz, Harry W., Ph.D. Chair, Dept of History, 
Univ. of Montana. 

Frodin, Joanna H., Ph.D. Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. 

From, Milton, Ph.D. Asst. Prot. of Physics, West- 
em Washington Univ. 

Fry, Edward S., Ph.D. Prof. of Physics, Texas 
A&M Unw. 

Frye, B.E, Ph.D. Provost and Vice President for 
Academic Affairs, Emory Univ. 

Frye, Richard Nelson, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Iranian Studies, Harvard Univ. 

Frykenberg, Robert Eric, Ph.D. Prof. Emer., His- 
tory and South Asian Studies, Univ. of Wisconsin. 
Fuhrmann, joseph T., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Murray State Univ. 

Fujita, T. Theodore, Sc.D. Prof. Emeritus of Me- 
teorology, Univ. of Chicago. 

Fukuta, Norihiko, Ph.D. Prof. of Meteorology, 
Univ. of Utah. 

Fulghum, Julia E., Ph.D. Prof., Dept of Chemistry, 
Kent State Univ. 

Fulton, E. Kaye,BA. Senior Writer, Macleans 
magazine. 

Fulton, Robert, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Sociolo- 
gy, Univ. of Minnesota, Twin Cities Campus. 
Furnas, David W., M.D. Clinical Prof. of Surgery, 
College of Medicine, Univ. of California, Irvine. 
Fusfeld, Daniel R., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Economics, Univ. of Michigan. 


Fuson, Karen Connors, Ph.D. Prof. ot Education, 
Northwestern Univ. 
G 


Gabel, Christopher R., Ph.D. Historian, US. 
Army Command and General Staff College. 


Gable, Dan, B.S. Former Wrestling Coach, Univ. 
of lowa. 


Gable, John A., Ph.D. Executive Director, 


Theodore Roosevelt Association. 


Gadwood, Robert C, Ph.D. Senior Scientist, 
Pharmacia & Upjohn. 

Gager, Wyvolyn.BA Former Editor in Chief, 
Cleaner Publications, Kingston, Jamaica. 
Gagliano, Joseph A., Ph.D. Prof. of Latin Amen- 
can History, Loyola Univ of Chicago. 

Gailey, Harry A., Ph.D. Prof. of History and Coor- 
dinator of African Studies, San Jose State Univ. 


Gait, Robert L, Ph.D. Curator Emeritus of Miner- 
alogy, Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto. 


Gallagher, joan S., PhD. Research Assoc., 
Pathology Immunology, Univ. of Cincinnati. 
Gallagher, Rachel, BA Author, Games in the 
Street 

Gallis, Paul E, Ph.D. Section Head, Europe and 
Eurasia Foreign Aftairs, Defense, and Trade Divi- 
sion, Congressional Research Service. 
Galloway, J.H., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, Univ. of 
Toronto. 

Galvin, Antoinette B., Ph.D. Research Assoc., 
Prof., Institute for the Study of Earth, Oceans, and 
Space, Univ. of New Hampshire. 

Gandy, Joan W., BA Former Managing Editor, 
The Natchez(MS) Democrat 

Gangel, Kenneth O., Ph.D. Former Academic 
Dean, Dallas Theological Seminary. 

Gantt, Elisabeth, Ph.D. Research Biologist, 
Smithsonian Institution. 

Gantz, Nelson M.,M.D. Chairman, Dept of Med- 
icine and Chief, Division of Infectious Diseases, 
Pinnacle Health Hospitals. 

Garbarino, Merwyn §S., Ph.D. Prof. Emerita of 
Anthropology, Univ. of Illinois, Chicago. 

Garber, Eugene K., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Eng- 
lish, State Univ. of New York, Albany. 


Garber, Lawrence L, Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, 
Indiana Univ., South Bend. 


Garcia, Homer D.C, Ph.D. Vice Provost for Aca- 
demic Planning, Baylor Univ. 

Gardin, Julius M., M.D. Prof. of Medicine, Div. of 
Cardiology, Univ. of California Invine Medical Ctr. 
Gardner, Lloyd C, PhD. Prof. of History, Rut- 
gers, the State Univ. of New Jersey. 

Garfield, Robert, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
DePaul Univ. 

Garfinkel, Irwin, Ph.D. Mitchell |. Ginsberg Prof. 
of Contemporary Urban Problems, Columbia Univ. 
School of Social Work. 

Garibaldi, Louis E, Dir., New York Aquarium. 
Garmon, Lucille B., Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, 
State Univ. of West Georgia. 


Games, Sara, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of English, Ohio 
State Univ. 

Gamick, Marc B., M.D. Clinical Prof., Medicine, 
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School. 

Garretson, Peter P., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Florida State Univ. 

Garrett, Charles L, B.S. President, Garrett 
Electronics, Ine. 

Garrison, David L, Ph.D. Asst Program Director, 
Ocean Sciences Div., National Science Foundation. 
Garrow, David J., Ph.D. Author, Bearing the 
Cross: Martin Luther King, Jr, and the Southem 
Chnstan Leadership Conference; winner, Pulitzer 
Prize for Biography or Autobiography, 1987. 
Garzke, William H., Jr., M.S. Staff Naval Archi- 
tect, Gibbs & Cox, Inc. 

Gass, Susan M., Ph.D. Prof. of English, Michigan 
State Univ. 

Gates, William C, Jr., MA Curator and Histon: 
an, Ohio Historical Society. 

Gaud, Susan M., Ph.D. Director, External Tech- 
nology, Kraft Foods. 

Gauthreaux, Sidney A., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Zoolo- 
gy, Clemson Unw. 

Gavrilas, Mirela, PhD. Asst. Prot., Dept of Mate- 
rials and Nuclear Engineering, University of Mary- 
land, College Park. 

Gavrilovich, Peter Deputy Nation World Editor, 
Detroit Free Press, author, The Detroit Almanac: 
300 Years of Lite in the Motor City. 

Gedzelman, Stanley David, PhD. Prof. of 
Meteorology, City College of New York. 
Geerken, John H., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Scripps 
College. 


Geherin, David, Ph.D. Prof. of English, Eastern 
Michigan Univ. 

Geiger, Gordon H., Ph.D. Consultant, T. P. 
McNulty & Associates. 

Geist, Valerius, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Environ- 
mental Sciences, Univ. of Calgary. 

Gelfand, Lawrence E., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
History, Univ. of lowa 

Gelles, Richard J., Ph.D. Prof. of Social Welfare 
and Director, Doctoral Program, School of Social 
Work, Univ. of Pennsylvania. 

Gellman, Barton, M.LH. Military Correspond- 
ent, The Washington Post 

Genovese, E.N., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair of Classics 
and Humanities, San Diego State Univ. 
Genovese, Michael A., Ph.D. Loyola Chair of 
Leadership, Loyola Marymount Univ. 

Genoways, Hugh H., Ph.D. Prof., Univ. of Nebras- 
ka State Museum, Univ. of Nebraska, Lincoln. 


Gentry, Alwyn H., Ph.D. Former Senior Curator, 
Missoun Botanical Garden. 

George, David B., B.S. Director, Technology, 
Kennecott Utah Copper Corp. 

George, William L, Jr., Ph.D. Assoc. Dean and 
Prof. of Horticulture, College of Agriculture, Univ. 
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. 

Gerace, Paul L, Ph.D. Former Technical Special- 
ist and Project Manager, Xerox Corp. 

Gerard, Valrie A., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Marine 
Sciences, State Univ. of New York, Stony Brook 
Gerber, Jane S., PhD. Prof. of History, Dir., Insti- 
tute for Sephardic Studies, City Univ. of New York. 
Gerbie, Melvin V., M.D. Prof., Clinical Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Northwestern Univ. Med. School. 
Gerdes, Dick, PhD. Prof. of Latin-American 
Literature, Univ. of New Mexico. 

Gereau, Roy E, M.S. Curatorial Asst, Missouri 
Botanical Garden. 

Gergen, Kenneth J., Ph.D. Prof. of Psychology, 
Swarthmore College. 

Gerking, Shelby, Ph.D. Prof. of Economics and 
Finance, Univ. of Wyoming. 

Gerlach, John, Ph.D. Lead Design Chemist, 
Unocal Corp. 

Gervers, Michael, PhD. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Toronto, Scarborough. 


Getson, Heather-Anne, BA Curator of Collec- 
tions, Fisheries Museum of the Atlantic. 


Gettleman, Marvin E., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Polytechnic Institute of New York 


Ghandakly, Adel A., Ph.D. Prof. of Electrical En- 
gineering and Computer Science, Univ. of Toledo. 


Giacumakis, George, Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of History 
and Director of California State Univ., Fullerton, 
Mission Viejo Campus. 

Giannelli, Paul C, LLM. Weatherhead Prof. of 
Law, Case Western Reserve Univ. 

Giannetti, Louis, Ph.D. Prof. of English and Film, 
Case Western Reserve Univ. 

Gibbard, Bruce G., Ph.D. Senior Physicist, 
Brookhaven National Laboratory. 

Gibbons, Don C, Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of Sociolo- 
gy and Urban Studies, Portland State Univ. 


Gibbons, J. Whitfield, Ph.D. Senior Ecologist, 
Savannah River Ecology Laboratory. 


Gibson, Arrell Morgan, Ph.D. George Lynn 
Cross Research Prof., Univ. of Oklahoma. 

Gibson, Charles, Ph.D. Former Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Michigan. 

Gibson, Janice T., Ed.D. Prof. of Developmental 
Psychology, Univ. of Pittsburgh. 

Gibson, Lay James Prof. of Geography and 
Regional Development and Director, Economic 
Development Research Program, Univ. of Arizona. 
Gibson, Robert er,BA Senior Waiter, Politi- 
cal Reporter, Chartottesville (VA) Daily Progress. 
Giddins, Gary, BA. Columnist, Staff Writer, 
Village Voice. 

Giele, Janet Zollinger, Ph.D. Prof. of Sociology, 
Heller Graduate School, Brandeis Univ. 

Gierasch, Peter J., PhD. Prof. of Astronomy, 
Comell Univ. 

Gies, David Thatcher, Ph.D Commonwealth 
Prof. of Spanish and Chairman, Univ. of Virginia. 
Gilbert, Marc Jason, Ph.D. Prof. of History, North 
Georgia College and State Univ. 








Gilbert, Roger, Ph.D. Asst Prof. of English, 
Cornell Univ. 

Gilbert, William H., Ph.D. Former Indian Affairs 
Specialist, Library of Congress. 

Gilderhus, Mark T., Ph.D. Prof. ut History, Lyn- 
don Baines Johnson Chair, Texas Christian Univ 
Gill, Thomas J., 1, M.D. Menten Prot. of Experi- 
mental Pathology Emeritus, Univ. of Pittsburgh, 
Gillenwater, Mack H., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Marshall Univ. 

Gillespie, Thomas D., Ph.D. P.-E. Senior Re- 
search Scientist, Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arhor. 
Gillette, Robert, B.S. Former Staff Writer, Wash- 
ington Bureau, Los Angeles Times. 

Gilligan, Amy K. City Editor, (Dubuque, IA) Je/e- 
graph Herald. 

Gillingham, John Senior Lecturer, London 
School of Economics and Political Science 
Gillmor, Desmond A., Ph.D. Emeritus Assoc. 
Prof. and Fellow, Trinity College, Univ. of Dublin. 
Gilman, Alan David, M.D. Asst. Prot. of Medi- 
cine, Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center. 
Gilman, Rhoda R., M.A. Research Assoc., 
Minnesota Historical Society. 

Gilmore, Daniel, BA. Former Editor, Prince Ru- 
pert(BC) Daily News. 

Gilmore, Jesse L, Ph.D. Former Prof. of History, 
Portland State Univ. 

Gilmour, Jeff, BA, LLB. Research Assoc., Arctic 
Institute of North America, Univ. of Calgary. 
Gitelman, Zvi, Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science and 
Judaic Studies, Univ. of Michigan. 

Gitlow, Howard Seth, Ph.D. Executive Director, 
Institute for the Study of Quality, Univ of Miamtr. 
Gittleman, Arthur, Ph.D. Prot. of Mathematics 
and Computer Science, California State Univ., 
Long Beach. 

Givens, David B., Ph.D. Director, Center tor Non 
verbal Studies. 

Glantz, Stanton A., Ph.D. Prof. of Medicine, Univ. 
of California, San Francisco. 

Glaser, Donald A., D.Sc. Former Prof. of Physics 
and Neurobiology, Univ. ot California, Berkeley; 
Winner of Nobel! Prize for Physics, 1960. 

Glazier, Stephen D., Ph.D. Prot. of Anthropolo- 
gy, Univ. of Nebraska. 

Glendon, Mary Ann, M.Comp.L_ Prof. of Law, 
Harvard Law School. 

Glenn, Alan H., Ph.D. Principal Eogineer, 
Flowserve Corp. 

Glenn, Justin M., Ph.D. Prof. ot Classics, Florida 
State Univ. 

Glenn, Stanley L, Ph.D. Emeritus Prot. of 
Dramatic Art, Univ. of Califoroia, Santa Barbara. 
Glickman, Harvey, Ph.D. Prof. of Political Sci- 
eoce, Haverford College. 

Glover, Sandra J., Ph.D Prof. Eoverita of Biology, 
Appalachiao State Univ. 

Gocek, F. Muge, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of Sociology, 
Univ. uf Michigan. 

Goddard, E. D., Ph.D. Corporate Research 
Fellow, Union Carbide Corp. 

Godfrey, James L, Ph.D. Distinguished Prof. of 
English History Emeritus, Univ of North Carolioa. 
Godson, Roy, Ph.D. Prof. of Government, 
Georgetown Univ. 

Godwin, Joscelyn, FR.CO. Prot. uf Music, 
Colgate Univ. 

Goering, Joseph, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Toronto. 

Goertzen, Valerie Woodring, Ph.D. Adjunct 
Prof. of Music; Coordinator of Graduate Stodies, 
School of Music, Univ. of Soothero Mississipp! 
Goetz, Alexander F. H., Ph.D. Prot., Dir, Ctr. for 
the Stody of Earth from Space, Univ of Colorado. 
Goetz, Thomas H., Ph.D. Prof. of Freoch, State 
Uoiv. of New York College, Fredoota. 
Goetzmann, William H., Ph.D. Prof. of Histar 
and Americao Studies, Uowy. of Texas, Austio 
Goff, John S., J.D. Prat, Emeritus of History 
Phoenix College. 

Goist, Park Dixon, Ph.D. Director, American 
Stodies and Assoc, Prof. of Theater Arts, Case 
Western Reserve Univ. 

Goizueta, Roberto S., Ph.D. Assoc. Prot o! 
Theology, Loyula Univ of Chicago 


Gold, Alison Leslie, B.A. Coauthor, Anne Frank 
Remembered 


Gold, Mark S., M.D Prof., Dept. of Psychiatry, 
Univ. of Florida College of Medicine. 

Goldberg, Alfred, Ph.D. Editor, A History of the 
US. Air Force 1907-1957. 

Goldberg, Morton F., M.D. Prof. of Ophthalmol- 
ogy, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. 
Goldman, Eric F., LLD. Former Rollins Prof. of 
History, Princeton Univ. 

Goldman, Sheldon, Ph.D. Prof. of Political 
Science, Univ. of Massachusetts, Antherst 
Goldman, Stuart D., Ph.D. Specialist in Russian 
and Eurastan Aftairs, Congressional Research 
Service, Library of Congress. 

Goldsmith, Timothy H., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, 
Yale Univ. 

Goldstein, Erik, Ph.D. Prof. of International Rela- 
tions, Buston Univ. 

Goldstein, Jerome C., M.D. Executive Vice 
President Emeritus, American Academy of Oto- 
laryngology-Head and Neck Surgery. 

Goldstein, Malcolm, Ph.D. Prot. Eoeritus of 
English, Queens College, City Univ. of New York. 
Golembiewski, Robert T., Ph.D, Research Prot. 
of Public Adininistration and Management, Univ. 
of Georgia. 

Goliber, Sue Helder, Ph.D. Prot. and Chair, Dept. 
of History and Distinguished Prof. of Teacher De- 
velopment, Mount St. Mary's College. 


Golley, Frank B., Ph.D. Research Prof. of Ecology, 
ey gy 


Institute of Ecology, Univ. ot Georgia. 

Golub, Leon, Ph.D. Astrophysicist, Harvard- 
Smithsonian Center tor Astrophysics. 

Gontrum, Peter, Ph.D. Prof. of German, Univ. of 
Oregon. 

Gooch, Brison D., Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of Histo- 
ry, Texas A&M Univ. 

Good, Alice B. Former Director, Arizona Dept. of 
Library and Archives. 

Goode, John Free-lance author and journalist 
Goode, Stephen, Ph.D. Senior Writer, /nsight 
Goodheart, Lawrence B., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
History, Univ. of Connecticut 

Goodman, Alyssa A., Ph.D. Prof. of Astronomy, 
Harvard Univ. 

Goodwin, Paul B., Jr., Ph.D. Assoc. Dean, Col- 
lege of Liberal Arts and Sciences, Univ. of Con- 
necticut 

Goodwyn, Frank, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritos of Span- 
ish aod Folklore, Univ. of Marylaod, College Park. 
Gordis, Enoch, M.D. Director, National Institote 
on Alcohol Abose aod Alcoholism. 

Gordon, John W., Ph.D. Prot., Dept. of History, 
The Citadel. 

Gordon, Linda, Ph.D. Florence Kelley Prot. of 
History, Uoiv. of Wiscoosin, Madison. 
Gorenstein, Paul, Ph.D. Sopervisory Astrophysi- 
cist, Smuthsoniao Astrophysical Observatory. 
Gosling, L. A. Peter, Ph.D. Prot. of Sootheast 
Asian Stodies, Univ. of Michigan. 

Gosner, Kevin, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History. 
Uoiv. of Arizooa. 

Gottschalk, Stephen, Ph.D. Aothor, Jhe Emer- 
gence ot Christian Science in American Religious 
Life. 

Gough, Aidan R., LLM. Prot. Emeritos of Law. 
Santa Clara Univ 

Gough, Barry M., D.Lit. Prof. of History. Wilfrid 
Laorier Uoiv. 

Gould, Lewis L, Ph.D. Prot Emeritos ot History. 
Uoiv. of Texas, Aostin. 

Gouttierre, Thomas £., M.A. Deao, Internatiooal 
Stodies and Prograins, Uorv. of Nebraska. Oonaha. 
Govenar, Alan, PhD. President, Docomentary 
Arts, Inc. author, Meeting the Blues 

Govig, Valerie, BA Publisher-Editor Arte Lines 
Grabar, Oleg, Ph.D Aga Khan Prot. ot Islanuc 
Art Emeritus Harvard Univ 

Grabiner, Judith V., PhD. Prot, Mathematics 
aod Scieoce, Technology and Saciety, Pitzer Cal- 
lege 

Grace, ShernillE., FRSC Prot. and Head Dept 
of Engltsh Univ ot British Calombia 


Graebner, Norman A., PhD. Prot Lmeritos ot 
Puhlic Attairs Vow of Virgtoia 





7s | 


Contributors and consultants XXV 


Graft, Harvey J., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Division 
of Behavioral and Cultural Sciences, Univ. of Texas, 
San Antonio. 


Graham, Colin C., Ph.D. President, Compact 
Croup, Bowen Island, British Coluonbia. 


Graham, Larry L, Ph.D. Prot., Paper Science and 
Engineering, Univ. of Wisconsin, Stevens Point. 
Graham, Robert O., M.D. Ophthalmologist. 
Graham, William P., IIL, M.D. Clinical Prof. of 
Surgery, Pennsylvania State Univ., Hershey. 


Grahan-Campbell, James A., Ph.D. Prof. of Me- 
dieval Archaeology, Univ. College Londoo. 


Gran, Richard J., Ph.D. Applications Engineer, 
The MathWorks. 


Granatstein, J.L, Ph.D. Prof. of History Emeritus, 
York Univ. 


Grant, B. J., B.A. Former Documents Researcher, 
Uoiv. of New Brunswick. 


Gray, Patrick T.R., Th.D. Assoc. Prot. of 
Humanities, York Univ. 


Graybill, John R., M.D. Prof. of Medicine, Univ. 
ot Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio. 
Grayson, George W., j.D. Class of 1938 Prof. of 
Government, College of William and Mary. 
Greaves, Richard L, Ph.D. Prof. and Chairman, 
Dept. of History, Florida State Univ. 

Green, Charles P., BA. Past Executive Director, 
Museum of Cartoon Art. 

Green, David, Ph.D. Prof. of Medicine, North- 
western Univ. 

Green, Jonathan, Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, 
Roosevelt Univ. 

Green, Larry, AA. Radio broadcaster, outdoor 
writer, lecturer, and author. 

Green, Michael D., Ph.D. Prot. of History, Univ. of 
Kentucky. 

Green, Paul J., Ph.D. Astrophysicist, Smithsonian 
Astrophysical Observatory. 

Greenberg, Douglas, Ph.D. Vice President, 
Aoverican Council of Learned Societies. 
Greenberger, Allen J., Ph.D. Prot. of History, 
Pitzer College. 

Greenblatt, Alan, MA. Reporter, Congressional 
Quarterly, Washington, D.C 

Greenblatt, Stephen, Ph.D. Prof. of English, Univ. 
of California, Berkeley. 

Greene, Charlotte H., Ph.D. Prof. of Physiology, 
Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine. 
Greene, Jerome A., M.A. Historian, Natiooal 
Park Service. 

Greenfield, David W., Ph.D. Prot. of Zoology, 
Univ. of Hawaii, Hooololo. 

Greenfield, Eloise Aothor, Pau/ Robeson. 
Greenwald, Carol S., Ph.D. Presideot, Potomac 
Investment Co., loc. 

Greenwell, Francis M. Former Chiet Taxider- 
must, Southsooiao lostitotion. 

Gregg, Walter Harold, Ed.D. Prot. Emeritos of 
Physical Edocatioo and Health, Northwestern Univ. 
Gregory, Hugo H., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritos, Speech 
and Laoguage Pathology. Northwestern Uoiv 
Gregory, Leonard W., B.A Managing Editor 
PuebIin (CO) Chieftain. 

Gregory, Richard V., Ph.D. Dir., School of Tex: 
tiles, Fiber aod Polymer Science, Clemsoo Uoiy 
Grendler, Paul F., Ph.D. Prat. ot History Vow of 
Taroota. 

Gribben, Alan, Ph.D Prof. aod Head, Dept. of 
English, Auborn Univ.. Mootgomery. 

Griepp, Eva Botstein, M.D. Clioical Assoc Prof 
ot Pediatrics. New York Uoiv. School ot Medicioe. 
Grier, James W., Ph.D. Prot. ot Zoology. North 
Dakota State Uoiv 

Griess, Thomas E., Ph.D. Former Prof. U.S Mili- 
tary Academy Brigadier Geo., US. Army. retired. 
Grieve, Michael D., BA. Maoaging Editor 
iThonder Bay ON! Times News Chronicle Journal 
Griffin, Robert B., Ph.D. Prot. at French aod 
Comparative Literature, Univ at Califorma 

Griffis, Patrick D,, MSEE Director Warldwide 
TV Standards and Strategy, Microsoft Carp. 
Griffith, Clark, Ph.D 
Uow at Oregon 
Griffiths, Ralph A., D.Litt Prof ot Medieval 
Histan Uni ot Wales Swansea 


Griffy, Thomas A., PhO Prot at Physics Uni ot 


Prot Emeritus of Eoglish, 


XXVI 


Texas, Austin. 
Grim, Pamela, M.D. Asst. Prof., Univ. of Chicago. 


Grima, A. P. Lino, Ph.D. Assoc. Director, Institute 
for Environmental Studies, Univ. of Toronto 
Grimsley, Judy L. Information Resources 
Manager, The Orlando (FU Sentinel 

Grodecki, Thomas S.,MA_ Former Historian. 
Analyst, U.S. Army Center of Military History. 
Grootes, Pieter M., Ph.D Prof. of Physics and 
Dir., Leibniz Laboratory, Christian-Albrechts-Univ. 
Gross, Beatrice, MA Author and editor. 
Gross, Laurence F., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Dept of 
Regional Economic and Social Development, Univ. 
of Massachusetts, Lowell. 

Gross, Ronald Cochair, Univ. Seminar on Inno- 
vation in Education, Columbia Univ.; editor, 7he 
Great School Debate. 

Grossholtz, Jean, Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
Mount Holyoke Cullege. 

Groth, Alexander J., PhD. Emeritus Prot. of 
Political Science, Univ. of California, Davis. 

Groth, Edward, I, Ph.D. Directur, Technical Pol- 
icy and Public Service, Consumers Union of Unit- 
ed States, Inc 

Gruber, Helmut, Ph.D. Former Charles S. Baylis 
Prof. of History, Polytechnic Institute of New York. 
Gruber, Samuel H., Ph.D. Director, Prof., Bimini 
Biological Field Station, Rosenstiel School of Ma: 
rine and Atmospheric Science, Univ. of Miami. 
Gruen, Erich S., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
California, Berkeley. 

Gruenbacher, Don M., Ph.D. Asst. Prof., Electri- 
cal and Computer Engineering, Kansas State Univ. 


Gruenberg, Alan M., M.D. Prof. of Psychiatry 
and Human Behavior. Jefferson Medical College. 
Grumet, Robert S., Ph.D. Anthropologist, New 
Hope, PA 

Gubser, Peter, D.Phil. President, Amencan Near 
East Refugee Aid. 

Guengerich, Thomas, B.A. General Manager, 
Spencer County IN) journal-Democrat 

Guentert, Kenneth, MA_ Editonal Director, 
Resource Publications, Inc. 

Guiley, Rosemary Ellen, BA. Author, Jhe Ency- 
clopedia of Witches and Witchcraft 

Guillemin, Jeanne, Ph.D Prof. of Sociology, 
Boston College. 

Gulley, Rosemarie C, MA. Former Dir., Com- 
munity Relations, WLS-TV, Chicago. 

Gundersen, Joan R., Ph.D Prof. of History, 
California State Univ., San Marcos. 

Gupta, Brijen K., Ph.D. Dir., Rsch. and Develop- 
ment, Council on International and Public Affairs. 
Gurel, Lois M., Ph.D. Former Assoc. Prof. of 
Clothing and Textiles, Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
and State Univ. 

Gurney, George, Ph.D Deputy Chief Curator, 
National Museum of American Art 

Gurshtein, Alexander A., D.Sc. Vice President 
for the Commission on History of Astronomy, In- 
ternational Astronomical Union. 


Gustin, Lawrence R.,BA  Mgr., News Relations, 
Buick Motor Division; ed., Picture History of Flint 
Gutek, Gerald L, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Education 
and History, Loyola Univ. of Chicago. 


Gutierrez, Joseph A., Jr.,. MA. Senior Dir. for 
Museum Operations and Education, Jamestown: 
Yorktown Foundation. 

Gutnik, Martin J., M.S. Educator, Shorewood 
Public Schools, Wisconsin. 

pra at James F., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science 
and Public Administration, City Univ. of New York. 


Gyles, Mary Francis, Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
History, Brooklyn College, City Univ. of New York 


H 


Habenmnan, David L, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Reli- 
gious Studies, Indiana Univ. 


Hachey, Thomas E, Ph.D. Dean, College of Arts 
and Sciences, Marquette Univ. 


Hackett, Perry B., Jr., Ph.D Prof., Dept. of Genet- 
ics, Cell Biology and Development and Institute of 
Human Genetics, Univ. of Minnesuta 

Haden, Andy Company Manager, Sporting Con- 
tacts Ltd. 

Hadow, HarioH., Ph.D Prof of Biolugy, Coe Col- 
lege 


Contributors and consultants 


Haenlein, Joy L,M.Sj. Editorial Page Editor, The 
Stamford, C1) Advocate. 

Hafner, James A., Ph.D. Prof., Geosciences, Mor- 
rill Science Center, Univ. of Massachusetts. 
Hagan, Kenneth J., Ph.D. Prof. of History, U.S. 
Naval Academy 

Hagedorn, John M., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Crimi- 
nal Justice, Univ. of Illinois, Chicago. 

Hagen, Charles, MFA Critic, The New York 
Times. 

Hahn, H. George, Ph.D Prof. of English, Towson 
State Univ. 

Hahn, Richard L, Ph.D Senior Chemist and 
Leader of Solar Neutrino Group, Chemistry Dept, 
Brookhaven National Laboratory. 

Hahn, Walther L, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Ger- 
man, Univ. of Oregon. 

Haider-Markel, Donald P., Ph.D. Asst. Prof., 
Dept of Political Science, Univ. of Kansas. 


Halder, Rebat M., M.D. Prof., Chairman, Dept of 
Dermatology, Howard Univ. College of Medicine. 
Hall, Charles A. S., Ph.D. Prof. of Environmental 
and Forest Biology, State Univ of New York, 
College of Environmental Sciences and Forestry. 
Haller, Gary L, Ph.D. Prof. of Chemical Engineer- 
ing, Yale Univ. 

Hallett, Judith P., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Dept of 
Classics, Univ. of Maryland. 

Hallin, Gustav W., M.D. Former Asst Prof. of 
Medicine, Univ. of New Mexico. 

Hallion, Richard P., Ph.D. Air Force Historian, 
Bolling Air Force Base, Washington, D.C 
Hallman, Joseph M., Ph.D. Prof. of Theology, 
Univ. of St Thomas. 

Halman, Hugh Talat, Ph.D. Visiting Prof., Middle 
Eastern Studies Program, Univ. of Arkansas. 
Halpern, Bruce P., Ph.D. Prof. of Psychology and 
Prof. of Neurobiology and Behavior, Cornell Univ. 
Halstead, Lois Kazmier, Ph.D. Director, Curricu- 
lum and Instruction, College of Nursing, Rush- 
Presbyterian: St Luke's Medical Center, Chicago. 


Halverson, Guy, MA. New York Correspondent. 
The Christian Science Monitor. 

Hamalainen, Pekka Kalevi, Ph.D. Prof. of 
History, Chairman of the Western European Area 
Studies Program, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 
Hambleton, Ronald K., Ph.D. Distinguished 
Univ. Prof., School of Education, Univ. of Massa- 
chusetts, Amherst. 

Hamby, Alonzo L, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Ohio 
Univ. 

Hamerow, Theodore S., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
History, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Hamilton, Charles V., Ph.D. Wallace S. Sayre 
Prof. of Political Science, Columbia Univ.; author, 
The Black Expenence in Amencan Politics. 
Hamilton, David, Ph.D. Prof. of English, Univ. of 
lowa:; Editor, The /jowa Review. 

Hamilton, John, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Classics, 
College of the Huly Cross. 

Hamre, Melvin L, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Animal 
Science, Univ. of Minnesota, Twin Cities Campus. 
Hanauer, Stephen B., MD. Prof. of Medicine, 
Univ. of Chicago. 

Hancock, Joseph G., Ph.D. Prof. of Plant Patholo- 
gy, Univ. of California, Berkeley. 


Hancock, M. Donald, Ph.D. Prof. of Political Sci- 
ence and Director of the Center for European 
Studies, Vanderbilt Univ 


Handelman, Howard, Ph.D. Prof. of Political 
Science, Univ. of Wisconsin, Milwaukee. 


Handler, Arden S., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. Dept of 
Community Health Sciences, Univ. of Illinois 
School of Public Health, Chicago. 


Handlin, Oscar, LL.D. Prof. Ementus, Harvard 
Unwv.; winner of Pulitzer Prize for History, 1952 
Hanes, Jeffrey E, Ph.D. Asst Prof. of History, 
Univ of Oregon. 

Hanks, Reuel, PhD. Assoc. Prof. of Geography, 
Oklahoma State Univ. 

Hanlon, David, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Hawaii, Honolulu. 

Hanna, Jack, BA. Director Ementus, Columbus 
Zoological Park. 

Hannigan, James E, BAE. Former Senior Staff 
Engineer, Eagle Technical Services, Inc. 


Hansen, EllenR., Ph.D Asst Prof., Dept of Social 


Sciences, Empona State Univ. 


Hansen, James R., Ph.D. Alumni Prof./Historian 
for National Aeronautics and Space Administra- 
tion, Auburn Univ. 


Hansen, Katherine, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Geogra- 
phy, Montana State Univ. 


Hansen, William F., Ph.D. Prof. of Classical 
Studies and Folklore, Indiana Univ. 


Hansma, Paul, Ph.D. Prof. of Physics, Univ. of Cal- 
ifornia, Santa Barbara 

Hanson, Stephen E, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Univ. of 
Washington. 

Hapeman, Cathleen J., Ph.D. Research Chemist, 
Agriculture Research Service, U.S Dept of Agri- 
culture. 

Hardcastle, David P., Ph.D. Writer and historian. 
Harden, Lydia Dixon, B.S. Former Managing 
Editor, Music City News. 

Harder, Leland, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Practical 
Theology, Mennonite Biblical Seminary. 

Hardy, Grant, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
North Carolina, Asheville. 

Hargis, B. M., Ph.D. Prof. and Director, Poultry 
Health Research Laboratory, Center of Excellence 
for Poultry Science, Univ. of Arkansas, Fayetteville. 
Harik, Elsa Marston, MS. Writer. 

Harik, iliya, Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, Indi- 
ana Univ. 

Harington, CR, Ph.D. Curator of Quaternary 
Zoology Emeritus, Canadian Museum of Nature. 
Harmon, Daniel P., Ph.D. Prof. and Chairman, 
Dept of Classics, Univ. of Washington. 


Harmon, Pat Curator-Historian, College Football 
Hall of Fame. 


Harmon, William, Ph.D. Prof. of English, Univ. of 
North Carolina. 


Harper, Craig, B.S.j. Former News Editor, 
News North, Yellow Knife, N.W. Ter. 


Harper, J.E, Ph.D. Research Leader, Agncultural 
Research Service, U.S. Dept of Agriculture. 
Harper, Kirnball T., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Botany and Range Science, Bigham Young Univ. 
Harran, Marilyn J., Ph.D. Prof. of Religion and 
History, Chapman Univ. 

Harries, Keith D., Ph.D. Contributing author, 7he 
Geography of Oklahoma 

Harrington, John A., jr., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Geography, Kansas State Univ. 

Harris, Alan A., M.D. Hospital Epidemiologist, 
Prof., Asst. Chairman of Internal Medicine, Rush- 
Presbytenian-St Luke's Medical Center, Chicago. 
Harris, Jules E, MD. Prof. of Medicine, Rush 
Univ. 

Harris, Leslie, Ph.D. Pres. Emer., Memorial Univ. 
Harris, Michael H., Ph.D. Prof. of Library Science, 
Univ. of Kentucky. 

Harris, Michael W.,BA Asst Editor, Houseboat 
magazine. 

Harris, Neil, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Chicago. 

Harrison, Frederick W., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, 
Western Carolina Univ. 

Harrison, Gregory B., BA. Vice President, 
Communications, American Motorcyclist Assn. 
Harrison, Michael M., Ph.D. Former Assoc. Di- 
rector, Graduate Institute of International Studies, 
Geneva, Switzerland. 

Hart, Lynn W., Ph.D. Physicist, Principal Staff, The 
Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory. 
Harti, Daniel L,, Ph.D. Prof. of Organismic and 
Evolutionary Biology, Harvard Univ. 

Hartlein, Richard A.,M.S.M.E. Program Manag- 
er, Underground Systems, National Electric Energy 
Testing Research and Applications Center, Geor- 
gia Institute of Technology. 

Hartman, Ann, D.S.W. Dean, Smith College 
School for Social Work 

Hartman, J. P., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Engineer- 
ing. Univ. of Central Florida, Orlando. 

Hartman, Marvis E, Ph.D. Director, Automotive 
Technologies Europe, PPG Industries. 

Hartman, S., Ph.D Director, Institute for 
Women s Leadership, Rutgers, the State Univ. of 
New Jersey: author, Victonan Murderesses. 
Hartmann, Emest, M.D. Prof. of Psychiatry, Tufts 
Univ School of Medicine; Director, Sleep 
Disorders Center, Newton-Wellesley Hospital. 








Hartwick, Brian, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Biologic! 
Sciences, Simon Fraser Univ. 


Harvey, Neil F., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Dept. of Gov- 
ernment, New Mexico State Univ. 

Harvey, Maurice, BA Air Commodore, Royal 
Air Force, retired; author, Gibraltar. 

Harvey, Robert R., MLA. Prof. of Landscape 
Architecture, lowa State Univ. 

Harwell, Mark A., Ph.D. Director, Center for Ma- 
rine and Environmental Analyses, Univ. of Miami. 


Haselkom, Robert, Ph.D. F. L Pritzker Distin- 
guished Service Prof. of Molecular Genetics and 
Cell Biology, Univ. of Chicago. 

Haskett, James P. Former Managing Editor, 
Lethbridge \AB) Herald. 

Hassler, Kevin, BA. Managing Editor, Enid (OK) 
News & Eagle. 

Hastings, Harold M., Ph.D. Prof. and Chairper- 
son of Mathematics and Assoc. Dean, Hofstra Univ. 
Hatch, Ronald B., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of English, 
Univ. of British Columbia. 

Hathaway, Bradford A.,B.S. Former Special 
Sections Editor, The (New Bedford, MA) Standard 
Times. 

Hatzenbuehler, Ronald L, Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Idaho State Univ. 

Hauser, Richard J., Ph.D. Director of Graduate 
Programs, Creighton Univ. 

Havard, William C., Jr., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
Political Science, Vanderbilt Univ. 

Haveman, Robert H., Ph.D. Prof. of Economics, 
Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Havens, Murray Clark, Ph.D. Prof. of Political 
Science, Texas Tech Univ. 

Haverdink, William H., M.S.E.M. Staff Research 
Engineer, General Motors Research Laboratories. 
Haverstock, Nathan A., AB. Affiliate Scholar, 
Oberlin College. 

Hawley, Ellis W., Ph.D. Prof. of Histury, Univ. of 
lowa. 

Hayes, Denis, ].D. President and CEO, Bullitt 
Foundation. 

per hd Mary Eshbaugh, BA Contributing Editor 
and Columnist, The Aspen (CO) Times. 

Hayward, Jane, Ph.D. Former Curator, Cloisters, 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City. 
Hazel, Fred, BA Editor Emeritus and Columnist, 
New Brunswick Publishing, Saint John. 

Head, James W., Ill, Ph.D. Prof. of Geological 
Sciences, Brown Univ. 

Heard, Andrew D., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Political 
Science Dept, Simon Fraser Univ. 

Hearn, M.F., Ph.D. Prof. of Fine Arts and Director 
of Architectural Studies, Univ. of Pittsburgh. 
Heath, James Edward, Ph.D. Prof. of Physiology 
and Biophysics, Univ. of Illinois. 

Heckman, Timothy M., Ph.D. Prof. of Physics 
and Astronomy, Johns Hopkins Univ. 

Hedgecoe, John, Dr.RCA. Photographer and 
author. 

Hedquist, Valerie Lind, Ph.D. Asst Prof. of Art, 
Central College, Pella, lowa. 

Hedrick, Philip W., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology. 
Arizona State Univ. 

Heginbotham, Stanley J., Ph.D. Former Chief, 


Foreign Affairs and National Defense Div., Con- 
gressional Research Service, Library of Congress. 
Hehr, John G., Ph.D. Prof. of Geosciences and 
Assoc. Dean, J. William Fulbright College of Arts 
and Sciences, Univ. uf Arkansas, Fayetteville 
Heidenreich, Conrad E., Ph.D. Prof. of Geogra 
phy, York Univ. 

Heidt, Gary A., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Dept of Bi 
ology, Univ. of Arkansas, Little Rock 

Heilbrun, Margaret, M.LS., MA. Library Direc: 
tor, The New-York Historical Society 

Heiman, Michael K., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof of Geog: 
raphy and Environmental Studies, Dickinson Col: 
lege. 

Heinrich, Bernd, Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, Univ. of 
Vermont 

Heitman, J. A. Former Executive Director, Protes 
sional Secretaries International. 

Heitmann, John A., Ph.D. Assoc Prot. of Histury 
Univ. of Dayton. 

Helfrick, Albert, Ph.D. Prof.. Aeronautical Sct 





Contributors and consultants XXVII 


ence Dept, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical Univ. 
iellen, J. A., D.Phil. Senior Lecturer, Dept of 
Geogtaphy, Univ. of Newcastle upon Tyne. 
Hellickson, Martin L, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Bioresource Engineering, Oregon State Univ. 
Helmer, William J., MA Senior Editor, Playboy. 
Helms, Christine Moss, D.Phil. Author, 


Cohesion of Saudi Arabia: Evolution of Political 
fdentity and frag: Eastern Flank of the Arab World. 


Helms, Joseph M., M.D. Founding President, 
American Academy of Medical Acupuncture. 


Helms, Ronald N., Ph.D. Prof. of Architectural En- 


gineering, North Carolina Agricultural and Techni- 
cal State Univ.; lighting consultant; expert witness. 


Hemingway, Sam News Columnist, Burlington 
(VT) Free Press. 


Henahan, John F., B.S. Science writer. 
Henderson, David E,, Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, 
Trinity College. 

Hendler, Nelson H.,M.D.,M.S. Clinical Director, 
Mensana Clinic. 

Hendricks, Lewis T., Ph.D. Prof. and Extension 
Specialist, Forest Products, Univ. of Minnesota, 
Twin Cities Campus. 

Hendrickson, Chris, Ph.D. Prof. of Civil and Envi- 
ronmental Engineering, Carnegie Mellon Univ. 
Henneman, John Bell, Ph.D. History Bibliogra- 
pher, Princeton Univ. 

Hennessey, William J.,PhD. President and Di- 
rector, Chrysler Museum of Art 

Henning, Basil D., Ph.D. Coauthor, Crises in Eng- 
lish History, 1066-1945. 

Henning, C Randall, Ph.D. Research Assoc, 
Institute for International Economics. 

Henry, Edward O., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology, 
San Diego State Univ. 

Henry, Richard W., Ph.D. Prof. of Physics, 
Bucknell Univ. 

Hentoff, Nat, BA. Columnist, Washington Post 
and Village Voice. 

Hepner, George F., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Univ. of Utah. 


Herbert, Harry John, M.Sc. Wildlife Biologist, 
Zimbabwe Forestry Commission. 


Herbert, Victor, }.D. Prof. of Medicine, Mount 
Sinai and Bronx Veterans Affairs Medical Centers. 
Hermalyn, Gary D., Ed.D. Executive Director, 
Bronx County Historical Society; Editor of the Bi- 
centennial of the United States Constitution Series. 
Hermann, Donald H. J., Ph.D. Prof. of Law and 
Philosophy and Director, Health Law Institute, 
DePaul Univ.; author, The Insanity Defense: 
Historical, Philosophical and Legal Perspectives. 
Hermann, William J., Jr.,M.D. Dir., Clinical Lab- 
oratories, Memorial Hospital-Memorial City. 
Hernon, Joseph Martin, Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of 
History, Univ. of Massachusetts, Amherst 

Herr, Edwin L, Ed.D. Distinguished Prof. of Edu- 
cation and Assoc. Dean for Graduate Programs, 
Research, and Technology, College of Education, 
Pennsylvania State Univ. 

Herving, George C.,, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Kentucky. 

Herron, Ron, AB.j. City Editor, (Frankfort, KY) 
State journal 

Hersey, G. L, Ph.D. Prof. of the History of Art, 
Yale Univ. 

Hershberg, Theodore, PhD. Director Center 
for Greater Philadelphia: Prof. of Public Policy and 
History, Univ. of Pennsylvania. 

Hertsgaard, Doris F., Ph.D. Director of Re- 
search, D H Research. 

Herzstein, R.E., Ph.D Carolina Distinguished 
Prof. of History, Univ of South Carulina 

Hess, Andrew C.,, Ph.D Prot. of Diplomacy, 
Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy Tufts Univ 
Hess, David F., PhU. Assoc Prof. ot Geology 
Western Illinois Univ 

Hesse, Mark B., MA President. The Amencan 
Mountain Foundation 
Hester, Thomas R., Ph.D 
Unw of Texas, Austin 
Heydebrand, Wolt, Ph.D 
New York Uni 

Hickey, Donald R., PhO Prot ot History, Wayne 
State College 


Prof of Anthropology 


Prot ot Sociology 


Higgins, Lynn A., Ph.D. Prof. of French and 
Comparative Literature, Dartmouth College. 
Highwater, Jamake Author, Ants Critic at-large, 
The Christian Science Monitor; Founder and Presi- 
dent, Native Land Foundation. 

Hildebrand, Kurtis R.,BA Asst. Managing Edi- 
tor, Nevada Appeal. 

Hildebrandt, Jack, Ph.D. Prof. of Physiology, 
Biophysics and Medicine, Univ. uf Washington. 
Hildesley, C. Hugh Executive Vice President, 
Sotheby's. 


Hill, Andrew, Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology, Yale 
Univ. 


Hill, David T., Ph.D. Prof. of Southeast Asian 
Studies, Murdoch Univ. 

Hill, James A., M.D. Prof. of Clinical Orthopedic 
Surgery, Northwestern Univ. Medical School. 
Hill, James E., Ph.D. Chief, Building Environment 
Division, Natl. Inst. of Standards and Technology. 
Hillary, Sir Edmund P., LLD. Explorer and 
mountain climber; author, High Adventure; first to 
reach the summit of Mount Everest. 


Hillson, C. j., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Botany, 
Pennsylvania State Univ. 


Hilt, Richard L, Ph.D. Prot. of Physics, Colorado 
College. 

Hindman, Sandra L, Ph.D. Prof. of Art History, 
Northwestern Univ. 

Hinman, Alan R., M.P.H. Director, National Cen- 


ter for Prevention Services, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. 


Hirsch, Edward, Ph.D. Prof. of English, Univ. of 
Houston. 

Hirsch, Rick, B.S. Deputy City Editor, The Miami 
(FL) Herald. 

Hirschfeld, Sue Ellen, Ph.D. Prof. of Geological 
Sciences, California State Univ., Hayward. 
Hirschhorn, Joel S., Ph.D. President, Hirschhorn 
and Associates. 

Hirsh, Richard F., Ph.D. Prof., Virginia Polytech- 
nic Institute and State Univ. 

Hirshman, Carol A., M.D. Prof. of Anesthesiolo- 
gy and Vice Chair for Research, Columbia Univ. 
College of Physicians and Surgeons. 


Hitchcock, Bert, Ph.D. Hargis Prof. of American 
Literature, Auburn Univ. 

Hobbs, Ray D.,BA Deputy Managing Editor, 
(Little Rock! Arkansas Democrat-Gazette. 

Hobbs, Richard R., MSA Physics Teacher, 
Anne Arundel City (MD) Schools: author, Marine 
Navigation. 

Hoberman, Robert D., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Dept 
of Linguistics, State Univ. of New York, Stony 
Brook 


Hobson, Burton H., BA President and Editorial 
Director, Sterling Publishing Co. 

Hocutt, Charles H., Ph.D. Ichthyologist. Center 
for Environmental and Estuarine Studies, Univ. of 
Maryland. 

Hodgetts, J.E.,F.RS.C Prof. Emeritus of Political 
Science, Univ. of Toronto. 

Hodgetts, Richard M., Ph.D. Prof., Florida Inter- 
national Univ. 

Hofferth, Sandra L, Ph.D. Senior Research 
Assoc., Urban Institute. 

Hoffman, Cyrus M., Ph.D. Adjunct Prof. of 
Physics, Los Alamos National Laboratory. 
Hoffman, Darleane Christian, Ph.D. Chemistry 
Pruf., Graduate School, Unw_ of California. Berke- 
ley; Nuclear Chemist, Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory 


Hoffman, M. Peter, Ph.D. Prof. of Animal Sci- 
ence, lowa State Univ 


Hoffmann, Peter, Ph.D. Fellow of the Royal Soci- 
ety of Canada: Prof of History McGill Univ 
Hoffmann, Richard J., Ph.D. Prot of Zoology and 
Genetics, lowa State Uni 

Hoffmeister, Werner, PhD. Prot of German and 
Comparative Literature, Dartmouth College. 
Hogan, Edward Patrick, Sr., Ph.D Asst. Vice 
President. South Dakota State Univ: State Geogra- 
pher for South Dakota 


Hogg, R., PhD Prof ot Mineral Processing and 
Geo Environmental Engineering, Pennsytwana 
State Univ 


Hoh, LaVahn G., MFA Prot of Drama Unw of 
Virginia 


XXVIII 


Holland, James C., Ph.D. Prof. of History. Shep- 
herd College. 


Hollister, C. Warren Prof. of History, Univ of 
California, Santa Barbara. 


Holloway, C.M. Journalist 

Holmes, A. William, M.D. Prof. of Medicine. 
Univ. of Califomia, San Francisco. 

Holmes, Johnny B., Ph.D. Prof. of Physics, 
Christian Brothers Univ. 

Holmes, Kim R., Ph.D. Vice President, Dir., The 
Kathryn and Shelby Cullom Davis Institute tor In- 
ternational Studies, The Heritage Foundation. 
Holscher, Louis M., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair Mexi- 
can American Studies, San Jose State Univ. 

Holt, Michael F., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Virginia. 

Holtzman, Neil A., M.D..M.PH. Emeritus Prof. of 
Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins Univ. 

Holzberlein, Deanne B., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. 

of Library Science, Northern Illinois Univ. 
Holzner, Lutz, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Geography. 
Univ. of Wisconsin, Milwaukee. 

Honig, Donald Novelist and baseball historian. 
Hood, Leroy, Ph.D. William Gates III Prof. and 
Chair, Dept of Molecular Biotechnology, Univ. of 
Washington, Medical School. 

Hoofnagle, Jay H., M.D. Director, Division of Di- 
gestive Diseases and Nutrition, National Institutes 
of Health. 

Hoogenboom, Ari, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Brook 
lyn College, City Univ. of New York. 

Hoogland, John L, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Biology, 
Univ. of Maryland. 


Hopkins, Richard J., Ph.D. Former Assoc Prot. of 
History and Assoc. Dean of Humanities, Ohio State 
Univ. 

Hopper, Kim, M.Phil. Research Scientist, Nathan 
S. Kline Institote for Psychiatric Research. 
Hordon, Robert M., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Geog- 
raphy, Rutgers, the State Univ. of New Jersey. 
Horita, Robert E., Ph.D. Prof. of Physics, Univ. of 
Victoria. 

Horle, Craig W., Ph.D. Chief editor, Lawinaking 
and Legislators in Pennsylvania: A Biographical 
Dictionary 

Hornsby, Alton, jr., Ph.D. Fuller E. Callaway Prot. 
of History, Morehouse College 

Horowitz, Leonard M., Ph.D. Prof. of Psycholo- 
gy. Stanford Univ. 

Horsman, Reginald, Ph.D. Distinguished Prof. of 
History, Univ. of Wisconsin, Milwaukee. 

Horwitz, Barbara A., Ph.D. Prof. of Physiology, 
Univ. of Calitomia. 

Hose, Louise D., Ph.D. Environmental Studies 
Program Director, Westminster College. 
Hoskote, Ranjit, MA. Art Critic and Asst. Editor, 
The Times of india. 

Hothersall, David, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Psy- 
chology, Ohio State Univ.. Columbus. 

Houghton, David D., Ph.D. Prof. of Atmospheric 
and Oceanic Sciences, Univ of Wisconsin. 
Hounshell, David A., Ph.D. Luce Prof. of Tech- 
nology and Social Change, Carnegie- Mellon Univ 
Howard, Don, PhD Prof. Dept of Philosophy, 
Univ. of Notre Dame. 

Howe, Daniel Walker, Ph.D. Rhodes Prof. of 
American History, Oxtord Univ. England 

Howe, Gordon Vice President, Howe Enterpris- 
es; aothor, Hockey, Heres Howe! 

Howe, Herbert M., Ph.D. Emer. Prof. of Classics 
and Integrated Liberal Stodies, Univ. of Wisconsin. 
Howe, Russell Warren, License es lettres. 
Writer. 

Howell, David L, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof of East Asian 
Stodies, Princeton Univ 

Howell, Roger, Jr., D.Phil. Former Prot. ot 
History, Bowdoin College 

Howse, Robert, B.A. Editor in Chief, The Halifax 
INS) Chronicle-Herald. 

Hoyt, Reginald A., Senior Vice President, Conser- 
vation and Science, Philadelphia Zoo. 

Hoyt, Robert D., Ph.D. Prot. of Biology, Western 
Kentocky Univ 

Hoyt, Robert S., Ph.D. Aothor, Europe in the 
Middle Ages. 


Hsu, Immanuel C. Y., Ph.D. Prof. of History Univ. 


Contributors and consultants 


of California, Santa Barbara. 
Hubbard, Paul, Ph.D Prof. of History Emeritus, 
Arizona State Univ. 


Hubbell, John T., Ph.D. Director Kent State Univ. 
Press. 


Huddleston, Ellis W., Ph.D. Prof. of Entomology, 
New Mexico State Univ. 

Hudecki, Michael S., D.Sc. Executive Officer, Bi- 
ological Sciences, State Univ. of New York. Buffalo. 
Hudson, Charles, Ph.D Prof. of Anthropology. 
Univ. of Georgia. 

Hudson, John C., B.Sc. Former Regional Manag- 
er, Land Transportation, Public Works Canada. 
Hudson, Michael C., Ph.D. Acting Dir., Center for 
Contemporary Arab Studies, Georgetown Univ. 


Huey, Raymond B., Ph.D. Prof. of Zoology, Univ 
of \Vashington. 


Hufbauer, Gary, Ph.D. Reginald Jones Senior 
Fellow, Institute for International Economics. 
Hufbauer, Karl, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
California, Irvine. 

Huff, Jerome J., Jr., BA. Managing Editor, |Fort 
Smith, AR) Southwest Times Record. 

Huffines, Marion Lois, Ph.D. Assoc. Vice Presi- 
dent, Academic Affairs, Bucknell Univ 


Huffman, Carl A., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Classics, 
DePauw Univ. 

Hughes, George R., M.S. Former Vegetable 
Crops Specialist and Specialist-in-Charge, Dept. of 
Horticulture Science, North Carolina State Univ. 
Hughes, Robert M. President, Hughes Sports 
Television. 


Hulse, James W., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Nevada. Reno. 

Hume, Stephen, BA. Columnist-at-large. Van- 
couver|BC) Sun, author, Ghost Camps. 
Humphris, Susan E., Ph.D. Senior Scientist, 
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institotion. 
Hunkins, Francis P., Ph.D. Prof. of Education, 
Curricolum, Social Stodies, Univ. of Washington. 
Hunner, Jon, Ph.D. Asst. Prof.. Dept of History, 
New Mexico State University. 

Hunt, George L, Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Ecology and 
Evolutionary Biology, Univ of California, Irvine. 
Hunt, Lester H., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Philnsophy, 
Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Hunt, Melody J., Ph.D. Asst Prof. of Environmen 
tal Engineernng, San Diego State Univ. 

Hunt, William R., Ph.D, }.D. Author, Arctic Pas- 
sage and To Stand at the Pole. 


Hunter, Albert, Ph.D. Prof. nf Sociology, North- 
western Univ. 


Hunter, O. Frank, M.S. Assoc. Prof., Clemson 
Univ. School of Textiles, Fiber and Polymer Sci- 
ence. 


Hunter, Rob Coauthor, The Book of Knots. 
Hunter, William D.G. Emeritus Prof. of 
Economics, McMaster Univ. 

Hurd, Bradley, BA. Former Editor, The (Mis- 
soula, MT) Missoufian. 

Hurley, Francis ¥.,D.D. Archbishop ot 
Anchorage. 

Hurst, Michael Fellow in Modern History and 
Politics, St John's College, Oxtord Univ. 


Hurt, R. Douglas, Ph.D. Director, Graduate 
Program in Agricultural History and Rural Studies, 
lowa State Univ. 

Hurtado, W. Jean, MA. Editor, HarperCollins 
Poblishers. 

Huse, Nancy Lyman, Ph.D Prnft. of English. 
Aogustana Cnillege. 

Huseboe, Arthur R., DHL. Executive Dir. The 
Center fnr Western Stodies, Augostana College. 
Hustrulid, William, Ph.D. Head, Mining Re 
search and Development, LKAB, Kiruna, Sweden. 
Hutchison, Jane Campbel!, Ph.D. Prot of Art 
History, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Hutjens, Michael F., Ph.D. Prot. of Animal 
Sciences and Extension Dairy Specialist. Univ. of 
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. 

Hutson, James H., Ph.D. Chiet, Manoscript 
Division, Library of Cnngress. 

Hyland, Douglas K. S., Ph.D. Directnr, San Anto- 
nio Museom of Art. 


Ibbotson, Roger G., Ph.D. Prof. in the Practice of 
Finance, Yale School of Management 

Ifkovic, John W., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Westfield 
State College. 

Ihde, Don, Ph.D. Prof. of Philosophy, State Univ. 
of New York, Stony Brook. 

Ihler, Garret M., M.D. Prof. of Medical Biochem- 
istry and Medical Genetics, Texas A&M College of 
Medicine. 


Ilyin, Mary Alexander, B.S.M.E. Mechanical 
Engineer, Pacific Gas and Electric Co. 


Imbelli, Robert P., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Theolo- 
gy, Boston College. 


Ingalls, Robert P., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
South Florida. 


Ingersoll, Andrew P., Ph.D. Prof. of Planetary 
Science, California Institute of Technology. 
Ingham, John N., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Toronto. 

Inglesby, Thomas V., M.D. Asst. Prof., Medicine, 
Johns Hopkins Univ. School of Medicine. 


Ingrao, Charles W., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Purdue Univ. 


Ingwersen, Niels, Cand. Mag. Prof. of Scandina- 
vian Studies, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 


Insler, Stanley, Ph.D. Salisbury Prof. of Sanskrit 
and Comparative Philology, Yale Univ. 


Ireland, Patrick, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Graduate 
School of International Studies, Univ. of Denver. 
Irish, Jerry A., Ph.D. Prof. of Religious Studies, 
Pomona College. 

Irland, Uoyd C., Ph.D. President, The Irland 
Group; former Budworm Program Coordinator, 
Maine Forest Service. 

Irmscher, William F., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
English, Univ. of Washington. 

Isenberg, Gerald l., MBA. Prof. and Executive 
Director of Electronic Media Projects, School of 
Cinema-Television, Univ. of Soothem California. 
Isquith, Irwin Richard, Ph.D. Prof. of Biology 
and Assoc. Dean, Fairleigh Dickinson Univ. 

Israel, Paul B., Ph.D. Managing Editor, Thumas A 
Edison Papers, Rutgers, the State Univ. of New 
Jersey. 

Ito, Philip J., Ph.D. Prof. of Horticulture and Con- 
sultant on Tropical Fruits and Nuts, Univ. of Hawaii. 


Ivers, Gregg, Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Dept. of Gov- 
ernment, American Univ 


Ivinski, Pamela A., M.A. Art Historian, Graduate 
Center, City Univ. of New York. 

Iwamoto, Tomio, Ph.D. Curator of Ichthyology. 
California Academy of Sciences. 


lyer, Raghavan, D.Phil. Former Prof. of Political 
Science, Univ. of California, Santa Barbara. 


J 


Jackson, Dennis R., MA. Professional climbing 
guide and outdoor educatnr. 

Jackson, KennellA., jr., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
History, Stanford Univ. 

Jackson, Richard, MLS. Former Head, Amen- 
can Collection, Music Division, New York Public 
Library. 

Jackson, W. Turrentine, Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Emeritus, Univ. of California. Davis. 

Jacob, Charles E., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritos of Political 
Science, Rutgers, the State Univ. of New Jersey. 
Jacob, Margaret C., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Califomia. Los Angeles. 

Jacobs, Dale W., MA. Editor in Chief. The World 
Book Encyclopedia. 

Jacobs, William Jay, Ed.D. Author: former Coor- 
dinator, History and the Social Sciences, Darien 
(CT) Poblic Schools. 

Jacobson, James E., MA. Contnbuting Editor, 
The Birmingham (AU News. 

Jaeger, C. Stephen, Ph.D. Prof. ot German and 
Comparative Literatore, Univ. of Washington. 
Jaenen, Comelius J., LLD. Prof. Emeritos of 
History, Univ. of Ottawa. 

Jaffe, Stephen, AM. Assoc. Prof. of Music, Doke 
Univ. 

Jahncke, Michael L, Ph.D. Dir., Virginia Seafood 
Agricoltoral Research and Extension Center. 


Jalongo, Mary Renck, Ph.D. Prof. of Edocation. 








Indiana Univ. of Pennsylvania. 

James, D. Clayton, Ph.D. John Biggs Prot. of 
Military History, Virginia Military Institute; author. 
The Years of MacArthur and A Time tor Giants. 


Jamieson, Kay Franzen, Ph.D. Food consultant 
Janda, Kenneth, Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
Northwestem Univ. 

Janick, Jules, Ph.D. Prof. of Horticulture and 
Landscape Architecture, Purdue Univ. 

Janke, Julie World champion logroller 


Jansen, Marius B., Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of History 
and East Asian Studies, Princeton Univ. 


Jared, AlvaH., Ed.D. Prof. , Chairman, Dept. of In- 
dustrial Studies, Univ. of Wisconsin, Platteville. 
Jarvis, Christine W., Ph.D. J. E. Sirrine Prof., Tex- 
tiles, Fiber and Polymer Science, Clemson Univ 
Jarvis, Donald K., Ph.D. Prof. of Russian, 
Brigham Young Univ. 

Jarvis, Robert L, Ph.D. Prof. of Wildlife Ecology, 
Oregon State Univ. 

Jaussi, Laureen R., B.S. Owner, Jaussi Publica: 
tions. 

Jaynes, Richard A,, Ph.D. Horticulturalist and 
consultant, Broken Arrow Nursery. 

Jeans, D.N., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Geography, 
Univ. of Sydney. 

Jednoralski, J. Neil, B.S. Water Resources Engi- 
neer, Mid-Kansas Engineering Consultants, Inc. 
Jenkins, Fred M., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., French and 
Linguistics, Univ. of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. 
Jenkins, Phil, BA. Local News Editor, The (Fred- 
ericksburg, VA) Free Lance-Star. 

Jenkins, Reese V., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Rutgers, 
the State Univ. of New Jersey. 

Jenks, William A., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus ot Histo- 
ry, Washington and Lee Univ. 

Jennings, Kathryn Pierson, M.LS. Asst. Librari- 
an, Hudson (WI) Public Library. 

Jensen, B., Ph.D. Former Assoc. Prof. of Physics, 
Univ. of Lowell. 

Jensen, Ulla Skovgaard, M.Phil. Asst. Prof., Insti- 
tute of Political Science, Arhus Univ., Denmark. 
Jepsen, David A., Ph.D. Prot. of Counselor Edu- 
cation, Univ. of lowa. 

Jespersen, James, M.S. Physicist, National Insti- 
tute of Standards and Technology. 


Jesseph, Douglas M., Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of Philoso- 
phy, North Carolina State Univ. 

Jick, Leon A., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of American 
Jewish Studies, Brandeis Univ. 

Joel, Cliffe D., Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry. Lawrence 
Univ. 

Joes, Anthony James, Ph.D. Director, Interna- 
tional Relations Program, St Joseph's Univ. 
Johansen, Harley, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography. 
Univ. of Idaho. 

Johnson, Bob, M.LS. Reference Librarian, Cali- 
fornia Room, San Jose Public Library. 

Johnson, Bobby H., Ph.D. Regents Prof. of Histo- 
ry, Stephen F. Austin State Univ. 

Johnson, Dale A., Th.D. Prof. of Church History, 
Vanderbilt Univ. 

Johnson, Donald D., Ph.D. Former Prot. of Histo: 
ry, Univ. of Hawaii. 

Johnson, Doris McNeely, M.S. Assoc. Prof. ot 
Psychology, Univ. of the District of Columbia. 
Johnson, Douglas A., Ph.D. Plant Physiologist, 
Agriculture Research Service Forage and Range 
Rsch. Lab., U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Logan, Utah. 
Johnson, Eugene M., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Neurolo- 
gy, Molecular Biology, and Pharmacology. Wash: 
ington Univ. Medical! School. 

Johnson, George B., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, 
Washington Univ. 

Johnson, James P., B.S. Captain and Instructor, 
Delta Air Lines; Consulting Meteorologist, James 
Johnson Associates. 

Johnson, Ronald C., Ph.D. Prot. ot Chemistry. 
Emory Univ. 

johnson, Susan R., M.D. Prof. of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology and Epidemiology, Univ of lowa Col: 
lege of Medicine. 

Johnson, Thomas H., Ph.D. Assoc Prof.of 
Anthropology, Univ. of Wisconsin, Stevens Point 
johnston, J. H., I Former Executive Editor The 
Leavenworth |KS) Times. 





Contributors and consultants XXIX 


Johnston, Laura, B.J. Executive Editor, North Plat- 
te 'NE) Telegraph. 


Johnston, N. Paul, Ph.D. Prof. of Animal Science, 
Brigham Young Univ. 

Johnston, Richard F., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Bio- 
logical Sciences, Unwv. of Kansas. 


Johnston, Taylor J., Ph.D. Interim Chair, Dept. of 
Crop and Soil Sciences, Michigan State Univ. 


Johnston, W. B., MA. Emeritus Prof. of Geogra- 
phy, Univ. of Canterbury. 


Jolliffe, Lee B., Ph.D. Assoc. Prot., School of Jour- 
nalism and Mass Communication, Drake Univ. 
Jones, Catherine Free-lance children’s writer. 
Jones, Charles O., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Jones, Clyde, Ph.D. Prot. of Biological Sciences. 
Texas Tech Univ. 


Jones, H.R, MA. Prof. of Geography, Univ. of 
Dundee. 


Jones, lan Historian and author uf Ned Kelly: A 
Short Life. 


Jones, James W., Ph.D. Prot. and Chairman, Dept 
of Surgery, Univ. of Missouri, Columbia. 

Jones, OrdieR., MS. Soil Scientist, Agricultural 
Research Service, U S. Dept of Agriculture. 
Jones, Peter dA,, Ph.D. Prof. ut History, Univ. of 
Illinois, Chicago. 

Jones, Philip Dwight, Ph.D. Assoc. Prot. of Histo- 
ry, Bradley Univ. 

jones, Ronald L, Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, Easter 
Kentucky Univ. 

Jones, W. T., Ph.D. Prof. of Philosophy, California 
Institute of Technology. 

Jordan, David P., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Illinois, Chicago. 

Jordan, |. King, Ph.D. President, Gallaudet Univ. 
Jordan, Terry G., Ph.D. Walter Prescott Webb 
Prof. of Geography, Univ. of Texas. 

jordan, V. Craig, Ph.D, D.Sc. Prot. of Cancer Re- 
search and Director, Breast Cancer Research Pro- 
gram, Northwestern Univ. Med. School. 

Joseph, James, Ph.D. Dir. Emeritus of Investiga- 
tions, Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission. 
joseph, Toni Grayson, M.PA_ Director ot 
Laboratory Management, U.S. Dept of Energy. 
Judd, Denis, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of North 
London. 

judd, Walter S., Ph.D. Prof. of Botany, Univ. of 
Florida. 

Juergensmeyer, Mark, Ph.D. Prot. of Sociology 
and Religious Studies, Univ. ot California, Santa 
Barbara. 

Juley, Michael, BA. Suburban Editor, Milwaukee 
Journal Sentinel. 


K 


Kaba, Lansine, Ph.D. Prot. and Dean, Honors Col- 
lege, Univ. of Illinois, Chicago 

Kadlec, Daniel, BA. Columnist, 7ime magazine. 
Kado, Clarence 1., Ph.D. Prot., Head Davis Crown 
Gall Group, Univ. of Calitornia. Davis. 

Kagan, Donald, Ph.D. Prof. ot History and Clas- 
sics, Yale Univ. 

Kagan, Jerome, Ph.D. Prof. of Psychology. Har- 
vard Univ. 

Kahn, Wilma J., DA Instructor of English \West- 
ern Michigan Univ. 

Kaiser, Peter K., Dipl. Ing CEO and President, 
Mining Innovation, Rehabilitation, and Applied Re- 
search Corp. Laurentian Univ 

Kalish, Richard A. Former Clinical Prof. ot 
Psychiatry Univ ot New Menico. 

Kamminga, AljeH Writer editor media spe 
cialist; tormer Special Projects Coordinator, Or- 
tawalON Citizen. 

Kane, William J., Ph.D. Prot ot Orthopaedic 
Surgery, Northwestern Unis 

Kaplan, Edgar Editor and Publisher, The Badge 
World. 

Kaplan, Edward K., Ph.D Prot of French and 
Comparative Literature, Brandeis Univ 

Kaplan, Sheldon L,\1D_ Prot, Dept ot Ped: 
atrics Bavlor College ot Medicine Chiet Intec 
tious Disease Service. Texas Children s Hospital 
Kappler, Brian Cit Biitor Zhe (Montreal PQ 
Gazefte 


Karamanski, Theodore J., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Loyola Univ. Chicago. 


Karan, P.P., Ph.D. Distinguished Prof. of Geogra- 
phy, Univ. of Kentucky. 

Karcheski, Walter J., Jr., M.Ed. Curator of Arms 
and Amor, Higgins Armory Museum. 

Karenga, Maulana, Ph.D. Chair and Assoc. Prof. 
of Black Studies, Univ. of California, Long Beach. 
Karlin, Eric F., Ph.D. Dean, School of Theoretical 
and Applied Science, Ramapo College of New Jer- 
sey. 

Karr, Paul, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Chemistry, 
Wayne State College. 

Kasonde, Alexander Raymond Makasa, Ph.D. 
Research Scholar (Linguistics), Emory Univ. 
Kastenbaum, Robert J. Prot. of Communication, 
Arizona State Univ. 

Katsaropoulos, Chris, BA. Director, Que Col- 
lege, a division of Macmillan Publishing. 

Katz, Debora M., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Physics, 
U.S. Naval Academy. 

Katzenberg, Dena S. Consultant Curator, Balti- 
more Museum of Art. 

Kaufman, Burton L, Ph.D. Prof. of History. Vir- 
ginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univ. 
Kaufmann, Arleen B., MA. Free-lance naturalist 
and photographer: Biological Scientist, State of 
Florida Dept of Agriculture. 

Kaufmann, John H., Ph.D. Prof. of Zoology, Univ. 
of Florida. 

Kaye, Neil S.,M.D. Asst. Clinical Prof. of Family 
Medicine, Jefferson Medical College. 

Kearley, F. Furman, Ph.D. Editor, Gospe/ Advo- 
cate. 

Kearns, Robin A., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Dept. of Ge- 
ography, Univ. of Auckland. 

Keating, Richard C., Ph.D. Botanist, Missouri 
Botanical Garden. 

Keddie, Nikki R., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
California, Los Angeles. 

Kedward, H.R, MPhil. Prof. of French History, 
Univ. of Sussex 

Keefe, John W., MA. Curator of Decorative Arts, 
New Orleans Museum of Art. 

Keen, Charlotte E., Ph.D. F.RS.C, Rsch. Scientist. 
Atlantic Geoscience Centre, Bedford Institute. 
Kehoe, Alice B., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Anthropol- 
ogy. Marquette Univ. 

Keil, David J., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, California 
Poiytechnic State Univ. 

Keinath, Thomas M., Ph.D. Dean, College of 
Engineering, Clemson Univ. 

Keith, Jennie, Ph.D. Provost and Centennial Prof. 
of Anthropology. Swarthmore College. 


Keith, Michael C., MA. Senior Lecturer in Com- 
munication, Boston College. 

Keith, Robert M., CPA. Director School of Ac- 
countancy, Univ. of South Florida. 

Keith-Lucas, Alan, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Social 
Work. Univ. of North Carolina. Chapel Hill. 
Kelleher, Paul G., M.S. Consultant, Polymer 
Processing Inst., Stevens Institute of Technology. 
Kelley, Ed, BA Editonal Director, The Daily 
Oklahoma City. OK) Okfahoman. 

Kelley, Patricia H., Ph.D. Chair Dept of Earth 
Sciences, Univ. of North Carolina, Wilmington. 
Kellogg, Kim O'Connor, B.S. Former Asst 
Director, Public Intormation. National PTA 

Kelly, James P., BA. \tanaging Editor The Hon- 
olulu (HD Advertiser. 

Kelso, Frank M., Ph.D. Faculty. Dept ut Mechani- 
cal Engineenng, Univ. ot Nunnesota. 

Kemball, Walter G., M.Ed. President. WW Kent 
ball Curnculum Consultants. Inc 

Kemmick, Edward A. Reporter. The Billings 
MT) Gazefte. 

Kenagy, G. }.,Ph.D Prof. of Zoology. Univ. of 
Washington. 

Kenkel, Don Ph.D Asso. Prot. Dept. of Policy 
Analvsis and Management. Cornell Ginn 
Kennedy, Brian, \AA Copy Editur Outback 
magazine 

Kennedy, Floyd D., Jr, \A.A0 Rsch Statt Mem- 
ber Center tor Naval Analyses Contributing Ed 
US Naval Institute coauthor Word Combat Air 
iraft Directocw: Miltary Helicopters ot the World 


Xxx Contributors and consultants 


Kennedy, Gavin, Ph.D. Prof. of Defence Finance. 
Heriot-Watt Univ., Edinburgh. 


Kennedy, George, Ph.D. Prof. of Journalism, 
Univ. of Missourt, Columbia. 

Kennedy, James E., Ph.D. Technical Staff Mem- 
ber, Los Alamos National Laboratory. 


Kennedy, Robert A., Ph.D. Vice President for 
Research and Assoc. Provost for Graduate Studies, 
Texas A&M Univ. 


Kenoyer, Jonathan Mark Ph.D. Prof. of Anthro- 
pology Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Kern, Edith, Ph.D. Doris Silbert Prof. of Humani- 
ties, Emeritus, Smith College. 

Kerr, Donald R,, Jr., Ph.D. Former Basic Skills 
Coordinator, Dept of Mathematics, Indiana Uni. 


Kerr, lan J., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of Mani- 
toba 

Kershaw, G. Peter, Ph.D. Prof., Dept of Earth and 
Atmospheric Sciences, Univ. of Alberta 

Kershaw, Gretha, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Anthro- 
pology, California State Univ., Long Beach. 
Kertzer, David I., Ph.D. Dupee Univ. Prof. of So- 
cial Science, Brown Univ. 

Kesha, Neville N. International Rugby Leaque 
football referee. 


Kessel, John L, B.A Director of Beach Vollev- 
ball, USA Volleyball. 


Kessell, John L, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of New Mexico; Editor, The Vargas Project 
Kesselman, Mark, Ph.D. Prof. of Government, 
Columbia Univ. 

Kestenbaum, Justin L, Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
History, Michigan State Univ. 

Kester, Dana R., Ph.D. Prof. of Oceanography, 
Graduate School of Oceanography, Univ. of Rhode 
Island. 

Kesterson, David B., Ph.D. Prof. of English and 
VP for Academic Affairs, Univ. of North Texas. 


Ketchum, Bostwick H., Sc.D. Former Senior 
Scientist, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. 


Kettering, Alison McNeil, Ph.D. Prof. of Art 
History, Carleton College. 


Ketti, Donald F., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science 
and Public Affairs Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 
Kevles, Daniel J., Ph.D. Prof. of Humanities, 
California Institute of Technology. 

Keyder, Caglar, Ph.D. Prof. of Sociology, Bing- 
hamton Univ, State Univ. of New York. 

Keyes, Charles, Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology and 
Intemational Studies, Univ. of Washington. 

Keyes, Jane, “A Author and editor. 

Keyes, P. Landis, Ph.D. Prof. of Physiology, Univ. 
of Michigan. 

Khalidi, Rashid L, D.Phil. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Chicago. 

Kibby, Michael W., Ph.D. Dir., Reading Clinic; 
Chair, Dept of Learning and Instruction and Assoc. 
Prof. of Education, State Univ. of New York, Buffalo. 
Kicza, John E., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Washington 
State Univ. 

Kidwell, Clara Sue, Ph.D. Director, Native Ameri- 
can Studies, Univ. of Oklahoma 

Kidwell, Peggy Aldrich, Ph.D. Museum Special- 
ist, Smithsonian Institution. 

Kienzler, Michael E.,“.A Metro Editor, (Spring- 
field, IL! State Journal-Register. 

Kieren, Thomas E., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Edu- 
cation, Univ. of Alberta 

Kiernan, David R., “A. Colonel, U.S. Army. ret 
Kierszenbaum, Felipe, Ph.D. Prof. of Micro- 
biology, Michigan State Univ. 

Kiger, Joseph C, Ph.D. Author Operating 
Principles of the Larger Foundations. 

Kirn, Hyung-chan, Ed.D. Prof. of Education and 
Asian American Studies, Wester Washington 
Univ. 

Kimmich, Christoph M., D.Phil. Prof. of History, 
Provost, Brooklyn College, City Univ. of New York. 
King, Dwight Y., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
Northern Illinois Univ. 

King, John N., Ph.D. Prof. of English, Ohio State 
Univ. 

King, Micki, “4A. Gold medal winner in diving 
1972 Olvmpic Games. 

King, Pauline N., Ph.D. Assoc. Prot of History 
Univ. of Hawaii. 


Kinkade, Richard P., Ph.D. Prof. of Spanish and 
Portuguese, Univ. of Arizona. 

Kinkel, Doreen H. D., Ph.D. Prof. of Animal 
Science, Texas A&M Univ., Kingsville. 

Kionka, Edward J., LLM. Prof. of Law School of 
Law, Southern Illinois Univ. 

Kirby, F. E., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Music. Lake 
Forest College. 

Kirkland, Colin J., F.Eng. Director, Sir Wm. Hal- 
crow & Partners Ltd. 

Kirschenbaum, Howard, Ed.D. Author, educa- 
tor, and consultant; Adjunct faculty, State Univ. of 
New York, Brockport 


Kispert, Robert J., Ph.D. Former Assoc. Prof. of 
English, Univ. of Hlinois, Chicago. 

Kiste, Robert C, Ph.D. Director and Prof., Univ. 
of Hawaii Center for Pacific Islands Studies. 

Kita, Joe, BA). Executive Editor Bicycling. 
Kitching, Brian “Managing Partner Kitching, 
Ruscoe Public Relations. 

Klein, Donald W., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 


Tufts Univ.; Research Assoc., Fairbank Center for 
East Asian Research, Harvard Univ. 


Klein, Marcus, Ph.D. Prof., Aodern American 
Literature, State Univ. of New York, Buffalo. 


Klein, Michael J., Ph.D. Radio Astronomer, jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Tech- 
nology; coauthor, Cosmic Quest Searching for In- 
telligent Life Among the Stars. 

Klein, Milton M., Ph.D. Editor, The Empire State: 
A History of New York 

Klein, Philip S., Ph.D. Former Prof. of American 
History, Pennsylvania State Univ. 

Klein, Richard G., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology, 
Stanford Univ. 

Klein, Ronald, M.D. Prof. of Ophthalmology, 
Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Kleindorfer, Paul R., Ph.D. Prof. of Decision Sci- 
ences and Public Policy, Univ. of Pennsylvania 
KJernent, Frank L., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Histo- 
ry, Marquette Univ. 

Klernm, David E., Ph.D. Asst Prof. of Religion, 
Univ. of lowa 

Kline, Hibberd V. B., Jr., Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of 
Geography, Univ. of Pittsburgh. 

Kline, Ronald R., Ph.D. Asst Prof. of History of 
Technology, Cornell Univ. 


Klocke, Robert A., “i.D. Prof. of Medicine and 
Physiology, State Univ. of New York, Buffalo. 


Klotzko, Arfene Judith, |.D. \Vriter in Residence, 


Science Museum, London. 


Kluger, Matthew J., Ph.D. Director, Institute for 
Basic and Applied Medical Research, Lovelace In- 
stitutes. 


Klumpe, Kerry, J.D. Managing Editor Amencan 
Bar Association Journal: tormer Asst Managing 
Editor, The Cincinnati (OH) Enquirer. 


Klymyshyn, Alexandra M. Ulana, Ph.D. Direc 
tor, Multicultural Programming, Central Michigan 
Univ. 

Knapp, Gregory, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. and Chair, 
Dept of Geography, Univ. of Texas, Austin. 
Knapp, Mark L, Ph.D. Chair and Jesse H. Jones 
Centennial Prof. in Communication and Distin- 
guished Teaching Prof., Univ. of Texas, Austin. 
Knechtges, David R., Ph.D. Prof. of Chinese. 
Univ. of Washington. 

Kneebone, Sterling Features Editor, The ‘Fred- 
ericton, NB) Daily Gleaner. 

Kneeshaw, Stephen, Ph.D. Prof. of History. Col- 
lege of the Ozarks. 

Knight, Charles A., Ph.D. Senior Scientist, Na- 
tional Center for Atmospheric Research. 

Knipe, C Lynn, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Dept of Food 
Science and Technology, Ohio State Uni. 

Knopt, Fritz L., Ph.D. Senior Scientist, U.S. Geo- 
logical Survey. 

Knowlton, Frederick F., Ph.D. Wildlife Biologist 
and Rsch. Prof., Animal and Plant Health Inspection 
Service, U.S. Dept of Agriculture, Utah State Univ. 
Koehler, Michael F., B.S. Vice President, Retail 
Worldwide Industry Marketing, AT&T Corp. 


Koenig, Michael E. D., Ph.D. Dean and Prof. 
Palmer School of Library and Information Science, 
Long Island Univ. 


Koenker, Diane P., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. 


Kolars, John, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, Dept of 
Near East Studies, Univ. of Michigan. 

Kolata, Alan L., Ph.D. Neukom Family Prof. of An- 
thropology, Univ. of Chicago. 

Kolaz, David J., M.S. Manager, Air Compliance 
Section, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 


Koontz, Fred, Ph.D. Program Director, Wildlife 
Preservation Trust International. 


Kopytoff, Igor, Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology, Univ. 
of Pennsylvania. 


Kombluh, Peter, MA. Senior Analyst, National 
Security Archive. 


Komblum, Aaron T., VU.LS. Archivist, Westem 
Jewish History Center, Magnes Museum. 

Kosel, Peter Bohdan, Ph.D. Director, Gallium Ar- 
senide Devices and Integrated Circuits Laboratory, 
Univ. of Cincinnati. 

Kosinski, Leszek A., Ph.D. Secretary General, In- 
ternational Social Science Council, UNESCO. 
Kosslyn, S.M., Ph.D. Prof. of Psychology, Harvard 
Univ. 

Koszczuk, Jackie, B.S. National Congressional 
Correspondent, Knight Ridder Newspapers. 
Kottak, Conrad Phillip, Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropol- 
ogy, Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 


Kotynski, Tom, B.A Assoc. Editor, Great Falls 
IMT) Tribune. 


Koumoulides, John A., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Ball State Univ. 

Kovacik, Charles F., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography 
and Director, Center of Excellence for Geographic 
Education, Univ. of South Carolina 


Kozloski, Lillian D., 8.S. Former Museum 
Specialist, National Air and Space Museum. 


Kozlowski, Don R., M.S.EE Former Senior Vice 
President, Military Transport Aircraft, McDonnell 
Douglas Corp. 

Kraft, Donald H., Ph.D. Prof. of Computer Sci- 
ence, Louisiana State Univ 

Krahmer, John, LLM. Prof. of Law, Texas Tech 
Univ. School of Law. 

Kraig, Bruce, Ph.D. Prof. of History and Humani- 
ties, Roosevelt Univ. 


Kramer, James R., Ph.D. Prof. of Geochemistry, 
McMaster Univ. 


Kramer, Victor A., Ph.D. Prof. of English, 
Georgia State Univ. 


Kranzberg, Melvin, L.H.D. Former Callaway Prof. 
of the History of Technology, Georgia Institute of 
Technology. 


Kraus, Pansy D.,F.GA Gem consultant 
Krefman, Ronald A.,O.D. Optometrist 
Kremer, Gary R., Ph.D. Prof. of History, William 
Woods Univ. 


Kremkau, Frederick W., Ph.D. Prof. and Direc- 
tor, Center for Medical Ultrasound. Wake Forest 
Univ. School of Medicine. 

Krentz, Peter, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Davidson 
College. 

Kress, Jack M., D.Crim. Executive Director, Advi- 
sory Committee on Organ Transplantation, US. 
Dept of Health and Human Senices. 

Krier, James E., |.D. Eari \Warren DeLano Prof. of 
Law, Univ. of Michigan Law School. 

Krisciunas, Kevin, Ph.D. Research Assoc., Dept 
of Astronomy, Univ. of Washington. 

Kroeber, Donald W., Ph.D. Dean, Co!lege of 
Business and Economics, Radford Univ. 

Kropf, Nancy P., Ph.D. Assoc. Dean, School of 
Social Work, Univ. of Georgia 

Krosby, H. Peter, Ph.D. Prof. of History, State 
Univ. of New York, Albany. 

Kuhn, George W. S., J.D. Rsch. Fellow, Logistics 
Nianagement Institute; former U.S. Army officer. 
Kulczycki, John J., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Illinois, Chicago. 

Kurnbier, William A., Ph.D. Asst Prof. of English, 
Missoun Southern State College. 

Kuntz, J. Fred, BAA Publisher, Grand River Val- 
ley Newspapers; former Assoc. Editor The Toron- 
to, Canada! Globe. 

Kupperman, Karen Ordahl, Ph.D. Prof. of 
History Univ of Connecticut 

Kurth, William S., Ph.D. Research Scientist, Dept 
of Physics and Astronomy, Univ. of lowa 
Kushma, David, MS. Editorial Page Editor, The 
(Memphis, TN’ Commercial Appeal. 





Kutler, Stanley |, Ph.D. Prof. of American Institu- 
tions, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Kutzbach, John E., Ph.D. Prof. of Atmospheric 
and Oceanic Sciences, and Director, Center for 
Climatic Research, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 


Kuzen, RobinH., MA. Administrator, Miller 
Center of Public Affairs, Univ. of Virginia. 


Kyanka, George H., Ph.D. Prof. of Wood Prod- 
ucts Engineering, State Univ. of New York 
Kyle, Richard, Ph.D. Prof. of History and Reli- 
gion, Tabor College. 


Kyvig, David E., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Akron. 
L 


Labuza, Theodore P., Ph.D. Prof. of Food 
Science, Univ. of Minnesota, Twin Cities Campus. 
Lack, Sylvia A., B.S. Director, Chronic Pain 
Program; Staff Physician, Gaylord Hospital. 
Laflen, John M., Ph.D. Dir., National Soil Erosion 
Research Laboratory, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture. 
Laguerre, Michel S., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Anthropology, Univ. of California, Berkeley. 

Lal, Anil, MA fnstructor of English, Truman Col- 
lege. 

Lal, Brij V., Ph.D. Senior Fellow in Pacific History, 
Australian National Univ., Canberra. 

Lal, Vinay, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
California, Los Angeles. 

Laline, Brian J. Editor, Staten Island (New York, 
NY) Advance. 

Lamar, Howard R., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Yale 
Univ.; author, The Far Southwest, 1846-1912. 
Lamb, David R., Ph.D. Prof. of Exercise Phystolo- 
gy and Preventive Medicine, Ohio State Univ. 
Lamb, Joseph F., Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of Art History, 
Ohio Univ. 

Lamba, Savi, M.S.Ch.E. Technical Director, James 
Finlay and Co. (U.S), Inc. 

Lambert, John, D.Phil. Assoc. Prof., Dept. of His- 
tory, Univ. of South Africa. 

Lambert, Wayne, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Geology, 
West Texas A&M Univ. 

Lancaster, Roger A., M.S. General Manager, 
U.S. Dept. of Agriculture Employee Services and 
Recreation Association. 

Lance, H. Darrell, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus, Old Tes- 
tament Interpretation, Colgate Rochester Bexley 
Crozer Theological Seminary. 

Lanctot, Barbara, MA. Senior subject editor, 
The World Book Encyclopedia. 

Landen, Robert Geran, Ph.D. Director, Center 
for Programs in the Humanities, Virginia Polytech: 
nic Institute and State Univ. 

Landers, Jack M., Ed.D. Prof. of Industrial Tech- 
nology, Central Missouri State Univ. 
Landis-Tyson, Noreen, BA. Asst. Executive 
Director, U.S. Field Hockey Association. 

Lang, Jack Executive Secretary, Baseball Writers 
Association of America. 

Lang, Kate, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Wisconsin, Eau Claire. 

Lang, Robert J., Ph.D. Senior Research Manager, 
Spectra Diode Laboratories. 

Langdon, Robert Visiting Fellow, Pacific and 
Asian History, Australian National Univ 

Lange, Thomas L. Former Director of Communt- 
cations, U.S. Soccer Federation. 

LaNoue, George R., Ph.D. Director, Policy — 
Sciences Graduate Program and Prof. of Political 
Science, Univ. of Maryland, Baltimore. 

Lansing, Richard H., Ph.D. Prof. of Italian and 
Comparative Literature, Brandeis Unis 

Lanyon, Scott M., Ph.D. Dir., james Ford Bell 
Museum of Natural History, Univ. of Minnesota. 
Lapidus, Leah Blumberg, Ph.D. Prof. of Psychol 
ogy, Teachers College, Columbia Univ. 

LaPierre, Laurier L., Ph.D. Former Prof of Histo: 
ry, McGill Univ. 

LaPorte, Robert, Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Public 
Administration and Political Scrence, Pennsylvania 
State Univ.; author, Power and Privilege: A Study of 
influence and Decision Making in Pakistan. 

Lapp, Douglas M., £d.D. Former Director Na: 
tional Science Resources Center, National Acade 
my of Sciences/Smithsonian Institution 


Larsen, Fenton E., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Hort 


Contributors and consultants XXX! 


culture, Washington State Univ. 

Larsen, Lawrence H., Ph.D. Coauthor, The Gate 
City, A History of Omaha. 

Larson, André P., Ph.D. Prof. of Music and Direc: 
tor, America’s Shrine to Music Museum, Univ. of 
South Dakota. 


Lasch, Christopher, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Histo- 
ry, Univ. of Rochester. 


Lass, William E., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Mankato 
State Univ. 


Lau, Tin-Man, MA. Prof., Dept. of Industrial De- 
sign, Auburn Univ. 


Laudan, Rachel, Ph.D. Prof. of General Science, 
Univ. of Hawaii, Honolulu. 


Laudon, Robert C, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Geology 
and Geophysics, Univ. of Missouri, Rolla. 
Laugharne, Peter J., Ph.D. Senior Lecturer, Lon- 
don Guildhall Univ. 

Laur, Timothy M., M.A. Lieutenant Colonel, 
retired, U.S. Air Force; consultant; lecturer. 
Lawley, Mark A., Ph.D. Asst. Prof., School of In- 
dustrial Engineering, Purdue Univ. 

Lawrence, Keith, M.S. Senior Writer, Owens- 
boro\KY) Messenger-Inquirer. 

Lawson, Wendy, Ph.D. Senior Lecturer, Univ. of 
Canterbury, Christchurch. 

Lazarte, Jaime E., Ph.D. Lecturer-Researcher, 
Harvard Univ. School of Medicine, Center for 
Blood Research. 

Lea, David A.M., Ph.D. Executive Director, North 
Australta Research Unit. 

Le Bon, Joel, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of Marketing, 
ESSEC Business School, France. 

Ledbetter, Mary Lee S., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, 
College of the Holy Cross. 

Ledeen, Lydia Hailparn, Ph.D. Prof. and Chair of 
Music Dept, Drew Univ. 

Ledes, Allison Eckardt, B.A. Editor, Antiques. 
Ledgerwood, Judy L, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Dept. of 
Anthropology, Northern IIfinois Univ., DeKalb. 
LeDuff, Garry R., MACE. Asst Dir., Curriculum 
Services, Dept. of Employment and Technical and 
Further Education, Adelaide, South Australia. 
Lee, ChongSik, Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
Univ. of Pennsylvania. 

Lee, Cindy T., MA. Research Analyst, Milken In- 
stitute. 

Lee, Harry W., Ph.D. Forest Engineer, Forest 
Products Dept, Univ. of Idaho. 

Lee, Kwang-sun, M.D. Prof. of Pediatrics and 
Obstetrics Gynecology, Univ. of Chicago. 

Lee, Warren F., Ph.D. Prof. of Agricultural, Envi- 
ronmental and Development Economics, Ohio 
State Univ. 

Lefebvre, R. Craig, Ph.D. Vice President and 
Chief Technical Officer, Intervention Services, 
Prospect Associates. 

Lefkovitz, Elliot B., Ph.D. Adjunct Prot. of 
History, Loyola Univ. and Spertus Institute of 
Jewish Studies. 

Lefkowitz, Mary R., Ph.D. Andrew \V. Mellon 
Prof. of Humanities, Dept. of Classical Studies, 
Wellesley College. 

Le Gall, Dina, MA. Scholar in Middle Eastem 
studies. 

Le Gall, Michel, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Middle 
Eastern History, St. Olaf College. 

Legg, Keith R., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
Univ. ot Florida 

Legon, Ronald P., Ph.D. Provost and Prof. of 
History, Univ. of Baltimore 

Lehrer, Adrienne, Ph.D. Prof. of Linguistics 
Unw. of Anzona. 

Leiren, Terje l., Ph.D. Prot. Dept. of Scandina 
vian Studtes, Uni. of \Vashington 

Lemanske, Robert F., Jr., M.D. Prof. of Pediatrics 
and Medicine. Univ. of Wisconsin Medical School. 
Lemarchand, René, Ph.D. Regional consultant 
on Covernance. U.S. Agency tor International 
Development 

LeMone, Margaret A., Ph.D. Senior Scientist 
National Center tor Atmospheric Research 
Lenardon, Robert j., PhO Prot and Head, Dept. 
of Classics, Siena Colleas 

Lengle, james I., PhD Prof ot Government 
Georgetown Uni 


Leonard, Joseph W., Ill, M.S. Former Mining 
Engineering Foundation Prof., Univ. of Kentucky. 


Leonard, Thomas C., Ph.D. Prof., Grad. School of 
Journalism, Univ. of California, Berkeley. 


Lersten, Nels R., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Botany, 
lowa State Univ. 

Lesko, Leonard H., Ph.D. Prof. of Egyptology and 
Chairman, Dept. of Egyptology, Brown Univ. 


Lester, David, Ph.D. Prof. of Psychology, The 
Richard Stockton College of New Jersey. 


Lester, Larry, B.S. Former Research Director, 
Negro Leagues Baseball Museum. 


Levanon, Yosef, Ph.D. Adjunct Assoc. Prof. of 
Jewish History, Spertus Institute of Jewish Studies. 


Levere, Trevor H., D.Phil. Prof. of the History of 
Science, Univ. of Toronto. 


Leveton, Deborah, MA. Curator, Des Moines 
Art Center. 


Leviatan, Uriel, Ph.D. Prof. Dept. of Sociology, 
Univ. of Haifa. 

Levier, Francis, £d.D. Consultant, Levier & Asso- 
ciates. 

Levine, Alan §., Ph.D. Chief Scientific Officer and 
Vice Chairman tor Scientific and Medical Affairs, 
NuStem Technologies, Inc. - 

Levine, Gordon L, Ph.D. Director, International 
Education Office, Univ. of Minnesota, Duluth. 
Levine, Robert M., Ph.D. Prof. and Dir. of Latin 
American Studies, Dept. of History, Univ. of Miami. 
Levings, Darryl W., M.A. Asst. Managing Editor 
for National News, The Kansas City(MO) Star. 
Levison, J. J., M.F. Consulting landscape forester. 


Levinson, Sanford, }.D. Prof. of Law and Govern- 
ment, Univ. of Texas Law School, Austin. 
Levitzky, Michael G., Ph.D. Prof. of Physiology, 
Louisiana State Univ. Medical Center. 

Levy, B. Barry, Ph.D. Dean, Faculty of Religious 
Studies, McGill Univ. 

Levy, David H., MA. Observer, Jamac 
Laboratory. 

Lewis, Anthony J., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Geogra- 
phy and Anthropology, Louisiana State Univ. 
Lewis, B.M., Ph.D. Senior Rsch. Assoc., National 
Astronomy and lonosphere Center (Arecibo). 
Lewis, Cathleen S., M.A. Asst. Curator, National 
Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution. 
Lewis, David L., Ph.D. Prof. of Business History, 
Univ. of Michigan. 

Lewis, Finlay Washington Correspondent, Cop- 
ley News Service. 

Lewis, G. Malcolm, M.Sc. Consultant, G. Mal- 
colm Lewis and S. Margaret Lewis History of Car- 
tography Research. 

Lewis, John P., Ph.D. Prof. of Economics and 
International Policy Emeritus, Princeton Univ. 
Lewis, Laurence A., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Clark Univ. 

Lewis, Mark !., Ph.D. Prof., Dept. of Aerospace 
Engineering, Univ. of Maryland, College Park. 
Lewis, Nancy Davis, Ph.D. Assoc. Dean, College 
of Social Sciences, Univ. ot Hawaii. 

Lewis, Thomas R., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Geogra- 
phy, University of Connecticut 

Lewis, W. David, Ph.D. Distinguished Unw. Prof. 
Auburn Univ. 

Lewis, W. Joe, Ph.D. Rsch. Entomologist, Agricul: 
tural Research Service, U S. Dept. of Agriculture. 
Lewis-Russ, Anne, Ph.D. Senior Project Scientist, 
Titan Environmental Corp 

Lewy, Guenter, Ph.D Prof. Emeritus of Political 
Science, Univ. of Massachusetts, Amherst 

Ley, Klaus, \iD Prof. and Director, Cardiovascu- 
lar Research Center Univ of Virginia. 

Liao, Thomas T., Ed.D Prof. and Chairman. Dept. 
of Technology and Society, State Univ. of New 
York, Stony Brook 

Libbrecht, Ken G., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Astro 
physics. Califorma Institute of Technology 

Lieber, Charles S.,\AD. Prot ot Medicine and 
Pathology Mount Sinai School ot Medicine, City 
Univ. ot New York 

Lieberman, jethroK.,}D Assoc Dean tor Aca- 
demic Aftairs and Prot of Law. New York Law 
School 

Liebow, Charles, PhD Prot. Dept. of Oral 
Surgery Scheal of Dental Medicine, State Univ ot 


XXXII 


New York, Buffalo. 

Liepelt, Klaus, MA. Director, Institute of Applied 
Social Research, Bonn, Germany. 

Likens, Gene E., Ph.D Director, Institute of 
Ecosystem Studies. 

Lillard, Paula P., MEd. Cofounder, Forest Bluff 
Montessori School. 

Lincoln, C. Eric, LLD. Former \Villiam Rand Ke- 
nan Prof. of Religion and Culture, Duke Univ. 


Lincoln, Louise, M.A. Curator of African, 
Oceanic, and New World Cultures, Minneapolis 
Institute of Arts. 


Lindahl, Carl, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of English, Univ. 
of Houston. 

Linden, James C., Ph.D. Prot. of Microbiology 
and of Agricultural and Chemical Engineering, 
Colorado State Univ. 

Lindgren, James, }.D. Prof. of Law, Northwestern 
Unw. School of Law. 

Lindgren, Raymond E., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
History, California State Univ., Long Beach. 
Lindheimer, Marshall D., \.D. Prof. of Medi- 
cine, Obstetrics and Gynecology, and Clinical 
Pharmacology, Univ. of Chicago. 

Lindow, John, Ph.D. Prof., Dept. of Scandinavian, 
Univ. of California, Berkeley. 


Lindstrom, Lamont, Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology. 


Univ. of Tulsa. 

Lindstrom, Marilyn M., Ph.D. Planetary Scientist, 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 
Johnson Space Center. 

Lindstrom, Naomi, Ph.D. Prof. of Spanish and 
Portuguese, Univ. of Texas, Austin. 

Lineback, Neal G., Ph.D. Prof., Dept of Geogra- 
phy and Planning, Appalachian State Univ.: Editor, 
Atlas of Alabama. 

Lineberry, Robert L, Ph.D. Prof. of Political 
Science, Unw. of Houston. 

Linhardt, Robert J., Ph.D. F. Wendell Miller Dis- 
tinguished Prot. of Medicinal and Natural Products 
Chemistry and Chemical and Biochemical Engi- 
neering, Univ. of lowa. 

Linker, H. Michael, Ph.D. Integrated Pest Man- 
agement Coordinator, Dept of Crop Science and 
Entomology, North Carolina State Univ. 

Lipking, Lawrence, Ph.D. Chester D. Tripp Prot. 
of Humanities, Northwestern Univ. 

Lippy, Charles H., Ph.D. Leroy A. Martin Distin- 
guished of Prof. of Religious Studies, Univ. of Ten- 
nessee, Chattanooga. 

Lipset, Seymour Martin, Ph.D. Prof. of Sociolo- 
gy in Public Policy, George Mason and Stanford 
universities. 

Liptay, Albert, Ph.D. Research Scientist, Agricul- 
ture & Agri-Food Canada, Government of Canada. 
Litchfield, R. Burr, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Brown 
Univ. 

Little, Richard Stark, Ph.D. President, Appalachi- 
an Geographic Information Systems. 

Little, Trevor J., Ph.D. Prof. of Textile and Appar- 
el Management, North Carolina State Univ. 

Little Soldier, Lee M., Ed.D. Prof. of Education, 
Texas Tech Univ. 

Littleton, C. Scott, Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Dept of 
Anthropology, Occidental College; author, The 
New Comparative Mythology and From Scythia to 
Camelot 

Litwack, Leon F., Ph.D. A F.and May T 
Morrison Prof. of History, Univ. ot California. 
Berkeley; winner of Pulitzer Prize for History, 1980. 
Litz, Richard E., Ph.D. Prof., Univ. of Florida 
Tropical Research and Education Center. 

Liu, Philip U-F., Sc.D. Prof. of Environmental 
Engineering, Comell Univ. 

Living, Patricia Communications Coordinator 
Health and Social Services, Government of Yukon. 
Lizzadro, John S. Director, Lizzadro Museum of 
Lapidary Art. 

Ljungquist, Kent, Ph.D. Prof. of English, 
Worcester Polytechnic Institute. 

Llanso, StevenL,MALD Marketiog Support 
Coordinator, Uoited Commuoications Group. 
Lloyd, Dan, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Philosophy, 
Trinity College. 

Lloyd, Howell C, Ph.D Prof. of Geography, 
Miami Lov. 

Lloyd, James E., Ph.D. Prof. of Entomology, Uoiv. 
of Florida. 


Contributors and consultants 


Lo, Chor-Pang, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, Univ. of 
Georgia. 


Lobeck, Anne, Ph.D. Prof. of English and Linguis- 
tics, Western Washington Univ 

Locascio, S. J., Ph.D. Prof. of Horticultural 
Sciences, Univ. of Florida. 

Locke, Robert, BA. Editor. Border Business. 
Lockhart, James, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
California, Los Angeles. 

Lockshin, Michael D.,FACP. Director, Barbara 
Volcker Center, Hospital for Special Surgery. 
Lofaro, Michael A., Ph.D. Prof. of American Liter- 
ature and American Studies, Univ. of Tennessee. 
Loft, Abram, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Chamber 
Music. Eastman School of Music. 

Loftus, Elizabeth F., Ph.D. Prof. of Psychology, 
Univ. of Washington. 

Logan, Bob, B.S. Sportswriter, (Arlington 
Heights, IL) Daily Herald. 

London, Ray William, A.B.P.H. President, Chief 
Executive Officer, Human Studies Center, Ltd. 
Londre, Felicia Hardison, Ph.D. Curators Prot. 
of Theatre, Univ. of Missouri, Kansas City. 

Long, Alexis B., Ph.D. Assoc. Research Prof. of 
Atmospheric Sciences, Desert Research Institute. 


Long, Charles A., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, Curator 
of Mammals, Univ. of Wiscoosin, Stevens Point 


Longyear, R. M., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Music, 
Univ. of Kentucky. 

Looft, W. Gene, B.S. President, Aerospace Divi- 
sion, Rexnord Corp. 

Lopata, Helena Znaniecka, Ph.D. Senior Prof. of 
ooo ogy and Director, Center for the Compara- 
tive Study of Social Roles, Loyola Univ. of Chicago. 


Lorenz, John R., B.B._ Transportation Analyst, 
New Century Freight Traffic Association. 
Lourdou, Dorothy, M.LS._ Librarian Ill, New York 
Public Library. 

Lovejoy, Thomas E., Ph.D. Counselor to the Sec- 
aa for Biodiversity and Environmental Affairs, 
Smitnsoniao Institution. 

Lovell, David J., Ph.D. Asst. Prof., Dept. of Civil 
Engineering, Univ. of Maryland, College Park. 
Loving, Jerome, Ph.D. Prof. of English, Texas 
A&M Un. 

Lovol!, Odd S., Ph.D. Prof. of History, St. Olaf Col- 
lege. 

Low, Frank J., Ph.D. Regents Research Prof., 
Univ. of Arizona. 

Lubin, Nancy, Ph.D. Pres., JNA Associates, Inc. 


Ludwickson, John, MA. Curator of Anthropolo- 
gy. Nebraska State Historical Society. 


Lukas, J. Anthony Author and journalist. 


Lukes-Lukaszewski, Edward A., Ph.D. Prof. of 
History, Hillsborough College. 

Lum, P. Andrea, F.R.CP.C. Abdominal Radiolo- 
gist, Ottawa Civic Hospital, Ontario. 

Lunenfeld, Marvin, Ph.D. Distinguished Teach- 
ing Prof. Emeritus of History, Fredonia College, 
State Univ. of New York. 


Lurie, Nancy Oestreich, Ph.D. Curator Emerita 
of Anthropology, Milwaukee Public Museum, 
Lussier, Frances M., Ph.D. Senior Policy Analyst, 
The Rand Corp. 

Lutas, Elizabeth Mary, M.D. Attending Physi- 
cian, Depts. of Community Medicine and Medi- 
cine, Saint Vincents Hospital. 

Luteyn, James L, Ph.D. Senior Curator of Botany 
and Mary Flagler Curator of Botany, New York 
Botanical Garden. 

Lutz, Thomas E., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Astrono- 
my, Washington State Univ. 

Ly, Uy-Loi, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Dept. of Aeronau- 
tics and Astronautics, Univ. of Washington. 
Lynch, John H., M.D. Prof. and Chief, Division of 
Urology, Georgetown Univ Medical Center. 
Lynfield, Yelva Liptzin, M.D. Clinical Prof. of 
Dermatology, State Univ. of New York Health Sci 
ences Center at Brooklyn and Chairman of Derma- 
tology Dept, Brookdale Uoiv. Medical Center. 
Lyon, Bryce, Ph.D. Bamaby C. and Mary Critch- 
field Keeney Emeritus Prof. of History. Brown Uoiv. 
Lyons, Charles R., Ph.D. Margery Bailey Prof. of 
Eoglish and Dramatic Literature, Stanford Univ. 


M 


Maas, John L, Ph.D. Research Plant Pathologist, 


U.S. Dept of Agnculture. 


MacAndrews, Colin, Ph.D. Fellow, Dept of 
Economics, Australian National Univ. 


MacCallum, Spencer Heath, M.A. Author, The 
Art of Community. 


MacDonald, Charles B., D.H. Former Deputy 
Chief Histonan, U.S. Dept of the Army. 


MacDonald, Kevin C., Ph.D. Senior Lecturer, In- 
stitute of Archaeology, Univ. College London. 


Macinko, George, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Central Washington Univ. 


Macintyre, Walter Assoc. Editor, 

The ‘Charlottetown, PE!) Guardian. 

Mack, Raymond W., Ph.D. Provost, Northwest- 
ern Univ.; coauthor, Principles of Sociology. 
Mackenzie, Hilary J.D., M.S.J. Senior Writer, 
Specialist in International Affairs, and Washington 
Bureau Chief, Maclean's magazine; specialist on 
Latin American urban areas. 

Mackey, Philip English, Ph.D. Consultant; 
author The Givers Guide: Making Your Charity 
Dollars Count 

Mackey, Robert R., Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of History, 
US. Military Academy, West Point 

Mackie, G. O., D.Phil. Prof. of Biology, Univ. of 
Victoria. 

Mackillop, James, Ph.D. Prof. of English, 
Onondaga Community College; Reviewer of 
Theater and Films, Syracuse (NY) New Times. 
Mackzum, Mary F., M.S.LS. Head Librarian, The 
Toledo, OH) Blade. 


MacLeod, D. Peter, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Ottawa. 

MacLeod, Murdo J., Ph.D. Graduate Research 
Prof. of History, Univ. of Flonda. 

Macleod, Roderick C, Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Alberta; author, The Mounties. 
Macmanus, Sheila, |.D. Former Asst. State's At 
torney, Cook County (IL) State's Attorney's Office. 
Maddalena, Ronald J., Ph.D. Astronomer, Na- 
tional Radio Astronomy Observatory. 
Madelung, Wilferd, Ph.D. Prof. of Arabic, Oxford 
Univ. 

Madsen, Willard J., M.Ed. Coordinator of Sign 
Language Evaluation, Gallaudet Univ. 

Maehl, William H., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Modern History, Aubum Univ. 

Magid, Andy R., Ph.D. George Lynn Cross 
Research Prof. of Mathematics, Univ. of Oklahoma. 
Magrath, C. Peter, Ph.D. President and Prof. of 
Political Science, Univ. of Minnesota, Twin Cities 
Campus. 

Mahaney, William C, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
York Univ. 

Maier, Pauline, Ph.D. William R Kenan, Jr., Prof. 
of History, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Maingot, Anthony P., Ph.D. Prof. of Sociology, 
Florida International Univ. 

Makward, Edris, Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, African 
Studies Program, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 
Malefakis, Edward, Ph.D. Prof. of European 
History, Columbia Unt. 

Malone, Russell L, Ph.D. Former Director, Pub- 
lic Information Dept, American Speech- 
Language-Hearing Association. 

Mamiya, Lawrence H., Ph.D. Prof. of Religion 
and Africana Studies, Vassar College. 

Mandel, Carola Champion skeet shooter. 


Mango, Karin N., M.LS. Writer: librarian; author, 
Armor~ Yesterday and Today. 

Mann, Alan E., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology, 
Princeton Univ. 

Mann, S. Lee, M.FA. Assoc. Prof. of Design, Univ. 
of Kansas. 

Manning, Kenneth R., Ph.D. Thomas Meloy Prof. 
of Rhetoric and of the History of Science, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 


Maraldo, Pamela J., FAAN. Former Chief 
Executive Officer, National League for Nursing. 
Marble, Vern L, Ph.D. Extension Agrooomist 
Emeritus, Univ of California, Davis. 


March, Robert H., Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of Physics 
and Integrated Liberal Studies, Uoiv. of Wisconsin, 
Madison. 


Marciniak, Ed, MSA. President, Institute of 
Urbao Life. 


Marcum, John A., Ph.D. Universitwwvide Director 








of Education Abroad Program and Special Advisor 
on International Education, Univ. of California, San- 
ta Barbara. 


Marcus, Abraham, Ph.D. Director, Center for 
Middle Eastern Studies, Univ. of Texas, Austin. 
Marcus, Jane, Ph.D. Distinguished Prof. of 
Gaplis! City Univ. of New York Graduate School 
and City College. 

Marcus, Philip S., Ph.D. Prof. of Mathematics. 
Eureka College. 

Marcus, Robert, M.D. Prof. of Medicine, 
Stanford Univ., and Director, Aging Study Unit, 
VA Medical Center, Palo Alto, CA. 

Mariani, John F., Ph.D. Free-lance entertainment 
writer. 

Marks, Bonita L., Ph.D. Asst Prof., Exercise Physi- 
ology, Univ. of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 
Marquardt, Thomas L., B.A. Managing Editor, 
The (Annapolis, MD) Capital 

Marquis, Robert E., Ph.D. Prof. of Microbiology 
and Immunology, Univ. of Rochester Medical 
School. 

Marrin, Albert, Ph.D. Chairman, Dept. of History, 
Yeshiva College. 

Marshall, Brian D. Managing Editor, Brandon 
(MB) Sun. 

Marshall, Donald G., Ph.D. Prof. and Head Dept. 
of English, Univ. of Illinois, Chicago. 


Marshall, Robert T., Ph.D. Arbuckle Prof. of 
Food Science and Human Nutrition, Univ. of 
Missouri, Columbia. 

Marshek, Kurt M., Ph.D. Harry L Kent Prof. of 
Mechanical Engineering, Univ. of Texas. 
Marszalek, John F., Ph.D. William L Giles Distin- 
guished Prof. of History, Mississippi State Univ. 
Martin, Dale Robert, M.A. Assoc. Prof. of 
Geography, Truman State Univ. 

Martin, Franklin W., Ph.D. Former Research 
Horticulturist, Tropical Agriculture Research 
Station, Puerto Rico. 

Martin, George C., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Po- 
mology, Univ. of California, Davis. 

Martin, George E., Ph.D. Prof. Emer., Mathemat- 
ics and Statistics, State Univ. of New York, Alhany. 
Martin, James Kirby, Ph.D. Distinguished Unt- 
versity Prof. of History, Univ. of Houston. 

Martin, June Johnson Caldwell, B.A. Book Edi- 
tor, (Tucson) Arizona Daily Star. 

Martin, Richard, M.Phil. Former Curator, Cos- 
tume Institute, Metropolitan Museum of Art. 


Martin, Richard A., Ph.D. Staff Member, Los 
Alamos National Laboratory. 

Martin, Richard C., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Religious Studies, Arizona State Univ 

Martin, Steve W., Ph.D. Prof. of Materials 
Science and Engineering, lowa State Univ. 
Martin, Susan Taylor,B.A. Senior Foreign Cor- 
respondent, St Petersburg |FL\ Times. 

Martin, William H., Ph.D. Director, Division of 
Natural Areas, Eastern Kentucky Univ. 


Martinson, Candace, Ph.D. Former Asst. Curator 
of Entomology, College of Insects and Spiders. 
Ohio State Uoiv. 


Martis, Kenneth C., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
West Virginia Univ. 

Marty, Martin £., Ph.D. Fairfax M. Cone Distin- 
guished Service Prof. Emeritus, Univ. of Chicago. 
Marvin, Betty, M.A. Historic Preservation Plan- 
ner, City of Oakland, CA. 

Marvin, Carolyn, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Communication, Univ. of Pennsylvania. 

Marx, Gary T., Ph.D. Prof. of Sociology Univ. of 
Colorado, Boulder. 

Marx, Robert F.,B.A. Marine Archaeologist, 
Phoenician Explorations. 

Masayesva-Jeanne, LaVerne, Ph.D. Assoc. Prot. 
of Anthropology, Univ. of Nevada, Reno. 

Mason, Charles Executive Editor, Sai/magazine 
Masotti, Louis H., Ph.D. Prof. of Management 
and Urban Development, Univ. of Calitornia, Inine 
Mass, Jeffrey P., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Stanford 
Univ. 

Been c. J., Ph.D. Curator, Herbarium, Univ otf 
North Carolina. 

Mast, Roderic B. Vice President, Conservation 
International. 

Mastny, Vojtech, Ph.D. Senior Research Scholar 








Contributors and consultants XXxXiIll 


Woodrnaw Wilson International Center far Schnl- 
ars; author, Russias Road tn the Cold War. 
Matalon, Reuben, Ph.D. Former Prnf. and Direc: 


tor Chief of Genetics, Miami Children’s Hospitak 
Research Institute. 


Mateja, James, B.S. Automohile Writer, Chicago 
Tribune. 


Mather, A.S., Ph.D. Prot. of Geography. Univ. of 
Aberdeen. 


Mather, Keith G.,B.A. Author and expert on 
Africa and the Middle East. 


Matheson, Katy, MA. Free-lance writer and 
dance historian. 


Mathews, Thomas G., Ph.D. Secretary General, 
Association of Caribbean Universities. 

Matloff, Maurice, Ph.D. Adjunct Prof. of History, 
Georgetown Univ., former Chief Historian, U.S. 
Dept. of the Army. 

Matolak, David W., Ph.D. Asst. Prof., School of 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 
Ohio Univ. 

Matt, PaulR. Publisher, Historical Aviation Al 
bum. 

Matta, Kristin, Director of Development, U.S. 
Figure Skating Association. 

Matthai, James, Ed.D. Former Prof. of Geo- 
sctences, Murray State Univ. 


Matthee, Rudi, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Delaware. 

Matthews, Leslie S., \.D. Chief ot Orthopaedic 
Surgery, Union Memorial Hospital, Baltimore. 
Matthews, Peter Hans, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of 
Economics and Director, International Politics and 
Economics, Middlebury College. 

Matthews, Robert W., Ph.D. Prof. of 
Entomology, Univ. of Georgia. 

Maugh, Thomas H., Hl, Ph.D. Medical writer. 


Mauseth, James D., Ph.D. Prof., Dept. of Integra- 
tive Biology, Univ. of Texas, Austin. 

Mauskopf, Seymour Harold, Ph.D. Prof. of 
History, Duke Univ. 

May, Jill P., M.S.LS_ Prof. of Children’s Literature, 
Purdue Univ 

Maycock, Paul F., Ph.D. Prof. of Botany, Erindale 
College, Univ. of Toronto. 

Mayer, George H., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
South Florida. 

Mayer, Jeremy D., Ph.D. Visiting Asst. Prof. of 
Government, Georgetown Univ. 

Mays, Larry W., P.H. Prof. and Chairman, Dept. of 
Civil Engineering, Anzona State Univ 

Mazo, Earl Former National Political 
Correspondent, Readers Digest 

Mazrui, Ali A., D.Phil. Director, Institute of Glob- 
al Cultural Studies and Albert Schweitzer Prof. in 
the Humanities, Binghamton Univ. 

Mazzone, Theodore, M.D. Director, Endo- 
crinology and Metaholism, Rush-Presbyterian-St 
Luke's Medical Center, Chicago. 

McArthur, David S., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography. 
San Diego State Univ. 

McCall, Christina, B.A. Author, Grits: An Intimate 
Portrait of the Liberal Partyand Trideau and Our 
Times. 

McCammon Feldman, Beth, Ph.D. Owner, 
Lively Run Goat Dairy. 

McCann, James C., Ph.D. Prot. of History Boston 
University. 

McCardell, John, Ph.D. Prot. of History and Presi- 
dent, Middlebury College. 

McCarthy, Justin, Ph.D. Prof. of History Univ ot 
Louisville. 

McClintock, leery E.,Ph.D. Astrophvsicist 
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. 
McCloud, Scott, BFA Comic book writer artist, 
and scholar 

McComb, David, Ph.D. Prot of Histon Colorado 
State Unt 

McCosker, John £., PhD Senior Scientist 
Califoroia Academy of Sciences. 

McCoy, Donald R., Ph.D Univ Distinguished 
Prot. ot Histon Unt of Kansas 

McCoy, Jennifer L, PhD Assoc Prot ot Political 
Science George’ State Unw 

McCracken, }.C, ‘SBA. Producton Director 
ThelParsippany Nj) Das/y Xeeo d 


McCusker, Jane, \i0) Prot Dept ot Clanical Eps 


demiology and Community Studies, St. Mary's 
Hospital Center. 

McDade, Barbara E., Ph.D. Assoc. Prnf., Dept. of 
Geography, Univ. of Florida. 

McDaniel, Ben T., Ph.D. Prot. of Animal Science. 
North Carolina State Univ. 

McDermott, Paul D., M.A. Former Prof., Applied 
Geography, Montgomery College. 

McDermott, Vincent, Ph.D. Prof. nf Music, Lewis 
and Clark College. 


McDonald, Charles J., M.D. Prof. and Head. 
Division of Dermatology, Brown Univ. and Roger 
Williams General Hospital. 

McDonald, Elvin Former Secretary, The Ameri- 
can Horticultural Society. 

McDonald, Robert A. J., Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of 
History, Univ. of British Columbia. 

McEachran, John D., Ph.D. Prof. of Wildlife and 
Fisheries Sciences, Texas A&M Univ. 

McElroy, David L, Ph.D. Former Senior 
Research Staff Member, Martin Marietta Energy 
Systems, Inc., Oak Ridge Natinnal Laboratory. 
McFerrin, John B., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Finance, 
Univ. of Florida. 

McGiffert, Michael, Ph.D. Editor, William and 
Mary Quarterly, and Prof. of History, College nf 
William and Mary. 

McGill, Lawrence D., Ph.D. Technical Vice 
President, Animal Reference Pathology. 


McGinley, P. A., B;Comm. Managing Director, 
Europa Publications Ltd. 

McGinnis, Christine, B.A. Editor, Special 
Editions, Arkansas Valley Publishing. 
McGinnis, Terri, D.V.M. Veterinarian; author, 
The Well Dog Book 


McGlathery, James M., Ph.D. Prof. of German 
and Head, Dept. of Germanic Languages and 
Literatures, Univ. of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. 
McGovern, James, B.S Free-lance writer. 
McGovern, William M., LLB. Prof. of Law, Univ. 
of California, Los Angeles. 


McGowan, Alan, B.E. President, The Gene Me- 
dia Forum, S. 1. Newhouse School of Public Com- 
munications, Syracuse Univ. 

McGrath, Roger D., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
ot Calitornia, Los Angeles. 

McGrath, William J., Ph.D. Prof. Ementus of His- 
tory, Univ. of Rochester. 

NicGuire, Nancy L., M.S. Editor and Publisher. 
Nome (AK! Nugget. 

McHugh, Pau! R., M.D. Director, Dept. of 
Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions. 
Mcintosh, Cecilia A., Ph.D. Prof., Dept. of Biolo- 
gy, East Tennessee State Univ. 

Mcintosh, Christopher, DPhil. Author, 
Astrology. 

McIntyre, Peggy Executive Secretary and Editor- 
ial Asst., The (Charleston, SC) Post and Courier. 
McKale, Donald M., Ph.D. Class ot 1941 
Memonial Prof. of Humanities, Clemson Univ, 
McKay, Kenneth B., M.Ed. Author, Puppetry in 
Canada: An Art to Enchant 

McKay, Nellie Y., Ph.D. Prof. ot Amencan and 
Afro-American Literature, Univ. of Wisconsin, 
Madison. 

McKeen, William, Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Dept. of 
journalism Unn. of Florida, Gainesville. 
McKerns, Joseph P., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. ot 
Journalism Ohio State Univ. 

McKibben, R. B., Ph.D. Senior Scientist, Ennco 
Fernu Institute, Univ of Chicago. 

McKinley, Mary B., Ph.D Prot of French. Univ of 
Virginia 

McKinnon, William B., Ph.D. Prof of Earth and 
Planetary Sciences. Washiogton Unt 

McKnight, Tom L., Ph.D Prof ot Geoqraphy. 
Uinn of Calitomta Los Angeles. 

McLaughlin, John F.,\4.D. Assoc Prot of 
Pediatrics Uon of Washington. 


McLaughlin, P. A., Ph.D. Research Scientist. 
Shannon Point Manne Center \Westerm 
Washington Univ 


McLaughlin, Peter Editona! \taoager 
The Melboume. Australia’ Age 


Mclean, flan S., PhD Prof of Physics and Astron. 
onv Un of Calitornia Los Angeles 


Mctear, Patrick E., PhD Prof ot Histon MMs 


XXXIV Contributors and consultants 


souri Western State College. 


McLeay, Elizabeth, Ph.D. Senior Lecturer of 
Politics, Victoria Univ. of Wellington, New Zealand. 
McLeese, Don, MA. Assoc. Editnr. Midwest 
Living. 

McLendon, George, Ph.D. Prof. nf Chemistry, 
Univ. of Rochester. 

McLeod, Jean F. Former Editor, ‘Kitimat, BO 
Northern Sentinel Press. 


McLemon, Thomas J., M.S. Former Director, 
Virginia School Boards Associatinn. 


McLure, Charles E., Jr.,Ph.D Senior Fellow, 
Hnover Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace, 
Stanford Univ. 


McMahon, James D., Jr., MA. Curator of 
Collections and Exhibitions, Hershey Museum. 


McNally, Karen C., Ph.D. Prof. of Earth Sciences, 
Univ. of California, Santa Cruz. 

McNichol, Ronald W., M.D. Former Dir., Chemi- 
cal Dependence Unit, San Antonio State Hospital. 
McNulty, Michael L., Ph.D. Assoc. Provost and 
Dean, International Programs, Univ. of lowa. 
McPherson, H. J., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
Geography, Univ. of Alberta. 


McPherson, James M., Ph.D. Prof. of Amencan 
History. Princeton Univ. : author Battle Cry of Free- 
dom: The Civil War Era; winner of Pulitzer Prize for 
History, 1989. 

McWilliams, Margaret, Ph.D Author, Food Fun- 
damentals. 


Meade, Marion, M.S. Author, F/eanor of 
Aquitaine. 

Means, D. Bruce, Ph.D. President and Executive 
Director, Coastal Plains Institute. 

Mech, L. David, Ph.D. Senior Rsch. Scientist, Bio- 
logical Resources Division, U.S. Geological Survey. 
Medicine, Beatrice, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. Emerita of 
Anthropology, California State Univ. 

Meeks, Brian Winston, Ph.D. Head, Dept. of 
Government, Univ. of the West Indies, Mona. 
Meeks, Harold A., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Univ. of Vermont. 

Meier, Heinz K., Ph.D. Former Prof. of History, 
Old Dominion Univ. 

Meilach, Dona Z., MA. Contnbuting Editor, 
Presentations Magazine and Computer Pictures, 
author of art, craft, and graphics books. 

Meister, F.A., MA. President and CEO, Distilled 
Spirits Council of the United States, Inc. 

Melder, Keith E, Ph.D. Curator of Political 
History, National Museum of American History. 
Melear, Charles, M.S.E.E. Manager, Advanced 
Microcontroller Applications, Motorola Inc. 
Melford, Sara Steck, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Chem- 
istry, DePaul Univ. 

Mellard, James M., Ph.D. Prof. of English, 
Northern Illinois Univ. 

Meltzer, Jack, MA. Former Dean, School of the 
Social Sciences, Univ. of Texas, Dallas. 
Mendelssohn, Irving A., Ph.D. Prof. of Oceanog 
raphy and Coastal Sciences, Louisiana State Univ. 
Mender, Harvey A., Ph.D. Director, Training and 
Organizational Development, Adecco. 

Menke, William V.,M.S. Curator, Vincennes 
State Historic Site. 

Menning, Carol Bresnahan, Ph.D. Prof. of Histo- 
ry, Univ. of Toledo. 

Mensoian, Michael G., J.D. Prof. of Geography: 
Dir., Armenian Studies, Univ. of Massachusetts. 
Mercer, Charles, BA. Author, Legion of 
Strangers: the Vivid History of a Unique Military 
Tradition: the French Foreign Legion. 

Merchant, Carolyn, Ph.D. Prof. of Conservation 
and Resource Studies, Univ. of California, 
Berkeley. 


Merenstein, Gerald B., M.D. Prof. of Pediatrics 
and Senior Assoc. Dean of Education, Univ. of Col- 
orado School of Medicine. 


Merkl, Peter H., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus nf Political 
Science, Univ. of California, Santa Barbara. 
Mermel, T. W., B.S.Engr. Consulting engineer, 
author, Register of Dams in the United States. 
Merriam, Alan P., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
Anthropology, Indiana Univ., Bloomingtnn. 
Merritt, James Douglas, Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
English, Brooklyn College, City Univ. of New Ynark 
Mertz, Barbara, Ph.D. Author, Jemp/es, Tombs 


and Hieroglyphs and Red Land, Black Land: Daily 
Life in Ancient Egypt 


Metzler, John D., Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of African 
Studies and Education, Michigan State Univ. 


Meulenberg, Norman F.,M.BA. Marketing 
Manager, Mettler- Toledo, Inc. 


Mews, Si ied, Ph.D. Prof. of German, Univ. of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 

Meyer, Alfred G., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Political 
Science, Univ. of Michigan. 

Meyer, B., Ph.D. Consultant; former Prof. of 
Chemistry. Univ. of Washington. 

Meyer, Gary C, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography and 
Natural Resources, Univ. of Wisconsin, Stevens 
Point. 


Meyer, John R., Ph.D. Prof., North Carolina State 
Univ. 


Meyer-Arendt, Klaus J., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, 
Department of Environmental Studies. Univ. of 
West Florida. 


Meyerhofer, David D., Ph.D. Prof. of Mechanical 
Engineering and Physics and Astronomy, Univ. of 
Rochester. 

Meyers, Caroll, Ph.D. Prof. of Religion, Duke 
Univ. 

Meyers, Eric M., Ph.D. Prof. of Religion, Duke 
Univ. 

Meyerson, Joel D., Ph.D. Historian, U.S. Army 
Center of Military History. 


Mezey, Susan Gluck, Ph.D. Prof. of Political 
Science, Loyola Univ. 


Michopoulos, John G., Ph.D. Senior Research 
Scientist, United States Naval Research Laboratory. 
Middleton, John, D.Phil. Prof. of Anthropology, 
Yale Univ. 


Mikalson, Jon D., Ph.D. Prof. of Classics, Univ. of 
Virginia. 


Milbert, Neil, BA. Sportswriter, Chicago Tribune. 


Milkis, Sidney M., Ph.D. James Hart Prof. of Gov- 
ernment and Foreign Affairs and Senior Scholar, 
Miller Center of Public Affairs, Univ. of Virginia. 
Millar, F. G. B., D.Litt. Camden Prof. of Ancient 
History, Oxford Univ. 

Millar, James R., Ph.D. Director of the Institute 
for European, Russian, and Eurasian Studies, 
George Washington Univ. 

Millbrooke, Anne, Ph.D. Former Manager, 
Archive and Historical Resource Center, United 
Technologies Corp. 

Miller, Alan L., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Religion, 
Miami Univ. 

Miller, Arthur L, Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Philosophy, and Communication of Science, 
Univ. College London. 

Miller, Carman, Ph.D. Prof. of History, McGill 
Univ. 

Miller, Dean, BA. Managing Editor, The {Idaho 
Falls, 1D) Post Register. 

Miller, E. Willard, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography and 
Assoc. Dean for Resident Instruction, College of 
Earth and Mineral Sciences, Pennsylvania State 
Univ. 

Miller, H. Lewis, B.S. Executive Vice President, 
International Association of Fairs and Expositions. 
Miller, J.D. B., MA. Former Executive Director, 
Academy of the Social Sciences, Australia. 
Miller, J. Maxwell, Ph.D. Director, Graduate 
Studies in Religion, Emory Univ. 

Miller, J. Patrick, MA. President, National 
Association of Rocketry. 

Miller, James E., M.S. Former Prof. of 
Meteorology, Polytechnic Univ. of New York. 
Miller, James S., Ph.D. Assoc. Curator and Asst. 
Dept. Head, Africa and Madagascar Dept, Mis- 
souri Botanical Garden. 

Miller, Jane K., Ph.D. Former Prnf., Lane Moun- 
tain College. 

Miller, John E., Ph.D. Prof. of History, South 
Dakota State Univ. 

Miller, Lee D., Ph.D. Curator. Allyn Museum of 
Entomology Florida Museum of Natural History. 
Miller, Raymond J., Jr., Ph.D. Director, Interna- 
tional Program in Agriculture and Natural Re- 
sources, Univ. of Maryland. College Park. 

Miller, Timothy T., M.D. Clinical Asst. Prof. nf 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Univ. of Illinois 
College of Medicine, Chicago. 


Miller, William C., B.S.Ed. Marketing Manager, 
Clauss Cutlery Co. 

Millett, Allan R., Ph.D. Prof., Mershon Center, 
Ohio State Unw. 

Mills, Daniel Quinn, Ph.D. Prof. of Business 
Administration, Harvard Univ. 

Millward, Hugh, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, Saint 
Marys Univ. 

Minch, Edwin W., Ph.D. Environmental 
Specialist, Arizona Dept. of Agnculture. 

Minkler, Julie, MA. Temporary Instructor of 
English and Womens Studies, lowa State Univ. 
Minor, Vernon Hyde, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Art 
History and Humanities, Univ. of Colorado. 

Mintz, Steven, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Houston. 

Minutaglio, Bill, M.S. Author. First Son: George 
W. Bush and the Bush Family Dynasty. 

Misfeldt, Willard E., Ph.D. Prof. of Art, Bowling 
Green State Univ. 


Miskokomon, Roberta, M.LS. First Nations 
Library Coordinator, Southern Ontario Library 
Service, London. 

Mitchell, Charlie, }.D. Managing Editor Attorney, 
Vicksburg Printing & Publishing. 

Mitchell, Donald W., Ph.D. Author, History of the 
Modern American Navy. 

Mitchell, Otis C., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Cincinnati. 

Mitchell, Robert D., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Univ. of Maryland. 

Mittermeier, Russell A., Ph.D. President, 
Conservation International. 

Miu, Karen N., Ph.D. Asst. Prof., Dept. of Electri- 
cal and Computer Engineering, Drexel Univ. 
Modell, Harold 1., Ph.D. Director, National 
Resource for Computers in Life Science Education. 
Modell, Judith, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Anthropology, Carnegie Mellon Univ. 

Moe, Doug, BA. Journalist: Author, The (Madi- 
son, WI) Capital Times. 

Moffatt, Michael, Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology, 
Rutgers, the State Univ. of New Jersey. 

Moffroid, Mary T., Ph.D. Prof. of Physical 
Therapy, Univ. of Vermont 

Mole, Paul A., Ph.D. Prof. of Physical Education, 
Univ. of California, Davis. 

Molho, Anthony, Ph.D. Munro Goodwin 
Wilkinson Prof. of European History, Brown Univ. 
Molineux, Will, BA. Editorial Page Editor, 
(Newport News, VA) Daily Press. 

Mollenhoff, Clark R., J.D. Former Prof. of 
Journalism, Washington and Lee Univ. 

Monath, Thomas P., M.D. Vice President, 
Research and Medical Affairs, OraVax, Inc. 
Moncton, David E., Ph.D. Director, Advanced 
Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory. 
Monet, Jacques, Ph.D. Director, Canadian Insti- 
tute of Jesuit Studies. 


Money, K.E.,N.D.C Senior Scientist, Defence 
and Civil Institute of Environmental Medicine. 
Monk, Patricia, Ph.D. Prof. of English, Dalhousie 
Univ. 

Monteon, Michael, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of California, San Diego. 

Moody, Joycelyn K., Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of English, 
Univ. of Washington. 

Moody, Patricia A., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of English, 
Syracuse Univ. 

Mooney, Raymond J., Ph.D. Prof. of Computer 
Science, Unw. of Texas at Austin. 

Moore, Clement Henry, Ph.D. Prof. of 
Government, Univ. of Texas, Austin. 


Moore, Jeffrey M., Ph.D. Research Scientist, 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Ames Research Center. 


Moore, Michael O., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Economics and International Affairs, George 
Washington Univ. 

Moore, Paul H., Ph.D. Research Leader, Agricul- 
tural Research Service, U.S. Dept. of Agnculture. 
Moore, Raymond K., Ph.D. Prof. of Civil 
Engineering. Univ. of Kansas. 

Morain, Stanley A., Ph.D. Director, Earth Data 
Analysis Center, Univ. of New Mexico. 

Moran, Joseph M., Ph.D. Prof. of Earth Science, 








Univ. ot Wisconsin, Green Bay. 

Morant, Ricardo B., Ph.D. Fierman Prof. of 
Psychology, Brandeis Univ. 

Moreno, Cesareo, M.FA. Visual Arts Director, 
Mexican Fine Arts Center Museum, Chicago. 
Morgan, Anthony W., Ph.D. Prof, Dept. of Edu- 
cation Leadership and Policy, Univ. of Utah. 
Morgan, H. Wayne, Ph.D. George Lynn Cross 
Research Prof. of History, Univ. of Oklahoma. 
Morgan, Richard E., Ph.D. Prof. of Constitutional 
Law and Government, Bowdoin College. 
Morgan, T. Clifton, Ph.D. Albert Thomas Prof. of 
Political Science, Rice Univ. 

Moritz, Owen, B.A. Former Urban Affairs Editor, 
New York Daily News. 

Morowitz, Harold j., Ph.D. Robinson Prof. of 


Biology and Director of Krasnow Institute. George 
Mason Univ. 


Morris, Clair E., Ph.D. Prof. of Economics, US. 
Naval Academy. 

Morris, Mark, Ph.D. Prof. of Astronomy, Univ. of 
California, Los Angeles. 

Morrison, Rodney J., Ph.D. William R. Kenan 
Prof. of Economics, Wellesley College. 
Morrissett, Irving Emeritus Prof. of Economics, 
Univ. of Colorado. 

Morrow, Monica, M.D. Prof. of Surgery, North- 
western Univ. Medical School; Director, Lynn Sage 
Comprehensive Breast Program, Northwestern 
Memorial Hospital. 

Morse, Edward E., M.D. Prof. of Laboratory 
Medicine, Univ. of Connecticut. 

Morton, Desmond, Ph.D. Director, McGill Insti- 
tute for the Study of Canada. 

Morton, Graeme, Ph.D. Lecturer in Economic 
and Social History, Univ. of Edinburgh. 

Moser, Katrina A., Ph.D. Asst. Prof., Dept. of Ge- 
ography, Univ. of Utah. 

Mosher, Paul H., Ph.D. Vice Provost and Director 
of Libraries, Univ. of Pennsylvania. 

Moss, Cynthia, BA. Director, Amboseli Elephant 
Research Project. 

Moss, Mark H., M.D. Fellow in Allergy and Im- 
munology, Univ. of Wisconsin Hospital & Clinics. 
Mossey, Peter R. Former Editor, Medicine Hat 
(AB) News. 

Mott, Thomas O., Ph.D. Division Director, 
Strategic Systems, Analytic Sciences Corp. 
Mould, Jeremy, Ph.D. Director, Mount Stromlo 
and Siding Spring Observatories, National 
Australia Univ. 

Moulton, Alice, B.Ed. Former Teacher Librarian, 
Winnipeg School Division # 1. 

Moulton, Edward C., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Manitoba. 

Moulton, Gary E., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Nebraska, Lincoln. 

Mounfield, Peter R., Ph.D. Senior Lecturer in 
Geography, Univ. of Leicester. 

Moyer, Albert E., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Dept of 
History, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
Univ. 

Muchie, Mammo, D.Phil. Visiting Professor. Aal- 
borg Univ., Denmark. 

Muckleston, Keith W., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Geography, Oregon State Univ. 

Mueller, Robert C., |.D. Commissioner, US. 
Court of Military Appeals. 

Mugnai, Robert Vice President and Publisher, 
Salon News, Fairchild Publications. 

Mulder, John M., Ph.D. President, Louisville Pres: 
byterian Theological Seminary. 

Mulholland, M. Robert, Jr., Th.D. VP and Chief 
Academic Officer, Asbury Theologica! Seminary 
Mullen, Kieran, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Physics, 
Univ. of Oklahoma. 

Mullen, Patricia Ann, MA. President, Tigon 
American, Inc. 

Muller, Edward K., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ of 
Pittsburgh. 

Muller, Peter O., Ph.D. Chairperson, Dept. of Ge 
ography and Regional Studies, Univ of Miami. 
Mullin, James V., M.LS.LS.. M.Ed. President, Insh 
Famine Curriculum Committee. 

Munnell, Alicia Haydock, Ph.D. Director Center 
for Retirement Research, Boston College 


Munski, Douglas C., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography 


Contributors and consultants XXXV 


Univ. of North Dakota; Chairperson, North Dakota 
Geographic Alliance. 

Munsen. Edwin S., M.D. Diplomate of the 
Amenican Board of Anesthesiology. 

Murnane, William J., Ph.D. Prof. of Ancient 
History, Univ. of Memphis. 

Murphy, Bruce Allen, Ph.D. Fred Morgan Kirby 
Prof. of Civil Rights, Lafayette College. 


Murray, Barbara B., Ph.D. Chairperson, Finance 
and Business Economics School of Management, 
Univ. of Michigan, Dearborn. 


Murray, John P., Ph.D. Prof., School of Family 
Studies and Human Services, Kansas State Univ. 


Muscari, Joseph A., Ph.D. Program Manager, 
Lockheed Martin Corp. 


Muscatine, L, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Biology, 
Univ. of California, Los Angeles. 


Musiek, Frank E, Ph.D. Director of Audiology, 
Dartmouth Medical School. 


Musoke, Jessica, Ph.D Research Representative, 
Mathematica Policy Research. 

Musto, David F., M.D. Prof. of Child Psychiatry 
and History of Medicine, Yale Univ. 


Mutu, Margaret, Ph.D. Head, Dept. of Maori 
Studies, Univ. of Auckland. 


Myers, Garth A., Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of Geography, 
Univ. of Kansas. 


Myers, Robert J., MA. Author, Celebrations, The 
Complete Book of American Holidays. 

Myhre, Larry, BA Editor, Sioux City \IA) Journal 
Myles, Edward L, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Geography, California State Univ., Chico. 


Myrsiades, Kostas, Ph.D. Pruf. of Comparative 
Literature, West Chester Univ. 


N 


Nabokov, Peter, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of 
Anthropology, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 
Nadeau, Roger, Ph.D. Head, Dept of Geography, 
Univ. of Sherbrooke. 

Nadelson, Theodore, M.D. Clinical Prof. of 
Psychiatry, Boston Univ. School of Medicine. 
Nadler, Henry L, M.D. Prof. Emeritus of Pedi- 
atrics, Univ. of Illinois, Chicago. 

Nadler, Leonard, Ed.D. Prof. Emeritus of Adult 
Education and Human Resource Development, 
George Washington Univ. 

Nagel, Roy K. Editor, The Prince George (BO) 
Citizen. 

Nagle, D. Brendan, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. Univ. of 
Southern California. 

Najita, Tetsuo, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Chicago. 

Napier, Rita G., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Kansas. 

Nash, Bonnie, MA. Editor and Publisher, Trap & 
Field magazine. 

Nash, Ray, ArtD. Author, Printing As an Art 
Nash, Stanley L, Ph.D. Prof. of Hebrew Litera- 
ture, Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of 
Religion. 

Nash, Suzanne, Ph.D. Prot. of French, Princeton 
Univ. 

Naske, ClausM., Ph.D. Exec. Dir., Univ. of Alaska 
Press: coauthor, Alaska’ A History of the 49th State. 
Nathan, David M., MD. Director Diabetes 
Center, Massachusetts General Hospital. 
Nathan, James, Ph.D. Khalid bin Sultan Eminent 
Scholar, Auburn Univ.. Montgomery. 

Nathan, Ronald G., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Family 
Practice and Psychiatry, Albany Medical College. 
Nathanson, Stephen, Ph.D. Prof. of Philosophy, 
Northeastern Univ 

Natoli, Marie D., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Scrence 
Emmanuel College, Boston. 

Navarro, Marysa, Ph.D. Prot. of History 
Dartmouth College. 

Nazareth, Peter, BA. Prof. of English and 
Atrican-Amencan Word Studies, Unt of lowa. 
Neal, Dan Editor Casper(WY Star Tribune. 
Needies, Howard L, Ph.D Prot Emer of Teatile 
and Matenals Science. Univ, of Calitornia. Dams. 
Neely, Mark E., Jr., PhD Prof of Histury and 
Amencan Studies. Saint Louts Untv 

Neety, Sharfotte PhD Prof of Anthropology 
Northern Kentucky Univ 


Neil, Randy L, B.S. Founder and President, 
International Cheerleading Association, inc. 
Nelson, Don H., M.D. Prof. of Medicine Emeri- 
tus, Univ. of Utah College of Medicine. 

Nelson, Hank, Ph.D. Prof. of Pacific and Asian 
History, Australian National Univ. 

Nelson, Jack L, Ed.D. Former Prof. of Education, 
Rutgers, the State Univ. of New Jersey. 


Nelson, Mark D., M.FA. Former Asst. Prof. of 
Music, Wabash College. 


Nelson, Paul David, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Berea 
College. 


Nelson, Roy Paul, M.S. Prof. of Journalism, Univ. 
of Oregon; author, The Cartoonist 


Nelson, Thomas, D.Phil. Foreign Researcher, 
Univ. of Tokyo, Historiographical Institute. 


Netravali, Arun N., Ph.D. Former President, Bell 
Labs, Lucent Technologies. 

Neumann, Robert G., Ph.D. Former Senior Ad- 
viser, Center for Strategic and International Stud- 
ies, Washington, D.C 

Neusner, Jacob, Ph.D. Distinguished Research 
Prof. of Religious Studies, Univ. of South Florida. 
Neville, Cynthia J., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Dal- 
housie Univ. 

Newman, Oscar, B.Arch. Pres. and Exec. Dir., In- 
stitute for Community Design Analysis, Inc. 


Nicely, Kenneth A., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, 
Western Kentucky Univ. 

Nicholson, H. B., Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of 
Anthropology, Univ. of California, Los Angeles. 
Nicholson, Philip D., Ph.D. Prof. of Astronomy, 
Cornell Univ. 


Nicodemus, Charles E, Jr., B.S. Government 
Reporter, Chicago Sun-Times. 


Niemeyer, Carl, Ph.D. Former Prof. of English, 
Union College. 


Niesen, James R. Executive Director, Binding 
Industries of America. 

Nightingale, Dave, B.S. Free-lance writer, Inside 
Sports and Sport Magazine. 

Niiler, Pearn, Ph.D. Prof. of Oceanography, 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography. 

Niles, David M., Ph.D. Former Curator of Birds, 
Delaware Museum of Natural History. 

Niles, Susan A., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology, 
Lafayette College. 

Nilsson, Greta, AA. Wildlife Consultant, Animal 
Welfare Institute. 

Nisetich, Frank, Ph.D. Prof. of Classics, Univ. of 
Massachusetts. 

Nix, }. Rayford, Ph.D. Nuclear Theory Staff 
Member, Los Alamos National Laboratory. 


Nixon, Donald M. Ph.D. Prof. of Agricultural 
Economics, Texas A&M Univ., Kingsville. 

Noble, Thomas F. X., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
History, Unw. of Virginia 

Nochimson, Martha, Ph.D. Prof. of English, 

Mercy College; author, No End to Her- Soap Opera 
and the Female Subject. 

Nock, Steven L, Ph.D. Prof. of Sociology, Univ. of 
Virginia. 

Nolan, Mary, Ph.D. Prof. of History, New York 
Univ. 

Noll, Mark A., Ph.D. Prof. of History Wheaton 
College. 

Nordstrom, Byron }., Ph.D. Prof. of History and 
Scandinavian Studies, Gustavus Adolphus College 
Norfleet, Donald S.,BA. Business Editor, News 
Tribune Co.. Inc.. Publications 

Norse, Elliott A., Ph.D. President, Marine Conser- 
vation Biology institute. 

Northrop, Gretajo, Ph.D. Assoc Prof of Medi: 
cine and of Obstetncs and Gynecology and Assoc. 
Attending Physician. Rush-Presbyterian- St. Lukes 
Medical Center. Chicago. 

Norwood, F.A., Ph.D Prof. Ementus of History of 
Chnstianity. Garrett-Evangelical Theological Semi 
nary 


Nott, Gerry, BA. Deputy Managing Editor The 
Hanutton iON) Spectator. 


Novick, Julius, DFA Prof of Lterature Purchase 
College State Unn of New York 


Novick, Sheldon Mt Scholar in Residence 
Vermont Law School author law of 
Environmental Protechon 


Novotny, Donald W,, Ph.D Prof of Electneal and 


XXXVI Contributors and consultants 


Computer Engineering, Univ. of Wisconsin. 


Nunn, Kenneth B., J.D. Prof. of Law, Fredric G. 
Levin College of Law, Univ. of Florida. 


Nye, Joseph S., Jr., Ph.D. Chairman, National 
Intelligence Council, Central Intelligence Agency. 
Nye, M. J., Ph.D. Horning Prof. of Humanities and 
Prof of History, Oregon State Univ 

Nyhan, Constance W., M.LS. Former Graduate 
Adviser, Graduate School of Library and Intnrma- 
tion Science, Univ. of California, Los Angeles. 


O 


Oakes, David D., M.D. Prof. of Surgery, Stantord 
Univ. School of Medicine. 

OBanion, Terry U., Ph.D. Pres. and CEO, Leaque 
for Innovation in the Community College. 

Oberg, James, M.S. Spaceflight engineer: 
author, UFOs and Outer Space Mysteries. 
Oberright, John E., B.M.E. Advanced Missions 
Study Manager, National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration Goddard Space Flight Center. 
OBrien, David M., Ph.D. Prof. of Gnvernment, 
Univ. of Virginia. 

O'Callaghan, John S., M1.B.A. Staff Engineer, Bell 
& Howell Co. 

O'Connell, Anne C., M.S. Director, Clinical Re- 
search Core, National Institute of Dental Research. 
O'Connell, Marvin R., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Notre Dame. 

O'Dell, C. R., Ph.D. Prof. of Space Physics and 
Astronnmy, Rice Univ. 

Odell, Daniel K., Ph.D. Adjunct Prof., Dept. of Bi- 
ology, Univ. of Central Florida. 

Odom, Selma Landen, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Dance and Womens Studies, York Univ. 
ODonnell, John L, Jr., B.S. Former Director of 
Facilities, Dept. of Intercollegiate Athletics, Univ. of 
Ilinois, Urbana-Champaign. 

Oetinger, David F., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, 
Kentucky Wesleyan College. 

agen Ronald A., BA. President, Ogan Antiques, 
Ltd.; former Editor, Rampant Colt magazine. 
Ogden, Michael R., Ph.D. Assoc. Prot., Dept. of 
Communication, Univ. of Hawatt, Manoa. 

Oh, Bonnie Bongwan Cho, Ph.D. Distinguished 
Prof. of Korean Studies, Georgetown Univ. 
OhnukrTierney, Emiko, Ph.D. William F. Vilas 
Research Prof. of Anthropology, Univ. of Wiscon- 
sin, Madison. 

O'Leary, Brendan, Ph.D. Prof. of Political Sci- 
ence, London School of Economics and Political 
Science. 

O'Leary, Philip R., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Engineer- 
ing Professional Development, Univ. of Wisconsin. 
Olien, Roger M., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Texas, Odessa. 

Olsen, Gary J.,Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Microbtolo- 
gy, Univ. of Hlinois, Urbana-Champaign. 
Olshansky, S. Jay, Ph.D. Professor of Epideminl- 
ogy, Univ. of Illinois at Chicago. 

Olson, Donald W., Ph.D. Prot. Dept of Physics, 
Southwest Texas State Univ. 

Olson, James §., Ph.D. Distinguished Prof. ot His- 
tory, Sam Houston State Univ. 

Olson, Judy M., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Michigan State Univ. 

Olson, Maynard V., Ph.D. Prof. of Medicine and 
Genome Sciences, Univ. of Washington Genome 
Center. 


Olson, Richard G., Ph.D. Prof., Dept. of Humani- 
ties and Social Sciences, Harvey Mudd College. 


O'Neill, Michael P., Ph.D. Former Asst. Prof. of 
Geography, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
Univ 
Onwudiwe, Ebere, Ph.D. Prof., Political Science; 
Dir., Center for African Studies, Central State Univ. 
Opgrande, J. Donald, M.D) Chairman, Division 
ot Orthopedic Surgery, Univ of Nnrth Dakota 
School of Medicine. 
Oppenheimer, Bruce I., Ph.D. Prof. nf Political 
Science, Vanderbilt Univ. 
Oppenheimer, John R., Ph.D. Assnc. Prot.. Biolo- 
y; Dir., Environmental Science Masters Program, 
ty Univ of New York, College of Staten Island. 
Orel, Harold, Ph.D. Univ. Prof. Fmeritus, Univ. of 
Kansas. 


Orenstein, Eugene V.,Ph.D Assoc Prof. nf 


Jewish Studies, McGill Univ. 


Oreskes, Michael Washington Bureau Chief. 
The New York Times. 

Orgel, Stephen, Ph.D. jacksnn Eli Reynolds Prot. 
of Humanittes, Stanford Univ. 

Oniin, Louis L, Ph.D Prof. Emer. of Ancient Near 
Eastern History and Literature, Univ. of Michigan. 
Ormsby, William, MA. Former Archivist, 
Archives of Ontario. 

ORourke, Thomas D., Ph.D. Thomas R Briggs 
Prof. of Engineering, School of Civil and Environ- 
mental Engineering, Cornell Univ. 

Orr, Delilah, M.Ed. Asst. Prnf.. Dept of English, 
Fort Lewis College. 


Ortiz, Alfonso, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Anthropolo- 


gy, Univ. of New Mexico. 

Osbom, Jack R., B.A Former President, United 
States Croquet Association. 

O'Shea, Brian P., MA. Content Manager, /nside 
Central Florida. 

Osler, Margaret J., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Calgary. 

Osman, M.O.M., Dr-Sc Techn. Prof. Emer. of En- 
gineering, Concordia Univ. 

Oster, Harry, Ph.D. Former Prof. of English, Univ. 
of lowa. 

Ostrower, Gary B., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Alfred 
Univ. 

Quellet, Fernand, Ph.D. Prof. of History, York 
Univ., Canada. 

Ouellette, Robert J., Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, 
Ohio State Univ. 

Ouse, David J., M.LS. Manager, Reference and 
Information Services, Duluth Public Library. 


Overland, James E., Ph.D. Supervisory Oceanog- 
rapher, Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory, 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin. 


Owen, Tobias C., Ph.D. Prof. of Astronomy, 
Institute for Astronomy, Univ. of Hawaii, Honolulu. 
Owens, Robert A., Ph.D. Research Chemist, Mo- 
lecular Plant Pathology Laboratory, Beltsville Agri- 
cultural Research Center, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture. 
Oyler, David D. Copy Editor, The (Wilmington, 
DE) News journal 

Ozment, Steven, Ph.D. McLean Prof. of Ancient 
and Modern History, Harvard Univ. 


P 


Paaswell, Robert E., Ph.D. Director, University 
Transportation Research Center, City College of 
New York 


Packer, Alex J., Ph.D. President and CEO, FCD 
Educational Services. 

Pailmateer, James Former Managing Editor, The 
Oshawa!ON! Times. 

Paimer, Colin A., Ph.D. Distinguished Prof. of 
History, City Univ. of New York Graduate School. 
Pandya, Rajul E., Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of Atmospher- 
ic Science, West Chester Univ. 

Pankhurst, Richard, Ph.D. Prof., Institute of 
Ethiopian Studies. 

Pankhurst, Tim Editor, 7he (Christchurch, NZ) 
Press. 


Pannabecker, Rachel K., Ph.D. Director, Kauft- 
man Museum. 


Panozzo, Michael E.,BA. Editor, Billiards Digest 


Pantuso, Peter J. President and CEO. American 
Bus Association. 

Papenfuse, Edward C., Ph.D. Sr. Facility Assoc., 
Gradual Liberal Arts Prngram and Division of Un- 
dergraduate Studies, Johns Hopkins Univ. 
Parascenzo, Marino A.,BA Golf Writer, 
Pittsburgh (PA) Post-Gazette. 

Parashonts, Travis N.,BA. Administrator Dept. 
of Family Support, State of Utah. 

Parker, George R., Ph.D. Prof. of Forestry, 
Purdue Unwy. 

Parker, Henry S., Ph.D. National Program Leader 
for Aquaculture, U.S. Dept of Agnculture. 

Parker, John, Ph.D. Curator Ementus, James 
Ford Bell Library, Univ. of Minnesota. 

Parker, Sue Morrow, Ed.D. Asst Prot., Dept of 
Clothing. Textiles and Design, Univ. of Alabama. 
Parker, Thomas J., B.E.E.T. Rsch. Technologist II, 


Natinnal Electric Energy Testing Research and Ap- 
plicatinns Center, Georgia Institute of Technology. 


Parkinson, Robert L, B.S. Former Research 
Center Director, Circus World Museum. 
Parmet, Robert D., Ph.D. Prof. of History. York 
College, City Univ. of New York. 

Parrott, Barton, B.A. Corporate consultant and 
trainer: former Editor, Canoe. 

Partner, Nancy F., Ph.D. Prof. of History. McGill 
Univ. 

Pasachoff, Jay M., Ph.D. Field Memorial Prot. of 
Astronomy and Director, Hopkins Observatory of 
Williams College. 

Passet, Joanne E., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., School of 
Library and Information Science, Indiana Univ. 
Passow, A. H , Ed.D. Former Prof. of Educa- 
tion, Teachers College, Columbia Univ. 

Patel, Medha S., BA. Former Asst in Directors 
Office, Nattonal Museum of American Art, 
Smithsonian Institution. 

Patterson, James T., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Brown Univ. 

Patterson, Victona D., Ph.D. Educator, 
Redwood Region Consortium for Professional 
Development, Mendocino College. 

Patton, James L, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus, Dept of 
Integrative Biology, Museum of Vertebrate 
Zoology, Univ. of California, Berkeley. 

Paul, lain C., Ph.D. Prot. of Chemistry, Univ. of Illi- 
nois, Urbana-Champaign. 

Paul, James C.N., J.D. Brennan Prof. of Law 
Emeritus, Rutgers, the State Univ. of New Jersey. 
Paulenich, Nicholas A., MA. Public Relations 
Director, U.S. Speedskating. 

Paulsgrove, Robin, BA. Fire Chief, Arlington 
(TX) Fire Dept 

Paulson, Boyd C., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Civil 
Engineering, Stantord Univ 

Paulson, Dennis, Ph.D. Director, Museum of 
Natural History, Univ. of Puget Sound. 

Pausch, Randy, Ph.D. Prof. of Computer Science, 
Carnegie Mellon Univ. 

Pavelka, Ed, B.S. Director of Internet Content, 
Performance Bicycle. 

Payne, Craig M., M.S. Instructor, Weapons and 
Systems Engineering, U.S. Naval Academy. 
Payne, Robert B., Ph.D. Curator ot Birds and 
Prof. of Biology, Univ. of Michigan. 

Payne, Stanley G., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Wisconsin, Madison; author, A History of Spain 
and Portugal 

Peacock, James L, Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology, 
Univ. of North Carolina. 

Pearson, Neale J., Ph.D. Prof Emeritus of Politi- 
cal Science, Texas Tech Univ. 

Pearson, Stuart, Ph.D. Lecturer, School of Geo- 
sciences, Univ. of Newcastle. 

Peck, Abe, BA. Chairman, Magazine Publishing 
Program, Medill School of Journalism, Northwest- 
em Unw. @ 

Peck, Chris Managing Editor, 7he (Spokane. 
WA) Spokesman-Review. 

Peck, Malcolm C, Ph.D. Program Officer, Merid- 
ian International Center, Programming Division; 
former Arabian Peninsula Aftairs Analyst, Bureau 
ot Intelligence and Research, U.S. Dept. of State. 
Pellegrino, Charles, Ph.D. Paleontologist and 
archaeologist. 

Pelletier, Kenneth R., M.D. Director, Stantord 
Corporate Health Program, Stantord Univ. School 
of Medicine. 

Pelley, Patricia M., Ph.D. Asst Prof. of History, 
Texas Tech Univ. 

Pellis, Neal R., Ph.D. Program Director, Cellular 
Biotechnology Program, National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration-Johnson Space Center. 
Pelrine, Michael J., Regional Executive Editor, 
independent Newspapers, Inc. 

Pemberton, William E., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Wisconsin, La Crosse. 

Pender, Michael R., M.S. Executive Director 
World s Fair Collector's Society. Inc. 

Pendleton, Wade C., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropolo- 
gy, San Diego State Univ 

Penn, Richard D., M.D. Prof. of Neurosurgery. 
Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke’s Medical Center. 
Pennington, Kenneth, Ph.D. Prof. of History 
Syracuse Univ. 

Pennycook, Stephen J., Ph.D. Corporate Fellow, 








Oak Ridge National Laboratnry. 


Peregrin, M. Isabelle, B.S. Assoc. Editor, The 
(Hot Springs, AR) Sentinel-Record. 

Pérez, Louis A., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 

Perini, Lynda, BA. Marketing Mgr., Sony Corp. 
Perkins, Barbara M., Ph.D. Adjunct Prof., Univ. 
of Toledo; Assoc. Editor, Narrative. 

Perkins, Edwin J., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of History, 
Univ. of Southern California. 

Perkins, Kenneth J., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of South Carolina. 

Perman, Michael, Ph.D. Prof. of History and Re- 
search Prof. in the Humanities, Univ. of Illinois, 
Chicago. 

Perry, Edgar Director, White Mountain Apache 
Culture Center. 

Pervin, Lawrence A., Ph.D. Prof. of Psychology, 
Rutgers, the State Univ. of New Jersey. 

Pesic, Peter, Ph.D. Tutor, St. John’s College; au- 
thor, Seeing Double: Shared Identities in Physics, 
Philosophy, and Literature. 

Peters, Charles M., Ph.D. Kate E. Tode Curator of 
Botany, The New York Botanical Garden. 

Peters, Edward, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Pennsylvania. 

Petersen, Harold A., Ph.D. Former Assoc. Prof. 
of History, Univ. of Southwestern Louisiana. 
Peterson, Charles H., Ph.D. Alumni Distin- 
guished Prof. of Marine Sciences, Biology, and 
Ecology, Univ. of North Carolina. 

Peterson, John W., B.S. Wildlife Biologist, Fish 
and Wildlife Service, U.S. Dept. of the Interior. 
Petrie, Joanne, J.D. Senior Attorney, U.S. Dept. of 
Transportation. 

Petro, Nicolai N., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
Univ. of Rhode Island. 

Pettigrew, Thomas F., Ph.D. Research Prof. of 
Social Psychology, Univ. of California, Santa Cruz 
Petulla, Joseph M., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus, Environ- 
mental Management, Univ. of San Francisco. 
Pfaff, Daniel W., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Journal- 
ism, Pennsylvania State Univ. 

Pfeifer, Etlen Music Critic and Arts Writer, The 
Boston Globe. 

Phelps, J}. Alfred, M.A. Author, Chappie: Daniel 
James, Jr, America’s First Black Four-Star General. 
Phelps, Michael E., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Dept. 
of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Univ. of 
California, Los Angeles, School of Medicine. 


Philips, F. Carter, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Classics, 
Vanderbilt Univ. 

Phillips, Bill! Security consultant. 

Phillips, Carla Rahn, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Minnesota, Twin Cities Campus. 

Phillips, Charles F., Jr., Ph.D. Robert G. Brown 
Prof. of Economics, Washington and Lee Univ. 
Phillips, Gene D., Ph.D. Prof. of English, Loyola 
Univ. of Chicago. 

Phillips, William D., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Minnesota, Twin Cities Campus. 

Phills, Bobby R., Ph.D. Dean and Directnr, Col- 
lege of Engineering Sciences, Technology and 
Agriculture, Florida A&M Univ. 

Picard, Louis A., Ph.D. Director, Division of Inter- 
national Development, Graduate School of Public 
and International Affairs, Univ. of Pittsburgh. 
Picard, M. Dane, Ph.D. Prof. of Geology and 
Geophysics, Univ. of Utah. 

Picciano, Mary Frances, Ph.D. Prof. of Nutrition, 
Pennsylvania State Univ. 

Picus, Lawrence O., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Divi- 
sion of Administration and Policy, Rossier School 
of Education, Univ. of Southern California. 
Pierce, William S.,M.D. Prof. of Surgery. Col- 
lege of Medicine, Pennsylvania State Univ. 
Pikula, Joan Brock, B.A. Assoc. Editor, Dance 
Magazine. 

Pinder, D. A., Ph.D. Prof. of Economic Geogra- 
phy, Univ. of Plymouth. 

Pinkava, Donald J., Ph.D. Prof. of Bntany. 
Arizona State Univ. 

Pinyuh, George, M.A. Area Extension Agent, 
Washington State Unwv. 

Piper, Linda J., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History Unis 
of Georgia. 


Contributors and consultants XXXVI 


Pisetsky, David S., M.D., Ph.D. Prnf. of Medicine 
and immunology, Duke Univ. Medical Center. 
Pitts, J. Roland, Ph.D. Seninr Scientist il, Natinnal 
Renewable Energy Lahnratory. 

Pitts, William Karl, Ph.D. Senior Research Scien- 
tist II, Pacific Narthwest Natinnal Laboratnry. 
Plante, Julian G., Ph.D. Founding Executive Di- 
rector Emeritus, Hill Monastic Manuscript Lihrary. 
Plante, Michael, Ph.D. Jessie J. Poesch Prof. of 
Art History, Newcomb Art Dept., Tulane Univ. 
Plaut, AndrewG., M.D. Director of Digestive 
Disease Research Center and Prof. of Medicine, 
Tufts Univ., New England Medical Center. 
Pletcher, James, Ph.D. Assoc. Prnf. of Political 
Science, Denison Univ. 

Plotkin, Allen, Ph.D. Prof. of Aerospace 
Engineering, San Diego State Univ. 

Plutchik, Robert, Ph.D. Prof. of Psychiatry and 
Psychology, Albert Einstein Cnilege nf Medicine 
Poag, James F., Ph.D. Prof. of German, 
Washington Univ., St. Louis. 

Poeppel, Roger B., Ph.D. Dir., Energy Technolo- 
gy Division, Argonne National Lahnratory. 
Poertner, Andrew, B.A. Managing Editor, 
Roswell (NM) Daily Record. 

Pohimann, Ken C., M.S.E.E. Director of Music 
Engineering, Univ. of Miami. 

Pointer, Richard W., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. nf 
History, Trinity College. 

Polachek, Dora E., Ph.D. Senior Lecturer nf 
French, Cornell Univ. 

Polachek, Solomon W., Ph.D. Prof. of Econom- 
ics, State Univ. of New York, Binghamton. 
Polasky, Janet L, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
New Hampshire. 

Polis, John E., B.A. Former Director of 
Communications, U.S. Soccer Federation. 
Politoske, Daniel T., Ph.D. Prof. of Music 
History, Univ. of Kansas. 

Polk, Noel, Ph.D. Prof. of English, Univ. of South- 
ern Mississippi. 

Pollard, James E., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Plant 
Binlogy and Biology Program Coordinator, Univ. 
of New Hampshire. 

Pollock, George H., Ph.D. Dunhar Distinguished 
Prof. of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, North- 
western Univ. Medical School. 

Polmar, Norman, B.A. Author, Ships and Aircraft 
of the U.S. Fleet and Guide tn the Soviet Navy. 
Poluhowich, John J., Ph.D. Prof. Life, Earth, and 
Environmental Sciences, West Texas A&M Univ. 
Pommer, David, B.A. City Hall Bureau Reporter, 
The Calgary \AB) Herald. 

Pope, Harrison G., Jr., M.D., M.P.H. Prof. of Psy- 
chiatry, Harvard Medical School. 

Popoff, Wilfred Former Assnc. Editor, Saskatoon 
(SK) Star-Phoenix 

Porch, Douglas, Ph.D. Mark W. Clark Prof. of 
History, The Citadel. 

Porco, Carolyn, Ph.D. Prof., Cussini Imaging 
Central Laboratory for Operations. Southwest Re- 
search Institute. 

Porter, Brian, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Michigan. Ann Arbor 

Porter, Stephen C., Ph.D. Prnf. Dept. of Geolngi 
cal Sciences, Univ. of Washington. 

Porton, Gary G., Ph.D. Prof., Director of Program 
for the Study of Religion, Univ. of Illinois, Urbana 
Champaign. 

Posner, Gerald L, }.D. Journalist; Authnr. 
Mengele: The Complete Sto: 

Possony, Stefan T., LLD. Author Lenin. the 
Compulsive Revolutionan 

Post, Robert C., Ph.D. Editor in Chief 
Technolngv and Culture 

Poston, John W., Sr., Ph.D. Prnf Dept ot Nu 
clear Engineering. Texas A&M Unis 

Pottage, John C,, Jr.,M.D Assoc Prnt ot 
internal Medicine. Rush Medical Cotlege 
Rush-Presbvterian: St Lukes Medical Center 
Pough, Frederick H., Ph.D Consulting mineralo 
gist: authnr. Field Guide to Kot&s and Viinerals 
Poulson, Barry W., Ph.D Prot of Economics 


Unw. ot Colorado Boulde 


Poulson, Thad Edito 
Poulson, Thomas L, PhD Prot jalogical 


1 
Scien es twas of Pinos. LNIicae 


Daler Sih AKI OS Ine 


Powell, Arthur G., Ph.D. Researcher and 
Cnnsultant. 

Powell, Evan, B.A. Directnr nf Engineering, 
Southeastern Products, Inc. 

Powell, Roger A., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Zooilngy 
and Forestry, North Carolina State Univ. 

Power, Harry W., Ph.D. Prof., Dept. of Ecology, 
Evolution and Natural Resources, Rutgers, the 
State Univ. nf New Jersey. 

Powers, Lenita, BA. Reporter, Renn Newspa- 
pers, Inc. 

Powless, Robert E., Ph.D. Prof. and Dept. Head, 
American Indian Studies, Univ. of Minnesota. 
Poynter, Dan, B.A. Columnist, Parachutist 
magazine; author, Parachuting, The Skydivers 
Handbook 

Pranger, Robert J., Ph.D. Managing Ed., Med- 
iterranean Quarterly; Adjunct Prof., American Univ. 
Pratt, Norman T., Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of 
Classics, Indiana Univ., Bloomington. 

Presley, Cora Ann, Ph.D. Former Assoc. Prof. of 
History, Tulane Univ. 

Presley, Lawrence A., M.A. Chief, Quality 
Assurance Unit, FBI Laboratory. 


Pressman, David, J.D. Patent lawyer and author. 


Preston, Katherine K., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Mu- 
sic, College of William and Mary. 

Prezant, Robert S., Ph.D. Dean, College of Sci- 
ence and Mathematics, Montclair State Univ. 
Price, Bobby E., Ph.D. Prof. of Civil Engineering, 
Louisiana Tech Univ. 

Price, Hugh C., Ph.D. Prof. and Chairperson, 
Dept. of Horticultural Science, Cornell Univ. 
Price, Richard, Ph.D. Prof. of American Studies, 
Anthropology, and History, College of William and 
Mary. 

Price, Steven D., LLB. Authnr, The Whnile Horse 
Catalog. 

Priddle, George B., Ph.D. Former Assoc. Prof. of 
Environment and Resource Studies, Univ. of 
Waterloo, Ontario. 

Pride, Mike, B.A. Editor, Concord (NH) Monitor. 


Prigo, Robert B., Ph.D. Prof. of Physics, 
Middlebury College. 

Primack, Joel R., Ph.D. Prof. of Physics, Univ. of 
California, Santa Cruz. 

Pritchett, Edward C., B.S. Fnrmer Chief, 
Geotechnical Branch, Headquarters, U.S. Army 
Corps of Engineers. 

Prockter, Louise M., Ph.D. Senior Professional 
Staff Scientist, Applied Physics Laboratnry, Johns 
Hopkins Univ. 

Procter, James E.,BA Night Editor, The (Gary, 
IN) Post-Tribune. 

Prusiner, Stanley B., M.D. Director, institute for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, Univ. of California, 
San Francisco: winner of Nobel Prize for physiolo- 
gy or medicine, 1997. 

Purpel, David E.,Ed.D Prof. of Educational, 
Leadership, and Cultural Foundations, Univ. of 
North Carolina. Greensbnro. 

Pusey, Merlo J.,LLD. Former Assoc. Editor, 
Mashingtnn Post & Times-Herald: winner of 
Pulitzer Prize for Bingraphy. 1952 

Putzel, James D.Phil. Director. Develnpment Re- 
search Centre Lnndon School nf Econnmics and 
Political Science. 

Pyle, Kenneth B., Ph.D. Prof. of History and Asian 
Studies. Henry M. Jackson School of Internatinnal 
Studies, Unt. of Washington. 


Q 


~ 
Quartaro, Emma Giordano, D.S\\_ Director. 
Dept. of Social WWnrk Seton Hall Univ 
Quere, Ralph W., Ph.D. Prof ot History and 
Theology \Wartburg Theological Seminary. 
Quimby, William R.,B.S Director of Publica: 
tions. Safan Cluh Internatinnal. 
Quintiere, James G., Ph.D Prot. ot Fire Protec 
ton Engineenng Univ nf Manland 


Quirarte, Jacinto, PhD Director Research Cen: 
ter tnr the Visual Arts Unw nt Texas San Antonin 


R 


Raat, W. Dirk, Ph.D. Prot of Histon, State Unn 


ot New York, Fredonia 


Rabiger, Michael, B.A) Director Documentan 
Center Columbia College Chicago 


XXXVIII 


Rabiner, Donald, Ph.D. Former Assoc. Prof. of 
Art History, Arizona State Univ. 
Rabinowicz, Ernest, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Me- 
chanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 
Rabinowitz, Philip D., Ph.D. Prof. of Oceanogra- 
phy and Director, Ocean Drilling Program, Texas 
A&M Univ. 
Raboteau, Albert J., Ph.D. Henry W. Putnam 
Prof. of Religion, Princeton Univ. 
Rader, Patricia W., M.LS. Asst. Catalog Librani- 
an, Dance Collection, New York Public Library. 
Raedeke, Kenneth J., Ph.D. Research Assoc. 
Prof.. Wildlife Sciences Program, College of Forest 
Resources, Univ. of Washington. 
Rahman, M. Omar, M.D.,D.Sc. Assoc. Prof. of 
Demography and Epidemiology, Harvard School 
of Public Health. 
Raitt, jill, Ph.D. Prof. Emerita, Dept of Religious 
Studies, Univ. of Missouri, Columbia. 
Raitz, Karl B., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, Univ. of 
Kentucky. 
Rakove, Jack N., Ph.D. Coe Prof. of History and 
American Studies, Stanford Univ. 
Raleigh, Donald J., Ph.D. Pardue Prof. of History, 
Univ. of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 
Ramanathan, Veerabhadran, Ph.D. Alderson 
Prof. of Ocean Sciences, Univ. of California, San 
Diego. 
Ramesh, Lalita, Ph.D. Research Assoc, Milken 
Institute. 
Ramet, Sabrina P., Ph.D. Prof., Dept. of Sociolo- 
gy and Political Science, Nonwegian Univ. of Sci- 
ence and Technology. Trondheim, Nomway. 
Ramsay, O. Bertrand, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Chemistry, Eastern Michigan Univ. 
Ramsey, Matthew, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
History, Vanderbilt Univ. 
Rango, Albert, Ph.D. Research Hydrologist. 
Hydrology Laboratory, Agricultural Research 
Service, U.S. Dept. of Agnculture. 
Rankin, Joanna M., Ph.D. Prof. of Physics. 
Univ. of Vermont 

rt, Herman, Ph.D. Prof.. Dept. of English, 
Univ. of Southampton. 
Rashkin, Esther, Ph.D. Prof. of French and Com- 
parative Literature, Univ. of Utah. 
Raven, Peter H., Ph.D. Dir., Missoun Botanical 
Garden; Prof. of Botany, Washington Univ. 
Rawal, Kanti M., Ph.D. Pres., California Hybrids. 
Rawls, James J., Ph.D. Instructor of History, 
Diablo Valley College. 
Ray, Brian D., Ph.D. President, National Home 
Education Research Institute. 
Rea, J.E, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of Manito- 
ba. 
Rector, Lee, BA. Former Editor, Music City 
News. 
Redbird-Smith, Helen Marie Former Prof. of 
Social Science, Westem Oregon State College. 
Reddy, William M., Ph.D. Laprade Prof. of Histo- 
ry and Prof. of Cultural Anthropology, Duke Univ. 
Reece, Bonnie B., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Advertising, Michigan State Univ. 
Reed, Brian V., PhD. Assoc. Prof. of Physica! 
Therapy, Univ. of Vermont 
Reed, David M., BA. Kentucky.com Editor. 
Lexington |KY) Herald-Leader. 
Reed, James S., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Ceramic 
Engineering, New York State College of Ceramics, 
Alfred Univ. 
Reed, William F.,BA Columnist, Leungton 'KY) 
Herald-Leader. 
Reefe, Thomas Q., Ph.D. President. Q Solutions. 
Rees, Peter W., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Geography. 
Univ. of Delaware. 
Reetz, Brian, BA. Sports Writer, Lincoi/n (NE) 
Journal Star. 
Reeves, Thomas C, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Wisconsin, Parkside. 
Regehr, T. D., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Saskatchewan. 
Rehkugler, Gerald E., Ph.D. Prof. of Agricultural 
and Bio a a Engineering, and Assoc. Dean, 
College of Engineering, Cornell Univ. 


Reich, Bernard, Ph.D. Prof., Political Science and 
Intemational Affairs, George Washington Univ 


Contributors and consultants 


Reich, Kenneth, MA. Columnist, Los Angeles 
Times. 

Reid, Donald J., Ph.D. Prof.. Dept of Agncultural 
Sciences, Texas A&M Univ.. Commerce. 

Reid, W. W., MA Former Editor, A// Hands 
magazine, Navy Internal Relations Activity. 

Reid, William J., Ph.D. Coauthor, Massachusetts. 
Reider, Bruce, M.D. Director of Sports Medi- 
cine, Prof. of Surgery, Univ. of Chicago. 

Reider, Richard G., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Unw. of Wyoming. 

Reilingh, Maarten, Ph.D. Free-lance writer and 
editor. 

Reilly, John G. Assoc. Prof. of Culinary Arts, Culi- 
nary Institute of Amenca 

Reilly, Timothy F., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Historical! 
Geography, Univ. of Southwestern Louisiana. 
Reimer, Michael J., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Amenican Un. in Cairo. 

Reirners, David M., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Histo- 
ry, New York Univ. 

Reiners, Stephen, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Horticul- 
tural Sciences, Comell Univ. 

Reiners, William A., Ph.D. Prof. of Botany. Univ. 
of Wyoming. 

Reisch, Bruce L., Ph.D. Prof. of Grape Genetics, 
Cornell Univ. 

Reiss, David L, M.D. Head of Endocnnology, 
Kaiser Permanente, Orange County. California. 
Reiss, Edmund, Ph.D. Author, Arthurian Legend 
and Literature. 

Reiter, Russel J., Ph.D. Prof. of Neuroendocrinol- 
ogy, Univ. of Texas Health Science Center. 


Reitz, Bruce A., M.D. Norman E. Shumway Prof. 
and Chairman, Dept of Cardiothoracic Surgery, 
Stanford Univ. School of Medicine. 

Rense, William C, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Shippensburg Unw. of Pennsylvania. 

Rentzepis, Peter M., Ph.D. Presidential Chair and 
Prof. of Chemistry, Univ. of California, Irvine. 
Restak, Richard, M.D. Clinical Prof. of Neurolo- 
gy. George Washington Univ. Medical School. 
Reyes, Socorro L, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Political 
Science, De la Salle Univ. 

Reynolds, Barbara A., M.S. President, Reynolds 
News Service. 

Reyne Frank E., Ph.D. Prof. of History of 
Religions and Buddhist Studies, Univ. of Chicago. 
Reynolds, Terry S., Ph.D. Prof. of History and 
Chair, Dept. of Social Sciences, Michigan Techno- 
logical Univ. 

Reznicek, Anton A., Ph.D. Curator, Vascular 
Plants, Univ. of Michigan Herbanum. 

Rhoades, Everett R., M.D. Former Vice Chair- 
man, Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma. 

Rhoades, Rex H. Executive Editor, (Lewiston, ME) 
Sun Journal 

Rhodes, Benjamin D., Ph.D. Prof. of History. 
Univ. of Wisconsin, Whitewater. 

Rhodes, Russell G., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology. 
Southwest Missouri State Univ. 

Ribera, Feliciano M., Ph.D. Prof. of History and 
Mexican Amenican Studies, San jose State Univ. 
Rice, Phillip L, Ph.D. Prof. of Psychology, 
Moorhead State Univ. 

Rich, George W., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology. 
California State Univ., Sacramento. 

Richards, Joan L, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Brown Univ. 

Richards, Nancy E, MA. Chief Researcher, 
Cliveden. 

Richards, William J., Ph.D. Senior Scientist, 
Southeast Fisheries Center. 

Richardson, D. H. S., DPhil. Dean of Science, St 
Marys Univ., Halifax, Nova Scotia 

Richardson, Deborah South, Ph.D Prof.. Dept 
of Psychology, Flonda Atlantic Univ. 

Richardson, Elmo R., Ph.D. Public Historian, 
Historians Services of the Northwest 

Richelson, Jeffrey T., Ph.D. Senior Fellow, Na 
tional Secunity Archive. 

Richmond, G. Wendell, M.D. Asst. Prof. of Im- 
munology Microbiology Internal Medicine, Rush- 
Presbyterian-St Lukes Medical Center Chicago. 


Richter, Daniel K., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Pennsylvania. 


Richter, David H., Ph.D. Prof. of English, Queens 
College. City Univ. of New York. 

Rickard, John, Ph.D. Reader in History, Monash 
Univ. 

Rickard, Lee J..Ph.D. Research Astronomer, 
Naval Research Laboratory. 

Rickspoone, Howard A., B.S. Former President, 
Amenican Contract, Inc. 

Ricou, Laurie R.,PhD. Prof. of English; Assoc. 
Dean, Graduate Studies, Univ. of British Columbia. 
Rider, Jeff, PhD. Assoc. Prof. of French and 
Medieval Studies, Wesleyan Univ. 

Ridley, Jeanne Clare, Ph.D. Prof. Emerita of 
Demography, Georgetown Univ. 

Ridolfi, Mark, MA. City Editor, (Davenport, lA) 
Quad-City Times. 

Rieck, James Nelson, Ph.D. Senior Research 
Specialist. Miles, Inc. 

Riedy, Mark J., Ph.D. Emest W. Hahn Prof. of 
Real Estate Finance. Univ. of San Diego. 


Rigg, Jonathan, Ph.D. Reader in Geography, 
Univ. of Durham. 


Riggs, Paula DeGraffenreid, M.D. Assoc. Protf., 
Psychiatry. Univ. of Colorado Schoo! of Medicine. 
Riley, Donald R., Ph.D. Assoc. Vice President and 
Chief Information Officer, Univ. of Maryland. 
Riley, James D., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History. 
Catholic Univ. of America 

Riley, Jonathan, D.Phil. Prof., Murphy Institute of 
Political Economy, Tulane Univ 

Riley-Smith, Jonathan, Ph.D. Dixie Prof. of Eccle- 
siastical History, Univ. of Cambridge. 

Ring, Richard R., Ph.D. Collection Development 
Librarian, Univ. of Kansas. 

Ringler, Richard N., Ph.D. Prof. of Scandinavian 
Studies, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Rink, Oliver A., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Califomia 
State Univ., Bakersfield. 

Rinke, Carlotta M., M.D. Physician; Clinical Asst 
Prof. of Medicine, Loyola Unw. of Chicago. 
Rischin, Moses, Ph.D. Prof. of History. San Fran- 
cisco State Univ. 

Risso, Patricia, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of New Mexco. 

Ristine, Karen Clark, B.S. Asst Metro Editor, 
San Diego Union-Tribune. 

Ritchie, Robert C., Ph.D. Dir. of Research, Hunt- 
ington Library, Art Gallery, and Botanical Gardens. 
Ritter, Jay R., PhD. Cordell Prof. of Finance, Univ. 
of Florida. 

Rivers, Jeff, BA. Assoc. Editor, The Hartford'|CT) 
Courant 

Rivkin, Ellis, Ph.D. Prof. Ementus of jewish Histo- 
ry. Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Relli- 
gion. 

Roan, Vernon P., Ph.D. Prof. of Mechanical 
Engineering, Univ. of Florida. 

Robb, Edith, BA. Asst. Managing Editor, (Monc- 
ton, NB! Times & Transcript 

Robbins, Clarence R., Ph.D. Distinguished 
Fellow, Colgate Palmolive Co. 

Robbins, Keith, D.Litt. Principal, Univ. of Wales, 
Lampeter; former Prof. of Modem History, Univ. of 
Glasgow. 

Roberts, Harold R., B.S. Consulting Engineer. 
Roberts, Jennifer Tolbert, Ph.D. Prof. of Foreign 
Lanigugaes and Literatures, City College of New 
Yo 


Roberts, Phil, Ph.D. Asst Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Wyoming. 

Roberts, W. Thomas, Jr., Ph.D. Senior Member. 
Technical Staff, Jet Propulsion Lab., Pasadena. 
Robertson, Don, Ph.D. Deputy Manager. Marine 
Research, MAF Fisheries, New Zealand. 


Robertson, Kenneth R., Ph.D. Botanist. Illinois 
Natural History Survey. and Prof. of Plant Biology. 
Univ. of Illinois. 

Robertson, Robert, Ph.D. Honorary Curator of 
Malacology. Academy of Natural Sciences of 
Philadelphia. 

Robinowitz, Joe, B.S. Editor in Chief, 7V Guide. 
Robinson, Adrian, Ph.D. Former Univ. Reader, 
Univ. of Leicester. 

Robinson, David J., Ph.D. Dellplain Prof. of Latin 
American Geography. Syracuse Univ. 

Robinson, David Mason, Ph.D. Assoc. Director 








for Scientific Programs, Division of Heart and 
Vascular Diseases, National Institutes of Health. 
Robinson, Geoffrey, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Histo- 
ry, Univ. of California at Los Angeles. 

Robinson, June K., M.D. Prof. of Medicine and 
Pathology, Loyola Univ. of Chicago. 

Robinson, William W., A.B. Contributing Editor, 
Cruising World Magazine. 


Robison, Henry W., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, 
Southern Arkansas Univ. 


Robson, Gary D. Free-lance writer. 


Rochette, Edward C.,G.E. Author, 7he Other 
Side of the Coin. 

Rock, Peter A., Ph.D. Dean, Division of Mathe- 
matical and Physical Sciences and Prof. of Chem- 
istry, Univ. of Califomia, Davis. 

Rocke, Alan J., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Case West- 
em Reserve Univ. 

Rodabaugh, James H., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
History, Miami Univ. 

Rodd, Laurel Rasplica, Ph.D. Prof. of Japanese, 
Univ. of Colorado, Boulder. 

Roddick, Daniel McCulloch, Ph.D. Writer, 
teacher and consultant. 

Rodier, Patricia M., Ph.D. Prof. of Obstetrics/Gy- 
necology and Director, Collaborative Program of 
Excellence in Autism, Univ. of Rochester Med. Ctr. 
Rodowskas, Christopher A., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. and 
Asst. Dean, Nova Southeastern Univ. 

Roemer, Elizabeth, Ph.D. Prof. Emerita of As- 
tronomy, Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, Univ. of 
Arizona. 

Roessel, Ruth W. Former Principal, Pinon Public 
School; former Director, Navajo and !ndian 
Studies Dept, Navajo Community College. 
Roessler, David M., Ph.D. Staff Rsch. Scientist, 
General Motors Research and Development Ctr. 
Rofen, Robert R., Ph.D. Director, Aquatic Re- 
search Institute. 

Rogers, George C.,, Jr., Ph.D. Former Chairman, 
Dept of History, Univ of South Carolina. 

Rogers, Jay, BA. Former Asst. Managing Editor, 
San Antonio Express-News. 

Rogers, Quinton R., Ph.D. Prof. of Physiological 
Chemistry, Univ. of California, Davis. 

Rohrbough, Malcolm J., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of lowa. 


Rojas, Cristina, Ph.D. Asst. Prof., Norman Pater- 
son School of International Affairs, Carleton Univ. 


Roland, Alex, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Duke Univ. 


Rolfe, Stanley T., Ph.D. Albert P. Learned Prof. of 
Civil and Environmental Engineering, Univ. of 
Kansas. 


Rollinson, Paul A., Ph.D. Prof, Dept. of Geogra- 
phy, Geology, and Planning, Southwest Missouri 
State Univ. 


Romano, Frank J., M.A. Prof., School of Printing, 
Rochester Institute of Technology. 


Romanowicz, Barbara, Ph.D. Prof. and Director, 


Berkeley Seismological Laboratory. 


Romer, Grant B., M.F.A Chief Conservator and 
Curator, International Museum of Photography. 
Romrell, Lynn J., Ph.D. Assoc. Dean for 
Education and Prof. of Anatomy and Cell Biology, 
Univ. of Florida College of Medicine. 

Roodman, G. David, Ph.D. Prof. of Medicine, 
Univ. of Texas Health Science Center; Chief of 


Hematology, Murphy Memorial Veterans Hospital. 


Ropp, Steve C., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
Univ. of Wyoming. 


Ropp, Theodore, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of History, 


Duke Univ.; author, War in the Modern World. 
Rorex, Robert A., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Art and 
Art History, Univ. of lowa. 

Rosario, Ruben A., B.A. Columnist, S¢ Pau/ (MN) 
Pioneer Press. 

Rosberg, CarlG., D. Phil. Former Pruf. of 
Political Science, Univ. of California, Berkeley. 
Rose, Emily Jane, Ph.D. Science Education Con 
sultant, Science Through Experiments Prograin 
Rose, Richard, D.Phil. Directur, Centre for the 
Study of Public Policy, Univ. of Strathclyde. 
Rosecrance, Richard, Ph.D. Dir., Univ. of Califor 
nia, Los Angeles, Center for Internatiunal Rela 
tions. 

Rosenheim, Daniel £.,8.A Former City Editor 
San Francisco Chronicle. 


Contributors and consultants XXXIX 


Rosenstone, Robert A., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
California Institute of Technology. 


Roserthal, Joel T., Ph.D. Prof. of History, State 
Univ. of New York, Stony Brook. 

Ross, David A., Ph.D. Senior Scientist, Dept. of 
Geology and Geophysics, Woods Hole Oceano- 
graphic Institution. 

Ross, Stewart L, Ph.D. Prof. of Music and 
Director of Bands, Mankato State Univ. 


Rossabi, Morris, Ph.D. Prof. of History, City Univ. 
of New York. 


Rosseker, A.D. City Editor, The Regina (SK) 
Leader-Post 

Rotberg, Robert I., D.Phil. Pres., World Peace 
Foundation; Dir., WPF Program on Intrastate Con- 
flict, Conflict Prevention, and Conflict Resolution. 
Roth, Jesse, M.D. Lublin Prof. of Medicine and 
Director, Division of Geriatric Medicine, Johns 
Hopkins Univ. School of Medicine. 

Roth, Leland M., Ph.D. Marion Dean Ross Prof. 
of Architectural History, Univ. of Oregon. 
Rourke, Ralph Martin, B.S. Dir., Hall of Fame for 
Great Americans, Bronx Community College. 
Rowan, Andrew N., D.Phil. Senior Vice Presi- 
dent, Research, Education and International {s- 
sues, Humane Society of the United States. 
Rowan, Carl T., MA. Former Syndicated Colum- 
nist, Chicago Sun-Times. 

Rowe, John A., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. Emeritus of 
History, Northwestern Univ. 

Rowley, William D., Ph.D. Griffen Prof., Dept. of 
Histury, Univ. of Nevada. 


Rozenblit, Marsha, Ph.D. Prof of History, Univ. of 
Maryland, College Park. 


Roznowsky, Wayne j. Former Managing Editor, 
Prince Albert(SK) Daily Herald. 


Rubel, David, BA President, Agincourt Press. 
Rubens, Jeff, MA. Coeditor, The Bridge World. 
Rubenstein, Allan E., M.D. Assoc. Prof. of Neu- 
rology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine. 
Rubenstein, Irwin, Ph.D. Prof. of Plant Biology, 
Univ. of Minnesota, Twin Cities Campus. 


Rubin, Kenneth H., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Geolo- 
gy, Univ. of Hawaii. 

Rubinstein, Donald H., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropol- 
ogy and Public Health, Micronesian Area Research 
Center, Univ. of Guam. 

Rubman, Marc L, B.S. Publisher, Fur Age. 
Rudd, J. William, M.A. Dean, College of 
Architecture and Planning, Univ. of Tennessee, 
Knoxville. 

Rudisill, Richard, Ph.D. Curator of Photographic 
History, Museum of New Mexico. 

Rudnyk, Marian £., B.S. Planetary photogeolo- 
gist/astronomer; Consultant, Jet Propulsion Lab., 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 
Rudnytsky, Peter L, Ph.D Former Asst. Prof, 
English and Comparative Literature, Columbia 
Univ. 

Rudolph, Frederick B., Ph.D. Prof., Chair, Dept 
of Biochemistry and Cell Biology; Exec. Dir., Insti- 
tute of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Rice Univ. 
Rudwick, Elliott, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Sociology 
and History, Center for Urban Regionalism, Kent 
State Univ. 

Rulon, Philip Reed, Ed.D. Prof. of History, North- 
ern Arizona Univ. 

Rumbaugh, Duane M., Ph.D. Director Emeritus, 
Language Research Center, Georgia State Univ. 
Rumbelow, Donald Police Officer, City of Lon- 
don Police; author The Complete jack the Ripper. 
Rumford, Beatrix T., MA. VP. Special Projects. 
Colonial Williamsburg Foundation. 

Rundel, Philip W., Ph.D. Prof., Dept. of Oganis- 
mic Biology, Ecology and Evolution, Univ of Cali: 
fornia, Los Angeles. 

Ruph, Morgan S., M.S.Ed. Senior Program 
Analyst. U.S. Dept. of Veterans Affairs 


Rupp, Jennifer A., \1.D. Former Physician, Dept 
of infectious Diseases. Univ of New Mexico 
Rushton, Alan R., Ph.D Dept of Pediatncs 
Hunterdon Medical Center 

Ruskin, William R., BS Vice President, Opera: 
tions. Quality Golt international LLC 

Russell, Peter H., LL.D Prot of Political Science 
Univ ot Torontu 


Rutger, J. Neil, ? Director Dale Buinpers Na- 


tional Rice Research Center. 


Rutledge, Albert J., M.LA. Prof. of Landscape 
Architecture, lowa State Univ. 


Ryan, Shannon Patrick, Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Memorial Univ. of Newfoundland. 


Ryll, Thomas Hardy Reporter, 7he (Vancouver, 
WA) Columbian. 
S 


Saab, A.P., Ph.D. Prof. of History and Assoc. 
Dean of the Graduate School, Univ. of North 
Carolina, Greensboro. 

Saari, Donald G., Ph.D. Prof. of Mathematics, 
Northwestern Univ. 

Sabatino, Dominick, M.D. Dir., Pediatric Hema- 
tology/Oncology, Nassau County Medical Center. 
Sack, James J., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
(linois, Chicago. 

Saenz, Candelario, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of 
Anthropology, State Univ. of New York, Purchase. 
Saffell, David C,, Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
Ohio Northern Univ. 


St. John, Ronald K., M.D., M.P.H. Senior 
Consultant, HIV/AIDS, Dept of Health, Canada, 
and Assoc. Prof., Dept. of Medicine, Univ. of Ot- 
tawa Medical School. 

Sakagawa, Gary T., Ph.D. Chief, Pelagic Fish- 
eries Resources Division, Southwest Fisheries Sci- 
ence Center. 


Sakalas, Ray V., M.S. Director, Vocational 
Rehabilitation, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago. 


Sakalowsky, Peter P., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of 
Geography, Southern Connecticut State Univ. 


Sakmyster, Thomas, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Cincinnati. 


Salih, H. Ibrahim, Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
Texas Wesleyan Univ. 


Sa Neal, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Smith Col- 
ege. 

Salter, C.L, Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Dept. of 
Geography, Univ. of Missouri, Columbia. 
Saltzman, Arthur M., Ph.D. Prof. of English, 
Missouri Southern State College. 

Saltzman, Martin D., Ph.D. Prof. of Natural 
Science, Providence College. 

Salvador, Ricardo J., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Agronomy, !owa State Univ. 

Salvatore, Nick, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., School of In- 
dustrial and Labor Relations, Cornell Univ. 
Salzman, Philip Carl, Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropolo- 
gy, McGill Univ. 

Sammons, Jeffrey L, Ph.D. Leavenworth Prof. of 
German, Yale Univ. 

Samsell, John, 8.5. News Editor, Morgantown, 
WV) Dominion Post 

Sanders, I. J. Author, English Baronies. 
Sanders, Keith P., Ph.D. Prof., School of Journal- 
ism, Univ. of Missoun. 

Sanders, R. “A. Managing Editor, Lubbock (™ 
Avalanche-fournal 


Sandhu, Sarwan S., Ph.D. Prof. of Chemical Engi- 
neering, Univ. of Dayton. 


Sando, Joe S.,M.S. Dir., Pueblo Indian Study and 
Research Center; author, The Pueblo Indians. 
Sanik, t Mietus, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Family Resource Management, Ohio State Univ. 
Santer, Richard A., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Geog: 
raphy, Ferris State Univ 

Santino, Jack, Ph.D. Prof. of Popular Culture. 
Bowling Green State Univ. 

Sardar, Riffat, Ph.D. Project Officer, UNICEF. 
Sarver, Rebecca Fo:mer Managing Editor, West 
Virginia Daily News 

Sassoon, Vidal Chairman of the Board. Vida! 
Sassoon. Inc. 

Sauers, Richard A., Ph.D. Military historian. 
Saul, William E., PE. Prof. Chair, Civil and Envi- 
ronmental! Engineering, Michigan State Univ. 
Saunders, Christopher, D.Phil. Prof., Dept of 
Histoncal Studies. Univ. of Cape Town 

Saunders, Richard, Jr., Ph.D Assoc. Prof. of 
History Clemson Univ 

Savage, Martha Kane, Ph.D Senior Lecturer, 
Institute of Geophysics, Victona Univ. Wellington. 


Savage, William W.,, Jr. Ph.D Prof of History 
Univ oft OMahonra 


XL Contributors and consultants 


Sayre, Henry M., Ph.D. Distinguished Prof. of Art 
History. Oregon State Univ. 

Saywell, John T., Ph.D. Univ. Pruf. and Prof. of 
History and Social Science, York Univ. 


Scarborough, John, Ph.D. Prof. History of 
Pharmacy and Medicine and Classics, Univ. of 
Wisconsin. 


Scargill, D. lan, D-Phil. Univ. Lecturer of 
Geography. Univ. of Oxford. 

Scavone, Daniel C,, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of His- 
tory, Univ. of Southern Indiana 


Schachter, Ruth, M.S. Communications 
Coordinator, Footwear Industries uf America. 


Schaffner, John A., M.D. Assoc Prof., Director of 
Clinical Gastroenterology, Rush Medical Center. 
Schagrin, Morton L, Ph.D. Prof. of Philosophy. 
State Univ. of New York. Fredonia 

Schaich, K. M., Sc.D. Prof. of Food and Lipid 
Chemistry, Rutgers, the State Univ. of New Jersey. 
Schaller, George B., Ph.D. Director tor Science, 
Wildlife Conservation Society, New York. 
Schankin, Arthur, B.S. Sales Marketing, 
Collegiate Cap & Gown. 

Schauer, Frederick, J.D. Frank Stanton Prof. of 
the First Amendment, Harvard Univ. 

Schebera, Richard L, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Religion, St Louis Univ. 

Schein, Jerome D., Ph.D. Author, Speaking the 
Language of Sign. 

Scheina, Robert L, Ph.D. Pruf. of History, 
Industrial College of the Armed Forces. 
Schiffman, Lawrence H., Ph.D. Edelman Prof. of 
Hebrew and Judaic Studies, New York Univ. 
Schiller, Dan, Ph.D. Prof. of Communication, 
Univ. of California, San Diego. 

Schlesinger, Richard C., Ph.D. Research 
Forester, Forest Service, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture. 
Schlessinger, David, Ph.D. Prof. ot Molecular 
Microbiology, Washington Univ. School of 
Medicine. 

Schlitter, Duane A., Ph.D. Executive Director, 
Museum Park, Republic of South Africa 
Schmeltzer, John C., MA. Financial Writer, 
Chicago Tribune. 

Schmid-Schoenbein, Geert W., Ph.D. Prof. of 
Bioengineering, Univ. of California, San Diego. 
Schmidlin, Thomas W., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Geography, Kent State Univ. 

Schmittberger, R. Wayne, J.D. Editor in Chief, 
Games magazine. 

Schneck, Stephen, Ph.D. Chair and Assoc. Prof, 
Dept of Politics, Catholic Univ. of America. 
Schneider, Edward L, M.D. Dean, Andrus 
Gerontology Center, Univ. of Southern California. 
Schneider, Stephen H., Ph.D. Prof. ot Biological 
Sciences, Stanford Univ. 

Schneir, Miriam Writer: editor. Feminism: The 
Essential Historical Writings. 

Schoenbrun, David Lee, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of 
History. Northwestern Univ. 

Schofield, Robert E., Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. Histo- 
ry of Technology and Science, lowa State Univ. 
Schonchin, Lynn J., Sr., B.S. Consultant: 
Educator, Klamath County School District 
Schott, Jeffrey J. Senior Fellow. Institute for 
International Economics. 

Schramm, David N., Ph.D. Former Louis Block 
Prof. of Physical Sciences, Univ. of Chicago. 
Schuchat, Anne, M.D. Chief, Respiratory Dis- 
eases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Schuelein, Marianne, M.D. Asst. Prof. of 
Pediatrics and Neurology. Geurgetown Univ. 


Schug, Kenneth, Ph.D. Prof., Dept of Biological, 
Chemical, and Physical Sciences, Illinois Institute 
ot Technology. 

Schuler, Ronald T., Ph.D. Chair Biological Sys- 
tems Engineering, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madisun. 
Schulman, Ivan A., Ph.D. Prof. of Spanish and 
Comparative Literature, Univ. of Illinois, Urbana- 
Champaign. 

Schultenover, David G., Ph.D. Prof. of Theology 
Creighton Univ. 

Schultz, Donald O., M.PA_ Prof. of Criminal 
Justice, Broward Community College. 

Schulz, James H., Ph.D. Prof. of Economics and 
hirstein Prof. of Aging Policy. Brandeis Univ. 


Schuman, Gerald E., Ph.D. Adjunct Prof., Soil 
Science, Univ. of Wyuming. 

Schurmann, H. F., Ph.D. Former Prof. of History 
and Sociology, Univ. of California, Berkeley. 
Schuyler, David, Ph.D. Prof. of American 
Studies, Franklin and Marshall College. 
Schwartz, Brian B., Ph.D. Vice President for Re- 
search, Graduate School, City Univ. of New York 
Schwartz, Gary E., Ph.D. Prof. of Psychology, 
Univ. of Anizona. 

Schwartz, Steven J., Ph.D. Prof. of Food Science 
and Technology, Ohio State Univ 

Schwarziose, Richard A., Ph.D. Prot. of Journal- 
ism, Medill School of Journalism, Northwestern 
Univ. 

Scott, Anne Firor, Ph.D. Authur, Making the 
invistble Woman Visible. 


Scott, Deborah Emont, MA_ Chief Curator, Nel- 
son-Atkins Museum of Art 


Scoville, James G., Ph.D. Prof. of Industrial Rela- 
tions, Univ. of Minnesota, Twin Cities Campus. 
Scrivener, Leslie, “S.J. Staft Writer, Toronto 
Star. 

Scriver, Charles R., M.D. Atva Prof. ot Human 
Genetics and Prof. of Biology and Pediatrics, 
McGill Univ.-Montreal Children s Hospital Re- 
search Institute. 

Scruggs, Otey M., Ph.D. Former Prof. of History, 
Syracuse Univ. 

Seaborme, Adrian A., Ph.D. Prof. and Head. 
Dept ot Geography, Univ. of Regina. 

Searl, Gary H., M.S. Adjunct Asst Prof. of 
Geography. Univ. of Oregon. 

Sebranek, Joseph G., Ph.D. Univ. Prof. of Animal 
Science, and Food Science and Human Nutrition, 
lowa State Univ. 

Sedgwick, Alexander, Ph.D. Dean, Graduate 
School of Arts and Sciences, Univ. of Virginia. 
Seely, Bruce E., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History. 
Michigan Technological Univ. 

Sefton, James E., Ph.D. Prof. of History, California 
State Univ., Northridge. 

Seidel, Michael, Ph.D. Prof. of English and 
Comparative Literature, Columbia Univ. 

Seigler, David S., Ph.D. Prof. of Plant Biology, 
Univ. of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. 

Sellers, John Irvin, BA Director of New Media, 
The Mobile (AU Press. 

Selman, Kelly, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Anatomy and 
Cell Biology, Univ. of Florida College of Medicine. 
Seltzer, Albert P., 11D. Emeritus Prof., Graduate 
School of Medicine, Univ. of Pennsylvania; author, 
far, Nose and Throat tor the General Practitioner. 
Seltzer, Vicki, M.D. Chairman, Obstetrics and Gy- 
necology, Long Island Jewish Medical Center and 
North Shore University Hospital. 

Selvi, Arthur M.,D.Pol.Sc. Prot. Emer., Modern 
Languages, Central Connecticut State Univ. 
Selvin, Hanan C.,, Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
Sociology, State Univ. of New York, Stony Brook. 
Semler, Charles E., Ph.D. President, Semler 
Matenals Services. 

Senften, Rick, BA. Special Projects Editor, The 
(Canton, OH) Repository. 

Senn, Frank C, Ph.D. Pastor, Immanuel Lutheran 
Church, Evanston, Ill. 


Serrano, Roberto, Ph.D. Prof. of Economics, 
Brown Univ. 


Servheen, Christopher, Ph.D. Grizzly Bear Re- 
covery Coordinator. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 
Setta, Susan M., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Philosophy 
and Religion, Northeastern Univ. 

Sevareid, Eric Former National Currespondent. 
CBS News. 


Sewell, James P., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Politics. 
Brock Univ. and External Assoc.. Centre for Interna- 
tional and Strategic Studies. York Univ. 

Shabad, Theodore, Ph.D. Former Member. 
Foreign News Staff, The New York Times. 

Shafer, Byron E., Ph.D. Andrew \W. Mellon Prof. 
of American Government, Oxford Univ. 

Shahady, Edward J., M.D. Prof. of Family 
Medicine. Univ. of North Carolina. Chapel Hill. 


Shailat, Todd, Ph.D Prof. of History. Boise State 
Univ. 

Shands, Kathryn N., M.D. Child psychiatrist: for- 
mer Asst to the Dir. Centers tor Disease Control 


(now Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 
Shangold, Mona M., M.D. Director, The Center 
tor Women s Health and Sports Gynecology. 
Shannon, David A., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
History, Univ. of Virginia. 

Sharer, Robert J., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology. 
Univ. of Pennsylvania. 


Sharkey, John B., Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry and 
Assoc. Dean, Dept. of Chemistry and Physical 
Sciences, Pace Univ. 


Sharpe, James Anthony, D.Phil. Senior Lecturer 
in History, Univ. of York. 


Sharpton, Virgil L, Ph.D. Presidents Prof., Geo- 
physical Institute. Univ. of Alaska Fairbanks. 


Shaw, Brian J.,M.Sc. Senior Lecturer, University 
of Western Australia. 


Shaw, C Frank, Ill, Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, 
Univ. of Wisconsin, Milwaukee. 


Shearer, Ned A., Ph.D. Prof. of Communication 
Arts and Sciences, Western Illinois Univ. 
Shedlin, Michele G., Ph.D. President, 
Sociomedical Resource Associates. 

Sheehan, James J., Ph.D. Dickason Prof. of 
Humanities, Stanford Univ. 

Sheets, Payson, Ph.D. Prof. and Assoc. Chair, 
Dept of Anthropology, Univ. of Colorado. 
Shelby, Lon R., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Sociology 
and History, Southern Illinois Univ. 


Sheldon, Kathleen, Ph.D. Research Scholar, 
UCLA Center for the Study of Women. 


Shelmerdine, Cynthia W., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, 
Dept of Classics, Univ. of Texas, Austin. 
Shepherd, Jack, Ph.D. Director, \War Peace Stud- 
ies, Dartmouth College. 

Shepperson, Jacqueline R., Ph.D. Prof. of 
Biology. Winston-Salem State Univ. 


Sherman, Carol L., Ph.D. Prof. of French, Dept of 
Romance Languages, Univ. of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill. 

Sherman, Paul W., Ph.D. Prof. of Animal 
Behavior, Cornell Univ. 

Sherwin, Martin B., Ph.D. President, Commercial 
Development Division, W.R. Grace & Co. 

Shetlar, David J., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Landscape 
Entomology, Ohio State Univ. 

Shields, Dianne, Ph.D. Former Educational 
Specialist, Evanston Hospital. 

Shiell, Mary C, BA. Free-lance journalist 

Shiff, Richard, Ph.D. Effie Marie Cain Regents 
Chair in Art, Univ. of Texas, Austin. 

Shilstone, Frederick W., Ph.D. Prof. of English, 
Clemson Univ. 


Shinnick, Thomas M., Ph.D. Chief, Tuberculo- 
sis Mycobacteriology Branch, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. 


Shively, Charles, Ph.D. Prof. of American 
Studies, Univ. of Massachusetts, Boston. 

Shor, Molly H., Ph.D. Asst Prot., Dept of Electri- 
cal and Computer Engineering, Oregon State Univ. 
Shorrock, William 1, Ph.D. Prof. of History; Vice 
Provost tor Academic Affairs. Cleveland State Univ. 
Short, D. Craig, BS. Product Development 
Manager, Sequoia Pacific Voting Equipment Inc. 
Short, John Rennie, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Syracuse Univ. 

Shortridge, James R., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography. 
Univ. of Kansas. 

Shortz, Will, |.D Crossword Editor The New 
York Times. 

Showalter, Gerald R., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Geography, Ball State Univ. 

Shriver, Duward F., Ph.D. Morrison Prof. of 
Chemistry. Northwestern Univ. 

Shuchat, Alan, Ph.D. Prof. of Mathematics, 
Wellesley College. 

Shurtleff, William, MA. President, Soyfoods 
Center. 

Sicilia, David B., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. ot History. 
Univ. of Maryland. 

Siddiquee, Baker A., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Eco- 
nomics, Univ. of Illinois, Springfield. 

Siddiqui, Wasim A., Ph.D. Prof. of Tropical 
Medicine. Univ. of Hawaii School of Medicine. 
Sidey, Hugh S., B.S. Washington Contributing 
Editor. Time magazine. 

Sidlo, StevenL, MA Managing Editor, Davton 








(OH) Daily News. 
Sieber, Harry, Ph.D. Prof. of Spanish, Johns Hop- 
kins Univ. 


Siedentop, Daryl, P.E.D. Director, P-i2 Project, 
Ohio State Univ. 


Siegel, Abraham J., Ph.D. Dean, Sloan School of 
Management, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 


Sieger, Charles F.,M.S.LS. Director, Lyndhurst 
Free Public Library. 


gil: Leonard §., LLD. Author, fconaniics in the 
eal World. 

Silver, David F., M.A. President, International 
Photographic Historical Organization. 
Silverman, Alan K., M.D. 


Silvers, Anita, Ph.D. Chair, Dept of Philosophy, 
San Francisco State Univ. 


Silverstein, Helena, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Govern 
ment and Law, Lafayette College. 


Silverstein, Melvin J., M.D. Director, Harold E. 
and Henrietta C Lee Breast Center, USC Norris 
Comprehensive Cancer Center and Hospital. 
Silverstein, Michael, Ph.D. Charles F. Grey Prof. 
of Aanp logy. Linguistics, and Psychology, 
Univ. of Chicago. 

Silvert, Kalman H., Ph.D. Author, Chile: Yester- 
day and Today. 

Simberloff, Daniel, Ph.D. Nancy Gore Hunger 
Chair of Excellence in Environmental Studies, 
Univ. of Tennesee, Knoxville. 

Simco, Bill A., Ph.D. Prot. of Biology. Univ. ot 
Memphis. 

Sime, Ruth Lewin, Ph.D. Instructor, Chemistry 
Dept, Sacramento City College. 

Simmons, William B., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of 
Mineralogy, Univ. of New Orleans. 

Simon, James E., Ph.D. Prof. of Horticulture, 
Purdue Univ. 

Simon, John Y., Ph.D. Executive Director and 
Managing Editor, Ulysses S. Grant Association. 
Simone, Joseph V., M.D. Physician in Chie, 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. 

Sims, Phillip L, Ph.D. Research Leader and 
Range Scientist, Agricultural Research Service. 
U.S. Dept. of Agriculture. 

Sims, Robert C., Ph.D. Prof. of History. Boise 
State Univ. 

Simson, Rebin Peter, M.Sc. Former Principal, 
Redbank Plains High School. 

Sine, Richard L., B.A. President, Envision; former 
Editorial Director, Scott Publishing Co. 

Singer, Franz J. Master Barber. 

Singer, Marcus G., Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of 
Philosophy, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Sinab, Vijay P., Ph.D. Arthur K. Barton Endowed 
Prot., Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineer- 
ing, Louisiana State Univ. 

Sinha, Surya Prakash, |.$.D. Former Prof. of 
Law, Pace Univ. School of Law. 

Sinnigen, William G., Ph.D. Prof. of Histury, City 
Univ. of New York Hunter College. 

Sivin, N., Ph.D. Prof. of Chinese Culture and of the 
History of Science, Univ. of Pennsylvania. 

Skates, John Ray, Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Southern Mississippi. 

Skeen, C. Edward, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Memphis. 

Skelley, George C., Ph.D. Pruf. Emeritus of Ani- 
mal Science, Clemson Univ. 

Skidmore, Bill, B.A. City Editor, Hefena(MT /n 
dependent Record. 

Sklar, Kathryn Kish, Ph.D. Distinguished Prot 
State Univ. of New York, Binghainton. 

Sklar, Robert, Ph.D. Prof. of Cinema Studies. 
New York Univ. 

Skorupa, Joseph, B.A. Boating Outduars Editor 
Popular Mechanics. 

Skroch, Walter A., Ph.D. Former Prof. ut 
Horticultural Science, North Carolina State Univ 
Slackman, Joel, M.S. Principal Analyst 
Congressional Budget Office. 

Sladek, N. E., Ph.D. Prot. of Pharmacology Unix 
of Minnesota, Twin Cities Campus 

Slater, Keith, FTI. Prof., School ot Engineering 
Univ. of Guelph. 

Slatta, Richard W., Ph.D. Prof. of History North 


Carolina State Univ. 


Slattery, Thomas C., Ph.D. President, Heritage 
Assuciates Corp.; former Chairman, Dept of Mu- 
sic. Coe Cullege. 


Slavin, Arthur J., Ph.D. justus Bier Distinguished 
Prot. of Humanities Emeritus, Univ. uf Louisville. 


Slemrod, Joel, Ph.D. Prof. of Economics, Univ. of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor. 

Slickpoo, Allen P., Sr. Consultant, History and 
Culture, Nez Perce Tribe. 


Sloan, Alice §., R.Ph. Pharmacy Consultant, 
HealthGuard of Lancaster, Inc. 


Sloan, Douglas, Ph.D. Author of Faith and 
Anowledge and Insight-Imagination. 

Sloan, Richard W., M.D. Chairman and Residen- 
cy Program Director, Dept. of Family Practice, York 
Hospital. 

Small, Melvin, Ph.D. Prot. of History, Wayne 
State Univ. 

Smelser, Marshall, Ph.D. Former Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Notre Dame. 

Smelser, Neil J., Ph.D. Director, Center for 
Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. 
Smiley, J.H., Ph.D. Extension Prof. of Agronomy, 
Univ. of Kentucky. 

Smith, A. Mark, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Missuuri, Columbia. 

Smith, Bradford A., Ph.D. Astrnnomer, Institute 
for Astronomy, Univ. of Hawaii. 

Smith, C Wayne, Ph.D. Prof. of Cotton Breeding, 
Texas A&M Univ. 

Smith, Carolyn J., Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, 
Delaware County Community College. 

Smith, Dale C., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Medical 
History, Uniformed Services Univ. of the Health 
Sciences. 

Smith, David R., M.LS. Archivist, Walt 

Disney Co. 

Smith, Deborah K., Ph.D. Senior Scientist, 
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. 

Smith, Douglas Clifford, CAS. Prof. and 
Director, Graduate Center, West Virginia Uni. 
Smith, Duane A., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Fort 
Lewis College. 

Smith, George P., Il, LLM. Prof. of Law, Catholic 
Univ. of America. 

Smith, Glenn, Ph.D. Prot. Chair, Leadership and 
Educational Policy Studies, Northern Illinois Univ. 
Smith, Harding E., Ph.D. Prot. of Physics, Center 
tor Astrophysics and Space Sciences, Univ. of 
California, San Diego. 

Smith, John E., LLD. Clark Prof. Emeritus of 
Philosophy, Yale Univ. 

Smith, John M., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
Mathematics, George Mason Univ. 

Smith, Jonathan Z.,Ph.D. Robert O. Anderson 
Distinguished Service Prof. of the Humanities, 
Univ. of Chicago. 

Smith, Lacey Baldwin, D.Litt. Prof. Emeritus of 
English History, Northwestern Univ. 

Smith, Mary Frances, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. Dept of 
History, Ohio Univ 

Smith, Maureen E., M.S. Genetic Counselor and 
Past President of the National Society of Genetic 
Counselors. 

Smith, Merritt Roe, Ph.D. Cutten Prof. of the His- 
tory of Technology. Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology 

Smith, Philip Chadwick Foster, BA. Maritime 
historian. 

Sinith, Robert Ellis, J.D. Publisher Privacy jour 
nal. 

Smith, Robert Freeman, Ph.D Distinguished 
Uni. Prot. of History. Univ. of Toledo 

Smith, Robert William, Ph.D. Former Prot. of 
Philosophy Religion Studies. Maricopa 
Community Culleges. 

Smith, Sam, M.A. Calumnist, Chicago Trbune. 
Smith, Suzanne f.,M.D Director of Breast Imag: 
ing, Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center 
Smith, W. Calvin, Ph.D Prot. ot History. Univ ot 
South Carolina, Aiken. 

Smith, W. David, Ph.D. Assoc. Prot. ot Crop 
Serence. Nurth Carolina State Univ 

Smith, Whitney, Ph.D Director Flag Research 
Center, flag consultant 


Smith, Willian: M., Ph.D Ementus Prot ot 


Contributors and consultants  XLI 


Psychology and Director, Office uf Instructional 
Services, Dartmouth College. 

Smock, Raymond W., Ph.D. Coeditur, Booker T. 
Washingtan Papers. 


Smole, William J., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology, 
Univ. of Pittsburgh. 


Smolensky, Michael H., Ph.D. Prot. of Environ- 
mental Sciences, Schuol of Public Health, Univ. of 
Texas Health Science Center, Houston. 
Snaddon, Andrew, B.A. Former Publisher, 
Medicine Hat{AB) News. 

Snipes, David S., Ph.D. Prof. of Geology, Clem- 
son Univ. 


Snoble, Joseph J., Ph.D. Prof. of Physics Science 
Education, Central Missouri State Univ. 


Snouffer, Chet A., B.S. Board of Directors, U.S. 
Buomerang Assoc. 


Snow, Dean, Ph.D. Prof. and Head of Anthropol- 
ogy, Pennsylvania State Univ. 


Snow, Vernon F., Ph.D. Former Prof. of History, 
Syracuse Univ. 


Snyder, Gregory K., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, Univ. 
of Colorado. 


Snyder, John W., Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of History, 
Kent State Univ. 

Soast, Allen, BA. Senior Editor, Engineering 
News-Record 

Sobel, Robert, Ph.D. Former Lawrence Stessin 
Prof. of Business History, Hofstra Univ. 


Sobieszek, Robert A., M.Phil. Curator, Los An- 
geles County Museum of Art. 


Sobre, Judith Berg, Ph.D. Prof. ot Art History, 
Univ. of Texas, San Antonio. 

Sochen, June, Ph.D. Prof. ot History, Northeast- 
ern Illinois Univ.; author, Herstory- A Record of the 
American Womans Past 

Sokal, Michael M., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Worcester Polytechnic Institute. 

Soll, van, Ph.D. Prof. of Philosophy, Univ. of Wis- 
consin, Madison. 

Solomon, Irvin D., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Florida Gulf Cuast Univ. 

Solomon, Keith J., Ph.D. Asst. Vice Chancellur, 
Northern Territory Univ. 

Solomon, Sean C., Ph.D. Director, Dept of Ter- 
restrial Magnetism, Carnegie Institution of Wash- 
ington. 

Sorrentino, Frank M., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Sci- 
ence, St Francis College. 

Southgate, W. M., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
History, Denison Univ. 

Spahr, Sidney L,, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Animal 
Sciences, Univ. of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. 
Sparberg, Marshall, M.D. Prof. of Medicine. 
Northwestern Univ. Medical School. 

Spencer, C. Bruce, B.A. President, Pipe Collec- 
tors International. 

Spencer, Cailean Former Education Director 
An Comunn Gaidhealach, Inverness, Scotland. 
Sperandeo, Andy, MA. Editor, Mfode/ 
Railroader. 

Sperling, Eliot, Ph.D. Prot. of Tibetan Studies. In- 
diana Univ.. Bloomington. 

Spielman, John P., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Histury. 
Havertord College. 

Spies, Dennis, B.A. Managing Editor. A:narifio 
(TX) Globe-News. 

Spindel, Donna J., Ph.D. Prof. ot History. 
Marshall Univ. 

Spinrad, Hyron, Ph.D. Prot. of Astronomy Univ. 
ut Calitornta. Berkeley. 

Spituinik, Debra, Ph.D. Asst. Prof. Dept. ot An- 
thropulogy. Emnry Univ. 

Spitzer, Leo, Ph.D. Prot. ot History. Dartmouth 
College: author The Creoles of Sierra Leone 
Splittstoesser, W.E., Ph.D. Prot. ut Plant 
Phystolugy in Horticulture Univ. of Illinnis. 
Urbana-Champaign. 

Sproule, Brian J.,\\D. Prot. and Director Divi- 
sian at Respiratan Medicine Uni of Alberta 
Spruge!, Douglas G., Ph.D. Prof. ot Forest 
Ecology College ot Forest Resuurces Univ. of 
Washington 

Spychalski, john C, DBA Prot ot Business 
Logistics, Pennsvivania State Univ 

Squyres, Steven W., PhD 
Camell Gniv 


Prof. ot Astronomy 








XLII 


Stacks, Don W., Ph.D. Director Program in Ad- 
vertising and Public Relations, School of Commu- 
nication, Univ. of Miami. 

Stafford, Carl W., £.D.D. Manager, Instructional 
Development, Purdue Univ. 

Stallings, E. Fran, Ph.D. Former Director, South- 
west Florida Office, Florida Wildlife Federation. 
Standen, S. Dale, PhD Prof. of History, Trent 
Univ. 

Stanley, G.F.G., D.Litt. Author, Canadas Soldiers 
and The War of 1812 

Stanley, Steven M., Ph.D. Prof. of Earth and 
Planetary Sciences, Johns Hopkins Univ. 
Stapleton, Darwin H., Ph.D. Director. 
Rockefeller Archive Center. 


Starr, Chester G., LLD. Author, History of the 
Ancient World. 


Starrfield, Sumner, Ph.D. Prof. of Physics and 
Astronomy, Arizona State Univ. 

Stasik, Andrew J., Jr., MFA President, Andrew 
Stasik Fine Arts; founder, Print Review. 

Staufier, Gary D., Ph.D. Fishery Biologist, Alaska 
Fisheries Science Center, National Marine 
Fisheries Service. 

Stavrou, Theofanis G., Ph.D. Prof. of Modern 
Russian and Near Eastern History, Univ of 
Minnesota 

Steams, Peter N., Ph.D. Heinz Prof. of History 
and Dean, College of Humanities and Social 
Sciences, Carnegie-Mellon Univ. 

Stedman, Lew, B.S. Library Asst. Theremin Play- 
er, Newport Beach Public Library. 

Steele, Russell W., M.D. Prof. and Vice Chairman 
of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital, New Orleans. 
Steele, Valerie, Ph.D. Adjunct Asst Prof., Fashion 
Institute of Technology. 

Steffen, Jerome O., Ph.D. Prof of History, Univ. 
of Oklahoma. 

Steigerwald, Bill, B.S. Writer, Pittsburgh PA) 
Post Gazette. 

Steinberg, David J., Ph.D. President, Long Island 
Univ 

Steinberg, Laurence, Ph.D. Prof. of Psychology, 
Temple Univ. 

Steinhardt, Paul Joseph, Ph.D. Prof. of Physics, 
Princeton Univ. 

Steinkamp, Myrna P., Ph.D. Former Rsch. As- 
soc., Beet Sugar Development Foundation, USDA 
Crops Rsch. Laboratory, Colorado State Univ. 
Stekert, Ellen J., Ph.D. Prof. of English, American 
Studies, and Folklore, Univ. of Minnesota 
Steketee, Drew, AB. Senior VP, Communica- 
tions, Aircraft Owners and Pilots Assoc. 
Stephenson, Skye, Ph.D. Regional Director, Latin 
America, Council on International Educational Ex- 
change. 


Sterling, Everett W., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
History, Univ. of South Dakota. 


Stern, David, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Asian and 
Middle Eastern Studies, Univ. of Pennsylvania 
Stern, Louis W., Ph.D. John D. Gray Distin- 
guished Prof. of Marketing, Northwestern Univ 

J. L Kellogg Graduate Schoo! of Management 
Stern, Robert M., Ph.D. Prof. of Economics and 
Public Policy, Univ. of Michigan. 

Stern, Robert S.,M.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Dermatology, Dermatologist, Beth Israel Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston. 

Stern, S. Alan, Ph.D. Director, Dept. of Space 
Studies, Southwest Research Institute. 
Sternberg, Robert J., Ph.D. 1BM Prof. of Psychol- 
ogy and Education, Yale Univ 

Stevens, Charles F.,M.D., Ph.D. Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute Investigator, The Salk Institute. 
Stevens, Dale J., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Geogra- 
phy, Brigham Young Unix 

Stevens, John H., BSEE, Mgr., Video Operations 
Engineering. Thomson Consumer Electronics. 
Stevens, Michael B., M.D. Clinical Assoc. Prof. of 
Family and Community Medicine, Stanford Univ. 
School of Medicine. 

Stevens, Milton C., Ed.M. Executive Secretary, 
American Watchmakers Institute. 

Stewart, A. T.Q., Ph.D. Former Reader in Insh 
History. Queen's Univ, Belfast. 

Stewart, David K., Ph.D. Assoc Dean uf Arts. 
Univ. of Manitoba. 


Contributors and consultants 


Stewart, Edward W., M.S. Marketing Director, 
E. |. du Pont de Nemours & Co. 


Stewart, Garrett, Ph.D. Prof. of English, Univ. of 
lowa. 

Stewart, Robert K., Ph.D. Prof. of Journalism, 
Ohio Univ. 

Stewart, Roderick J.,BA Former Fellow, 
Bethune College. York Univ., Toronto. 
Stinebring, Daniel R., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Physics, Oberlin College. 

Stinger, Charles L, Ph.D. Prof. of History, State 
Univ. of New York, Buffalo. 

Stinson, Donald L, Ph.D. Consulting engineer. 
Stivender, Donald L,MS.E Owner, Stivender 
Engineering Associates. 

Stocking, George W., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of 
Anthropology, Univ. of Chicago. 

Stoker, H. Stephen, Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, 
Weber State Univ. 

Stokes, Carol E., MAT. Command Historian, 
U.S. Army Signal Corps. 

Stokesbury, James L, Ph.D. Author, Navy and 
Empire and A Short History of Air Power. 
Stokstad, Marilyn, Ph.D. Judith Harris Murphy 
Distinguished Prof. of Art History Univ. of Kansas. 
Stolar, Mark, M.D. Assoc. Prof. of Medicine, 
Northwestern Univ. 

Stone, Andrew, BA, Dip. Journalism. Senior 
Journalist, New Zealand Herald. 

Stone, M. David, BA Free-lance writer: 
Contributing Editor, PC Magazine. 

Stone, Neil J.,.“.D. Prof. of Clinical Medicine, 
Northwestern Univ. School of Medicine. 

Stone, Orville J., “4D. Former Clinical Prof. of 
Dermatology, Univ. of California, Irvine. 
Stone-Ferrier, Linda, Ph.D. Prot. and Chair, Dept 
of Art History, Univ of Kansas. 


Stout, David B., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
Anthropology, State Univ. of New York, Buffalo. 
Stout, Joseph A., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Oklahoma State Univ. 

Stow, George B., Ph.D. Prof. of History, LaSalle 
Univ. 

Stowers, Cariton Free-lance journalist; author, 
Dallas Cowboys: The First Twenty-Five Years. 


Stowers, Stanley K., Ph.D. Prof. of Religious 
Studies, Brown Univ. 


Strahl, Stuart D., Ph.D. Former Coordinator, 
Tropical South America Program, WCi-New York 
Zoological Society. 

Straus, E.G., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Mathematics, 
Univ. of California, Los Angeles. 

Strauss, Arnold W., MD. Prof.; Director, Divi- 
sion of Pediatric Cardiology, Washington Univ. 
Stricklin, George P., Ph.D. Prof., Div. of Derma- 
tology. Vanderbilt Univ. School of Medicine. 


Stringer, Gary A., Ph.D. Prof. of English, Univ. of 
Southern Mississippi. 


Strohm, Paul, Ph.D. Prof. of English, Indiana 
Univ. 

Stromberg, Roland N., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Wisconsin, Milwaukee. 

Strong, Gary E., AMLS. Director, Queens 
Borough Public Library, Jamaica. New York City 
Strout, Jeffrey, BA Asst News Editor, Bangor 
(ME) Daily News. 

Stuart-Fox, Martin, Ph.D. Head, Dept of History, 
Univ. of Queensland. 


Stuckey, Kenneth A., M.LS. Research Librarian, 
Perkins School for the Blind. 


Stucky, Galen D., Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry and of 
Materials, Univ of California, Santa Barbara. 
Studlar, Susan Moyle, Ph.D. Adjunct Assoc. Prof. 
of Biology, West Virginia Univ , Morgantown. 
Stuewer, Roger H., Ph.D. Prof. of the History of 
Science and Technology, Univ. of Minnesota 
Stults, Taylor, Ph.D Prof. of History, Muskingum 
College. 

Sturgill, Claude C, Ph.D. Prot. of History, Univ. of 
Florida 

Su, Linli, B.S. Graduate Asst, Liquid Crystal Insti- 
tute, Kent State Univ. 

Subtelny, Orest, Ph.D. Prof. of History and Politi- 
cal Science, York Univ. 


Suchlicki, Jaime, Ph.D. Prof., Graduate School of 
International Studies, Univ. of Miami. 


Sues, Hans-Dieter, Ph.D. Vice President, Collec- 
tions and Research, Royal Ontario Museum. 


Sugar, Bert Randolph, |.D. Publisher-Editor, 
Boxing Illustrated. 

Sullivan, Daniel R., Ph.D. Manager, Product 
Development, Keebler Co. 

Sullivan, Donald B., Ph.D. Chief, Time and 
Frequency Division, National Institute of Standards 
and Technology. 

Sullivan, John M., Jr., B.S. President, 
International Silk Association. 

Sullivan, M.,M.S.]. Editor and Vice 
President, The Buffalo (NY) News. 

Sullivan, Michael E., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Geography, Ball State Univ. 

Sullivan, Michael P., Ph.D. Prof. of Political 
Science, Univ. of Arizona 

Sullivan, Peggy, Ph.D. Executive Director, 
American Library Association. 

Sullivan, Peter Editor, The (Johannesburg, SA! 
Star. 

Sullivan, Rosemary, Ph.D. Prof. of English, Univ. 
of Toronto. 

Sullivan, Teresa A., Ph.D. Vice President and 


Dean of Graduate Studies and Prof. of Sociology 
and Law. Univ. of Texas, Austin. 


Sulok, Nancy J.,BA Columnist, The South Bend 
IIN} Tribune. 


Summers, David, Ph.D. Vm. R. Kenan, Jr., Prof. 
of the History of Art, Univ. of Virginia 

Summers, Hollis, D.Lit. Former Distinguished 
Prof. of English, Ohio Univ. 

Sunley, Emil M., Ph.D. Asst Director of Fiscal Af- 
fairs, International Monetary Fund. 

Surratt, Jerry L, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Wingate 
Univ. 

Susman, Randall L, Ph.D. Prof. of Anatomical 
Sciences, State Univ. of New York, Stony Brook 
Sutcliffe, Anthony, F.RH.S. Special Prof. in the 
Dept of History, Univ. of Nottingham, England. 
Sutherland, D. A., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Dalhousie Univ. 

Sutherland, Donald, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Maryland. 

Sutherland, Zena, MA. Author, The Best in 
Childrens Books and Children and Books. 
Sviedrys, Romualdas, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
History of Science, Polytechnic Univ 

Swain, Carol M., Ph.D. Prof. of Law and Prof. of 
Political Science, Vanderbilt Univ. Law School. 
Swainson, Donald, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Histo- 
ry, Queen's Univ. 

Swan, Patricia B., Ph.D. Vice Provost for Re- 
search and Graduate Dean, lowa State Univ. 
Swank, Duane, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Political Sci- 
ence, Marquette Univ. 


Swanson, Michael R. H., Ph.D. Prof. of Historic 
Preservation, Center for Historic Preservation, 
School of Architecture, Roger Williams Univ 


Swedlund, Alan, PhD. Prof. of Anthropology, | 





Univ. of Massachusetts, Amherst. 

Sweet, R. F.G., Ph.D. Prof. of Near Eastern 
Studies, Univ. of Toronto. 

Sweetman, Jack, Ph.D. Naval and Military 
Historian, U.S. Naval Academy. retired 

Sweet, David C, Ph.D. President, Youngstown | 
State Univ. 

Sweets, John F., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Kansas. 

Sweitzer, James S., Ph.D. Dir. of Astrophysics 
Education, Rose Center for Earth and Space. 


Swerdlow, David L, MD. Medical Epidemiolo- 
gist, Foodborne and Diarrheal Diseases Branch, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Swezey, Marilyn Pfeifer, MA Art Historian. 
Swinton, Elizabeth deS., Ph.D. Curator of Asian 
Art, Worcester Art Museum. 


Sydnor, Charles W., Jr., Ph.D. President and 


ief Executive Officer Central Virginia Education- t 
al Telecommunications Co. Inc. 
Symons, Donald, Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology, » 7 
Univ. of California, Santa Barbara é 
Szpornuk, Roman, Ph.D. M. S. Hrushevsky Prof. T 
of Ukrainian History. Harvard Univ. Fs 


a ——————eEEEE~ESOS™C~ 


T 


Tabuteau, Emily Zack, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
History, Michigan State Univ. 


Tachau, Frank, Ph.D. Author, Jurkey- The Politics 
of Authority, Democracy, and Development. 
Taeuber, Karl, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Sociology, 
Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Taft, Robert, Jr., LLB. Former U.S. senator. 


Takaha, Michael, B.S. Asst. Track Coach, Univ. of 
Houston. 


Talbott, Basil B., Jr., BA. Washington Corre- 
spondent, Chicago Sun-Times. 

Tanabe, Michael J., Ph.D. Prof. of Plant Science, 
Univ. of Hawaii, Hilo. 

Tanis, Nicholas, B.F.A. Assoc. Prof. of Film, New 
York Univ. 

Tanner, Allan B., M.LS. Former Librarian, The 
Wichita \KS) Eagle. 


Tanner, Raymond L, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Ra- 

diology, Univ. of Tennessee Center for the Health 

Sciences. 

Tanzi, Vito, Ph.D. Director, Fiscal Affairs Dept, 

International Monetary Fund. 

Tao, Eugene, M.A. Editor, (Hilo) Hawai Tribune- 

Herald. 

Tardif, Claude, M.B.A. Director, International 

Maple Syrup Institute. 

Tarter, Brent, MA. Editor, Dictionary of Virginia 

Biography. 

Tarter, JillC.,, PhD. Director, SETI Research, SETI 

Institute. 

Tate, Lisa M., B.A. Former Media Relations 

Coordinator, Distilled Spirits Council, U.S. 

Tatum, Henry K., B.A. Assoc. Editor, Editorial 

Page, Dallas Morning News. 

Taubman, Paul, Ph.D. Prot. of Economics, Univ. 

of Pennsylvania. 

Taylor, Andrew C,, Ili, B.S. Metro Editor, Rich- 

mond (VA) Times-Dispatch. 

Taylor, C. Richard, Ph.D. Former Charles P. 

Lyman Prof. of Biology, Harvard Univ. 

Taylor, George E., D.Litt’ Prof. Emeritus of Asian 

Studies, Jackson School of International Studies, 

Univ. of Washington. 

Taylor, Harriet V., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 

Chemistry, Miami Univ. 

Taylor, Heber, B.A. Editor, The Galveston County 
Daily News. 

Taylor, Kathleen C., Ph.D. Physical Chemistry 

Dept Head, General Motors Research and 

Development Center. 

Taylor, Leighton R., jr., Ph.D. Research Assoc., 

California Academy of Sciences. 

Taylor, Michael J.H. Author and editor of books 

on aircraft. 

Taytor, R. Craig, Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, 

Oakland Univ. 

Taylor, R. William President, American Society 

of Association Executives. 

Taylor, Robert H., Ph.D. Prof. of Politics, School 

of Oriental and African Studies. 

Taylor, Robert W., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Dept. 

of Criminal Justice, Univ. of North Texas. 

Tebben, Joseph R., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Classics, 

Ohio State Univ. 

Tefft, Stanton K., Ph.D. Prof. of Anthropology. 

Wake Forest Univ. 

Teitelbaum, Jeremy, Ph.D. Prof. of Mathematics, 

Dir. of Graduate Stodies, Univ. of Illinois, Chicago. 

Temperley, Howard, Ph.D. Prot. of History. 

Univ. of East Anglia 

Temperley, Judith K., Ph.D. Chief, Weapons 

Analysis Branch, U.S. Army Research Laboratory 

Temple, Frederick T.,Ph.D Chief, Resident 

Mission in Turkey, World Bank. 

Templeton, Alan R., Ph.D. Rebstock Prof. of Bio! 

ogy, Washington Univ. 

terHorst, J.F., BA. Author, Gera/d Ford and the 

Future of the Presidency. 

Terrasse, Jean, Ph.D. Prof. of French Language 

and Literature, McGill Univ. 

TeSelle, Eugene, Ph.D. Prof. of Church History 

and Thenlogy, Divinity School, Vanderbilt Univ 

Tétreault, Mary Ann, Ph.D Una Chapman Cox 

Distinguished Prof. of International Affairs Dept. of 


Contributors and consultants — XLIII 


Political Science, Trinity Univ. 
Thayer, Ralph E., Ph.D. Prof. of Urban Planning 
and Pubic Administration, Univ. of New Orleans. 


Thelen, David P., Ph.D Prof. of History, Indiana 
Univ., Bloomington. 


Thiel, Elizabeth, B.A. Day Metro Editor, The 
(Nortolk, VA) Virginian-Pilot 


Thomas, Steve, B.A. Economy Editor, Savannah 
(GA) Morning News. 


Thomas, Wm. Wayt, Ph.D. Assoc. Curator, New 
York Botanical Garden. 


Thomasma, David C., Ph.D. Former Prof. and Di- 


rector, Medical Humanities Program, Loyola Univ. 
Chicago Medical Center. 


Thome, G. D., Ph.D. Consulting scientist, 
Raytheon Co. 

Thompson, Brian J., Ph.D. Distinguished Univ. 
Prof., and Prof. of Optics, Univ of Rochester. 
Thompson, Brian S., Ph.D. Prof. of Mechanical 
Engineering, Michigan State Univ. 

Thumpson, Carol L, M.A. Former Editor, 
Current History magazine. 

Thompson, David W., Ph.D. Chancellor Prof. of 
Chemistry, College of William and Mary. 
Thompson, Dennis “, Ph.D. Prof. of Political 
Science, Brigham Young Univ. 

Thompson, Hugh A., M.S. Engineer/Inventor, 
Procter & Gamble Co. 

Thompson, James E., Ph.D. Prof., Chair, Dept. 
of Electric Engineering, Univ. of Texas, Arlington. 
i ar John R,, Jr., Ph.D. Former Head 
Basketball Coach, Georgetown Univ. 
Thompson, Larry C., Ph.D. Prof. of Chemistry, 
Univ. of Minnesota, Duluth. 

Thompson, Levi T., Ph.D. Prof, Dept. of Chemi- 
cal Engineering, Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 
Thompson, Louis S., MBA Railways Adviser, 
World Bank. 


Thompson, W. Scott, D.Phil. Adjunct Prof., 
Georgetown Univ. and Fletcher School of Law and 
Diplomacy, Tufts Univ.; editor, The Third World. 
Thompson, Wayne, Ph.D. Historian, Center for 
Air Force History, Headquarters, U.S. Air Force. 
Thomson, Dale C., Ph.D. Prof. of Political 
Science, McGill Univ. 

Thomson, Keith Stewart, PhD. President, 
Academy of Natural Sciences. 

Thornton, John 1, D.Crim. Emeritus Prof. of 
Forensic Science, Univ. of California, Berkeley. 
Thornton, Lee, Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, College of 
Journalism, Univ. of Maryland, College Park. 
Thurman, Harold V., M.A. Former Prof. of Earth 
Science, Mount San Antonio College. 

Thursby, Gene R., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Religion, 
Univ. of Florida. 

Tidwell, William D., Ph.D. Prof. of Botany, 
Brigham Young Univ. 

Tierney, Kevin, LLM. Prof. of Law. Hastings Col- 
lege of the Law, Univ. of California, San Francisco. 
Tiffney, Bruce H., Ph.D. Assoc. Prot. of Geologi- 
cal Sciences, Univ. of California, Santa Barbara. 
Tignor, Robert L, Ph.D. Prof. ut History, Prince- 
ton Univ 

Tillman, Barrett, B.S. Secretary, Amencan 
Fighter Aces Association. 

Timm, Robert M., Ph.D Curator of Mammals 


and Assoc. Prof. of Ecology and Evolutionary Biolo- 


gy, Museum of Natoral History, Univ. of Kansas. 


Timms, Howard, BA. Editorial and Media Direc 
tor, World Boo Online. 

Tirro, Frank, Ph.D Prot. ot Music Yale Univ 
Tismaneanu, Vladimir, Ph.D. Prof. of Govern- 
ment and Politics, Univ of Maryland; Semor 
Fellow. Foreign Policy Research Institute. 
Titman, Rodger D., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of \Vildlite 
Biology Macdonald Campus ot McGill Uni 
Tobach, Ethel, Ph.D. Curator Ementa. Amencan 
Museum ot Natoral History Adjunct Prot of 
Biology and Psvchulogy, City Univ of New York 
Todd, James K.,M.D_ Prot of Pediatncs 
Microbinlogy and Preventive Medicine, Univ ot 
Colorado School of Medicine. 

Todd, Malcolm, D.Litt Prot of Archaeology 
Univ of Exeter 

Tong, Phillip $., PhD Prot, Dairy Pr oducts Tech 
nolaqy Center Calttornia Polytechnic State Uni 


Tonomura, Hitomi, Ph.D Assoc. Prof. of History: 
Director, Center for Japanese Studies, Univ. of 
Michigan. 

Tonos, Michael, B.A. Executive Editor, The 
(Biloxi, MS) Sun Herald 

Toppin, Edgar Allan, Ph.D. Dean of the Gradu- 
ate School and Prof. of History, Virginia State Univ. 
Torrey, E. Fuller, M.D Research Psychiatrist, 
National Institute of Mental Health. 

Tortike, W. Simon, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Petroleum Engineering, Univ. of Alberta. 

Tortora, Phyllis, Ph.D. Prof. Emerita, Home Eco- 
nomics, Queens College, City Univ. of New York. 
Towell, W. Patrick, PhD. Senior Writer, 
Congressional Quarterly. 

Trachtenberg, Marc, Ph.D Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Pennsylvania. 

Trachtenberg, Marvin, Ph.D. Edith Kitzmiller 
Prof., Institute of Fine Arts, New York Univ. 
Travisono, Anthony P., BA. Former Executive 
Director, American Correctional Association. 
Trede, Larry D., Ph.D. Prof., Dept of Agricultural 
Education and Studies, lowa State Univ. 

Trefil, James, Ph.D. Clarence j. Robinson Prof. of 
Physics, George Mason Univ. 

Tripathi, Brenda, Ph.D. Prof. of Pathology and 
Adjunct Prof. of Ophthalmology, Univ. of South 
Carolina School of Medicine. 

Tripathi, Ramesh C,, F.R.CPath. Prof. and 
Chairman, Dept. of Ophthalmology, Univ. of South 
Carolina School of Medicine. 

Tripathi, Vijai K., Ph.D. Prof. of Electrical and 
Computer Engineering, Oregon State Univ. 
Trotta, Paul D., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Engineering, Northern Arizona Univ. 

Trotter, William R., B.A. Free-lance writer; au- 
thor, A Frozen Hell: The Russo-Finnish Winter War 
of 1939-1940, 


Troxell, Harry E., D.F. Former Prof. of Forest and 
Wood Science, Colorado State Univ. 

Troy, Nancy J., Ph.D. Chair, Art History Dept, 
College of Letters, Arts, and Sciences, Univ. of 
Southem California, Los Angeles. 


Truemper, David G., S.T.D. Prof. of Theology, 
Valparaiso Univ. 

Trujillo, Chadwick A., Ph.D. Postdoctoral Schol- 
ar in Planetary Science. California Institute of Tech- 
nology. 

Trussell, James, Ph.D. Prof. of Economics and 
Public Affairs and Director, Office of Population 
Kesearch, Princeton Univ. 


Truzzi, Marcello, Ph.D. Prof. of Sociology, 
Eastern Michigan Univ. 


Tu, Anthony T., Ph.D. Prof. of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Colorado State Univ. 

Tuck, James A., Ph.D. Prof. of Archaeology, 
Memonial Univ. of Newfoundland. 


Tucker, Barbara M., Ph.D. Prof. of History and 
Director, Center for Connecticut Studies, Eastern 
Connecticut State Univ 


Tunks, Thomas W., Ph.D. Assoc Provost, South 
ern Methodist Univ 


Tunnell, Ted, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History. Vir- 
ginia Commonwealth Univ 


Turley, William S., Ph.D. Prof., Dept of Political 
Science. Southern Illinois Univ. Carbondale 


Turner, Howard, Ph.D. Prof of Surveying 
Engineering. California State Polvechnic Univ.. 
Pomona. 

Turner, R. Carroll, MBA Technical Assoc, 
Carpet and Rug Institote. 

Turner, Robert L, M.PA Deputy Editor, Editon- 
al page. Boston Globe. 


Turner, Walter W. Vice President and Manager 
Marketing and Development Industrial Pitch 
Koppers Industnes Inc 


Turque, Bill, BA Washington Correspondent, 
Newsweed author Inventing A/ Gore 


Tweton, D. Jerome, PhO Fonner Chester Fritz 
Distinguished Prot. History Unis. of North Dakota 


Tyler, Seth, PhD Prot. Dept. of Biological Sci 
ences Unw of Maine Orono 


U 


Ubelaker, Douglas H., PhO Curator of Phystcal 
Anthropology Smithsoman Insntuton 


Uchendu, Victor Chikezie, ?)D Director 


XLIV. Contributors and consultants 


Institute of Public Policy, Univ. of Calabar, Nigeria. 
Udelson, Joseph H., Ph.D. Prof. of History. 
Tennessee State Univ. 

Uhler, Sharron G., B Phil. Archivist, Colorado 
Springs Pioneers Museum. 


Ullrich, Arthur H., Jr. Fellow, Academy of 
Underwater Arts and Sciences; Member, Board 
of Advisers, National Association of Underwater 
Instructors. 


Ultee, Maarten, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Alabama. 


Uman, Martin A., Ph.D. Prof. of Electrical and 
Computer Engineering, Univ. of Florida. 
Underwood, T. Bryan, Jr.,)|.D. Attorney, 
Northern Trust Co. 

Ungar, Sanford J.,M.S. Director, Voice of Amer- 
ica. 

Unger, Richard W., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ 
of British Columbia. 

Urban, Joan Barth, Ph.D. Ordinary Prof. of 
Politics, Catholic Univ. of America. 

Urla, Jacqueline, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Anthropol- 
ogy, Univ. of Massachusetts, Amherst. 

Usselman, Melvyn C., Ph.D. Assoc, Prnf. nf 
Chemistry. Univ of Western Ontario. 


Utley, Robert M.. MA. Former Chief Historian 
and Asst. Director, National Park Service. 


V 


Vachon, Andre, Docteur en Histoire. Fellow of 
the Royal Society of Canada, historian, and writer. 
Vahala, George, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. ot Physics, 
William and Mary College. 

Vail, Leroy, Ph.D. Former Prof. of History, Har- 
vard Univ. 

Valbuena, Jose A. Fernandez, Ph.D. Lecturer in 
Anthropology, Baylor Univ. 

Valgemae, Mardi, Ph.D. Prof. of English, City 
Univ. of New York Herbert H. Lehman College. 
Van Camp, Leonard W., D.MA._ Dir. of Choral 
Activities, Southern Illinois Univ., Edwardsville. 
Vance, Charles C. Former Director of Public 
Relations, National Safety Council. 

Vancko, Robert M., Ph.D. Prof. of Mathematics, 
Ohio Univ. 

Van den Berghe, Pierre L, Ph.D. Prof. of 
Sociology, Univ. of Washington. 

Vandergrift, Kay E., Ed.D. Assoc. Dean, School 
of Communication, Information and Library Stod- 
ies, Rutgers, the State Univ. of New Jersey. 

Van der Linden, F. Robert, M.A. Corator of 
Aeronaotics, National Air and Space Museom. 
VanDerWege, David, M.S. Director of Member 
and Field Services, American Camping Assoc. 
Vander Zanden, James W., Ph.D. Former Prot. 
of Sociology, Ohio State Univ. 

Vandiver, Frank, Ph.D. Author, Rebe/ Brass: The 
Contederate Conimand System. 

Vandiver, J. Kim, Ph.D. Dean for Undergradoate 
Research, Massachosetts Institote of Technology. 
Van Dusen, Albert E., Ph.D. Emeritus Prof. of 
History, Univ. of Connecticot 

Van Riper, Charles, Ill, Ph.D Prof. of Biology, 
U.S Geological Survey, Northern Arizona Univ. 
Van Riper, Sandra, M.S. Science writer. 

Van Tine, Warren, Ph.D. Prnf. of History, Ohio 
State Univ. 

VanWingen, Peter M., M.S. in LS. Former Spe- 
cialist for the Book Arts, Library of Cnngress. 
Vardy, Steven Bela, Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Doqoesne Univ. 

Vardys, V. Stanley, Ph.D. Former Prof. nf Political 
Science, Univ. of Oklahoma. 

Vatai, Frank L,Ph.D Asst. Prof. of History, 
California State Univ., Northridge. 

Vaughan, Alden T., Ph.D. Prof of History, 
Columbia Univ. 

Vehrencamp, Sandra L, Ph.D. Prof. of Neurobi- 
ology and Behavior, Cornell Lab. of Ornithology. 
Veillette, Robert D., B.G.S. Managing Editnr, 
The Waterbury (CT) Republican-American. 

Venit, Marjorie S., Ph.D. Assoc. Prot. of Art His- 
tory and Archaeology, Univ. of Maryland. 
Verderher, Nadine L, Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
Mathematics, Southern Illinois Univ., Edwardsville. 


Vergano, Peter J., 5<.D. Assoc. Prof. of 


Packaging Science, Clemson Univ. 

Verity, John W. Dept Editor, Business Week 
Vermeer, Donald E., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Dept 
of Geography and Regional Science, George 
Washington Univ. 

Ver Steeg, Clarence L, Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Northwestern Univ 

Verts, William T., Ph.D. Asst. Prof., Dept of Com- 
puter Science, Univ. of Massachusetts, Amherst. 
Vickery, John B., Ph.D. Prof. of English Emeritus, 
Univ. of California, Riverside. 

Videon, Fred F., Ph.D. Senior Structural 
Engineer, Bridger Engineers, Inc. 


Vietor, Richard H.K., Ph.D. Senator John Heinz 
Prof. of Environmental Management, Harvard Univ. 
Graduate School of Business Administration. 
Vincenti, Virginia B., Ph.D. Prof, Dept. of Family 
and Consumer Sciences, Univ. of Wyoming. 
Vinquist, Mary, Ph.D. Author, Performance 
Practice: A Bibliography. 

Vinson, S. Bradleigh, Ph.D. Prof. of Entomology, 
Texas A&M Uni. 

Visich, Marian, Jr., Ph.D. Assoc. Dean of 
Engineering, State Univ. of New York, Stony Brook 
Vitt, Dale H., Ph.D. Prof. Dept. of Plant Biology, 
Southern Illinois Univ., Carbondale. 

Vitt, Laurie J., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, Univ. of Cali- 
fornia, Los Angeles. 

Vizenor, Gerald, BA. Prof., American Studies, 
Univ. of California, Berkeley. 

Vogel, Morris J., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Temple 
Univ. 


Vogele, William B., Ph.D. Asst. Prof. of Political 
Science and Coordinator of the Program in Social 
and Political Systems, Pine Manor College. 


Voorhies, Michael R., Ph.D. Curator, Vertebrate 
Paleontology, Univ. of Nebraska State Moseum. 


Voyles, J. Bruce, BA = Publisher and Author, 
Chattanooga, TN. 


Ww 


Wacker, Peter O., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Rutgers, the State Univ. of New Jersey. 


Waddell, Eileen, MA. Asst. Managing Editor, 
The (Columbia, SC) State. 


Wade, John W., S.J.D. Former Dean and Prof. of 
Law. Vanderbilt Univ. School of Law. 


Wade, Thomas Edward, Ph.D. Professor of Elec- 


trical Engineering, Univ. of South Florida. 


Wadsworth, Frank W., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus, 
State Univ. of New York College, Porchase. 
Wagner, David H., Ph.D. Senior Scientist, 
Northwest Botanical Institute. 

Wagner, John E., Jr., M.D. Assoc. Director, 
Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Univ. of Min- 
nesota, Minneapolis. 

Wagner, Mary Emma, Ph.D. Lecturer Emerita in 
Geology, Univ. of Pennsylvania. 

WagnerMartin, Linda, Ph.D. Hanes Prof. of 
English, Univ. of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 
Wailes, B., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Anthropology, 
Univ. of Pennsylvania. 


Waiser, Bill, Ph.D. Head, Dept. of History. Univ. 
of Saskatchewan. 

Waite, P.B., LLD. Prof. Emeritos of History, 
Dalhousie Univ. 

Waite, Robert G.L, Ph.D. Brnwn Prof. of History 
Emeritus, Williams College. 

Wakeman, Frederic, Jr., Ph.D. Haas Prnit. nf 
Asian Studies, Univ. of California, Berkeley. 
Walcott, Charles, Ph.D. Prnf., Neurobiology and 
Behavior, Cornell Univ. 

Waldfogel, Jane, Ph.D. Assoc. Prnf. of Social 
Work and Poblic Affairs, Colombia Univ. School of 
Sneial Work. 

Wales, Patience, B.A. Chief Editor, SA/Z maga- 
zine. 

Wales, Robert W., Ph.D. Prof. ot Geography, 
Univ. of Soothern Mississippi. 

Walker, Deward E., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of 
Anthropology, Univ. of Colorado. 

Walker, James C.G., Ph.D. Prof. of Atmospheric 
Science, Univ. of Michigan. 

Walker, Jearl, Ph.D Prof. of Physics, Cleveland 
State Uni. 

Walker, Jerry T., Ph.D. Prof., College of Agricol- 
tural and Environmental Sciences, Univ. of Geor- 


gia, Georgia Station. 


Wallace, C.M., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of History, 
Laurentian Univ. 

Wallace, Jane Y., M.S. Former Vice President, 
Publisher, Restaurants and Institutions magazine. 
Wallace, Susan Lutz, Ph.D. Asst. Prof., Division 
of Sociology, Anthropology, and Gerontology, 
Baylor Uni. 

Wallechinsky, David Chief Executive Officer, 
Almanac Researchers. 

Waller, Bruce F., M.D. Cardiologist, Nasser 
Smith Pinkerton Cardiology, Saint Vincent Hospi- 
tal, Indianapolis. 

Waller, John F., M.D. Chief, Foot Service, Mount 
Sinai Hospital. 

Wallerstein, Immanuel, Ph.D. Distinguished 
Prof. of Sociology and Director of the Fernand 
Braudel Center, Binghamton Univ. 

Walsberg, Glenn E., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, Ari- 
zona State Univ. 

Walsh, J. Michael, Ph.D. President, Walsh 
Group, Public Accountants. 

Walsh, Patrick, ].D. Prof. and Asst. Dean, Univ. of 
Wisconsin, Madison. 


Walter, Hartmut S., Ph.D. Prot. of Geography, 
Univ. of California, Los Angeles. 

Walters, James C., Ph.D. Prof. of Geology, Univ. 
of Northern lowa. 

Walters, William D,, Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Geogra- 
phy, Illinois State Univ. 


Walton, Clyde C., MA. Former Director of 
Libraries, Univ. of Colorado, Boulder. 

Walton, Craig, Ph.D. Prof. of Philosophy and 
Director, Institute for Ethics and Policy Studies, 
Univ. of Nevada, Las Vegas. 

Walton, Hanes, Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of Political 
Science, Univ, of Michigan. 

Walz, Arthur H., Jr., MS. Chief, Geotechnical 
and Materials Branch, Directorate of Civil Works, 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 

Wanatee, Donald W., Sr., M.S.W. Historian, 
Sac and Fox Tribe of the Mississippi in lowa: 
Mesquaki. 

Wang, Chien Yi, Ph.D. Research Horticulturist, 
U.S. Dept. of Agricoltore. 

Ward, Graham, M.Ed. Former Senior Rsch. 
Officer, Aostralian Council for Edocational Rsch. 


Ward, Norman, LLD. Prof. Emeritus of Political 
Science, Univ. of Saskatchewan. 

Ward, Roger, Ph.D. Curator of European Art, 
Nelson-Atkins Moseom of Art 

Ward, William A., Ph.D Prof., Brown Univ. 
Wardowski, Wilfred F., Ph.D. Coaothor, Florida 
Citrus Diagnostic Guide. 

Ware, Donna M. Eggers, Ph.D. Research Assoc. 
Prof. of Biology, College of William and Mary. 


Wareham, Rachel E. Former Editor, 
International Old Lacers. 

Waring, Geo. H., Ph.D. Prof. of Ethology, 
Southern Illinois Univ. 

Waring, Richard H., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritos of For- 
est Ecology, Oregon State Univ. 


Warner, H. Jack, B.S. President and Chief 
Executive Officer, Beatreme Foods, Inc. 


Warner, Ralph P., M.Ed. Former President, RAM 
Radio Controlled Models, Inc. 


Warren, Ann Alexander, MA__ Instructor. 
Kansas State Univ 

Warren, Cliff, MA. President, Raytek, Inc.; 
former Managing Director, AGA Infrared Systems. 
Warren, Dennis M., Ph.D. Former Prof. of An- 
thropology, lowa State Univ. 

Waterland, Larry R., Ph.D. Operations Manager, 
Energy Systems, Arthur D. Little, Inc. 
Watermeier, Daniel J., Ph.D. Prof. of Theatre, 
Film, and Dance, Univ. of Toledo. 

Watson, David Lowes, Ph.D. Prof. of Theology 
and Congregational Life and Mission, Wesley 
Theological Seminary, Washington, D.C 

Watson, Harry L, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Director 
of the UNC Center for the Stody of the American 
Sooth, Univ. of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 
Watson, John L, Ph.D. Chair, Prof., Dept. of Met- 
allorgical Engineering, Univ. of Missouri, Rolla. 
Watson, Richard L, Jr., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
History, Doke Univ. 

Watt, lan, MA. Aothor, The Rise of the Novel 








and Conrad in the Nineteenth Century. 


Wayman, Michael L., Ph.D. Prof. of Metallurgy, 
Univ. of Alberta, Edmonton. 

Weale, David, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Prince Edward Island. 

Wearing, J. P., Ph.D. Prof. of English, Univ ot Ari- 
zona. 

Weart, Spencer R., Ph.D. Director, Center for 
History of Physics, American Institute of Physics. 
Weaver, David C., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Dept of 
Geography, Univ. of Alabama. 

Weaver, Robert F., Ph.D. Assoc. Dean, College 
of Liberal Arts and Sciences and Prot., Dept. of 
Molecolar Biosciences, Univ. of Kansas. 

Webb, Charles H., D.M. Dean, School of Music, 
Indiana Univ. 

Webb, John W., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography and 
Planning, State Univ. of New York, Albany. 

Webb, Kempton E., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of 
Geography, Columbia Univ. 

Webb, Leland F., Ph.D. Prof. and Chair, Dept of 
Mathematics, California State Univ., Bakersfield. 
Weber, Darrell J., Ph.D. Prof. of Botany, Brigham 
Yoong Univ. 

Weber, Herb, Ph.D. Prof. and Director of Work 
Physiology Laboratory, East Stroudsburg Univ. 
Weber, Joan, BA. Consumer Affairs Manager, 
Wm. Wrigley, Jr., Co. 

Webster, Duane E., MALS. Executive Director, 
Association of Research Libraries. 

Webster, Frederick E., jr., Ph.D. Charles Henry 
jones Third Centory Prof. of Management, Tock 
School of Bosiness, Dartmooth College. 
Weertman, Johannes, D.Sc. Walter P. Murphy 
Prof. of Matertals Sctence and Engineering Emeri- 
tos, Northwestern Univ. 

Wehner, Todd, Ph.D. Prof., Dept of Horticultural 
Sciences, North Carolina State Univ., Raleigh. 
Weigl, Peter D., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, Wake 
Forest Univ. 

Weil, Andrew, M.D. Assoc. Director, Division of 
Social Perspectives in Medicine, Univ. of Arizona 
Wein, Ross W., Ph.D. Prof., Dept. of Renewable 
Resources and Dept. of Biological Sciences, Univ 
of Alberta 

Weinberg, Martin S., Ph.D. Prof. of Sociology, 
Indiana Univ. 

Weiner, Myron, Ph.D. Former Prof. of Political 
Science, Massachosetts Institote of Technology. 
Weiner, William }., M.D. Prof. of Neurology, 
Univ. of Miami. 

Weir, Lorraine, Ph.D. Prof.ofEnglishand 
Comparative Literatore, Univ. of British Colombia. 
Weir, Robert M., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of History, 
Univ. of Sooth Carolina 

Weisberg, Martin, M.D. Clinical Assoc. Prof. of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Thomas Jefferson 
Univ. 

Weishampel, David B., Ph.D. Prof., Johns Hop- 
kins Univ. School of Medicine. 

Weishar, Peter, 0A. Prof. of Film and Television, 
New York University. 

Weiss, Nancy J., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Princeton 
Univ. 

Weller, Milton W., Ph.D. Prof., Kleberg Chair in 
Wildlife Ecology. Texas A&M Univ. 

Wellford, Charies F., Ph.D. Prot. of Criminology 
and Criminal Jostice, Univ. of Maryland. 

Welling, Joel S., Ph.D. Senior Scientific Special: 
ist, Pittsburgh Sopercompoting Center, Carnegie 
Mellon Univ. 

Wells, Paul F., MA. Director, Center for Popolar 
Mosic, Middle Tennessee State Univ. 

Welsch, Frank, D.V.M. Senior Scientist, 
Chemical Indostry Institute of Toxicology. 
Welther, Barbara L., MA. Historian of Astrono 
my, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. 
Welty, Gus, BA. Senior Editor, Railway Age 
Wendel, Eari F., M.D. Assoc. Prof. ot Urology 
Northwestern Univ. Medical! School. 

Wendland, Wayne M., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography 
Univ. of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. 

Wenig, Barry L, M.D. Director Division of Head 
and Neck. Surgery and Prof.. Northwestern Unis 
Medical School. 


Wertheim, Albert, Ph.D. Prof. of English. Theatre 


and Drama, and Comparative Literatore and Assoc 


Dean, College of Arts and Sciences, Indiana Univ. 


Wespestad, Vidar G., Ph.D. Chief Scientist, Pacif- 


ic Whiting Conservation Cooperative. 

Wester, Lyndon, Ph.D. Assoc Pruf. of 
Geugraphy, Univ. of Hawaii. 

Westermann, Edwin j., Ph.D. Pruf. Emeritos of 
History, Univ. uf Missoori, Kansas City. 

Weston, Michele, B.A. Editor, American Power 
Boat Assuc. 

Wetz, Max, B.S. City Editur, Black Hills (SD) Pia- 
neer. 

Weyant, Robert G., Ph.D. Prof. of General 
Studies, Univ. of Calgary. 

Wharton, Annabel Jane, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Art History, Duke Univ. 


Wheaton, Bruce R., Ph.D. Director, Inventory of 
Sources for History of Twentieth-Centory Physics. 


Wheeler, Douglas L, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 


of New Hampshire, Dorham; aothor, Republican 
Portugal. 

Wheeler, James O., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Univ. of Georgia 

Wheelwright, Julie, MA. Writer; Lecturer, City 
Univ., London. 


Whitaker, Jim Editor, Hannibal (MO) Courter- 
Post 


White, Charles S. J., Ph.D. Prot. Emeritus ot 
Philosophy and Religion. American Univ. 

White, D.E., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Dept of English 
and Comparative Literature, Columbia Univ. 
White, Geoffrey M., Ph.D. Senior Fellow. 
Edocation Program, East-West Center. 

White, John H., Jr., B.A. Curator Emeritus, 
National Museum of American History. 

White, John Kenneth, Ph.D Prof. of Politics, 
Catholic Univ. 

White, K.H. Senior Joornalist. Northern Territory 
News Semices. 

White, Linda R., BA. Former Asst. Production Di- 
rector, Portland Newspapers. 

White, Rae E., Ph.D. Prof. and Chairman, Dept 
of Chemical Engineering, Univ. of Sooth Carolina. 
White, Raymond E., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus, Dept 
of Astronomy, Univ ot Arizona. 

White, S. Elizabeth, MA.Ed. Former Senior As- 
soc., American Red Cross. 

Whitehead, Nancy Dickerson, B.S. Author. 
Among Those Present 

Whiteside, Don, Ph.D. Former Social Research 
Analyst, Dept of Indian and Northern Affairs. 
Whitfield, Chris Editor, (Cape Town, SA) Week- 
end Argus. 

Whorton, M. Donald, M.D. M.P.H_- Consultant, 
Whorton and Associates. 

Wick, Susan M., Ph.D. Prot. of Plant Biology. 
Univ of Minnesota, Twin Cities Campus. 
Wickham St. Germain, Margaret E., B.S. Envi- 
ronmental Scientist, Environmental Protection 
Agency. 

Wicklund, Douglas M., MA. Corator of 
Collections, National Firearms Moseum. 
Wielebnowski, Nadja, Ph.D. Postdoctoral Fel- 
low, Conservation and Research Center. National 
Zoological Park. Smithsonian Institotion. 

Wiens, John A., Ph.D. Prot. of Biology, Univ. of 
New Mexico. 

Wigge, Larry Hockey Editor Chief Statistician, 
The Sporting News. 

Wilbur, Richard, A. Author: historian: former 
Supervisor Legislative Research Service, New 
Brunswick Legislative Assembly 

Wilczek, Frank, Ph.D. Herman Feshbach Prof. of 
Physics, Massachusetts Institute ot Technology 
Wild, M. Trevor, Ph.D. Seniur Lecturer Dept of 
Geography, Unt ot Holl. 

Wilentz, Sean, Ph.D Dayton: Stockton Prof of 
Histon. Princeton Univ 

Wiles, Richard C., Ph.D Charles Ranlett Flint 
Prot ot Economics, Bard College 

Wilford, John Noble, M.A Science Correspond: 
ent The Vew York Times. winner of the Pulttzer 
Prize for National Reporting 1984 

Wilkie, Richard W., PhD. Prot ot Geography 
Univ of Massachusetts Ainherst 

Wilkins, Frederich C., Ph.D. Prot and Chairman 
Dept uf English Sum k Lon 


Contributors and consultants XLV 


Wilkinson, Sylvia, M.A. journalist and author of 
books on automobile racing. 

Willett, Debra A., BA. Assuc. Director, Long Is- 
land Studies, Hufstra Univ. 

Williams, Bob, B.AJj. Execotive Editor, O// and 
Gas fournal. 


Williams, Edward V., Ph.D. Prof. uf Masic, Penn- 
sylvania State Univ. 


Williams, Irving G., Ph.D. Aothor, The American 
Vice-Presidency New Louk 

Williams, James G., Ph.D. Prof. uf Information 
Sciences, Univ. of Pittsburgh. 

Williams, Jerre S., J.D. Former Jodge, United 
States Court uf Appeals for the Fifth Circuit 
Williams, Jerry R., Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
California State Univ., Chico. 

Williams, Joseph M., Ph.D. Prof. of English, Univ. 
of Chicago. 

Williams, Larry E., Ph.D Prof. of Viticulture and 
Enulugy, Univ. of California, Davis. 

Williams, Nudie Eugene, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
History, Univ. of Arkansas, Fayetteville. 

Williams, Peter W., Ph.D. Prof. of Religion and 
American Stodies, Miami Univ. 

Williams, Robert E., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Political 
Science, Pepperdine Univ 

Williamson, Frank, Jr., Ph.D. Author of 
mathematics articles. 

Willis, Eliza j., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Political 
Science, Grinnell College. 

Willits, Ann, MA. Director, Parable Conference 
for Dominican Life and Mission. 

Willmarth, Philip R., BA. Executive Editor and 
Business Manager, The Linking Ring. 

Wills, John E., Jr., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. of 
Southern California 


Wilmeth, Don B., Ph.D. Asa Messer Prof.; Prof. of 
Theatre and English; Brown Univ. 


Wilson, Alan, Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of History, 
Trent Univ. 


Wilson, Carroll, MA. Editor, ‘Wichita Falls, TX) 
Times Record News. 


Wilson, Dru, BA. Feature Writer, The (Colorado 
Springs, CO) Gazette. 

Wilson, Jean Gaddy, BJ. Executive Director, 
New Directions for News. 

Wilson, John F., Ph.D. Collord Prof. of Religion, 
Princeton Univ. 

Wilson, John 8. Free-lance music critic. 
Wilson, Margaret D., Ph.D. Former Prof. of Phi- 
losophy, Princeton Univ. 

Wilson, Randy, MA. Editor, |Flagstatf) Anzona 
Daily Sun. 

Wilson, Samuel M., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
Anthropology, Univ. of Texas, Austin. 

Wilson, Terry P., Ph.D. Prof. of Ethnic Studies, 
Univ of California, Berkeley. 

Wilson, Theodore A., Ph.D. Prof. of History, 
Univ. of Kansas. 

Wilson, W. Herbert, Jr., Ph.D. Asst Prof. and 
Chair, Dept. of Biology. Colby College. 

Wilson, William Julius, Ph.D. Malcolm \Viener 
Prot. of Social Policy. Harvard Univ. 

Winberry, John J., Ph.D. Prot. of Geography, 
Univ. ot Sooth Carolina. 

Windeyer, Kendal Former Transport Editor The 
Montreal) Gazette 

Winfield, Barry Technical Director Car and 
Driver magazine. 

Wing, John F., \A.BA Senior Vice President. 
Booz Allen & Hamilton. 

Winks, Robin W., Ph... Randolph W Townsend 
Prot. ot Histon Yale Univ 

Winokur, James L, LLB. Prof. of Law. Uni. ot 
Denver Special Counsel, Holme Roberts & Owen. 


Winsberg, Gwynne Roeseler, Ph.D. Assoc 
Dean and Assoc. Prot. ot Commonity and Family 
Niedicine. Lovola Un 

Winslow, David J., PhD. Folklorist and museum 
consoltant 

Winston, Judith E., Ph.D. Director of Research 
Virginia Niuseom of Natural History 

Wintermute, Orval, PhD Prot of Religron. Duke 
Lanin 

Winters, Harold A., PhD = Prot ot Geography 
Ntichigan State Univ 


XLV! Contributors and consultants 


Wise, M. Norton, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Princeton 
Univ. 

Wise, Thomas N., M.D. Prof. of Psychiatry, 
Georgetown Univ. School of Medicine. 


Wishart, David, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, Univ. 
of Nebraska. 


Wiswell, Thomas E., M.D. Prof. of Pediatrics, 
State Univ. uf New York, Stony Brook. 

Wit, Lawrence C., Ph.D. Prof., Dept. of Biological 
Sciences, Auburn Univ. 

Withiam, Glenn, B.S. Executive Editor, Corne/f 
Hotel Quarterly. 

Withuhn, William L, M.B.A. Curator of 
Transportation, National Museum of American 
History, Smithsonian Institution. 

Wohlstetter, Priscilla, Ph.D. Director, Center on 
Educational Governance, Rossier School of Educa- 
tion, Univ. of Southern California. 

Wojcicki, Stanley G., Ph.D. Prof. of Physics, 
Stanford Univ. 

Wolchik, Sharon L, Ph.D. Prof. of Political Sci- 
ence and International Affairs, George Washing- 
ton Univ. 

Wolf, Kirsten, Ph.D. Prof. of Scandinavian Stud- 
ies, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 

Wolf, Larry L, Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, Syracuse 
Univ. 

Wolf, Richard M., Ph.D. Prof. Emeritus of Psy- 
chology and Education, Columbia Univ. 

Wolf, Virginia L, Ph.D. Prof. of English, Univ of 
Wisconsin, Stout. 

Wolfe, Willard, Ph.D. Former Social Sciences 
Bibliographer, State Univ. of New York, 
Binghamton. 

Wolff, Margaret A., B.A. Author, Finger Painting. 
Wolfgang, Marvin E., Ph.D. Former Prof. of 
Criminology and Law, Univ. of Pennsylvania. 
Wolfson, Richard, Ph.D. Prof. of Physics, 
Middlebury College. 

Wolk, Donald J., Ph.D. Clinical psychologist; 
former Prof. of Psychology, Univ. of Bridgeport. 
Woll, Peter, Ph.D. Prof. of Politics, Brandeis Univ. 
Wolman, Howard B., Ph.D. Prof. of Classics, 
Brooklyn College, City Univ. of New York. 
Woloch, Isser, Ph.D. Prof. of History, Columbia 
Univ. 

Woloch, Nancy, Ph.D. Author, Women and the 
American Experience. 

Wood, Lon, B.A. Columnist, Victoria, BC, Times 
Colonist 

Wood, Louise Later, BA. Writer, Editor, and 
Public Relations Consultant, Louise L. Wood Public 
Relations. 

Woodard, Fredrick, Ph.D. Assoc. Prof., Chair, 
African-American World Studies, Univ. of lowa. 
Woodward, Susan L,, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Radford Univ. 

Woodley, David T., M.D. Prof. and Co-Chief, 
Univ. of Southern California Division of Dermatol- 
ogy, LAC + USC Medical Center. 

Woodside, Jeffrey R., M.BA. Prof. of Urology 
and Executive Director, Univ. of Tennessee 
Medical Center, Univ. of Tennessee, Memphis. 


Woodworth, Steven E., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of 
History, Toccoa Falls College. 

Workman, David L. Director of Communica- 
tions, Washington Dept. of Natural Resources; 
author, Washington: A Centennial Portrait 
Workman, Mark E., Ph.D. Chair and Prof. of 
Literature and Folklore, Univ. of North Florida. 
Worley, Barbara A., Ph.D. Lecturer, Dept of An- 
thropology, Boston Univ. 

Worster, Donald, Ph.D. Hall Distinguished Prof. 
of American History, Univ. of Kansas. 

Wortel, John P., M.S. Assoc. Clinical Prof. of 
General and Oral Pathology, Loyola Univ. School 
of Dentistry. 

Worth, John Former Executive Director, Acade- 
my of Model Aeronautics. 

Wright, Grant, BA. Publisher, 7hompson|MB) 
Citizen. 


Wright, Paul W., M.D. Prof. of Family Practice, 
Univ. of Texas Health Center, Tyler. 

Wrighton, Mark S., Ph.D. Chancellor, Washing- 
ton Univ., St. Louis. 

Wuhl, Charles Michael, M.D. Clinica! Asst. Prof. 
of Psychiatry, New York Univ. 

Wiirsig, Bernd, Ph.D. Prof. of Marine Biology, 
Texas A&M Univ., Galveston. 

Wych, Robert D., Ph.D. Senior Research Scien- 
tist, Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Inc. 

Wynn, Graeme, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, Univ. 
of British Columbia. 

Wyse, Roger E., Ph.D. Dean and Director, Col- 
lege of Agricultural and Life Sciences, Univ. of 
Wisconsin, Madison. 


Wyszecki, Gunter, Dr.Eng. Former Dir., Institute 
of Optics, National Research Council of Canada. 


X 


Xanthos, Marino, Ph.D. Director of Research, 
Polymer Processing Institute, New Jersey Institute 
of Technology. 

Y 


Yaffe, Michael! P., Ph.D. Prof. of Biology, Univ. of 
California, San Diego. 

Yago, Glenn, Ph.D. Director, Capital Studies, 
Milken Institute. 

Yang, Chen Ning, Ph.D. Director, Institute for 
Theuretical Physics, State Univ. of New York, Stony 
Brook; winner of Nobe! Prize for Physics, 1957. 
Yarar, Baki, DIC Prof., Dept. of Mining, Colorado 
School of Mines. 

Yasso, Warren E., Ph.D. Prof. of Natural Sciences 
and Chairman, Dept. of Mathematics and Science 
Education, Teachers College, Columbia Univ. 
Yatskievych, George, Ph.D. Curator of Missouri 
Plants, Missouri Botanical Garden. 

Yeninas, Barbara, M.A. Executive Director, 
Containerization and Intermodal Institute. 
Yeomans, Donald K., Ph.D. Senior Research 
Scientist, Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 

Yoftee, Norman, Ph.D. Prof. of Near Eastern 
Studies, Univ. of Michigan. 

Young, Hugh D., Ph.D. Prof. of Physics, 
Carnegie- Mellon Univ. 


Young, M. Crawford, Ph.D. Prof. of Political 
Science, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison. 


Youngman, Joan, J.D. Senior Fellow, Lincoln In- 
stitute of Land Policy. 


Yu, Victor L, M.D. Prof. of Medicine, Univ. of 
Pittsburgh. 
Z 


Zabik, Mary E., Ph.D. Univ. Distinguished Prof. of 
Food Science and Human Nutrition and Assoc. 
Dean for Academic Affairs, Michigan State Univ. 
Zablocki, Benjamin, Ph.D. Prof. of Sociology, 
Rutgers, the State Univ. of New Jersey. 

Zafran, Eric M., Ph.D. Curator, am of European 
Paintings and Sculpture, Wadsworth Atheneum. 
Zagare, Frank C., Ph.D. Prof. of Political Science, 
State Univ. of New York, Buffalo. 

Zarchan, Paul, M.S.E.E. Staff Engineer, C S. 
Draper Laboratory, Inc. 

Zebley, Eric, BA. Senior Communications 
Manager, Binney & Smith Inc. 

Zee, Yuan Chung, Ph.D. Prof. of Veterina 
Microbiology and Immunology, Univ. of California 
School of Veterinary Medicine, Davis. 

Zeft, Dan, M.S.J.. Humanities Subject Editor, Zhe 
World Book Encyclopedia; theater critic for the 
Copley News Service. 

Zehnder, Kirk Lee, B.A. President, Continental 
Candle Co. 

Zeitlin, Irving M., Ph.D. Prof. of Sociology, Univ. 
of Toronto. 

Zenilman, Jonathan M., M.D. Assoc. Prot. of 
Medicine, Johns Hopkins Univ. School of Medi- 
cine. 

Zettl, J. Robert, M.PA.; DABFE President, Foren- 
sic Consultant, Inc. 


Ziegler, Gregory R., Ph.D. Assoc. Prof. of Food 
Sciences, Pennsylvania State Univ. 

Zigler, Edward, Ph.D. Sterling Prof. of 
Psychology, Yale Univ. 

Zihlman, Adrienne L, Ph.D. Prof. of 
Anthropology, Univ. of California, Santa Cruz 
Zils, John J., M.S. Assoc. Partner, Skidmore, Ow- 
ings, & Merrill. 

Zimmer, David E., Ph.D. Technology Transfer 
Coordinator, Agricultural Research Service, U.S. 
Dept of Agriculture. 


Zimmerman, Barry, Ph.D. VP and Managing Di- 
rector, 21 International Holdings, Inc. 


Zimring, Franklin E., J.D. Dir., Earl Warren Legal 
Institute, Prof. of Law, Univ. of California, Berkeley. 
Ziskind, Samuel J., M.A. Former Managing 
Editor, Soldiers, U.S. Dept. of the Army. 

Zobel, Donald B., Ph.D. Prof. of Botany, Oregon 
State Univ. 


Zobell, Charles, BA. Managing Editor, Las Ve- 
gas (NV) Review-Journal 

Zolberg, Aristide R., Ph.D. University-in-Exile 
Prof., Graduate Faculty, New School Univ. 

Zophy, Jonathan W., Ph.D. Prof. of History, Univ. 
of Houston, Clear Lake. 

Zuckerman, Harriet, Ph.D. Senior Vice Presi- 
dent, Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. 
ZumBrunnen, Craig, Ph.D. Prof. of Geography, 
Univ. of Washington. 


Zwicker, Steven N., PhD. Prof. of English, 
Washington Univ. 








A is the first letter of our alphabet. It was the first letter 
in all the alphabets from which ours evolved. The Sem- 
ites, who lived in Syria and Palestine, named their first 
letter aleph, meantng ox They adapted an Egyptian A/- 
eroglyphic (picture symbol) for an ox. The ancient 
Greeks later used this symbol, and called it a/pha. Our 
word a/phabet comes from a/pha and beta, the second 
letter in Greek. The Romans gave the letter its present 
form. See Alphabet. 

Uses. A or a is about the third most frequently used 
letter in books, newspapers, and other printed material 
in English. When used on a report card, A represents 
the highest grade given in a school subject. In Latin, a 
stands for ante, or before, as in a.m. for ante meridiem, 


Common forms of the letter A 


Aa Aa 


Roman letters have small 
finishing strokes called serfs 
that extend from the main 
strokes. The type face shown 
above is Baskerville The italic 
form appears at the right 


Aa CB 


Handwritten letters vary 
from person to person. Manu- 
script (printed) letters, /ef, 
have simple curves and 
straight lines. Cursive letters, 
right, have flowing lines. 





or before noon. The a is used to abbreviate such words 
as adjective, alto, and ampere. 

Pronunciation. In English, the principal sound of A 
ora is long 2, as in fate. Long a ts pronounced by raising 
the tongue toward the roof of the mouth and holding 
the mouth slightly open. Short a, as in Aat, is pro- 
nounced with the tip of the tongue below the edges of 
the lower front teeth, the back of the tongue raised, the 
jaw lowered, and the lips moderately open. Broad a, as 
in father, is pronounced with the tip of the tongue 
placed first below the edges of the lower front teeth and 
later raised. The mouth is opened wide. Unstressed a, as 
in /oya/ or about, is roughly equivalent to unstressed u 
in unfit. See Pronunciation. 


Marianne Cooley 


Special ways of expressing the letter A 





International Braille 


Morse Code 





SS ———— 


Aa Aa A 


Sans-serif letters are also 
called gothic letters. They 
have no serifs. The type face 
shown above is called Futura. 
The italic form of Futura ap- 
pears at the right. 


International Semaphore Code 


Flag Code 


Sign Language 
Alphabet 








Computer letters have spe- 
cial shapes. Computers can 
“read these letters either opti- 
cally or by means of the mag- 
netic ink with which the let- 
ters may be printed 


2 A.A. 


A.A. See Alcoholics Anonymous. 

Aachen, AH kuhn (pop. 238,587), is an industrial city in 
Germany. It is called Aix-la-Chapelle by the French. For 
the location of Aachen, see Germany (political map). 

A number of historic buildings stand near the center 
of Aachen. The magnificent cathedral was begun by the 
European ruler Charlemagne during the 700's and con- 
tains his tomb. The Imperial and City Hall dates from 
1330 and is a fine example of Gothic architecture. It 
houses a number of art treasures. Each year, thousands 
of people visit the city’s resort, Bad Aachen (pronounced 
BAHD AH kuhn), whose hot mineral springs are be- 
lieved to cure some ailments. Aachen’s factories pro- 
duce machinery, metal products, and textiles. 

Roman soldiers established a settlement on the site of 
Aachen shortly after the birth of Jesus Christ. Charle- 
magne was born in Aachen in 742 and made it the capi- 
tal of his western European empire. Peter H. Merkl 
Aalto, AHL taw, Alvar, AHL vahr (1898-1976), was a 
Finnish architect, town planner, and furniture designer. 
He gained fame for buildings that imaginatively com- 
bine modern design principles with traditional materi- 
als, especially wood. Aalto often used flowing, wavy 
forms that marked a strong departure from the strict 
geometric lines favored by other modern architects. 

Aalto designed his first two major works in the 1920's, 
a tuberculosis sanitarium in Paimio, Finland, near Turku, 
and a municipal library in Viipuri, Finland (now Vyborg, 
in Russia). He designed birchwood tables and chairs for 
these projects that made him famous as a furniture de- 
signer. His other buildings include a number of civic, 
university, and apartment buildings. The Hall of Resi- 
dence (1947-1949), at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, with its curved facade, is one of his most 
distinguished buildings in North America. The Aalto 
Theater, an opera house he designed in Essen, Ger- 
many, opened in 1988, after his death. Aalto’s projects as 
a town planner include a town center in Seindjoki, Fin- 
land. The center features several small wedge-shaped 
buildings, largely made of wood. Aalto was born on Feb. 
3, 1898, in Kuortane, near Vaasa. Nicholas Adams 

See also Architecture (introduction (picture); Furni- 
ture (The 1900's to the present lpicture)). 

Aardvark, AHRD vahrk, is an African mammal that eats 
ants and termites. It has an arched body with a tubelike 
snout, large ears, and a long tail. The animal hunts for 
food at night and sleeps in a burrow during the day. In 
the 1600's, Dutch settlers in southern Africa gave the 
aardvark its name, which means earth pig. 

Aardvarks grow 4 to 6 feet (1.2 to 1.8 meters) long and 
weigh about 140 pounds (64 kilograms). Their coarse 
hair ranges from pinkish to grayish. The animals lack 
front teeth. But peglike molars on the sides of their 
mouths grow continuously. Unlike teeth of many mam- 
mals, aardvarks molars have no enamel coating. Instead, 
a hard tissue called cementum covers the teeth. Aard- 
varks have four sharp, spoon-shaped claws on their 
front feet and five on their hind feet. When attacked, 
they roll on their backs and use their claws for defense. 
Lions, leopards, and people often kill aardvarks for food. 

An aardvark digs burrows faster than most other ani- 
mals. It can make a deep hole in only a few minutes. Per- 
manent burrows may extend to 43 feet (13 meters) in 
length. The aardvark does not have good eyesight, but it 





Norman Myers. Bruce Coleman Ltd. 


The aardvark rips open the nests of ants and termites with its 
claws. Then it catches the insects with its long, sticky tongue. 


uses its excellent senses of smell and hearing to find 
prey. When an aardvark searches for food, its snout 
stays close to the ground and its ears point forward. The 
animal uses its claws to rip open ant or termite nests, 
and it licks up the insects with its long, sticky tongue. 
The tongue is about 12 inches (30 centimeters) long. 
Females give birth to one baby at the start of the rainy 
season. Young aardvarks start digging burrows at about 
6 months of age. After about a year, males move away 
from their mothers. Young females also become inde- 
pendent but stay near their mothers. Duane A. Schlitter 
Scientific classification. The aardvark is the only living 
member of the order Tubulidentata. It is Orvcteropus afer. 
Aardwolf, AHRD wuif, is an unusual type of hyena that 
lives on the plains of southern and eastern Africa. Most 
hyenas have powerful jaws and strong teeth, but the 
aardwolf's teeth are small, weak, and cone-shaped. It 
feeds chiefly on termites, which it laps up with its broad, 
sticky tongue. The aardwolf is unlike other hyenas be- 
cause it has five toes on its front feet, and four toes on 
its hind feet. Other kinds of hyenas have four toes on 
each foot. It is also smaller than other hyenas, standing 
20 inches (51 centimeters) high at the shoulder. 
Aardwolves live alone, in pairs, or in family groups 
with two to four young. The aardwolf has a mane along 





© Tom Raat ugh Phot Researchers 
The aardwolf is tawny-colored with black stripes, black feet, 
and a black-tipped bushy tail. It is not a wolf but a hyena. 





Lo 


the back. It can raise the mane to make itself look larger. 

The name aardwol/f, which is Afrikaans for earth wolf, 
was given the animal because it lives in a burrow. Aard- 
wolves only come out at night. Anne Innis Dagg 

Scientific classification. Aardwolves are in the hyena family, 
Hyaenidae. They are Proteles cristatus. 

Aaron, A/R ufhn, in the Bible, was the brother of Moses 
and Miriam. In earlier Biblical traditions, he was seen as 
a prophet and as Moses's helper. In later traditions, he 
was viewed as the first high priest of Israel. Aaron may 
have originally played an independent role from Moses 
in the Israelites deliverance from slavery in Egypt. Like 
Moses, Aaron was denied entrance into Canaan and 
died on Mount Hor in Edom. The priestly traditions in 
the Bible give Aaron an expanded role in Israelite reli- 
gious life and consider him founder of the Aaronite 
priesthood. This priesthood became important in Jeru- 
salem after the Israelite return from exile in 538 B.C. See 
also Moses; High priest; Birthstone. Carole R. Fontaine 
Aaron, A/R vhn, Henry (1934- ), hit 755 regular- 
season home runs, more than any other baseball player 
in major league history. Aaron hit his 715th home run, 
which broke Babe Ruth's record of 714 homers, on April 
8, 1974. 

Aaron played for the Milwaukee (later Atlanta) Braves 
of the National League from 1954 through 1974. He was 
traded to the Milwaukee Brewers of the American 
League following the 1974 season and retired as a play- 
er after the 1976 season. Aaron played right field most of 
his career but also played 
left field, center field, and 
first base. 

Aaron led the National 
League in home runs in 
1957, 1963, 1966, and 1967. 
He won the league batting 
championship twice. He 
also holds the major 
league career record for 
runs batted in—2,297. 
Aaron led the National 
League in runs batted in 
four times. He received 
the 1975 Spingarn Medal, 
and he was elected to the 
National Baseball Hall of 
Fame in 1982. Henry Louis Aaron was born on Feb. 5, 
1934, in Mobile, Alabama. 

See also Baseball (picture). 





Allanta Braves 


Henry Aaron 


Dave Nightingale 


Additional resources 


Aaron, Henry, and Wheeler, Lonnie. | Had a Hammer. 1991. 
Reprint. HarperCollins, 1992. Autobiography. 

Rennert, Richard S. Hamk Aaron. Chelsea Hse., 1993. Younger 
readers. 


AARP, ahrp, is the largest private nonprofit member- 
ship organization in the world. Its name Is a shortened 
form of its original title, the American Association of Re- 
tired Persons. It has over 30 million members, who must 
be 50 years old or older. | 
AARP’s main purpose is to address the needs of older 
people in the United States. It does this by prov iding 
them with education and services and by representing 
their interests before government agencies and othe! 


Abacus 3 


public bodies. AARP also works to improve the lives of 
older people by promoting their independence and dig- 
nity and by encouraging them to pursue personal goals. 
AARP offers members a number of benefits, including 
group health insurance, legal services, and a mail-order 
pharmacy. The AARP magazine, Modern Maturity, is the 
largest circulation magazine in the United States. 

Ethel Percy Andrus, a retired educator, founded the 
American Association of Retired Persons in 1958. The 
group changed its name to AARP in 1998. Its headquar- 
ters are in Washington, D.C. For more information, see 
its Web site at www.aarp.org. Critically reviewed by AARP 
AAUW. See American Association of University 
Women. 

Abaca, 4H buh KAH, is a plant grown in Borneo, the 
Philippines, and Sumatra for its fiber. The plant grows 
about 20 feet (6 meters) high and has large oblong 
leaves. The leaves grow from the trunk of the plant, and 
the bases of the leaves form a sheath (covering) around 
the trunk. These sheaths contain the valuable fiber. The 
coarse fibers grow 5 to 11 3} feet (1.5 to 3.5 meters) long 
and consist primarily of the plant materials cellulose, 
lignin, and pectin. Abaca fiber is sold under the name 
manila, after the major city of the Philippines. See also 
Philippines (picture: Manila hemp). Christine W. Jarvis 

Scientific classification. The abaca plant belongs to the ba- 
nana family, Musaceae. It is Musa textilis. 

Abacus, AB uh kuhs, is an ancient device used in Chi- 
na and other countries to perform arithmetic problems. 
It can be used to add, subtract, multiply, and divide, and 
to calculate square roots and cube roots. The abacus 
consists of a frame containing columns of beads. The 
beads, which represent numbers, are strung on wires or 
narrow wooden rods attached to the frame. 

The abacus was used by the ancient Greeks and Ro- 
mans. The Chinese abacus is called suanpan, which 
means counting, or reckoning, board. A typical Chinese 
abacus has columns of beads separated by a crossbar. 
Fach column has two beads above the crossbar and five 
below it. Each upper bead represents five units, and 
each lower bead equals one unit. 

The first column on the right is the ones column. The 
second column is the tens column. The third column is 
the hundreds, and so on. The ones column represents 
numbers from one to nine. Each bead below the cross 





WORLD BOOK photo by Dan Miller 


4 Abadan 


bar has a value of one (or 1), and each bead above the 
crossbar has a value of 5 ones (or 3). The tens column 
represents numbers from 10 to 90. Each lower bead in 
the tens column represents 1 ten (or 10), and each upper 
bead represents 5 tens (or 50). Anumber is represented 
on the abacus by moving the appropriate beads to the 
crossbar. Arthur Gittleman 
Abadan, 4H bah DAHN (pop. 206,073), is a refining cen- 
ter for Iran’s oil industry. It lies on Abadan Island, on the 
Shatt al Arab River in southwestern Iran {see Iran [map)). 
Pipelines link Abadan with Iranian oil fields. The city's 
petroleum refinery, completed in 1913, ranks among the 
largest in the world. It was badly damaged by Iraqi for- 
ces in 1980, during a war between Iran and Iraq. The An- 
glo-Persian Oil Company, a British firm, began the de- 
velopment of Abadan in the early 1900's. Michel Le Gall 
Abalone, 48 uh LOH nee, is a marine snail found in 
most mild and tropical seas. It is sometimes called an 
ear shell or ormer. \t is found along the coasts of Califor- 
nia, Australia, Japan, New Zealand, South Africa, and Eu- 
rope. It clings to submerged rocks by means of a flat, 
muscular foot It feeds on plants that it scrapes off the 
rocks with its filelike tongue. Abalone steak, the snail's 
muscular foot, is a popular seafood dish on the Pacific 
Coast of the United States and in Japan. The abalone 
colorful shell, which may be from 1 to 12 inches (2.5 to 
30 centimeters) long, is used in making costume jewelry. 
See also Mother-of-pearl. Robert Robertson 

Scientific classification. Abalones are in the family Halioti- 
dae, and the genus Ha/liotis. 
Abandonment is a legal term that has two chief 
meanings. In the field of property law, abandonment oc- 
curs when a person intentionally gives up all rights to 
something he or she owns. For example, if a person pur- 
posely throws away a ring, it has been abandoned. In 
family law, abandonment refers to the desertion of a 
husband, wife, or child without intention to support the 
person. Most states of the United States make it a crime 
for a parent to abandon a child. A father or mother who 
does this may lose the right to raise the child. 

Abandonment, also called desertion, is grounds for 
divorce in states that permit divorce because of a wrong 
done by the husband or wife (see Desertion). Some 
states allow no-fault divorce, in which one of the part- 
ners simply testifies that the marriage has failed. As a re- 
sult of no-fault divorce, fewer people seek divorce on 
the ground of abandonment. 
Abbado, Claudio (1933- 


Mary Ann Glendon 
), is an internationally 


known Italian symphony orchestra and opera conductor. 


Abbado has been music director of several of the major 
orchestras and opera companies in Europe. 

Abbado was born on June 26, 1933, in Milan, Italy. He 
studied piano with his father, and at the Milan Conserva- 
tory. He then studied conducting at the Vienna Academy 
of Music. Abbado won two prestigious international 
conducting competitions in 1958 and 1963. By the mid- 
1960's, he had become recognized as one of the leading 
conductors of his generation. 

In 1968, Abbado became principal conductor of the 
La Scala opera in Milan. He served as the institution's 
music director from 1971 to 1986. He won praise for rais- 
ing the artistic standards of the La Scala orchestra both 
in opera and in concert performances. Abbado was 
principal conductor for the London Symphony Orches- 


tra from 1979 to 1988. He was also music director for the 
Vienna State Opera from 1986 to 1991. 

Abbado became principal conductor for the Vienna 
Philharmonic in 1971 and artistic director and principal 
conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra in 1989. 
Over the years, Abbado has established several new or- 
chestras and music festivals. He has been especially in- 
terested in training young musicians. John H. Baron 
Abbas I, ab BAHS (1571-1629), was the shah (king) of the 
Safavid dynasty in Southwest Asia from 1587 until his 
death in 1629. Under Abbas, the Safavids reached the 
height of their power, ruling all or parts of present-day 
Iran, Iraq, Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan, and Afghanistan. 

Abbas brought peace and stability to an empire that 
had been weakened by internal conflict since the 1570's. 
Before Abbas’s reign, the Safavids relied on Turkic war- 
riors called Qizilbash (Red Heads) for military and ad- 
ministrative support But Qizilbash tribes constantly 
fought with one another for power. As shah, Abbas re- 
duced Qizilbash influence by creating an army of Geor- 
gian, Armenian, and Circassian slaves who were loyal 
only to him. He also seized land that had been under 
Qizilbash control. Under Abbas, the Safavids regained 
territory that had been lost to the Ottoman Empire in the 
west and to the Uzbek and Mughal empires in the east. 

Abbas relocated the Safavid capital to the Persian city 
of Isfahan in 1598. He turned Isfahan into a splendid cap- 
ital with a magnificent public square and beautiful 
mosques, palaces, and gardens. 

Abbas was born on Jan. 27, 1571, in Herat, a city in 
what is now Afghanistan. He died on Jan. 19, 1629, in 
Ashraf (now Behshahr). Kathryn Babayan 

See also Isfahan; Safavid dynasty. 

Abbot is the religious superior of a monastery of an 
early religious order, such as the Benedictines and Cis- 
tercians. The term comes from the Aramaic word abba, 
which means father. Young Egyptian monks first used 
the title in the early 300’s. These monks would seek an 
older monk or a hermit of the desert, whom they called 
abba, to teach and guide them. In the 500's, the Benedic- 
tine order established the title for the monk who had au- 
thority over other monks and monastic property. 

In early times, monks often appointed an abbot for 
life. In the Middle Ages, abbots were often appointed by 
civil officials. Today, monks elect an abbot, usually to 
serve a limited term. Abbots are generally independent 
of the local bishop. A woman who is the head of an 
abbey of nuns is called an abbess. David G. Schultenover 
Abbott was the name of two sisters who were Ameri- 
can social-work pioneers. They were born in Grand Is- 
land, Nebraska—Edith on Sept 26, 1876, and Grace on 
Nov. 17, 1878. 

Edith Abbott (1876-1957) taught at the Chicago 
School of Civics and Philanthropy and was dean of the 
University of Chicago's School of Social Service Admin- 
istration from 1924 to 1942. She fought against injustices 
in the treatment of the poor and was a critic of politics in 
welfare programs. She helped awaken the government 
to its responsibility in the welfare field. 

Grace Abbott (1878-1939) was chief of the United 
States Children’s Bureau from 1921 to 1934 and fought 
for the rights of women and children worldwide. She 
was on the Committee on Economic Security, which de- 
veloped the Social Security Act 





Alan Keith-Lucas 





Sir John Joseph 
Caldwell Abbott 


Prime Minister of Canada 
1891-1892 


Thompson 
1892-1894 


Macdonald 


1878-1891 1891-1892 


Abbott, Sir John Joseph Caldwell (1821-1893), 
served as prime minister of Canada from June 1891 to 
November 1892. He succeeded Sir John A. Macdonald, 
who died in office. During his administration, Abbott 
faced many problems that he could not solve. They in- 
cluded a severe nationwide depression and major con- 
flicts between English- and French-speaking Canadians. 
Abbott became prime minister at the age of 70 and re- 
signed because of poor health. 

Abbott was a distinguished lawyer, a position that 
drew him into politics. Before becoming prime minister, 
he had served in the Assembly of the Province of Can- 
ada and in the Canadian Parliament. He also had been 
dean of the law school of McGill College (now McGill 
University) in Montreal. 

Abbott claimed he did not like politics. He said he 
held political office because he believed public service 
was his duty. Shortly before taking office as prime minis- 
ter, Abbott wrote a friend, “I hate notoriety, public meet- 
ings, public speeches, caucuses, and everything that | 
know of what is apparently the necessary incident of 
politics— except doing public work to the best of my 
ability.” 

Abbott had a wide range of interests. He owned a 
salmon stream where he often fished, and he grew 
many varieties of rare orchids. He also loved animals 
and helped establish the Canadian Society for the Pre- 
vention of Cruelty to Animals. 

Early life. John Abbott was born on March 12, 1821 
in St. Andrews, near Montreal, Lower Canada (present 
day Quebec province). His father, Joseph Abbott. was 
Anglican missionary who had come there froin Englant 


in 


Abbott, Sir John Joseph Caldwell 5 





The Public Archives of Canada, Ortawa 


in 1818. Soon after arriving in Canada, he married Har- 
riet Bradford, the daughter of a Canadian minister. 

The Abbott family moved to Grenville, Lower Canada, 
in 1830, but John spent much time with an uncle in St. 
Andrews. He learned about astronomy and mathematics 
from a retired sea captain there and attended school in 
the nearby village of Carillon. 

Abbott left home at age 17 and began a business ca- 
reer, which he followed most of the time through the 
mid-1840's. He conducted his activities, which included 
selling cloth, packing apples, and buying grain, in Mont- 
real and other communities. He interrupted these activi- 
ties to attend law school at McGill College. 

Abbott received a law degree in 1847 and began to 
practice in Montreal that year. He specialized in corpo- 
ration law and soon became known as an authority in 
this field. In 1849, he married Mary Bethune, whose fa- 
ther was the principal of McGill College. Abbott served 
as dean of the law school at McGill from 1855 to 1880. 

Early political career. Abbott was elected to the leg- 
islature of the Province of Canada in 1857 and served 
until 1867. He entered politics as a Liberal but gradually 
shifted toward the Conservative Party. During the early 
1860's, some Conservatives favored the unification 
under one government of all the British colonies in 
North America. In 1865, Abbott joined these Conserva- 
tives in support of the movement for confederation. The 
Dominion of Canada was established in 1867. It con- 
sisted of the provinces of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, 
Ontario, and Quebec. That same year, Abbott was 
elected io the Dominions first House of Commons, 
where he served until 1874. 


6 Abbott, Sir John Joseph Caldwell 


Abbott continued his thriving law practice while serv- 
ing as a legislator. During the early 1870's, he became in- 
volved in negotiations for the construction of a Canadian 
transcontinental railroad. Two financial groups were 
competing for the construction contract. One group was 
headed by a client of Abbotts, Sir Hugh Allan, a Montre- 
al shipping line owner. Abbott tried to unite the two 
groups into one company, but he could not do so. Al- 
lan’s group eventually received the construction con- 
tract. 

The Pacific Scandal. In 1873, a clerk in Abbotts of- 
fice stole some papers that revealed large campaign 
contributions by Allan to the Conservatives in the 1872 
general election. The papers included a telegram in 
which Prime Minister John A. Macdonald, the Conserva- 
tive leader, had demanded of Allan: “Send me another 
ten thousand. Do not fail me.” Liberal members of Parlia- 
ment acquired the papers and revealed their contents. 
Macdonald admitted receiving the money, but he de- 
nied that the contributions had influenced his decision 
to give the contract to Allan. The government appointed 
a royal commission to investigate the case, which be- 
came known as the Pacific Scandal. 

The scandal finally forced Macdonald to resign as 
prime minister in November 1873 and led to formation 
of a Liberal government headed by Alexander Macken- 
zie. Abbott lost his seat in the House in the 1874 election. 
Historians disagree about Abbotts involvement in the 
scandal. Most believe he was innocent of personal mis- 
conduct but was probably aware of some of the deal- 
ings between Macdonald and Allan. 

The railroad project was abandoned after the Pacific 
Scandal, and Mackenzie failed in his efforts to reorgan- 
ize it. The Conservatives regained control of Parliament 
in 1878, and Macdonald again became prime minister. 
He quickly revived the railroad plans. In 1880, Abbott be- 
came the lawyer of the Canadian Pacific Railway. He 
wrote the charter for the railroad, which was completed 
in 1885. 

Return to Parliament. Abbott was reelected to the 
Canadian House of Commons in 1880 and served until 
1887. He was then appointed to Macdonald's Cabinet 
and to the Canadian Senate, where he served as govern- 
ment leader. In 1887, Abbott was also elected mayor of 
Montreal, a position he held until 1889. In 1891, Prime 
Minister Macdonald wanted to increase Abbott's duties 
in the Cabinet. However, Abbott refused because he did 
not feel capable of handling more speeches and public 
meetings. 

Prime minister. Macdonald died in June 1891. The 
Conservatives wanted either Sir John S. D. Thompson, 
the Minister of Justice, or Sir Charles Tupper, the Cana- 
dian High Commissioner in the United Kingdom, to be 
the party leader. Both Thompson and Tupper refused 
the position, however, and Abbott was chosen. Abbott, 
who preferred Thompson for the leadership, reluctantly 
took over as party leader and became prime minister. 
Abbott relied on Thompson to handle many of the re- 
sponsibilities in the House of Commons and in the Cabi- 
net. 

Even before Abbott took office, a scandal in the public 
works department had shaken the Conservative govern- 
ment. Some employees in that department were found 
guilty of awarding railroad contracts to companies in ex- 


change for money. An investigation was conducted, and 
the department head, Sir Hector-Louis Langevin, was 
found to have been negligent. Abbott asked for his res- 
ignation, and Langevin submitted it in September 1891. 

In 1892, the Manitoba school dispute caused addi- 
tional problems for Abbott's administration. The Mani- 
toba provincial government had passed a law in 1890 
that abolished tax support for Roman Catholic and 
French-language schools. A single nonreligious school 
system was established, with English as the official lan- 
guage. The Roman Catholic and French-speaking popu- 
lation in Manitoba charged that this action violated a law 
of 1870. In 1891, the Supreme Court of Canada had de- 
clared the 1890 law unconstitutional. However, in the 
summer of 1892, the court's ruling was reversed by the 
British Privy Council, which was then the highest court 
of appeal. Tension between English- and French- 
speaking Canadians increased. But Abbott, with Thomp- 
sons help, prevented a political crisis by keeping the 
dispute in court. 

A depression that had hit Canada in 1890 became 
worse during Abbotts term. His health began to fail, and 
he was able to handle fewer responsibilities. Queen Vic- 
toria of Britain knighted Abbott in May 1892. He went to 
London in October for medical advice but resigned 
from office in November. Thompson succeeded Abbott 
as leader of the Conservative Party and as prime minis- 
ter. Abbott later returned to Montreal, where he died on 
DEL 3071893: P B. Waite 

See also Prime minister of Canada. 


Additional resources 


Donaldson, Gordon. The Prime Ministers of Canada. Doubleday, 
1994. Includes a chapter on Abbott. 

Waite, P. B. Canada, 1874-1896: Arduous Destiny. 1971. Reprint. 
Oxtord, 1996. Examines the years of the Abbott administration. 


Abbott, Robert Sengstacke (1868-1940), was an 
African American journalist. He founded the Chicago 
Defender, which became one of the nations largest and 
most influential black newspapers. 

Under Abbotts leadership, the Defender encouraged 
Southern blacks to move 
to the industrial states of 
the North. Beginning in 
the 1910's, and continuing 
after World War | (1914- 
1918), hundreds of thou- 
sands of blacks moved to 
the North in search of bet- 
ter job Opportunities. Ab- 
bott’s editorials demanded 
full equality for blacks. 

Abbott was born on 
Nov. 28, 1868, on St. Si- 
mon’s tsland, Georgia. His 
parents had been slaves. 
He learned about printing 
at his stepfather's newspaper, the Woodville (Georgia) 
Times, and later at Hampton Institute in Virginia. Abbott 
put himself through Kent Law School (now Chicago-Kent 
College of Law) by working as a printer. He graduated in 
1899 and became a lawyer. But he decided he could bet- 
ter serve African Americans by publishing a newspaper. 
He founded the Chicago Defender, a weekly, in 1905. 


Chicago Daily Detender 
Robert Sengstacke Abbott 





A OR A 


et ee ee Ee: 
—- —_— 


wr as Ss 


In 1956, under John H. Sengstacke, Abbott's nephew 


and successor, the Defender became a daly. Around the 


Defender, Sengstacke built the largest chain of black 


newspapers in the United States. 


Robert K. Stewart 


Abbreviation is a shortened form of a word ora 


phrase. Some abbreviations include only initial letters of 
a word, as when Feb. stands for February. Other abbrevi- 


ations use first and last letters, as when V7 stands for 
Vermont Key letters in a word or phrase may also be 
used, as when VCR stands for videocassette recorder. 
Abbreviations save space. They are used in tables, in 
technical and scientific material, and in indexes, foot- 
notes, and bibliographies. They are also used instead of 
long official names, as in AFL-C/O (American Federation 
of Zabor and Congress of /ndustrial Organizations). Ab- 
breviations called acronyms are words made up of the 


first letters or syllables of other words, such as UNESCO 


(United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Or- 


ganization). Such abbreviations are often written without 


periods. Symbols that are not made up of letters of the 
alphabet are not abbreviations, but they serve the same 
purpose abbreviations do (see Symbol). 

Abbreviations have been found on the earliest known 
tombs, monuments, and coins. When manuscripts were 
written by hand, abbreviations were used to save time 


Common abbreviations 


Abbreviation 7 


and space. Many Latin abbreviations are still used. 
Many World Book articles contain abbreviations in 
lists, tables, picture credits, and captions. Abbreviations 
are also used to a limited extent in the text of articles. 
This article includes a table of abbreviations commonly 
used in published works. Other categories of abbrevia- 
tions can be found in the following World Book articles: 
Canadian provinces. Abbreviations are given in the 
Canada article in the table 7he provinces and territories 


of Canada. 


College degrees. Some common abbreviations can 
be found in the article Degree, College. 

New Deal agencies. Abbreviations for many New 
Deal agencies are ina table in the article New Deal. 

Proofreading. The most common abbreviations and 
marks used by proofreaders are in a table in the article 


Proofreading. 


States. Abbreviations for the states are in a table with 


the article United States. 


United Nations. Abbreviations for United Nations 
agencies and committees are given in the table 7he 
United Nations system with the article United Nations. 

Weights and measures. Abbreviations can be found 
in tables with the article Weights and measures. 


Sara Garnes 





A.A.—Alcoholics Anonymous; 
Associate in Arts 

AAA—American Automobile 
Association 

AAU—Amateur Athletic 
Union 

AC—alternating current 

ACLU—American Civil Liber- 
ties Union 

A.D.— anno Domini(in the 
year of our Lord) 

ad lib—ad /ibitum (as one 
pleases) 

AFL-C1lO—American Federa- 
tion of Labor and Congress 
of Industrial Organizations 


AIDS—acquired immunodefi- 


ciency syndrome 
a.k.a.—also known as 
ALA—American Library Asso- 
ciation 
AM-—amplitude modulation 
a.m., A.M.—ante meridiem 
(before noon) 
AMA—American Medical As- 
sociation 
AMVETS—American Veter- 
ans of World War II, Korea, 
and Vietnam 
anon.—anonymous 
AP—Associated Press 
assn.—association 
assoc,—associate; association 
asst.—assistant 
ATM—automated teller ma- 
chine 
atty.—attorney 
Aug.— August 
ave.~—avenue 
AWOL — absent without leave 
b.—born 
BBC-— British Broadcasting 
Corporation 


B.C.—before Christ 
bibliog.— bibliography 
biog.—biography 
bldg.—building 
blvd.—boulevard 
Br.—Britain; British; Brother 
Btu—British thermal unit 


c.— circa (about); centum (cen- 


tury); copy; copyright 
cal, cal.—calorie (heat) 
Cal, Cal.—calorie (nutrition) 
cap.— capital; capital letter 
CB—citizens band 
CBC—Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation 
CD—compact disc; certificate 
of deposit 
CDC—Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention 
CD-ROM-—-compact disc 
read-only memory 
CDT-—Central Daylight Time 
cent.— century 
CEO-—chief executive officer 
ch., chap.—chapter 
ClA—Central Intelligence 
Agency 
CO—commanding ofticer 
c/o—in care of 
co.—company; county 
COD-—cash on delivery 
Cong.—Congress 
cont.—continued 
coop.—cooperative 
corp.—corporation 
CPA~certified public ac 
countant 
CPB—Corporation for Public 
Broadcasting 


CST —Central Standard Time 
CT=computed tomography 
D— Democrat 


d.—died 

D.A.—district attorney 

DAR—Daughters of the 
American Revolution 

db, dB—decibel 

D.C.— District of Columbia 

DC—direct current 

DDT — dichloro-diphenyl- 
trichloroethane 

dec.—deceased 

Dec.—December 

Dem.— Democrat 

dept.—department 

DNA--deoxyribonucleic acid 

DOA ~ dead on arrival 

Dr.—doctor 

DST —daylight saving time 

DUI-— driving under the influ- 
ence 

E.—east 

ECG—electrocardiogram 

ed.— edition; editor; edited 

EEOC—Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission 

e.g. exempli gratia for exam- 
ple 

EPA--Environmental Protec- 
tion Agency 

eq.— equal; equation 

ERA—Equal Rights Amend- 
ment: earned run average 

ESP—extrasensory perception 

esp. especially 

EST— Eastern Standard Time 

E.T.A.—estimated time of ar- 
rival 

et al.—et alibi and else- 
wherel: et a/iiland others 

et seq.— ef sequens, ef se 
quentis. et Sequentia\and 
what follows 

etc.— et Ceterasand so tarth 


EU—European Union 

FAA—Federal Aviation Ad- 
ministration 

FBI—Federal Bureau of Inves- 
tigation 

FCC— Federal Communica- 
tions Commission 

FDA—Food and Drug Admin- 
istration 

FDIC—Federal Deposit Insur- 
ance Corporation 

Feb.—February 

ff.—folios (page numbers); fol- 
lowing (pages! 

FHA—Federal Housing Ad- 
ministration; Future Home- 
makers of America 

FICA—Federal Insurance 
Contributions Act 

fig.— figure 

ft.— floruit (flourished) 

FM-— frequency modulation 

Fr.—Father: French; Friar 

Fri. —Friday 

FTC-— Federal Trade Commis: 
sion 

GDP gross domestic prod: 
uct 

GED—General Educational 
Development 

Gl-—government issue 

GNP--gross national product 

Gov.— Governor 

Govt— government 

h.—hour 

HIV —human immunodeti- 
ciency virus 

HMO—health maintenance 
organization 


8 Abbreviation 


Common abbreviations (continued) 


H.M.S.—His (or Her} Majesty's 


Ship 

Hon.—Honorable 

H.P., h.p.—horsepower 

HQ—headquarters 

hr.—hour 

HUD— Department of Hous- 
ing and Urban Develop- 
ment 

Hz—hertz 


ibid.— ibidem (in the same 
place) 

IBM— International Business 
Machines Corporation 

ICBM — intercontinental bal- 
listic missile 

1CU—intensive care unit 

id.— idem (the same) 

i.e.—id est (that is) 

ill.—illustrated 

IMF—International Monetary 
Fund 

inc.—incorporated; including 

1.0.U.—I owe you 

1Q— intelligence quotient 

IRA—Irish Republican Army; 
individual retirement ac- 
count 


J—joule 
Jan.— January 
Jr.—Junior 


k.—carat; knot 
kHz—kilohertz 
KP—kitchen police 


lab.— laboratory 

lang.— language 

lat.—latitude 

L.C.—Library of Congress 

lit.— literature 

loc. cit—/oco citato (in the 
place cited) 

log.—logarithm 

lon., long.—longitude 

itd.—Limited 


m.— minute; mile; meter 
max.—maximum 
meas.—measure 
meg, MB—megabyte 
mfd.— manufactured 
mfg.—manufacturing 
mfr.— manufacturer 
MHz—megahertz 
M.I.A.—missing in action 
min.—minimum; minute 
misc.—miscellaneous 
M.O.— money order; mail or- 
der; modus operandi 
(method of working) 
Mon.— Monday 
M.P.—Member of Parliament 
MP-— Military Police 
mph—miles per hour 
MRI—magnetic resonance 
imaging 
mss.— manuscripts 
MST—Mountain Standard 
Time 
Mt.— Mount 


n.—noun; note (footnote) 


N.—north 

NAACP-—National Associa- 
tion for the Advancement 
of Colored People 

NAFTA—North American 
Free Trade Agreement 

N.A.LA.— National Associa- 
tion of Intercollegiate Ath- 
letics 

NASA-—National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration 

NASDAQ — National Associa- 
tion of Securities Dealers 
Automated Quotation (sys- 
tem) 

natl.— national 

NATO—North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization 

N.B., n.b.— nota bene (note 
well) 

NBC—National Broadcasting 
Company 

NCAA — Nationa! Collegiate 
Athletic Association 

NCO—noncommissioned offi- 
cer 

NEA—National Education As- 
sociation 

NIH— National Institutes of 
Health 

NLRB—National Labor Rela- 
tions Board 

no.— numero; number 

non seq.—70n sequitur (it 
does not follow) 

Nov.— November 

NOW— National Organization 
for Women 

N.P.-notary public 

N/S, N.S.F.—not sufficient 
funds 


OAS— Organization of Ameri- 
can States 

ob.— obiit (died) 

Oct.—October 

OK, O.K.—correct; all right 

o.p.— out of print 

op. cit.— opere citato(in the 
work cited) 

OPEC— Organization of Petro- 
leum Exporting Countries 

OSHA~— Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration 


Pp.— page; part 

P—pence; penny 

PAC— political action commit- 
tee 

Parl.—Parliament 

pat.— patent; patented 

PBS—Public Broadcasting 
System 

PC— personal computer 

PCB—polychlorinated 
bipheny! 

pd.— paid 

PIN—personal identification 
number 

pk.—park; peak; peck 

pl.—plural; place; plate 

PLO~- Palestine Liberation 
Organization 

p.m.— post mortem 


p.m., P.M.—post meridiem 
(after noon) 

P.O.— post office 

pop.— population 

POW-— prisoner of war 

p.p.—parcel post 

ppd.—prepaid 

pref.—preface 

pro tem.— pro tempore (for 
the time being) 

prov.—province 

P.S.— post scriptum (post- 
script} 

pseud.— pseudonym 

PST—Pacific Standard Time 

PTA—Parent-Teacher Associ- 
ation 


Q.E.D.— quod erat demon- 
strandum (which was to be 
shown or proved) 

quot.—quotation 

q.v.— quod vide (which see) 


R.—rex (king); regina (queen); 
Republican; River 

RAF—Royal Air Force 

RAM-—random-access memo- 


ry 

R.C.—Red Cross; Roman 
Catholic 

R.D.—rural delivery 

rd.—road 

ref.—refer; reference 

reg.—region; regulation 

Rep.—Republic; Republican; 
Representative 

Rev.—Reverend 

rev.—revised 

R.LP.— requiescat in pace (rest 
in peace) 

R.N.—Royal Navy; registered 
nurse 

RNA—ribonucleic acid 

ROM-—read-only memory 

ROTC—Reserve Officers 
Training Corps 

rpm—revolutions per minute 

R.R.—railroad; rural route 

R.S.V.—Revised Standard 
Version (Bible) 

R.S.V.P.—Reépondez, sil vous 
p/ait (Answer, if you 
please) 

Rt Rev.—Right Reverend 

RV—recreational vehicle 

R.V.—Revised Version (Bible) 


S.—south 

s—second 

Sat.— Saturday 

sci.—science; scientific 

sec.—second 

SEC—Securities and Ex- 
change Commission 

Sept.— September 

secy.—secretary 

Sen.— Senator 

Sig.— signature 

sing.— singular 

sp.—spelling; species 

SPCA-— Society for the Pre- 
vention of Cruelty to Ani- 
mals 


sq.—square 

Sr.—Senior 

SS.—Saints 

S.S.—steamship 

SST—supersonic transport 

St.—Saint; strait; street 

STD—sexually transmitted 
disease 

Ste.— Sainte 

Sun.—Sunday 

Supt.— Superintendent 


syn.— synonym 


tech.—technical; technology 

temp.—temperature 

ter., terr.—territory; terrace 

theol.—theological; theology 

Thurs.—Thursday 

TNT—trinitrotoluene 

tp., twp.—township 

tr.—translation; transpose 

treas.—treasurer 

trig.—trigonometry 

Tues.—Tuesday 

op Wo: pao 
pay 


UAW—United Automobile 
Workers 

UFO—unidentified flying ob- 
ject 

UHF—ultrahigh frequency 

univ.— university 

UPI— United Press Interna- 
tional 

UPS—United Parcel Service 

URL—uniform resource loca- 
tor 

U.S.—United States 


v.—verb 

V—-volt 

v., vid.— vide (see) 

v., VS.— versus (against) 

VAT~—value-added tax 

VCR—videocassette recorder 

vet— veteran, veterinarian 

VFW-— Veterans of Foreign 
Wars of the United States 

VHF-—very high frequency 

VIP—very important person 

viz.— videlicet (namely) 

vol.— volume 

v.p.—vice president 


W-—Watt 

W.—West 

WCTU—Woman’s Christian 
Temperance Union 

Wed.—Wednesday 

wt—weight 


Xmas—Christmas 


YMCA~—Young Men's Chris- 
tian Association 

YWCA—Young Women's 
Christian Association 

YM-YWHA— Young Men's 
and Young Women’s He- 
brew Association 


ZIP—Zoning Improvement 
Plan 
zool.—zoology 





> 


| 





Diaphragm 


Liver 


Spleen 


Stomach 


Large 
intestine 


Small 
intestine 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Robert Demarest 


The abdomen is a large body cavity that lies between the thorax 
(chest) and the pelvic cavity. The abdomen contains various inter- 
nal organs, including the major organs of digestion. 


Abdomen is a large body cavity between the thorax 
(chest) and the pelvic cavity. A strong wall of muscle, 
called the diaphragm, separates the abdomen from the 
thorax. But no structure separates the abdomen from the 
pelvic cavity. The abdominal organs include the stom- 
ach, liver, pancreas, intestines, kidneys, adrenal glands, 
and spleen. A thin membrane known as the peritoneum 
lines the entire abdominal cavity and covers most of the 
abdominal organs. Two large blood vessels, the aorta 
and vena cava, run along the spine and pass through the 
diaphragm and into the thorax. 

The front wall of the abdomen consists of layers of 
sheetlike muscles attached to the ribs above and the 
pelvic bones helow. These muscles hold in the abdomi- 
nal organs and assist in bending and rotating the body 
trunk. Other muscles and the backbone form the rear 
wall of the abdomen. 

The abdomen is the part of the body behind the tho- 
rax of insects, crustaceans, and certain other kinds of an- 
imals without backbones. Laurence H. Beck 

Related articles. See the Trans-Vision three-dimensional pic- 
ture with Human body. See also: 


Appendix Intestine Pancreas Spleen 
Coelom Kidney Pelvis Stomach 
Diaphragm Liver Solar plexus 


Abduction. See Kidnapping. 
Abdul-Jabbar, 418 doo! juh BAHR, Kareem, kuh — 
REEM (1947- ), became one of the greatest centers In 
basketball history. Standing 7 feet 2 inches (218 centime 
ters) tall, he combined his height advantage with quick, 
graceful movements, fine shooting, and excellent team 
work. He was especially known for a sweeping hook 
shot that became known as the ‘sky hook. | 
Abdul-Jabbar played in the Nationa! Basketball A 


Abdullahi 9 


ation (NBA) from 1969 until his retirement at the end of 
the 1988-1989 season. During his professional career, he 
scored a record 38,387 regular-season points. He played 
in 1,560 regular season games over 20 seasons. Abdul- 
Jabbar led the NBA in scoring in the 1970-1971 and 1971- 
1972 seasons. He was named the league’s Most Valuable 
Player six times. 

During his college career, Abdul-Jabbar led UCLA to 
national championships in 1967, 1968, and 1969. After 
graduation, he joined the Milwaukee Bucks of the NBA. 
In 1975, he was traded to the Los Angeles Lakers, finish- 
ing his career with that team. 

Abdul-Jabbar was born in New York City. His given 
and family name was Ferdinand Lewis Alcindor, Jr. He 
received the name Kareem Abdul-Jabbar when he 
adopted the Islamic religion in 1971. His name was 
legally changed to Abdul-Jabbar in 1971. An autobiogra- 


phy, Kareem, was published in 1990. Bob Logan 





Focus on ae 
Kareem AbdutJabbar scored more points than any other play- 
er in the history of the National Basketball Association. 


Abdullah Hi, ab DUHL uh or ab dool LAH (1962- iF 
became king of Jordan in 1999, following the death of 
his father, Hussein. He is the oldest son of Hussein and 
his second wife, Princess Muna al-Hussein. Before tak- 
ing the throne, Abdullah was a career military officer. 

Abdullah was born in Amman, the capital of Jordan, 
and attended high school at Deerfield Academy in the 
United States. In the 1980's, he studied international rela- 
tions at Oxford University in the United Kingdom and 
Georgetown University in the United States. He also had 
military training at schools in both countries. 

In 1981, Abdullah joined the Jordanian army as a sec- 
ond lieutenant. He was promoted to colonel in 1993 and 
became commander of Jordans special forces in 1994. 
While in the military, Abdullah represented his father on 
diplomatic missions to the Middle East, Europe, and the 
United States. 


10 A Becket, Thomas 


Abdullah is married to Queen Rania Abdullah, a Pales- 
tinian from the West Bank. They have a son, Hussein, 
and a daughter, Iman. 
A Becket, Thomas. See Becket, Saint Thomas. 
Abel, AY buAl the second son of Adam and Eve, was a 
shepherd (Genesis 4). He offered some of the first born 
of his flocks as a sacrifice to the Lord. His sacrifice was 
accepted. But when his older brother, Cain, who was a 
farmer, offered “fruit of the ground, his sacrifice was re- 
fused. Cain grew angry and killed Abel. See also Adam 
and Eve; Cain. Carole R. Fontaine 
Abelard, A8 uh LAnrp, Peter (1079-1142), was one of 
the leading philosophers and theologians of the Middle 
Ages. But he is probably best known for his love affair 
with Heloise, a gifted young Frenchwoman. 

Abelard was born near Nantes, France. His father, a 
nobleman, planned a military career for him, but 
Abelard became a scholar. From 1113 to 1118, he taught 
theology in Paris. There, Abelard founded a school that, 
along with two others, developed into the University of 
Paris. 

In 1113, Abelard became the tutor of Heloise, the 
niece of an official of the Cathedral of Notre Dame. A 
love affair developed between Abelard and the young 
woman, and she became pregnant. Soon after the birth 
of their baby in 1118, Héloise and Abelard were secretly 
married. Fulbert, Héloises uncle, learned of the love af- 
fair and marriage and was outraged. In anger, Fulbert 
hired several men who broke into Abelard’s house and 
castrated him. After the attack, Abelard and Heloise sep- 
arated. Abelard became a monk, and Héloise joined an 
order of nuns. The fame of their tragic love affair result- 
ed largely from the many letters they exchanged. 

Abelard’s major contributions to medieval thought 
were in the areas of logic and theology. He urged the 
use of logic in order to understand and defend Christi- 
anity. Abelard compiled a book called Sic et Non (Yes 
and No} \t consisted of the conflicting views of theologi- 
cal authorities on various religious problems and princi- 
ples. The work became an influential textbook in the me- 
dieval philosophical system called Scholasticism (see 
Scholasticism). Abelard also wrote an important book 
on ethics and The Story of My Misfortunes, a revealing 
autobiography. William J. Courtenay 
Aberdeen, 48 uhr DEEN (pop. 201,099), is the third 
largest city in Scotland. Only Glasgow and Edinburgh 
have more people. Aberdeen lies on the east coast of 
northern Scotland, along the North Sea and between 
the River Dee and River Don (see Scotland [political 
map]). Sometimes called the Granite City, Aberdeen has 
many office and apartment buildings made of gleaming 
gray granite. It has long been the main port and distribu- 
tion center for products of northern Scotland. Its econo- 
my is based on trade and other service industries. 

Aberdeen dates from the 1100's. Much of the modern 
city was laid out during the late 1700's and 1800's. During 
the 1800's, Aberdeen became the marketing center for 
the surrounding agricultural area, and it developed fish- 
ing, granite, and textile industries. Since the 1970's, the 
production of petroleum in the North Sea has brought 
new growth and prosperity to Aberdeen. The city has 
become the headquarters for businesses related to pe- 
troleum production. Thousands of new jobs have been 
created by this economic activity. A S. Mather 


Peter Gubser 


Aberdeen and Temair, 48 ur DEEN, tuh MAIR, Mar 
quess of (1847-1934), a British politician, served as gov- 
ernor general of Canada from 1893 to 1898. In 1896, he 
set an example for future governors general when he 
refused to approve last-minute political appointments 
recommended by outgoing Prime Minister Sir Charles 
Tupper. 

Aberdeen was born in Edinburgh, Scotland. His given 
and family name was John Campbell Hamilton-Gordon. 
He became the seventh Earl of Aberdeen in 1870. Lord 
Aberdeen attended St. Andrews University and Oxford 
University. He began his political career as a Conserva- 
tive but later joined the Liberal Party. Aberdeen was the 
chief British administrator in Ireland in 1886 and from 
1905 to 1915. He became a marquess in 1916. Aberdeen 
and his wife wrote a book about their life called We Twa 
(1925). 
Aberdeen Proving Ground, AB uhr Deen, Maryland, 
is the United States Army’s center for ordnance activi- 
ties. The Army tests vehicles, bombs, guns, and other 
ordnance there. The post is the home of the Army Ord- 
nance Center and School, the Army Test and Evaluation 
Command, and the Chemical Research Development 
and Engineering Center. It also has laboratories for bal- 
listic research, development and proof services, ord- 
nance disposal, and ergonomics (see Ergonomics). The 
post covers about 73,000 acres (29,000 hectares) and ex- 
tends about 18 miles (29 kilometers) along the upper 
part of Chesapeake Bay near Aberdeen. It was estab- 
lished in 1917. It is recognized as one of the leading mili- 
tary testing and research facilities in the world. 

Steve E. Dietrich 
Abernathy, Ralph David (1926-1990), was an Ameri- 
can civil rights leader. Abernathy served as president of 
the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) 
from 1968 to 1977. He succeeded Martin Luther King, Jr., 
who was murdered. In 1955 and 1956, Abernathy helped 
King lead a bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama, to 
protest racial discrimination (see King, Martin Luther, Jr. 
[The early civil rights movement). He and King helped 
organize the SCLC in 1957. 
Abernathy became the 
SCLCs vice president at 
large in 1965. In May 1968, 
he led the “Poor People's 
March’ on Washington, 
D.C., which dramatized 
problems faced by poor 
people. 

Abernathy was born in 
Linden, Alabama. He 
earned a B.S. degree at Al- 
abama State College and 
an M.S. degree at Atlanta 
University. He became a 
Baptist minister in 1948. 
Abernathy wrote And the Walls Came Tumbling Down: 
An Autobiography (1989). 
Aberration, in optics, is the failure of a lens or mirror 
to produce an image that is sharply focused and has the 
same proportions as the object being viewed. There are 
three main kinds of aberration: (1) point aberration, (2) 
distortion, and (3) chromatic aberration. 

Point aberration produces a fuzzy image by failing 


Jacques Monet 





Elaine Tomlin 


Ralph David Abernathy 


C. Eric Lincoln 








to focus light to a point. The three primary types of point 
aberration are (1) spherical aberration, (2) astigmatism, 
and (3) coma. 

Spherical aberration occurs in a lens in which one or 
both sides are curved like a portion of the surface of a 
sphere. A spherical surface is easy and inexpensive to 
produce. As a result, a typical lens in a camera, a pair of 
binoculars, or a small telescope is a piece of glass with 
spherical surfaces. This kind of lens focuses light well 
enough for those applications. 

To understand spherical aberration, imagine that par- 
allel rays of light strike a lens as shown in the accompa- 
nying illustration. If there were no aberration, all the rays 
would come to a focus at a point on the other side of 
the Jens. But because of aberration, rays that pass 
through different parts of it come to a focus at different 
points. All the points are located along the optical axis, 
an imaginary line through the center of the lens. Rays 
that pass through the lens near its center come to a fo- 
cus at a point relatively far from the lens. Rays that pass 
through the lens near its edge come to a relatively close 
focus. An inward-curving spherical mirror produces 
spherical aberration in a similar way. 

Aberrations are not necessarily a result of manufactur- 
ing errors. For example, even a lens with perfectly 
spherical sides could not focus all parallel rays that pass 
through it to a single point. 

In astigmatism, light comes to a focus as a line, rather 
than a point. In coma, the light focuses in the shape of a 
cone. Astigmatism and coma make the image blurry at 
its edge but not its center. 

Distortion results when a Jens or mirror focuses light 
at an incorrect distance from the optical axis. The image 
will appear either stretched or compressed near the 
edges. 


Spherical aberration occurs 
in a lens because light rays 
that pass through the lens at 
different distances from its 
center come to a focus at dif- 
ferent distances irom its edge. 





WORLD BOOK illustration 





stration 


WWORLD BOOK 


Chromatic aberration occurs because a lens focuses different 
colors of light at different points —violet light at the nearest point 
red at the farthest, and the other colors at points in between. 


Abnormal psychology 11 


Chromatic aberration occurs in lenses but not in 
mirrors. It occurs because a lens focuses light rays of 
different colors at different distances. The distance to 
the focal point of a ray of light depends upon the wave- 
length of the ‘ight. Wavelength is the distance between 
successive crests of a light wave. Each color has its own 
wavelength. From the longest wavelength to the short- 
est, the colors of visible light include red, orange, yel- 
low, green, blue, and violet. 

In /ongitudinal chromatic aberration, a \ens focuses 
the different colors at different points on the optical axis. 
Violet light comes to a focus that is closest to the lens. 
Then comes the focal point for blue light, then the point 
for green, and so forth. In /ateral chromatic aberration, 
focal points are also offset above and below the optical 
axis—red the least, violet the most. W. Thomas Roberts, jr. 

See also Lens; Mirror; Parabola; Telescope. 
Abidjan, 48 jh JAHN (pop. 1,930,000), is the largest city 
of Cote d'Ivoire and one of the busiest seaports in west- 
ern Africa. The city lies along a lagoon. A canal connects 
the lagoon with the Gulf of Guinea, an arm of the At- 
lantic Ocean (see Céte d'Ivoire {map)). 

Abidjan has many high-rise office and apartment 
buildings and single-family houses. But it also has areas 
of overcrowded slums, especially in the suburbs. Its 
port is a center of West African import and export activi- 
ties. Products made in the city include automobile parts, 
beer, and soap. Businesses in Abidjan also process ca- 
cao beans, coffee beans, and palm and vegetable oils. 

In the late 1800's, France took control of Abidjan and 
the rest of Céte d'Ivoire. In 1934, Abidjan became the 
capital. Cote d'Ivoire gained independence from France 
in 1960. In 1983, the country’s legislature approved a 
proposal allowing the capital to be moved from Abidjan 
to Yamoussoukro. Robert |. Rotberg 
Abilene, A8 uh Leen (pop. 6,543), a city in east-central 
Kansas, is a railroad shipping center for crops raised in 
the east-central part of the state (see Kansas [political 
map)}. Abilene is the seat of Dickinson County. 

Between 1867 and 1872, cowhands drove longhorn 
cattle over the Chisholm Trail to Abilene, where the 
stock was loaded and shipped to Eastern markets. Prob- 
ably the biggest year was 1871, when 5,000 cowhands 
and 700,000 head of cattle came to Abilene from Texas. 
Wild Bill Hickok became famous as a ‘two-gun marshal” 
of Abilene. 

President Dwight D. Eisenhower grew up in Abilene. 
The city is the site of the Eisenhower Center. The center 
includes Eisenhower's boyhood home, the Eisenhower 
Museum, Eisenhower Library, and the Place of Medita- 
tion, where Eisenhower is buried. The city has a council- 
manager form of government. James R Shortridge 

See also Westward movement in America (Cattle 
frontiers). 

Abnormal psychology is the scientific study of psy- 
chological disorders. These disorders affect the way 
people feel, think, speak, and behave. The field of abnor- 
mal psvchology is sometimes called psychopathology. 

Standards of normal and abnormal behavior differ 
from society to society and change as social conditions 
and customs change. For example, the practice of se- 
verely beating children to discipline them was consid- 
ered normal behavior tor many centuries. Today, many 
people consider such behavior abnormal and cruel. 





12. Abnormal psychology 


Studies in abnormal psychology are conducted 
mainly by clinical psychologists, psychiatrists, and social 
workers. These experts collect data by such means as 
personality and intelligence tests, experiments, and case 
studies. One kind of case study, an idiographic study, 
describes the behavior and thought patterns of one per- 
son. Another type, called a nomothetic study, examines 
the behavior and thought patterns common to many 
people who suffer the same disorder. 

Theories of abnormal psychology describe mental 
illnesses, suggest their possible causes, and propose 
certain methods of treating them. These theories can be 
divided into four main groups or schools: (1) biophysi- 
cal, (2) intrapsychic, (3) existential, and (4) behavioral. 

Biophysical theories emphasize the importance of un- 
derlying physical causes of psychological disturbances. 
Such disturbances include two main groups: (1) those 
due to a medical condition, such as a disease or injury, 
and (2) those related to the use of a drug or medication. 
In these disorders, the condition, drug, or medication is 
believed to cause mental problems by affecting the 
brain or other parts of the nervous system. Biophysical 
theorists think such factors also underlie mental disturb- 
ances whose causes have not yet been identified. They 
believe many disturbances result from inherited physi- 
cal defects. 

Biophysical therapists treat mental disorders mainly 
with tranquilizers, antidepressants, sleeping pills, and 
other drugs. They sometimes use electric shock or sur- 
gery on the brain or other parts of the nervous system. 

Intrapsychic theories focus on the emotional basis of 
abnormal behavior. Intrapsychic theorists believe that 
conflicts in early childhood cause people to worry or 
have other unpleasant feelings throughout life. 

Psychologists use the term neurotic to describe peo- 
ple who sometimes behave abnormally but can usually 
cope with everyday problems. Individuals who lose 
track of reality are called psychotic. Some psychotics be- 
lieve in very unrealistic ideas called de/usions. They may 
also think perceptions such as “hearing voices’ or “see- 
ing visions, called ha//ucinations, are real. 

A treatment called psychoanalysis is often used to 
help neurotics and psychotics understand and resolve 
their conflicts and anxieties. During psychoanalysis, the 
patient talks to the therapist, who is called an analyst In 
one technique, called free association, the patient talks 
to the analyst about whatever thoughts, images, or feel- 
ings come to mind. 

Existential theories of abnormal behavior stress the 
importance of current experiences and the person's 
view of himself or herself. Existential therapists try to 
help patients gain insight into their feelings, accept re- 
sponsibility for their lives, and fulfill their potential. 

Behavioral theories emphasize the effects of learning 
on behavior. Behaviorists use a learning process called 
conditioning to change abnormal behavior. In this 
process, behaviorists treat disturbed people by teaching 
them acceptable behavior patterns and reinforcing de- 
sired behavior by rewards and punishments. 

History. Since ancient times, people have attempted 
to understand and treat mental disorders. Many early 
societies believed that demons caused abnormal behav- 
ior. Later, people came to regard the mentally ill as dan- 
gerous persons with insufficient self-control to be nor- 


mal. Disturbed individuals were imprisoned, sometimes 
locked in chains, or sent to dismal institutions called in- 
sane asylums. 

During the late 1700's, the idea that abnormal behav- 
ior resulted from serious personal problems began to 
be investigated. People started treating the mentally ill 
more humanely. In the 1800's, people believed in possi- 
ble physical reasons for different kinds of mental disor- 
ders. A German psychiatrist named Emil Kraepelin be- 
came famous for his Kompendium der Psychiatrie (A 
Textbook of Psychiatry, 1883). This book classified vari- 
ous mental illnesses according to their specific types of 
abnormal behaviors. 

In the late 1800's and early 1900's, Sigmund Freud, an 
Austrian physician, developed theories about the effects 
of unconscious drives on behavior. Freud and his fol- 
lowers laid the foundations for both the intrapsychic 
school of psychopathology and psychoanalysis. The 
Freudians became especially known for their use of free 
association to interpret dreams, analyze memories, and 
make people aware of their unconscious conflicts. 

Later in the 1900's, researchers proposed several oth- 
er theories and treatments of abnormal psychology. 
These proposals centered on the relationship of psycho- 
logical, physical, and social conditions in the individual 
and society. Leah Blumberg Lapidus 

See also Mental illness and its list of Re/ated articles. 


Additional resources 


Frances, Allen, and First, M. B. Your Mental Hea/th. Scribner, 
1998. 

Hales, Dianne and RE. Caring for the Mind. The Comprehensive 
Guide to Mental Health. Bantam, 1995. 


Abolition movement was activity that took place in 
the 1800's to end slavery. Most abolitionist activity oc- 
curred in the United States and Britain, but antislavery 
movements operated in other countries as well. 

In the United States, antislavery activity began in 
colonial days. During the 1680's, Quakers in Pennsylva- 
nia condemned slavery on moral grounds. In the late 
1700's, several leaders of the American revolutionary 
movement, including Thomas Jefferson and Patrick Hen- 
ry, spoke out against slavery. 

The American Colonization Society, founded in 1816, 
led antislavery protests during the early 1800s. It tried to 
send freed slaves to Liberia in Africa. The abolitionist Eli- 
hu Embree published the first periodicals devoted whol- 
ly to the abolition of slavery. He established a weekly 
newspaper in Jonesborough, Tenn., in 1819 and a 
monthly publication, The Emancipator, which appeared 
in 1820. In 1831, the abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison 
began publication of his newspaper, 7he Liberator. Gar- 
rison demanded immediate freedom for slaves. The 
American Anti-Slavery Society, founded in 1833, sup- 
ported Garrisons crusade. The abolition movement 
gradually spread throughout the Northern States de- 
spite bitter and violent opposition by Southern slave- 
holders and Northerners who favored slavery. In 1837, a 
mob murdered Elijah P. Lovejoy, a newspaper editor of 
Alton, lll, who had published antislavery editorials. 

Many famous abolitionists came from New England. 
They included Garrison, poets James Russell Lowell and 
John Greenleaf Whittier, and reformer Wendell Phillips. 
Others, such as the merchant brothers Arthur and 








Lewis Tappan and the reformer Thecdore Weld, came 
from Middle Atlantic or Midwestern states. 

Women also played an important role in the abolition 
movement. Lucretia Mott and the sisters Sarah and An- 
gelina Grimké organized groups and made speeches. 
Many free blacks also joined the abolitionists. They in- 
cluded James Forten and Robert Purvis, wealthy 
Philadelphia merchants; Frederick Douglass, a former 
fugitive slave from Maryland; and Sojourner Truth, a 
freed slave from New York. 

The movement entered a new phase in 1840, when 
some of its leaders entered politics and founded the Lib- 
erty Party. James G. Birney, a former slaveholder born in 
Kentucky, ran as the party's candidate for president in 
1840 and 1844. In 1848, abolitionists became an impor- 
tant element in the Free Soil Party. After 1854, most abo- 
litionists supported the Republican Party. 

Even after abolitionists entered politics, they re- 
mained more interested in their cause than in political 
offices. They combined political protest with direct ac- 
tion. Their homes often became stations on the under- 
ground railroad, which helped slaves fleeing to the free 
states or to Canada. 

After the American Civil War began in 1861, abolition- 
ists rallied to the Union cause. They rejoiced when Presi- 
dent Abraham Lincoln issued the Emancipation Procla- 
mation on Jan. 1, 1863, declaring the slaves free in many 
parts of the South. In 1865, the 13th Amendment to the 
Constitution abolished slavery in the United States. 
Large numbers of abolitionists then joined the fight to 
win social and political equality for blacks. 

in the United Kingdom, abolitionists worked to end 
the international slave trade and to free slaves in the 
British colonies. Slavery had never flourished in England 
itself. On the other hand, many English people had be- 
come wealthy through the slave trade. 

William Wilberforce, a statesman and orator, headed 
the antislavery movement in England. In 1807, he helped 
persuade Parliament to pass a bill outlawing the slave 
trade. In 1833, another bill abolished slavery throughout 
the British Empire. —_ David Herbert Donald 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Adams, Charles Francis Kemble, Fanny 
Adams, John Quincy (The Gag _Liberty Party 


Rules) Lovejoy, Elijah P. 
Banneker, Benjamin Lowell, James Russell 
Barnburners Lundy, Benjamin 
Brown, John Mott, Lucretia Coffin 
Child, Lydia Maria Phillips, Wendell 
Clay, Cassius M. Stone, Lucy 


Stowe, Harriet Beecher 
Sumner, Charles 

Truth, Sojourner 
Underground railroad 
Walker, David 

Whittier, John Greenleaf 
Wilberforce, William 
Woolman, John 


Crandall, Prudence 
Dickinson, Anna Elizabeth 
Douglass, Frederick 
Emancipation Proclamation 
Forten, james 

Free Soil Party 

Gabriel 

Garrison, William Lloyd 
Grimké (family) 


Additional resources 


McPherson, James M. The Abolitionist Legacy 2nd ed. Prince- 
ton, 1995. The Struggle for Equality. 2nd ed. 1995. _ 

Ripley, C Peter, and others, eds. Witness for Freedom: African — 
American Voices on Race, Slavery, and Emancipation. Univ. ot 
N.C Pr., 1993. Representative documents from The Black Abo 
litionist Papers (1985-1992). 


Aborigines, Australian 13 


Abominable Snowman, wh BAHM uh nuh buhl, also 
called Yeti, YEH tee, is a creature said to live on Mount 
Everest and other mountains of the Himalaya range of 
Asia. Reports of such a creature have also come from re- 
mote parts of China, Siberia, and other parts of Asia. Ac- 
cording to legend, the Abominable Snowman is a hairy 
beast with a large, apelike body and a face that resem- 
bles that of a human being. It has long arms, and it walks 
erect on thick legs. 

The name Abominable Snowman may have come 
from a journalist's translation of metoh kangmi, a Ti- 
betan name for the creature. The name Yeti was given to 
it by the Sherpa people of Nepal. The word probably 
once meant a//-devouring creature. \t may refer to a 
mountain demon rather than a real creature. 

There is no direct evidence that the Yeti exists. Local 
tribes have reported seeing it, but their stories cannot 
be verified. Since the 1890's, travelers have reported 
sightings, and explorers have seen footprints of a large, 
unknown creature in the snow. In 1951, Eric Shipton, a 
British explorer, photographed “snowman ’ tracks near 
Everest. Several expeditions, including one sponsored 
by World Book in 1960, have searched for the creature. 
The explorers neither captured nor saw anything that 
might be the snowman. Scientists of the World Book ex- 
pedition said the tracks may have been made by bears 
or other animals. They found that the sun can cause 
such tracks to melt into large footprints. Daniel Cohen 


Additional resources 


Coleman, Loren, and Huyghe, Patrick. The Field Guide to Bigfoot, 
Yeti, and Other Mystery Primates Worldwide. Avon, 1999. 
Landau, Elaine. Yeti Millbrook. 1993. Younger readers. 


Aborigines, AB uh R/H/ uh neez, Australian, are the 
modern descendants of the first people to live in Aus- 
tralia. The word aborigines comes from the Latin phrase 
ab origine, meaning from the beginning. Spelled with a 
small a, the term refers to any people whose ancestors 
were the first to live in a country. The group of indige- 
nous Australians who live on islands off the northern tip 
of Queensland are known as Torres Strait Islanders. 

Most scholars believe the ancestors of today’s Aborig- 
ines first arrived in Australia from Southeast Asia be- 
tween 50,000 and 120,000 years ago. More than 300,000 
Aborigines lived on the continent when European 
colonists first reached Australia in 1788. These Aborig- 
ines spoke about 250 distinct languages with about 600 
dialects. Today, most of these languages have been lost. 
Some Aboriginal languages have between 3,000 and 
4,000 speakers today. Many Aborigines speak a local va- 
riety of English called Aboriginal English or Creole. 

Most early European colonists considered the 
Aborigines primitive. Because Aborigines have dark 
skin, Europeans thought that the Aborigines were inferi- 
or to them. When Europeans arrived, Aborigines had 
complex cultural, political, and economic rules and be- 
liefs. But Europeans did not initially understand or ap- 
preciate these elaborate social systems. 

During the first 150 years of European settlement, 
many Aborigines were killed in skirmishes across the 
frontier, poisoned by settlers, or died of diseases intro- 
duced by the Europeans. Others were forced into gov- 
ernment or missionary settlements. In the far north of 
Australia, however, many Aborigines were able to live 


14. Aborigines, Australian 


somewhat independently through the 1930s. Today, the 
Aborigines and the Torres Strait Islanders make up 
about 2 percent of the country’s population. 

Aboriginal life. Prior to the European colonization of 
Australia, Aborigines had complex social systems and 
beliefs that varied across the continent. Most Aboriginal 
groups were composed of people closely related 
through descent and marriage. Each group had its own 
spiritual ceremonies and stories about the origin of the 
group itself and its territory. Some ceremonies were se- 
cret. Men and women often had separate ceremonial 
practices but also came together in joint ceremonies. 

Aborigines had a spiritual relationship to the land 
through ancestral beings. According to Aboriginal be- 
liefs, these beings created the world long ago during a 
period called the Dreaming, or Dreamtime. Aborigines 
believe that these ancestral beings never died but 
merged with the natural world. 

Aboriginal groups did not have a formal government 
or a single leader. Territorial rights were based on de- 
scent, birth, and ceremonial ties to a region. When dis- 
putes about the use of the land arose, Aborigines nego- 
tiated among themselves to solve the dispute. 

The economy of Aboriginal society before European 
colonization consisted of hunting, fishing, and gather- 
ing. Men and boys hunted large sea and land animals, 
such as kangaroo, emu, and sea turtles. Women and 
young children collected plants, turtles, lizards, and sea 
snails, using digging sticks, boomerangs, and clubs. 
Aboriginal society emphasized sharing food among the 
larger family group. Aboriginal men and women wore 
waistbands and ornaments but little other clothing in 
the warm climate. In colder areas, the Aborigines used 
kangaroo and possum fur to make cloaks and beds. 

Aboriginal men and women crafted bags, baskets, 
and hunting instruments from bark, root fibers, and 
many other materials. They often decorated these items 
with red, yellow, and white ochres (pigments) and char- 






WHAT ABour 


USTRALIA 5 


“Human RighT/ 
ViolLATIONS f 


© Torsten Blackwood. Agence France-Presse 
An Aborigine takes part in a protest in Canberra. Australian 
Aborigines have called upon the government to apologize for 
the hardships that settlement has caused Aboriginal people. 


® 


coal. Some groups drew figures of the Dreamtime be- 
ings on these items as well as on cave walls, rock sur- 
faces, stones, and wooden planks. Some drawings were 
part of secret ceremonies. 

Aboriginal life today. Aborigines today are Aus- 
tralian citizens. But most still face discrimination and 
prejudice and are underprivileged economically, social- 
ly, and politically. Prior to the 1930's, the government 
thought that the Aboriginal population would die out as 
settlers moved onto their land. Children with mixed Eu- 
ropean and Aboriginal ancestry were separated from 
their families and placed in institutions, missions, and 
foster homes. These people became known as the 
Stolen Generation. From the 1930's through the 1960's, 
the government sought to assimilate (incorporate) Abo- 
rigines into the country’s economic, social, and political 
life. They discouraged Aboriginal social practices, reli- 
gious observances, and cultural beliefs. 

In the late 1960's, Aboriginal activists fought the gov- 
ernment policy of assimilation. In 1976, the government 
passed the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) 
Act, which allowed Aboriginal groups in the Northern 
Territory to reclaim their traditional lands. In 1980, the 
government formed the Aboriginal Development Com- 
mission. The commission, which is made up of Aborig- 
ines, manages lands regained by Aboriginal groups and 
makes loans to Aboriginal businesses. Today, Aborig- 
ines in Australia blend traditional and contemporary 
lifestyles and practices. Elizabeth A Povinelli 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Australia (The Aborigines; pic- Races, Human (Climatic adap- 


tures) tations) 
Boomerang Stolen Generation 
Jandamarra Tasmania 


Additional resources 


Bartlett, Anne. 7he Aboriginal Peoples of Australia. Lerner, 2001. 
Younger readers. 

Mulvaney, John, and Kamminga, Johan. Prehistory of Australia. 
Smithsonian Institution, 1999. 

Oxtord Companion to Aboriginal Art and Culture. Oxtord, 2000. 

Reynolds, Henry. Aboriginal Sovereignty. Allen & Unwin, 1996. 


Abortion is the ending of a pregnancy before birth. 
Early in a pregnancy, the fertilized egg that grows and 
develops is called an embrvo. After three months of de- 
velopment, it is usually called a fetus. An abortion caus- 
es the embryo or fetus to die. In a spontaneous abortion, 
also called a miscarriage, the fetus passes from the 
woman's body. Spontaneous abortions may result from 
such natural causes as an abnormality in the embryo, a 
hormonal imbalance, a long-term disease, or some oth- 
er disorder in the woman. In an induced abortion, the 
fetus is purposely removed from the woman's body. 
This article deals with induced abortion. 

Abortion methods. Physicians perform abortions in 
several ways. During the first trimester of pregnancy, the 
most common method is suction curettage, also known 
as vacuum aspiration. This method involves removing 
the fetus by suction, then scraping the woman's uterus 
with surgical instruments called curettes. 

Abortion can also be caused in the first trimester by a 
drug called mifepristone or RU-486. The drug blocks the 
action of the hormone progesterone in the woman's 
body. Normally, this hormone prepares the woman's 
uterus to receive and nourish the embryo. 





In the second trimester, many doctors use a method 
called dilation and evacuation, or simply D arid E. |n this 
way, the fetus is taken apart in the uterus and removed. 
Another method involves adding a salt solution to the 
amniotic fluid, the liquid that surrounds the fetus. The fe- 
tus then dies and passes from the woman’s body. An 
abortion also may be performed by adding hormonelike 
drugs called prostaglandins to the amniotic fluid. The 
drugs cause muscle contractions that expel the fetus. 

Induced abortion has been a topic of dispute for hun- 
dreds of years. People disagree on two basic questions. 
One question is whether the law should permit a 
woman to have an abortion and, if so, under what cir- 
cumstances. The other is whether the law should pro- 
tect the unborn. Those who wish to legally limit or for- 
bid abortion describe their position as ‘right-to-life’ or 
“pro-life.” Those who believe a woman should have the 
right to an abortion refer to themselves as “pro-choice.” 

Arguments against abortion are generally based 
on the belief that an abortion is the unjustified killing of 
an unborn child. Most people who oppose abortion be- 
lieve that human life begins as soon as a sperm fertilizes 
an egg. Some believe that human embryos and fetuses 
should have legal rights and that abortion is actually a 
form of murder. Many pro-life people believe that legal- 
ization of abortion increases the number of irresponsi- 
ble pregnancies and leads to a disrespect for human life. 

The Roman Catholic Church is probably the leading 
opponent of abortion. Conservative branches of other 
religions also disapprove of abortion. 

Arguments for abortion. Many people would allow 
abortion under certain circumstances. Some approve of 
abortion if a woman's life or health is endangered by 
her pregnancy. Others find abortion permissible if med- 
ical tests predict that the child will be born with a seri- 
ous mental or physical defect. Some people would per- 
mit abortion when a pregnancy has resulted from rape 
or incest. Others believe that a woman should have an 
unrestricted right to an abortion, especially before the 
fetus becomes viable—that is, capable of living outside 
the mother’s body. Most fetuses become viable after the 
sixth month of the pregnancy. 

People who favor an unrestricted right to abortion 
during early pregnancy often separate human life from 
personhood. They argue that personhood includes an 
ability to experience self-consciousness and to be ac- 
cepted as a member of a community. These people be- 
lieve fetuses are not persons and thus should not be 
granted the rights given to persons. Such pro-choice 
thinkers consider birth the beginning of personhood. 

Another pro-choice argument is that legal abortion 
eliminates many of the illegal abortions performed by 
unskilled individuals under unsanitary conditions. These 
abortions cause many women permanent injury or re- 
sult in their deaths. Also, some argue that women 
should not have to give birth to unwanted children be- 
cause the world’s population is growing rapidly and nat- 
ural resources are becoming scarce. 

Abortion history. Abortion has been practiced and 
debated since ancient times. The ancient Hebrews per- 
mitted it in cases where the mother’s life was at risk. 

The early Christian church generally opposed abor- 
tion. For hundreds of years, however, the church debat- 
ed whether abortion might be justifiable betore anima: 


Abortion 15 


tion. Church scholars defined animation as the point at 
which the fetus received a soul. According to church 
teachings, animation occurred between 40 and 80 days 
after conception (fertilization). From about the 1300's to 
the 1800's, abertion before animation became generally 
accepted in Europe tf the pregnancy endangered the life 
of the mother. If an abortion before animation took 
place for a less serious reason, many church scholars 
considered it to be wrong, but not homicide. 

In 1869, Pope Pius IX condemned abortion from the 
moment of conception, but some Catholic church schol- 
ars continued to teach that abortions performed to save 
the mother were morally acceptable. In 1895, the Roman 
Catholic Church declared that abortion is never justifi- 
able. Today, the Catholic church condemns all forms of 
direct abortion—that is, the intentional ending of preg- 
nancy. Current Catholic teaching permits indirect abor- 
tion, in which the fetus ts lost as a side effect of medical 
treatment designed to save the mother’s life. 

Abortion in the United States is a subject of public 
debate. Opinion polls show that most people think abor- 
tion should be legal. These people might disapprove of 
abortion or disagree with some of the reasons that 
women seek abortions, but they would permit a legal 
choice. Some believe only the states—and not the feder- 
al government—should regulate or outlaw abortion. 

Before the mid-1800's, abortion was not a crime under 
U.S. common law if it took place before quickening. 
Quickening is the time when the mother first feels the 
fetus moving. State laws prohibiting abortion began to 
appear in the 1820's. By 1900, every state except Ken- 
tucky had made abortion a serious crime. But some 
courts refused to impose penalties for early abortion. 

By the 1960's, pro-choice organizations in the United 
States had begun working to change state abortion 
laws. By the early 1970's, 14 states had laws permitting 
abortion if the woman's health was in danger or if the 
woman was a victim of incest or rape. 

In 1973, the Supreme Court of the United States deliv- 
ered a historic decision on abortion in the case of Roe v. 
Wade. The court ruled that states could not forbid a 
woman to have an abortion during the first trimester 
(three months) of pregnancy. The court also ruled that, 
during the second trimester, states may regulate abor- 
tion only to protect women’s health. Once the fetus be- 
comes viable in the third trimester, states may regulate 
abortion to protect the interests of both women and the 
unborn. The Roe v. Wade decision stated that the U.S. 
Constitution implies the right of privacy and allows a 
woman to decide for herself if she will have an abortion. 

The 1973 decision also defined when a fetus becomes 
viable. It stated, “Viability is usually placed at about sev- 
en months (28 weeks) but may occur earlier, even at 24 
weeks.” The court said that states may forbid abortion of 
a viable fetus except when the abortion is necessary to 
protect the mother's life or health. 

Since the Roe v. }Wade decision, many groups have 
organized to oppose abortion and the legislation and 
court decisions that permit it. These groups include the 
National Right to Life Committee. the Christian Coalition, 
and Operation Rescue. Most pro-life groups strongly 
oppose illegal acts. But some individuals have vandal- 
ized, bombed, or set fire to abortion clinics. Others have 
attacked and killed doctors and other clinic employees. 





16 Abortion 


Pro-choice groups also have expanded their efforts. 
They contact lawmakers, hold demonstrations, and at- 
tack restrictive abortion laws in court. Pro-choice organi- 
zations include the National Abortion and Reproductive 
Rights Action League, the Planned Parenthood Federa- 
tion of America, and the National Organization for 
Women. 

Since 1973, some Supreme Court rulings have limited 
the influence of Roe v. Wade. One such case was Web- 
ster v. Reproductive Health Services (1989). The court 
ruled that states may require doctors to test a fetus's via- 
bility before performing an abortion on a woman preg- 
nant for 20 weeks or more. The court also ruled that 
States may outlaw abortions in public hospitals and pro- 
hibit public employees from assisting in abortions. 

Following the Roe v. Wade decision, the federal gov- 
ernment and many state governments began to pay for 
abortions for poor women under the Medicaid pro- 
gram. Many opponents of abortion objected to this use 
of government funds. In 1977, the Supreme Court ruled 
that the government was not obligated to finance abor- 
tions considered unnecessary to preserve the mother’s 
physical or emotional health. In 1980, the court said the 
government had no obligation to pay for even most 
medically necessary abortions. This ruling upheld a fed- 
eral law called the Hyde Amendment. 

In 1990, the Supreme Court decided that states may 
require minors to obtain parental or court consent be- 
fore having an abortion. In Planned Parenthood of East- 
ern Pennsylvania v. Casey (1992), both sides of the abor- 
tion dispute asked the Supreme Court to review the 
ruling in Roe v. Wade. The justices upheld the ruling by 
a vote of 5 to 4. The court also ruled that states may re- 
quire women seeking an abortion to first receive coun- 
seling by a doctor about fetal development and abortion 
risks. The court also decided that states may require 
women to wait 24 hours between the counseling and 
the abortion. 

The case of National Organization for Women v. 
Scheidler (1994) was a legal response to incidents at 
abortion clinics. The Supreme Court decided that pro- 
testers who block access to clinics can be prosecuted 
under federal racketeering laws. In 1994, Congress 
passed the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act, 
which protects abortion clinics and their staff members 
from violence and blockades. 

In Stenberg v. Carhart(2000), the Supreme Court ruled 
that a Nebraska law banning what pro-life activists call 
partial-birth abortions was unconstitutional. The proce- 
dure, which doctors call intact dilation and extraction, in- 
volves aborting a fetus after it has been partially re- 
moved from a woman’s body. The court stated that the 
Nebraska law placed an “undue burden’ on a woman's 
right to choose an abortion and did not allow the proce- 
dure even to protect a woman's health. 

In September 2000, the U.S. Food and Drug Adminis- 
tration approved the sale of the abortion drug mifepris- 
tone, marketed by the name Mifeprex. The decision al- 
lows women to buy pills through physicians to end 
pregnancies. Supporters of the drug claimed that it 
would enable women to end their pregnancies earlier, 
more safely, and with greater privacy than before. The 
drug had been available in Europe for more than 10 
years. 


In other countries, abortion laws differ. Lawmakers 
in some countries have considered abortion an effective 
tool for limiting family size and combating poverty. In 
China, for example, abortions are legal and common be- 
cause the government allows only a limited number of 
children per family. Chinese women may have an abor- 
tion at any time during their pregnancy. In Russia, abor- 
tion is allowed up to the 29th week of pregnancy. Japan 
restricts abortions to the first 24 weeks of pregnancy. 
Both Russian and Japanese women are allowed to use 
abortion as a method of birth control. 

In the United Kingdom, an abortion may be per- 
formed up to the 24th week of pregnancy. However, it 
must be shown that continuing the pregnancy would 
endanger the physical or mental health of the woman or 
her children. Canadian law permits abortion at any time 
during pregnancy and for any reason. However, most 
physicians avoid performing abortions during the later 
stages of pregnancy and do not offer abortion as a 
method of birth control. David M. OBrien 

See also Miscarriage; National Right to Life Commit- 
tee; Planned Parenthood Federation of America; Roe v. 
Wade. 


Additional resources 


Hull, N. E. H., and Hoffer, P.C. Roe vs. Wade. Univ. Pr. of Kans., 
2001. 

Knapp, Lynette, ed. The Abortion Controversy. Rev. ed. Green- | 
haven, 2000. 


Abraham was the founder of Judaism and the ances- 
tor of both the Arabs and the Jews. The Arabs trace their 
ancestry to Abraham's oldest son, Ishmael. The Jews 
consider Abraham their ancestor through another son, 
Isaac. Abraham, Isaac, and Isaac's son Jacob are called 
the patriarchs (founding fathers) of the Jews. 

Many scholars believe that Abraham lived between 
about 1800 and 1500 B.C. The story of his life is told in 
Genesis, the first book of the Bible. During his early life, 
Abraham was called Abram. He was born in the city of 
Ur, in ancient Mesopotamia (now mostly Iraq). The peo- 
ple of Ur, like most people then, worshiped many gods. 
However, Abram believed in one God. Abram left Ur 
and traveled west with his wife, Sarah; his nephew Lot; 
and other members of his household. At God's com- 
mand, he went to a land called Canaan (later called 
Palestine). God told Abram that the land would belong 
to Abram and his descendants. 

Abram settled in Canaan, where God made a cove- 
nant(special agreement) with him. The covenant prom- 
ised that Abram would have many descendants and that 
Canaan would be their “everlasting possession’ if they 
remained faithful to God (Genesis 17:4-8). To symbolize 
His pledge, God changed Abram’s name to Abraham, 
which means father of many nations. God commanded 
him and all males in his family to be circumcised as a 
symbol of this covenant (see Circumcision). 

God repeatedly promised Abraham many children. 
But he and Sarah remained childless. Following a cus- 
tom of the time, Sarah gave her maid Hagar to Abraham 
to bear him a child. Hagar bore Abraham a son, Ishmael. 

When Abraham and Sarah were very old, God 
promised them a son within a year.God alsotold Abra- | - 
ham that He intended to destroy the cities of Sodom and p 
Gomorrah because nearly all the people were wicked. —|_, 








Abraham pleaded with God to spare the cities for the 
sake of the righteous but could not persuade Him to do 
so. But God saved Lot, who lived in Sodom. The next 
year, Abraham and Sarah had a son, Isaac. 

God later gave Abraham his greatest test of faith and 
obedience. He commanded Abraham to sacrifice Isaac. 
Abraham took his son to a mountaintop, laid him on an 
altar, and prepared to kill him. At the last minute, howev- 
er, God intervened, stopped the killing, and provided a 
ram for the sacrifice. 

The Bible says Abraham died at an advanced age. Ac- 
cording to tradition, he was buried in the Cave of Mach- 
pelah in Hebron, in what is now the West Bank region 
of Southwest Asia. Eric M. Meyers 

See also Isaac; Ishmael; Jews (Beginnings); Judaism 
(The covenant with God); Lot. 

Absalom. See David. 

Abscess, AB sels, is a collection of pus within an in- 
fected part of the body. Pus contains bacteria, blood 
plasma, and debris from dead cells. !t also contains 
white blood cells, which the body uses to combat infec- 
tion. An abscess often appears as a red and swollen 
lump, which may open and drain. Abscesses may occur 
in any tissue that becomes infected by bacteria. 

When abscesses form, blood vessels di/ate (expand) 
and fluid from the blood collects in the injured tissue. 
Serum and white blood cells help destroy the invading 
bacteria and their poisons. Abscesses swell because the 
blood vessels expand and the amount of blood in the in- 
fected area increases. An abscess is painful because the 
pus presses on the nerve endings. 

Small superficial abscesses, such as pimples, need no 
special treatment. Boils, carbuncles, or internal abscess- 
es are treated with antibiotics, such as penicillin, and 
surgical incision if necessary (see Antibiotic). An abscess 
at the root of a tooth should be treated by a dentist. No 
abscess, regardless of size, should be squeezed, be- 
cause bacteria can enter the bloodstream and produce 
infection elsewhere. David T. Woodley 

See also Boil; Carbuncle; Teeth (Diseases and defects 
of the teeth). 

Absentee voting. See Voting (Methods of voting). 
Absolute zero is the theoretical temperature at which 
the atoms and molecules of a substance have the least 
possible energy. This temperature, which scientists be- 
lieve is the lowest attainable, equals ~ 273.15 C, or 

— 459.67 °F. These values are based partly on observa- 
tions of the relationship between the temperature and 
pressure of a gas. When the temperature of a gas con- 
fined ina fixed volume is lowered, its pressure decreas- 
es in direct proportion—as though it would become 
7etOiiees 279.15°C 

A temperature scale that has absolute zero for its zero 
point is called an abso/ute temperature scale. One such 
scale is the Kelvin scale, the international standard tor 
scientific temperature measurement. On the Kelvin 
scale, absolute zero equals zero kelvin (0 kK). The word 
degree and the degree symbol () are not used with 
Kelvin temperature readings. 

The Kelvin scale is related to the Celsius scale. A kel- 
vin temperature can be obtained by adding 273.15 to a_ 
corresponding Celsius temperature. For example. 20 °C 
equals 293.15 K. An absolute temperature scale related 
to the Fahrenheit scale is the Rankine scale. This scale is 





Absorption and adsorption 17 


used in the United States for certain kinds of engineer- 
ing work. A Rankine temperature is obtained by adding 
459.67° to a corresponding Fahrenheit temperature. For 
example, 68 °F equals 527.67 ‘R. 

Physicists theorize that it is impossible to attain a tem- 
perature of precisely absolute zero. But scientists have 
recorded temperatures of less than 1 trillionth of a 
kelvin in experiments in which they exposed samples of 
metal to magnetic forces. Nuclei of the metal atoms re- 
acted to the forces in a way that caused the nuclei to 
lose energy, thereby becoming extremely cold. 

Hugh D. Young 

See also Cryogenics; Gas; Temperature. 
Absolutism, AB suh /oo Tz uhm, is a form of govern- 
ment in which one or more persons rule with power 
unlimited by law. It includes dictatorships and absolute 
monarchies. Most dictatorships are run by a ruler or rul- 
ers who seized power by force. In some dictatorships, 
the governinent is satisfied to keep the people from re- 
volting while the rulers obtain advantages for them- 
selves. Other dictatorships try to maintain almost com- 
plete control over people so as to make great changes 
in society. Adolf Hitler of Germany and Joseph Stalin of 
the Soviet Union headed such absolutist governments. 

The power of most absolute monarchs is inherited 
and is supposed to derive from God's will. The monarch 
may do what he or she wishes. In practice, however, 
judges, governors, and other officials carry out govern- 
ment functions according to laws, customs, or simply 
their own judgment. Absolute monarchs ruled ancient 
China, Egypt, and Rome. Absolute rulers called czars 
governed Russia until the early 1900's. Alexander J. Groth 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Authoritarianism Divine right of Monarchy 
Despotism kings Totalitarianism 
Dictatorship Fascism Tyranny 


Absorption and adsorption, ab SAWKP shuhn, ad 
SAWRP shuhn, are processes by which substances take 
in matter or energy, or both. In absorption, the matter or 
energy taken in becomes distributed throughout the ab- 
sorbing material. Adsorption is the gathering of matter 
only. The matter collects on the surface of the adsorbing 
material. It does not enter the interior. 

Absorption. There are many familiar examples of ab- 
sorption. Heavy drapes absorb sound energy. The 
sound waves make the fibers in the drapes vibrate and 
rub together. Friction turns the sound energy into heat 
so the sound cannot be reflected as an echo (see Insula- 





ri 
a 
~ ~~ = 


Nee 


Water drops soak entirely 
through sponge. & 


Molecules of gas or liquid 
form film around particle. 
WORLD BOOK Bustratons by Stark Swindle 


Absorption Adsorption 








18 Abstract art 


tion [Insulation against sound)). Colored objects and fil- 
ters selectively absorb light energy. White light is com- 
posed of all colors of light. When white light strikes a 
colored substance, some colors of light energy are ab- 
sorbed. The absorbed light energy excites electrons in 
the atoms of the colored substance—that is, it raises 
them to higher energy levels. The substance will trans- 
mit or reflect the colors of light that have not been ab- 
sorbed. Dry earth absorbs water by a process called 
capillarity (see Capillarity). The water in a lake absorbs 
oxygen by dissolving it. 

Adsorption. Usually only solid material can act as an 
adsorbent. The adsorbed matter can be the molecules 
of a liquid or a gas, or tiny particles of a solid. Adsorp- 
tion is often highly selective, making it useful for sepa- 
rating or purifying liquids and gases. A charcoal filter 
adsorbs molecules on the surface of each charcoal parti- 
cle. Silica gel adsorbs water molecules from moist air 
and holds them on the surface of each grain. Adsorption 
releases heat called heat of adsorption. 

The interaction of adsorbed molecules with the ad- 
sorbing surface may be weak or strong. Molecules are 
weakly held when physical attraction holds them to the 
adsorbing surface (see Molecule [Molecules and mat- 
terl). This process is called physiosorption. When ad- 
sorbed molecules are united chemically with the sur- 
face, they are strongly held. This process is called 
chemisorption. ln chemisorption, the adsorbed mole- 
cules form a single layer. In physiosorption, they may 
form layers several molecules deep. 

See also Plant (Water movement. 
Abstract art is a style of art of the 1900's that discards 
identifiable subject matter. Abstract art is sometimes 
called nonobjective art or nonfigurative art. 

Abstract art broke with a long tradition in Western 
culture that considered art a kind of refined illustration. 
Works of art were often admired because of the impor- 
tance given to the story or theme they represented. This 
view began to change in the first decade of the 1900's. 
At that time, painters allowed the means of imagemak- 
ing—brushstrokes, color, and shapes—to overshadow 
or distort the subject matter. They discovered that the 
formal characteristics of painting were interesting in 
their own right. 

The first abstract art was produced by painters identi- 
fied with such movements as Fauvism, Expressionism, 
Cubism, and Futurism. Their paintings were called “ab- 
stract,” though subject matter could still be recognized 
in their work. 

After about 1910, some artists eliminated all subject 
matter in favor of pure forms. Two distinct and opposite 
theoretical defenses of totally abstract art emerged. The 
Spiritualists worked from the belief that the elements of 
art could stir the soul and spirit directly. For these artists, 
references to the material world hindered their ability to 
convey emotional messages directly and powerfully. 
Leading Spiritualists were Wassily Kandinsky and 
Kasimir Malevich of Russia and Piet Mondrian of the 
Netherlands. Kandinsky was a founder of a German art 
movement known as Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue Rider). 
Malevich was a leader of a Russian movement called 
Suprematism. Mondrian was a member of a Dutch art 
movement known as Neoplasticism or Die Stijl 

The other major theory of abstract art was grounded 


Emily Jane Rose 


on Materialism. \t appeared first in the work of the Con- 
structivist artists in Russia about 1915. Their art essential- 
ly dealt with textures, shapes, colors, and patterns. Their 
paintings rejected storytelling, poetry, or emotional ex- 
periences. To portray objectively the new age and its 
scientific basis, artists stressed geometric forms; flat, un- 
modulated colors; and an impersonal approach to their 
art. Leading Russian Constructivists included Vladimir 
Tatlin, El Lissitsky, Naum Gabo, and Alexander Rod- 
chenko. 

The term abstract art was originally confusing be- 
cause it could mean art with altered but still recogniz- 
able content, or totally nonfigurative or nonobjective art. 
However, by the end of World War II in 1945, the term 
was used primarily as a synonym for art completely 
without recognizable subject matter. Total abstraction 
was given wide publicity through the work of the ab- 
stract expressionist, or New York School, artists such as 
Jackson Pollock, Willem de Kooning, Arshile Gorky, 
Franz Kline, and Robert Motherwell. David Cateforis 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Abstract expressionism Painting (The 1900's in Eu- 


Cubism rope; The 1900's in North 
Expressionism America) 

Fauves Sculpture (Modern interna- 
Futurism tional sculpture) 


Malevich, Kasimir 


Abstract expressionism was a movement in Ameri- 
can painting that flourished from the mid-1940's to the 
mid-1950's. The abstract expressionists developed a rev- 
olutionary approach to the nature and purpose of paint- 
ing. They influenced artists in many countries. 

The abstract expressionists rejected many of the cus- 





West Brant (1960), an oil painting on canvas by Franz Kline 
collection of Mr and Mrs Graham Gund ‘Art Resource 


Abstract expressionist paintings include West Brant, a power- 
ful black-and-white work by Franz Kline. 





toms and rules of earlier art. They did not paint tradition- 
al pictures that told a story or created the appearance of 
reality. Instead, the abstract expressionists emphasized 
color, the physical qualities of paint, and the enveloping 
character of very large paintings. 

The abstract expressionist movement was more a 
philosophical attitude than a particular style. For exam- 
ple, certain abstract expressionist works feature many 
shapes and thick paint, while others are exceptionally 
simple and thinly painted. Some of the painters deliber- 
ately left portions of the canvas unpainted to provide a 
contrast with the painted areas. But all the diverse per- 
sonalities in this movement shared the belief that both 
the figurative and abstract traditions of modern art 
could be used freely to express their immediate feelings 
and their attitude toward life. They maintained that no 
matter how abstract their paintings appeared, there was 
always an underlying serious subject. 

One of the important abstract expressionists was Jack- 
son Pollock. He placed his canvas on the floor and 
dripped and splattered the paint from above. This tech- 
nique led some critics to call Pollock and certain other 
members of the movement action painters. Other lead- 
ing abstract expressionists included Willem de Kooning, 
Helen Frankenthaler, Arshile Gorky, Adolph Gottlieb, 
Philip Guston, Franz Kline, Joan Mitchell, Robert 
Motherwell, Barnett Newman, Mark Rothko, Clyfford 
Still, and Bradley Walker Tomlin. Dore Ashton 

Each artist discussed in this article has a biography in 
World Book. See also Painting (Abstract expressionism). 
Abu Bakr. See Muslims (The early caliphs). 

Abu Dhabi, AH boo DAH bee \pop. 242,975), also 
called Abu Zaby, is the capital of the United Arab Emi- 
rates, a confederation of seven Arab states. Abu Dhabi is 
also the capital of the emirate of Abu Dhabi, which is 
one of the seven states. Founded in 1761 as a pearl-fish- 
ing port, Abu Dhabi lies on an island in the Persian Gulf 
(see United Arab Emirates {map]). Abu Dhabi has devel- 
oped rapidly since oil was discovered on the land and in 
offshore fields in the early 1960's. A development pro- 
gram improved its harbor and constructed buildings, 
roads, and an international airport. Robert Geran Landen 
Abu Simbel, AH boo SIHM buhl, Temples of, are 
two ancient Egyptian temples that were carved ina 
mountainside beside the Nile River in southern Egypt. 
The pharaoh Ramses 1! built the temples in the 1200's 
B.C. The Great Temple extended 200 feet (60 meters) into 
the mountainside. Four seated figures of Ramses II, each 
67 feet (20 meters) high, guarded the entrance. Four fig- 
ures of Ramses 1] and two of his wife, Queen Nefertari, 
stood at the entrance to the other temple. 

The temples’ original location is now covered by Lake 
Nasser, which was formed by the Aswan High Dam. In 
the mid-1960's, the temples were cut into huge blocks 
and moved to higher ground. About 50 nations contrib- 
uted funds to this project. Leonard H. Lesko 

See also Egypt, Ancient (map); Ramses Il. 

Abuja, ah BOOH jah (pop. 378,671), is the capital of 
Nigeria. The city lies in a hilly region in the central part 
of the country. For location, see Nigeria (political map). 

Abuja is part of the Abuja Federal Capital Territory 
which has an area of about 3,100 square miles (8.000 
square kilometers). The city itselt covers about 100 
square miles (260 square kilometers) 


Acacia 19 


Abuja’s major buildings include the National Mosque 
and the administrative headquarters of the Economic 
Community of West African States. Many modern roads 
connect Abuja with surrounding cities and towns. The 
city is served by an international airport. Huge rock for- 
mations lying in or near the city include Aso and Zuma 
rocks. The official residence of the Nigerian president 
stands near Aso Rock and is itself nicknamed Aso Rock. 

Nigeria created the capital territory in 1976 mainly be- 
cause Lagos, the former capital, was overcrowded and 
lacked room for expansion. Construction of the new city 
of Abuja has occurred since the 1980's. Abuja officially 
became the new capital in 1991. By the late 1990's, all of 
Nigeria's government ministries had moved their head- 
quarters from Lagos to Abuja. 

See also Nigeria (picture). 
Abyssinia. See Ethiopia. 
Abzug, AB zuhg, Bella Savitzky (1920-1998), a Demo- 
crat from New York, served in the United States House 
of Representatives from 1971 to 1977. She gained fame 
for her support of the women’s rights movement. Abzug 
also supported legislation that promotes federal job 
programs, public transportation, and the individual's 
right to privacy. She served on the House Government 
Operations Committee. 

Abzug was born on July 24, 1920, in New York City. 
She earned a law degree from Columbia University. In 
1961, she helped establish Women Strike for Peace, 
which works for nuclear disarmament. In 1971, Abzug 
helped found the National Women’s Political Caucus, 
which aids women running for office. 
AC. See Electric current 
Acacia, uh KAY shuh, is the name of about 1,200 spe- 
cies of trees and shrubs in the pea family. Many acacias 
grow in tropical and subtropical regions of Australia, Af- 
rica, and the Americas. Over 30 species, most of them 
shrubs, grow in the United States. They are most com- 
mon from Texas to California. The flowers of most aca- 
cias are yellow or white and grow in round or long clus- 
ters. Many species have compound leaves consisting of 


Ebere Onwudiwe 


Guy Halverson 








= Eo Oooo 


WORLD BOOK Wustranon by Chistabet King 


The catclaw acacia grows in the southwestern United States. 
The plant has vellow flowers. Its seeds grow in pods. 


20 Academic freedom 


numerous leaflets. In some species, the leaves grow 
from wide, flat leafstalks. Other species lack true leaves 
and have only the leafstalks. Certain species, including 
the catclaw acacia of the southwestern United States and 
the bullhorn acacia of Mexico, have sharp spines. The 
bullhorn acacia has large, paired hornlike spines that 
are partly hollow and often inhabited by ferocious ants. 
These ants attack any other animal that invades the tree. 
Some acacias produce a gum called gum arabic that is 
used in making foods, drugs, and other products. The 
bark of various acacias produces fannin, a substance 
used to make leather. In arid regions, acacia leaves and 
fruits provide food for livestock. 


Scientific classification. Acacias belong to the pea family, 
Leguminosae or Fabaceae. The catclaw acacia is Acacia greggii. 
The bullhorn acacia is A. cornigera. 


j. Massey 


See also Catechu; Gum arabic; Mimosa. 

Academic freedom is a term that refers primarily to 
certain rights claimed by professors at universities and 
colleges. The term also refers to various rights claimed 
by students at those institutions and by the institutions 
themselves. During the 1960s, the term academic free- 
dom came into use to describe rights claimed by ele- 
mentary-school and high-school teachers as well. 

For professors, academic freedom means the right to 
teach, to conduct research, and to write without fear of 
dismissal. For their students, it means the right to chal- 
lenge the professors views without being penalized. For 
the institutions, it means the right to determine what is 
taught and what research is conducted on the campus. 
For teachers, such freedom means a larger share in se- 
lecting the contents of courses, and greater freedom to 
engage in political and social activities. 

Academic freedom grew out of freedom of thought 
and expression, a basic right of any free society. Without 
such freedom, scholars cannot perform their vital role of 
seeking and spreading new knowledge. Scholars insist 
on having the freedom to present the truth as they find 
it, even if it conflicts with popular belief. They say that 
creative research is impossible if its findings must be 
withheld or distorted to agree with established views. 
This spirit of free inquiry and teaching helps give univer- 
sities and colleges their unique character. 

The chief importance of academic freedom is that so- 
ciety benefits from the knowledge discovered by schol- 
ars. Yet, the history of academic freedom is largely the 
history of the many attacks on it 

Beginnings. The idea of academic freedom devel- 
oped with the rise of universities in Europe during the 
1100's and 1200's. The scholars at those institutions want- 
ed freedom to pursue their studies. The universities 
governed themselves, and many became famous and 
powertul. But even the most powerful universities were 
subject to church control. The church persecuted many 
scholars whose ideas and teaching contradicted reli- 
gious beliefs. One such scholar was the Italian as- 
tronomer and physicist Galileo. In the 1600's, the church 
persecuted Galileo for supporting various theories, in- 
cluding the one that the earth moves around the sun. 

By the 1800's, the concept of academic freedom had 
been established in Germany, along with the idea of the 
university as a research institution. Professors could 
teach whatever they desired and could undertake any 
research. Students could study whatever they wanted, 


subject only to their taking a final examination. Such 
ideas influenced the growth of American universities. 

In the United States, academic freedom has faced a 
variety of threats. In colonial times, religious intolerance 
presented the biggest danger to academic freedom. 
Universities dismissed many teachers whose religious 
beliefs conflicted with the established views. 

During the 1800's, economic and political power be- 
came the major source of threats to academic freedom 
in the United States. Many private universities had 
wealthy benefactors as trustees, and most state universi- 
ties had politically appointed trustees. Some trustees felt 
that the teaching in their universities should agree with 
their own economic and political views. As a result, a 
number of professors lost their jobs for teaching certain 
economic or political concepts. However, most universi- 
ty trustees respected academic freedom. 

The 1900's. After World War I] ended in 1945, acade- 
mic freedom in the United States came under attack by 
many people who feared possible Communist infiltra- 
tion of universities. An investigation by the Un-American 
Activities Committee of the U.S. House of Representa- 
tives found Communists on the faculty of a few universi- 
ties. As a result, many people feared that most universi- 
ties were full of Communists. A number of professors 
were unjustly accused of supporting Communism and 
lost their jobs. 

In the 1960's, academic freedom faced new chal- 
lenges—from the campus itself. Many students opposed 
the U.S. role in the Vietnam War (1957-1975)—and all 
forms of war as well. They resented having military re- 
search conducted on campus. They thought that funds 
spent for military purposes should go instead to help 
minority groups gain equality and to eliminate poverty 
and pollution. Many students also questioned the rela- 
tionship of some of their courses to current problems. A 
number of faculty members joined the student protests. 

Student unrest brought different types of academic 
freedom into conflict with one another. Student de- 
mands challenged the right of professors to teach and 
to conduct research. Similarly, student and faculty de- 
mands challenged the universities right to decide what 
should be taught and what research should be conduct- 
ed. This clash raised serious issues. For example, what 
responsibilities accompany the rights of academic free- 
dom? To what extent does a person's academic freedom 
entitle him or her to interfere with that of others? The fu- 
ture of universities and colleges in the United States de- 
pends largely on solutions to these issues. 

A Harry Passow 
Academy is the general name for a group of people or 
an organization that promotes art, literature, science, or 
some other field of knowledge. Some high schools are 
also called academies. See also Arts and Sciences, 
American Academy of; Education (The colonial period); 
French Academy; National Academy of Sciences. 
Academy Award. See Motion picture (table: Acade- 
my Award winners). 

Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences 
is an honorary nonprofit organization. It was founded in 
1927. Its 5,200 members represent leaders in every 
phase of filmmaking. !ts purposes are to advance the 
arts and sciences of motion pictures; to foster coopera- 
tion in the industry for cultural, educational, and techno- 








logical progress; and to recognize ouistanding film 
achievements through the presentation of arninual 
awards called Oscars. See also Motion picture (table). 

Critically reviewed by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences 
Acadia, uh KAY dee uh, was a region in eastern Cana- 
da that became the site of the first permanent French 
colony in North America. French colonists settled there 
in 1604. Acadia included what are now the provinces of 
Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward Island. 
Also in Acadia were parts of what are now the province 
of Quebec and the state of Maine. Acadia is best known 
as the setting for the romantic poem Evangeline (1847) 
by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, an American poet. 

The French explorer Sieur de Monts founded the 
original settlement in Acadia. Acadia remained a French 
settlement until the early 1700's, when it became in- 
volved in the struggle for control of North America be- 
tween France and England. 

During Queen Anne's War (1702-1713), Port Royal, the 
seat of the Acadian government, surrendered to the 
British. The Treaty of Utrecht, which ended the war, 
gave Acadia to Britain. A dispute arose, however, when 
France only ceded (surrendered) what is now mainland 
Nova Scotia. The other parts of Acadia tried to remain 
neutral in the dispute. 

In 1755, during the French and Indian War, British offi- 
cials tried to force the Acadians to take an oath of alle- 


= Anticosti 
sland 















Prince Edward 
Island i 


> | * ha s 
fie : JSiik Pe Loursbourg 
‘ at Beau ie: + 


ne 


e 

a Canso 
e 
‘Grant 


Nova Scotia 
La Have 


100 Miles 





100 Kilometers 


WORLD BOOK map 


Location of Acadia 


giance to the British king. But the Acadians refused to 
do so, and between 1755 and 1763 about 10,000 men, 
women, and children were forced to move to colonies 
farther south. After suffering much hardship, most of 
these people in time returned to Acadia and settled in 
southeastern New Brunswick. Over 350,000 of their de- 
scendants still live there. About 4,000 Acadians went to 
Louisiana, a former French colony in what is now the 
United States. Descendants of these Acadians are known 
as Cajuns. Many of them still speak a French dialect. 

Jobn A Dickinson ; . 

See also Cajuns; French and Indian wars; Grand Pre; 
Monts, Sieur de; Nova Scotia |The struggle in Acadia 
Acadia National Park, uh KAY dee uh was the first 
national park established in the United States east of the 





Acapulco 21 


Mississippi River. It lies in Maine on Mount Desert Is- 
land, Isle au Haut, and on the Schoodic Peninsula. For 
the area of Acadia National Park, see National Park Sys- 
tem (table: National parks). 

Acadia National Park contains several peaks, including 
Cadillac Mountain (1,530 feet, or 466 meters). Cadillac 
Mountain is the highest granite mountain on the eastern 
coast. Forests and lakes make the park an excellent 
wildlife sanctuary. A marine biological laboratory has 
been established in the park. Acadia National Park was 
established on land donated by residents of the island in 
1916. Critically reviewed by the National Park Service 
Acanthus, uh KAN thuhs, is a group of shrubs or 
herbs that are found chiefly in Asia, Africa, and southern 
Europe. They spread from underground stems and 
sometimes become pests. The flowers vary in color 
from white to purple and develop on rigid spikes. The 
large leaves have many 
narrow, pointed lobes. 

Acanthus plants prefer 
rich soil and some shade, 
and can live with little wa- 
ter. One species grows in 
semiarid parts of the 
Southwestern United 
States. 

In architecture, acan- 
thus refers to a leafy deco- 
ration that was popular in 
Greek and Roman times. 
The design at the top of 
the Corinthian column is 
an example of acanthus. 
See Column. 

Melinda F. Denton 

Scientific classification. Acanthus plants belong to the acan- 
thus family, Acanthaceae. They are in the genus Acanthus. 
Acapulco, 4H kah POOL koh (pop. 721,011), officially 
known as Acapulco de Juarez, day HWAH rehz, is a 
Mexican port and resort city. Its beautiful scenery and 
warm, sunny climate make it one of the world’s most 
popular vacation spots. Acapulco lies on forested hills 
along a deep, natural harbor on Mexico's Pacitic coast. 
The city is about 190 miles (306 kilometers) southwest of 
Mexico City (see Mexico I political map). 

Acapulco has many activities for vacationers, includ- 
ing sunbathing, swimming, sailing, deep-sea fishing, 
and water-skiing. People also enjoy the city's fine restau- 
rants and nightclubs. Visitors are thrilled by the divers at 
the nearby La Quebrada cliffs. These daring divers 
plunge more than 120 feet (37 meters) from a platform 
into the water of a rocky cove. The cove is too shallow 
except when large waves surge in, and so the divers 
must time their fall to hit one of the waves. 

Tourism became Acapulco s leading industry after the 
city underwent rapid expansion beginning in the 1950s. 
Acapulco has over 250 hotels and motels. 

A small Indian village stood near what is now Acapul- 
co when Spanish explorers arrived there during the 
early 1500s. The Spaniards tounded Acapulco in 1550 as 
a seaport and built ships there for Pacific exploration 
and trade. During Spanish rule, Acapulco was the last 
stop for ships bringing silks and spices trom the Philip- 
pines. In 1616 Fort San Diego was built to protect Aca 





tnc Crichton, Bruce Coleman Ltd 


Acanthus 


22 Acceleration 





pulco from pirates. The fort was rebuilt in the 1780's af- 
ter an earthquake and still stands in the center of the 
city. Nathan A. Haverstock 

Acceleration. See Motion (Acceleration); Falling bod- 
ies, Law of; Velocity (Acceleration). 

Accelerator, Particle. See Particle accelerator. 
Accent, AX se/nt, in language, is an emphasis placed 
ona syllable in a word and is often called stress. Dictio- 
naries usually indicate an accented syllable by the mark, 
‘, placed after the syllable. A secondary accent can be in- 
dicated by two marks, “, or by one light accent mark. 
Accented syllables can also be shown by capital letters 
or italics. Where pronunciations are given in The World 
Book Encyclopedia, capital letters are used for the sylla- 
ble with the primary accent and small capital letters for 
the secondary accent. See Key to pronunciation at the 
beginning of the A volume. 

The tendency in English is to shift the accent toward 
the beginning of the word. The accent in the word re 
VOKE shifts toward the beginning in the form ir REV 
ocable. This tendency often causes a change in the lan- 
guage. The accent in the word BAL con y was once 
placed on the second syllable (ba/ CON y,. 

Words spelled in the same way are sometimes ac- 
cented on different syllables. This usually means they 
have different meanings or different usages. The verb of 
a pair of identical words may have the accent on the sec- 
ond syllable, although the noun or adjective has it on 
the first. For example, ab SENTis the verb, while AB sent 
is the adjective. Accent is important in sentences as well 
as in words. Marianne Cooley 

See also Meter (in poetry); Music (Rhythm). 
Acclimatization. See Adaptation. 
Accommodation, in physiology. See Eye (Focusing). 
Accordion is any of a family of portable reed instru- 
ments with bellows suspended in front of the player by 
shoulder straps. The player stretches and compresses 
the bellows by hand. These movements force air past 
metal reeds, making them vibrate and produce sounds. 
The right hand plays buttons or keys arranged in the or- 
der of the scale, like piano keys. The left hand presses 
buttons that produce single tones and chords. In many 
countries, accordions are used in folk and popular mu- 
sic. Cyrillys Damian invented an accordion in Vienna in 
1829. But the principle had been known for centuries in 
China. 

See also Concertina 


Valerie Woodring Goertzen 





Scenic Acapulco lies on 
Mexico's Pacific coast. The 
warm, sunny climate and 
beautiful beaches of this pop- 
ular resort city attract thou- 
sands of visitors yearly. 


Barbara Van Cleve 


Accounting is a system of gathering, summarizing, 
and communicating financial information for a business 
firm, government, or other organization. Accounting, 
also called accountancy, enables decision makers to in- 
terpret financial information and use the results in plan- 
ning for the future. For example, such data tell execu- 
tives which products or departments are doing well and 
which poorly. 

Business people often call accounting the “language 
of business” because they use accounting data in com- 


WORLD BOOk illustration by Oxtord Illustrators Limited 


Headboard Button keyboard 















AKIN 


ut 


Piano keyboard Bellows 


David R. Frazier 


The accordion is played by 
stretching and compressing 
the bellows while the fingers 
press various keys and but- 
tons. 


Ms 





municating about a firm's activities. information provid- 
ed by accountants helps managers and other executives 
understand the results of business transactions and in- 
terpret the financial status of their organization. With 
this knowledge, managers can make informed decisions 
about such matters as production, marketing, and fi- 
nancing. Charities, churches, colleges, government 
agencies, and other nonprofit organizations also use ac- 
counting to keep track of their financial situation. 

Bookkeeping is a small but important part of account- 
ing. It involves recording financial transactions and 
keeping other financial records. Most repetitive book- 
keeping is done with computers. 


Financial reports 


In the United States, publicly owned businesses are 
required by law to issue financial reports. These reports 
are used by investors; officials of banks, government 
agencies, and labor unions; and others interested ina 
firm or its industry. Accountants prepare the reports, 
which provide summaries of a company’s financial con- 
dition. Most companies issue quarterly reports. All firms 
use similar accounting procedures so that the reports 
can be compared. In the United States, the Financial Ac- 
counting Standards Board (FASB), a group of profession- 
al accountants, establishes these procedures, which are 
called accounting principles. 

The most important financial reports include balance 
sheets, income statements, and statements of cash flows. 
A balance sheet shows a company’s assets, liabilities, 
and net worth. An income statement is a report of a 
firm’s revenue and expenses during a certain period. 
The bottom line of an income statement shows whether 
the company had a net profit or a net loss for that peri- 
od. A statement of cash flows shows the amounts of 
money flowing into a company and out of it as a result 
of its operating, investing, and financing activities. 

Organizations that do not seek a profit need many of 
the same kinds of financial reports. For example, private 
schools must keep track of their tuition income and their 
expenses. A government agency may wish to compare 
the cost of a program with the benefits. Possible donors 
to a charity may like to see how previous donations 
were used. 


Fields of accounting 


Accountants may be classified by the type of organiza- 
tion for which they work. For example, business accoun- 
tants are employed by all types of companies. A small 
firm may have one general accountant who handles all 
financial records. But a large corporation may have 
many accountants for the various duties involved. 

Organizations or individuals may hire professional 
public accountants for occasional tasks or special ac- 
counting services. Most public accountants have passed 
a state examination and obtained a license to practice as 
certified public accountants (CPA s). Such accountants 
are called chartered accountants in Canada, the United 
Kingdom, and some other countries. | | 

Most accountants specialize in a field of accounting. 
The major fields include financial accounting, manage: 
ment accounting, tax accounting, auditing, and manage- 
ment consulting services. 

Financial accounting involves the preparation o! 


Accounting 23 


business's financial statements, mainly for users outside 
the business. These reports are used by owners and po- 
tential owners of a business and by people who have 
loaned a company money. Some government agencies 
that regulate business and the stock market require 
companies to submit financial statements to them. 

Management accounting helps managers plan and 
control a company’s operations. Accountants prepare 
budgets to express management's goals in financial 
terms. After a budget has been adopted, performance 
reports compare actual results with the budget. Cost ac- 
countants help management keep track of how much it 
costs a company to make the product, or provide the 
service, it sells. 

Tax accounting consists of preparing tax returns for 
Organizations or individuals and determining the taxes 
involved in proposed business transactions. Tax accoun- 
tants suggest ways to save money on taxes. They must 
have a thorough knowledge of the tax laws that affect 
their clients or employers. They also must know the de- 
tails of court rulings in a wide variety of tax cases. 

Auditing involves the examination of an organiza- 
tion's financial statements and records. CPA auditors 
from outside the organization provide assurance that 
the organization's statements present financial informa- 
tion fairly and that they follow generally accepted ac- 
counting principles. People use such statements when 
deciding which companies to invest in and lend money 
to. 

Internal auditors are employees of an organization 
who make sure that organization follows the accounting 
procedures management wants. They also seek ways to 
increase efficiency and reduce waste. 

Management consulting services consist of a vari- 
ety of activities that many accountants perform. These 
services include the design and installation of comput- 
erized financial information systems, assistance in set- 
ting up employee pension plans, and the planning of an 
individual's personal finances. 


Careers 


The number of jobs in many accounting fields is 
growing. Increasingly sophisticated management tech- 
niques demand information that can be provided most 
efficiently by accountants. Accounting requires the abili- 
ty to gather data, analyze problems completely, and pre- 
sent conclusions clearly. 

A college education with a major in accounting is 
good preparation for an accounting career. Many 
organizations prefer accountants with a master's degree 
in accounting or management. Many accountants be- 
come certified public accountants because they wish to 
practice public accounting or to have the distinction of 
earning a CPA certificate. 

Most accountants work for business companies or 
government agencies. Some have jobs with founda- 
tions, hospitals, labor unions, universities, or other non- 
profit organizations. Many CPAs practice in public ac- 
counting firms that provide a wide range of services. In 
the United States, four large public accounting firms 
dominate the accounting industry. These four firms are 
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu; Ernst & Young; KPMG Inter- 
national; and PricewaterhouseCoopers. Robert M Keith 

See also Audit; Bookkeeping; Spreadsheet. 


24 Accra 


Accra, uh KRAH or AK ruh (pop. 964,879; met. area pop. 
1,420,065), is the capital and largest city of Ghana. it lies 
on the northern coast of the Gulf of Guinea. For the loca- 
tion of Accra, see Ghana (map). Accra’s transportation ta- 
cilities include a railroad and an international airport. 
The city’s industries include the production of tife and 
brick and the processing of diamonds and lumber. The 
University of Ghana is located in Legon, a residential 
area north of the city. 

Accra was established by the Ga people by the mid- 
1600's. It was a center of the African slave trade trom the 
1500's to the mid-1800's. European nations competing 
for slaves built several forts in Accra. In 1923, a railroad 
linking Accra and the interior added to the city's eco- 
nomic importance. Samuel Decalo 
Acculturation. See Culture (Contact with other cul- 
tures). 

Ace is a pilot who shot down at least five enemy aircraft 
during a war. By military custom, most air forces award 
a victory or a kill only when a pilot causes an enemy air- 
craft to crash or destroys it in flight. In addition, most air 
forces require confirmation by an eyewitness or by 
videotape or film of the incident. Because of human er- 
ror and differences in counting practices, the actual 
number of aircraft a pilot has shot down can be higher 
or lower than a force's official tally of victories. 

The custom of qualifying aces originated during 
World War | (1914-1918). A minimum of five victories be- 
came widely used as the standard for becoming an ace. 

The leading aces of World War | became national he- 
roes. The top ace of the war was Baron Manfred vor 
Richthofen of Germany, who was known as the Red 
Baron or Red Knight. Von Richthofen shot down 80 ene- 
my aircraft before he was killed in action in 1918. Aces 
from other countries included Captain René Fonck of 
France, with 75 kills; and Major Edward Mannock of 
Britain, with 61. Canadian Major Billy Bishop claimed 72 
kills, but some historians have questioned that number. 
The top American ace, Captain Eddie Rickenbacker, had 
26 kills. 

During World War II (1939-1945), Major Erich Hart- 
mann of Germany was the top ace, with 352 victories. In 
addition, thousands of other German aviators qualitied 
as aces by U.S. standards, many with 100 victories or 
more. Warrant Officer Hiroyoshi Nishizawa of Japan de- 
stroyed or damaged 87 Allied planes. Major Richard I. 
Bong of the U.S. Army Air Force became the leading 
American ace, shooting down 40 Japanese planes. Six 
other Americans also equaled or surpassed Eddie Rick- 
enbackers World War | record. The Soviet Union's top 
ace, Major Ivan Kozhedub, claimed 62 victories from 
1942 to 1945. 

During the Korean War (1950-1953), U.S. Air Force 
Captain James Jabara became the first jet-to-jet combat 
ace, destroying 15 enemy jets. During the Vietnam War 
(1957-1975), two American pilots became aces. 

Barrett Tillman 

See also Air Force, United States (History); Bishop, 
Billy; Foss, Joseph J.; Rickenbacker, Eddie. 

Acerola, 45 uh ROH /uh, is the fruit of a bushy tree that 
grows 10 to 15 feet (3.0 to 4.6 meters) tall. It is native to 
the West Indies and parts of Mexico, Central America, 
and northern South America. The tree has deep roots 
and grows well even in poor soil, if there is enough rain. 











WORLD BOOK illustration by Kate Lloyd-Jones, Linden Artists Ltd 


Acerola is the nutritious fruit of a bushy tree that is also called 
the acerola. The ripened fruit resembles a deep red cherry. 


The acerola is also called the Puerto Rican, West Indian, 
or Barbados cherry. The fruits are about the size of cher- 
ries. When ripe, acerolas have a deep red color and soft 
flesh. Most have a tart flavor. 

The acerola ranks as the richest known natural source 
of vitamin C (ascorbic acid). The vitamin C content varies 
in ditterent varieties and under different environmental 
conditions. Green fruits contain more vitamin C than 
ripe truits. The edible part of the acerola has about 1 to 4 
percent ascorbic acid. Jn other kinds of fruits, even 0.06 
percent ascorbic acid is high. Jelly and juices made from 
acerolas retain the fruits high vitamin C content. 

The acerola was eaten by Indians long before the Eu- 
ropeans came to the Western Hemisphere. During the 
late 1940's, commercial canners began to use the acero- 
la in fruit juice mixes. Today, the fruit is an important 
crop in Puerto Rico. Philip J. Ito 

Scientific classification. The acerola belongs to the 
malpighia faintly Ma!lpighiaceae. The scientitic name is 
Malpighia ciiarginata. in the past, it was often classified as M. 
glabra oi M. puncitolia. 


Acetaminophen, wh seer uh MIHN uh fuhn, is a com- 
monly used drug that relieves pain and reduces fever. 
Many people take acetaminophen instead of aspirin be- 
cause they are allergic to aspirin, have stomach ail- 
ments, or use anticoagulants (substances that prevent or 
slow blood clotting). Acetaminophen, unlike aspirin, 
does not irritate the stomach or interfere with blood 
clotting. Howevei, acetaminophen cannot reduce in- 
tlammation nearly as well as aspirin. Therefore, it is not 
as useful in treating inflammatory conditions, such as 
arthritis or rheumatic fever. 

Acetaminophen can be purchased without a prescrip- 
tion under many trade names, including Tylenol. Doc- 
tors advise people to be extremely careful not to take 
more than the recommended dose. The drug can cause 
liver damage that may, in some cases, progress to liver 
failure and death. 

Acetaminophen was first used in medicine in 1893. 
However, it gained widespread use only after 1949, 





when scientists discovered that another nopular drug, 
phenacetin, is converted to acetaminophen in the body. 
Acetaminophen proved to be as effective as phenacetin 
but less toxic. Eugene M. Johnson, Jr. 

Acetate, AS wh tayt, is a manufactured fiber produced 
from wood. It is delicate and resembles silk in feel and 
appearance. Acetate is used primarily in textiles, espe- 
cially draperies, linings for clothing, and formal wear. 

In acommon method of acetate production, called 
acetylation, pulped wood is mixed with acetic acid, 
acetic anhydride, and sulfuric acid. The mixture is added 
to water, and white flakes of ce//ulose acetate form. The 
flakes are dried and dissolved in acetone. The resulting 
solution, pure or with dyes added, is then forced 
through a spinneret (plate with tiny holes), forming a 
continuous filament. Acetate filaments can be spun into 
threads and yarns of different thicknesses and textures. 

Acetate’s naturally shiny finish can be dulled by 
adding titanium dioxide to the solution before forcing it 
through the spinneret. Acetate melts when exposed to 
temperatures of 350 F (177 (©) or higher, so acetate fab- 
rics must be ironed at low settings. 
Acetic acid, uh SEE tihk, is an important organic acid 
and industrial chemical. It gives vinegar its sour taste. 
Vinegar used in the home contains about 5 percent of 
the acid. Pure acetic acid is called glacial acetic acid be- 
cause it solidifies at 62 F (17 C), the temperature of a 
cool room. When diluted with water, it is known simply 
as acetic acid. See Vinegar. 

Georg Stahl, a German chemist, first isolated glacial 
acetic acid from vinegar in 1700. Commercially, the acid 
is usually produced by such chemical processes as the 


Richard V. Gregory 


oxidation of acetaldehyde with air in the presence of cat- 


alysts. Acetaldehyde is itself formed from the oxidation 
of ethylene obtained from petroleum. 

One of the chief uses of acetic acid is as an intermedi- 
ate for making other chemicals. Manufacturers convert 
it into acetic anhydride and acetate esters. Acetic anhy- 
dride is used to make acetate fibers and cellulose ac- 
etate, a plastic. Ethyl acetate is an important ester used 
as a solvent for varnishes and in nail polish remover As 
a reagent, acetic acid is used to make synthetics, rubber, 
and aspirin and other pharmaceuticals. 

Acetic acid is a colorless liquid with a sharp, irritating 
odor. It is a caustic substance, and concentrated forms 
of it can cause severe burns. The chemical formula of 
acetic acid is CH,COOH. Robert J. Ouellette 
Acetone, AS wh tohn, is an important industrial chemi- 
cal. Its chief use is in making other compounds. Industry 
prepares acetone commercially from isopropy! alcohol, 
using brass or copper catalysts. Acetone can also be ob- 


tained from corn and other starchy products by ferment- 


ing them with a special bacteria and then distilling them. 

Acetone also forms in the body of a diabetic person. 
Its presence in urine is one symptom of the disease. 

Acetone dissolves many substances, including gums, 
oils, resins, fats, and cellulose. Industry uses acetone in 
paints, varnish removers, nail polish and nail polish re- 
movers, and some polishes and lacquers. 

Acetone is a clear, colorless, flammable liquid with a 
fruity odor. It mixes easily with water. Its ¢ hemical for 
mula is CH,COCH,, and it boils at 56.2 C (133.2 F 

Suzanne R. Abrams 

See also Acetylene. 


Achebe, Chinua 25 


Acetylene, uh SEHT uh leen, is a colorless, flammable 
gas used for welding and for preparing other chemical 
compounds. Its chemical formula is C,H,. Acetylene is 
poisonous if inhaled. It also forms explosive mixtures 
with air. Edmund Davy, an English chemist, first pro- 
duced acetylene in 1836. The gas was forgotten until 
1860, when the French chemist Marcelin Berthelot dis- 
covered a way to synthesize the gas from carbon and 
hydrogen, using an electric arc. 

Acetylene mixed with oxygen produces a flame that 
reaches a temperature of about 6000 F (3316 C). This 
flame, called the oxyacetylene flame, is used to weld and 
cut metals. In welding, the edges of the metal are melt- 
ed by the flame and then fused together (see Welding). 
In cutting, the metal to be cut is heated but not melted 
by the oxyacetylene flame. Then a fine stream of oxygen 
is sprayed onto the metal. The oxygen burns through the 
metal, leaving a clean-cut edge. Acetylene also serves as 
a raw material in the preparation of certain chemical 
compounds used to manufacture plastics. In addition, 
acetylene is used in the manufacture of vitamins. 

Acetylene may be produced commercially by creating 
a chemical reaction between calcium carbide and water. 
It is also made in industry by decomposing methane at 
high temperatures. Acetylene is stored in cylinders un- 
der high pressure. If not properly handled, the com- 
pressed gas can break down chemically and explode. To 
prevent explosions, acetylene is dissolved in acetone in 
special cylinders. Suzanne R. Abrams 

See also Acetone; Calcium carbide; Hydrocarbon. 
Acetylsalicylic acid. See Aspirin. 

Achaeans, wh KEE uhnz, were people of ancient 
Greece who lived in the Peloponnesus (Greece's south- 
ern peninsula), in east-central Greece, and on the islands 
of Crete, Rhodes, Cephalonia, and Ithaca. The term 
Achaeans appears in the epic the //rad to identify the 
Greeks who fought in the Trojan War. Achaeans are also 
mentioned in Hittite documents from the 1300's and 
1200's B.C, found in what is now Turkey. Some 
Achaeans may have taken part in sea raids on Egypt in 
the early 1100's B.C. Later in the 1100's B.C, Dorian in- 
vaders swept across Greece and drove the Acnaeans to 
a region in the northern Peloponnesus. This region later 
became known as Achaea. 

In the 300's B.C, 12 Achaean cities formed a confeder- 
ation that was known as the Achaean League. The 
league played an important part in Greek politics, op- 
posing first the Macedonians and then the Romans. The 
Romans conquered Greece and broke up the league in 
146 B.C 

See also Aeolians; Dorians; liad. 

Achebe, ah CHAY bay, Chinua, CH/HN 00 ah(1930- 

), is a leading Nigerian author best known for nov- 
els that explore the psychological and social impact of 
Western colonialism on traditional African societies. 
Achebe, who writes in English, also deals with aspects 
of African life after Africans gained their independence 
from European colonial powers in the mid-1900 s. Critics 
have praised the simplicity of Achebe s lanquage, his 
use of proverbs and folklore, his irony, and his objectivi 
ty in presenting complex issues. 

Achebe gained international recognition with his first 
novel, Things Fall Apart (958). The work portrays the in- 
fluence of colonial European missionaries and govern- 


Norman A. Doenges 


26 Acheron 


ment on a west African tribe during the late 1800's. 
Achebe continued this theme in the novel Arrow of 
God (1964). He dealt with late colonial and postcolonial 
life in Africa in the novels No Longer at Ease (1960), A 
Man of the People (1966), and Anthills of the Savannah 
(1987). 

In addition to his novels, Achebe has published the 
short-story collections The Sacrificial Egg (1962) and 
Girls at War (1973). He has written a number of children’s 
books, including Chike and the River (1966), How the 
Leopard Got His Claws (1972) as co-author, and The Flute 
and The Drum (both 1977). His poetry has been collected 
in Beware, Soul-Brother (1971) and Christmas in Biafra 
(1973). Many of his essays have been published in Morn- 
ing Yet on Creation Day (1975), The Trouble with Nigeria 
(1983), and Hopes and Impediments (1988). 

Albert Chinualumogu Achebe was born in Ogidi, 
Nigeria, which was then a British colony. He attended 
University College in Ibadan from 1948 to 1953. Achebe 
worked in broadcasting in Nigeria from 1954 to 1966 
and was professor of English at the University of Nigeria 
from 1976 to 1981. He has also taught at several universi- 
ties in the United States. 
Acheron. See Hades. 
Acheson, ACH ih suhn, Dean Gooderham (1893- 
1971), was United States secretary of state under Presi- 
dent Harry S. Truman from 1949 to 1953. Before he held 
that position, Acheson had served as undersecretary to 
three secretaries of state—Cordell Hull, James F. Byrnes, 
and George C. Marshall. 

In the Acheson-Lilienthal Report of 1946, Acheson 
urged international control of nuclear power. He negoti- 
ated the treaty that led to the North Atlantic Treaty Or- 
ganization (NATO) in 1949. He began carrying out the 
Marshall Plan in 1948. This plan aided the economic re- 
covery of Europe after World War II (see Marshall Plan). 
Acheson began much of the Truman Doctrine to protect 
Greece and Turkey from Soviet imperialism (see Tru- 
man, Harry S. [The Truman Doctrine]. 

Senator Joseph McCarthy and other people accused 
Acheson of “coddling” Communists in the State Depart- 
ment. His critics also blamed him for encouraging the 
Communist invasion of South Korea in 1950 and for the 
Communist victory in China in 1949. But his supporters 
have argued that Chiang Kai-shek, leader of the Chinese 
government, lost to the Communists because he lacked 
the support of his own people, and not because of lack 
of U.S. support. Most historians have also rejected the 
other charges against Acheson. 

Acheson wrote many books, including Present at the 
Creation: My Years in the State Department (1969), which 
won the 1970 Pulitzer Prize for history. He was born in 
Middletown, Connecticut. William E. Pemberton 
Achilles, u/ K/HL eez, in Greek mythology, was the 
best Greek warrior in the Trojan War. In the 10th year of 
that war, the Greeks defeated the city of Troy. 

The events in Achilles’s life are legends but may have 
some historical basis. Achilles was the son of Peleus, the 
king of Phthia in Thessaly, and Thetis, an immortal sea 
nymph. Soon after Achilles was born, Thetis dipped him 
in the River Styx, whose water would make him invul- 
nerable, like a god. However, the immortalizing water 
did not touch the heel by which Thetis held him. 

When the Trojan War began, Agamemnon, the com- 


Peter Nazareth 


mander of the Greek forces, sent soldiers to recruit 
Achilles into the Greek army. Thetis feared her son, who 
was just approaching manhood, would be killed in bat- 
tle. She sent him, disguised in women’s clothing, to live 
with King Lycomedes on the island of Skiros. But 
Odysseus (Ulysses in Latin), who was a cunning Greek 
general, saw through the disguise, and Achilles joined 
the army. 

During the last year of the war, Achilles quarreled 
with Agamemnon, who took away Briseis, a young 
woman Achilles had captured as a prize of war. In 
anger, Achilles refused to fight any longer and, without 
him, the Greek forces began to lose. Achilles allowed 
Patroclus, his best friend, to join the battle wearing his 
armor. Patroclus was slain by Hector, the greatest Trojan 
warrior. Enraged, Achilles returned to the battlefield, 
slaughtering everyone in his path. He eventually killed 
Hector, aided by the goddess Athena. According to 
some stories, Hector's brother Paris shot an arrow into 
Achilles’s heel, and Achilles died from the wound. 

Nancy Felson 

See also Trojan War; Iliad; Hector; Priam. 

Achilles tendon, uh K/HL eez, is the tendon at the 
back of the ankle. It attaches the muscles of the calf to 
the heel bone and is one of the strongest tendons in the 
body. The name Achilles tendon comes from the legend 
of Achilles, a Greek hero killed by an arrow in the heel. 

The Achilles tendon may rupture as the result of a 
powerful upward movement of the foot or a blow to the 
calf when the calf muscles are contracted. This injury 
most commonly occurs in people over the age of 30 
who compete in sports that involve running. Complete 
rupture frequently is accompanied by a snap, severe 
pain, and the inability to 
push off or stand on the 
toes. As soon as possible, 
ice should be applied to 
the back of the ankle, and 
the leg should be raised 
and immobilized. Surgery 
may be necessary to sew 
the tendon together. The 
person should stay off the 
injured leg for up to two 
months before beginning 
a program of gradual 
stretching and strengthen- 
ing exercises. Full recov- 
ery may take a year or 
more. 

john R. Conway Il! 

Acid is any of a group of 
chemical compounds with certain similar properties. 
Solutions of acids have a sour taste and produce a prick- 
ling or burning sensation if they come into contact with 
the skin. They dissolve many metals and turn blue litmus 
paper red. Chemical compounds called bases or alkalis 
neutralize acids. 

Many acids occur naturally and some are essential for 
life. For example, Aydrochloric acid(HCl) is produced in 
the stomach of most people and helps digestion. Acids 
are also used widely in industry, and they are a part of a 
large number of foods and beverages. But many acids 
are poisonous, and strong acids can cause severe burns. 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Charles Wellek 
Achilles tendon 





Chemists use several definitions to describe the be- 
havior of acids. When water is the solvent, an acid is 
often defined as a compound that dissolves to produce 
hydrogen ions (H+) in solution. A hydrogen atom con- 
sists of one proton, which has a positive electric charge, 
and one electron, which has a negative charge. A hydro- 
gen ion is the proton that remains when the atom loses 
its electron. In solution, the proton is closely associated 
with solvent molecules, forming Aydronium ions (H,O+). 

An acid may also be defined as a substance that 
serves aS a proton donor—that is, it readily gives up a 
proton to another substance. However, acids are most 
broadly defined as compounds that are e/ectron pair ac- 
ceptors. This definition describes all acids, including 
those that have no hydrogen that they can release and 
that cannot serve as proton donors. The acid accepts a 
pair of electrons from another atom or molecule. In 
such cases, the acid and the electron pair donor form a 
new molecule in which they share the electrons. 

The strength of an acid depends on the degree to 
which the acid dissociates (breaks up) in solution to 
form hydrogen ions. For example, in water solution, 
every molecule of hydrogen chloride (HCI) releases a hy- 
drogen ion to form hydrochloric acid. Hydrochloric acid 
is therefore considered a strong acid. Acetic acid 
(CH,COOH), which is found in vinegar, forms only a few 
hydrogen ions in solution. It is a weak acid. 

Inorganic acids, in genera!, do not contain carbon 
atoms. Many inorganic acids are strong acids. They are 
used in the production of other chemicals, explosives, 
fertilizers, metals, paints, plastics, and synthetic fibers, 
and in the refining of petroleum. Sulfuric acid (H,SO,), a 
strong inorganic acid, is commonly used as the fluid in 
automobile batteries. Other important inorganic acids 
are hydrochloric acid and nitric acid (HNO). 

Organic acids contain carbon atoms. They are used 
in beverages, cosmetics, detergents, foods, drugs, plas- 
tics, and soaps. Common organic acids include citric 
acid (C,H,O.), which is found in citrus fruits; ascorbic 
acid (C.H,O,), or vitamin C; and acetylsalicylic acid 
(C.H,O,), or aspirin. Amino acids, which contain nitrogen, 
are also organic acids. Amino acids are the building 
blocks of proteins, and some of them are necessary for 
human life. 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Emily Jane Rose 


Acids 
Acetic acid Hydrofluoric acid Prussic acid 
Amino acid Hypochlorous acid _ Salicylic acid 
Aqua regia Lactic acid Stearic acid 
Chromic acid Nitric acid Sulfuric acid 
Citric acid Oxalic acid Tannic acid 
Formic acid Phosphoric acid Tartaric acid 


Hydrochloric acid 
Other related articles 

Acid rain Base pH 
Anhydride Litmus Salt, Chemical 
Acid rain is a term for rain, snow, sleet. or other wet 
precipitation that is polluted by such acids as sulfuric 
acid and nitric acid. Acid rain harms thousands of lakes 
rivers, and streams worldwide. killing fish and other 
wildlife. It also damages buildings, bridges, and statues. 
In high concentrations, it can harm forests and sol. 

Acid rain forms when water vapor in the air reacts 
with certain chemical compounds These compounds 


Acne 27 


including sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides, come 
largely from the burning of coal, gasoline, and oil. Most 
automobiles, factories, and power plants burn such fu- 
els for energy. Regions affected by acid rain include 
large parts of eastern North America, Scandinavia and 
central Europe, and parts of Asia. Since about the 1950's, 
the problem has increased in rural areas. This has oc- 
curred because the use of taller smokestacks in urban 
areas has enabled the winds to transport pollutants far- 
ther from their sources. 

Scientists and engineers have developed ways to re- 
duce the acidity of rain. For example, several kinds of 
devices remove sulfur and nitrogen compounds from 
fuels or industrial emissions before they reach the at- 
mosphere. Adding lime to lakes and rivers and their 
drainage areas temporarily neutralizes their acidity. But 
the neutralization may have harmful side effects. 

In 1990, the United States Congress amended the 
Clean Air Act of 1970 to reduce acid rain in the United 
States and Canada. The amendments tightened emis- 
sions standards and required fuels that burn more 
cleanly. In 1999, the World Health Organization pub- 
lished air quality guidelines designed to reduce world- 
wide production of pollutants that result in acid rain and 
other environmental problems. Marian R. Chertow 

See also Air pollution. 

Acidosis, as uh DOH sihs, is a condition in which the 
body fluids tend to have a higher acid content than nor- 
mal. The body has a variety of ways to compensate for 
mild acidosis. But prolonged acidosis can produce 
weakness, headache, and heavy or rapid breathing. Se- 
vere acidosis may lead to acidemia—a build-up of acids 
in the blood. Acidemia can result in coma and death. 

Acidosis itself is not a disease, but it may warn of the 
presence of a disease. It arises from disorders that cause 
the body to accumulate excess acid or to lose too much 
alkali. Most of these disorders are respiratory failures or 
metabolic failures. Respiratory acidosis results from 
such disturbances as severe lung disease, blockage of 
the upper air passages, and chest injury. Metabolic fail- 
ures involve malfunctioning of the process by which the 
body changes food into energy and tissue. Metabolic 
acidosis arises from kidney failure, diabetes, poisoning, 
and severe diarrhea. Treatment usually consists of cor- 
recting the underlying problem and administering sodi- 
um bicarbonate or another alkaline substance through a 
vein. Edward £. Morse 

See also Alkalosis. 

ACLU. See American Civil Liberties Union. 

Acne is a skin disorder that occurs most commonly 
among teen-agers. It consists of various kinds of blem- 
ishes, mainly on the face, upper chest, and back A few 
blemishes are normal. but severe acne may result in 
permanent scarring. Some teen-agers find severe acne 
so distressing that they develop emotional problems. 

In most cases, acne appears during early adolescence 
—at about the age of 13, when a child starts to develop 
physically into an adult. This development is controlled 
by chemical! substances called honnones. Gne kind of 
hormone stimulates the oil glands in the skin. These 
glands, which are called sebaceous glands, grow larger 
and produce more oil. Each sebaceous gland empties 
into a air follicle. a cylinderlike structure that sur- 
rounds a hair Normally, the oil empties out ot the folli- 


28 Acne 


Hair 
follicle 


WORLD BOOkK illustrations by Charles Wellek 


The development of an acne pimple is illustrated above. Fig- 
ure A shows a normal hair follicle and sebaceous gland. In fig- 
ure B, a blockage prevents the flow of oil out of the hair follicle. 
Bacteria breed in the backed-up oil. In figures C and D, the folli- 
cle swells with pus. The walls of the follicle eventually burst, and 
the pus drains away, as shown in figure E. 


cle through a pore that opens onto the surface of the 
skin. 

Sometimes the pores become plugged and oil accu- 
mulates under the plugs. A plugged pore forms a blem- 
ish called a blackhead or whitehead. The black color of a 
blackhead comes from a normal skin pigment that dark- 
ens when exposed to air. A whitehead develops if a 
pore is so clogged that no air can enter. 

Small, pus-filled bumps called pimples, or tender red 
lumps called cysts, may also develop. In pimples and 
cysts, a type of bacteria called Propionibacterium acnes 
breeds in the follicles, sebaceous glands, and backed- 
up oil, producing inflammation that causes the redness 
and pus. Cysts may leave permanent scars, but pimples 
usually do not scar unless squeezed or picked. 

A poor diet, worry, and various bad habits are often 
blamed for acne, but they have little to do with the dis- 
order. A balanced diet, enough sleep and exercise, and 
regular washing are good for the complexion and gen- 
eral health but cannot prevent or cure acne. Mild acne 
can be treated with nonprescription lotions that contain 
benzoyl peroxide or other medications. Heavy makeup 
makes acne worse and should not be used. 

Severe acne should be treated by a physician. An an- 
tibiotic called tetracycline may be prescribed. This drug 
blocks the growth and reproduction of Propionibacteri- 
um acnes bacteria. Medications containing vitamin A 
acid may be applied to the skin to help prevent new 
blemishes. Other treatment used by doctors includes re- 
moving blackheads, freezing the skin with dry ice or liq- 
uid nitrogen to make it peel, and using a sun lamp. A 
drug called /sotretinoin may be used to treat severe 
acne. But this drug, which has the trade name Accutane, 
can cause birth defects. It should not be used by women 
who are pregnant or who may become pregnant while 
undergoing treatment. David T. Woodley 

See also Abscess; Pimple. 





Aconcagua, 4H kawng KAH gwah, is an extinct vol- 
cano and the highest mountain in the Western Hemi- 
sphere. It is part of the Andes range in South America. 
Aconcagua stands 22,831 feet (6,959 meters) high in 
west-central Argentina, near Chile. Long ago, Acon- 
Cagua was probably more than 1,000 feet (300 meters) 
higher than now. But its upper part has crumbled away 
and no trace of its crater remains. Jerry R. Williams 

See also Andes Mountains; Mountain (diagram: Ma- 
jor mountains). 
Aconite, AK uh nyt is the name of a group of plants 
that thrive in cool, northern regions. They are perennials, 
which means they can live for more than two years. 
There are more than 100 species. Most of them grow in 
Asia. Aconite flowers bloom in spring and summer and 
vary in color from purple-blue to yellow and white. 

Aconites may grow from 1 to 6 feet (30 to 180 centime- 
ters) high. The upper parts of their flowers resemble 
hoods or helmets. The roots, seeds, and leaves of some 





WORLD BOOK itlustration by Christabel King 


The helmet flower is an aconite that has purplish flowers. The 
plant produces a poisonous drug also called aconite. 


aconites are poisonous. A species of aconite called the 

helmet flower produces a poisonous drug also called 

aconite. This drug contains a powerful chemical, aconi- 

tine, which was once used extensively as a medicine. 
Jerry M. Baskin 


Scientific classification. Aconites belong to the crowfoot 
family, Ranunculaceae. The scientific name for the helmet flower 
is Aconitum Napellus. 


Acorm is the nut produced by any of the various kinds 
of oak trees. Acorns are sometimes used to feed hogs. 
Many wild birds and mammals, including quail, deer, 
and squirrels, eat acorns. Many kinds of acorns are bit- 
ter. American Indians crushed acorns and soaked them 
in water to remove the bitterness. American pioneers 
ate acorns when food was scarce. See also Oak. 

Richard A. Jaynes 
Acoustics, uh KOOS tihks, is the study of how sounds 
are created, transmitted, and received. The word 
acoustics also refers to the quality of sound as heard or 
transmitted in a room or concert hall. Two of the major 
fields in the study of acoustics are architectural acoustics 
and environmental acoustics. 








Architectural acoustics deals with making rooms 
and buildings quiet and providing good cunditions for 
listening to speech and music. It plays an important role 
in the planning and construction of auditoriums, church- 
es, halls, libraries, and music rooms. 

The acoustical quality of a room is affected by various 
factors. These include (1) the size and shape of the room; 
(2) the ability of the ceiling, walls, and floor to keep out 
unwanted sound; and (3) the use of furnishings made of 
sound-absorbing materials. 

Another factor in the acoustical quality of a room is 
the way the room reflects sound. Sounds made by a 
speaker or a musical instrument bounce back and forth 
against the ceiling, walls, floor, and other surfaces. 
These reflections of a sound make up its reverberation. 
The reverberation time of a room is the time in which a 
sound dies away to one-millionth of its original energy. 
Reverberations should last about one second in an audi- 
torium designed for speech, and about two seconds ina 
music hall. But no single strong reflection should arrive 
at a listener's ear later than about 5, of a second after the 
arrival of the direct sound from a speaker or instrument. 
Otherwise, the listener hears the strong reflection as a 
disturbing echo of the original sound. 

Furnishings made of sound-absorbing materials con- 
trol reflection in a room. These include acoustical tiles, 
carpets, drapes, and upholstered furniture. 

Environmental acoustics involves the control of 
noise pollution, a widespread problem in many residen- 
tial areas. Major sources of environmental noise include 
automobiles and other motor vehicles, aircraft, industri- 
al plants, and heavy construction equipment. 

Noise pollution can be controlled in three ways: (1) by 
quieting the source of the noise, (2) by blocking the pas- 
sage of noise from one place to another, and (3) by ab- 
sorbing noise energy. For example, mufflers quiet the 
noise of automobile engines, heavy walls that have no 
cracks or pores block noise, and furnishings made of 
acoustical materials absorb noise. 

Frequent exposure to intense noise can damage a 
person's hearing temporarily or permanently. The inten- 
sity of noise is measured in units called decibels. Feder- 
al laws require industries to reduce factory noise to 90 
decibels or lower or to order workers to use protective 
earplugs or earmuffs. 

Other areas of acoustics include (1) physiological 
acoustics—the way we hear sounds; (2) psychological 
acoustics—the way we interpret sounds; (3) musical 
acoustics—the way instruments and voices produce 
sounds; and (4) speech communication—the way we 
produce and hear speech. Acoustics also includes the 
study of sound waves that we cannot hear. For example, 
infrasound is too low in frequency for the human ear. 
and ultrasound is too high in frequency. Sound waves 
within the earth and underwater also fall outside the 
range of human hearing and form fields of study. 

James D. Chalupnik 

See also Insulation (Insulation against sound); Muf- 
fler; Sound; Ultrasound. . 
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. See 
AIDS. 

Acre is a unit of land area in the inch-pound system ot 
measurement. One acre equals 160 square rods or 
43,560 square feet (4046.856 square meters). An acre that 


Acrylic 29 


is square in shape measures about 208.7 feet (63.6 me- 
ters) on each side. There are 640 acres in a square mile. 
In the metric system, one measure of land area is the 
hectare, which equals 10,000 square meters, or 2.471 
acres. Richard S. Davis 
Acrobatics. See Gymnastics; Diving. 
Acronym. See Abbreviation. 
Acropolis, uh KRAHP uh Iihs, was the religious and 
military center of a city-state in ancient Greece. The 
Greeks usually fortified a hill, called an acropolis, within 
or near the city for defense. The acropolis was often the 
first place to be inhabited. During the height of the My- 
cenaean era (1400 to 1200 B.C), the palace of a local king 
was usually built on a hill. The palace also served as a 
military fort and a place of refuge for the townspeople 
in emergencies. The most important temples were also 
built on the hill, including the local shrines of the gods. 
The most famous acropolis was in Athens. The Athen- 
ian Acropolis was a rocky hilltop, originally the site of 
the local armory and royal palace. The Persians demol- 
ished many old buildings on the Acropolis during a de- 
structive invasion in 480 B.C. The Athenians then built a 
magnificent new group of temples. From 447 to 432 B.C, 





Art Resource 


An acropolis served as the religious and military center of an 
ancient Greek city-state. The Acropolis in Athens includes the 
Parthenon, upper right, and ruins of other ancient temples. 


the Athenians built the Parthenon, dedicated to the vir- 
gin goddess Athena, the patron of the city (see Parthe- 
non). The Erechtheum, built to honor the legendary 
founders of the city, was constructed from 421 to about 
406 B.C. The Temple of Athena Nike, built about 425 B.C, 
honored Athena as the goddess of victory. Two theaters 
and several minor sanctuaries also occupied the slopes 
of the hilltop. On sacred holidays, a procession made its 
way up the slopes of the Acropolis and passed through 
the Propylaea. a large rooted gateway. to various tem- 
ples. 
For pictures of the Acropolis in Athens, see Athens; 
Greece 
Acrylic, uh KRIHL th, 1s any one of a group of synthet- 
ic products made primarily from petroleum. Acrylics are 


Wilham J. Hennessey 


30 Actof... 


manufactured as fibers or plastics or as substances 
called resins (see Resin, Synthetic). Common acrylics in- 
clude Acrilan, Lucite, Orlon, and Plexiglas. 

Acrylic fibers are woven or knitted into durable fab- 
rics of various textures. These fabrics dry rapidly and re- 
sist fading, wrinkling, and mildew. They are used to 
make blankets, carpets, sweaters, and many other prod- 
ucts. 

Acrylic plastics are tough materials that resist weath- 
ering, sharp blows, and corrosion. Acrylic plastics are 
often used as substitutes for glass in such products as 
aircraft windows, television screens, automobile tail 
lights, and lighting fixtures. They are less breakable than 
glass but are more easily scratched. 

Liquid acrylic resins are used to make paints and syn- 
thetic waxes. Acrylic paints dry quickly and provide 
strong protection against the weather. They are widely 
used as house paints and in coatings for automobiles. 
High-gloss acrylic waxes are spread as protective coat- 
ings on floors and automobiles. 

Acrylic adhesives and sealants are made from soft, 
elastic acrylic resins. Acrylic adhesives are used in such 
products as prepasted wallpaper and tapes. Acrylic 
sealants are used to seal cracks and joints in buildings. 

Marvis E. Hartman 
Act of ... Laws that begin Act ofor Act forappear under 
their key words, as in Union, Act of. 

Actaeon. See Artemis. 

ACTH is an abbreviation of the chemical substance 
adrenocorticofropic hormone. This hormone is pro- 
duced, stored, and released into the blood by the pitu- 
itary gland, a pea-sized organ that lies at the base of the 
brain. ACTH is necessary for the normal growth and 
function of the adrenal glands, two organs located on 
top of the kidneys. ACTH stimulates the adrenal glands 
to secrete various hormones, including a group called 
glucocorticoids. Glucocorticoids regulate the use of di- 
gested food and help the body adjust to stress. 

Normally, the pituitary gland releases high levels of 
ACTH in the morning and low levels at night. Physical or 
mental stress or disruption of a person's normal sleep- 
ing habits can change this pattern. Disturbances in the 
production or release of ACTH can cause severe illness. 

Physicians use ACTH in the treatment of certain ill- 
nesses and of inflammation. ACTH used for medical pur- 
poses is obtained either synthetically or from the pitu- 
itary glands of animals. Charlotte H. Greene 

See also Gland; Hormone. 

Acting. See Motion picture (Assembling the cast; 
Holding rehearsals); Television; Theater (The perform- 
ers). 

Actinide. See Rare earth; Element, Chemical (Periodic 
table of the elements). 

Actinium, ak T/HN ee uhm, a chemical element, is an 
extremely rare, silvery-white, radioactive metal that 
glows in the dark. It is formed naturally by the decay of 
uranium 235. Actinium also can be artificially prepared 
from radium treated with neutrons in a nuclear reactor. 
It is a difficult element to study because it can be pro- 
duced only in very small quantities and because it de- 
cays into products that give off radiation. 

Actinium has the chemical symbol Ac. Its atomic num- 
ber is 89. Its most stable isotope has an atomic weight of 
227 and a half-life of 22 years. Actinium melts at 817 C 


and boils at 2470 ‘C. Most simple actinium compounds, 
such as the oxides, hydrides, and halides, contain the 
positively charged actinium ion, Ac**. André Debierne, a 
French scientist, discovered actinium in 1899. 

Ss. C Cummings 
Actinomycosis, 4k tuh nuh my KOH sihs, is a rare, in- 
fectious disease that affects human beings. It is charac- 
terized by the formation of painful abscesses in the 
mouth, lungs, or digestive organs. These abscesses 
grow larger as the disease progresses, often over a peri- 
od of months. In severe cases, the abscesses may bore 
through bone and muscle to the skin, where they break 
open and leak large amounts of pus. Actinomycosis can 
destroy a person's jaw or lungs. It can also block the 
passage of food through the digestive system. It occurs 
in cattle and other animals as a disease called /umpy jaw. 
This name refers to the large abscesses that grow on the 
head and neck of the infected animal. 

Actinomycosis is caused by any of several members 
of a group of bacteria called actinomyces. These bacte- 
ria are anaerobes—that is, they cannot survive in the 
presence of large amounts of oxygen. Actinomyces nor- 
mally live harmlessly in the small spaces between the 
teeth and gums. They cause infection only when they 
can multiply freely in places where oxygen cannot reach 
them. The three most common sites of infection are de- 
cayed teeth, the lungs, and the intestines. Doctors use 
penicillin to treat actinomycosis. John R. Graybill 
ACTION was a federal agency that directed the domes- 
tic volunteer programs of the United States government 
from 1971 to 1993. ACTION’s programs included those 
that aided senior citizens, assisted low-income commu- 
nities, and worked to prevent drug abuse. In 1993, most 
of these programs were transferred to the Corporation 
for National and Community Service. Some of them have 
been changed somewhat and renamed. 

ACTION volunteers varied in age from 14 to more 
than 60 years old. They carried out programs in the 50 
states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin 
Islands,.and Guam. 

ACTION originally included the Peace Corps, which 
coordinates U.S. volunteers who serve outside the coun- 
try. In 1982, the Peace Corps became an independent 
agency (see Peace Corps). 

Actium, AX tee uhm or AK shee uhm, Battle of, was 
a naval battle that settled the struggle for control of an- 
cient Rome between co-rulers Gaius Octavian and Mark 
Antony. Octavian’s forces won the battle, which took 
place in 31 B.C. off the coast of Actium, near present-day 
Preveza in western Greece. 

Antony wanted to become the sole ruler of the vast 
Roman lands, which stretched across Europe. About 37 
B.C,, he married Cleopatra, the queen of Egypt, and be- 
gan giving her Roman lands. War between Rome and 
Egypt broke out in 32 B.C. Antony and Cleopatra led 400 
ships into the Battle of Actium. Marcus Agrippa, Octa- 
vian's chief military leader, commanded a fleet of equal 
size. Soon after the fighting began, Antony and Cleopa- 
tra apparently fled from the battle. Their navy then sur- 
rendered to Octavian’'s forces. In 30 B.C, Antony and 
Cleopatra committed suicide. In 27 B.C, Octavian be- 
came Emperor Augustus, the first emperor of the Ro- 
man Empire. 

See also Agrippa, Marcus. 


William G. Sinnigen 





Acton, AK tuhn, Lord (1834-1902), was one of the most 
respected historians of the 1800's. Many of his works fo- 
cused on the history of freedom. Acton also planned the 
massive Cambridge Modern History. His statement that 
“Power tends to corrupt, and absolute power corrupts 
absolutely’ has become a famous proverb. 

Acton was a prominent liberal Roman Catholic. At Vat- 
ican Council | (1869-1870), he worked with bishops who 
opposed the church's adoption of the doctrine of papa/ 
infallibility. This doctrine states that the pope can com- 
mit no errors when he speaks as head of the church to 
define solemnly, in matters of faith and morals, what is 
to be accepted by all Roman Catholics. 

John Emerich Edward Dalberg Acton was born on Jan. 
10, 1834, in Naples, Italy. As a child, he moved with his 
family to the United Kingdom. In 1869, he became a bar- 
on. He was a professor of modern history at Cambridge 
University from 1895 until his death on June 19, 1902. 

James C. Holland 
Actor and actress. See the lists of biographies in the 
Related articles of Motion picture and Theater. 

Acts of Supremacy. See Church of England. 

Acts of the Apostles is the fifth book of the New Tes- 
tament. It is a continuation of the Gospel of Luke. This 
Gospel and Acts are volumes one and two ofa single 
work. According to Christian tradition, Acts was written 
by Saint Luke, a companion of Saint Paul. But many 
scholars doubt that this is true. Most scholars believe 
that Luke and Acts were written about A.D. 85. 

Acts is the only record of the Christian church in the 
years just after the death of Jesus. It tells how followers 
of Jesus were His witnesses, first in Jerusalem and then 
in Judea and Samaria and finally “to the end of the earth” 
(Acts 1:8). Acts tells the story of the spread of the church 
mainly by narrating the career of Paul. In three mission- 
ary journeys, Paul evangelized what is now Turkey and 
Greece. After Paul was imprisoned and taken to Rome, 
he evangelized there. Terrance D. Callan 

See also Bible (Books of the New Testament); Luke, 
Saint. 

Acuff, Roy (1903-1992), was an American country mu- 
sic singer and fiddler. Acuff and his band, the Smoky 
Mountain Boys, helped make Tennessee mountain mu- 
sic internationally known. Such recordings as The Great 
Speckled Bird” (1936) and “Wabash Cannonball” (1936) 
became country music classics. 

Acuff was born on Sept. 15, 1903, in Maynardville, 
Tennessee. He became a radio entertainer and began 
recording in 1936. In 1938, he joined The Grand Ole 
Opry’ radio show in Nashville and became one of Its 
longest-running performers. He died on Nov. 23, 1992. 
See also Popular music (picture: Country musicl. 

Lee Rector 
Acupuncture, AK yuh puhngk chuhr, is an ancient 
Chinese method of relieving pain and treating various 
diseases by inserting needles into specific places on the 
body. According to Chinese philosophy, acupuncture 
influences a life force that flows along 12 paired and 2 
unpaired meridians, energy channels that run longitudt: 
nally in the body. Specialists called acupuncturists insert 
needles at points along these meridians or at painful 
points on the body. Insertion o! the needles is said to re- 
store balance between two principal forces of nature 
called yinand yang. Acupuncturists believe imbalance 


between these two forces 
causes disease and pain. 
Insertion of the needles 
produces a pinching feel- 
ing. This feeiing quickly 
disappears and may be re- 
placed by occasional tin- 
gling or a sense of numb- 
ness, heaviness, or 
soreness while the nee- 
dles are in place. 
Acupuncture is used 
alone or in combination 
with Western medicine or 
Chinese herbal prepara- 
tions. It is most often used 
to relieve pain due to 
chronic illness and severe 


Adam 31 





L Steinmark, Custom Medical 
Acupuncture relieves pain 
by the insertion of needles. 
This photo shows needles in- 


ae serted near a person's ear. 
injury. Some common af- 


flictions acupuncturists 

treat include headaches, sinusitis, chronic respiratory 
infections, digestive disturbances, and drug dependen- 
cies. Since the late 1950's, doctors in China have used 
acupuncture to relieve pain during major surgery. The 
patient is conscious and seems to feel little or no pain. 

Researchers have shown that acupuncture increases 
the brain's production of natural painkillers called en- 
dorphins. These substances are morphinelike chemicals 
that influence the body's perception of pain (see Endor- 
phin). Much of acupuncture’s influence, however, is not 
understood. 

Acupuncture is practiced widely in Asia and Europe, 
and itis gaining popularity and respect in the United 
States. Its practitioners include many medical doctors. 

Joseph M. Helms 
A.D. is the abbreviation for anno Domini, which is Latin 
for in the year of our Lord. \n 532, the monk Dionysius 
Exiguus introduced a system of dating events, beginning 
with the year he believed Jesus Christ was born. In this 
system, the year of Christ's birth was A.D. 1, and the year 
before that was 1 B.C (before Christ). Modern scholars 
believe Christ was actually born no later than 1 B.C But 
people still determine dates using the original system. 

Writers generally use A.D. and B.C only to avoid con- 
fusion. When a writer mentions a year without using er- 
ther abbreviation, readers should assume that the year 
was, oris,an A.D." year. 

Because there is no “year zero’ in the dating system, it 
takes two steps to calculate an interval between a date 
ina B.C’ year and the same date in an “A.D.” year. First, 
add the numbers representing the years. Then subtract 
1. Thus, the interval between the end of 1 B.C and the 
end of A.D. 1 was 1 year. The interval between the end 
of 2000 B.C. and the end of A.D. 2000 was 3,999 years. 

An alternative system uses the same numbering 
method as that of Dionysius Exiguus, but does not refer 
specifically to Christ. In the alternative system, CE, 
which stands for common era, replaces A.D.; and BCE. 
betore the common era/replaces B.C Michael Dine 

See also B.C 
Ad Dawhah. See Doha. 

Adam was the family name of two brothers— Robert 
Adam |'1728-1792) and James Adam (1732-1794'—who 
were famous Scottish architects. Robert Adam settled in 


32 Adamand Eve 





London in 1758 and formed a partnership with his broth- 
er. Their interest in ancient Roman architecture formed 
the basis for the light and delicate neoclassical character 
of their work. The brothers are especially noted for their 
residential buildings, furniture, and interior design. 

Robert Adam's best-known buildings include Syon 
House (1762-1769) and Osterley Park House (1763-1780), 
both in London. The brothers collaborated on the Adel- 
phi (1772), a large row of residential and commercial 
buildings in London. Robert Adams book Ruins of the 
Palace of the Emperor Diocletian at Spalato in Dalmatia 
(1764) was a significant archaeological publication of the 
period. J. William Rudd 

See also Architecture (Neoclassical architecture; pic- 
ture); Furniture (English neoclassical furniture; picture); 
Museum (picture: Museums). 

Adam and Eve, according to the Bible, were the first 
man and woman created by God. The account of Adam 
and Eve is told in Genesis 2-3. According to Genesis, 
God created two human beings, later called Adam and 
Eve, and placed them in the Garden of Eden (see Eden). 
Adam and Eve lived in Eden, tending the garden of God. 
They were permitted to eat from any tree in the garden 
except from the tree of knowledge of good and evil. But 
a serpent persuaded Eve to eat fruit from this tree. Eve 
gave some to Adam, who also ate the fruit. Thus, they 
became mortal and God exiled them from Eden. Outside 
the garden, Adam had to work hard to make a living, 
and Eve also had to work and to bear many children. 

The story of Adam and Eve begins a long Biblical nar- 
rative of human history. Their position at the beginning 
of the Bible makes them seem historical. But many Bibli- 
cal scholars consider them as models who reveal the es- 
sential qualities of human existence. Their names are 
normally not proper names in Biblical Hebrew. They are 
general terms for Aumanity and living being. 

According to one interpretation, the account of Adam 
and Eve focuses especially on those characteristics that 
define human nature as opposed to the nature of God 
and that of animals. Adam and Eve were made in God's 
image, and they gained wisdom, or knowledge of good 


A Robert Adam design for 
Kedleston Hall in Derbyshire 
is a masterpiece of English 
neoclassical architecture. The 
state drawing room, shown 
here, was completed in the 
1760s. It blends ceiling and 
wall decorations with paint- 
ings and furniture. 


A Haslam, Royal Oak Foundation 


and evil, which made them like God. But like animals, 
they had to die. Some people also believe the account 
emphasizes universal human fellowship by showing all 
humans as descendants of one couple. Carol L Mevers 

See also Genesis; Abel; Cain. 

Adams, Abigail Smith (1744-1818), was the wife of 
John Adams, the second president of the United States. 
She also was the mother of John Quincy Adams, the 
sixth president. Abigail Adams is known for many letters 
containing her opinions of the society of her time. 

Abigail Smith was born in Weymouth, Massachusetts. 
She and Adams were married in 1764. They had four 
children besides John Quincy Adams. She managed the 
family farm in Braintree (now Quincy), Massachusetts, 
while Adams served in the Continental Congress and as 
a diplomat in Europe during the 1770's and 1780s. 

Abigail Adams supported women’s rights and provid- 
ed her daughter, Abigail, with a broad education. Writ- 
ing to Adams in Philadelphia in 1776, she urged him to 
‘remember the ladies’ in the new nation’s laws. She also 
opposed slavery. 

During the Revolutionary War in America (1775-1783), 
Abigail Adamss letters to her husband contained valu- 
able information about British troops and ships in the 
Boston area. In 1800, the Adamses became the first cou- 
ple to live in the White House. _ Kathryn Kish Sklar 

See also Adams, John (Adams family; picture). 
Adams, Ansel (1902-1984), was an American photog- 
rapher known for his dramatic photographs of the West 
He took large pictures of landscapes that include moun- 
tains, forests, and rivers. Adams's interest in preserving 
wilderness areas also led him to become active in the 
conservation movement. 

Adams was a leading supporter of straight photogra- 
phy, a style featuring detailed, focused photos that por- 
tray subjects simply and directly. In 1932, he and six oth- 
er photographers formed a group that promoted this 
style of photography. 

In 1940, Adams helped found the Department of Pho- 
tography at the Museum of Modern Art in New York 
City. In 1946, he established a photography department 














Ansel Adamis 
Nature's majestic beauty is portrayed in Ansel Adams photo 
Mt. Williamson, Sierra Nevada, trom Manzanar, California 1944. 


at the California School of Fine Arts (now the San Fran- 
cisco Art Institute). This department was the first of its 
kind at a college in the United States. Adams also wrote 
a series of books on photography. He was born in San 
Francisco. Charles Hagen 

Adams, Brooks (1848-1927), was an American histori- 
an and a critic of capitalism. He believed that commer- 
cial civilizations rise and fall in predictable cycles. First, 
masses of people draw together in large population 
centers and engage in commercial activities. Then, as 
their desire for wealth grows, greed replaces spiritual 
and creative values. Finally, the society crumbles. In The 
Law of Civilization and Decay (1895), Adams noted that as 
new population centers emerged in the West, centers of 
world trade shifted. They moved from Constantinople 
(now Istanbul, Turkey) to Venice, Italy, and eventually to 
London. Adams predicted in Americas Economic Su- 
premacy (1900) that Russia and the United States would 
become the leading world powers by 1950. 

Adams was born in Quincy, Massachusetts. He was 
the son of U.S. diplomat Charles Francis Adams, brother 
of historian Henry Brooks Adams, and a grandson of 
President John Quincy Adams. Joseph Martin Hernos, Jr. 
Adams, Charles Francis (1807-1886), was one of the 
most successful diplomats in United States history. He 
gained this reputation through his work as U.S. minister 
to Britain between 1861 and 1868. During these years, 
Adams helped keep Britain and France from recogniz- 
ing the independence of the Confederacy during the 
American Civil War (1861-1865). 

Adams was born in Boston. His father, John Quincy 
Adams, later became the sixth president of the United 
States. Charles spent his boyhood in Russia and Britain, 
where his father was U.S. minister. Charles graduated 
from Harvard University in 1825. 

In the mid-1830's, Charles Adams became invols edin 
the controversy over slavery in the United States. He 
served in the Massachusetts legislature from 1841 to 
1845 and helped persuade fellow house members to 
take an open stand against slavery. He also edited the 
Boston Daily Whig, an antislavery party journal. Gradual 


Adams, Henry Brooks 33 


ly, Adams became leader of the Conscience Whigs, an 
antislavery group. The group supported the Free Soil 
Party in 1848, which nominated Martin Van Buren for 
president and Adams for vice president. Zachary Taylor, 
the Whig candidate for president, won the election. 

Adams devoted most of his time during the 1850's to 
editing the 10-volume Works of John Adams. He was 
elected to the U.S. House of Representatives from Mass- 
achusetts in 1858 and 1860. In 1861, President Abraham 
Lincoln appointed Adams minister to Britain. There 
Adams had to face strong sympathy for the Southern 
States in the Civil War. As minister, Adams struggled to 
prevent British recognition of Confederate independ- 
ence and urged British officials not to equip Confeder- 
ate ships. In 1871, President Ulysses S. Grant chose 
Adams to represent the United States in the settlement 
of claims involving the Confederate cruiser Alabama 
(see Alabama [ship)). Elliott Robert Barkan 
Adams, Gerry (1948- ), became the president of 
Sinn Féin (shihn fayn), an Irish nationalist political party, 
in 1983. Sinn Féin is the political wing of the Irish Repub- 
lican Army (IRA), a group that has long sought to unite 
the country of Ireland with Northern Ireland, which is 
part of the United Kingdom. 

Adams defended the IRA‘s use of violence to achieve 
its goals. However, he also sought a peaceful settlement 
to the conflict. Adams participated in talks that led to a 
1998 agreement committing all sides to resolve their dif- 
ferences by peaceful means. He also participated in 
hard-fought negotiations on implementation of the ac- 
cord. See Northern Ireland (Recent developments). 

Gerard Adams was born in Belfast, Northern Ireland. 
In 1964, while still in school, he joined Sinn Féin, where 
he worked for fair housing laws for Roman Catholics in 
Belfast. Adams was imprisoned by authorities in North- 
ern Ireland during most of the 1970's because they sus- 
pected him of membership in the IRA. Adams denied 
being a member of the IRA. Paul E. Gallis 

See also Irish Republican Army; Sinn Féin. 

Adams, Henry Brooks (1838-1918), was an important 
American historian. His autobiography, The Education ot 
Henry Adams (privately printed in 1907, published in 
1918), won a Pulitzer Prize in 1919. In this book, Adams 
painted a vivid picture of the increasing sense of discon- 
nectedness, terrifying diversity, and rapid change that 
many people began to experience in Western society 
during the 1800s. 

Adamss greatest contribution to American history 
was the nine-volume History of the United States (1889- 
1891). In it, he made extensive use of historical docu- 
ments to establish sure facts with little personal com- 
ment. He thus helped found the ‘scientific method’ of 
history-writing that developed in the !ate 1800's. His 
Mont-Saint-Michel and Chartres (1913) established him 
as one of the best American writers of medieval history. 

Adams was born in Boston, the son of American 
diplomat Charles Francis Adams. He was also the grand- 
son of U.S. President John Quincy Adams and the great- 
grandson of President John Adams. Henry Adams grad- 
uated trom Harvard University in 1858 and taught history 
there from 1870 to 1877. He edited the North American 
Review trom 1870 to 1876. Adams also wrote two 
novels = Democracy (1880) and Esther (1884). 


Dantel Mark Fogel! 


34 Adams, John 


Shc eI! 


2nd President of 
the United States 1797-1801 





Washington J. Adams Jefferson 

Ist president 2nd president 3rd president 
1789-1797 1797-1801 1801-1809 

No political Federalist Democratic- 
party Republican 


Adams, John (1735-1826), guided the young United 
States through some of its most serious troubles. He 
served under George Washington as the nations first 
vice president and followed him as the second presi- 
dent. The United States government moved from 
Philadelphia to Washington, D.C, during Adams's ad- 
ministration, and he became the first President to live in 
the White House. Adams was the first chief executive 
whose son also served as president. The second father 
and son to be elected president were George Herbert 
Walker Bush, who held office from 1989 to 1993, and 
George Walker Bush, who was elected in 2000. 

Adams played a leading role in the adoption of the 
Declaration of Independence, and was a signer of the 
historic document. He had spoken out boldly for separa- 
tion from Britain at a time when most colonial leaders 
still hoped to settle their differences with the British. As 
president, Adams fought a split in his own party over his 
determination to avoid war with France. He kept the 
peace, but in the process he lost a second term as presi- 
dent He was succeeded by Thomas Jefferson. 

Adams seldom achieved popularity during his long 
political career. Adams was anything but a cold man, 
and those who knew him well, loved him. But his blunt- 
ness, impatience, and vanity made more enemies than 
friends. On the great decisions of his public career, his- 
tory has proved him right and his opponents wrong. But 
his clumsiness in human relations often caused him to 
be misunderstood. Few people knew about another part 
of Adams's personality. His diary and personal letters 
show his genial, affectionate, and often playful nature. 

During Adams's term, the United States took its first 
steps toward industrialization. The first woolen mills be- 
gan operating in Massachusetts, and Congress estab- 
lished the Department of the Navy and the Marine 
Corps. Americans enjoyed such songs as The Wearing 








Thomas 
Jetferson 
Vice president 
1797-1801 


Oil painting on canvas 1 


of the Green’ and ‘The Blue Bells of Scotland.” People 
read and admired /he Life and Memorable Actions of 
George Washington by Mason Locke Weems. On the 
frontier, Johnny Appleseed began wandering through 
Ohio and Indiana, planting apple seeds and teaching the 
Bible. 


Early life 


Childhood. John Adams was born in Braintree (now 
Quincy), Massachusetts, on Oct. 30, 1735. (The date was 
October 19 by the calendar then in use.) His father, John 
Adams, was a farmer, a deacon of the First Parish of 
Braintree, and a militia officer. His mother, Susanna 
Boylston Adams, came from a leading family of Brook- 
line and Boston merchants and physicians. 

The Adams farm lay at the foot of Penn's Hill. The city 
of Quincy has preserved as a memorial the house in 
which John Adams was born. The house stands close to 
the place where his great-great-grandfather, Henry 
Adams, settled before 1640. Henry Adams had sailed 
from Somerset, England, along with thousands of other 
Puritans, to escape the religious persecution found in 
his homeland. 

Young John helped with the chores on the farm. He 
studied hard in the village school, but did not particular- 
ly enjoy books. 

Education. Adams graduated from Harvard College 
in 1755, ranking 14th in a class of 24. In those days, the 
rank of a student indicated social position, not scholar- 
ship, and Adams was one of the best scholars in his 
class. 

After teaching school for a short time, Adams studied 
law in the office of james Putnam in Worcester, Massa- 
chusetts. He began to practice law in Braintree in 1758. 
Ten years later he moved to Boston, where he became a 
leading attorney of the Massachusetts colony. 


793! by John Trumbull: Fogg Art Museum, Harvard Unnerstty 


Part of Mass, 


orthwest Vt 


Terr South ol 
Ohio River 


Mississippi Terr. 


a. Existing state 


t= | Existing territory = New territory 


Two new territories were organized during Adams  presi- 
dency—the Mississippi Territory in 1798 and the Indiana Ter- 
ritory in 1800. No new states entered the Union. 


Adams’ family. In 1764, Adams married Abigail 
Smith (Nov. 22, 1744-Oct. 28, 1818), the daughter of a 
minister in Weymouth, Mass. Their eldest son, John 
Quincy Adams, became the sixth President the year be- 
fore his father died. 

Like most women of her time, Abigail Adams had re- 
ceived little formal schooling. But she read widely, and 
became one of the best-informed women of the day. 
She wrote delightful letters to Adams during his ab- 
sences from home. John Quincy Adams son, Charles 
Francis, published many of these letters in 1840. Mrs. 





Hans & Oberg Quticy Historical Soe 


john Adams’ birthplace stands in Quincy then Braintree 
Mass. Farmland surrounded the house al the time of Adams 
birth. The house is now preserved as a naliiinal historic site 





Adams, John 35 


The world of President John Adams 


The rebirth of the United States Navy was symbolized by 
the launching of the frigate United States in 1797. Two other 
ships launched that year, the Constitution and the Constella- 
tion, made up the core of the nation’s first naval force since 
the Revolutionary War. Congress established a separate De- 
partment of the Navy in 1798. 

The United States Marine Corps was established by Con- 
gress in 1798 as a separate military service. The nation’s first 
marine corps had been dissolved after the Revolutionary 
War. 

The first organized strike in the United States took place 
in 1799. A group of Philadelphia shoemakers refused to 
work for nine days, until their demands for higher wages 
were met. 

Napoleon became First Consul of France in 1799 and began 
to rule as a dictator. 

The Library of Congress was established in 1800. Con- 
gress appropriated $5,000 to buy books and to furnish a 
room in the Capitol to house the library. 

The federal government moved to Washington, D.C., 
from Philadelphia in June 1800. Congress convened in the 
new capital city for the first time in November of that year. 
France secretly reacquired Louisiana from Spain in 1800. 
The United States did not learn of the transaction until the 
following year. 


WORLD BOOK map 


Adams was a lively observer of people and events, and 
her letters provide colorful pictures of colonial life. 

The Adams eldest child, Abigail, became the wife of 
Colonel William Stephens Smith, the secretary to the 
United States legation in London. The third child, Su- 
sanna, died in infancy. The fourth child, Charles, died 
while his father was President. Thomas, the youngest 
child, became a lawyer and a judge. 


Political and public career 


In New England. Adams took a leading part in op- 
posing British colonial policies in America. The year 
1765, when the British Parliament passed the Stamp Act, 
was a turning point in his life. This law taxed newspa- 
pers, legal papers, and other items. It hit Adams hard as 
a lawyer. He wrote: ‘This tax was set on foot for my ruin 
as well as that of Americans in general.” 

Adams wrote resolutions against the tax which were 
adopted by the Braintree town meeting. More than 40 
other Massachusetts towns adopted these resolutions. 
The Boston town meeting appointed a committee to 


Important dates in Adams ‘life 


1735 (Oct. 30) Born in Braintree (now Quincy), Mass. 

1764 (Oct. 25) Married Abigail Smith. 

1774 Chosen a delegate to the First Continental Congress. 

1777, Elected commissioner to France to negotiate a treaty of 
alliance. 

1780-1782 Obtained recognition ot American independence 
from the Netherlands. 

1782-1783 Served on the commission that negotiated peace 
with Great Britain. 

1785 Appointed ninister to Great Britain 

1789 Elected Vice President of the United States. 

1792 Reelected Vice President. 

1796 Elected President of the United States. 

1826 jJuly 4! Died in Quincy 


36 Adams, John 





Oil painting on canvas 11785) by Mather Brown, New York 
State Historical Assocration, Cooperstown, N Y 


Abigail Smith Adams was an intelligent, well-read woman, 
and a keen observer of colonial life. She and her husband car- 
ried on a lively correspondence when he was away from home. 


present a petition against the tax to the British governor, 
and Adams served as one of the three members. He ar- 
gued that the tax was illegal because the people had not 
consented to it. This amounted to saying that Parliament 
could not tax the colonies at all. Britain repealed the 
Stamp Act in 1766. See Stamp Act. 

Adams rejoiced at every expression of popular oppo- 
sition to the British. But the treatment of British soldiers 
who had taken part in the Boston Massacre distressed 
him (see Boston Massacre). His sense of justice led him 
to defend Captain Thomas Preston and the British sol- 
diers charged with manslaughter. He felt that the sol- 
diers should be freed, because they had only obeyed 
orders. Adams feared his viewpoint would cost him 
popularity. Instead, his prestige rose. In 1770, the people 
of Boston chose him as one of their representatives in 
the colonial legislature. There, with the help of his 
cousin, Samuel Adams, he led the fight against British 
colonial policies. 

The British tax on tea enraged Adams and most of his 
fellow colonists. When a band of patriots dumped large 
quantities of tea into Boston Harbor on Dec. 16, 1773, 
Adams Called this act “the most magnificent movement 
of all.” See Boston Tea Party. 

National politics. In 1774, the British government 
passed several laws that became known as the Intolera- 
ble Acts (see Intolerable Acts). Several of the colonies 
promptly called for representatives from each colony to 
meet in Philadelphia. Adams was one of the four Massa- 
chusetts delegates at this meeting, later called the First 
Continental Congress. He and a few other men wanted 
to seek independence from Britain, but he knew it was 
too early to propose such drastic action. 

Adams influence had grown by the time the Second 


Continental Congress met in 1775. He began to insist 
that the colonies should be independent, and opposed 
all halfway measures. He persuaded Congress to organ- 
ize the 16,000 militiamen of New England as the Conti- 
nental Army. He also helped bring about the appoint- 
ment of George Washington as commander in chief. 

Beginning in 1776, Adams served as chairman of the 
Continental Board of War and Ordnance. He also 
worked on a committee appointed to draft a plan for 
treaties with European powers, especially with France. 
Adams later wrote: “I was incessantly employed through 
the whole fall, winter, and spring of 1775 and 1776, in 
Congress during their sittings, and on committees in the 
mornings and evenings, and unquestionably did more 
business than any other member of the house.” 

On June 7, 1776, Richard Henry Lee of Virginia pre- 
sented a resolution to Congress declaring that ‘these 
United Colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and 
independent States.” Adams seconded the resolution. 
Congress chose him a member of the committee to pre- 
pare a declaration of independence. Adams urged 
Thomas Jefferson to draft the document. Adams de- 
fended the Declaration in the stormy debate that fol- 
lowed in Congress. Jefferson later called Adams the “co- 
lossus of that debate.” 

Diplomat. Early in 1778, Congress sent Adams to 
Paris to help Benjamin Franklin and Arthur Lee 
strengthen American ties with France and other Euro- 
pean nations. Adams arrived in Paris to find that treaties 
had already been signed with France. He noted that fric- 
tion had developed among the American ministers, and 
wrote to Congress proposing that one person take 
charge of affairs in France. Congress chose Franklin, and 
Adams sailed home in 1779. 

Upon his return to Massachusetts, the people of 
Braintree elected Adams to the convention that framed a 
state constitution. Adams wrote almost all the constitu- 
tion, which won acclaim for its detailed bill of rights. 
Many other states adopted features of this Massachu- 
setts Constitution of 1780. 

During the Massachusetts constitutional convention, 
Congress appointed Adams to negotiate treaties of 
peace and trade with Great Britain. He sailed for Paris, 
and arrived in February 1780. The French, although allies 
of America, gave Adams no independence in doing his 
work. The proposed negotiations never got started. 
Adams then went to the Netherlands to promote diplo- 
matic and commercial support for the American war ef- 
fort. After two years of hard work, he obtained recogni- 
tion of the United States as a sovereign power. He also 
obtained a loan of about $1,400,000 for the United 
States. Adams’ mission to the Netherlands ranks as his 
greatest diplomatic achievement. 

In the fall of 1782, Adams joined John Jay and Benja- 
min Franklin in Paris to meet British and French repre- 
sentatives and arrange a peace treaty. Adams and Jay 
distrusted the French foreign minister, Count de Ver- 
gennes. They feared he would sacrifice American inter- 
ests to gain advantages for France and its ally, Spain. As 
a result, the Americans departed from their instructions 
and negotiated with the British without informing Ver- 
gennes of each step taken. Franklin smoothed over af- 
fairs with France after the British and Americans had 
agreed on peace terms. 











British and American commissioners signed a prelim- 
inary peace treaty on Nov. 30, 1782. The document was 
signed again in Paris on Sept. 3, 1783, as the final peace 
treaty. Adams made sure that the United States kept fish- 
ing rights in North Atlantic waters. He also arranged 
provisions recommending amnesty for Americans who 
had remained loyal to the British. During the next two 
years, Adams negotiated another Dutch loan and served 
in Paris on a commission to negotiate trade treaties with 
many European governments. He was proud when the 
French called him “the Washington of negotiations.” 

In 1785, Congress named Adams the first U.S. minister 
to Great Britain. He hoped to negotiate treaties that 
would encourage trade with Britain. But the British 
proved to be uncordial, and made it clear that they 
would not relax their harsh trade policies. Adams even- 
tually asked to be recalled, and returned home in 1788 
after almost 10 years abroad. 

Vice President. Adams had been home only a few 
months when he was named Vice President. At that 
time, every elector voted for two men for the presi- 
dency. The man who ran second became Vice President. 
Each of the 69 electors voted for George Washington, 
and 34 gave their second vote to Adams. 

Adams later wrote that the vice presidency was ‘the 
most insignificant office that ever the invention of man 
contrived or his imagination conceived.” But he pre- 
sided over the Senate with dignity, and tried to avoid 
political arguments. When called upon to cast a tie- 
breaking vote in the Senate, he always sided with Wash- 
ington, feeling that he should reflect the President's poli- 
cies. Adams was reelected Vice President in 1792. 

During his first term as Vice President, Adams wrote 
and published Discourses on Davila, a series of newspa- 
per articles. Many readers thought these articles indi- 
cated that he had become much more conservative in 
his political views. Old friends, such as Thomas Jeffer- 
son, felt he had become too fond of kingly rule and too 
distrustful of popular government. 

Two political groups began to form during Washing- 


Adams, john 37 


tons second term. Adams and Alexander Hamilton led a 
group that favored a strong federal government. This 
group, known as the Federalists, supported Washing- 
ton’s policies. James Madison and Thomas Jefferson led 
the Democraiic-Republicans (called Republicans at the 
time, though Jater to become the Democratic Party) in 
fighting for strong states’ rights. Jefferson resigned as 
secretary of state in 1793 because he disapproved of the 
growing dominance of Hamilton in the Cabinet. 

When Washington refused in 1796 to serve a third 
term, the two parties had become well defined. The Fed- 
eralists supported Adams for the presidency, and the 
Democratic-Republicans nominated Jefferson. Adams 
received only three more votes than Jefferson did, and 
political opponents thus became President and Vice 
President. 


Adams’ Administration (1797-1801) 


The Federalist split. During Adams’ four years as 
President, the government faced many problems at 
home. Relations with European nations were also unset- 
tled. To make his task more difficult, Adams could not 
count on the support of his party or his Cabinet. Dis- 
agreement over foreign policy split the Federalist Party 
into two groups. Adams led the more moderate of these 
groups. The other was led by Alexander Hamilton, who 
had left the Cabinet and returned to private life before 
Adams became President. 

Difficulties with France. The French Revolution 
caused most of the problems that faced Adams. Presi- 
dent Washington had insisted that neutrality was the 
best policy in case of a war in Europe. But, in the wars 
following the French Revolution, European warships at- 
tacked American ships. France and Great Britain claimed 
the right to seize American vessels. The United States 
was forced to protect itself, and the government 
launched several new warships, including the Constitu- 
tion (‘Old Ironsides’). 

The United States also became involved in the Euro- 
pean wars on philosophical grounds. Jefferson believed 


A View of the Amencan fee Constellation Capturing the French National Fngate. Linsurgente, engraving by an unknown artist (1800) New York 
City 


Historical Society, New Yo 





Naval battles between US. 
and French ships occurred in 
spite of President Adams ef- 
forts to keep the United States 
neutral during the European 
wars of the late 1700s. 


38 Adams, John 


<n > ~ 
a *S ye. 
" — — — _ am as ny _=—_ — —— : 
aS oe so a | a 
eee OS <= eo ‘ SS 5. a -_ nt 
~~ a P 
— —-- — - - -- sae : s- —. » ae. en 2? 
eee 3. * To Qtat Se  M, 63 Oe Ee eT Re a+ WERE FY, 2 NSA AUR AR eS 
; E cA 





Maryland Historical Society. Baltimore 


john Adams was the first President to live in the White House. He and Mrs. Adams moved 
into the mansion in 1800, before it was completed, and suffered many inconveniences. The illustra- 
tion above shows the original design for the White House by architect James Hoban. 


that the French Revolution was a people's movement, 
like the Revolutionary War in America. His party sympa- 
thized with the French people, and wanted to aid them. 
But Hamilton led many Federalists in demanding a war 
against France. Adams was determined to keep the 
United States neutral, and deplored the policy of Hamil- 
ton and his followers. The split in the Federalist Party be- 
came irreparable. 

One of Adams first acts as President was to call a spe- 
cial session of Congress to consider ways of keeping 
peace. He sent ministers to France to work out a treaty. 
Three French diplomats offered to negotiate a pact if the 
United States would bribe Charles Maurice de Talley- 
rand-Périgord, the French foreign minister. This episode 
became known as the XYZ Affair, because the French 
diplomats were referred to by these initials instead of 
their names {see XYZ Affair). The Americans ended the 
negotiations late in 1797. 

The XYZ Affair caused great anger in the United 
States. People rallied to the cry of “Millions for defense, 
but not one cent for tribute!” Congress began preparing 
for war with France. It established the Department of the 
Navy, ordered the construction of more warships, and 
summoned George Washington to command the Army. 


Vice President and Cabinet 


Vice’President ............cceccseeee:- “Thomas Jefferson 
Secretary of state ..................... * Timothy Pickering 
* John Marshall (1800) 


Secretary of the treasury ............. Oliver Wolcott, Jr. 
Samuel Dexter (1801) 
Secretary of war......-......:.+.5.0es: * James McHenry 
Samuel Dexter (1800) 
Attorney general ..................... Charles Lee 
Secretary of the Navy ............00% * Benjamin Stoddert 


"Has a separate biography in World Book 


Neither nation declared war, but American and French 
ships fought many battles. 

Adams was still determined to keep peace. He again 
asked Talleyrand for a treaty. This time, Talleyrand was 
eager to negotiate, because he feared that the United 
States might join forces with Great Britain. Without con- 
sulting Congress, Adams sent a second commission to 
France. This act was the boldest of his career as Presi- 
dent, and lost him support in his own party. But he be- 
lieved that avoiding war was the most important 
achievement of his Administration. 

The Alien and Sedition Acts. The Federalists faced 
bitter criticism because of their opposition to France. 
Most of the criticism came from American citizens, but 
some of the critics were French. In 1798, the Federalists 
passed laws designed to limit this criticism. Two A/ien 
Acts gave the President authority to banish or imprison 
foreigners by a simple order. The Sedition Act made it a 
crime to criticize the government, the President, or Con- 
gress. Adams never used the Alien Acts, but a number 
of journalists who supported Jefferson were arrested for 
violation of the Sedition Act. See Alien and Sedition 
Acts. 

These laws caused a storm of disapproval. Many peo- 
ple claimed they violated the guarantees of freedom of 
speech and of the press. Jefferson wrote the resolutions 
adopted by the Kentucky legislature declaring the Alien 
and Sedition Acts unconstitutional {see Kentucky and 
Virginia Resolutions). Historians agree that the acts 
were unwise. 

Life in the White House. President Adams moved 
into the White House just a few months before the end 
of his Administration. The unfinished Executive Mansion 
stood in isolated splendor amid a dismal, swampy land- 
scape. Abigail Adams wrote her sister: As | expected to 





find it a new country, with houses scattered over a 
space of 10 miles, and trees and stumps in pienty with a 
castle of a house—so | found it.” Only half a dozen 
rooms of the White House were finished. Mrs. Adams 
had to dry the laundry in the East Room, because no 
drying yard had been provided. 

The unfinished condition of the White House made it 
hard to carry on official social functions. But Adams and 
his wife struggled to overcome their difficulties. As the 
first residents of the White House, they felt they should 
set a social tone appropriate to the home of the Presi- 
dent. Mrs. Adams admired the courtly entertainments of 
Martha Washington and tried to follow her example. 

Election of 1800. Hamilton strongly criticized Adams 
for not fighting France. This argument influenced many 
Federalist voters. The Democratic-Republicans de- 
nounced Adams for the Alien and Sedition Acts, and for 
hostility toward France. The Democratic-Republican 
presidential candidates, Thomas Jefferson and Aaron 
Burr, received 73 electoral votes each. Adams received 
65 electoral votes. The House of Representatives then 
chose Jefferson as President. 

Late in 1800, the government had moved from 
Philadelphia to the new capital in Washington, D.C. 
Adams made appointments to government offices until 
his last day in office. One of his most important appoint- 
ments was that of John Marshall as chief justice of the 
United States (see Marshall, John). 


Later years 


John Adams was nearly 66 years old when he left the 
White House. His defeat grieved him so much that he 
refused to stay in Washington for Jefferson's inaugura- 
tion. He hurried off for his home in Quincy on the morn- 
ing of March 4, 1801. Adams devoted himself to study- 
ing history, philosophy, and religion. 





‘Quotations from John Adams 
- The following quotations come from some of John Adams's 
speeches and writings. 
Liberty cannot be preserved without a general knowl 
edge among the people ... but besides this, they have a 
‘ight ... to that most dreaded and envied kind of knowl 
edge, | mean of the characters and conduct of their 
rulers. 
___ A Dissertation on the Canon and Feudal Law 1765 






Facts are stubborn things; and whatever may be our 
wishes, our inclinations, or the dictates of our passions, 
they cannot alter the state of facts and evidence. 


3 Argument in defense of the British soldiers in the Boston Massacre trials, 
a December 1770 


As the happiness of the people is the sole end of gov- 
ernment, so the consent of the people Is the only four- 

lation of it. 

Proclamation, 1774 
Education makes a greater difference between man 
and man than nature has between man and brute. 
Letter to Abigail Adams, Oct. 29, 1775 

When annual elections end, there slavery begins. 

a Thoughts on Government, \776 
The fundamental article of my political creed is that 
despotism, or unlimited sovereignty, or absolute pow 
er, is the same in a majority of a popular assembly, an 
aristocratic council, an oligarchical junto, and a single 


— 








emperor. 
Letter to Thomas Jefferson, Nu 15, 187) 
a | * 


Adams, JohnC. 39 


Adams renewed his friendship with Thomas Jefferson. 
These two great Americans from North and South had 
met in Congress in 1775. Their friendship cooled steadi- 
ly after about 1790, because they differed on the mean- 
ing of the French Revolution. But they forgot their politi- 
cal quarrels after retiring from public life. 

By a remarkable coincidence, both men died on July 
4, 1826. Adams's last words were: “Thomas Jefferson still 
survives. Adams died less than four months before his 
91st birthday. He was buried in Quincy, Massachusetts. 

James H. Hutson 

Related articles in World Book include: 

Adams, Abigail Smith 
Adams, Charles Francis 
Adams, Henry Brooks 
Adams, John Quincy 

Adams, Samuel 

Boston Massacre 

Boston Tea Party 

Declaration of Independence 
Hamilton, Alexander 
Jefferson, Thomas 

Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions 
Logan Act 

Marshall, John 

President of the U.S. 
Talleyrand 

Washington, George 

XYZ Affair 


Outline 


I. Early life 
A. Childhood 
B. Education 
ll. Political and public career 
A. In New England C. Diplomat 
B. National politics D. Vice President 
iil. Adams’ Administration (1797-1801) 
A. The Federalist split D. Life in the White House 
B. Difficulties with France E. Election of 1800 
C. The Alien and 
Sedition Acts 
IV. Later years 


C. Adams family 


Questions 


What did John Adams consider his most important achievement 
as President? 

How long did John Adams live in the White House? 

What was the XYZ Affair? 

What military measures did Adams help bring about during the 
first year of the Second Continental Congress? 

Who was one of President Adams s most important last-minute 
appointees? 

Why did Adams defend Thomas Preston? 

What part did John Adams play in the adoption of the Declara- 
tion of Independence? 

How did Adams disagree with Hamilton and Jefferson over rela- 
tions with France? 

What was Adams s greatest diplomatic success? 

Why was President Adams forced to expand the Navy? 


Additional resources 


Ellis, Joseph J. Passionate Sage: The Character and Legacy of John 
Adams. 1993. Reprint. Norton, 2001. 

Ferling, John E. John Adams. 1992. Reprint. Henry Holt, 1996. 

McCullough. David. Jjohn Adams. Simon & Schuster, 2001. 

St. George, Judith. John and Abigail Adams. Holiday Hse., 2001. 
Younger readers. 

Stefoft, Rebecca. /ohn Adams. Garrett Educational, 1988. 
Younger readers. 

Weisberger, Bernard. Amenca Afire: Jefferson, Adams, and the 
Revolutionary Election of 1800. Morrow, 2000. 


Adams, John C. See Neptune (Discovery). 


40 Adams, John Quincy 


Jobrn ermey Ad 





6th president of 

the United States 1825-1829 

Monroe j.Q. Adams Jackson 

5th president a president 7th president 
1817-1825 1825-1829 1829-1837 
Democratic- Democratic-Re- Democrat 
Republican publican 








John C. 
Calhoun 

Vice president 
1825-1829 


Oil painting on canvas (1824) by Thomas Sully, Nationa! Gallery of Art, Washington, DC, Andrew W Mellon Collection 


Adams, John Quincy (1767-1848), was the first son of 
a president of the United States who also became presi- 
dent. The second father and son to be elected were 
George Herbert Walker Bush and George Walker Bush. 
Like his father, John Adams, he failed to win a second 
term. But soon afterward, he was elected to the U.S. 
House of Representatives. This pleased him more, he 
said, than his election as president. 

Before entering the presidency, Adams held several 
important diplomatic posts. He took part in the negotia- 
tions that ended the War of 1812. As secretary of state, 
he helped develop the Monroe Doctrine. Quarrels with- 
in his party hampered Adams as president, and he made 
little progress with his ambitious legislative program. 
His years in the White House were perhaps the unhap- 
piest period of Adams's life. 

Adams was short and stout, and his shrill voice often 
broke when he became excited. Yet he spoke so well he 
was nicknamed “Old Man Eloquent. He was affectionate 
with close friends, but more reserved toward others. He 
once referred to himself as “an unsocial savage.” 

During Adams's administration, Noah Webster 
brought out his two-volume American Dictionary of the 
English Language, and James Fenimore Cooper pub- 
lished his famous novel The Last of the Mohicans. The 
American labor movement began in Philadelphia. 


Early life 


Childhood. John Quincy Adams was born on July 11, 
1767, in the family home in Braintree (now Quincy), 
Massachusetts. He was the second child and eldest son 
of the second president of the United States. During the 
1770's, his father was away much of the time serving in 
the Continental Congresses. John Quincy had to help his 
mother manage a large farm. In February 1778, Con- 


gress sent his father to France. John Quincy, although 

not yet 11, pleaded to go along on the dangerous voy- 
age. His father proudly wrote in his diary: “Mr. Johnny's 
behavior gave me a Satisfaction | cannot express. Fully 
sensible of our danger, he was constantly endeavoring 
to bear it with a manly patience, very attentive to me, 

and his thoughts constantly running in a serious vein.” 

Education. Adams attended schools in Paris, Amster- 
dam, and Leiden as his father moved from one diplo- 
matic assignment to another. At 14, he went to St. Peters- 
burg as private secretary to Francis Dana, the first 
American minister to Russia. The boy rejoined his father 
in 1783 and served as his private secretary. 

When the elder Adams became minister to Britain in 
1785, the boy returned home and entered Harvard Col- 
lege. He said later: “By remaining much longer in Europe 
| saw the danger of an alienation from my own country.” 
His previous studies enabled him to join the junior class 
at Harvard. He graduated in 1787. 

Lawyer and writer. Adams read law for three years 
and began his own practice in 1790. But he had few 
clients and soon turned to political journalism. 


Important dates in Adams's life 


1767 (July 11) Born in Braintree (now Quincy), Massachusetts. 
1794 Became minister to the Netherlands. 

1797 (July 26) Married Louisa Catherine Johnson. 

1803 Elected to the United States Senate. 

1809 Appointed minister to Russia. 

1814-1815 Helped negotiate peace with the United Kingdom. 
1815 Became minister to the United Kingdom. 

1817 Appointed secretary of state. 

1825 Elected president of the United States. 

1830 Elected to the U.S. House of Representatives. 

1848 (Feb. 23) Died in Washington, D.C 


—— 


I 







; er. 
re ot a = 
~w 


a 














a= 
ia ‘SS 2 > 
. Se deb as) 
=i F * ‘i | = <x ay + 
a ee 

Sarr, eee 
eee i 
— = a 

— i ef 2 a 


3 


a ame 7 


The Erie Canal, completed in 1825, linked Lake Erie with 
the Hudson River. It enabled freight to be shipped between 
the Atlantic Ocean and the Great Lakes. 


Adams, John Quincy 41 


The world of President John Quincy Adams 


The first women’s labor unlon was organized in 1825. The 
union was formed by women working in the garment indus- 
try in New York City. 

Czar Nicholas | of Russia crushed the Decembrist uprising, 
a revolt of discontented nobles, in 1825. As a result of wars 
fought during the late 1820's, Russia expanded its borders to 
include important territory on the Black Sea. 

July 4, 1826, marked the 50th anniversary of the signing of 
the Declaration of independence. In a remarkable coinci- 
dence, the deaths of two of the nation’s Founding Fathers, 
Thomas Jefferson and John Adams, occurred that same day. 
The Last of the Mohicans, one of James Fenimore Coo- 
per’s most popular works, was published in 1826. 

The first overland expedition from Utah to California 
was led by trader and explorer Jedediah Smith in 1826. 
Smith crossed indian territories, the Mojave Desert, and the 
High Sierras in search of trade routes to California and the 
Northwest 

The Creek Indians signed treaties in 1826 and 1827 that 
transferred land in western Georgia to the U.S. government 
Artist and naturalist John James Audubon published the 
first part of his masterpiece, Birds of America, in 1827. The 
work, eventually completed in 1838, consisted of 435 life- 
sized, color engravings of Audubon’s water colors. 

Noah Webster published An American Dictionary of the 
English Language in 1828. The two-volume work included 
about 12,000 words and 40,000 definitions that had never ap- 
peared in any other dictionary. 


View on the Ere Canal, a water color (1832) by John William Hill: Stokes Collection, New York Public Library 


In 1791, Thomas Paine published the first part of 
Rights of Man. Adams considered Paine’s ideas too radi- 
cal and replied with 11 articles that he signed with the 
name “Publicola.” A second series, signed “Marcellus,” 
defended President George Washington's policy of neu- 
trality. A third series, signed “Columbus,” attacked 
French minister Edmond Genét, who wanted America to 
join France in a war against Britain. 


Political and public career 


Diplomat. In 1794, Washington appointed Adams 
minister to the Netherlands. The French invaded the 
country three days after Adams arrived and overthrew 
the Dutch Republic. On a special assignment in London, 
Adams met his future wife, Louisa Catherine Johnson 
(Feb. 12, 1775-May 15, 1852), the daughter of the Ameri- 
can consul general. 

In 1796, Washington appointed Adams minister to 
Portugal. Just before he left for Lisbon, his father was 
elected President. Both men felt it would be undesirable 
for the son to hold such a post during his father's Ad- 
ministration. But Washington urged that the younger 
Adams stay on, calling him ‘the most valuable public 
character now abroad.’ President Adams followed this 
recommendation and nained his son minister to Prussia. 

Adams’ family. John Quincy married Miss Johnson in 
1797, just before leaving for Berlin. He served there — 
more than four years. Adams and his wife had four chil- 
dren. Their only daughter, Louisa Catherine, died in in- 
fancy. George Washington Adams, the eldest son, died 
in 1829, at the close of his father's presidency. John, who 
was named for his grandfather, died five years later. The 
youngest son, Charles Francis, ser ed as minister to 
Great Britain during the Civil War 


U.S. senator. Thomas Jefferson became President in 
1801. John Quincy Adams soon returned home, and was 
elected to the Massachusetts Senate in 1802. He soon 
displayed the independence that marked his entire ca- 
reer. Fisher Ames, the Federalist leader in Massachu- 
setts, described him as ‘too unmanageable.” 

In 1803, the Federalists chose Adams to fill a vacant 
seat in the United States Senate. Although a Federalist, 
he often voted with the Democratic-Republicans. He 
broke with his party completely in 1807, when Congress 
passed the Embargo Act. The Federalists in New Eng- 
land wanted to trade with the British, but Adams sup- 
ported the embargo, believing that it benefited the na- 
tion as a whole. 





© Historical Sacrety 
John Quincy Adams’ birthplace stands in Quincy, Mass. His 
father. John Adams. was born tn a neariy identical house neat 
door The two busidings are now hisionc sues 


+S Uderg Qui 


42 Adams, John Quincy 





Oil painting en canvas (1821) by Gilbert Stuart. © White House Historical 
Association (National Geographic Society! 


Louisa Johnson Adams was born in London, the daughter of 
an American diplomat. She first came to the United States in 
1801, four years after she married John Quincy Adams. 


Federalist leaders in Massachusetts felt that Adams 
had betrayed them. They elected another man to his 
Senate seat several months before the 1808 elections. 
Adams resigned immediately and prepared for a career 
as professor of rhetoric and oratory at Harvard. 

Again a diplomat. Adams intended to stay out of 
public life permanently. But in 1809, President James 
Madison persuaded him to accept an appointment as 
minister to Russia. From mid-1814 to early 1815, Adams 
served as one of the American commissioners who ne- 
gotiated the Treaty of Ghent with the British, ending the 
War of 1812. The negotiations gained respect for the 
United States, as well as for Adams as a diplomat. 

Madison next appointed Adams as minister to Great 
Britain, a post once held by his father. While in London, 
Adams began discussions that led to improved relations 
along the U.S.-Canadian border. Great Britain and the 
United States agreed to stop using forts and warships in 
the Great Lakes region, leaving the frontiers of the two 
countries unguarded and open. 

Secretary of state. In 1817, President James Monroe 
called Adams home to serve as secretary of state. 
Adams made an agreement with Great Britain for joint 
occupation of the Oregon region. He negotiated a treaty 
that quieted Spanish claims to territory in the northwest 
and also acquired Florida. But his most important 
achievement as secretary of state was to help develop 
the Monroe Doctrine. Adams made the first declaration 
of this policy in July 1823, several months before Mon- 
roe formally announced it. He told the Russian minister 
that “the American continents are no longer subjects for 
any new European colonial establishments.” 

Austria, Prussia, and Russia had formed the Holy Allli- 
ance in 1815, after the fall of Napoleon. During and after 
the Napoleonic Wars, the countries of Central and 
South America had revolted against Spanish rule. When 
King Ferdinand VII regained the Spanish throne in 1823, 
many people feared that the Holy Alliance might help 
Spain reconquer its former colonies. British Foreign 


Minister George Canning asked the United States to join 
in a declaration against any such move. But Adams in- 
sisted that the United States should make its own policy. 
He declared that America must not “come in as a cock- 
boat (small rowboat) in the wake of the British man-of- 
war. Monroe followed Adams’ advice, and the Monroe 
Doctrine became a part of U.S. foreign policy. See Mon- 
roe Doctrine. 

Election of 1824. Many Americans believed Adams 
should follow Monroe as President. Both Madison and 
Monroe became President after serving as secretary of 
State. Adams felt he also should be elected but did little 
to attract votes. Four Democratic-Republicans opposed 
him: John C. Calhoun, Henry Clay, William H. Crawford, 
and Andrew Jackson. Calhoun withdrew, and was 
elected Vice President. Jackson received 99 electoral 
votes; Adams, 84; Crawford, 41; and Clay, 37. For votes 
by states, see Electoral College (table). None had a ma- 
jority, so the House of Representatives had to choose 
one of the first three men. Clay then threw his support 
to Adams, who was elected in February 1825. 


Adams’ Administration (1825-1829) 


Democratic-Republican Party split. Even before 
the House elected Adams, followers of Jackson accused 
Adams of promising Clay a Cabinet post in return for his 
support. When Adams named Clay secretary of state, 
Jackson's powerful supporters in Congress charged that 
the two men had made a “corrupt bargain.” This split the 
Democratic-Republican Party, and Adams’ group be- 
came known as the National Republicans. Jackson’s 
group fought Adams for the next four years. 

Rebuff by Congress. Adams delivered his inaugural 


address in the Senate chamber of the unfinished Capitol. 


In this address, and in his first message to Congress, he 
recommended an ambitious program of national im- 
provements. This program included the construction of 
highways, canals, weather stations, and a national uni- 
versity. He argued that if Congress did not use the pow- 
ers of government for the benefit of all the people, it 
“would be treachery to the most sacred of trusts.” But 
the majority in Congress disagreed. Adams hopes for a 
partnership of government and science were not to be 
realized until after his lifetime. 

The “tariff of abominations.” By 1828, manufactur- 
ing had replaced farming as the chief activity in most 
New England states. These states favored high tariffs on 
imported goods. But high tariffs would make farmers in 
the South pay more for imported products. Southern 
leaders wanted a low tariff or free trade. 

Jackson's supporters in Congress wrote a tariff bill 
that put high duties on manufactured goods. The bill 
also raised duties on raw materials so high that even 
New Englanders could be expected to oppose it. To eve- 
ryone’s surprise, enough New Englanders voted for the 
bill to pass it. The “tariff of abominations,” as it became 
known, aroused bitter anger in the South. 

Life in the White House. Adams threw all his ener- 
gies into the presidency from the day he took office. 
Each day, he conferred with a steady procession of con- 
gressmen and department heads in his upstairs study in 
the White House. The President wrote in his diary: “I can 
scarcely conceive a more harassing, wearying, teasing 
condition of existence.” He felt a lack of exercise, in spite 





j 





Vice President and Cabinet 





Vice President .................. “John C Calhoun 


Secretary of state ............... * Henry Clay 
Secretary of the treasury ........ Richard Rush 
Secretary of war ................. James Barbour 
Peter B. Porter (1828) 
Attorney general ................. William Wirt 
Secretary of the Navy ............ Samuel L Southard 


*Has a separate biography in World Book 


of daily walks. In warm weather, Adams liked to swim in 
the Potomac River. 

Mrs. Adams suffered ill health during her husband’s 
term as President, but she overcame her sickness to 
serve as White House hostess. She was responsible for 
a brilliant series of parties during the visit of the Mar- 
quis de Lafayette in 1825. 

Election of 1828. Adams had never been popular, 
chiefly because of his aloof manner. He had not even 
tried to defend himself against the attacks of Jackson 
and his followers, feeling it was below the dignity of the 
President to engage in political debate. At the same 
time, Jackson gained great popularity. In the election of 
1828, Jackson won a popular vote proportionately larger 
than any other presidential candidate received during 
the rest of the 1800's. He and his running mate, Vice 
President Calhoun, won 178 electoral votes. Adams and 
Secretary of the Treasury Richard Rush had 83. 


Back to Congress 


Election to the House. Adams again planned to re- 
tire, but the people of Quincy asked him to run for Con- 
gress in 1830. He defeated two other candidates by 
large majorities and wrote in his diary: “My election as 
President of the United States was not half so gratifying.” 
He took his seat in the House of Representatives in 1831 
and served for 17 years. 

Adams served at times as chairman of the House For- 
eign Affairs Committee and of the Committee on Manu- 
factures. But he remained independent of party politics. 
He fought President Jackson's opposition to the second 
Bank of the United States. He also opposed Jacksons 
policy of recognizing the independence of Texas. But 
Adams supported Jackson’s foreign policy and stern re- 
sistance to nullification (see Nullification). 

The Gag Rules. Adams greatest public role may have 
occurred during debates about slavery. Abolitionists 
sent many petitions to Congress urging that slavery be 
abolished in the District of Columbia and in new territo- 
ries. These petitions took much of the lawmakers time. 
In 1836, the House adopted the first of a series of resolu- 
tions called the Gag Rules to keep the petitions from be- 
ing read on the floor. Adams believed these rules violat- 
ed the constitutional rights of free speech and petition. 
He was strongly criticized in the House for opposing the 
Gag Rules, but he finally succeeded in having them 
abolished in 1844. 

Adams became the first congressman to assert the 
right of the government to free slaves during time of 
war. President Abraham Lincoln based the Emancipation 
Proclamation on Adams arguinents. 

The Amistad Rebellion. In 1841, Adams again publi- 
cally showed his opposition to slavery when he detend: 
ed the Amistad rebels before the Supreme Court of the 


Adams, John Quincy 43 





United States. The rebels were black Africans who had 
been captured and enslaved by whites. In 1839, they at- 
tacked their captors while on a ship called La Amistad in 
the Caribbean Sea. They killed two whites and took con- 
trol of the vessel. They were later arrested in the United 
States for the killings and mutiny. Their case ended up in 
the Supreme Court. There, Adams strongly defended 
the rebels, arguing that every person has the right to 
freedom. The rebels were found not guilty. For more de- 
tails, see Amistad Rebellion. 

Death. On Feb. 21, 1848, he suffered a stroke at his 
House desk. Too ill to be moved from the building, he 
was Carried to the Speaker's room. He died there two 
days later. Adams was buried in the churchyard of the 
First Unitarian Church in Quincy, Massachusetts. His 
wife died on May 15, 1852, and was buried at his side. 
Their remains were later moved to the church crypt. 

Jack Shepherd 


Related articles in World Book include: 


Adams, Charles Calhoun, John C Jackson, Andrew 


Francis Clay, Henry Monroe Doctrine 
Adams, Henry Democratic-Re- President of the 
Brooks publican Party U.S. 
Adams, John Genet, Edmond Tariff 
Bank of the U.S. Ghent, Treaty of Whig Party 
Outline 
I. Early life 
A. Childhood C. Lawyer and writer 
B. Education 
Il. Political and public career 
A. Diplomat D. Again a diplomat 


B. Adams family E. Secretary of state 
Cc. US. senator F. Election of 1824 
ill. Adams’ Administration (1825-1829) 
A. Democratic-Republican Party split 
B. Rebuff by Congress 
C. The “tariff of abominations” 
D. Life in the White House 
E. Election of 1828 
IV. Back to Congress 
A. Election to the House 
B. The Gag Rules 


C. The Amistad Rebellion 
D. Death 


Questions 


How did Adams help develop the Monroe Doctrine? 

Why did Adams become President even though Andrew Jack- 
son received more electoral votes? 

Why did Adams oppose the Gag Rules? 

What honor pleased Adams more than his election as President? 

How did Adams contribute to the Emancipation Proclamation? 


Additional resources 


Adams, John Quincy Diary of John Quincy Adams. 2 vals Har 
vard 1982 


44 Adams, Samuel 


Coelho, Tony. john Quincy Adams. Chelsea Hse., 1990. Younger 
readers. 
Hargreaves, Mary W. M. The Presidency of john Quincy Adams. 

Univ. Pr. of Kans., 1985. 

Kent, Zachary. John Quincy Adams. Childrens Pr., 1987. Younger 
readers. 
Nagel, Paul C. john Quincy Adams. Knopf, 1997. 
Parsons, Lynn H. john Quincy Adams. Madison Hse., 1998. 
Adams, Samuel (1722-1803), was an American patriot 
and politician who stirred opposition to British rule in 
the American Colonies. However, Adams attempted to 
make people work for their rights peacefully through 
committees and other meetings. He was willing to justify 
violent opposition to Britain only if all else failed. Adams 
was a signer of the Declaration of Independence. 

Adams was born in Boston. He was the cousin of John 
Adams, who became the second president of the United 
States. Samuel graduated from Harvard College in 1740, 
received an MA. degree from the college in 1743, and 
then entered private business. However, Adams failed in 
that career and by 1764 was deeply in debt 

The patriot. Adams became increasingly involved in 
politics. He belonged to several patriotic clubs and was 
a prominent figure in Boston town meetings. Adams op- 
posed several laws passed by the British Parliament to 
raise revenue in the American Colonies. Those laws in- 
cluded the Sugar Act of 1764, the Stamp Act of 1765, and 
the Townshend Acts of 1767 (see Stamp Act). Adams 
served in the Massachusetts legislature from 1765 to 
1774. As its clerk, he corresponded widely with other 
colonial leaders. 

Parliament repealed the Stamp Act in 1766. In 1770, it 
canceled all the duties (import taxes) in the Townshend 
Acts except the tax on imported tea. Adams, however, 
believed American freedom was still in danger. In 1768, 
the British had sent soldiers to Boston. Adams thought 
the use of soldiers against civilians was a sign of tyranny. 
He served as a spokesman for the town of Boston after 
British troops killed several colonists in the Boston Mas- 
sacre on March 5, 1770, and succeeded in getting the 
British troops sent elsewhere. In 1772, the Boston town 
meeting, spurred by Adams, set up a committee of cor- 
respondence. This committee published a declaration of 
colonial rights, which Adams had written, and sent it to 
other towns. 

In 1773, Adams led Boston’s resistance to the Tea Act, 
which gave a British company a monopoly on all tea ex- 
ported to the colonies. The resistance reached its high 
point on the evening of Dec. 16, 1773, when a group of 
Bostonians dumped a 
cargo of British tea into 
the harbor (see Boston 
Tea Party). 

The British Parliament 
responded in 1774 by pass- 
ing the so-called Intolera- 
ble Acts. Those laws in- 
cluded measures that 
closed the port of Boston, 
restricted town meetings, 
and made it easier for 
Britain to use troops 
against American civilians 
(see Intolerable Acts). 
Adams then urged all the 


Portratt by John Singleton Copley 
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston 


Samuel Adams 





American Colonies to boycott trade with Britain. Repre- 
sentatives of 12 colonies soon assembled in the First 
Continental Congress in 1774 (see Continental 
Congress). The Massachusetts legislature sent Adams 
and four others to represent it at the congress. In 1775, 
Adams began serving in the Second Continental Con- 
gress, where he pleaded for independence and a con- 
federation (union) of the colonies. He narrowly escaped 
arrest by the British in Lexington while he was on his 
way to Philadelphia. Congress approved the Declaration 
of Independence in 1776. 

In office. Adams served in the Continental Congress 
until 1781, when he returned to Boston. He at first op- 
posed the newly written Constitution of the United 
States. In the end, however, he supported its ratification 
(approval) in Massachusetts. Adams served as governor 
of Massachusetts from 1793 to 1797. A statue of Adams 
represents the state in the U.S. Capitol. 

See also Revere, Paul. 


Pauline Maier 


Additional resources 


Farley, Karin C Samuel Adams. Raintree Steck-Vaughn, 1995. 

Younger readers. 

Fowler, William M., Jr. Samuel Adams. Longman, Inc., 1997. 
Fradin, Dennis B. Samuel Adams. Clarion, 1998. 

Adams, Samuel Hopkins (1871-1958), was an Ameri- 
can journalist and author. Early in his career, Adams 
wrote newspaper and magazine articles that exposed 
dishonesty in business and government His articles col- 
lected in The Great American Fraud (1906) dealt with 
patent medicine frauds and contributed to the passage 
of the first federal food and drug act in 1906. 

About 1910, Adams began concentrating on fiction 
and wrote novels and short stories for both children and 
adults. Adams often used people and events from Amer- 
ican history in his fiction. His most appealing historical 
works describe life along the Erie Canal in New York 
during the 1800's. His children’s novel Chingo Smith of 
the Erie Canal(1958) is an example. Adams based his po- 
litical novel Reve/ry (1926) on events in the administra- 
tion of President Warren G. Harding. Adams also wrote 
several biographies and a number of mystery stories 
about an amateur detective called Average Jones. Ad- 
ams's Grandfather Stories (1955) is a collection of essays. 
Adams was born in Dunkirk, New York Bert Hitchcock 
Adams, Scott (1957- ), an American cartoonist, 
created the comic strip “Dilbert” Dilbert is an engineer 
who struggles daily with the often ridiculous policies of 
corporate management Other characters include fellow 
employees Alice and Wally; Catbert, a cat who is the hu- 
man resources director; and Dogbert and Ratbert, a dog 
and arat who serve as consultants. Adams bases many 
of his cartoons on stories that readers send him about 
actual experiences at their jobs. 

Adams was born in Windham, New York He earned a 
graduate degree in business administration and held 
numerous jobs in technology and finance. “Dilbert” was 
first syndicated—that is, distributed to a large number of 
newspapers—in 1989. Several collections of Dilbert car- 
toons became best-selling books, including The Dilbert 
Principle (1996) and Dogbert’s Top Secret Management 
Handbook (1996). Pamela J. Fehl 
Adams, Sherman (1899-1986), served as chief of staff 
to United States President Dwight D. Eisenhower from 
1953 to 1958. He resigned after Democratic and Republi- 





———S_ 





can leaders criticized him for taking gifts from a Boston 
industrialist whose business affairs were under govern- 
ment investigation. Adams served as a Republican rep- 
resentative in Congress from 1945 to 1947, and as gover- 
nor of New Hampshire from 1949 to 1953. He was born 
in East Dover, Vermont. Stephen E. Ambrose 

Adams apple. See Larynx. 

Adamson, Joy (1910-1980), was a wildlife conserva- 
tionist and author who won wide recognition for her 
observations on animal behavior in Africa. She is best 
known for her books Born Free (1960), Living Free (1961), 
and Forever Free (1962), in which she describes the life 
of the lioness Elsa. Elsa was raised in the Adamson 
household. She was then trained to survive in the wild 
by Adamson and her husband, George Adamson, a 
wildlife conservationist and game warden. The movie 
Born Free (1966), based on Joy Adamson’s books, helped 
spread her message of concern for wildlife. 

Joy-Friederike Victoria Gessner was born in Troppau, 
Silesia (now Opava, the Czech Republic). She went to 
Kenya at the age of 27, where she married George 
Adamson and lived for the rest of her life. They acquired 
Elsa after George had shot a lioness, Elsa’s mother, in 
self-defense. They took Elsa and the lioness’s two other 
orphaned cubs into their home. The couple trained Elsa 
to develop her natural hunting skills so that she could 
survive on her own. After her release into the wild, Elsa 
found a mate and raised three cubs. 

The Adamsons were among the first conservationists 
to train a captive animal to establish its wild nature. They 
also worked to control poaching, the illegal killing of an- 
imals to obtain animal skins or the ivory of elephant 
tusks. Joy Adamson’s books include joy Adamson s 
Africa (1972) and an autobiography, 7he Searching Spirit 
(1978). Poachers shot her to death. George Adamson, 
who worked for Kenya’s wildlife department, was fatally 
shot by poachers in 1989. G. |. Kenagy 
Adaptation is a characteristic of an organism that 
makes it better able to survive and reproduce in its envi- 
ronment. No two organisms of the same species are ex- 
actly alike. Every trait, such as size, color, and personali- 
ty, shows some variation. Additionally, in nature, 
organisms produce more offspring than can survive. 
The offspring most likely to survive and reproduce are 
those with adaptations best suited to the environment. 
Offspring with variations less suited to the environment 
do not compete as successfully for food, water, and oth- 
er necessities. This process of competition, by which 
those best adapted are most likely to survive and repro- 
duce is called natural selection (see Evolution). 

Some forms of life are adapted to living in many dif- 
ferent environments. For example, people live in all 


Adaptation 45 





Z. Leszczynski Animals Animals 


An adaptation of color enables the butterflyfish to escape 
predators. The fish s markings make its tail look like a head. Con- 
fused predators do not know which end to attack 


kinds of climates. Thus, human beings are generalized— 
that is, the human body has adaptations that enable peo- 
ple to live in widely different environments. But such or- 
ganisms as mosquitoes and bamboo plants are more 
specialized. Because of their physical makeup, they can 
live only in a rather warm, wet climate. 

Living things often die when they cannot adapt to a 
changing environment. Many kinds of plants and ani- 
mals that once lived on the earth have become extinct. 
For example, millions of years ago, dinosaurs roamed 
the earth. But the environment in which they lived 
changed. The dinosaurs failed to adapt, and they died 
out (see Dinosaur [Why dinosaurs died out). 

The word adaptation also refers to the ability of living 
things to adjust to varying conditions in their environ- 
ment. !f people move to the mountains, their bodies 
adapt to the lower oxygen supply at high altitudes by 
making more oxygen-carrying red blood cells. A dog 
adapts to warm weather by shedding its hair. Adapta- 
tions that occur over a relatively short time, particularly 
because of changes in climate, are often called acclima- 
tizations. 

See also Animal: Ecology: Environment; Insect: 


Lawrence C Wit 


DILBERT reonnted by permission of United Feature Syndicate Inc 


DOES HE UNDERSTAND 
WHAT HE SAID OR > 
IS IT SOMETHING 
HE SAW IN A TAADE y 
MAGALINE AD? ~~” 


IT THINK WE SHOULD 
BUILD AN SQL 
DATABASE. 


SCOTTAGAMBMAOL COM 


E-mail 








© 1096 United Peatwre Byndicete ine iNYC} 





fKHAT COLOR DO YOU \ 


WANT THAT DATABASE’ 


T THINK 
MAUVE HAS 





A Scott Adams comic strip 
satirizes bureaucracy and mis- 
management in business 
through the expenences of an 
engineer named Dilbert. The 
comic stnp often pokes fun at 
the impact of computers in 
corporate activities. 












46 Addams, Charles 


Plant; Races, Human (Climatic adaptions). 
Additional resources 


Quinn, John R. Wildlife Survivors: The Flora and Fauna of Tomor- 
row. TAB, 1993. 

Secrets ot Animal Survival. National Geographic Soc., 1983. 
Younger readers. 


Addams, Charles (1912-1988), an American cartoon- 
ist, became famous for the morbid humor of his draw- 
ings. Addams enjoyed turning ordinary situations into 
ghoulish comedy. His cartoons featured ghosts, mon- 
sters, haunted houses, and cemeteries. Addams was 
best known for creating the comically grotesque charac- 
ters called the Addams family. The family inspired a 
popular television series (1964-1966) and two motion pic- 
tures, The Addams Family (1991) and Addams Familv Val- 
Hes(lg93): 

Charles Samuel Addams was born and raised in 
Westfield, New Jersey. He showed a fascination with the 
morbid at an early age, frequently visiting the local 
cemetery. His neighborhood had many Victorian houses 
like the spooky mansion he later drew for the Addams 
family. Addams achieved his greatest popularity as a car- 
toonist with The New Yorker magazine. He began pub- 
lishing in The New Yorker in the 1930's and became one 
of the magazine's most celebrated cartoonists. Collec- 
tions of Addams s cartoons have been published in sev- 
eral books. Pamela J. Fehl 

See also Cartoon (picture: A gag cartoon). 

Addams, Jane (1860-1935), was an American social 
worker and humanitarian. She and Ellen Gates Starr 
founded Hull House in Chicago in 1889 (see Hull House). 
Addams shared the 1931 Nobel Peace Prize with 
Nicholas Murray Butler. Visiting Europe in 1883 and in 
1888, she became interested in Toynbee Hall, a settle- 
ment in London. On her return home, Addams created a 
more democratic kind of settlement house, sometimes 
called a neighborhood center, among the immigrants 
in Chicago (see Settlement house). There she set up 
many programs, from day nurseries to college courses, 
designed for people of every nation and ethnic group. 

Addams was not content with simple friendliness or 
with the programs she established. She believed strong- 
ly in the need for research into the causes of poverty 
and crime, in the importance of trained social workers, 
and in social action to press for reforms. She organized 
civic groups to bring pressure on legislatures and offi- 
cials. Among the reforms with which she was closely as- 
sociated were the first eight-hour law for working 
women, the first state 
child-labor law, housing 
reform, and the first juve- 
nile court. 

Addams wrote and lec- 
tured on a wide variety of 
social problems, including 
child labor, public health, 
unemployment relief, and 
social insurance. In 1909, 
she became the first 
woman president of the 
National Conference of 
Charities and Corrections, 
now the National Confer- 
ence on Social Welfare. 





niversity ol Hlinois at Chicago 
Library Jane Addams 
Memonal Collection 


Jane Addams 





She led in the fight to give women the vote, and was a 
pacifist, serving as president of the Women’s Interna- 
tional League for Peace and Freedom from 1915 to 1929. 

The width of her interest is reflected in her books, 
which include Democracy and Social Ethics (1902), The 
Spirit of Youth and the City Streets (1909), Twenty Years 
at Hull-House (1910), Women at The Hague (1915), Newer 
Ideals of Peace (1915), and Peace and Bread in Time of 
War (1922). 

Addams was born of Quaker parents on Sept. 6, 1860, 
in Cedarville, Illinois. She graduated from Rockford Col- 
lege and began medical studies in Philadelphia. Howev- 
er, she was forced to give up her studies because of her 
health. Alan Keith-Lucas 

See also Nobel Prizes (picture). 


Additional resources 


Addams, Jane. A Centennial Reader. Macmillan, 1960. The Sec- 
ond Twenty Years at Hull-House. 1930. Twenty Years at Hull- 
House. 1910. Reprint. Lightyear, 1992. 

Davis, Allen F. American Heroine: The Life and Legend of Jane 
Addams. Oxtord, 1973. A classic biography. 

Hovde, Jane. /ane Addams. Facts on File, 1989. 

McPherson, Stephanie S. Peace and Bread: The Story of Jane Ad- 
dams. Carolrhoda, 1993. Younger readers. 


Addax, AD aks, is an antelope that lives in the deserts 

of northern Africa. The addax resembles its close rela- 

tive, the oryx (see Antelope [Kinds of antelope; picture). 
The addax is well suited for desert life. It can with- 


© Gail Rubin, Photo Researchers 


The addax is an antelope with spirally twisting horns. It lives tn 
North African deserts and travels in herds of 5 to 30 animals. 


stand hot temperatures, go without water for long peri- 
ods, and eat coarse desert plants. The addax stands 
about 3 } feet {107 centimeters) high at the shoulder. Its 
body and neck are grayish-brown in winter and sandy to 
almost white in summer. There is a patch of chestnut- 
colored hair on the forehead. The spirally twisting horns 
grow about 4 feet (1.2 meters) long. The addax usually 
runs in herds of from 5 to 30 animals. It is in danger of 
extinction due to overhunting. William L Franklin 
Scientific classification. The addax belongs to the bovid 
family, Bovidae. It is Addax nasomaculatus. 
Adder is the name given to several species of snakes in 
various parts of the world. Some of these snakes are 
poisonous. The European viper is frequently called 
‘adder’ in the United Kingdom. This snake is the only 
poisonous Snake in Britain. The puff adder of Africa is a 
large, deadly snake with distinct markings. It has a 





— 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Richard Lewington, The Garden Studio, Landon 


An adder commonly known as the European viper, shown here, 
is the only poisonous snake that is found in the United Kingdom. 


thick body and long fangs. The death adder of Australia 
is a dangerous snake related to cobras. The hognose 
snakes of the United States, whose bite is not deadly to 
human beings, are commonly called “blowing adders.” 
They get their name from their habit of hissing and flat- 
tening the front part of their bodies when they are dis- 
turbed. Albert F. Bennett 


Scientific classification. Most adders are in the family Viper- 
idae. The European viper is classified as Vipera berus. The puff 
adder is Bitis arietans. The death adder belongs to the family 
Elapidae. It is classified as Acanthophis antarcticus. Hognose 
snakes belong to the family Colubridae and the genus Het- 
erodon. 


See also Snake (pictures: The North American hog- 
nose snake; In rectilinear movement). 
Adder’s-tongue. See Dogtooth violet. 

Addiction. See Drug abuse. 

Addis Ababa, AD ihs AB uh buh (pop. 2,084,588), is 
the capital and largest city of Ethiopia. It is a leading city 
of Africa and the headquarters of important regional or- 
ganizations. Addis Ababa lies in central Ethiopia. For lo- 
cation, see Ethiopia (map). 

Addis Ababa lies on the southern slopes of the Entoto 
Mountains. Deep ravines cut through the city. Many eu- 
calyptus trees grow in and near Addis Ababa. 

Ethiopias national government occupies the palace of 
a former emperor, Menelik II, in Addis Ababa. The Ju- 
bilee Palace, the residence of former Emperor Haile Se- 
lassie |, is in the city. The African Union (AU) and the 
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa have 
their headquarters in Addis Ababa. The National The- 
ater, the University of Addis Ababa, and several muse- 
ums are also in the city. 

Homes of wealthy and poor people stand next to each 
other throughout Addis Ababa. The citys housing 
ranges from high-rise apartment buildings and Euro- 
pean-style homes to traditional African mud huts. 

Addis Ababa is an important commercial center and 
has one of the largest open-air markets in Africa. This 
market is called the Mercato. The city’s products include 
cement, sugar, textiles, and tobacco. Addis Ababa has an 
international airport, and a railroad links the capital with 
Djibouti, a city on the Gulf of Aden. A rapidly growing 
population and other factors have made unemployment 


Addison, Joseph 47 


‘= ie 


_ _ = ens 
- Seip menses ela fea Hdrafatesser ame 
_ eee es 
oyeadabali- So tilde: 
= 


Four by Five 


Addis Abaha, the capital of Ethiopia, lies in the central part of 
the country on the southern slopes of the Entoto Mountains. It is 
Ethiopia's largest city and a major commercial center. 


a problem in Addis Ababa. 

Addis Ababa was founded in 1887 by Menelik 11, who 
was then king of Shawa Province. Menelik made Addis 
Ababa the capital of the province. He took the throne as 
emperor of Ethiopia in 1889, and Addis Ababa became 
the nation’s capital. 

Until 1974, much of Addis Ababa's land was owned by 
the emperor's family, members of the nobility, and the 
Ethiopian Orthodox Church. That year, a revolution 
headed by Ethiopian military leaders overthrew Emper- 
or Haile Selassie |. Most of the city’s land then came un- 
der government control. Kenneth J. Perkins 

See also Ethiopia (picture: Addis Ababa). 

Addison, Joseph (1672-1719), was an English author 
and politician. He is best known for his collaboration 
with Sir Richard Steeie in writing and publishing The 
Spectator, a series of 555 popular essays published in 
1711 and 1712. These essays were intended to improve 
manners and morals, raise the cultural level of the mid- 
dle-class reader, and popularize serious ideas in science 
and philosophy. Most of the essays deal with social be- 
havior, love and marriage, and literature. Addison wrote 
with charm and polish, and Steele with liveliness and 
feeling. See Steele, Sir Richard. 

The Spectator became popular because it expressed 
in a natural but sophisticated manner the ideals admired 
by its readers. The essays also gave middle-class readers 
a pleasant sense of self-improvement in manners and 
taste. To add to the interest of the essays, Addison and 
Steele introduced a set of representative English charac- 
ters. The most famous of these characters was the sim- 
ple but delightful country squire, Sir Roger de Coverley. 

Addison also contributed to 7he Tatler(1709-1711), a 
periodical started by Steele. Addison's verse tragedy, 
Cato (1713), ran for a month on the London stage and 
was adinired for its patriotic sentiments. 

Addison was born in Milston in Wiltshire on May 1, 
1672. While attending Oxford University from 1687 to 
1699, he earned a reputation as a classical scholar. He 
was rather reserved, but his personal charm and wit 
won him powertul friends in London. He entered poli- 
tics after achieving sensational success with a patriotic 
poem, The Campaign (1704), describing the English vic- 





48 Addison, Thomas 


tory in the Battle of Blenheim. He served in Parliament 
from 1708 until his death and also held several govern- 
ment appointments. In 1717, Addison was appointed 
secretary of state. Illness forced him to resign in 1718. 

Gary A Stringer 
Addison, Thomas (1793-1860), was a British doctor 
famous for his description of Addison's disease (see Ad- 
dison’s disease). Addison reported this condition, in 
which bronzed skin is found together with diseased 
adrenal glands, in a research paper in 1855. He also de- 
scribed Addison's anemia, known today as pernicious 
anemia (see Anemia). 

During his lifetime, Addison's reputation rested 
largely on his outstanding ability as a doctor and 
teacher. His painstaking examinations of patients and his 
uncanny diagnoses became a legend. 

Addison was born near Newcastle, England. He ob- 
tained his medical degree at the University of Edinburgh 
in 1815 and started his practice in London. In 1824, Addi- 
son was appointed assistant physician at Guy's Hospital 
in London. He began teaching and conducting clinical 
medical studies there, and his work eventually made 
Addison a leading figure in British medicine. 

Dale C Smith 
Addison’s disease is a disorder that gradually de- 
stroys the adrenal glands, causing them to produce in- 
sufficient amounts of certain hormones. The body has 
two adrenal glands, one located on top of each kidney. 
The most common cause of Addison's disease ts an au- 
toimmune disorder in which the body's immune system 
attacks and destroys the adrenal glands. Other causes of 
Addison's disease include cancer, infectious diseases 
such as tuberculosis, and such fungal diseases as histo- 
plasmosis. Addisons disease is named after the British 
doctor Thomas Addison, who first described the disor- 
der in 1855. 

Addison's disease develops gradually, and patients 
are unable to say exactly when their symptoms began. 
Almost all patients experience weakness and fatigue, 
and most suffer weight loss. Many patients experience 
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. The disease also is char- 
acterized by abnormal skin pigmentation (coloration). In 
most patients, the skin becomes darker than normal. Ab- 
normal pigmentation may be especially evident in areas 
of the body exposed to light. 

Doctors treat Addisons disease by prescribing drugs 
to replace the missing hormones. One of the most 
widely used drugs is hydrocortisone. The majority of pa- 
tients who receive treatment can live full, active lives. 

David L Reiss 
Addition is a way of putting together two or more 
things to find out how many there are all together. Only 
like things can be added. This is, you cannot add apples 
and pencils together. 

Suppose you have a set of 5 apples and a set of 3 ap- 
ples ona table: 





Now put the sets together in a new set of 8 apples. 





You add when you put together two or more sets to 
find out how many there are all together. 


Learning to add 


To find out how many things you have added to make 
a new set, you can countthem or think them together. 

Addition by counting. Ralph has 3 red marbles and 
4 blue marbles. He puts them together in one set. 


How many marbles are there in the first set? Count 
them. There are 3 marbles. How many marbles are there 
in the second set? Count them. There are 4 marbles. 
Now, put the marbles together and count them in the 
third set. There are 7 marbles. We call this counting to- 
gether. You counted to find how many 3 marbles and 4 
marbles are together. You discovered that 3 and 4 are 7. 

Suppose you have drawn 3 circles. Now draw 4 more 
circles next to the first 3. 


QOQOO0O0000 


You know that there were already 3 circles. So you can 
think §3° and point to each of the 4 new circles, and 
count 4, 5,6, 7. This is called counting on. You can find 
out how many 3 and 4 are together by thinking 3° for 
the first set, and counting on until you have counted the 
4 circles in the second set. Counting on serves as a 
quicker way ot adding things than counting them to- 
gether. 

Addition by thinking. Suppose there are 4 girls at 
the blackboard and 5 girls at the reading table. You find 
how many girls there are all together by thinking. For 
example, you could think: | already know that 4 and 4 
are 8, so 4 and 5 will be 1 more. That means that 4 and 5 
are 9. Or, you could think: “4 girls and 5 girls are 9 girls.” 
We call this thinking together. Thinking together is a 
quicker way of adding than counting together or count- 
ing on. 








Addition terms 





Addend. In4 + 9 = 13, the numbers which are added, 
4 and 9, are both addends. 

Addition fact is a basic statement in addition. For 
example, 2 + 3 = 5and 8 + 7 = 15 are addition facts. 

Carry in addition means to transfer anumber from 
one place in the sum to the next. A 10 in the 1's place 
must be carried to the 10's place. 

Sum. in4 + 9 = 13. the total, 13. is the sum. 








Addition 49 


Regrouping. Suppose you warit to put together two Addition facts. By putting together sets, you have 
sets in a new set and the new set will be niore than 10. discovered that 5 + 3 = 8,3 + 4 =7,and9 + 6 = 15. 
For example, Nancy wanted to know how many 9 and 6 We call these addition facts. Each addition fact is made 
are. To find out, she drew a number line: up of two addends and a sum. You can discover all the 


addition facts by putting together sets of things. Some 
| if = eee | | beginners practice with sets of pennies or bottle caps. 


| itt a! I | 
PS 4 56 7s 910 12 13°14 15°16-17_—s «gHevgy addition facts 


Then, she drew lines to show 9 and 6 as shown below: 1 
9 6 = 
1. he See eae i) en , 
Weeeon 4 5 6 7 8 9 AO 11 12 «13 14 +15 (16 «17 9 
Nancy found out that 9 and 6 are 15. But she saw some- W 
thing interesting and drew two more lines: : 
10 5 
———— jd 
2 es a | 12 
feu oe h6U6DlUGlUM7 U8 (10 WT 12 13" “214 15 :s«6 17 
P< = 
7 6 


Nancy found that 9 and 6 are the same as 10 and 5. It is 
easier for beginners to add 10 and 5 than it is to add 9 
and 6. We call changing the sets 9 and 6 to the sets 5 
and 10 regrouping. Here are some examples: 


8 and 4 are 12 (10 and 2) 
7 and 8 are 15 (10 and 5) 
9 and 4 are 13 (10 and 3) 


Writing addition. You should write down your addi- 
tion problems, so you have a record of your counting or 
thinking. 

You can make a record with pictures: 


BS iow pode SiS ON oy — tom trl eco bet Bn eae 
lo wo Sl @ OINN @GIN®@® NING GIN &® GINwWwW FINN WId — 
lew wo = les Slo ~N WOIWA DBlWH NIWb B1WW DIWN AW — 
law alow a@loN io omole a Clon WIR W DIAN NIa— 
IN GIN@® INN GINe SING Fina SlNw wINn wIN-= 
leo w o|c0 «0 cleo N nloo loo wn Nlo » Xl w Slow o/c — 
low Ylow olon aloo Rlow clo» 


Bless Ral co Se rarer Ol2Rn BDlFA NIibBRw OAH GA — 
alas G3 |envoo Sine = cre olan OID DBlNnw NIQn a&[un— 


>) 
Le) 
n 
Oo 
N 
jee] 





It is best to learn the addition facts so you can use 
Or you can make a record with numbers and words: them quickly and easily. You will be able to use them in 
your daily life. You will also need them to add larger 

2 and 4 are 6 numbers and solve problems. 
But it is easiest and best to make a record with num- Learning these addition facts looks like work at first. 


bers and signs: But there are several ways to make learning the facts 


2 easier. For instance, if you look at all the facts in which a 
2 +49=)6 or £ number and 1 are added, you will see that learning 
6 them is something like ordinary counting. Also, many of 
In the first example, the plus sign (+) tells you to add. the pairs of addends are just the reverse of each other. 
You can read 2 + 4 as “two and four.” The equals sign For example, 4 + 5 adds up to the same thing as 5 + 4. 
—) means that the sets on one side of the sign are equa/_~ We calla fact like 3 + 3 = 6a double. Knowing doubles 
to the set on the other side of the sign. You can read is useful. If you know that 4 + 4 = 8, then 4 + 3is 1 less 


than 8, and 4 + 5is 1 more than 8. You should be able 


2 + 4 = 6as “two and four are six.” The second exampte 
to think of other ways to help you learn the addition 


shows how you write an addition problem when you 
want to work out the answer on paper. The two or more _ facts. 
groups you want to put together, or add, are called ad- sachin dears 


dends. The new group is called the sum. ; ee Diese ) 
4 ‘ou use the addition tacts ana the idea of place value 
2 “seme Adden to add larger numbers. 


Addend 
4 P Adding 10's. Last week, Tom earned 2 dimes, or 20e. 
6 Gee Lum This week, Tom earned 3 dimes, or 30¢. How much has 








50 Addition 


Tom earned all together? You can find the answer by 
counting. 





You find that Tom earned 5 dimes, or 50c. You can find 
the answer by adding. 





2 dimes 20¢ 
3 dimes 30¢ 
5 dimes 50¢ 


If you know that 2 + 3 = 5, you know that 2 dimes and 
3 dimes are 5 dimes. A dime is 10¢, so you can see that 
20¢ + 30¢ = 50. 

Here is another example: 


4 4 tens 40 
2 2 tens 20 
6 6 tens 60 


You can see that 4 + 2 = 6,4 tens + 2tens = 6tens, 
and 40 + 20 = 60. The 6 in the 60 shows six 10's be- 
cause it is in the 10s place. You add 10's the same way 
you add I's. But you must write the sum in the 10's place. 
And you must remember to write a zero in the 1's place 
to show that the sum is 10s, not 1's. 

Here is a third example: 





8 8 tens 80 
9 9 tens 90 
17 17 tens 170 


Here the sum of the 10's is seventeen 10's. Seventeen 
10's is the same as ten 10's and seven 10s. But ten 10's is 
100. So you must write the sum in the 10's and 100's 
places, and write in a zero to show that the answer is 
one 100, seven 10s, and no 1's. 

Adding 10’s and 1's. Suppose there are 23 boys and 
24 girls in a school play. To find out how many children 
there are all together, you must add 23 and 24. 


2 tens ond 3 ones 23 
2 tens and 4 ones 24 


4 tens and 7 ones 


We call the numbers 23 and 24 two-place numbers. 
When you add two-place numbers, you add the 1's first. 
In this example, three 1's and four 1's are 3 + 4 = 7. You 
write the sum of the 1's in the 1's place of the answer: 


23 
ae 
7 
Next, you add the 10's. Two 10's and two 10's are added 


as2 + 2 = 4. The 4 stands for four 10's. You write the 
sum of the 10's in the 10's place of the answer. 


23 
x 
47 


So there are 47 children in the school play. 


Here is another example: 


72 
43 


115 


First, you add the 1's: 2 + 3 = 5. Next, you find that 
seven 10's and four 10's are eleven 10's. Eleven 10's are 
the same as ten 10's and one 10, or one 100 and one 10. 
So you must write the sum of the 10's in the 10's and 
100s places in the answer. 

When there are several addends, we often speak of 
the 1's, 10's, and 100's as co/umns. When you add col!- 
umns, you must learn to “hink the additions. At first it 
may help to keep some kind of record. 





With practice, adding two-place numbers and long col- 
umns will be easy. 

How to carry. When you add two-place numbers, 
the sum of the 1's column is often 10 or more. To add 
such numbers, you must learn to carry. 

Here is an example of carrying: 


=a — —— 





45 
27; 
2 
From the 1’s column, there is a 
10 to be added to the 10’s column. 
CARRY Write a 1 for the one 10 at the 

top of the 10’s column. This 
is what carrying means. 

? 

45 

24 

72 


You add longer columns the same way. 


24 
52 
17 


First, add the 1's column: 4 + 2 = 6, and 6 + 7 = 13. 
Thirteen is one 10 and three 1's. Write the 3 in the 1's 
place of the answer. Carry the one 10to the 10's column 
by writing a1 at the top of the 10's column. 

} 

24 

a2 

ues 

3 





Now add the 10's column: 1 + 2 = 3,3 +5 = 8, and 
8 + 1 = 9. This 9 means nine 10's. Write the 2 in the 10's 
place. 

] 

24 

52 

7 

93 


Adding three-place and four-place numbers is no 
more difficult than the examples you have just done. You 
must always remember to keep the columns straight, 
and to add 1's, 10's, 100s, and so on, in order. Here is an 


example: 
4 aval 


403 
139 


First, add the 1's column: 1 + 3 + 9 = 13. Write 3 for 
three 1's in the 1's place of the answer. Carry the 10 by 
writing 1 for one 10 at the top of the 10's column. 


] 
371 
403 
139 


3 


Next, add the 10's column: 1 + 7 + 0 + 3 = 11. This is 
not eleven 1's. It is eleven 10's. Eleven 10's is one 100 and 
one 10. So write 1 for the one 10 in the 10's place of the 
answer. Carry the 100 by writing 1 for one 100 at the top 
of the 100's column. 


1] 
371 
403 
139 


13 


Now add the 100s column: 1 + 3 + 4 + 1 = 9. This 9is 
nine 100s. Write 9 in the 100's place of the answer. 


1] 

371 
403 
139 


913 


The sum is 913. You use the same method of carrying 
for 1,000's and larger numbers. 
Here is an example in which the number you Carry is 
more than one 10. 
37 
29 
18 


First, add the 1’s column: 7 + 9 + 8 = 24. Twenty-four is 


two 10's and four 1's. Write the 4 in the 1s place in the 
answer. Carry the two 10s to the 10's column by writing 
a 2 at the top of the 10's column. 


Addition 51 


Now add the 10s column: 2 + 3 + 2 + 1 = 8. This 8 
means eight 10's. Write the 8 in the 10's place of the an- 
swer. 

Z 

37 

29 

18 

84 


The sum is 84. The numbers you carry may often be 20's 
or 30s or 40s, and so on. 


Checking addition 


Good workers always check their addition to see if 
they have made any mistakes. There are several ways to 
check addition. 

Adding up. You have learned to add a column of fig- 
ures by starting at the top and adding down. After you 
have written the sum, you can check your answer by 
adding up. That is, starting at the bottom of the column 
and adding up to the top. Here is an example: 





If you get the same answer adding up as you did adding 
down, your answer is probably right. 

Subtraction can be used to check problems with 
only two addends (see Subtraction). Here is an example: 


422 
+736 
1158 
To check the addition, subtract one of the addends from 
the sum. For example, subtract 736 from 1,158. The sub- 
traction should leave 422 if the addition is correct: 


1158 
—736 


422 





Estimating is a good way of checking addition, but it 
will not catch small mistakes. If you estimate before you 
work a problem, you will have an idea of your answer in 
advance. You should get into the habit of always estimat- 
ing your answer first. Here is an example: 


ESTIMATING 
eo . (Think) 
ak 32 is about 30. 
71 46 is about 50. 
aa 30 and 50 are 80. 


71 is about 70. 
80 and 70 are 150. 
The answer should be about 150. 





52 Addition 


There are other methods of checking used in arithmetic. 
Some of them can be used for addition. 


Addition rules to remember 


1. Remember what addition means. You can find the 
answers to addition problems by counting. But it is 
quicker and easier to think the answers. 

2. Learning the 81 addition facts will help you think 
the answers to addition problems. 

3. You can put the addends in any order without 
changing the sum of the equation. For example, 
34247 12,2 +44 3 = 12,andae 3 — 2a 

4. You can add only quantities of the same kind. That 
is, you must add 1s to 1's and 10s to 10s, and be careful 
not to mix them up. 


Fun with addition 


Two winks. Make a pack of 20 cards on which the 
numbers from 1 to 10 have been written. Make two 
cards for each number. Divide the pack of cards into 
two piles, and put one pile face down in front of each 
player. The first player turns a card and holds it up for 
both players to see. The second player does the same 
thing from the other pile of cards. The player who first 
sees that the sum of the numbers on the two cards is 10 
or more calls out ‘Two winks! Then, that player takes 





the two cards. If the two cards do not equal 10 or more, 
the players put them back in the piles. The game contin- 








Tick-tack-toe puzzle. Each player draws a tick-tack- 
toe figure on a piece of paper. 





Then, each tries to fill in the spaces with the numbers 

from 1 to 9, so that if three numbers are added across, 

up and down, or diagonally the sums will be 15. The 

player must use each number from 1 to 9. The first 

player with the correct answer wins. Nadine L Verderber 
Related articles in World Book include: 


Abacus Division Numeration sys- 
Algebra (Addition) Fraction tems (Working 
Arithmetic Mathematics with numeration 


Decimal system Multiplication systems) 


Subtraction 


Outline 


I. Learning to add 

A. Addition by counting 
B. Addition by thinking 
C Regrouping 

ll. Adding larger numbers 
A. Adding 10's 
B. Adding 10s and 1's 

Wl. Checking addition 


D. Writing addition 
E. Addition facts 


C How to carry 











ues, with two new players turning the cards. When all of IV. poacn's =e re Seah Sun Cosine 

the cards have been turned, the player with the most V. Fun with addition 

cards wins. 

Practice addition examples 

In each of the first six problems, what number should be used to replace the N? 

lLS+2=7 2.8 &6= 14 3. dK. 9 = 14 94.3 4 6) — NS 4 6.8 — Naas 
2+N=7 N+ 8 = 14 9+5=N 6+3=N 9+N= 16 5+8 = 

7. 4 10. 34 13. 3% 16. 20¢ 19, 10 22. 7a 25. 14 28. 37¢ 

2 2 6 80¢ 70 65¢ 64 56¢ 

8. 14 M. 5 14. 45 17. 60¢ 20. 37¢ 2 3Os 26. 65¢ 29. 98 
2 6 6 70¢ 42¢ 23 18¢ 69 

9. 24 12. 25 15. 40¢ 18. 50 21. 56¢ 24. 43 27. 29¢ 30. ¥5 
2 6 30¢ 90 33¢ 52 48¢ 58 

31. 3¢ 32. 6¢ 33. 6 34. 7 35. $2.49 37. $3.95 39. 618 41. 30 42. 43 43. 402 44. 5627 45. 7269 
o¢ 8¢ 5 8 1.29 4.89 489 78 20 187 1872 143 
4¢ é6¢ 4 4 — waa —_ 62 80 260 9000 2425 
6¢ 3¢ Z 6 36. $7.65 38. 525 40. 311 50 7 517 435] 82 
Te BR 82 el 

Answers to the practice examples 

Eos G; Sa 1aeeeite wt 16. $1.00 21. 89¢ 26. 83¢ 31. 22¢ 36. $9.47 41. 220 

oO fines 12. 34 17. $1.30 22.'$1.39 27. Foihe gil eh 37. $8.84 42. 150 

3. 14 8. 16 13. 41 18. 140 23. 88 28. 93¢ 33. 22 38. 1,007 43. 1,366 

4.9,9 9. 26 [4. 51 19. 80 Oe 95 29.467 ©34, 25 39. 1,107 44. 20,850 

&. Wont: wlOm3s6 15. 7O¢ 20. 79¢ 25. 78 30. 133 35. $3.78 40. 610 45. 9,919 





Address, Forms of, are courteous, formal ways to in- 
troduce, speak to, write to, or send e-mail 10 other peo- 
ple. In most cases, you can address another person as 
“Mr. Green’ or “Ms. Green’ or by using that person's title 
before his or her last name. In business correspond- 
ence, use ‘Miss’ or “Mrs.” only when you know that the 
recipient prefers such a form of address. Government 
officials, members of royalty, religious dignitaries, and 
members of certain professions merit special forms of 
address. This article gives some of the most commonly 
used forms of address for people in such positions. 

“Yours truly” is a common closing for letters, though 
there are many others. Certain situations require a more 
formal closing such as “Respectfully yours.” 

In the examples listed here, the first indentation under 
each entry provides the formal way to introduce or refer 
to the person in each position. The second indentation 
gives the proper salutation to use for communicating 
with the person in writing or by e-mail. An acceptable 
closing is also included for positions in which “yours 
truly” is considered insufficiently formal. 


Officials of the United States 


President 
The President 
Dear Mr. or Madam President: 

Closing: Respecttully, 

Vice president 
The Vice President 
Dear Mr. or Madam Vice President 

Cabinet member (except attorney general) 

The Honorable John or Mary Green, Secretary of (State or 
Transportation, for example) 

Dear Mr. or Madam Secretary: or Dear Secretary Green: 
(Deputy secretaries, assistant secretaries, and undersecretaries 
are addressed by their specific title, but the salutation is ‘Dear 
Mr. or Ms. Green:.) 

Assistant to the president 
The Honorable John or Mary Green or Assistant to the Presi- 
dent Green 
Dear Mr. or Ms. Green: 

Attorney general 
The Attorney General 
Dear Mr. or Madam Attorney General: 

Chief justice of the United States 
The Chief Justice of the United States 
Dear Mr. or Madam Chief Justice: 

Associate justice of the Supreme Court 
Justice Green 
Dear Mr. or Madam Justice: or Dear Justice Green: 

United States senator 
The Honorable John or Mary Green 
Dear Senator: or Dear Senator Green: 

United States representative 
The Honorable John or Mary Green 
Dear Mr. or Ms. Green: or Dear Representative Green: or 
Dear Congressman or Congresswoman Green: 

Speaker of the House of Representatives 
The Honorable John or Mary Green 
Dear Mr. or Madam Speaker. 

Member of an agency, bureau, or commission 
The Honorable John or Mary Green 
Dear Mr. or Madam Chairman: or Dear Mr. or Ms. Green: 

(For a commissioner, the salutation is generally Dear Commis: 

sioner Green:’) 

Ambassador . ' 
The Honorable John or Mary Green, Ambassador of the Unit- 
ed States of America 
Sir or Madam: orDear Mr. or Madam Ambassador 


Address, Forms of 53 


Closing: Very truly yours, 
(Although it is permissible to refer to a United States ambas- 
sador as “American Ambassador, it is best not to do so because 
other Western Hemisphere ambassadors also consider them- 
selves Americans. Ministers, charges daffaires, consuls, and 
secretaries all use their full title in place of “Ambassador” but are 
addressed as “Dear Mr. or Ms. Green:.) 
Governor of a state 

The Honorable John or Mary Green 

Dear Sir orMadam: or Dear Governor Green: 
State senator 

The Honorable John or Mary Green 

Dear Sir or Madam: or Dear Senator Green: 
State representative 

The Honorable John or Mary Green 

Dear Sir or Madam: or Dear Representative Green: 
Mayor or city manager 

The Honorable John or Mary Green 

Dear Sir or Madam: or Dear Mayor Green: 
(City managers do not use ‘Honorable’ except at ceremonies. 
They are addressed as “Mr. John Green” or’Ms. Mary Green” 
and “Dear Mr. Green” or“Dear Ms. Green’.) 


Officials of the Commonwealth of Nations 


King or queen 
His or Her Majesty 
Your Majesty: or Madam: 
Closing: Respectfully, or Respectfully yours, 
Prince or princess 
His Royal Highness, the Prince John or Her Royal Highness, 
the Princess Mary 
Your Royal Highness: 
Closing: Respectfully, or Respectfully yours, 
Knight or dame 
Sir John Green or Dame Mary Green 
Dear Sir John Green or Dear Dame Mary Green: 
(A knights or dame’s name is followed by initials that designate 
the order of knighthood. For example, KCB or DCB stand for 
Knight Commander of the Bath or Dame Commander of the 
Bath, and KGor DG stand for Knight of the Garter or Dame of the 
Garter.) 
Prime minister 
The Right Honourable John or Mary Green, Prime Minister of 
(Canada or the United Kingdom, for example} 
Dear Sir or Madam. or Dear Prime Minister. 
Closing: Respectiully yours, or Very truly yours, 
Member of the House of Lords of the United Kingdom 
The Right Honourable the (Duke or Earl or 
Viscount, for example) Green 
My Lord: 
Member of the House of Commons 
John or Mary Green, MP. 
Dear Sir or Madam: 
Governor general 
His orHer Excellency the Right Honourable John or Mary 
Green, Governor General of (Canada, tor example) 
Dear Sir or Madam: or Sir or Madam: 
Premier or prime minister of a province 
The Honourable John or Mary Green, Prime Minister of (On- 
tario, for example) 
Dear Sir or Madam: or Sir or Madam: 
Senator 
The Honourable John or Mary Green 
Dear Sir or Madam: 
Minister of a department 
John or Mary Green, Minister of (Transport, for example) 
Dear Sir or Madan: 
Judge 
The Honourable Mr Justice John Green or The Honourable 
Ms. Justice Mary Green 
Dear Justice Green: 
A High Court judge is addressed as Your Lordship or My 
Lord only when the caurt is in session. An English or Australian 


54 Address, Forms of 


justice of the peace on the bench is addressed in court as “Your 
Worship.” In Canada, judges for county and district courts are 
addressed as ‘His or Her Honour Judge Green:) 
Mayor 

His Worship Mayor John Green or 

Her Worship Mayor Mary Green 

Dear Sir or Madam: or Dear Sir or Madam Mayor. 
President 

The Right Honourable John or Mary Green, President 

of the Republic 

Dear Sir or Madam: or Dear Sir or Madam President 


Foreign officials in the United States 


Ambassador to the United States 

His or Her Excellency John or Mary Green, 

Ambassador of (Australia, for example) 

Dear Mr. or Madam Green: or Dear Mr. or 

Madam Ambassador. 
Secretary-general of the United Nations 

His or Her Excellency John or Mary Green, 

Secretary-General of the United Nations 

Sir or Madam: or Dear Mr. or Madam Secretary-General: 
(Ambassadors and representatives to the United Nations use the 
form “Representative of Brazil to the United Nations.) 
Representative to the United Nations 
You may use the forms of address for Ambassador as a general 
guide for addressing United Nations representatives. However, 
each member nation awards its own titles to its individual repre- 
sentatives to the United Nations. Whenever possible, the repre- 
sentatives should be addressed by the titles conferred by their 
country. 


Members of the clergy 


Roman Catholic archbishop or bishop 
Your excellency orArchbishop Green 
Your excellency or Bishop Green 
Archbishop or Bishop of (Chicago, for example) 
Dear Archbishop or Bishop Green: 
(Episcopal bishops often use “The Right Reverend.” 
Greek Orthodox bishops often use ‘The Very Reverend.) 
Roman Catholic cardinal 
His Eminence John Cardinal Green 
Your Eminence: or My Dear Cardinal Green: 
Roman Catholic priest 
The Reverend Father John Green 
Dear Father Green: or Reverend Father. 
Roman Catholic nun 
Sister Mary Xavier, T.O.S-F. 
Dear Sister Xavier. 
Church of England archbishop 
The Most Reverend John Green, the Lord Archbishop 
of (Canterbury, for example) 
Your Grace: or My Dear Archbishop: 
Church of England bishop 
The Right Reverend John Green, the Lord Bishop 
of (Bristol, for example) 
My Lord: or My Lord Bishop: 
Church of England priest 
The Reverend John Green 
Dear Father Green: 
Church of England canon 
The Reverend Canon John Green 
Dear Canon Green: 
Protestant minister 
The Reverend John or Mary Green 
Dear Reverend Green: 
(lf a minister has a doctor's degree from a university, it is often 
used in the salutation in place of “Reverend, as “Dear Doctor 
Green: 
Rabbi 
Rabbi Jacob or Miriam Green 
Dear Rabbi Green: 


Other forms 


President or chancellor of a university or college 

President or Chancellor John Green or President 

or Chancellor Mary Green 

Dear President or Chancellor Green: 
Professor 

Professor John or Mary Green 

Dear Professor Green: 
(Full professors, associate professors, and assistant professors 
can be addressed as “Professor. Lecturers, instructors, and fel- 
lows are addressed as “Mr.” or Ms.) 
Lawyer 

John R. Green, Esq. 

Dear Mr. Green: 
(Attorneys, especially in the United States, usually address each 
other by “Esq.” This abbreviation stands for “esquire. In the United 
Kingdom, Queens Counsel add the initials Q.C after the name.) 
Doctor of medicine or dentistry 

Medicine: Dr. John or Mary Green, orJohn or Mary 

Green, M.D. 

Dentistry: Dr. John or Mary Green, or John or Mary 

Green, D.D:S. 
(In the United States, all medical doctors and dentists are ad- 
dressed as “Dr.” In the United Kingdom, surgeons and specialists 
are more often addressed as “Mr.” Dentists are rarely addressed 
as ‘Dr. 
Doctor of veterinary medicine: 

Dr. John or Mary Green, or John or Mary 

Green, D.V.M. 

Dear Dr. Green: 
Doctor of an academic discipline 

Dr. John or Mary Green, orJohn or Mary 

Green, Ph.D. or Ed.D. 

Dear Dr. Green: 
(People outside the medical and health professions who hold a 
doctorate may choose whether or not to be addressed as “Dr. } 
Military officer 

Captain John or Mary Green, U.S. Coast Guard 

Dear Captain Green: 
(All people who hold rank that has subgrades, such as vice admi- 
ral, second lieutenant, or master sergeant, are addressed by their 
rank without qualification—as, for example, “Dear Admiral:’, ‘Dear 
Lieutenant,” or “Dear Sergeant’.) 
Widow 

Mrs. John Green 

Dear Mrs. Green: 
(If a widow or a divorced woman signs her own name to a letter 


“Mrs. Betty Green,” then the person writing to this woman should 


use the same form of address.) Deborah Dumaine 


See also Letter writing. 

Ade, ayd, George (1866-1944), was an American hu- 
morist, playwright, and journalist. He won fame for his 
comic stories written in the everyday speech and popu- 
lar slang of the rural Midwest, especially his home state 
of Indiana. 

Ades best-known work is Fables in Slang (1899), a col- 
lection of stories modeled on Aesop’s Fables. The work 
consists of humorous tales of country life and of country 
people living in the city. It also makes fun of show-offs 
and bigots. 

Ade was also a noted comic playwright and author of 
musical comedies. His most successful works for the mu- 
sical stage were The Sultan of Sulu(1902) and The Sho- 
Gun (1904). His most significant plays were two comedies 
of small-town life in the United States, The County Chair- 
man (1903) and The College Widow(1904). Although 
Ade’s theater works are rarely staged today, they provide 
a significant record of American life in the early years of 
the 1900's. 

Ade was born in Kentland, Indiana. In the 1890's, he 





worked as a reporter for the Chicago Record. Many of 
his stories originally appeared in a column he wrote for 
the newspaper. Samuel Chase Coale 

Adelaide, AD uh Layo (pop. 1,045,854), is the state of 
South Australia's capital, largest city, economic center, 
and chief port. It lies on a plain on Australia’s southern 
coast and extends inland from the Gulf of St. Vincent, an 
inlet off the Indian Ocean. For the location of Adelaide, 
see Australia (political map). It was named for Queen 
Adelaide, whose husband, William IV, ruled Britain from 
1830 to 1837. 

The River Torrens flows through Adelaide. The city’s 
central business district is on both banks of the river, 6 
miles (10 kilometers) inland from the Gulf of St. Vincent. 
A belt of beautiful parkland surrounds the central busi- 
ness district. Adelaide's residential, commercial, and in- 
dustrial areas spread north and south along the plain. 
The Mount Lofty Ranges rise east of the city. 

Manufacturing is the areas chief economic activity. 
Products manufactured include household appliances, 
motor vehicles, electrical goods, and processed foods. 
Adelaide hosts an international Festival of the Arts every 
two years. 

Adelaide was first settled by Europeans in 1836. 
Colonel William Light, the first surveyor general of 
South Australia, completed a city plan for Adelaide in 
1837. The city quickly became an important center for 
nearby agricultural and mining activities. A large num- 
ber of new industries were established in Adelaide after 
World War II ended in 1945. The city’s population has 
grown greatly since then and now accounts for more 
than 70 percent of South Australia’s population. 

Garry R. LeDuff 
Aden, AHD uhn or AYD uhn (pop. 318,000), is the sec- 
ond largest city of Yemen. Only Sanaa has more people. 
Aden lies on a small peninsula that extends into the Gulf 
of Aden. For the location of Aden, see Yemen (map). 
Aden has served as an important port and trading cen- 
ter since ancient times. 

Aden has both broad streets lined by Western-style 
buildings and winding, narrow streets bordered by old, 
thick-walled Arab buildings. The city serves as the trad- 
ing center for its region and as a refueling place for 
ships. It has a iarge oil refinery. Manufactured products 
include cooking oil and textiles. 

Aden became an important Roman trading center 
during ancient times. In 1839, British forces took over 
the city. In 1967, Yemen (Aden) became an independent 
nation with Aden as its capital. In 1990, Yemen (Aden) — 
and Yemen (Sanaa) merged and became the country of 
Yemen, with Sanaa as the capital. Robert Geran Landen 
Adena Indians. See Mound builders. 

Adenauer, AH duh now uhr, Konrad (1876-1967), 
served as chancellor of the West German Republic from 
its formation in 1949 until he retired in 1963. Under his 
leadership, West Germany gained its sovereignty, made 
an extraordinary economic recovery, built its military 
power, and played a major role in Western European af- 
fairs. Adenauer’s accomplishments were all the more re- 
markable because he was 73 years old when he started 
his 14 years as chancellor. 

Adenauer helped bring Germany into the North At 
lantic Treaty Organization (NATO! the Counc il of E lu 
rope, the European Coal and Steel Cammunity, ana the 


Adenoids 55 


European Economic Com- 
munity. Adenauer allied 
his country with the West- 
ern powers. He acknowl- 
edged Germany's respon- 
sibility for the crimes 
committed against the 
Jews during World War II, 
and Germany paid war 
reparations to the Jewish 
state of Israel. Adenauer 
and French President 
Charles de Gaulle signed a 
Franco-German Treaty of 
Cooperation in 1963. The 
treaty was seen as a symbol of reconciliation between 
France and Germany, which had traditionally been ene- 
mies. 

As chancellor, Adenauer exercised strong rule. He 
treated his ministers as subordinates rather than as his 
colleagues. During his later years as chancellor, Ade- 
nauers actions were criticized both by his own Christian 
Democratic Union Party members and by his opponents. 

Adenauer was born on Jan. 5, 1876, in Cologne, Ger- 
many. He studied at the universities of Freiburg, Mu- 
nich, and Bonn, and became a lawyer. He served as may- 
or of Cologne from 1917 to 1933. During World War II, 
the Nazis imprisoned him several times. 

The Allies made Adenauer mayor of Cologne when 
they occupied Germany after World War II. However, 
the British dismissed him, and Adenauer entered nation- 
al politics in 1947 as the leader of the Christian Demo- 
cratic Party. He played an important role in drafting the 
West German constitution, which went into force in 
1949. That year, Adenauer won his first election as chan- 
cellor. After Adenauer retired in 1963, his vice chancel- 
lor, Ludwig Erhard, was elected chancellor. 

Otis C Mitchell 
Adenine. See Cell (The code of life). 

Adenoids, AD uh noydz, also known as pharyngeal 
tonsils, are a mass of glandlike tissue normally present 
in the upper part of the throat, directly behind the nasal 
passages. A small amount of this tissue is always found 
in the throats of newborn babies. Usually it shrinks grad- 
ually and disappears by the time the child is 10 years 
old. But sometimes this shrinking process does not take 
place. Instead, the adenoid tissue increases in varying 
degrees to form a large growth. It is this growth that 
people commonly call adenoids. 

The adenoid tissue may grow so extensively that it fills 
the entire space behind the nose and interferes with 
nasal breathing. The soft, spongy tissue harbors germs 
and becomes infected easily. The infecting organisms 
often cause additional swelling so that the whole upper 
part of the throat may become clogged. Then breathing 
through the nose becomes almost impossible, and the 
whole area is inflamed and sore. 

Enlarged adenoid tissue also may block the Eustachi- 
an tube that connects the back of the throat and the mid- 
dle ear. Fluid then forms in the middle ear, resulting in a 
condition that is known as serous otitis media. This con- 
dition may lead to hearing loss and recurrent ear infec- 
tions. See Ear (Diseases). 

Like the other tonsils, the adenoids consist of lvm- 





Wide World 
Konrad Adenauer 


56 Adhesion 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Charles Wel 
The adenoids, or pharyngeal tonsils, are in the upper part of 
the pharynx (throat). They sometimes become enlarged and in- 
flamed, causing difficulties in breathing through the nose. 





leh 


phoid tissue (see Lymphatic system). The adenoids and 
other tonsils form a continuous ring of lymphoid tissue 
around the back of the throat. If adenoid tissue causes 

repeated infections, doctors may remove it in a surgical 
operation called an adenoidectomy. 

See also Tonsil. 

Adhesion, ad HEE zhuhn, is the property of two unlike 
substances that causes them to stick together. Adhesion 
occurs because of the attraction between all molecules 
and atoms. 

Adhesive strength varies, depending on the charac- 
teristics of the substances coming together. The adhe- 
sion between the surfaces of two solid substances tends 
to be low, even if they seem perfectly flat and clean. The 
surfaces are actually rough when viewed through a mi- 
croscope, and touch each other at relatively few places. 
But if one of the substances is part or all liquid, contact 
between the surfaces is much greater. 

The strongest adhesives are applied as thin layers of 
liquids. In many cases, these liquids are solutions of 
polymers (compounds of high molecular weight). As 
these solutions set, their molecules become immovable.. 
The adhesion can be so good that a strong force will 
cause the substance, but not the adhesive bond, to 
break. 

See also Cohesion. 

Adhesion, ad HEE zhuhn, in the body, is a name for 
new tissue that sometimes binds together internal or- 
gans that are normally separate. Such tissue usually 
grows as a result of inflammation or a surgical opera- 
tion. Adhesions are often painful and may interfere with 
the normal work of the internal organs. Diseases of the 
heart or lungs may result in painful adhesions between 
those organs and the surrounding parts of the body. Af- 
ter abdominal operations, adhesions sometimes Cause 
portions of the intestine to grow together or to the lin- 
ing of the abdomen. If the adhesions interfere with di- 
gestion, additional surgical operations may be neces- 
sary. See also Tissue. David T Woodley 

Adhesive is a substance that bonds surfaces together. 
Adhesives include such materials as cement, epoxy, 


Jerome C. Goldstein 


James Nelson Rieck 





paste, polyurethane, white glue, and cyanoacrylate (su- 
per glue). Adhesives are used in homes, offices, and 
schools. They also play an important role in the manu- 
facture of many products, including aircraft, automo- 
biles, books, furniture, and toys. In addition, they are 
used in the construction of buildings and roads. Many 
people use adhesives to make simple household re- 
pairs. 

Since ancient times, people have made adhesives 
from such natural materials as beeswax, egg yolks, tree 
sap, and proteins from animal hides, hooves, and blood. 
Today, most adhesives are made from plastics and other 
synthetic materials. 

Adhesives vary in the way they are applied and in the 
manner in which they form a bond. For example, adhe- 
sives made from the synthetic materials polyethylene 
and polwiny/ acetate, called hot melt adhesives, are 
heated to a liquid state before being applied. The bond 
forms as the adhesive cools and hardens. Epoxy adhe- 
sives are usually sold as two substances in separate 
tubes. The two substances must be mixed before being 
applied to the surfaces to be joined. The molecules of 
epoxy adhesives cross-/ink (interconnect) to form a ther- 
moset material, which cannot be deformed by heat or 
pressure. Cyanoacrylate reacts with water on the joined 
surfaces to create a strong, but brittle, adhesive bond. 

Daryl J. Doyle 

See also Adhesion; Glue; Gum; Mucilage. 
Adirondack Mountains, 40 uh RAHN dak, are a 
group of mountains that cover about 12,000 square 
miles (31,000 square kilometers) in northeastern New 
York. Millions of tourists, hikers, and sports enthusiasts 
are drawn every year to the Adirondacks for its beautiful 
scenery, wildlife, and recreational opportunities. 

More than 40 of the Adirondack Mountains rise 
above 4,000 feet (1,200 meters). Mount Marcy, at 5,344 
feet (1,629 meters), is the highest point in New York. Lake 
Champlain and Blue Mountain Lake are among the hun- 
dreds of lakes that dot the region. Lake George and Lake 
Placid are famous resort areas. 

The mountains were formed when powerful geologic 
forces lifted the earth's crust more than a billion years 
ago. Glaciers later created most of the region's lakes. Ad- 
irondack Park has 6 million acres (2.4 million hectares) of 
public and private lands. The 2 } million acres (1 million 
hectares) of public land makes up the largest wilderness 
preserve in the eastern United States. The word Adiron- 
dack comes from the Iroquois Indian word for bark 
eater. The Iroquois may have used this term to describe 
the neighboring Algonquin Indians. Michael K. Heiman 

See also Lake Champlain; Lake Placid; New York (pic- 
ture). 

Adjective is a part of speech that describes, qualifies, 
or places limits on a noun or pronoun. Adjectives are 
said to modify nouns or pronouns. 

As a part of speech, adjectives are single words. How- 
ever, Clauses and phrases may serve roughly the same 
function. For example, in the angry woman and the 
woman angered by his crude behavior, the phrase an- 
gered by his crude behavior modifies the noun 
woman, just as the word angry does. Relative clauses 
generally function as adjectives. For example, in “The 
man whose sister is arriving trom France, the relative 
clause whose sister is arriving trom France modifies the 








man. These clauses and phrases that serve as adjectives 
are called adjectival clauses and phrases. 

A speaker or writer uses adjectives to add detail, to 
make distinctions, and to be precise about what they are 
saying. For example, various adjectives can make the 
noun fulip more and more specific. A red tulip adds a 
quality. A big, beautiful, red tulip adds even more detail. 
Sometimes the effects are more dramatic. An alleged 
murdereris not necessarily a murderer. A false 
prophetis not a prophet at all. 

The position of adjectives. Adjectives can occupy 
three different positions in a sentence. An adjective can 
come before a noun, as in wild animal. Or an adjective 
can follow a noun, as in the title Captains Courageous. 
When adjectives are themselves modified by a preposi- 
tional phrase, the adjective and prepositional phrase fol- 
low the noun (The wet shirtversus The shirt wet with 
perspiration), 

Adjectives can also follow a /inking verb. Linking 
verbs include the verb to be and such verbs as seem, 
become, feel, or taste. \n the sentence Jhe furniture is 
durable, the adjective durable follows the linking verb 
isand modifies the noun furniture. 

Adjectives that follow a linking verb are called predi- 
cate adjectives. Adjectives that follow nouns and repeat 
the meaning of the noun in different words are called 
adjective appositives. For example, The boring lecture, 
long and dull, fasted until 9 p.m. 

Comparison of adjectives. Adjectives show differ- 
ences in amount or degree by the addition of function 
words or by changes in form. The function words /ess 
and /east show decreasing amounts or degrees. The 
function words more and most show increasing 
amounts or degrees. Adjectives have three degrees of 
comparison, called the positive, the comparative, and 
the superlative. Some adjectives, usually those of one or 
two syllables, add -erto form the comparative and -est 
to form the superlative, as shown in the following exam- 


ples: 

Positive Comparative Superlative 
dry drier driest 

free freer freest 
happy happier happiest 
high higher highest 
rich richer richest 
slow slower slowest 
warm warmer warmest 


The comparative and superlatives here show increas- 
ing amounts or degrees. Adjectives of more than two 
syllables use function words, as shown in the next exam- 


ples: 

Positive Comparative Superlative 
accurate more accurate most accurate 
accurate less accurate least accurate 
beautiful more beautiful most beautiful 
beautiful less beautiful least beautiful 
interesting more interesting most interesting 
interesting less interesting least interesting 


Many adjectives, including handsome, happy, lovely; 
and proud, may be compared by either method ~ for ex 
ample, happy, happier, happiest or happy. more happy 
most happy. | | 

A special group of adjectives show comparison by ir- 
regular forms. That is, their changes in form follow no 


Adjective 57 


set rules. Here are some examples: 


Positive Comparative Superlative 

bad worse worst 

far farther, further farthest, furthest 
good better best 

little littler, less, lesser littlest, least 
many, much more most 


Although many adjectives show three degrees of 
comparison, such adjectives as chief main, and fore- 
most exist in only one degree and cannot be compared 
at all. There is a difference of opinion about whether ad- 
jectives such as round, perfect, and unique can be com- 
pared. Many persons consider them absolute adjectives 
that cannot show degree, except in phrases such as a/- 
most round, more nearly perfect, and almost completely 
unique. However, such comparisons as more round, 
more perfect, and most unique have become increasing- 
ly common in informal usage. 

Classifying adjectives. Adjectives are classified into 
several types according to their meaning and function. 

Descriptive adjectives specify the kind, nature, or con- 
dition of the words they modify, as in When we saw the 
fierce dog, we grew cautious. 

Proper adjectives come from a proper name and are 
written with a capital letter. Some examples of proper 
adjectives are: American flag, Roman numerals, and 
Shakespearean sonnets. 

Interrogative adjectives ask a question, as in Which 
car do you mean? or What difference does it make? 

Determiners are adjectives that place limits on a noun 
rather than add description. Several groups of words 
serve as determiners. They include the articles a, an, and 
the; the demonstrative adjectives that, this, these, and 
those; and the indefinite adjectives all, each, no, some, 
other, and much; and such numbers as one box and sec- 
ond place. Some scholars consider determiners to be a 
separate part of speech. 

Usage. The careful use of adjectives can clarify mean- 
ing, but too many adjectives in a sentence may confuse 
a reader or listener. One carefully chosen adjective of- 
ten can express more information than two or three 
vague ones. 

Sometimes a person may have difficulty in deciding 
whether to use an adjective or an adverb after certain 
verbs. If the sentence requires a word to modify the 
verb, the choice should be an adverb—for example, He- 
len sings well, not Helen sings good. \f the sentence re- 
quires a word following a linking verb to modify the 
subject, the choice should be an adjective—for example, 
/ feel bad, not | feel badly. \n the sentence He looked 
calmly at the judge, the word ca/mlvis an adverb that 
modifies /ooked. It describes the manner in which the 
person acted. In the sentence He looked calm, the word 
calm is a predicate adjective that modifies he. It de- 
scribes the condition of the subject. 

Errors in agreement can be created when such words 
as kind, sort. and type are used with the demonstrative 
adjectives this or that. In such cases, both the adjective 
and the noun should be either singular or plural. For ex- 
ample, //ike this kind ot motion picture or | like these 
kinds ot motion pictures, but not / like these kind ot mo- 
tion pictures. 

See also Adverb; Apposition; Article; Comparison; 
Parts of speech. 


Susan MM Gass 


58 Adjutant 


Adjutant, A/ uh tuhnt, is the name of two species of 
large birds in the stork family. They are found in India 
and Southeast Asia. The greater adjutant stands about 5 
feet (1.5 meters) high, and the /esser adjutant measures 
up to 4 feet (1.2 meters) tall. Both birds have a white 
body, and the back and wings are dark gray. The greater 
adjutant has along bag of skin that hangs under its bare 
neck. The bird can puff out this skin and fill it with air. 
The Indian government protects adjutants because 
these birds eat dead animals that would otherwise de- 
cay and possibly spread diseases. Eric G. Bolen 


Scientific classification. Adjutants belong to the stork fami- 
ly, Ciconiidae. The greater adjutant is Leptoptilos dubius, and 
the lesser adjutant is L javanicus. 


See also Marabou; Stork. 





E RDEganigér 
The adjutant is the largest member of the stork family. It has a 
long beak and a white body with a gray back and wings. 


Adler, Alfred (1870-1937), an Austrian psychiatrist, de- 
veloped important theories concerning the motivation 
of human behavior. According to Adler, the major force 
of all human activity is a striving from a feeling of inferi- 
ority toward perfection. Adler at first referred to this 
force as an aggressive drive. He later called the force a 
striving for superiority. Adler termed his school of 
thought individual psychology. Today, it is often referred 
to as Adlerian psychology. 

Adler taught that everyone experiences feelings of in- 
feriority and each person Strives to overcome such feel- 
ings according to a unique set of goals. Every individual, 
he said, also has a unique way of attempting to achieve 
the goals. Adler used the term sty/e of life for the per- 
son's goals and methods of pursuing them. He claimed 
that the style of life becomes established by the age of 4 
or 5. He also believed that an individual's self-image and 
opinion of the world reflect the person's style of life. 

Adler emphasized the importance of social forces in 
determining behavior. He believed everyone is born 
with a trait called social interest, which enables a person 
to relate to other people and to place the good of soci- 
ety above their own interests. Many of Adler's ideas 
have become part of the theory and practice of psychia- 


try. 


Adler was born near Vienna, Austria. He received his 
M.D. degree from the University of Vienna in 1895. Adler 
was an eye specialist and a neurologist before becom- 
ing a psychiatrist. From 1902 to 1911, he worked with the 
famous Austrian neurologist and psychoanalyst Sig- 
mund Freud. From 1921 to 1934, Adler established child 
guidance clinics in Vienna. He trained teachers, worked 
with parents, and supervised teachers clinical activities 
with disturbed children. Adler moved to New York City 
in 1934. Hannah S. Decker 
Adler, Dankmar (1844-1900), was an American archi- 
tect noted primarily for his association with architect 
Louis H. Sullivan. The two formed the partnership of 
Adler & Sullivan in 1883. Together they designed such 
important structures as the Auditorium Building (1889) in 
Chicago and the Wainwright Building (1891) in St. Louis. 
These buildings helped define the influential Chicago 
School of architecture. The firm's other notable Chicago 
structures include the Chicago Joint Board Building 
(1884), the Garrick Theater in the Schiller Building (1892), 
the Transportation Building (1893) at the World's 
Columbian Exposition, and the Stock Exchange Building 
(1894). 

In spite of Adler's training as an architect, his respon- 
sibilities within the firm seem to have been limited to 
structure, ventilation, and acoustics, in which he was an 
expert. Adler was also an excellent business manager. 
The partnership was dissolved in 1895 following the 
construction of the Guaranty Building (1895) in Buffalo, 
New York. 

Adler was born near Eisenach, Germany, and immi- 
grated with his family to the United States in 1854. He 
moved to Chicago in 1861 and served as an engineer in 
the Union army during the Civil War (1861-1865). Adler 
returned to Chicago in 1866. Nicholas Adams 

See also Sullivan, Louis Henri; Architecture (Early 
modern architecture in America). 

Administrator is a person who takes charge of the 
property of a person who has died. Probate courts ap- 
point administrators to handle the property of a person 
who leaves no will, or who leaves a will but names no 
executor. An executor is a person who is named in a will 
to handle property (see Executor). The administrator's 
duty is to collect the assets of the dead person's estate, 
pay claims against the estate, and then distribute the bal- 
ance to the person’s heirs and next of kin—or to the /ega- 
tees (beneficiaries) of the will if there is one. 

Courts usually name a qualified close relative of the 
deceased to serve as administrator. In many large cities, 
officials called public administrators manage the estates- 
of dead people who have no relatives. When citizens of 
another country die while in the United States without 
leaving a will, their country’s consul is usually named to 
administer the estate. William M. McGovern 

See also Probate; Will (document); Heir. 

Admiral is the highest rank in the navy of the United 
States and of many other countries. Most admirals com- 
mand fleets or specially organized naval units called task 
forces or task groups. 

There are four basic grades of admiral in the U.S. 
Navy. They are—from the lowest to the highest grade— 
rear admiral, vice admiral, admiral, and fleet admiral. A 
rear admiral wears the insignia of two stars and general- 
ly commands a task group. A vice admiral wears three 


ee 


stars and commands a task force. An admiral, with four 
stars, commands a fleet. The rank of fieet admiral carries 
five stars. It was created in 1944 and was held by four 
heroes of World War II—William F. Halsey, Ernest J. 
King, William D. Leahy, and Chester W. Nimitz. 

The word admira/ comes from the Arabic term amir- 
albahr, which means “commander of the sea.” The title of 
admiral was introduced into Europe during the Cru- 
sades (A.D. 1096-1500's). In the United States, captains 
were the highest-ranking Navy officers until 1862, when 
the rank of rear admiral was adopted. David G. Farragut 
became the first person to hold this rank. He also be- 
came the Navy's first vice admiral in 1864 and its first ad- 
miral in 1866. In 1899, Congress created the honorary 
rank of Admiral of the Navy for George Dewey, a hero of 
the Spanish-American War. Ann Alexander Warren 

See also Flag officer; Rank, Military. 

Admiralty, AD muhr uhl tee, is a department of a na- 
tion's government that directs naval affairs. For example, 
the Admiralty Board in the United Kingdom controls the 
Royal Navy. Beginning in the 1300's, the Lord High Admi- 
ral commanded the Royal Navy. In 1708, the Board of 
Admiralty (now Admiralty Board) assumed control of 
naval affairs. Its powers are about the same as those of 
the Department of the Navy in the United States and of 
the Maritime Command in Canada. The term admiralty 
law applies to a body of laws relating to ships and ship- 
ping. It covers wrecks, collisions, and cargo damage. In 
the United States, district courts hear these cases. See 
also Maritime law. Ann Alexander Warren 

Admiralty Islands, AD muhr uh/ tee, a group of is- 
lands in the South Pacific Ocean, are part of the nation 
of Papua New Guinea. The islands have a population of 
about 30,500 and cover 800 square miles (2,072 square 
kilometers). The group includes one large island 
(Manus), several small, hilly volcanic islands, and about 
100 low reef islands (see New Guinea [map)). Lorengau, 
the group's principal town, is on Manus Island. 

The first Europeans to reach the island were probably 








Erie Lindgren 


Manus Island, shown here, is the largest of the Admiralty Is- 
lands. It is covered by a dense tropical forest. 





Adobe 59 


the Dutch navigators Willem Schouten and Jakob le 
Maire. In 1616, they found the islands inhabited by Mel- 
anesians, a dark-skinned people with black, woolly hair. 
Germany claimed the group in 1884. Australians cap- 
tured the islands in World War I (1914-1918), and Japan 
occupied thern in 1942, during World War II (1939-1945). 
In 1944, American and Australian troops recaptured the 
islands. A naval base was built at Manus and was used 
to launch the invasion of the Philippine island of Leyte in 
1944. The base was later abandoned. David A. M. Lea 

See also Bismarck Archipelago; Pacific Islands. 
Admiralty law. See Maritime law. 

Adobe, uh DOH bee, is the Spanish name for sun- 
dried bricks, or for a house built with such bricks. A less 
common type of adobe is made with dampened earth 
pressed down in building forms similar to those used 
for poured concrete walks. 

People have used adobe to build houses and other 
structures in desert regions for thousands of years. The 
ancient Egyptians and Babylonians used adobe. 

To make adobe, workers mix sandy clay or loam with 
water and a small quantity of straw, grass, or similar ma- 


‘terial. The straw holds the mixture together, giving the 


bricks greater stability. The mixture is placed in wooden 
forms that shape it into bricks. Workers remove the 
forms when the bricks are dry. Then they bake the 
bricks in the sun from ten days to two weeks. 

Adobe houses are common in Mexico and the south- 
western part of the United States. Traditional adobe 
houses are covered with mud. Modern adobe houses 
are covered with a plasterlike material called stucco. 
Adobe houses are cooler than uninsulated homes made 
of wood or stone, but adobe is not suitable for use in 
cold or damp regions. The bricks will crumble if they 
are exposed to rain or to periods of freezing tempera- 
tures followed by thaws. Jack M. Landers 


ee 


Click Chicago 
Adobe structures are made of sun-dried bricks. Since ancient 
times people living in desert regions have built adobe houses. 
Adobe consists mostly of clay, which stays cool in extreme heat. 





60 Adolescent 





Be ee tte: 


aes 2 wd 


© Lawrence Migdale 





ny 


WORLD BOOK photo by Steven Spicer (jones Metropolitan High School 
of Business and Commerce. a Chicago Public High School) 


During adolescence, relationships with peers (people of one’s own age) take on great importance. 
Teen-agers spend much time with their peers in such activities as eating together or chatting after 
school. The students shown above right attend a high school with a strict dress code. 


Adolescent 


Adolescent refers to a person who is experiencing 
the period of development between childhood and 
adulthood. This period is often called ado/escence. 
Many experts in human development believe adoles- 
cence begins at about the age of 10. They recognize 
adolescence as a period of growth with many distinc- 
tive features. These features involve changes in the indi- 
vidual’s body, thinking abilities, psychological concerns, 
and place in society. 

Human beings, like all mammals, go through a series 
of physical and biological changes, called puberty, that 
prepares them for sexual reproduction. As a biological 
phenomenon, therefore, adolescence has always exist- 
ed as a period in human development. However, ado- 
lescence as a separate psychological and social stage is 
a concept that was developed in industrialized nations 
during the mid-1800's. 


The “invention” of adolescence 


Before the 1800's, adults did not make important dis- 
tinctions among children of different ages. However, 
new patterns of work and family life came with industri- 
alization in the 1800's. Individuals from age 12 to 16 
were greatly affected by these changes. As work shifted 
away from farming and became less tied to the family, 
young people needed a new kind of preparation for 
adulthood. Children in working-class families often took 
jobs in mines, factories, and mills. Others were appren- 
ticed to craftworkers to learn a trade. Adolescents in 
middle-class families were expected to attend school, 
where they were grouped with others of the same age. 


Laurence Steinberg, the contributor of this article, is Professor 


of Psychology at Temple University and co-author of You and 
Your Adolescent: A Parents Guide for Ages 10 to 20. 











At school, they could be better educated for a rapidly 
changing workplace. 

By the early 1900's, adolescence in some societies 
and some social and economic classes had become a 
lengthy period of preparation for adulthood. During this 
time, young people remained grouped with people 
their own age, often referred to as their peers, and were 
economically dependent on adults. This role is still what 
is expected of adolescents in most societies today. 

How society regards adolescence has a tremendous 
impact on the psychological and social development of 
individuals. Before the 1800's, the lives of adolescents 
did not revolve around socializing with their friends. 
There was no such thing as a ‘teen culture.” Young peo- 
ple seldom felt compelled to take a certain action, adopt 
certain values, or otherwise conform to be accepted by 
the group. Today, social pressure from people their 
own age, known as peer pressure, is a major influence 
on many adolescents. 

Before adolescence became defined as a distinct de- 
velopmental stage, most young people did not struggle 
to develop a clear sense of self or to sort out what they 
would become in the future. Most young people had 
few real choices open to them. Today, psychological ex- 
perts use the term /dentity crisis to refer to the psycho- 
logical distress many adolescents feel as they seek a 
sense of purpose and an acceptable role in the world. 
Peer pressure, popular culture, and identity crises may 
seem to make up the core of adolescence, but they are 
actually consequences of how adolescence is defined 
today. 


Physical development 


Puberty is the most obvious sign that an individual 
has entered adolescence. Technically, puberty refers to 
the period during which the individual becomes capa- 
ble of sexual reproduction. More broadly, however, pu- 
berty is used as a collective term for all the physical 








changes that occur in a growing nirl or boy as the indi- 
vidual passes from childhood to adulthood. 

The physical changes of adolescence are triggered by 
hormones (chemical substances in the body) that act on 
specific organs and tissues. In boys, a major change is 
increased production of the hormone testosterone, 
while girls experience increased production of the hor- 
mones called estrogens. In both sexes, a rise in growth 
hormone produces a growth spurt. During this spurt, 
which lasts two or more years, an individual commonly 
grows 2 to 4 inches (5 to 10 centimeters) taller per year. 

Sexual development. Many of the most dramatic 
changes of puberty involve sexual development. Inter- 
nally, adolescents become capable of sexual reproduc- 
tion. Externally, as secondary sexual characteristics ap- 
pear, girls and boys begin to look more like mature 
women and men. The term secondary sexual character- 
istics refers to a variety of physical traits, such as body 
shape, voice, and facial hair. 

Not everyone goes through puberty at the same time 
or rate. In Western industrialized societies today, the 
adolescent growth spurt occurs, on average, between 
the ages of 12 and 14 in boys, and 10 and 12 in girls. But 
some young people start puberty when they are 8 or 9, 
and others not until they are in their mid-teens. General- 
ly, girls begin puberty about two years earlier than boys. 
The duration of puberty also varies greatly, from 15 to 6 
years in girls and from 2 to 5 years in boys. 

Adolescent “awkwardness.” Because different 
parts of the body grow at different rates during puberty, 
many adolescents temporarily look and feel awkward. 
For many years, psychologists believed that puberty was 
stressful for young people. According to one theory, 
changes in hormones made young adolescents moody, 
irritable, and depressed. We now know that most emo- 
tional disturbances in adolescence result from changes 
in the teen-ager’'s roles and relationships. Adolescents 
can minimize difficulties associated with adjusting to pu- 
berty by knowing what changes to expect and having 
healthy attitudes toward them. 

The timing of puberty may affect an adolescent's so- 
cial and emotional development in important ways. Be- 
cause early-maturing boys and girls appear older physi- 
cally, people often treat them as if they were more ma- 
ture psychologically than they are. Early maturers will 
more likely engage in risky behavior during early ado- 
lescence, such as experimentation with drugs, sex, or 
delinquency. Many psychologists believe these risky ac- 
tions result from the influence of older teen-agers, who 
befriend early maturers more often than they befriend 
younger-looking adolescents. 

Because of the emphasis many boys place on athlet- 
ics, early-maturing boys may have temporary advan- 
tages over their peers. As a result, during the first years 
of adolescence, early-maturing boys tend to be more 
popular, have higher self-esteem, and have more seif- 
confidence than average- or late-maturing boys. 

In contrast, the effects of early maturation on girls are 
more mixed. Early-maturing girls tend to be more popu- 
lar with their peers. But they are also more likely to feel 
awkward and self-conscious, perhaps because they are 
uncomfortable with the attention, both welcome and un- 
welcome, their new appearance draws. 

Over time, puberty has begun at younger and young- 





Adolescent 61 


National Archives/Photo Researchers 
An adolescent of the past worked long hours in a factory, 
shown here. Before the 1800's, adolescence was not regarded as 
a separate psychological and social stage of development. 


er ages. Part of the trend is due to improvements in nu- 
trition and health care. The trend appears to be leveling 
off, however. 


Intellectual development 


Compared with children, adolescents begin to think 
in ways more like adults. Their thinking becomes more 
advanced, more efficient, and generally more effective. 
These improvements appear in five chief ways. 

(1) An adolescent's thinking is less bound to concrete 
events than that of a child. Children’s thinking focuses 
on things and events that they can observe directly in 
the present. Adolescents can better compare what they 
observe with what they can imagine. 

(2) During adolescence, individuals become better 
able to think about abstract things. Adolescents have an 
increased interest in relationships, politics, religion, and 
morality. These topics involve such abstract concepts as 
loyalty, faith, and fairness. 

(3) Adolescents think more often about the process of 
thinking itself. As a result, they can develop better ways 
to remember things and to monitor their own thinking. 

(4) Adolescents have the ability to think about things in 
several ways at the same time. Adolescents can give 
much more complicated answers than children to such 
questions as “What caused the American Civil War?” 
Adolescents have more sophisticated, complicated rela- 
tionships with others because they can better under- 
stand other people's feelings. They also understand that 
social situations can have different interpretations, de- 
pending on one’s point of view. 

(5) Children tend to see things in absolute terms. Ado- 
lescents often see things as relative. They are more likely 
to question statements and less likely to accept “facts” as 
unquestionably true. This change can be frustrating to 
parents, who may feel that their adolescent children 
question everything just for the sake ot argument. How- 
ever, such questioning is normal and helps teen-agers 
develop individuality and personal convictions. 

One by-product of these changing aspects of intellec- 


62 Adolescent 


tual development is the tendency for adolescents to be- 
come self-conscious and self-absorbed. This tendency is 
sometimes called adolescent egocentrism. Intense self- 
consciousness sometimes leads teen-agers mistakenly 
to believe that others are constantly watching and evalu- 
ating them. A related problem is an adolescent's incor- 
rect belief that his or her problems are unique. For ex- 
ample, a teen-ager who has just broken up with a girl- 
friend or boyfriend may say that nobody else could pos- 
sibly understand what he or she is feeling, even though 
such breaking up is a common experience. 


Psychological development 


Identity and self-esteem. As individuals mature, they 
come to see themselves in more sophisticated, compli- 
cated ways. Adolescents can provide complex, abstract 
psychological descriptions of themselves. As a result, 
they become more interested in understanding their 
own personalities and why they behave the way they do. 
Teen-agers feelings about themselves may fluctuate, es- 
pecially during early adolescence. However, self-esteem 
increases over the course of middle and late adoles- 
cence, as individuals gain more confidence. 

Some adolescents go through periods when they 
genuinely wonder what their “real” personality is. Ado- 
lescents who have gone through a prolonged identity 
crisis may feel a stronger sense of identity as a result of 
taking the time to examine who they are and where they 
are headed. 

Independence and responsibility. During adoles- 
cence, individuals gradually move from the dependency 
of childhood to the independence of adulthood. Older 
adolescents generally do not rush to their parents 
whenever they are upset, worried, or need assistance. 
They solve many problems on their own. In addition, 
most adolescents have a great deal of emotional energy 
wrapped up in relationships outside the family. They 
may feel just as attached to their friends as to their par- 
ents. By late adolescence, children see their parents, and 
interact with them, as people—not just as a mother and 
father. Unlike younger children, adolescents do not typi- 
cally see their parents as all-knowing or all-powerful. 

Being independent also means being able to make 
one’s Own decisions and behave responsibly. In general, 
decision-making abilities improve over the course of the 
adolescent years, with gains in being able to handle 
responsibility continuing into the late years of high 
school. 

During childhood, boys and girls are dependent upon 
and relate closely to their parents rather than their 
peers. During early adolescence, conformity to parents 
begins to decline, while peer pressure and conformity 
to peers increase. Peer pressure is particularly strong 
during junior high school and the early years of high 
school. 

Adolescents yield more often to peer pressure when 
it involves day-to-day social matters, such as styles of 
dress, tastes in music, and choices among leisure activi- 
ties. But teen-agers are mainly influenced by their par- 
ents and teachers when it comes to long-range ques- 
tions concerning educational or occupational plans, or 
decisions involving values, religious beliefs, or ethics. 

Becoming independent involves learning how to 
cope with peer pressure. During middle adolescence, 


individuals begin to act the way they think is right, rather 
than trying to impress their friends or please their par- 
ents. 


Social development 


Relationships with peers change in four important 
ways during the teen-age years: (1) There is a sharp in- 
crease in the amount of time adolescents spend with 
their peers compared to the time they spend with adults 
or their families. (2) Peer groups function much more 
often without adult supervision than they do during 
childhood. (3) In most societies, there is much more con- 
tact with peers of the opposite sex. (4) Adolescents tend 
to move in much larger peer groups than they did in 
childhood. Crowds tend to dominate the social world of 
the school. 

The increased importance of peers during early ado- 
lescence coincides with changes in an individual's need 
for intimacy. As adolescents begin to share secrets with 
their friends, a new sense of loyalty and commitment 
grows between them. An adolescent's discovery that he 
or she thinks and feels the same way as someone else 
becomes an important basis of friendship and helps in 
the development of a sense of identity. 

Dating and sex. In industrialized societies, most 
young people begin dating sometime during early to 
mid-adolescence. Dating can mean a variety of activities, 
from gatherings that bring males and females together, 
to group dates, in which a group of boys and girls go 
out jointly. There can be casual dating in couples or seri- 
ous involvement with a boyfriend or girlfriend. 

Most adolescents first experience with sex does not 
involve another person. Many boys and girls report hav- 
ing sexual fantasies about someone they know or wish 
they knew. It is also fairly common for adolescents to 
masturbate (handle or rub their sex organs). 

By the time many adolescents have reached high 
school, they have had some experience with intimate 
sexual contact, such as kissing, caressing, or sexual in- 
tercourse. During the 1970's and 1980's, more adoles- 
cents became sexually active than in the past and they 
became sexually active at an earlier age. Surveys in the 
late 1990's, however, indicated that the trend toward be- 
coming sexually active at an early age might be leveling 
off. Many individuals and religious groups consider 
sexual activity outside of marriage to be morally wrong. 
They also urge adolescents to avoid sexual activity for 
health reasons. 

Family relationships change most about the time of 
puberty. Conflict can increase between parents and ado- 
lescents, and closeness between them diminishes 
somewhat. Changing adolescent views on family rules 
and regulations may contribute to increased disagree- 
ment between young people and their parents. 

Although young people may distance themselves 
from their parents as they enter adolescence, this period 
is not normally a time of family stress. Most conflicts 
take the form of minor arguments over day-to-day is- 
sues. In many families, the decline in closeness between 
parents and children in early adolescence results from 
the adolescent's increased desire for privacy. In addi- 
tion, teen-agers and parents may express affection for 
each other less often. Generally, this distancing is tem- 
porary, and family relationships become closer and less 





conflict-ridden during middle and late adolescence. 

Certain constants remain in family life. Among the 
most important is an adolescent's need for parents who 
are both nurturing and demanding. This combination of 
warmth and strictness is associated with healthy psycho- 
logical development. Children raised by loving parents 
who maintain clear and constant personal and social 
standards are more likely to have good feelings about 
themselves than children brought up by harsh or lax 
parents. Adolescents raised with both warmth and firm- 
ness are more likely to excel in school, to have close and 
satisfying relationships with others, and to avoid trouble 
with drugs and delinquency. 


Special problems and challenges 


Adjusting to school life. A young person's move 
from elementary school to middle school or junior high 
school can be difficult. In elementary school, the child 
had a single homeroom teacher who knew him or her 
personally. In middle school or junior high, the child 
usually has a different teacher for each subject. In ele- 
mentary school, children are rewarded for trying hard. 
In middle or junior high school, grades are based more 
on performance than on effort. In elementary school, 
children work under close supervision all day. In middle 
school or junior high, young people must learn to work 
more independently. 

For such reasons, many students are temporarily dis- 
oriented during the transition between schools. Their 
self-esteem falters, and their grades may drop off slight- 
ly. Their interest in school activities declines. They may 
feel anonymous, isolated, and vulnerable. Parents can 
help by talking to the child before school begins about 
the differences he or she will experience. 

Alcohol and drug abuse. Many adolescents in in- 
dustrialized countries experiment with alcohol, tobacco, 
and marijuana. Adolescents may experiment with such 
substances because of a desire to fit in with their 
friends. Many adolescents see smoking, drinking, and 
using drugs as a key to popularity. Other reasons ado- 
lescents experiment with drugs and alcohol include 
boredom, and a desire to feel grown-up~—that is, they 
see drugs as a way to prove they are adults and no long- 
er under adult control. 

Young people who abuse drugs and alcohol are more 
likely to experience problems at school, to suffer from 
psychological distress and depression, to have unsafe 
sex, and to become involved in dangerous activities. Al- 
cohol and drugs often contribute to automobile acci- 
dents, the leading cause of death among American teen- 
agers. Adolescent substance abusers also expose them- 
selves to long-term health risks that result from drug 
addiction or dependency. 

Pregnancy. Some young women become pregnant 
before the end of adolescence. Adults can help adoles- 
cents prevent unwanted pregnancies. For example, par- 
ents and teachers can provide sex education to instruct 
young people in how to deal with their sexual feelings 
before they become sexually active. Adults also can 
make adolescents feel more comfortable about dis- 
cussing sexual matters so that young people will exam- 
ine their own behavior seriously and thoughttully. 

Establishing a sexual identity. Normal developmen- 
tal tasks of adolescence include learning to think of one- 


Adolescent 63 





© Bob Higbee, Berg & Associates 


Dating normally begins during adolescence. Learning to enjoy a 
new kind of closeness with another person is a normal develop- 
mental task of this period of life, as well as learning to think of 
oneself as a sexual being and to deal with sexual feelings. 


self as a sexual being, to deal with sexual feelings, and to 
enjoy a new kind of closeness with another person. Part 
of this involves developing a sexual identity. Sexual iden- 
tity includes sexual orientation—that is, whether a per- 
son is sexually attracted to the opposite sex or the same 
sex. People who are primarily attracted to members of 
their own sex are called homosexual, gay, or, if they are 
women, /esbian. People who are attracted to the oppo- 
site sex are called heterosexual or straight No one factor 
determines sexual orientation. 

At some time, almost all young adolescents worry that 
they might be homosexual. At the age when children en- 
ter puberty, they still spend most of their time with 
members of the same sex. As a result, many adolescents 
begin to experience sexual feelings before they have 
much contact with the opposite sex. This does not mean 
that all of these young adolescents have homosexual de- 
sires. Their sexual development is just ahead of their so- 
cial development. 

Unfavorable attitudes toward homosexuality may 
cause significant psychological distress for adolescents 
who experience gay and lesbian feelings, especially if 
they encounter hostility from those around them. The 
psychological tasks of adolescence, such as developing 
a sense of identity, present great challenges for all teen- 
agers. These challenges may be intensified for those 
adolescents attracted to members of the same sex. They 
may have to resolve these issues without the social sup- 
port available to their heterosexual peers. 

Eating disorders. Some adolescents, especially fe- 
males, become so concerned about weight control that 
they take drastic and dangerous measures to remain 


64 Adolescent 





S Billy E. Bames. Photo Edit 
Conflicts between adolescents and their parents can arise 
because adolescents are more likely than children to question 
what they are told and more likely to disagree with family rules. 


thin. Some overeat and then force themselves to vomit 
to avoid gaining weight. This pattern is associated with 
an eating disorder called bu/imia. Young women witha 
disorder called anorexia nervosa actually starve them- 
selves to keep their weight down. Adolescents with eat- 
ing disorders have an extremely disturbed body image. 
They see themselves as overweight when they are actu- 
ally underweight Bulimia and anorexia nervosa are rare 
before the age of 10. It was once believed that eating 
disorders were more common in North America and 
Western Europe than in other parts of the world, and 
were more common among the prosperous and well 
educated. However, research in the late 1990's found 
these disorders to be common among all social and 
economic levels, and in many countries throughout the 
world. 

Although the incidence of anorexia and bulimia is 
small, many adolescents, especially females, remain un- 
happy with their body shape or weight. Many girls 
whose weight is normal by medical and health stand- 
ards believe they are overweight. A majority of adoles- 
cent girls report that they would like to be thinner. Most 
believe that being thinner would make them happier, 
more successful, and more popular. 

Delinquency. Violations of the law are far more com- 
mon among adolescents and young adults than in any 
other age group. Violent crimes and crimes against 
property peak during high school. 

Violent crime is a serious concern to youths as well as 
to adults. Adolescents are the age group most likely to 
become victims of such crimes as theft, robbery, rape, 
and assault. However, adolescents may also commit 
such violent crimes. Delinquents who repeatedly com- 
mit serious crimes typically come from disrupted or 
badly functioning families, and they frequently abuse al- 
cohol or drugs. Hostile, neglectful, or unfit parents may 
mistreat children and fail to instill in them proper stand- 
ards of behavior or the psychological foundations of 
self-control. 


Risk taking. Many adolescent health problems result 
from behaviors that can be prevented. These behaviors 
include substance abuse, reckless driving, unprotected 
sex, and violence. One particular concern is sexually 
transmitted diseases, such as AIDS, among teen-agers. 
Some people mistakenly consider AIDS a homosexual 
disease, but the virus can be transmitted from male to 
female or female to male. The virus is also transmitted 
through needles and syringes that are used in taking 
drugs. It may even be spread by tattooing or body pierc- 
ing if the instruments were previously used on an infect- 
ed person. 

Suicide. The suicide rate among teen-agers has risen 
dramatically since the mid-1900's. Four factors in particu- 
lar place an adolescent at risk for a suicide attempt (1) 
suffering from low self-esteem or an emotional prob- 
lem, such as depression; (2) being under stress, espe- 
cially in school or because of a romantic relationship; (3) 
experiencing family disruption or family conflict; and (4) 
having a history of suicide in the family or a friend who 
has committed suicide. 

Any threat of suicide demands imniediate profession- 
al attention. Anyone who suspects an adolescent is con- 
sidering suicide should immediately call a suicide hot 
line or the emergency room of a local hospital. 


Planning for the future 


Career planning is part of the identity development 
process during adolescence. Occupational plans devel- 
op in stages. Prior to adolescence, children express ca- 
reer interests that are often little more than fantasies and 
have little bearing on the plans they eventually make. In 
adolescence, individuals begin to develop self-concepts 
and ideas about work that will guide them in their edu- 
cational and occupational decisions. Although adoles- 
cents may not settle on a particular career at this point, 
they do begin to narrow their choices according to their 
interests, values, and abilities. 

One problem all young people face in making career 
plans is obtaining accurate information about the labor 
market and the best ways of pursuing positions in vari- 
ous fields. One goal of career education is to help ado- 
lescents make more informed choices about their ca- 
reers and to free them from misinformation that inhibits 
their choices. For a discussion of how to choose and 
plan a career, see the Careers article. 

Education is essential today for any person who 
wants a well-paying job with a promising future. Young 
people need at least a high school education to com- 
pete in the job market. Those who want to go into a craft 
or trade usually need a two-year course of college 
study. 

Most of the better jobs go to individuals with at least 
some college education. However, getting a job is not 
the only reason for going to college. College plays a crit- 
ical role in a young person's psychological develop- 
ment. College not only provides occupational advan- 
tages but also affects where individuals will live, whom 
they will marry, who their lifelong friends will be, and, 
most important, who they become. 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Acne Bulimia | | 





Laurence Steinberg 


Anorexia nervosa Child . 
Boys Town Developmental psychology 





Drug abuse Middle school 
Family Minor 

Gang Personality 
Growth Rite of passage 
Guidance Sex education 
High school Sexuality 


Homosexuality 
Junior high school 
Juvenile delinquency 
Marriage 


Sexually transmitted disease 
Student government 
Universities and colleges 
Vandalism 


Outline 


1. The “invention” of adolescence 
i. Physical development 
A. Sexual development 
B. Adolescent ‘awkwardness’ 
C. The timing of puberty 
ii. Intellectual development 
IV. Psychological development 
A. Identity and self-esteem 
B. Independence and responsibility 
Vv. Social development 
A. Relationships with peers 
B. Dating and sex 
C. Family relationships 
VI. Special problems and challenges 
A. Adjusting to school life 
B. Alcohol and drug abuse 
C Pregnancy 
D. Establishing a sexual identity 
E. Eating disorders 
F. Delinquency 
G. Risk taking 
H. Suicide 
Vil. Planning for the future 
A. Career planning 
B. Education 


Questions 


What is peer pressure? 

How does puberty affect an adolescent's social and emotional 
development? 

What challenges does an adolescent face in moving into a mid- 
dle or junior high school? 

Why is education important for an adolescent? 

What actions should individuals take if they suspect an adoles- 
cent is considering suicide? 

How do an adolescent's thinking patterns differ from those of a 
child? 

When did the term ado/escent first emerge? 

How do family relationships change for an adolescent? 

What are the chief reasons why some adolescents experiment 
with alcohol, drugs, and tobacco? 

What are the two most important adolescent eating disorders? 


Additional resources 


Fenwick, Elizabeth, and Smith, Tony. Adolescence: The Survival 
Guide for Parents and Teenagers. Dorling Kindersley, 1994. 

Fox, Annie. Can You Relate? Real-World Advice tor Teens on 
Guys, Girls, Growing Up and Getting Along. Free Spirit, 2000. 

Kagan, Jerome, and Gall, S. B., eds. The Gale Encyclopedia ot 
Childhood and Adolescence. Gale Group, 1997. 

Kutner, Lawrence. Making Sense of Your Teenager. \997. 
Reprint Avon, 1998. 

Lerner, Jacqueline V. and Richard M. Adolescence in America: 
An Encyclopedia. 2 vols. ABC-CLIO, 2001. 

Mosatche, Harriet, and Unger, Karen. Too Old tor This, Too 
Young for That! Your Survival Guide tor the Middle School 
Years. Free Spirit, 2000. 

Panzarine, Susan. A Parent's Guide to the Teen Years. Checkmark 
Bks., 2000. 

Rollin, Lucy. Twentieth-Century Teen Culture by the Decades. 
Greenwood, 1999. 

Schickedanz, Judith A., and others. Understanding Children and 
Adolescents. 4th ed. Allyn & Bacon, 2000. 


Adonis 65 


Stepp, Laura S. Our Last Best Shot Guiding Our Children 
Through Early Adolescence. Riverhead Bks., 2001. 
Adolphus, Gustavus. See Gustavus Adolphus. 
Adonis, uh DAHN ihs, was a handsome youth in Greek 
mythology. Adonis’s beauty attracted Aphrodite, the 
goddess of love. According to one myth, Aphrodite 
warned him of the dangers of hunting. But Adonis did 





aah. 
= va 
m~ “> 
° 
bas yA ; 
Marble sculpture (mid-1600's) by Dienisio Mazzuoli; 
Hermitage museum. St Petersburg (Bridgeman Art Library) 


Adonis was a handsome young man in Greek mythology. Ac- 
cording to one myth, he was killed by a boar he was hunting. 


not heed her advice and was killed by a boar, or by He- 
phaestus, Aphrodite's jealous husband, disguised as a 
boar. A flower called the anemone sprang either from 
Adoniss blood or from Aphrodite's tears at his death. 
According to another myth, Aphrodite placeo the in- 
fant Adonis in a chest and gave it to Persephone, the 
queen of the underworld, for safekeeping. Persephone 
became enchanted with the youth and wanted to keep 
him. To settle the quarrel between the goddesses, Zeus, 
king of the gods, ruled that Adonis would spend part of 
the year with Aphrodite and part of the year with Per- 
sephone. When Adonis stayed with Aphrodite on earth, 
plants and crops flourished. During his time in the un- 
denvorld, vegetation died. The Greeks used this myth to 
explain why the seasons changed. They honored Adonis 
in ceremonies and by cultivating plants that grew and 
died quickly. 
Adonis, ui DAHN ths, is the name of a group of 20 
species of plants that grow wild in Europe and Asia. 


Nancy Felson 


66 Adoption 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Christabel King 


The autumn Adonis has bright red flowers. It grows wild in Eu- 
rope and Asia but is sometimes cultivated in gardens. 


They are sometimes cultivated in gardens in North 
America. Some types of Adonis plants may grow 1 foot 
(30 centimeters) high. The autumn Adonis, also called 
pheasant s-eye, has flowers with bright red petals. The 
spring Adonis has flowers with gold petals. 

Kenneth A. Nicely 


Scientific classification. Adonis plants are members of the 
crowfoot family, Ranunculaceae. The scientific name for the au- 
tumn Adonis is Adonis annua. The spring Adonis ts A. vernalis. 


Adoption is a legal process by which people take as 
their own son or daughter a person not born to them. 
Most adoptees (adopted persons) are adopted when 
they are children. Adoptees are entitled to the same 
privileges as children born to a parent or parents, in- 
cluding the right to inherit property. This article chiefly 
discusses the adoption of children. 

Many adoptions occur partly out of a need to find 
permanent, loving families for babies who are the result 
of unwanted pregnancies. Numerous other adoptions 
involve foster children who need permanent homes af- 
ter being legally separated from their birth parents. 
Many adults adopt children because they are, for med- 
ical reasons, unable to become birth parents, or be- 
cause they choose not to become birth parents. Surveys 
show that most adoptions work out well and that most 
adopted children develop normally. 

In the United States, there are about 2 million adopt- 
ed children under the age of 18. Each year, approxi- 
mately 150,000 children are adopted, two-thirds of them 
by their relatives. In Canada, about 15,000 children are 
adopted every year. 

The adoption process is similar in the United States 
and Canada. !n the United States, licensed agencies 
arrange more than half of all adoptions by nonrelatives. 
These agencies are either privately funded or public 
and tax-supported. In Canada, provincial agencies han- 
dle most adoptions by nonrelatives. Agency adoptions 
involve three steps: (1) the legal separation of a child 
from the birth parents, (2) the transfer of custody to a 
qualified adoption agency, and (3) the transfer of paren- 
tal rights and responsibilities to the adoptive parents. 

When a couple applies to an adoption agency, the 


agency assigns them a caseworker. The caseworker ob- 
tains information about the couple's health and emo- 
tional maturity and answers their questions about the 
physical and emotional development of the child they 
want to adopt. The caseworker also makes sure the cou- 
ple has a stable relationship and can afford to support 
the child. This process is often called the home study. 

In some cases, a single person applies to an agency 
to adopt a child. Although most agencies choose cou- 
ples over single applicants, agencies sometimes place 
children who have special needs with single individuals 
when two-parent homes cannot be found. Children with 
special needs include older, disabled, or emotionally 
disturbed children; minorities; and brothers and sisters 
who need to be adopted together. In the United States, 
adoptive parents have not been found for more than 
100,000 children with special needs. Most of these chil- 
dren live with foster parents (see Foster care). 

Some people adopt a child without the services of an 
agency. In many cases, physicians and lawyers put birth 
parents in touch with couples wishing to adopt. These 
adoptions are called private, or independent, adoptions. 
Many private adoptions do not involve a thorough 
home study. Private adoptions are illegal in some states. 

In most states and provinces, adoptions do not be- 
come legal until children have lived in the home of their 
adoptive parents for 6 to 12 months. A lawyer then pre- 
pares a formal request for adoption. The adoptive par- 
ents submit the request to the proper court. If the court 
approves the request, the adoption becomes legal. 

International adoptions. Most adoptive parents 
adopt children who were born in the country in which 
the adoptive parents live. Since the 1960's, however, the 
number of people waiting to adopt children in the Unit- 
ed States has risen while the number of available infants 
in the country has declined. Therefore, some people 
adopt children from other countries. In most U.S. states, 
many of these international, or intercountry, adoptions 
are handled by state agencies. Other states rely only on 
independent, voluntary agencies to connect couples 
with foreign babies needing adoption. 

The United Nations has established guidelines con- 
cerning the rights of foreign adoptees. These guidelines 
recommend using authorized adoption agencies that 
can provide the same protection that children receive in 
national adoptions. According to the guidelines, the 
child should have an official name, nationality, and legal 
guardian at every stage of the adoption process. 

Interracial adoptions are those in which a couple or 
person considered to be of one race adopts someone 
considered to belong to another race or to be of mixed 
race. Most international adoptions are also interracial 
adoptions. 

Black market adoptions. The scarcity of adoptable 
infants has led, in some cases, to the buying and selling 
of babies. Such transactions, known as black market 
adoptions, are against the law. 

Rights of adoptive parents and adoptees. Most 
states and provinces keep adoption records secret once 
a child is adopted. The state or province issues a new 
birth certificate showing only the names of the adoptive 
parents. However, many adopted persons want to know 
more about their backgrounds. Some organizations 
concerned about the rights of adopted persons have 





proposed that nonidentifying information about the 
child be given to the adoptive parents. Such information 
would not reveal the identity of the birth parents but 
might include their medical and ethnic histories. In a 
small number of states, adopted adults have a legal right 
to see their original birth certificates. 

Adopted persons and birth parents may decide that 
they want to contact one another. A number of states 
and provinces maintain registries to aid these people. 
However, adopted children may not register until they 
reach adulthood. In addition, both the adopted person 
and the birth parents must register before contact may 
be established. 

Some groups favor open adoptions. |n an open adop- 
tion, the birth parent or parents meet the adoptive par- 
ents and participate in the adoption process. The birth 
parents give up their basic parental rights but keep the 
right to remain in contact with the child. The birth par- 
ents also have the right to know where the child lives 
and to keep informed about the child's well-being. 

History. People have been adopting children for 
thousands of years. In ancient times, a childless person 
often adopted an individual in order to have a legal heir. 
Adoptions were common among the ancient Greeks, 
Romans, Babylonians, and Assyrians. One of the first 
written law codes, the Babylonian Code of Hammurabi 
(1700's B.C), includes a lengthy section about adoption. 
In the United States, the first adoption law was passed in 
Massachusetts in 1851. 


Sheila Macmanus 


Additional resources 


Adamec, Christine, and Pierce, W. L. The Encyclopedia of Adop- 
tion. 2nd ed. Facts on File, 2000. 

Harnack, Andrew. Adoption. Greenhaven, 1995. 

Pertman, Adam. Adoption Nation. Basic Bks., 2000. 


Adrenal gland, wh DREE nuhl is a small, pyramid- 
shaped organ that secretes many important hormones. 
The body has two adrenal glands, one on top of each 
kidney. The adrenals, also called suprarenals, measure 
about 2 inches (5 centimeters) each in diameter. Each 
adrenal gland consists of a meduifa (inner core) and a 
cortex (outer shell). 

The adrenal medulla is controlled by the nervous sys- 
tem. Nerve signals stimulate the medulla to secrete epi- 
nephrine (also called adrenalin) and norepinephrine 
(also called noradrenalin) into the blood. These hor- 
mones help the body adjust to sudden stress. For exam- 
ple, they increase the rate and strength of the heartbeat, 
raise the blood pressure, and speed up the body's 
energy-producing processes. 

The adrenal cortex secretes many hormones, some of 
which are essential to life. These hormones, called corti- 
costeroids, belong to three main groups—(1) glucocorti- 
coids, (2) mineralocorticoids, and (3) sex hormones. 

Glucocorticoids regulate the use of digested foods 
and help the body adapt to stress. The most important 
glucocorticoid is cortisol also called hydrocortisone. 
The secretion of the glucocorticoids is controlled by 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). ACTH is pro- 
duced by the pituitary gland, a small organ near the 
base of the brain. Physicians use cortisol, and synthetic 
compounds that resemble it, to control intlammation. 

Mineralocorticoids regulate the excretion of sodium 
and potassium by the kidneys. A/dosterone is the most 





AdrianlV_ 67 


Cartex 
Medulla 


Left adrenal 
gland 


| ys 


| } 


i] 
be 
, 
4 


Right adrenal A 


gland 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Leonard Morgan 


The adrenal glands are important hormone-producing organs 
that lie atop the kidneys. As shown in the circle, each gland con- 
sists of two parts, an outer cortex and an inner medulla. 


important mineralocorticoid. Renin, a hormone secreted 
by the kidneys, controls the production of aldosterone. 
Overproduction of aldosterone causes high blood pres- 
sure in some people. 

The adrenal glands produce only small amounts of 
sex hormones, chiefly the male sex hormones called an- 
drogens. The adrenal androgens help regulate the de- 
velopment of pubic hair and other early sexual charac- 
teristics in both males and females during the period 
just prior to puberty. Charlotte H. Greene 

Related articles in World Book include: 


ACTH Gland (Endocrine glands) 
Addison's disease Hormone (Human hormones) 
Cortisone Hypertension 

Epinephrine Steroid 


Adrenalin. See Epinephrine. 
Adrian, Roman emperor. See Hadrian. 
Adrian IV (about 1110-1159) was the only English pope. 
He was elected pope in 1154. The city of Rome was in 
revolt against the papacy at the time of his election. 
Adrian placed Rome under a religious ban. With the co- 
operation of the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick 1, Adri- 
an regained control of the city. Adrian made great 
claims for papal authority, and his policies led to a split 
between the empire and the papacy after his death. 

At the imperial Diet of Besancon in 1157, Adrian sent 
a letter to Frederick in which he claimed that he had be- 
stowed the empire on Frederick as a fief of the papacy. 
The letter caused a great uproar because it implied that 
the emperor was subordinate to the pope. Adrian ex- 
plained that the translation of an ambiguous word led to 
the misunderstanding, and that he had only meant that 
the emperor had received ‘gifts’ from the pope. The ex- 
change destroyed the relationship between the pope 
and the emperor. The next year, at the Diet of Roncaglia, 
Frederick declared imperial authority over all of north- 
ern Italy. Adrian threatened to excommunicate Frederick 
if he did not withdraw his claims. But the pope died 
soon after the confrontation. 

Adrian was born near St. Albans. His given and family 


name was Nicholas Breakspear. Kenneth Pennington 


68 Adrianople 


Adrianople. See Edirne. 

Adriatic Sea, Ay dree AT thk, is an extension of the 
Mediterranean Sea. It lies east of Italy and separates 
Italy from Croatia, Yugoslavia, and Albania. The Strait of 
Otranto joins the Adriatic to the lonian Sea, another arm 
of the Mediterranean. 

The Adriatic Sea is about 480 miles (772 kilometers) 
long. It has an average width of 100 miles (160 kilome- 
ters) and an area of about 60,000 square miles {160,000 
square kilometers). 

The Po and Adige rivers empty into the Adriatic. The 
Dalmatian coast, in Croatia, and the Albanian coast are 


Adriatic Sea 


eee 


Ravenna 


Rimini 


100 Miies 


100 Kilometers 





WORLD BOOK map 


rocky and dotted with islands. The Italian coast is low 
and flat. 

Both the Italian and Croatian coasts are popular 
tourist regions. They are noted for their scenery and 
mild climate. Major port and resort cities on the Adriatic 
include Trieste, Venice, Ancona, Pescara, and Bari in 
Italy; and Rijeka, Split, and Dubrovnik in Croatia. Ferry 
services connect Italian ports on the western coast of 
the Adriatic Sea with ports on the eastern coast. 

Industry and other factors have polluted many areas 
of the Adriatic. Navigation in the Adriatic is hazardous in 
winter due to sudden storms. The sea was named for 
the city of Adria in Italy, once an important Roman port. 

Howell C Lloyd 
Adsorption. See Absorption and adsorption. 

Adult education is instruction for men and women 
who no longer go to school full time. It is also called 
continuing education or recurrent education. Adult edu- 
cation includes classes, correspondence courses, dis- 
cussion groups, lectures, reading programs, and other 
organized learning activities. In the United States, about 
21 million men and women—more than an eighth of the 
adult American population—take part in some form of 
adult education. 


Men and women enroll in adult education activities 
for a variety of reasons. Many take part to improve their 
job skills—to get new jobs or to advance in the ones 
they have. Some people want to learn such skills as pot- 
tery making or speed reading to use in their leisure 
time. Others participate simply for the joy of learning. 
Many of these people study such subjects as art, litera- 
ture, and philosophy. Still other adults attend classes to 
meet people and make new friends. 

Adult education differs in several ways from the edu- 
cation of children. Adults have more experience and 
knowledge than children do, and teachers plan the in- 
struction accordingly. For example, a teacher might use 
more group discussions with a class of adults. Most 
children receive free schooling, but most adults pay for 
much or all of their instruction. As a result, adult educa- 
tion must provide programs that adults want to buy. 


Sources of adult education 


The chief sources of adult education are (1) public 
schools, (2) colleges and universities, (3) proprietary 
schools, and (4) the government. Many businesses, 
churches, libraries, museums, park systems, and other 
organizations also provide adult education programs. 

Two major testing programs enable adults to take ex- 
aminations to earn credit for the equivalent of a high 
school or college education. These programs are the 
General Educational Development Test (GED) and the 
College Level Examination Program (CLEP). 

The GED is administered by the departments of edu- 
cation of all the 50 states and of several Canadian prov- 
inces. Adults who pass the test receive a high school 
equivalency certificate. Many employers, colleges, and 
universities accept a GED certificate as the equivalent of 
a high school diploma. The CLEP enables adults to earn 
credits that can be applied toward a college degree. 
The Educational Testing Service, a private agency, ad- 
ministers this program. 





re 8 
WORLD BOOK photo by Dan Miller 
Adult education includes courses on a wide variety of subjects. 


These students in a community college are listening to an in- 
structor lecturing on the history of computers. 





== 


Public schools hold adult classes at night in the same 
buildings used by children during the day. Some 
schools also offer daytime classes for adults. 

Colleges and universities have special programs for 
adults both on and off the campus. Extension courses 
are provided for people who cannot attend college dur- 
ing regular school hours. Many extension courses do 
not lead toward a degree. Many are held evenings or 
weekends, and others are offered by mail or on TV. 

Proprietary schools operate like businesses—to 
make a profit for the owners. Most proprietary schools 
teach vocational skills for such positions as those of 
beauty operator, computer programmer, dental assist- 
ant, or secretary. Some offer correspondence courses. 

The government sponsors a number of adult-educa- 
tion programs. For example, the Department of Agricul- 
ture provides training in farming and homemaking for 
adults in rural areas. The Department of Defense oper- 
ates a program called the Defense Activity for Non-Tra- 
ditional Education Support (DANTES). This program fur- 
nishes information on correspondence courses and 
other educational services for men and women in the 
armed forces. DANTES also enables these men and 
women to receive high school and college credit by 
passing examinations, whether or not they take courses. 
The Department of Education provides funds for instruc- 
tion in reading, writing, and mathematics up to the 
eighth-grade level for undereducated adults under the 
Adult Education Act. 

Other sources of adult education include libraries 
and museums. These institutions offer both individual 
and group educational programs. Such organizations as 
the League of Women Voters, the Young Men's Chris- 
tian Association (YMCA), and the Young Women’s Chris- 
tian Association (YWCA) offer many adult classes. Labor 
unions provide educational opportunities for their 
members, and many business companies make school- 
ing and on-the-job training available for employees. 


History 


The colonial period. Apprenticeship was one of the 
earliest forms of adult education in the American 
Colonies. Under this system, a person learned an art or 
trade by working under a skilled master for a period of 
time. Many apprenticeship agreements required the 
master to teach the apprentice to read and write. 

In 1727, the American statesman Benjamin Franklin 
founded one of the first adult-education organizations, a 
group called the Junto. It met weekly to discuss philoso- 
phy, politics, and other topics. In 1731, Franklin organ- 
ized another means of educating adults, the first sub- 
scription library in the colonies. Members of the library 
paid dues, which entitled them to borrow books. The li- 
brary used the dues to buy books. 

During the 1800's, a wide variety of adult-education 
institutions developed. Some of the most important of 
these institutions were study groups called /vceums. The 
members of a lyceum attended debates and lectures 
and held discussions. Josiah Holbrook, an educator, or- 
ganized the first lyceum in 1826 in Millbury, Massachu- 
setts. The lyceum movement grew rapidly, and by 1835 
more than 3,000 lyceums belonged to the National 
American Lyceum. This national organization was dis- 
solved in 1839. However, a large number ot local 


Adult education 69 





WORLD BOOK photo by Dan Miller 
An automotive class for women teaches female car owners to 
take care of cars and make minor repairs. Such courses help 
people save money by servicing their cars themselves. 


lyceums continued to hold regular meetings. 

Another important educational movement was the 
chautauqua (pronounced shuh TAW kwuh/ movement. 
In 1874, John H. Vincent, a clergyman, and Lewis Miller, 
a businessman, established a summer school for Sun- 
day school teachers in Chautauqua, New York, near 
Jamestown. This school, which still exists, soon added 
other summer programs and a correspondence school. 
Related institutions, called chautauquas, were later 
founded in other parts of the country. The word chau- 
tauqua also referred to traveling groups that went from 
town to town presenting lectures and entertainment. 

In 1891, the educator William Rainey Harper became 
the first president of the University of Chicago. He estab- 
lished an extension division there, and many other uni- 
versities soon started their own adult programs. 

In the 1900's, the government began to take an in- 
creasingly important role in adult education. The Smith- 
Lever Act of 1914 provided federal funds for instruction 
in farming and home economics. The Smith-Hughes Act 
of 1917 financed vocational training. 

During the Great Depression of the 1930's, the gov- 
ernment sponsored adult-education projects to create 
jobs for unemployed teachers. These programs were 
run by the Works Progress Administration (WPA), later 
called the Work Projects Administration. 

After World War II ended in 1945, the government 
provided funds for veterans to go to school. This pro- 
gram, called the Gl Bill of Rights, contributed to the 
growth of many colleges and universities. It also led to 
the development of many proprietary schools where 
veterans could get vocational training. 

The Manpower Development and Training Act of 
1962 and the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 fur- 
nished federal funds to train unemployed adults. The 
1964 act also set up the Adult Basic Education program. 

Today. a number of professional associations pro- 
mote education for adults. One, the Adult Education As- 


70 Advent 


sociation of the United States of America (AEA/ USA), in- 
cludes adult-education directors, university professors, 
and others in adult education. The National Association 
for Public Continuing and Adult Education is an organi- 
zation for adult educators in public schools. The Ameri- 
can Society for Training and Development has members 
who are adult educators in business and industry. The 
National University Continuing Education Association 
(NUCEA) helps coordinate credit and noncredit adult ed- 
ucation programs at the university level. 

During the 1970's, many schools became community 
schools, which serve everyone in the community— 
adults as well as children. Another trend involved recur- 
rent education to help adults keep up with the continual 
new developments in their fields. A high school or col- 
lege diploma no longer meant the end of a person's ed- 
ucation. Five years after graduating from school, an en- 
gineer might find that half of what he or she had learned 
was out of date. Large numbers of men and women be- 
gan to regard learning as a lifelong activity. 

Douglas Clifford Smith 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Chautauqua Library (Services for adults) 
Correspondence school lyceum 
Distance learning Vocational education 
Extension programs 


Additional resources 


Galbraith, Michael W., ed. Adu/t Learning Methods: A Guide for 
Effective Instruction. 2nd ed. Krieger, 1998. 

Kett, Joseph F. The Pursuit of Knowledge Under Difficulties: 
From Self-Improvement to Adult Education in America, 1730- 
1990. Stantord, 1994. 

Siebert, Al, and Gilpin, Bernadine. Time for College: The Adult 
Students Guide to Survival and Success. 3rd ed. Practical Psy- 
chology, 1996. 

Advent, AD vehnt, is the season that marks the begin- 

ning of the Christian church year. For most Christians, it 

starts on the Sunday nearest St. Andrew's Day (Novem- 
ber 30) and continues until Christmas Eve (December 

24). The term comes from the Latin word adventus, 

which means coming or arrival. The season is thus one 

of preparation for the celebration of the feast of the Na- 
tivity of Jesus Christ on Christmas Day. See Christmas 

(Religious practices; picture). 

Beginning in the 500s, the Advent season was marked 
by a spirit of penitence, and it lasted as long as six 
weeks. Under the influence of the church in Rome, the 
season was gradually reduced to four weeks. The sea- 
son in modern times has taken on a spirit of somber yet 
joyful preparation for the Advent of Christ, both in His 
birth in Bethlehem and on Judgment Day. During Ad- 
vent, many members of the clergy wear vestments of 
royal purple or royal blue. David G. Truemper 
Adventists, AD vehn tihsts, are members of religious 
groups that stress the doctrine of the Second Coming. 
That is, they believe that Jesus Christ may return to the 
earth at any moment. 

Such questions as when, where, and how Jesus 
would return have excited the curiosity of Christians. In- 
terest was particularly high during the early 1800's. 
William Miller, a Baptist minister in Low Hampton, New 
York, was one of many students of the Bible who tried to 
find the answers. For years, Miller studied the prophe- 
cies recorded in the Old Testament Book of Daniel and 
the New Testament Book of Revelation. After many cal- 


culations, he announced in 1831 that the Second Advent 
would occur in 1843 or 1844. Thousands of people be- 
lieved him, and some sold their possessions. His follow- 
ers, Called Millerites, waited for the coming of Christ 
and the end of the world. 

When the world did not end in 1844, many of Miller's 
followers were bitterly disappointed. They abandoned 
his movement to form new ones. The largest one—the 
Seventh-day Adventist Church—emerged about the time 
of the American Civil War. This group also stressed the 
doctrine of the Second Coming. But it avoided Miller's 
inclination to predict the specific time of Jesus's return. 

The Seventh-day Adventists believe the body is the 
temple of the Holy Spirit. They abstain from anything 
that might affect bodily health, including tobacco, alco- 
hol, tea, and coffee. The Adventists conduct an extensive 
missionary program because they believe the Second 
Coming cannot take place until all nations have heard 
the Gospel. Charles H. Lippy 

See also Seventh-day Adventists. 

Adverh is a part of speech that adds meaning to a 
verb, an adjective, or another adverb. Adverbs may be 
single words (quickly), phrases fin the morning}, or claus- 
es (ifthe meeting continues). 

A speaker or writer uses adverbs to add detail by de- 
scribing how, when, where, or why something happens. 
For example, My brother crawled becomes more specif- 
ic if adverbs are added: After the accident, my brother 
crawled paintully from the car. The adverbs modify the 
verb crawled. After the accidentis an adverbial phrase 
that tells when. The adverb painfully describes how, and 
the adverbial phrase from the car shows where. 


Classifying adverbs 


Adverbs can be distinguished on the basis of their 
use or function as simple adverbs, sentence modifiers, 
conjunctive adverbs, interrogative adverbs, intensifiers, 
adverbial equivalents, or parts of verbs in verb-adverb 
combinations. 

Simple adverbs are single words. Most of them end 
in -/y, as in certainlyand deeply. Some simple adverbs 
do not have an -/yending. They include above, ahead, 
down, too, and well 

A few simple adverbs may be used either as adverbs 
or as adjectives. They include better, early, fast, much, 
more, and /ate. Another group of adverbs has two ac- 
cepted forms: close, closely; cheap, cheaply; slow, slow- 
ly; even, evenly; deep, deeply; tight, tightly; loud, loudly. 
The -/yform is preferred in formal usage. 

Not all words that end in -/vare adverbs. For example, 
lovely and jolly are adjectives. 

Sentence modifiers are adverbs that modify the 
whole action of a sentence or clause rather than a single 
word in it. They often appear at the beginning of a sen- 


tence. For example: 
Usually we have dinner on the patio. 
As | recall, nobody asked any questions. 
Yesterday / went to a ball game. 


Conjunctive adverbs serve a double purpose. They 
modify, often as sentence modifiers, but they also serve 
as structure words—words that connect one part of a 


sentence to another. 
You have made a tew payments; however, we must ask you 
to send checks regularly. 





The adverb however connects the two clauses as a con- 
junction. It also modifies the final clause. Other words 
commonly used as conjunctive adverbs include there- 
fore, still, otherwise, also, moreover, nevertheless, and 
yet. Phrases that are frequently used as conjunctive ad- 
verbs include for example, that is, on the other hand, 
and in conclusion. 

Interrogative adverbs introduce a question: When 
did he live? Where is the milk? How are you? The most 
common interrogative adverbs are how, when, where, 
and why. 

Intensifiers add emphasis to the words they modify. 
Examples include very proud, extremely quiet, quite 
concerned, and foo loud. 

Adverbial equivalents are words that are not ad- 
verbs but function as adverbs in certain cases. In the 
sentence He went home, the noun home serves as an 
adverb. It modifies the verb went, and tells where. 

Verb-adverb combinations are formed by verbs 
plus such words as fo, up, off, or on. These words often 
serve as adverbs or as prepositions. The use of verb-ad- 
verb combinations and other adverbial expressions may 
be seen in the following sentences: 


Mary looked up every new word. 
Mary looked up. 
Mary looked up the old mine shaft. 


In the first sentence, up combines with /ooked to func- 
tion as a single verb, /ooked up. The object of the verb is 
every new word. \n the second sentence, up is simply an 
adverb modifying /ooked. In the third, the phrase up the 
old mine shaft modifies the verb /ooked. 


Position of adverbs 


An adverb can occupy a number of positions in a sen- 
tence: 


Slowly she walked off the stage. 
She walked s\owly off the stage. 
She walked off the stage slowly. 


In these three sentences, the position of the adverb 
changes the emphasis but not the overall meaning. 
However, the placement of certain adverbs can change 
both the emphasis and the meaning of a sentence. The 
following three sentences show how the meaning 
changes with the position of the adverb on/y: 


Only my brother asked to see the gift. 
My brother only asked to see the gift. 
My brother asked to see only the gift. 


Other adverbs whose placement can affect the emphasis 
and meaning of a sentence include a/most, ever, hardly, 
just. merely, nearly, quite, and scarcely. 


Usage 


Adverb-adjective confusion. Through usage, cer- 
tain words have been established as only adverbs and 
others as only adjectives. Confusion between some ol 
these adjectives and adverbs is common because they 
are similar in form. The following words often cause 
trouble: 

Adjectives 

good (kind, agreeable, 
(satisfactory) 

real (authentic, genuine) 

sure (firm, secure) 

some {in an indefinite 
amount) 


Adverbs 

well (satisfactory), ina 
desirable way) 

really (actually) 

surely (certainly) 

somewhat (to a certain 
extent) 


Adverb 71 


Consider the use of adverbs in the following three sen- 
tences: 


He was surely (not sure) afraid of his mother. 
It was a really (not real) good game. 
He did very well (not good) on his first test. 


Confusion between adverb and adjective is common 
after linking verbs (some form of the verb fo be or verbs 
like feel seem, hear, or smel/. A linking verb should be 
followed by an adjective modifying the subject, not an 
adverb. But the adverb form may be used to modify the 
verb. For example: 

He felt bad (not badly) because he had played so poorly 
(not poor). 

The adjective bad, modifying Ae, appears after felt. 
But poorly, the adverb, is used to modify played. 

The use of the adjective most in place of the adverb 
almost appears frequently in informal usage. However, 
the substitution should be avoided in formal writing. For 
example: 

Almost all the elephants died, not Most all the elephants 

died. 

Unnecessary adverbs often clutter and confuse a 
sentence. Usually a single specific verb can replace an 
adverb and sharpen expression. Hurried is preferable to 
moved quickly, and grasped is better than took eagerly. 
Such adverbs as hardly, barely, and scarcely carry a neg- 
ative meaning. Using the adverb not with these words is 
unnecessary and confusing: 


The family had scarcely enough to eat, not The family 
did not have scarcely enough to eat. 

! can hardly remember the incident, not / cannot hardly 
remember the incident. 


Unnecessary adverbs also may merely repeat and con- 
fuse the meaning of the words that they modify. For ex- 
ample: 
The old man reverted (not reverted back) to the days of 
his childhood. 
He advanced (not advanced forward) to his position in 
the line. 
This (not this here) book has more pictures than that \not 
that there) one. 


Adverbs that split an infinitive. An infinitive is the 
base part of a verb, such as go or See. It is often used 
with the word fo, as in to go or to see. Splitting an infini- 
tive means placing one or more words between fo and 
the verb form, as in fo quickly go or to readily see. 

Splitting an infinitive with an adverb is a matter of 
style rather than correct grammar. It sometimes results 
in an awkward expression: 

He promised to faithfully and cheerfully work with his 
teacher. 
In this example, the placement of the words faithfully 
and cheerfully splits the infinitive to work. The sentence 
would be easier to understand if the adverbs did not 
split the infinitive: 
He promised to work faithfully and cheerfully with his 
teacher. 
In other cases, however, splitting the infinitive may be 
the only way to get the special emphasis and meaning a 
writer wants. For example: 
/ preter to actually see a play, not just read it. 
Placing actua//y in any other position would alter the 
meaning of the sentence. 
See also Adjective. 


William F Jemscher 


§ —-\anunam, 


eal 





Advertising messages promote a wide variety of products, services, and ideas in nearly all the world’s 
countries. The streets of the Ginza district of Tokyo, shown here, are lined with brightly colored signs and 
displays that advertise specific brands of automobiles, beverages, and other goods. 


Advertising 


Advertising is a message designed to promote a 
product, a service, or an idea. In everyday life, people 
come into contact with many kinds of advertising. Print- 
ed advertisements make up a large part of newspapers 
and magazines. Poster ads appear in many buses, sub- 
ways, and trains. Neon signs along downtown streets 
flash advertisements. Billboards dot the roadsides. Com- 
mercials interrupt TV and radio programs. Advertise- 
ments appear on many sites on the World Wide Web. 

The purpose of most advertising is to sell products or 
services. Manufacturers advertise to try to persuade 
people to buy their products. Large business firms also 
use advertising to create a favorable ‘image’ of their 
company. Local businesses use it to gain new customers 
and increase sales. Advertising thus plays a key role in 
the competition among businesses for the consumers 
dollar. In many businesses, the volume of sales depends 
largely on the amount of advertising done. 

Advertising is also used by individuals, political par- 
ties and candidates, social organizations, special-interest 
groups, and the government. Many people advertise in 





Bonnie B. Reece, the contributor of this article, is Associate 
Protessor of Advertisi 1g at Michigan State Universit 


newspapers to sell used cars, homes, or other property. 
Political parties and candidates use advertising to try to 
win votes. Social organizations and special-interest 
groups often advertise to promote a cause or to influ- 
ence the way people think or act. For example, the Part- 
nership for a Drug-Free America sponsors ads designed 
to discourage people from using illegal drugs. The 
United States government uses advertising chiefly to re- 
cruit volunteers for the armed forces. 

Advertising is a multibillion-dollar industry. More than 
$200 billion is spent on advertising and advertising- 
related activities in the United States each year. About 
$400 billion is spent on advertising in other countries. 

Advertising is common in almost all countries. In 
many countries, however, advertising is more restricted 
than it is in the United States. In most of the countries of 
Western Europe, for example, the governments limit the 
amount of advertising that appears on television. In ad- 
dition, these governments make greater use of advertis- 
ing for social, political, and educational purposes. 

This article deals chiefly with advertising in the United 
States. It mainly discusses advertising by business and 
industrial organizations. But much of the material ap- 
plies to advertising by other groups as well. 


Ways of advertising 


Advertising reaches people through various forms of 
mass communication. These media include newspapers, 


Advertising 73 





>) Reed Kaestner Corbis 


Television is the chief medium used by national advertisers. 
Companies use TV commercials to reach large numbers of con- 
sumers who view programs, movies, and sports events on TV. 






magazines, television, and radio. Advertisers buy space 
in newspapers and magazines to publish their ads. They 
buy time on television and radio to broadcast their com- 
mercials. National advertisers, such as automobile mak- 
ers and fast-food restaurants, use the media to reach 
consumers throughout large parts of the country or all 
of it. Local advertisers, such as department stores and 
supermarkets, use the media to reach consumers within 
a city or town. . 
The chief advertising media in the United States are (1 
television, (2) newspapers, (3) direct mail, (4) radio, (5) 
magazines, and (6) outdoor signs. Newspapers and tele- 
vision each receive between 20 and 25 percent of the 
money spent on advertising. A chart in this article shows 
the percentage spent on each medium | 
Television is the chief medium used by national ad- 
vertisers. The 100 largest advertisers spend an average 


ni 


FYEAR 
7 


Lorem ipsum dolor 
Store displays called point-of purchase displays advertise prod- 
ucts within a store. These displays often involve colorful signs, 
banners, and the careful arrangement of items for sale. 


AP Wide World 





Outdoor advertising is ef- 
fective in communicating 
brief messages to large num- 
bers of people. Some compa- 
nies place advertisements on 
airships called blimps, which 
then fly over highly populated 
areas and popular events. 


of 65 percent of their advertising budgets—not includ- 
ing direct mail and sales promotion—on television. Food 
companies spend about 75 percent of their budgets on 
television, and companies that make games and toys 
spend about 90 percent. 

A main advantage of television to advertisers is that it 
brings sight, sound, and action directly to consumers in 
their homes. Advertisers can explain and demonstrate 
their products to viewers who are enjoying a TV pro- 
gram and cannot easily avoid the commercials. In addi- 
tion, network television reaches a vast, nationwide audi- 
ence at a low cost per viewer. For example, a 30-second 
commercial on a TV network may cost $1 million. But if 
50 million viewers watch the commercial, the advertiser 
pays only 2 cents for each person who sees the ad. 

The majority of TV commercials consist of short spot 
announcements, most of which last 30 seconds. The 


74 Advertising 


commercials are usually run in groups of three to six. 
Television networks and stations generally limit com- 
mercial time to about 10 minutes per hour during prime 
time and 16 minutes per hour during most other broad- 
cast times. Prime time refers to the evening hours, when 
TV programs draw the largest audience. 

Advertisers can buy spot time from local TV stations 
or network time from one of the national TV networks. 
They can also buy time on cable television. In addition, 
advertisers can either sponsor an entire TV program or 
buy scatter packages. |n scatter packages, the commer- 
cials are aired at various times for several weeks. Most 
advertisers buy scatter packages. But special entertain- 
ment programs, sports events, and certain motion pic- 
tures are often sponsored by one advertiser. In this way, 
the advertiser hopes to gain added recognition by being 
identified with the program. 

Newspapers, on the average, devote almost half of 
their space to advertising. Local businesses and individ- 
uals place approximately 85 percent of this advertising. 
National advertisers sometimes use newspapers to in- 
form consumers of the names and locations of local 
stores where the advertisers products are available. Na- 
tional advertisers also use newspapers when they want 
to concentrate their sales efforts in particular regions of 
the country. 

Newspapers offer advertisers several advantages over 
other media. Most adults read a daily newspaper, and 
many of them specifically check the ads for information 
about products or services. Daily newspapers also offer 
the advantage of timeliness. An advertiser can prepare 
and publish an advertisement within a day. Newspaper 
ads can thus quickly reflect a sudden demand for cer- 
tain merchandise. For example, a department store can 
advertise snow shovels in a newspaper the day after the 
city has its first snowfall of the season. 





APAVide World 


Direct-mail advertising involves the mailing of leaflets, cata- 
logs, brochures, and other printed materials. This man is gather- 
ing envelopes stuffed with ads to be sent to potential customers. 


Newspapers carry two main kinds of advertisements: 
display ads and classified ads. Display ads range in size 
from less than 1 column-inch (1 column wide by 1 inch 
(2.5 centimeters! deep) to a full page or more, and most 
include illustrations. Advertisers can appeal to people 
with special interests by placing their ads on certain 
pages, such as those devoted to travel, home life, or 
sports. Classified ads, which are also called want ads, 
appear in a separate section of a newspaper. Most clas- 
sified ads consist of a few lines of print. The ads list 
homes, used cars, furniture, and other property that in- 
dividuals have for sale. Used-car dealers, real estate 
companies, and firms with job openings also place clas- 
sified ads. Most newspapers will also accept preprinted 
ad sections called free-standing inserts, which are sever- 
al pages long. 

Direct mail includes leaflets, brochures, catalogs, 
and other printed advertisements that are delivered by a 
postal service. Mail-order firms, which sell largely 
through the mail, are the main users of direct-mail ad- 
vertising. 

The effectiveness of advertising by direct mail de- 
pends mainly on the quality of the mailing list Some lists 
consist of all the addresses in a city and are simply sent 
to “Occupant.” Other mailing lists consist of individual 
names with addresses. Some firms specialize in prepar- 
ing lists of people according to their occupation, age, 
income, interests, or other characteristics. For example, 
a firm might assemble a list of 20,000 new mothers or 
10,000 lawyers. These lists are sold to advertisers. Some 
advertisers assemble their own mailing lists. 

Direct-mail advertising costs more per person 
reached than do other ways of advertising. However, ad- 
vertisers who obtain special mailing lists know they are 
reaching good prospects. In addition, advertisers can 
choose from many different sizes and forms of adver- 


How advertising money is spent 











Newspapers 
21.7% 










Direct mail 19.2% 


A. 


~~. Yellow pages 5.9% 


Consumer 
_ Magazines 5.3% 








Television ) 
23.4% ~ Business and trade 
publications 
Other* Outdoor signs 20% 
12.8% 0.8% Internet 0.9% 








Billions of dollars are spent on advertising in the United States in 
a year. This chart shows the percentage spent in each of the ma- 
jor advertising media 





>_=--— 


Advertising 75 


A Tutrosport | 


Newspapers and maga- 
zines devote !arge amounts 
of their space to advertising. 
The wide variety of publica- 
tions allows advertisers to tar- 
get readers of a certain age or 
location, or with specific 
areas of interest. 


Eis CORRIERE > SIEWA | 


= 


| Farad b dd] a? 
aCCOL Reka! 


COPPIERE » SIENA 


FINISCE 
A COLTELLATE 


2 “ LALITE | 
] im TRA OPERA! 
Li 





tisements. Some products or services are too complicat- 
ed to be explained in any other medium. 

Radio. Local advertisers place about 70 percent of the 
advertising on radio stations. The rest is placed by na- 
tional advertisers, who buy time either from individual 
stations in various cities and towns or from one of the 
radio networks. 

One advantage of advertising on radio is that people 
can listen to programs while doing other things. Anoth- 
er advantage is that radio audiences, in general, are 
more highly selected by the type of programming than 
are television audiences. For example, stations that fea- 
ture country music attract different kinds of listeners 
than do those that play rock. By selecting the station, ad- 
vertisers can reach the people most likely to buy their 
products. Radio commercials include direct sales an- 
nouncements, dramatized stories, and songs. Most com- 
mercials last 30 or 60 seconds. In general, radio stations 
have more commercial time per hour than television sta- 
tions. Thus, a major drawback of radio is that listeners 
often hear so many commercials that it is difficult for any 
one ad to make an impression. 

Magazines. Most magazines have a nationwide Cir- 
culation and so are used chiefly by national advertisers. 
Magazines have a number of advantages over newspa- 
pers as an advertising medium. They are usually read in 
a leisurely manner and are often kept for weeks or 
months before being discarded. In many cases, several 
members of a family read each copy of a magazine. An- 
other advantage of magazines is that they offer better 
printing and color reproduction than newspapers do. 
Advertisers can thus show off their products to greater 
advantage in magazines. 

Advertisers can choose from a wide variety of maga- 
zines. Some magazines, such as newsmagazines, appeal 
to a mass audience. Others are designed for specitic 
groups of people, such as teen-agers, homemakers, or 
amateur photographers. Certain companies advertise in 
trade publications, which are devoted to particular bust 
nesses, industries, or professions. For example, farm 





© TH Foto from Alamy.com 


magazines are used by advertisers who sell agricultural 
equipment and supplies. Drug firms advertise in med- 
ical journals to reach doctors and druggists. 

Outdoor signs. Most advertising on outdoor signs is 
placed by national advertisers. One of the main advan- 
tages of outdoor signs is that people pass by the signs 
repeatedly. In addition, large, colorful signs easily attract 
attention. However, the ads on outdoor signs must be 
short and simple because most passers-by see a sign for 
only a few seconds. 

The main kinds of outdoor signs are (1) posters, (2) 
painted bulletins, and (3) electric spectaculars. Posters, 
commonly called billboards, are the most widely used 
form of outdoor advertising. They consist of printed 
sheets of paper that are pasted on large billboards. The 
billboards are owned by local companies, which rent 
them by the month to advertisers. Painted bulletins are 
signs painted on buildings or billboards. Electric spec- 
taculars consist of large illuminated displays. Many fea- 
ture changing messages and moving pictures. Electric 
spectaculars are the most expensive kind of outdoor 
sign. 

Other ways of advertising include the use of (1) 
transit signs, (2) displays, (3) telephone directories, (4) 
novelties, and (5) the Internet. 

Transit signs are small posters placed in or on local 
trains, subways, buses, and taxicabs. Posters placed in- 
side vehicles can carry a longer message than outside 
ads because riders have more time to read it. 

Displays. Window displays are designed to draw cus- 
tomers into a store. Point-of-purchase displays are 
arrangements of signs, banners, and other items within 
a store. These displays highlight certain products and 
are designed to encourage impulse buying—that is, buy- 
ing without previous thought or planning. Many stores 
have a promotion department, whose duties include 
preparing displays. Other stores hire display firms. 
Many manufacturers supply display materials to retail- 
ers that sell their products. 

Telephone directories carry ads in a section called 


76 Advertising 














A, Shor ———S sae 2) EY 
Welcome ll! 
Computing Shop@] toate , Cbersntes AOL prefers RZE75 | 
Entertainment Welcome, Jackie VGil 
pone Browse ! Pack oH # Stour Caveg ery. Feature of the Day 
Games 
Health Apparel Health & Beauty Enter to win 
Tieanek Art & Collectibles Home & Garden | $5,000 in 

Auctions & Outlets Home Office & Business . giftcertificates & 
oceans Books, Aiusic & Video Jewelry & Accessories Renew-a-Room! 
Kids Only Computing Kids,Toys& Babies (me — 
Lifestyles Consumer Electronics Pets & Animals a 
Local Department Stores Sports & Outdoors Shop@AOL 
News Flowers & Gifts Travel & Auto HIGHLIGHT 


Personal Finance 
Research & Learn 


Gourmet Food & Wine 





<n Shopping Tyee) abe — 

on search LS 

Sports 4 
Teens >QuickTips Quick, last minute gifts. 

ae >BestBets Find all Nl d for Summer Fun! 

m 

WorkPlace ING all youll need for summer Fun 


A-Z Listing of Stores 


Tennis Shop Shop for 
your tennis gear and 
new tennis whites. 





S. > Give the ultimate gift with diamonds. 


Keyword. Shopping 


© America Online, Inc. Used with permission. 


Internet advertising allows companies to reach computer users around the world. Many companies 
advertise through their own Web sites, through signs displayed on other sites, or in electronic directories. 


the yellow pages. Some of the ads consist of a few print- 
ed lines that give the name, address, and telephone 
number of local businesses. Others take up more space 
and are like display ads in newspapers. 

Novelties are inexpensive items that many advertisers 
give away. Such items include calendars, matchbooks, 
and key rings that carry an advertisers name and mes- 
sage. People are reminded of the advertiser as long as 
they use the item. 

Internetadvertising is the newest and fastest-growing 
type of advertising. Advertising on the Internet, a world- 
wide computer network, includes small signs called 





WORLD BOOK photo by leff Guerrant 


Novelty items that carry an advertisers name and message are 
often given away to potential customers. Such items include cal- 
endars, matchbooks, mugs, pens, and T-shirts. 


banner ads, as well as listings in electronic directories. 
Many companies maintain sites on a part of the Internet 
known as the World Wide Web. A company’s Web site 
may contain information about the company and its 
products, along with pictures or other artwork. 


Advertising techniques 


Advertising is designed to inform, influence, or per- 
suade people. To be effective, an advertisement must 
first attract attention and gain a persons interest. It may 
then provide reasons for buying a product and for be- 
lieving the advertiser's claims. 

Advertisers use a variety of techniques to create effec- 
tive advertisements. They start with a basic appeal, 
which is the main selling point, or theme, of an adver- 
tisement. Advertisers then use certain specific tech- 
niques. The most commonly used techniques include (1) 
attention-getting headlines, (2) slogans, (3) testimonials, 
(4) product characters, (5) comparison of products, and 
(6) repetition. 

Basic appeals. Advertisers rely on many kinds of ap- 
peals to persuade people to buy. In general, appeals can 
be classified as informational or transformational. Adver- 
tisements that use an informational approach describe 
the demonstrable characteristics of a product. Such ads 
tell what the product is, how it works, or how it is made. 
Advertisements that use a transformational appeal stress 
the ways in which a product will provide personal satis- 
faction. Such an ad might suggest that the product will 
satisfy the consumer s need for love, security, or prestige. 

Advertisers often use sexual themes that appeal to a 
person's desire to be attractive. For example, an adver- 
tisement for after-shave lotion might suggest that the 
product will help a man attract women. 

To persuade the largest possible number of people, 
many advertisements combine different types of ap- 
peals. Appeals may also be aimed at a large general au- 





dience or targeted at a limited group of people, such as 
business executives or young married couples. 

Attention-getting headlines are an important fea- 
ture of printed advertisements. A successful headline 
leads a person into reading the rest of the ad. Some 
headlines attract attention by promising the reader a 
personal benefit, such as a savings in money or an im- 
provement in physical appearance. Other headlines are 
cleverly worded to arouse a person's curiosity. Still 
other headlines carry news, such as an announcement 
of a new product. Headlines also attract attention by di- 
rectly addressing a specific group. For example, a head- 
line might read: “For the Young Single Woman.” The 
opening lines in a radio or TV commercial serve the 
same purpose as headlines in printed ads. 

Slogans are short phrases that are used over and 
over. Good slogans are easy to remember. The majority 
of slogans are designed to help create a favorable im- 
age of a company and its products. Most such slogans 
do not relate to particular features of a product. Compa- 
nies also use slogans in advertising inexpensive prod- 
ucts, such as chewing gum or soft drinks. 

Testimonials are advertisements in which a person 
endorses a product. The person may be someone who 
looks like an average user of the product. Advertisers 
also pay movie and TV stars, popular athletes, and other 
celebrities to endorse products. A celebrity helps attract 
attention to an advertisement. Under United States gov- 
ernment regulations, endorsers must use the advertised 
product if they claim they do so. 

Product characters are fictional people and cartoon 
animals or characters that are used in advertisements 
over along period. Many advertisers use product char- 
acters to deliver sales messages for a whole line of 
products. The characters become highly familiar to peo- 
ple and so provide lasting identification with a compa- 
ny’s products. Product characters are often used in ad- 
vertising aimed at children because such characters 
delight many young people. 

Comparison of products is used most frequently to 
sell products that compete heavily with other brands. 
Advertisers compare their product with similar brands 
and point out the advantages of using their brand. A 
competitor's product may be named, or it may be re- 
ferred to as “Brand X’ or “the leading brand.’ 

Repetition is one of the most basic techniques adver- 
tisers use to get their message across. Advertisers may 
broadcast their commercials several times a day for 
weeks on TV or radio. Or they may publish their ads fre- 
quently in printed media. Repetition can help build or 
reinforce a company’s reputation. Advertisers also be- 
lieve that the more often people see or hear an adver- 
tisement, the more likely they are to accept the message 
and want the product. 


Creating advertisements 


Most business firms hire advertising agencies to cre- 
ate their advertisements and place them in the various 
media. In most cases, individual advertisements form 
part of an advertising campaign. A campaign Is an or- 
ganized sales effort that may run for several months and 
that usually involves more than one medium. 

In planning an advertising campaign, the agency must 
first determine the objective of the campaign. The ob- 


Advertising 76a 


jective may be to prove a products superiority over 
competing brands, to change the image of the compa- 
ny, or to achieve some other goal. The agency must also 
determine the target market—that is, the people who are 
likely users of a product and at whom the advertising 
will be aimed. Finally, the agency has to estimate how 
much money and time will be needed to carry out the 
campaign. 

Large advertising agencies generally assign a team of 
people from the various departments of the agency to 
handle all the advertising for a specific advertiser, or 
client. The typical agency includes a research depart- 
ment, creative department, media department, and pro- 
duction department. An account manager, or account 
executive, has overall responsibility for planning and di- 
recting a clients advertising. The following discussion 
describes in broad terms the way an agency creates ad- 
vertisements. The main steps in the process include (1) 
research, (2) media selection, (3) creative work, and (4) 
production. 

Research. Information gathered from consumers 
provides the basis for many advertising decisions. It 
helps an agency determine the kinds of people at whom 
to aim advertisements, the types of appeals to use, and 
in which media to place the ads. The chief kinds of re- 
search include (1) market research, (2) motivation re- 
search, and (3) media research. 

Market research seeks information about consumers 
and their buying habits. The information is obtained 


There are alot of good reasons for choosing the Quiet Company. 






a 
Some are more 


important than others. 


~, r 
‘ANS 
RentrsGicra Miguel (ehemabesys ! ™ 
recerved the higghewt pewhte maine: frum —_ l 
Vhiaxh's Standard & Pur AM Hoe ad Dud Le 


& Viacke. fh has hoon soerd “th: eet Gnancalh) wand ¥ 
bi neuer compan” vcr jour na wine quero 
t RORTUNE’ magesnc. When you tune anew cee 
for wannng the sund woure bile murance. talk 

the Qhact (Company. North cecre Mesual Life. 


The Quiet Companys 


2 Ry ae te eS Bt ate Bape 


© Northwestern Mutual Ufe Insurance Company (Victor Skrebneski! 
An emotional appeal is used in many advertisements to attract 
attention so that people will learn about the product. This adver- 
tisement appeals to parents love and concern for their children 
and then gives reasons for buying the product. 


76b Advertising 





from a sample of consumers by means of surveys. The 
information includes the age, sex, income, and occupa- 
tion of potential consumers. Researchers may also learn 
how consumers rate various brands of a product, in- 
cluding the advertiser's brand. Such information helps 
advertisers decide on the best way to present the fea- 
tures of their products. 

Motivation researchtries to find out why people buy 
certain products. Motivation researchers gather such in- 
formation in personal interviews, during which they use 
techniques developed by psychologists and sociolo- 
gists. By discovering the motives for people's buying be- 
havior, advertisers hope to find the most effective ap- 
peal to use in their advertisements. For example, adver- 
tisers may learn that many people buy certain kinds of 
automobiles chiefly to impress their friends. The motiva- 
tions of consumers are complex, and the study of moti- 
vations is therefore more difficult than most other types 
of research. 

Media research. Various research firms measure the 
size and makeup of radio and TV audiences at different 
times of the day. The Audit Bureau of Circulations—an 
organization of advertisers, advertising agencies, and 
publishers—measures the circulations of publications. 
Advertisers use information on audience size and make- 
up in selecting media in which to place ads. 

Media selection. The members of an agency's media 
department compare the various media in terms of audi- 
ence size and makeup. They decide which particular 
magazines, newspapers, and radio and television sta- 
tions or networks to use to reach the target market. They 
then prepare a media plan that will give an effective 
combination of reach and frequency within the limita- 
tions of the budget. Reach is the number of people who 
will see or hear the advertisement. Frequency is the 
number of times that they will see or hear it. The media 
planners may decide to reach a large number of people 
a few times or to reach fewer people more often. 

The recommendations of the media department must 


Testimonials include adver- 
tisements in which a celebrity 
endorses a product or serv- 
ice. In amusing television 
commercials, entertainer Bill 
Cosby, shown here, urges 
viewers to sample Jell-O 
products. 


Kraft General Foods 


be approved by the client. The media planners then buy 
time and space from the media and schedule the adver- 
tisements for specific dates. 

Creative work. An agency’ creative department de- 
velops the central theme of an advertising campaign. 
The department then designs individual advertisements. 
The theme, and the ideas for carrying it out, must be ap- 
proved by the account manager and the client. 

For printed advertisements, a copywriter prepares the 
copy (written words) and an artist prepares a /ayout of 
the advertisement. A layout is a sketch that shows the 
placement of the copy and illustrations. The illustrations 
may consist of artwork or photographs or both. The 
copy, illustrations, and layout may be revised several 
times. The finished artwork may be prepared by an artist 
in the agency or by a free-/ance (independent) artist. 
Most photographs are taken by professional photogra- 
phers who are hired by the agency. 

For radio commercials, a copywriter prepares the 
script, which may consist simply of a sales message to 
be read by a radio announcer. Some scripts are skits 
that feature dialogue and perhaps sound effects or back- 
ground music. Original music or songs are written by 
composers commissioned by the agency. 

For television commercials, a copywriter creates the 
script and an artist designs a storyboard, which is a se- 
ries of drawings of the planned action. The storyboard is 
combined with the script and includes directions for 
filming the commercial. 

Production. The production of printed advertise- 
ments, radio commercials, and TV commercials is 
arranged by the production department of an advertis- 
ing agency. The production department deals with ad- 
vertising service and supply houses, which include 
graphic arts firms and producers of radio and TV com- 
mercials. In each case, the client has to approve the final 
advertisements before they are printed or broadcast. 

For printed advertisements, the production depart- 
ment works with graphic arts firms, which set the copy 





in type and prepare the film or other material for print- 
ing the type and illustrations. This material is then sent to 
the publications in which the ads will appear. Newspa- 
per advertisements are sometimes produced by the 
newspaper printers themselves. 

For radio commercials, the production department 
may simply deliver the script to the radio station where 
it will be read by an announcer. If the script has dia- 
logue, the commercial must be prerecorded, and so the 
agency hires a radio producer. The producer selects 
performers to read the commercial and sets up rehears- 
als. If necessary, a musical director and an orchestra are 
also hired. The commercial is then recorded on tape ina 
studio and delivered for broadcasting. 

The agency also uses a producer for television com- 
mercials. If the commercial is to be filmed or video- 
taped, the producer may work with a director. These 
two individuals select performers and arrange rehears- 
als. After the commercial is shot in the studio or on loca- 
tion, the production department combines it with the 
sound track and edits it. After the producer has ap- 
proved the finished commercial, the commercial is sent 
to the TV stations or network where it will be aired. 

Some TV commercials consist of stop-motion films or 
animated cartoons. Stop motion is a method of photo- 
graphing objects in different positions so that, when the 
film is run, they appear to move. For example, bottles 
may seem to dance across a table. 

Animated cartoons produced in the traditional way re- 
quire many individual drawings that must be filmed in 
sequence. Modern computer-generated animation and 
special effects are much easier to produce. For example, 
an electronic device called a scanner can convert the 
colors and shades of illustrations or photos into digital 
(numerical) code, then feed this code to a computer. An 
animator can then use the computer to manipulate the il- 
lustrations. 

If the commercial is a live announcement, the produc- 
er makes sure the script, product, and furniture or other 
objects are supplied to the station. The producer also 
supervises the rehearsals. Today, live announcements 
are rare. 


The advertising industry 


The United States has the largest advertising industry 
in the world. The center of the U.S. advertising industry 
is New York City, where many of the major agencies 
have their headquarters. Numerous U.S. agencies have a 
large international business. 

Advertising agencies. The United States has about 
6,000 advertising agencies. These agencies range in size 
from one-person organizations to huge agencies with 
several thousand employees and with offices in several 
U.S. and foreign cities. Among the largest United States 
advertising agencies are Leo Burnett Company Incorpo 
rated in Chicago and J. Walter Thompson Co. in New 
York City. 

An advertising agency's chief service is to create and 
place advertising for clients. Some agencies also pro- 
vide information and advice on selling plans, packaging 
designs, and other marketing operations. 

Advertising agencies receive income in three main 
ways: (1) from commissions paid by the media, (2) from 
service charges paid by clients for materials and work 


Advertising 77 


purchased from graphic arts firms and other companies, 
and (3) from fees paid by clients. The standard commis- 
sion is 15 percent of the cost of the space or time that an 
agency buys for a client. The agency charges the client 
the total cost of the space or time and deducts 15 per- 
cent before paying the media. 

Advertising departments. Most large business 
companies have an advertising department. In some 
companies, the department prepares all the company’s 
advertising and so functions as an in-house agency. 
Among those firms that employ an advertising agency, 
the company’s advertising department works closely 
with the agency. The department might also prepare 
such materials as point-of-purchase displays and direct- 
mail brochures, which are not usually considered part 
of an agency's duties. 

Some companies that manufacture a large number of 
products have brand managers. A brand manager su- 
pervises the advertising and promotion of one or a few 
products. 

Newspapers, magazines, and radio and television sta- 
tions and networks also have advertising departments. 
These departments collect and publish information de- 
signed to persuade advertisers to use their particular 
media vehicle. They supply advertisers and advertising 
agencies with reports on the vehicle's circulation, listen- 
ing audience, or viewing audience. They may also pro- 
vide production assistance. 

Advertising associations work to promote the in- 
dustry and to raise the standards of advertising. The 
leading national advertising organizations include the 
American Association of Advertising Agencies, the 
American Advertising Federation, and the Association of 
National Advertisers. 

Two other important advertising organizations are the 
Advertising Council and the National Advertising Re- 
view Board. The Advertising Council prepares public 
service ads, such as those that promote highway safety 
and energy conservation. The National Advertising Re- 
view Board fosters self-regulation of the advertising in- 
dustry. It evaluates complaints about deceptive (false or 
misleading) advertisements. If the council judges an ad- 
vertisement to be deceptive, it asks the advertiser to dis- 
continue the ad. 

Regulation of advertising. Both the U.S. government 
and the state governments have laws designed to pro- 
tect consumers from deceptive advertising. They also 
have laws that prohibit certain kinds of advertising. For 
example, a federal law bans cigarette advertising on ra- 
dio and television. But the Supreme Court of the United 
States has ruled that advertising and the advertising in- 
dustry have some protection under the First Amend- 
ment to the U.S. Constitution. Thus, regulations concern- 
ing advertising must be no more restrictive than neces- 
sary to accomplish the goals of state and federal 
governments. 

Federal laws against deceptive advertising are en- 
forced chiefly by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). 
The FTC monitors all advertising and may ask advertis- 
ers for proof of their claims. If the FTC decides that an 
advertisement is false or misleading, it may order an ad- 
vertiser to withdraw the ad. The FTC may further require 
an advertiser to run ‘corrective’ advertising to inform 
the public that former advertisements were deceptive. 


78 Advertising 


However, the FTC rarely requires this. Advertisers may 
be fined for violating an FTC order. Some advertisers 
are also subject to regulation by the Federal Communi- 
cations Commission (FCC), the Food and Drug Adminis- 
tration (FDA), the Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC), and certain other federal agencies. 

Advertising in other countries. Many of the largest 
advertisers in the United States also spend significant 
amounts of money to advertise in other countries. These 
companies may use local agencies or branch offices of 
U.S.-based agencies to create ad campaigns. Many large 
U.S. agencies have acquired toreign-based local agen- 
cies or developed a network of international offices to 
handle the advertising of multinational corporations. 
WPP Group, based in London, and Interpublic Group 
and Omnicom Group, both based in New York City, are 
among the largest advertising agencies in the world. An- 
other large agency is Dentsu, in Tokyo. 

In Western Europe, government had regulated broad- 
casting tightly until the 1980's. The state owned the 
broadcast industry, each country had only one or two 
television channels, and the amount of advertising time 
was severely restricted. In the 1980's, more channels 
were added by the state and private companies, and ad- 
vertising restrictions were loosened. In addition, satel- 
lites began to beam TV signals to rooftop antennas on 
individual homes. Most such signals reach consumers 
in more than one country. Because of increased access 
to consumers, the trend among major European adver- 


it does more. It costs less. It's that simple. | 





AP Wide Word 
International ad campaigns can spread an advertisers mes- 
sage to people throughout the world. This billboard for a U.S.- 
based computer company appeared in Yangon, Myanmar. 


tisers has been to develop a single ad campaign for sev- 
eral countries. 

Regulations on advertising differ in other parts of the 
world. In Australia, for example, most ads must be pro- 
duced locally. China charges higher ad rates for foreign 
advertisers than for local companies or joint ventures. 

Agencies throughout the world support the Interna- 
tional Advertising Association, which has headquarters 
in New York City. This organization works for truth in ad- 
vertising, the protection of commercial speech, and im- 
provements in the quality of media research. 


Effects of advertising 


Advertising greatly influences many aspects of life in 
the United States. This section deals with some of its 
economic, social, and political effects. 

Economic effects. Advertising plays a major role in 
the distribution of goods from manufacturers to con- 
sumers. It provides an effective way for sellers to inform 
buyers about products. Advertising thus helps manufac- 
turers sell their products and benefits consumers by 
providing them with shopping information. 

Advertising also helps the economy grow by stimulat- 
ing demand for new products. Manufacturers spend 
much money to develop new products. Through adver- 
tising, they can speed upthe process of creating a market 
for a product and so recover their costs more quickly. 
Fewer new products would be developed if manufact- 
urers could not use advertising to help sell the products. 

Some economists believe that a large amount of the 
money spent on advertising is wasted. They argue that 
much advertising simply leads consumers to switch 
from one brand of a product to another brand. Brand- 
switching may increase the profits of a particular firm 
but has no positive effect on the overall economy. 

Advertisers include the expense of advertising in the 
sales price of a product. In some Cases, advertising rais- 
es the price of a product. In other cases, advertising 
helps lower prices by creating the mass demand that 
supports mass production. Successful advertising 
makes many people want a product. By mass producing 
a product and developing a large volume of sales, the 
manufacturer can charge less per unit. 

Social effects. Perhaps the most important social 
contribution of advertising is that it supports the mass 
communication media. Advertising pays all the costs of 
commercial television and radio. It provides viewers 
with free entertainment and news programs, though 
viewers are often irritated by commercial interruptions. 
Advertising also pays three-fourths of the costs of news- 
papers and magazines. Without advertising, readers 
would have to pay a higher price for newspapers and 
magazines, and many of the publications would go out 
of business. 

Because the mass media depend on advertising to 
stay in business, many people question whether adver- 
tisers control the media. Generally, media do not allow 
advertisers to influence their programming or editorial 
content. However, many broadcasters and publishers do 
not hesitate to run favorable information about their ad- 
vertisers, and they sometimes refuse to run unfavorable 
information. Critics of commercial television maintain 
that dependence on advertising lowers the quality of TV 
programming. In order to sell advertising time at high 








I 





prices, TV stations try to attract the largest possible audi- 
ence. Critics argue that the stations therefore broadcast 
too many general entertainment programs and not 
enough informational and cultural programs. 

Many critics also charge that advertising persuades 
people to buy products they do not need or want 
through the use of psychological techniques. Advertis- 
ers reply that they do not have the means to make peo- 
ple buy unwanted products. They argue that adults 
freely choose what to buy or what not to buy. Most ex- 
perts agree, however, that advertising is particularly per- 
suasive to young children, who do not have the ability 
or experience to judge advertising critically. For this rea- 
son, the Federal Trade Commission has strict regula- 
tions governing advertising aimed at children. 

Political effects. Little attention was paid to political 
advertising until 1952, when Dwight D. Eisenhower suc- 
cessfully ran for the U.S. presidency. Advertising execu- 
tives, rather than politicians, directed Eisenhower's pres- 
idential campaign. Much of Eisenhower's campaign con- 
sisted of a flood of spot announcements on television 
stations. 

Since 1952, advertising executives have played an in- 
creasingly important role in political campaigns. !n addi- 
tion, TV spot announcements have become a major fea- 
ture of campaigns for public offices at the national and 
state levels. The chief criticism of political advertising 
concerns the use of such spot announcements, which 
may concentrate on creating an image ofa candidate 
and tend to oversimplify the issues. Critics object to can- 
didates being “sold” through advertising methods like 
those used to sell products. Another complaint is that 
candidates with the most money to spend on advertis- 
ing have an unfair advantage over their opponents. Be- 
cause of this complaint, Congress passed a law in 1974 
that limits the amount of money candidates may spend 
in presidential campaigns. 


History 


Most historians believe that outdoor signs above 
shop doors were the first form of advertising. As early as 
3000 B.C, the Babylonians, who lived in what is now 


Advertising 79 


Political advertising has 
played an important role in 
election campaigns since the 
mid-1900's. President Dwight 
D. Eisenhower, shown here 
with his wife, Mamie, used 
television to reach out to vot- 
ers during the 1950's. 


| © Corbis/Bettmann 


Iraq, used such signs to advertise their stores. The an- 
cient Greeks and Romans also hung signs outside their 
shops. Few people could read, and so merchants used 
symbols carved in stone, clay, or wood for the signs. For 
example, a bush indicated a wine shop, and a boot ad- 
vertised a shoemaker's shop. 

In ancient Egypt, merchants hired criers to walk 
through the streets and announce the arrivals of ships 
and their cargo. By the A.D. 900's, town criers, who 
called out the news, were common in European coun- 
tries. They also were hired by merchants to direct cus- 
tomers to shops and to tell them about goods and 
prices in the marketplace. 

The impact of printing. About 1440, Johannes Guten- 
berg of Germany invented movable type in Europe. His 
invention led to the first forms of mass advertising— 
printed posters, handbills, and newspaper ads. William 
Caxton, who introduced printing into England, pro- 
duced the first printed advertisement in English in 1472. 
It was a poster announcing the sale of a book and was 
tacked on church doors. 

The first newspaper regularly printed in England, a 
weekly newssheet, appeared in 1622. In the years that fol- 
lowed, more English newspapers were started, and ad- 
vertising soon becamea standard feature of newspapers. 

The first newspaper advertisement in the American 
Colonies appeared in The Boston News-Letter in 1704. 
Many of the early magazines in the United States either 
refused to print advertisements or carried only certain 
kinds of ads. But in the mid-1800's, more and more mag- 
azines began to accept advertising, and magazine adver- 
tising grew quickly. Some magazines were started chief- 
ly to earn advertising money. 

Many early ads in both the United States and England 
paid little heed to the truth. Advertisers made wildly ex- 
aggerated claims. Ads for nonprescription drugs, for ex- 
ample, boasted cures for all kinds of ailments. 

The development of advertising agencies. The 
first advertising agencies acted as brokers—that is, they 
bought space at a discount from newspapers and resold 
it to advertisers. The ads were prepared by the advertis- 
ers themselves or by hired writers. 


80 Advertising 





Try it and be Convinced. 


DISCOUNT, ONE-THIRD. 





THIS BELT CURES 


PARALYSIS, LUMBAGO. MALARIA, 
BW EURALGIA, DYSPEPSIA. LAME BACH, 
REEUMATISH FEVER AND AGUE, LIVER COMPLAINT. 


SPINAL IRRITATION SEMINAL WESENESS KIDNEY DISEASES. 
HERVOUS EXHAUSTION. FEMALE COMPLAINTS. GENERAL DEBILITY 


FAC-SIMILE OF LABEL 


COMMON SENSE ELECTRIC BELT, 


THE BELT FOR THE MILLION. 


Warranted Equal w any of the High Priced Belta and Sold at a REASONABLE Price. 
= Manufactured by the->- 


Common Sense Electric Belt Co. | 


Pat. Sept. 20, 1861. CHICACO, ILL. 





Price, according to quality, $3.00, $4.00 and $5.00 cach. 
Sent by mail on recent of price. Address your orders to our agents, 
CHAS. TRUAX & CO 
Historical Pictures Service 


Exaggerated claims were made in many ads in the 1800's for 
medicines and such “medical aids’ as electric belts, shown here. 


Volney B. Palmer started the first U.S. advertising 
agency in Philadelphia in 1841. Palmer worked as an 
agent for newspaper publishers. He received 25 percent 
commission on the space that he sold to advertisers. 

In 1875, N. W. Ayer & Son, another Philadelphia adver- 
tising agency, began to emphasize agency services to 


= 
Lc 


Tee aateasat svEaIRS POST 


The 
pause that 


refreshes 







ED tee Ge mm Gare OE ee Ge te et en eek « oe) eee 

weeny Gey ot whrd we eye Ge etter ww 
wip wae @ @e fr eye ere Pore et ee ed ees Geet mst re ee 
ROrek vee with ee te ell Cre tat ed Se ee 
we 6 Sek eet Ne whee Best eee te 
Ot red ot he ee 0 Oe ae ee Oe 


ett ee a 
SK a eh Ce 


eee were ee 


1929 1983 


advertisers. In time, the firm hired writers and artists and 
carried out complete advertising campaigns for clients. 
N. W. Ayer & Son thus became the first “modern” adver- 
tising agency. By 1900, most agencies in the United 
States were writing copy for advertisers. By the 1920's, 
they had assumed responsibility for complete advertis- 
ing campaigns. 

The rise of radio and television provided advertis- 
ers with new, powerful media. Commercial radio sta- 
tions began operating in the United States in the 1920's. 
Radio soon became a major medium for national adver- 
tisers. It enabled them to reach the large, captive audi- 
ences that tuned in to popular programs. Many of the 
radio shows were produced by advertising agencies. 
The popularity of radio soared for about 20 years, untii 
television began to boom after World War I! (1939-1945). 
Radio then lost much of the business of national adver- 
tisers, though it continued to be an important medium 
for local advertisers. The rise of coast-to-coast TV broad- 
casts in the 1950's provided national advertisers with ac- 
cess to mass audiences far larger than those reached by 
radio. By 1955, advertisers were spending over $1 billion 
a year on television. 

Recent developments. Advertising expenditures in 
the United States have increased tremendously since 
World War II. In 1950, about $5.7 billion was spent on 
advertising. Advertising expenditures are now more 
than $200 billion a year. 

The growth of advertising since the 1950's has been 
accompanied by criticism of advertising practices. Much 
of the criticism has focused on the use of psychological. 
techniques in advertising. Advertising has also been crit- 
icized for its stereotypical portrayal of women, elderly 
people, and racial minorities. As a consequence, many 
advertisers have broadened the variety of roles played 
by members of these groups in ads. In addition, some 
advertisers have used people with physical disabilities 
in commercials for products and services not related to 
the disabilities. 





1994 


Advertising over many years has helped establish the widespread popularity of Coca-Cola Dis- 
tinctive slogans and an emphasis on youth, enjoyment, and success have long characterized Coke 
ads. The company regularly updates its ads to appeal to more consumers. 





Total growth of U.S. advertising 


This graph shows how US. advertising expenditures have risen 
since 1950. The rise has been especially marked since 1970. 


World 
United States 








Billions of U. S. dollars 


450 
1299: 


$431,500,000,000 





400 


350 





E999; 
$215,200,000,000 


200 
150 


; / 
ae 


1960 


0 


1950 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 


Source: Universal McCann, Inc. 
Figures are for 1999. 


Since the 1980's, many new advertising media have 
appeared. For example, advertisements are now seen in 
motion-picture theaters and on videotapes prior to the 
featured movie. They appear in high school classroom 
news programming. Supermarket shoppers may be ex- 
posed to in-store radio and grocery carts with miniature 
billboards or video screens advertising products. 

Advertising on the Internet began after the creation of 
the World Wide Web in the early 1990's. Businesses 
spend only a small percentage of their advertising bud- 
gets on the Internet, but this medium is growing rapidly. 

Advertisers also began to spend more money on pro- 
motional campaigns. Promotions involving coupons, re- 
bates, premiums, or sweepstakes awards may provide a 
short-term boost in sales. But some industry experts be- 
lieve the increase in sales comes at the expense of the 
long-term image of the brand or product. 


Careers 


The field of advertising offers a wide variety of job op- 
portunities for people with creative, analytic, business, 
or technical skills. The industry needs writers, artists, re- 
searchers, media buyers, salespeople, production man- 
agers, and account executives. Jobs can be found with 
advertisers, advertising agencies, the advertising media, 
or advertising service and supply houses. 

The majority of jobs in advertising require a college 


Advertising 81 
Growth of U.S. advertising by medium 


This graph indicates how advertising expenditures in the United 
States have been distributed since 1940 among the chief media. 


Billions of dollars 


55 

50 ———Television 
$ 50,440,000,000 

55 

L— — Newspapers 

40 S$ 46,642 000 000 
$ 41,403,000,000 

30 

25 

20 
Radio 

1 $ 17,215,000,000 
Yellow pages” 

10 S$ 12,652,000,000 
Consumer 
magazines 

5 S$ 11,433,000,000 
Vara 
0 S 1,940,000,000 
1940 1955 1970 1985 2000 2015 


Excludes media on which comparatively little money is spent, such as outdoor signs and store 
displays. “Information for yellow pages not counted separately prior to 1980. 

Source: Universal McCann, Inc. Figures are for 1999. 

education or special training. Approximately 30 colleges 
and universities in the United States offer major pro- 
grams in the field of advertising. People with education 
in the liberal arts, journalism, behavioral sciences, busi- 
ness, or commercial art may also find employment in 
the advertising industry. 

Information about careers in advertising may be ob- 
tained from the American Advertising Federation in 
Washington, D.C, and from the American Association of 
Advertising Agencies in New York City. 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Commercial art Motivation research 


Bonnie B. Reece 


Computer graphics (In Newspaper 

advertising) Packaging 
Consumerism (The right toin- — Poster 

formation) Propaganda (Businesses) 
Magazine Public opinion poll 


Mail-order business Public relations 


Market research Radio 
Marketing Sales 
Modeling Television 
Motion picture (Distribution) 
Outline 
Il. Ways of advertising 
A. Television £. Magazines 


B. Newspapers 
C. Direct mail 
D. Radio 


F. Outdoor signs 
G. Other ways of advertising 


82 AEC 


ll. Advertising techniques 
A Basic appeals 
B. Attention-getting headlines 
C Slogans 
D. Testimonials 
E. Product characters 
F. Comparison of products 
G. Repetition 
ll. Creating advertisements 
A. Research 
B. Media selection 
IV. The advertising industry 
A Advertising agencies 
B. Advertising depart- 
ments 
V. Effects of advertising 
A. Economic effects 
B. Social effects 
VI. History 
Vu. Careers 


C. Creative work 
D. Production 


C Advertising associations 
D. Regulation of advertising 


C. Political effects 


Questions 

What are testimonials? 

With what kinds of information does market research provide 
advertisers? 

What advantages do magazines have over newspapers as an ad- 
vertising medium? 

How does advertising in other countries differ from that in the 
United States? 

What do most historians believe was the first form of advertis- 
ing? 

What is the chief criticism of political advertising? 

How did the term hidden persuaders come into use? 

What are some of the ways in which the headlines of advertise- 
ments attract attention? 

What work does the creative department of an advertising 
agency do? 

What is the chief U.S. government agency that enforces federal 
laws against deceptive advertising? 


Additional resources 


Berger, Warren. Advertising Today. Phaidon, 2001. 

Field, Shelly. Career Opportunities in Advertising and Public Re- 
lations. 3rd ed. Checkmark, 2002. 

Pricken, Mario. Creative Advertising: ldeas and Techniques from 
the World's Best Campaigns. Thames & Hudson, 2002. 

Sutherland, Max, and Sylvester, A K. Advertising and the Mind 
of the Consumer. 2nd ed. Allen & Unwin, 2000. 

Wells, William, and others. Advertising: Principles and Practice. 
6th ed. Prentice Hall, 2002. 

Wilson, Lee. The Advertising Law Guide. Allworth, 2000. 


AEC. See Atomic Energy Commission. 

Aédes aegypti. See Finlay, Carlos J.; Yellow fever. 
A.E.F. stands for the American Expeditionary Forces 
sent to Europe during World War I. See Pershing, John 
Joseph; World War | (The United States enters the war); 
American Legion. 

Aegean civilization, jh /EE uhn, consisted of four 
cultures that flourished on the islands and shores of the 
Aegean Sea between 3000 and 1200 B.C. These cultures 
are called the Cycladic, Minoan, Mycenaean, and Trojan 
cultures. The Cycladic culture developed on a group of 
islands called the Cyclades. The Minoan culture arose 
on the island of Crete, and the Mycenaean culture flour- 
ished on the mainland of Greece. The Trojan culture 
centered upon the ancient city of Troy in what is now 
northwestern Turkey. 

The Aegean civilization arose after the people of the 
area discovered how to make bronze. During this peri- 
od, called the Aegean Bronze Age, the people became 
highly skilled in architecture, painting, and various 


crafts. They built richly decorated palaces and used sys- 

tems of writing. The Aegean Bronze Age ranks as one of 
the greatest artistic and cultural ages in history. It lasted 

from about 3000 to about 1100 B.C 

The Aegean civilization collapsed in the 1100's B.C 
The craftwork skills, the systems of writing, and the 
building knowledge were lost, and most trade ended. 
The region made little progress during the next 300 
years. 

The Aegean people left no written history. However, 
their descendants told stories about gods, great kings 
and heroes, and bloody wars. Some of these stories may 
have been based on actual people and events. The tales 
formed the basis for the epics the //iad and the Odyssey, 
attributed to the Greek poet Homer. The Aegean people 
also kept some records written on clay tablets. These 
records were written in characters that were not deci- 
phered until A.D. 1953. 

Archaeologists have uncovered most of the informa- 
tion known about the Aegean civilization. In the 1870's, 
the German archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann began 
research on the civilization. He believed that many sto- 
ries in classical Greek literature were based on real 
events, and he searched for the sites of legendary cities. 
In 1870, using legends as a guide, Schliemann conduct- 
ed the first major excavation on the site of Troy. In 1876, 
he launched the study of the Mycenaean culture. Schlie- 
mann discovered royal graves in Mycenae on the Greek 
mainland. 

In the 1880's, James T. Bent, a British scholar, explored 
the Cycladic culture. In 1900, Sir Arthur Evans, another 
British scholar, began excavating the Palace of Minos in 
Knossos on the island of Crete. His research provided 
most of the present-day knowledge of the Minoan cul- 
ture. 

The Cycladic culture flourished on a number of 
Aegean islands, including Kos, Milos, Siros, and Thira. 
Many Cycladic people made their living by fishing. 
Others worked as sailors and traders. Still others were 









f~ % , 
Levkas /\_ 
J 


. 
satan 


Zakinthos 


SkrrosQ, > 


~ . Q ~~ * 
cee xnge) 


a eee 
0 a a i) 







q-) 
D Pa “Delos 





° Naxos > = 
Sycladic G “Pa 
uN Milos a Tho yy a ' 
N ~~ Thirad = a? 
Seve Rhodes 


Mediterranean Sea % 


Minset {feroatnos 
Phai 


Crete 


150 Miles 





150 Kilometers 


WORLD BOOK map 
Aegean civilization flourished on the islands and shores of the 
Aegean Sea between 3000 and 1200 B.C. Four cultures—the Cy- 
cladic, Minoan, Mycenaean, and Trojan—developed there. 








farmers, many of whom grew grapes for use in produc- 
ing wine. Cycladic craftworkers made distinctively de- 
signed pottery and stone figurines. After 1900 B.C, the 
Cycladic culture declined and adopted many features of 
the Minoan and Mycenaean cultures. 

The Minoan culture, which arose on Crete, was 
named for Minos, the legendary king of the island. Ac- 
cording to tradition, Minos ruled the Aegean Sea and 
kept the Minotaur, a monster that was half man and half 
bull. See Minos; Minotaur. 

The Minoans were skilled artists and architects and 
active traders. They built the Palace of Minos in Knossos, 
as well as palaces in Zakros, Mallia, and Phaistos. The 
Minoans established trading posts throughout the 
Aegean region and in Egypt. Other people of the 
Aegean area copied Minoan designs in pottery and oth- 
er craftwork. The Minoans developed a decimal system 
and used a writing system in which complex symbols 
represented syllables of words. The Mycenaeans on the 
mainland of Greece later adapted the Minoan writing 
system to their language. 

After about 1450 B.C, fire destroyed nearly all the 
towns and palaces on Crete. But the palace in Knossos 
survived, and Mycenaeans gained control of it. The 
palace was burned by other people from Greece in the 
early 1300's B.C. The Minoan culture began to decline af- 
ter the palace was burned. The culture disappeared in 
the mid-1100's B.C 


The Mycenaean culture, also called the He/ladic cul- 


ture, centered on Mycenae, a powerful city on the main- 
land of Greece. By about 2000 B.C., a group of people 
had moved to the Peloponnesus, the southern peninsula 
of Greece, and had established Mycenae. Archaeolo- 
gists do not know where these people came from. The 
people introduced new styles of pottery to the area and 
built houses that had a large central room. Scholars be- 
lieve the Mycenaeans may have spoken a dialect that lat- 
er developed into the Greek language. 

By the 1500's B.C., the Mycenaeans had grown rich 
and powerful, and they greatly influenced Greek culture. 
For this reason, archaeologists call the late Bronze Age 
in Greece the Mycenaean period The Mycenaeans used 


Aegean civilization 83 


The Aegean people were 
highly skilled architects, 
artists, and craftworkers. The 
Minoans on the island of 
Crete produced such works 
as the scene shown here. The 
painting, which dates from 
between 1600 and 1400 B.C, 
shows people offering gifts to 
a god. 


Ronald Shendan 


Minoan architecture as a model for their palaces. Dur- 
ing the 1300's B.C, they built palaces in Mycenae and in 
such places as Athens, Thebes, Pylos, and Tiryns. The 
palace in Mycenae was surrounded by massive walls 
with a huge gateway called the Lion Cate. 

About 1200 B.C, the Mycenaean civilization had col- 
lapsed, and its main centers had been destroyed. Schol- 
ars do not know whether the civilization fell because of 
internal disorder or under attack from invaders. Accord- 
ing to one traditional account, the Mycenaeans were in- 
vaded by the Dorians, a people from northwestern 
Greece. But many experts now believe the Dorians did 
not arrive until after the fall of the Mycenaeans. 

The Trojan culture, also called the 7roadic culture, 
developed in and around Troy. Archaeologists have un- 
covered the remains of nine cities on the site of Troy. 
Each successive city was built on the ruins of the one 
before it. Archaeologists believe the seventh city was 
the legendary Troy described in the //iad and the Od- 
yssey. This city was built during the early 1200's B.C. It 
was set afire and destroyed in the mid-1200's B.C, possi- 
bly by invaders from the mainland of Greece. 

Norman A Doenges 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Architecture (Minoan archi- Mycenae 
tecture; Mycenaean archi- Painting (Aegean painting) 
tecture; picture: Greek ar- Schliemann, Heinrich 
chitecture) Sculpture (Aegean; pictures: 
Clothing (Ancient times: pic- Cycladic marble figurine; 
tures: The Cretans; Cretan Woman praying) 


women) Ship (Minoan and Mycenaean 
Crete ships! 
Evans, Sir Arthur John Trojan War 
Greece, Ancient (History) Troy 


Knossos Ventris, Michael George Fran- 
Labyrinth cis 


Additional resources 


Barber, R.L.N. The Cyclades in the Bronze Age. Univ. of la. Pr., 
1987. 

Castleden, Rodney. Minoans: Lite in Bronze Age Crete. 1990. 
Reprint. Routledge, 1993. 

Dickinson, Oliver, The Aegean Bronze Age. Cainbridge. 1994. 

Tavlour, William. The “ivcenaeans Rev. ed. 1983. Reprint. 
Thames & Hudson, 1990. 


84 Aegean Sea 


Aegean Sea, ee /FF ufn, is a gulf or arm of the Medi- 
terranean Sea. It lies between Greece on the west and 
north, Turkey on the east, and the island of Crete to the 
south. Its southernmost part is called the Sea of Crete. 
The Aegean covers about 69,000 square miles (179,000 
square kilometers). It is about 400 miles (640 kilometers) 
long and more than 200 miles (320 kilometers) wide at 
its widest point The Dardanelles, a strait on the north- 
east shore, links the Aegean to the Sea of Marmara. 
Many islands, together known as the Grecian Archi- 
pelago, lie throughout the Aegean Sea. They form four 
main groups—the Cyclades, the Dodecanese, the Spora- 
des, and a widely scattered group in the northern Ae- 


Aegean Sea 


20° East Longitude 7abyo 30° 
BULGARIA |, 
- | § MACEDONIA me Sea 
Istanbul 
Ea, wy — ag 
ALBANIAY Thessaloniki, .— ~THasos f , - . a 
Y vad L as & C= Qe f 
°, an , / ce ~~ Sea of Marmara 
= Se: aD Vii he ws = ay 
ps on _ a Ti cn Spadineles 
a \ <, LIMNOS P 
“GREECE No Se SMR 
ye ea ¥ 
ae =D sino: Ly, > TURKEY 
Ba. dS “bmi 
AN pe > At rds > 7+ Ss iF 
» <¢ 7 « \ ANOROS SAMOS 
af ~ XN - Pop = 
= N Ur ring? PATMOS-»“y, \ 
2 Jo lejos %\ 7 
Wee, crcpeS p> Ae 
3 ¥ 7 | Gow ‘ € — <r v eg 
2 ye & ISLANDS © g Y 
B North , ae Bh DODECANESE“ RHooES = 
E CYTHERA fre ISLANDS 
2 phe _, > KARPATHOS 
2 Mediterranean Sea —~—_ SRETE <n 
Oistance Scale 
0 100 200 300 400 500 Miles 


700 Kilometers 
WORLD BOOK map 


0 100 200 300 400 500 600 


gean that includes Limnos and Thasos. The beautiful is- 
lands of the Aegean achieved fame in Greek history and 
legend. Some are ancient volcanoes and are made of 
lava. Others are made of pure white marble. The impor- 
tant historic islands include Delos, Euboea, Samos, Les- 
bos, Lemnos, Patmos, and Rhodes. All the islands of the 
Grecian Archipelago have an area of about 2,500 square 
miles (6,470 square kilometers). John J. Baxevanis 

See also Aegean civilization; Dardanelles; Lesbos; 
Rhodes. 

Aegis, FE jihs, was the name of the shield or breast- 
plate made for Jupiter by Vulcan. Jupiter created thun- 
der with it. Minerva (Athena), Jupiter's daughter, carried 
it as a sign of authority when she went on missions for 
her father. In its center was the head of Medusa, which 
is said to have had the power of turning men to stone. 

See also Medusa; Minerva. Mary R. Lefkowitz 
Aeneas, if NEE uhs, was a Trojan hero in Greek and 
Roman mythology. The Romans believed he was an an- 
cestor of Romulus and Remus, the mythical founders of 
Rome. The Roman poet Virgil celebrated the adventures 
of Aeneas in the Aeneid, Rome's national epic. 

Aeneas was the son of the Trojan prince Anchises 
and the Greek goddess Aphrodite (called Venus by the 
Romans). When Troy fell, Aeneas fled with his father and 
his son Ascanius from the burning city (see Trojan War). 
On nearby Mount Ida, Aeneas gathered the few other 


Trojan survivors and sailed away to found a new home. 
They stopped at various places and had many adven- 
tures. In the city of Carthage in Africa, Aeneas met 
Queen Dido. She fell in love with him and committed 
suicide when a sense of duty to his destined role as a 
founder of a new home for the Trojans compelled him 
to leave her. 

Aeneas finally arrived in Italy. He visited the lower 
world, where he learned about Rome's future glory. Ae- 
neas then traveled to the Italian region of Latium, where 
he became friends with King Latinus. The king offered 
his daughter Lavinia in marriage. Aeneas married Lavinia 
and founded the city of Lavinium. 

Aeneas later disappeared from this world during a 
battle with a neighboring people called the Etruscans. 
According to some versions of the myth, he was taken 
to heaven and became the god Jupiter Indiges. 

Daniel P. Harmon 

See also Aeneid; Dido; Virgil. 

Aeneid, jh NEE ihd, the national epic of ancient Rome, 
is one of the world’s greatest poems of heroic adven- 
ture. It was written by the Roman poet Virgil between 30 
and 19 B.C. This period was one of national pride for the 
Romans. The emperor Augustus had just united the peo- 
ple of the Italian peninsula to defeat Rome's enemies in 
the eastern provinces. Virgil chose the myth of the Tro- 
jan hero Aeneas to express ancient Rome's moral and 
religious values and to honor Augustus, who was be- 
lieved to be Aeneas descendant. 

The Aene/d contains 12 books. The first six books imi- 
tate the Greek epic the Odyssey. They describe Aeneas’ 
adventures at sea following the capture of Troy by the 
Greeks during the Trojan War. 

As the Aeneid begins, a storm shipwrecks Aeneas 
and his Trojan followers near Carthage in North Africa. 
There, Aeneas falls in love with the queen, Dido. But the 
gods order him to leave for Italy. In despair, Dido com- 
mits suicide. After Aeneas finally reaches Italy, he goes 
down to the underworld and learns about his future de- 
scendants, the Romans. 

Virgil bases the last six books of the Aene/d on the 
Greek epic the //iad. They begin as Aeneas arrives near 
the future site of Rome. There, the local king, Latinus, of- 
fers him land for his people and marriage to his daugh- 
ter, Lavinia. Turnus, Lavinia’s jealous suitor, attacks the 
Trojans and kills the young soldier Pallas, whom Aeneas 
has promised to protect. Aeneas later fights Turnus and 
kills him in punishment for the death of Pallas. 

Aeneas obedience to the gods costs him his personal 
happiness and the lives of those he loves. Yet he retains 
his sense of duty and commitment to creating a new na- 
tion in an unknown land. 

See also Virgil; Aeneas; Dido; Sibyl; Troy. 

Aeolian harp, ee OH /ee uhn, is an unusual ancient 
musical instrument. It consists of a wooden box with 
from 8 to 15 strings of various thickness stretched along 
the top. The strings are raised slightly by low bridges 
near each end of the box. The instrument produces soft, 
exotic sounds when the wind blows on the strings, caus- 
ing them to vibrate. The Aeolian harp is named for Aeo- 
lus, the ancient Greek god of the winds. Abram Loft 
Aeolians, ee OH /ee uhnz, were a group of ancient 
Greeks. They lived in a large part of east-central Greece | 
before 1150 B.C. Toward the end of the 1100's, other 


Elaine Fantham 





Greeks called Dorians invaded Aeolian territory, and 
many Aeolians moved to the western coast of Asia Mi- 
nor (present-day Turkey) and the nearby islands of Les- 
bos and Tenedos. The coastal district was known as Ae- 
olis. The Aeolians organized themselves in a loose 
confederacy. The island of Lesbos became a busy trad- 
ing center and the home of a famous school of poetry. 
Its most famous poets included Alcaeus and Sappho. 

Norman A. Doenges 

See also Achaeans; Dorians; Greece, Ancient (Histo- 
ry); lonians; Sappho. 

Aeolus, FF uh luhs, was the keeper of the winds in 
Greek mythology. Aeolus lived on a floating island, 
which scholars believe was one of the Aeolian Islands 
near Sicily. These islands were named for him. Aeolus 
kept the winds confined in a cave on the island and re- 
leased them whenever he wished. 

Aeolus plays an important part in two great epic po- 
ems, the Odyssey and the Aeneid. in the Odyssey, Aeo- 
lus gives the Greek hero Odysseus (Ulysses in Latin) a 
leather bag containing the winds that could prevent 
Odysseus from sailing home. Odysseus’s sailors open 
the bag because they mistakenly believe that it contains 
treasure. The winds escape from the open bag and blow 
Odysseus’s ship off its course. At the beginning of the 
Aeneid, the goddess Juno, an enemy of the Trojan hero 
Aeneas, persuades Aeolus to release winds that cause a 
storm. The storm then scatters Aeneass fleet. 

Nancy Felson 
Aerated water. See Mineral water. 

Aerial. See Antenna. 

Aerial photography. See Archaeology (Locating 
sites; picture: Aerial photography); Photogrammetry. 
Aerial surveying. See Photogrammetry; Surveying. 
Aerobatics. See Airplane (Special-purpose planes; 
picture: Aerobatic planes). 

Aerobics, air OH bihks, is a system of exercises de- 
signed to promote the supply and use of oxygen in the 
body. These exercises include bicycling, dancing, jog- 
ging, rowing, skating, swimming, and fast walking. 
Many people participate in aerobics programs to in- 
crease their endurance and energy and to achieve and 
maintain their proper weight. Regular aerobic exercise 
may also help lessen the risk of heart disease. 

A regular, vigorous program of aerobic exercises 
helps the body process large amounts of oxygen effi- 
ciently. The presence of oxygen in the muscle cells is 
necessary for the formation of a compound called 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The breakdown of ATP 
produces the energy for all muscular activity. During 
vigorous activity, more oxygen is inhaled and passes 
from the lungs into the blood. More oxygen-rich blood 
is delivered to the muscles, creating more ATP. This in- 
creased amount of ATP produces more energy for the 
body. If the circulatory system cannot supply enough 
oxygen to the muscles or if the muscles cannot use oxy- 
gen efficiently, the body produces a smaller amount of 
ATP. This results in early fatigue. 

For maximum effectiveness, individuals should per- 
form aerobic exercises continuously for 15 minutes to 
an hour 3 to 5 times a week. Men and women over the 
age of 35 should get a medical examination before be- 
ginning an aerobics program. Herb Weber 

See also Jogging; Running; Physical fitness. 


Aerodynamics 85 


Aerodynamics, 4/8 oh dy NAM ihks, is the study of 
forces that act on an object as it moves through air or 
some other fluid. Aerodynamic forces act on airplanes 
and all other objects that fly through the air. These 
forces also act on automobiles and other objects that 
move partly through the air and partly along a solid sur- 
face. In addition, aerodynamic forces act on ships, which 
move partly through the air and partly through water. 
Such forces even act on buildings due to the wind that 
blows around them. Scientists, engineers, and architects 
study aerodynamics to learn to design vehicles and 
structures. 


Principles of aerodynamics 


There are two basic aerodynamic forces—/ift and 
drag. Both result from a transfer of force from a fluid to 
the surface of a solid object. The force from the fluid 
creates a pressure and a shear stress on the surface. 

Pressure is force per unit area, with the force applied 
perpendicular to the surface. Pressure can be measured 
in pounds per square inch in the system of units custom- 
arily used in the United States. The pounds are a meas- 
ure of the force, and the square inch ts the unit of sur- 
face area. In the metric system, a common unit of 
pressure is the k/lopascal One kilopascal equals a force 
of 0.1 newton on an area of 1 square centimeter. One 
pound per square inch equals about 6.9 kilopascals. 

Shear stress is also force per unit area, but this force 
is applied along the surface. Shear stress occurs in a flu- 
id due to the fluid’s viscosity, its internal friction that re- 
sists motion. Friction occurs in a fluid whenever one lay- 
er of the fluid slides over another layer. Because of 
friction, the layers resist sliding. 

The total aerodynamic force transferred from the fluid 
to the surface is a result of the pressure and the shear 
stress acting over the entire surface. Lift and drag are 
components (parts) of the total aerodynamic force. Lift is 
the component that is perpendicular to the direction of 
motion of the object. In the case of an airplane that is fly- 
ing horizontally, the lift is applied in the upward direc- 
tion. Drag is the component that pushes in the direction 
opposite that of the object's motion. Thus, drag opposes 
the motion of the object. 

Lift keeps an airplane in the air by balancing the 
weight of the plane. This aerodynamic force is created 
along a wing by the motion of the wing through the air. 

Lift can be analyzed in terms of the motion of an a/rfoil 
(cross section of a wing) through the air. The motion cre- 
ates lift by producing a difference in air pressure. The 
air pressure on the lower surface of the airfoil becomes 
greater than the air pressure on the upper surface. 

The pressure difference is a result of a difference in 
the speed of the air flowing along the two surfaces. Ac- 
cording to a principle discovered by Daniel Bernoulli, a 
Swiss mathematician, the pressure of a fluid increases 
as the speed of the fluid decreases. The air pressure on 
the lower surface of the airfoil is greater because the air 
flows more slowly along that surface. 

Lift can occur when the airflows along the top and 
bottom surfaces are unsymmetrical (unbalanced). 
Unsymmetrical flow is a result of one or both of the fol- 
lowing factors: (1) the camber (curved shape) of the air- 
foil and (2) the ang/e of attac& (the angle at which the air- 
flow meets the airfoil). A typical airfoil has a rounded 


86 Aerodynamics 


How lift occurs 


WORLD BOOK diagram by Jonathan Simpson 


Lift can occur when the airflows along the top and bot- 
tom surfaces of an airplane wing are unsymmetrical (un- 
balanced). The air approaching the wing's rounded edge 
splits smoothly along a line called a dividing streamline 
and merges smoothly at the sharp edge. 


Lower surface Ao 
Td 


———-~» Stream direction 


Angle of attack 
WORLD BOOK diagram by Jonathan Simpson 


Factors that create lift in an airplane include (1) the 
angle of attack that each wing makes with the airstream 
and (2) the shape of the mean camber line that represents 
the average curvature of the wing's upper and lower sur- 
faces. At the leading edge of the wing, the mean camber 
line curves upward from the straight chord line connecting 
the leading and trailing edges. 





leading (front) edge and a sharp trailing (rear) edge. As 
the air approaches the leading edge, it splits to go 
around the airfoil. The air that travels along the top ac- 
celerates as it goes around the highly curved leading 
edge. As a result, the speed of the air on the upper sur- 
face is greater. 

In addition, the airflows along the top and bottom of 
the airfoil merge smoothly as they leave the trailing 
edge. This condition is known as the Kutta condition— 
named for its discoverer, Martin W. Kutta, a German 
mathematician. 

Another explanation for lift is related to an airfoil’s 
ability to deflect (turn) air downward. An airfoil deflects 
air by guiding the air along its cambered surface and by 
meeting the air at an angle. Deflection produces lift ac- 
cording to a law of motion explained in 1687 by the Eng- 
lish scientist and mathematician Isaac Newton. This law 
states that, for every action, there is an equal and oppo- 
site reaction. Thus, as an airfoil deflects air downward, 
the reaction to the deflection produces an upward force 
by the air on the airfoil. 

The amount of lift created by the airflow along a wing 
depends mainly on the wing's angle of attack, speed, 
and camber. The area of the wing and the density of the 


air also affect the amount of lift. 

Angle of attack is the angle that a wing makes with the 
air flowing past it. A pilot can change this angle by 
changing the plane's position in space. Increasing the 
angle of attack increases the lift—but only up to a point. 
If the angle of attack becomes too large, the airflow will 
separate from the upper surface of the wing. As a result, 
lift will decrease sharply, producing a condition called 
stall An airplane at the point of stalling may crash unless 
the angle of attack is quickly reduced. Airplanes fly at 
angles of about 3 to 15 degrees. An airplane will stall if 
the angle becomes larger than 15 or 20 degrees. 

Speed. A wing's speed through the air helps deter- 
mine how much lift will occur. The faster the airplane is 
flying, the greater will be the lift 

Wing area. An increase in wing area creates extra lift 
by increasing the total forces due to air pressure and 
shear stress. If the air pressure and the shear stress are 
held constant, the amount of force depends only on the 
area: The greater the area, the greater the force. 

Air density. Air that is relatively dense creates more 
lift than does relatively thin air. This happens because, 
according to Bernoulli's principle, pressure increases 
with density. 

Creating extra lift During take-offs and landings, pi- 
lots want to fly as slowly as possible. Special parts called 
high-lift devices enable a plane to fly at minimum 
speeds. These devices are extensions that fit smoothly 
against the wing while the airplane is cruising. The pilot 
can lower them when they are needed. The extension at 
the leading edge of the wing is called a s/at The exten- 
sion at the trailing edge is a fap. When lowered, these 
extensions increase the wing camber and area, furnish- 
ing extra lift 

Drag is a force that resists the forward motion of a 
solid object in a fluid. The object's shape affects the 
amount of drag. Objects shaped to produce little drag 
are called streamlined or aerodynamically clean. 

Two types of drag—friction drag and form drag—act 
on all moving objects. A third type, induced drag, affects 








WORLD BOOK diagram by Jonathan Simpson 


A boat sails into the wind. When the wind blows past the sail, 
it creates a total aerodynamic force that can be represented by a 
driving force, which propels the boat, and a feeling force. This 
diagram also shows lift and drag forces for comparison with the 
corresponding forces on an airplane wing. 





only objects with lift. Still another kind of drag, wave 
drag, results when an object moves faster than the 
speed of sound. Wave drag also occurs when a ship 
generates waves on the surface of the water. This sec- 
tion discusses friction drag, form drag, and induced 
drag. For a discussion of wave drag, see the section 
Shock waves later in this article. 

Friction drag is a component of the drag due to shear 
stress. Friction has its strongest effect in the boundary 
layer, a thin layer of fluid next to the surface. 

The amount of friction drag depends upon whether 
the fluid flow is /aminar or turbulent \|n laminar flow, the 
fluid molecules move in orderly paths essentially along 
the direction of the surface. Turbulent flow occurs at 
higher speeds. In turbulent flow, the fluid’s speed and 
direction of flow vary randomly from an average value. 
This variation increases the shear stress. As a result, fric- 
tion drag is much higher when flow is turbulent than it 
is when flow is laminar. 

Airflow is usually laminar near a wing's leading edge, 
and it becomes turbulent farther along the surface. Air- 
plane designers try to delay the change from laminar 
flow to turbulent flow. One way to do this is to make the 
surface as smooth as possible. 

Form drag is a component of the drag due to pres- 
sure. The amount of form drag on an object depends on 
the object's form, or shape. If the object is not stream- 
lined, the drag force is mostly form drag. If the object is 
streamlined, the drag force is mostly friction drag. 

In form drag, the flowing fluid separates from the ob- 
ject. The pressure next to the rear surface of the object 
therefore decreases. This decrease makes the pressure 
on the front surface larger than that on the rear surface. 
The net result is a force that pushes against the front of 
the object. This force is the form drag. Designers can re- 
duce form drag by streamlining the object. 

Induced drag is a result of a phenomenon that is also 
responsible for lift. Airflow will lift an airplane wing if 





Aerodynamics 87 


the air pressure on the wing's lower surface is greater 
than that on the upper surface. But this pressure differ- 
ence also makes air flow at the tip of the wing. The air at 
the tip moves from the lower surface to the upper sur- 
face. This flow creates vortices, swirling streams of air 
that flow away from the tip and continue behind the 
Wing. 

The creation of wing-tip vortices uses energy that 
could otherwise be spent to provide lift and propel the 
aircraft. In addition, the vortices threaten the safety of 
airplanes flying close behind. Aircraft designers lessen 
induced drag by giving airplanes long, narrow wings. 

Lift and drag in a sailboat. The principles of aerody- 
namics also apply to objects that move through air but 
do not fly. One can use these principles to explain, for 
example, how a Sailboat sails into the wind. 

When the wind puffs the sail out, the sail resembles a 
cambered airplane wing. The apparent wind—the wind 
measured by an observer on the boat—thus generates a 
total aerodynamic force that corresponds to the force 
on a wing. This force can be reso/ved into (represented 
by) two components relative to the apparent wind: (1) lift, 
which tends to push the sail in a direction perpendicular 
to the apparent wind; and (2) drag, which resists the 
movement of the boat directly against the wind. 

The total aerodynamic force can also be resolved into 
another pair of components: (1) a driving force in the 
sailing direction, and (2) a heeling force, which is per- 
pendicular to the driving force. The driving force pro- 
pels the boat. As the boat moves, the water exerts an 
aerodynamic force on its hull and kee/ The keel is the 
main timber that extends the entire length of the bottom 
of the boat. 

The boat will sail at constant speed when the aerody- 
namic force generated on the sail is both equal to and 
opposite the corresponding aerodynamic force that the 
water exerts on the hull and keel. This condition also has 
the effect of canceling the heeling force. 


NASA’ Ames Research Center 


Stringlike lines represent air- 
flow in this illustration drawn 
by a supercomputer. Engi- 
neers typically use such com- 
puter simulations to evaluate 
proposed designs for an air- 
plane. The engineers then se- 
lect a design and build a 
physical model for testing. 


88 Aerodynamics 


How a sonic boom is created 


Ground 


A sonic boom occurs when an airplane flying faster than 
the speed of sound creates a shock wave. People on the 
ground hear the boom when the wave reaches them. 


WORLD BOOK diagram 


Supersonic aerodynamics 


Effects of supersonic aerodynamics occur when the 
airplane flies at speeds greater than the speed of sound. 
Supersonic means faster than the speed of sound. Two 
of the major effects of supersonic aerodynamics are 
shock waves and sonic booms. Both are created by pres- 
sure disturbances that a moving airplane produces in 
the air. 

These disturbances result from the flow of air around 
the plane. The disturbances travel away from the plane 
just as ripples in a pond spread from the spot where a 
stone falls into the water. Pressure disturbances travel at 
the speed of sound—about 760 miles per hour (mph), or 
about 1,225 kilometers per hour (kph), at sea level. 

Sound itself is a pressure disturbance, and so some of 
the disturbances produced by the airplane can be 
heard. If the plane is flying at less than the speed of 
sound, the sound of the plane travels ahead of the plane. 
Thus, people on the ground can hear the plane coming 
toward them. However, the sound ofa plane flying 
faster than the speed of sound cannot be heard on the 
ground until the aircraft has passed. 

Engineers and pilots use special numbers called 
Mach numbers to describe the speed of planes flying 
near or above the speed of sound. A Mach number is 
found by dividing the speed of an airplane by the speed 
of sound at the planes altitude. For example, the Mach 
number of a plane flying at 1,520 mph at sea level would 
be 2. Modern airliners cruise at an altitude of about 
35,000 feet (9,000 meters) and a speed of about Mach 
0.80 to Mach 0.85. 

Flight that is slightly faster or slower than Mach 1 is 
known as transonic flight. Flight that is significantly slow- 
er than Mach 1 is subsonic. Flight that is significantly 
faster than Mach 1 is supersonic, and flight at or faster 
than about Mach 5 is Aypersonic. Mach numbers are 
named for Austrian physicist and psychologist Ernst 
Mach. 

Shock waves are pressure disturbances produced 
by the flight of an airplane at supersonic speed. Because 
disturbances cannot move ahead of the plane, they 





build up into shock waves. The waves then attach them- 
selves to the front and rear of the plane. An airplane fly- 
ing at slightly less than the speed of sound can also pro- 
duce shock waves. These waves occur because the 
airflow next to some surfaces of the plane is actually su- 
personic. 

Shock waves create wave drag, thereby increasing 
the total amount of drag on the plane. A plane designed 
for transonic and supersonic flight therefore has fea- 
tures that help reduce wave drag. For example, its nose 
is sharply pointed, and its wings have sharp, thin edges 
that can knife through the air. The wings may also be an- 
gled back from the body of the plane. 

Sonic boom. After a supersonic airplane flies over- 
head, people on the ground may hear a sharp “bang.” 
This sound, called a sonic boom, is caused by shock 
waves from the plane. A plane flying at a supersonic 
speed sends out at least two shock waves—one from its 
front and the other from its rear. But the two waves may 
reach the ground so close together that people hear 
only one boom. A sonic boom may be strong enough to 
break windows or damage buildings. 


Applying aerodynamic principles 


To design an airplane, engineers need to determine 
how the airflow will interact with the surfaces of the 
plane. They need to know in detail how strong the air 
pressure and shear stress will be at various places along 
the body, the wings, and other parts of the airplane. To 
gather the information they need, the engineers must 
study more than the layers of air next to the surfaces. 
They must investigate the entire flow field, the large re- 
gion of space in which the airflow and the plane will in- 
teract. To study flow fields, aircraft design engineers al- 
most always use a combination of two techniques— 
wind-tunnel testing and computational fluid dynamics. 

Wind-tunnel testing. A wind tunnel is a ground- 
based facility in which a stream of air is blown at an ob- 
ject at uniform speed. Some wind tunnels are so huge 
that they can be used to test full-sized experimental air- 
planes. But most wind tunnels are relatively small facili- 
ties that are used to test scaled-down models. 

Engineers can obtain much valuable information from 
wind-tunnel testing. However, the models are expensive 
to build. Furthermore, as the design evolves, the engi- 
neers often must test a large number of different air- 
plane shapes. 

Computational fluid dynamics employs supercom- 
puters, the fastest and largest computers. In this tech- 
nique, a supercomputer solves equations describing 
physical Jaws that govern what happens at a large num- 
ber of points in a flow field. The equations contain a 
huge number of factors that are related to one another 
in complex ways. Some factors pertain to features of the 
airplane, such as the sizes and shapes of various parts of 
the plane. Other factors have to do with flying condi- 
tions, including aircraft speed, wind speed, angle of at- 
tack, and air density. 

The engineers first enter the equations into the super- 
computer. Next, they enter the numerical values that 
apply to the plane they are designing and to the flying 
conditions. The computer then calculates the corre- 
sponding pressures, shear stresses, and other results. 
These calculations simu/ate (represent) how the airplane 








would interact with the air. In many cases, the computer 
creates a motion picture that shows a few moments of 
flight. The engineers evaluate the results and change the 
design as necessary. Allen Plotkin 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Air Glider Rocket 

Airplane Helicopter Sonic boom 

Bernoulli's princi- Jet propulsion Streamlining 
ple Propeller Wind tunnel 


Additional resources 


Anderson, John D. A History of Aerodynamics and Its Impact on 
Flying Machines. Cambridge, 1997. 

Dalton, Stephen. The Miracle of Flight Firefly Bks., 1999. 

Tennekes, Henk. The Simple Science of Flight. MIT Pr., 1996. 

Wegener, Peter P. What Makes Airplanes Fly?2nd ed. Springer- 
Verlag, 1996. 


Aeronautics. See Aviation. 

Aeronautics and Space Administration, Na- 
tional. See National Aeronautics and Space Adminis- 
tration. 

Aeroplane. See Airplane. 

Aerosol, A/R uh sahil, is a mixture of extremely small 
particles and gas. The particles may be liquid droplets 
or tiny bits of solid material. They are suspended (dis- 
tributed) throughout the gas. Clouds and fog are 
aerosols that occur naturally. Cans of deodorant and hair 
spray produce aerosols when used. 

Fine solid particles and moisture constantly enter the 
earth's atmosphere, producing atmospheric aerosols. 
The solid particles include soil and coal dust, smoke, 
and pollen. Atmospheric aerosols contribute to air pol- 
lution. They also reflect some solar radiation back into 
space, slightly lowering the earth's surface temperature. 
Light scattered by atmospheric aerosols produces the 
sky's red glow at sunset. 

Containers for manufactured aerosol products are 
called aeroso/ cans. Within such cans, the product is dis- 
solved in a propellant, usually a liquefied gas. The con- 
tents of the can are sealed under pressure, and the can 
is fitted with a release valve. When the valve is opened, 
the pressurized solution is ejected. The released propel- 
lant vaporizes with the product suspended in it, forming 
an aerosol. Some products in pressurized cans, such as 
shaving cream and whipped cream, are not aerosols. 
These foamlike substances consist of gases that are sus- 
pended in a liquid base rather than solids or liquids that 


An aerosol container sprays 
out such products as deodor- 
izers and paints in the form of 
a fine mist. The product is 
mixed with a liquefied gas, 
called a propellant, and is 
held in the container under 
pressure. When the cap of the 
container is pushed down, the 
inlet opens and the solution 
moves through the dip tube. 
As the solution reaches the 
opening in the cap, the pro- 
pellant vaporizes and the par- 
ticles shoot into the air. 

WORLD BOOK dtagram 






| 
______ Dip tube 


Gas 
| under 
} pressure 


Solutian 





Aerospace medicine 89 


are suspended in a gaseous base. 

Chemicals used as propellants in manufactured 
aerosols include hydrocarbons, carbon dioxide, and ni- 
trous oxide. Chlorofluorocarbons (CFC’s) were also once 
used extensively as propellants (see Chlorofluorocar- 
bon). During the 1970's, however, many scientists be- 
came concerned that CFC’s were reacting with and di- 
minishing the ozone /ayer in the earth’s upper 
atmosphere. This layer shields the earth's surface from 
dangerous ultraviolet radiation (see Ozone). In 1978, the 
U.S. government banned the use of CFC propellants. By 
1996, most industrialized countries, including the United 
States, had ended all production of CFCs. 

H. Stephen Stoker 

See also Air (Particles in the air); Ozone hole. 
Aerospace industry. See Aviation. 

Aerospace medicine is the field of medical science 
concerned with the effects of flight on human health. It 

deals with aviation medicine, the care of airplane crews 
and passengers; and space medicine, the care of astro- 

nauts. Doctors and scientists in this field try to increase 

the job performance and safety, as well as the health, of 
people who fly. 

Aviation medicine. There are many common stress- 
es of air travel. They include motion sickness, noise, vi- 
bration, changes in oxygen levels, and rapid changes in 
speed and atmospheric pressure. 

An important stress in fighter aircraft is a rapid up- 
ward acceleration. This movement can cause blood to 
be pooled, or concentrated, in the lower parts of the 
body. The flow of blood to the heart may then be insuffi- 
cient for the heart to maintain adequate circulation to 
the brain, causing unconsciousness. As a result, fighter 
pilots must wear special trousers called G suits that 
squeeze blood out of the legs and back to the heart. 

Doctors who specialize in aviation medicine are 
called flight surgeons. Flight surgeons help to design 
equipment and develop crew selection and training 
programs. Other areas of aviation medicine include in- 
vestigating accidents, training crews for survival after 
crashing, and transporting sick or injured people by air. 

Space medicine. During space travel, weightlessness 
(freedom from the pull of gravity) can cause several dis- 
orders. These include motion sickness, disorientation 
(loss of a sense of direction), and a shift of blood and 
other fluids from the feet and legs to the chest and head. 
Weightlessness also can cause the loss of bone and 
muscle tissue in the feet and legs. This condition proba- 
bly occurs because the bones and muscles no longer 
need to work against the pull of gravity. Researchers are 
seeking a combination of exercises, drugs, and special 
diets that will reduce bone and muscle loss. 

Another hazard of space flight is radiation from the 
sun and other objects in space. Being exposed to radia- 
tion increases a person's chances of developing 
leukemia and other cancers. Astronauts exposed to 
more than a certain amount of radiation would be 
grounded. Today s spacecraft have too little protection 
against radiation for long-duration manned flights into 
deep space (space beyond the earth and the moon). 

Some scientists have suggested that the most serious 
problem for astronauts on long missions could be psy- 
chological. Space travelers have found that after 30 days 
of being confined together in a small space on a flight 


90 Aeschylus 


scheduled to last many months, they develop an intense 
dislike for each other and a strong desire to go home. 

K E. Money 

See also Anoxia; Bends; G (symbol); Space explo- 
ration. 

Aeschylus, FHS kuh luhs (525-456 B.C) was the earliest 
writer of Greek tragedy whose plays exist in complete 
form. He wrote more than 80 plays, of which seven sur- 
vive. These seven plays reveal a deeply patriotic and reli- 
gious artist who brought Greek tragedy to maturity. Be- 
fore Aeschylus, tragedies had a single actor who could 
only respond to the questions or suggestions of the 
chorus. Aeschylus increased the number of actors to 
two, which created dialogue that permitted interaction 
between characters. 

Aeschylus's plots are simple. Most of them center on 
a conflict between an individual's will and the divine 
powers that rule the world. Aeschylus wrote tragedy in 
the grand manner, with arichness of language and com- 
plexity of thought that only the English playwright 
William Shakespeare has rivaled. Aeschylus’s greatest 
work is the Oresteia (458 B.C), which consists of three 
plays forming one drama. They are Agamemnon, The Li- 
bation Bearers, and The Eumenides (The Furies). In these 
plays, Aeschylus turned the violence after the return of 
King Agamemnon from Troy into a drama about the rec- 
onciliation of human suffering with divine power. 
Aeschylus’s other surviving plays are The Persians (472), 
Seven Against Thebes (467), The Suppliants (4632), and 
Prometheus Bound, which was probably written late in 
Aeschylus's life. Aeschylus was born into a prominent 
family in Eleusis, near Athens. 

See also Drama (Greek drama). 
Aesculapius. See Asclepius. 
Aesop’s fables, FF sahps, are a collection of stories 
attributed to a Greek slave named Aesop, who died 
about 565 B.C Like all fables, each of these tales teaches 
a moral and offers useful advice. Most of the characters 
in Aesop's fables are animals that talk and act like hu- 
mans. They show the failings and virtues of human na: 
ture in a simple, humorous way. Each fable ends with a 
proverb that sums up the fable’s moral and advice. 

The best-known of Aesop’s fables is probably The 
Tortoise and the Hare.” It tells about a race between a 
slow tortoise and a swift hare. Halfway through the race, 
the hare is so far ahead and so confident of victory that 
he takes a nap. The tortoise plods along steadily and 
eventually passes the hare, who awakens and sees his 
slow opponent crossing the finish line. The proverb 
“Slow and steady wins the race” sums up the moral of 
this story, teaching that persistence can be more impor- 
tant than speed. 

Another favorite fable, “The Ant and the Grasshopper,” 
illustrates the value of hard work and preparation for the 
future. In this fable, the grasshopper frolics all summer, 
while the ant stores food. When winter comes, the ant 
has plenty to eat, but the grasshopper starves. 

Aesop's fables have provided numerous popular ex- 
pressions. For example, an enemy who pretends to be a 
friend is sometimes called “a wolf in sheep's clothing.” 
This expression comes from the fable in which a wolf 
disguises himself in a sheepskin. The wolf then moves 
undetected among a herd of sheep and kills them for 
food. However, the shepherd also mistakes the wolf for 


Luci Berkowitz 


a sheep and kills him for supper. 

No one knows how many of the stories attributed to 
Aesop were actually composed by him. Some of the fa- 
bles originated from more ancient sources, and Aesop 
may have been responsible only for retelling them and 
making them popular. 

For many years, Aesopss fables were handed down 
orally from generation to generation. About 300 B.C, an 
Athenian politician named Demetrius of Phaleron gath- 
ered about 200 of them into a collection called Assem- 
blies of Aesopic Tales. This collection was translated into 
Latin about 300 years later by Phaedrus, a freed Greek 
slave. About A.D. 230, the Greek writer Valerius Babrius 
combined Aesop’s fables with some from India and 
translated all of them into Greek verse. Since then, other 
writers have retold the fables and expanded their mean- 
ing, but the tales have never lost their original charm 
and simplicity. Cynthia W. Shelmerdine 

See also Allegory; Fable; La Fontaine, Jean de. 


Additional resources 


Barnes-Murphy, Frances, ed. The Fables of Aesop. Lothrop, 1994. 

Younger readers. 

Clark, Margaret, ed. The Best of Aesop's Fables. Little, Brown, 

1990. Younger readers. 

Keller, John E., and Keating, L C, eds. Aesop’s Fables, with a Life 

of Aesop. Univ. Pr. of Ky., 1993. 

Aesthetics, ehs THEHT ihks, also spelled esthetics, is 
the study of theories that apply to the arts in a broad and 
fundamental way. People think about aesthetics when 
they ask why some things are beautiful and some are 
not, or whether there are basic rules for creating or in- 
terpreting good paintings, poems, and music. 

Aestheticians study the arts in general. They compare 
arts from different cultures and from different periods of 
history, in order to organize our knowledge of them sys- 
tematically. For many years, the study of beauty was re- 
garded as the central problem of aesthetics. Now the 
subject has broadened to include many other aspects of 
art. Aestheticians try to understand how art is related to 
what people feel, to what they learn, and to the cultures 
in which they live. To gain this understanding, they col- 
lect, organize, and interpret information about the arts 
and aesthetic experience. Aestheticians try to find 
whether there are standards of art criticism. This helps 
people appreciate different kinds of art and judge them 
intelligently. 

In addition to studying theories about works of art, 
aestheticians want to understand artists and audiences. 
They can understand art better if they have learned how 
artists imagine, create, and perform, and what makes 
artists activities different from the work of nonartists. 
They also try to understand what happens to people's 
feelings when they experience art. Aestheticians study 
how art affects people's moods, beliefs, and values. 

Aesthetics is the youngest branch of philosophy to be 
given its own name, which was first used in the late 
1700's. But philosophers from the ancient Greeks to the 
present day have discussed the philosophy of art. Al- 
most all of them have talked about whether art is good 
for people and for society. Some point out that art can 
have dangers as well as benefits, and a few argue that 
art and artists are so disruptive that they threaten the so- 
cial order. But most philosophers believe art is good be- 
cause it allows us to express our emotions, teaches us 





about ourselves and the world, or communicates the 
traditions of different times and cultures. 

Aestheticians use art history to understand the art of 
previous times. They use the psychology of art to learn 
how our senses interact with our imagination and un- 
derstanding when we experience art. Art criticism 
serves as a guide to enjoy each individual work of art. 
The social sciences, such as anthropology and sociolo- 
gy, help aestheticians understand how creating and ap- 
preciating art relate to other human activities. The social 
sciences also indicate how art varies in relation to physi- 
cal, social, and cultural environments. Anita Silvers 

See also Philosophy (Aesthetics); Art and the arts. 


Additional resources 


Kelly, Michael, ed. Encyclopedia of Aesthetics. 4 vols. Oxford, 

1998. 

Lyas, Colin. Aesthetics. McGill-Queens Univ. Pr., 1997. 
Manns, James W. Aesthetics. Sharpe, 1998. 
Paulson, Ronald. The Beautiful, Novel, and Strange: Aesthetics 

and Heterodoxy. johns Hopkins, 1996. 

Aetna, Mount. See Mount Etna. 

Afars and Issas. See Djibouti. 

Afer, Publius Terentius. See Terence. 
Affenpinscher, AH fuhn pinn shuhr, is a small, shag- 
gy, black dog. It weighs about 8 pounds (3.6 kilograms), 
and stands only 10 inches (25 centimeters) high. It has 
bushy eyebrows that hang down over its eyes. Tufts of 
hair stick out all over its face, and it has a mustache. The 
name affenpinscher comes from the German words 
meaning monkey terrier. The affenpinscher is bold, 
quick on its feet, and playful. 

Critically reviewed by the American Kennel Club 

See also Dog (picture: Toy dogs). 

Affidavit, af uh DAY viht, in law, is a written or printed 
statement of facts sworn to, or affirmed, before a court 
bailiff, a notary public, or any other person qualified to 
administer an oath. The person who swears to the truth 
of an affidavit usually must sign it 

In the United States, affidavits can be introduced as 
evidence in a few stages of legal proceedings. But 
judges and lawyers generally consider affidavits less re- 
liable evidence than oral testimony given by a witness in 
open court. The reason is that an affidavit may be signed 
and sworn to without the presence of an adversary to 
contradict it if it misstates the facts. Oral testimony given 
in open court may be questioned by the attorney for the 
opposing party. 

Affidavits are widely used in preliminary legal pro- 
ceedings. For example, when the plaintiff files a written 
complaint to start a lawsuit, the law may require that the 
plaintiff include an affidavit of the truth of the charges. 

Jack M. Kress 

See also Deposition; Notary public. 

Affirmative action refers to policies aimed at in- 
creasing the numbers of people from certain social 
groups in employment, education, business, govern- 
ment, and other areas. In the United States, these 
groups are women and such minorities as African 
Americans, Asian Americans, Hispanic Americans, 
American Indians, disabled people, and Vietnam veter- 
ans. In general, affirmative action is intended to benetit 
groups that are thought to have suffered from discrimi- 
nation. But critics argue that some groups benefit from 
affirmative action as a result of their political influence. 


Afghanhound 91 


Different affirmative-action programs have different 
features. Some seek only to remove barriers so that all 
people may compete equally. Others use numerical 
goals called quotas to ensure that women or minorities 
are included in preset proportions. Programs using quo- 
tas may prefer members of certain groups. 

For federal contracts, the term affirmative action was 
first used in an order issued by President John F. 
Kennedy in 1961. That and other early federal orders re- 
quired businesses with U.S. government contracts to 
treat their employees without regard to race, ethnic ori- 
gin, religion, or gender. Later, the government asked 
these businesses to consider the race and gender of 
their employees to ensure that the mix of people on 
their staffs reflected the mix in the local work force. 
Also, a share of federal contracts were set aside for 
businesses owned by women or minorities. Many state 
and local governments, as well as many businesses and 
schools, created their own affirmative-action programs. 

Since the 1970's, controversy over affirmative action 
has grown. People disagree about how to achieve the 
goal of nondiscrimination. Some claim temporary pref- 
erences are necessary to achieve equality. Others be- 
lieve quotas and other affirmative-action policies unfair- 
ly affect the right of people to be treated according to 
their abilities. People also disagree about which groups 
are entitled to affirmative action and for how long. 

In 1995, the United States Supreme Court ruled that a 
federal program requiring preference based on a per- 
son's race is unconstitutional unless the preference is 
designed to make up for specific instances of past dis- 
crimination. This meant that affirmative action could no 
longer be used to counteract racial discrimination by so- 
ciety as a whole, but must be aimed at eliminating spe- 
cific problems. In 1989, the court had made a similar de- 
cision regarding state and local programs. 

in 1996, voters in California approved Proposition 
209, which banned the use of racial or gender prefer- 
ences in public hiring, contracting, and education. Vot- 
ers in Washington state approved a similar measure, Ini- 
tiative 200, in 1998. At some universities where 
affirmative action has been abolished, new admissions 
policies have been established to ensure diversity. 
Some university systems now use a percentage formula 
based on high-school class ranking. Also during the 
1990's, federal courts ruled that affirmative action pro- 
grams in a number of states discriminated against non- 
minorities. George R. LaNoue 


Additional resources 


Guernsey, Joann B. Affirmative Action: A Problem or a Remedy? 
Lerner, 1997. 
Mills, Nicolaus, ed. Debating Affirmative Action. Dell, 1994. 


Afghan hound, 4F guhn, is a dog known for its 
speed and agility. It has been used for hunting gazelles, 
hares, and snow leopards in Afghanistan for hundreds 
of years. The Afghan hound has long ears, large feet, 
and a heavy coat of long, silky hair. It can be any of many 
colors. It stands about 27 inches (69 centimeters) high at 
the shoulder and weighs about 50 to 60 pounds (23 to 27 
kilograms). The Afghan hound moves with its head and 
tail held high. No one knows just where or when the 
Afghan originated. See also Dog (picture: Hounds). 
Critically reviewed by the Atghan Hound Club of America 


92 Afghanistan 





AP Wide World 


Kabul, Afghanistan’s capital and largest city, has both traditional and modern buildings. Tradi- 
tional mud-brick dwellings, such as those on the hillside, are found throughout Afghanistan. Some 
modern buildings rise in downtown Kabul. Parts of the city are being rebuilt after decades of war. 


Afghanistan 


Afghanistan, a nation in southwestern Asia, has tow- 
ering mountains, scorching deserts, fertile valleys, and 
rolling plains. Afghanistan is surrounded by six other 
countries and so does not have a seacoast. The country 
is bordered by Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Tajikistan 
on the north, China on the far northeast, Pakistan on the 
east and south, and Iran on the west. 

Afghanistan is one of the world’s least developed 
countries. Most Afghan workers farm the land, and 
many use old-fashioned farming tools and methods. 
Some of the people are nomads, who roam the country 
with their herds of sheep or goats. Kabul is the capital 
and largest city of Afghanistan. 

Almost all the people of Afghanistan are Muslims. The 
religion of the Muslims, Islam, is the chief common link 
among them. The population of Afghanistan consists of 
about 20 ethnic groups, most of which are divided into 
several tribes. Most of the ethnic groups have distinct 
languages and cultures. The variety of ethnic groups has 
made it difficult for Afghanistan to develop into a uni- 
fied, modern nation. 

Afghanistan has a long and troubled history. In early 
days, Persians, Greeks, Mongols, and other peoples 
conquered the region. In modern times, Afghanistan has 














The contributor of this article, Thomas E. Gouttierre, is Direc- 
tor of the Center tor Atghanistan Studies and Dean of Internation- 
al Studies and Programs at the University of Nebraska, Omaha. 





continued to suffer foreign interference. The Soviet 
Union sought to occupy Afghanistan in a war that lasted | 
from 1979 to 1989. 

In the 1990's, a conservative Islamic group called the 
Taliban came to power. The Taliban allowed internation- 
al terrorist organizations to run training camps in Af- 
ghanistan. After terrorist attacks against the United 
States in 2001, the United States and anti-Taliban forces 
within Afghanistan drove the Taliban from power. A 
transitional government was set up to rule the country. 


Facts in brief 





Capital: Kabul. 

Official languages: Pashto (also called Pakhto) and Dari. 

Official name: Da Afghanistan Dow/lat (in Pashto) or Dowlati 
Afghanistan {in Dari), both meaning State of Afghanistan. 

Area: 251,773 mi’ (652,090 km’). Greatest distances—east west, 
820 mi (1,320 km); north-south, 630 mi (1,012 km). 

Elevation: Highest—Nowshak, 24,557 ft (7,485 m) above sea level. 
Lowest—n Sistan Basin, 1,640 ft (500 m) above sea level. 

Population: Estimated 2002 population—24,977,000; density, 99 
persons per mi? (38 persons per km); distribution, 80 percent 
rural, 20 percent urban. 1979 census—13,051,358. | 

Chief products: Agriculture—barley, corn, cotton, fruits, Karakul 
skins, mutton, nuts, rice, vegetables, wheat, wool. Manufactur- 
ing—jewelry, leather goods, rugs. Mining—coal, lapis lazuli, 
natural gas. | 

Money: Basic unit—afghani. One hundred pule equal one 
afghani. 





oor -—“( tt 


‘ —_ 





Ae. b> a - ~ f 
Oh ray ae en a 





Noreen S. Ahmed-Ullah © Chicago Tribune 


A jirga (council) is a traditional Afghan community meeting. This 
jirga near Khowst, in eastern Afghanistan, met in 2002 to choose 
delegates to send to a national /oya jirga (grand council) in Kabul. 


Government 


In the late 1990's, the Taliban controlled most of 
Afghanistan, including Kabul. The Taliban imposed their 
harsh interpretation of Islamic law on the country. How- 
ever, few nations recognized the Taliban government as 
the legal government of Afghanistan. 

The United States and its Afghan allies drove the Tal- 
iban from power in 2001. The United Nations then 
brought together the leaders of Afghanistan's main eth- 
nic and regional groups, who organized a temporary 
government. These leaders also developed a plan for 
creating a permanent, more democratic government. 
Hamid Karzai, head of the Popalzai, an important clan of 
the Pashtun ethnic group, became head of the tempo- 
rary government. 

In June 2002, Afghan leaders held a /oya jirga (grand 
council) to create a transitional government. Loya jirgas 
are held at times of crisis or when major political or so- 
cial changes need consideration. Loya jirgas attempt to 
include representatives of all of Afghanistan's many re- 
gional and ethnic groups. In 1964, Afghan women at- 
tended a loya jirga for the first time. Afghan tribes and 
communities often hold smaller jirgas (councils) to de- 
cide matters of local importance. Local jirgas include all 
of a single community's adult men or the leaders from 
several neighboring communities. 

In 2002, the loya jirga created a transitional govern- 
ment to lead the country for up to two years. During that 
time, it would work to establish a commission to create 
anew constitution and then hold democratic elections 
for a permanent government. The loya jirga chose Karzei 
as president of the transitional government. To gain na- 
tional support for the government, Karzai selected 
Afghans from a variety of regions and ethnic groups to 
serve in his cabinet. 


People 


Ancestry. Most Afghans are a blend of early peoples 
who came to the country as invaders or settlers. These 
groups included Aryans, Persians, Arabs, Turkish: 


Afghanistan 92a 


speaking people from central Asia, Mongolians, and 
people from the Xinjiang region of western China. 

Ethnic groups and languages. Afghanistan has 
about 20 ethnic groups, most of which have their own 
language and culture. Most ethnic groups consist of 
several tribes, many of which speak their own dialect of 
the ethnic language. Many Afghans feel greater loyalty 
to their ethnic group or tribe than to their country. 

The largest ethnic groups are the Pashtuns (or 
Pakhtuns) and the Tajiks. Pashtuns and Pakhtuns are also 
spelled Pashtoons and Pakhtoons. The Pashtuns and 
Tajiks make up more than 60 percent of the population. 
Most Pashtuns live in the southeast, near the Pakistan 
border. Their language, Pashto or Pakhto, is one of 
Afghanistan’s two official languages. Most Tajiks live in 
northeastern Afghanistan and speak Dari, the other offi- 
cial language. Dari is also known as Afghan Persian. 
Most of the country’s other ethnic groups speak Dari as 
either their first or second language. 

Way of life. Most of Afghanistan’s rural people live in 
homes made of sun-dried mud bricks. City dwellers live 
in homes and apartment buildings made of baked brick, 
concrete, or both. Most of the country’s nomadic and 
seminomadic people live in tents made of goat hair. 

Most Afghans wear traditional clothing. In winter, the 
people wear a heavy coat made of sheepskin, quilted 





Symbols of Afghanistan. Afghanistan's flag has black, red, and 
green vertical stripes and the nation’s coat of arms in the center. 
The coat of arms bears four Arabic inscriptions: at the top, There 
ls No Ged but Allah and Muhammad Is the Prophet of Allah; near 
the top, God Is Great; near the bottom, the Islamic year 1380 
(2001-2002 in the Gregorian calendar); and at the bottom, 
Afghanistan. 






Russ; Aral Sea | _— 
: = -- Kazakhstan \ ma x 
h 
al reese | Nort 
> ae , 
> °rbaijan ; Wabekista Syaie, l gh Laude” 


a ——7 “ee St NO 
° ~ Turkmenistan\ 1 | 
a / T aiistan | chine 





. Pakistan 





ay 
 Gatar 4 i 
= s 
Saudi Arabia a 
an 





i 
Y; 
Healt 


{ 


—_ eee 








WORLD BOOK map 


Afghanistan is a landlocked country in southwestern Asia. It is 
surrounded by six other countries. 


92b Afghanistan 


1 Z 3 4 5 6 7 
60 Chardzhoe at 
nveaecuis f 
A TURKMENISTAN 
W\ ‘S 






*Uch Adzhi 
af Kora ke » 










































B Sarakhs.\ _o 5 Mazar-e Qonduz’ > 
do , Sharif _ 
th i : 5 
N- ‘ eymaneh,. ; 
a = j 
3 _f ‘Bala Mor. hall 
35 i Towraghondr ee Por rave ee 
Tayyebad* _ Galeh-ye Now a . 
C= AROPAMISUS RANGE 
ee Herat; =~ “Swbeh a in 
= fa i . —" 
a2 FN , a_i 7 
— AFGHANIS TAINS : : zs 
Prine j ee | | ee re ee he Kol & » islamabat 
fs. J | a coil re Giz P 77 Pr — is " a in i = 
} , : ee 
diz | ff / iv! J Chakwale  Shelur 
a «¥ 4 * Oruzgan® - ee 
a “4 FY Kap Katar Jar Ghar : sMianwalt IS 
= Vag iy ron male F ae {f 
= "Farah ¢ va Kao N Me a i 
Delaram™ = 4, le = wal ae eal A AG ashuray © Afghanistan 
*lash-e J d Geronly_/  Gesenery- a | Si 
sh-e Joveyn ~ Lash - ‘Des Kite By 
: so ‘Se zak Lake. = Gong 7 o>” = ae Magi wi 8h kkar 
\ sou stth Se “yChathansur ip - | International boundary 
e Sistan * "Zaranj > Spin Buldak,. TOBA **® "jo \« 
Marsh! SISJAN =/ Kuchnay ‘ Leiah Raa 
 e. “ Darvishan Chama f RNMhojak Pass ie 
|r RIGESTAN | 7 PAKISTAN. Railroad 
DESERT 


toralar. 
Dam and reservoir 


‘Quetta 


= ———— 
ZEREH ; Bolan Pass | 
DEPRESSION sy) we ae ~ Ce 


National capital 





Sibi 
L . Nushid —* Other city or town 
Fa Ps _ 
4 | 5 . 
sila Safed - | Kalat a\ “a 6 Mountain pass 
—— Elevation above 
. sea level | 
0 100 200 300 400 500 Miles | 
WORLD BOOK map | 
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 Kilometers 








Afghanistan map index 


Cities and towns 


Ahangaran (Gas Dahaneh-ye Kajaki — Des Mazar-e Sarhadd B 7 
Andkhvoy B 3 Kashan C3 Kandahar 191,345 E— 3 Shar .. 110,367 B 4 Sheberghan 19.969 B 3 
Aqcheh sof B 3 Delaram D 2 Khanabad.._.. B 5 Mehtar Lam 4.191 C 5 Shindand D2 
Asadabad . 219% € 6 Dowlat Yar Ces Kholm B 4 Meymaneh . 40212 B 3 Shir Khan . BS 
Asmar. . . ete Dowlatabad oa Khowst DS Mogor me) os Spin Buldak —E 4 
Aybak 5,191.B 4 Eshkashem B 6 Kowt-e Orgun nas 5 Tagab C 53 
en 41240.B 5 Farah 19.761..D 1 Ashrow C 5 Oruzgan . D 4 Taloqan 20347 B 5 
Bala Mi C5 Farsi D 2 Kuchnay Owbeh CZ Tann Kowt 3534 D 3 
eames be Gaz Feyzabad 9564 B 5 Darvishan Eee? Panjab G4 Teyvareh DBD 3 
B 4 Gardez 10,040 D 5 Lash-e Pole Alam . mG. 5 Tirgari Cio 
Sardar v7525 6 74 Gereshk & 3 v thE 1 Pol-e Khomn. 32695.8 S$ To B 4 
Baraki Barak 1,164, CS Ghazni 31,985. D 4 Lashkar Gah 22,707 mE 2 Qalat 6.2516 ‘D4 Towraghondi , C2 
Chaghcharan 3,126 C 3 Gizab . D 3 Mahmud-e Qaleh-ye Now 5614 C 2 Zaranj 6, —E 1 
r Herat 150,497 C 2 Eraqi 1.262 eC 5 Qarain ‘oe 3 Zareh 
Borjak £1 Jalalabad 37,824 C 5 Ma Eh 4 Qonduz 37,112 8 5 Sharan’ 1469 D 5 
Chakhansur Em 1 jorm B 5 Mashura . gh gl Sang-e Zaydabad iews 
Charikar 25,117 C€ 5 Kabul 1,036,407 C 5 Maydan Shahr .2,153..C 5 MMasheh -D a Zibak B 6 
Physical features 
Aria tee (River) D3 Hindu Kush Khash (River) LLY Namaksar Lake Cc 1 Rigestan Desert — 3 
handab Reservoir. £ 3 Mountains) Cc Ss Khyber Pass Cams Panj (River) . A 53 Saberi Lake al 
Ba h (River) B 4 Istadeh-ye Moqor Konar (River! C 6 Panyshir Vail Ce Safid Kuh (Mountains) .C 2 
Farah (River) Diez Lake D 4 Kowkcheh iRiver) B 5 Paropamisus Range Cr Salang Tunnel C5 
Fuladi (Mountain) C4 Kafar Jar Ghar Lowrah iRiver} E 3 Patargan Marsh D1 Sistan Basin ‘es 1 
Hanrud (River) ic 3 Mountain) D 3 Lurah iRiver) D 4 Puzak Lake 3 —E | Tora Bora (Mountains). A 5 
Helmand (River D 3 Kajaki Reservoir D 3 Morghab (River) (GA! Qonduz (River) G 4 Zereh Depression iF 


“Does not appear on map. key shows general location. 
Source 1982 official estimates 








Afghanistan 93 


Islam greatly influences fami- 
ly and community relation- 
ships and almost all other as- 
pects of Afghan life. This 
beautiful blue mosque (Islam- 
ic house of worship) is in 
Mazar-e Sharif. 


eo es 
wis Wye be 


fabric, or felt. Many rural men wear a turban, which may 
be tied in a certain way to indicate their ethnic group. 


Most Pashtun women wear a burqa, also called a chadri, 


which is a full-length hooded garment that covers the 
body from head to toe. The Pashtuns believe a woman 
must not be seen by any men outside of her family. 
Some rural women in Afghanistan cover their heads 
with a shawl. 

Afghans serve flat loaves of whole-grain, sourdough 
bread at every meal. They also enjoy vegetables, yogurt, 
chicken, beef, mutton, and rice. Popular desserts in- 
clude nuts and fruits. Tea is the favorite drink. 

Women have traditionally played a secondary role in 
Afghan society. Their opportunities for education and 
careers have been limited, especially in rural areas. Men 
dominate women in many ways. For example, some 
Afghan tribes do not allow women to leave their homes 
without a male relative. 

During the 1900's, several Afghan governments at- 


a 


ar th 5 


AP Wide Word 
The blue burga(or chadri)is a full-length hooded garment 


worn by most Pashtun women in Afghanistan. Some Afghan 
women drape a shawl over their heads. 





Zin aa 


© loki Siceloff 


tempted to give women more rights. In 1964, for exam- 
ple, a new constitution gave Afghan women equal status 
with men, and the social and economic position of 
some women improved. However, most women in rural 
areas never gained more rights. 

In the 1990's and early 2000's, the Taliban greatly limit- 
ed the freedom of women. For example, the Taliban re- 
quired all women to cover themselves completely when 
in public. They also made it illegal for women to work 
outside their homes. Women who violated Taliban laws 
were punished severely. 

After the Taliban were driven from power in 2001, 
many Afghan women hoped to reclaim their lost rights. 
In 2002, several women played significant roles in the 
national council that created a transitional government 
and helped decide the country’s future. 


PAKISTAN 


Iranian 
[_] Aimak 
=| Baloch 
f=) Hazara 
[} Pashtun 


20 Qizibesh 


EB Tagrk 





(am) Uzbek 


Other 
44 Brahui 


Nuristani 


WORLD BOOK map 


Afghanistan’s major ethnic groups inhabit various parts of 
the country. The map key arranges the ethnic groups by their 
language types. For example, the language spoken by the Pash- 
tuns is an Iranian language, but that spoken by Uzbeks is Turkic. 
Stripes indicate areas shared by more than one ethnic group. 


94 Afghanistan 






A 


= pa 


© SuperStock 


Goat herders lead their herd over an arid mountain path. 
Afghanistan's economy depends heavily on agriculture. Many of 
the country’s farmers practice sheep and goat herding. 


Religion. About 99 percent of all Afghans are Mus- 
lims. Their religion strongly influences family and com- 
munity relationships and most other aspects of life. Al- 
most every Afghan village or nomadic group has a 
religious leader called a mullah. Mullahs lead prayer 
services and educate the young. They sometimes have 
great influence in their communities. 

Education. Most of Afghanistan's people 15 years of 
age or older cannot read and write. For the country's lit- 
eracy rate, see Literacy (table: Literacy rates for selected 
countries). Many children cannot attend school because 
the country does not have enough schools or teachers. 
This lack of educational facilities is due largely to the up- 
heaval caused by decades of war. Afghanistan has two 
universities—Kabul University and Ningrahar University 
in Jalalabad. 

The arts. Because most of the people of Afghanistan 
cannot read and write, folklore, folk songs, and folk 
dances play an important part in Afghan life. They en- 
able the people to pass their values and traditions on 
from one generation to the next. The aftan (also spelled 
atan/is an energetic folk dance. Pashtuns dance the attan 
at weddings and other community celebrations. 

Recreation. Afghans enjoy sports and games, such 
as soccer, volleyball, and basketball. Many men in 
Afghanistan like to hunt, and some of them use the fa- 
mous Afghan hounds as hunting dogs. Men of the 
northern plains play a game called buzkashi. |n the 
game, dozens of horsemen try to grab a headless calf 
and carry it across a goal. 


The land and climate 


Afghanistan is made up of three main land regions. 
These regions are, from north to south: (1) the Northern 
Plains, (2) the Central Highlands, and (3) the Southwest- 
ern Lowlands. 

The Northern Plains stretch across northern Afghan- 
istan and consist of mountain plateaus and rolling hills. 
The soil is fertile in the Northern Plains but can be culti- 
vated only where water is available. Large irrigation sys- 
tems have been built along the Harirud, Helmand, Qon- 
duz, and other rivers. Nomadic and seminomadic 
people raise sheep and goats on the vast grasslands. 


Temperatures in the Northern Plains of Afghanistan 
average about 38 °F (3 °C) in January and approximately 
90 °F (32 °C) in July. The average annual precipitation in 
the region totals about 7 inches (18 centimeters). 

The Central Highlands cover about two-thirds of 
Afghanistan. They consist of the towering Hindu Kush 
mountain range and its branches. Snow-capped peaks 
rise about 25,000 feet (7,620 meters) along the Pakistani 
border in the east. The range gradually descends to a 
rolling plain in the southwest. Most Afghans live in the 
high, narrow valleys of the Hindu Kush. 

The Central Highlands have an average temperature 
of about 25 “F(-4 °C) in January and about 75 °F (24 °C) 
in July. The region receives about 15 inches (38 centime- 
ters) of precipitation yearly. 

The Southwestern Lowlands lie in southwestern 
Afghanistan and consist mainly of desert or semidesert 
land. The region is crossed by the Helmand River, which 
flows from the Hindu Kush to the Sistan Basin on the 
Iranian border. The basin has several slightly salty lakes 
and marshes. Barley, corn, fruits, and wheat are grown 
in the Helmand Valley. 

Temperatures in the lowlands of Afghanistan average 
about 35 “F(2 °C) in January and about 85 °F (29 °C)in 
July. The average annual precipitation ranges from 2 to 9 
inches (5 to 23 centimeters). 


Economy 


Afghanistan's economy once benefited from the coun- 
trys location along the Silk Road and other ancient trade 
routes. As these routes died out, the country became 
isolated. In the mid-1900's, Afghan governments attempt- 
ed to develop the country’s economy and to improve 
educational opportunities. But decades of war and inter- 
nal struggles at the end of the 1900's reversed most of 
these advances. A severe drought in the late 1990's and 
early 2000's further weakened Afghanistan's economy. 
However, economic aid flowed into the country follow- 
ing the defeat of the Taliban in 2001. 

Agriculture. About 85 percent of all Afghan workers 
earn their living in agriculture. Wheat is the chief crop of 
Afghanistan. Other crops include barley, corn, cotton, 
fruits, nuts, rice, sugar beets, and vegetables. Production 
is limited by a shortage of modern machinery, fertilizer, 
and high-quality seeds. 

During the late 1900's, Afghanistan became one of the 
world’s leading producers of opium, which is used to 
make the illegal drug heroin. Many Afghan farmers 
raised opium poppies because it was more profitable 
than growing wheat and other food crops. In 2000, the 
Taliban began enforcing a strict ban on poppy farming, 
but the practice resumed after the Taliban were driven 
from power in 2001. The governments that have ruled 
Afghanistan since then have also tried to stop farmers 
from growing opium poppies. 

Afghanistan's nomadic and seminomadic people raise 
most of the country’s livestock. The chief livestock prod- 
ucts are dairy items, mutton, wool, and animal hides. 
The skins of Karakul sheep, a fat-tailed sheep known for 
its silky pelt, are especially valuable. 

Mining. Afghanistan is rich in minerals, but most of 
the deposits are largely undeveloped. In the 1960's, 
large deposits of natural gas were discovered in Af- 
ghanistan. Since then, the production of natural gas 





has become an important part of the nation’s economy. 
Afghanistan also produces some coal, copper. gold, and 
salt. The country has huge deposits of iron ore, but be- 
cause of Afghanistan's rugged terrain and frequent con- 
flicts, they remain undeveloped. 

Afghanistan has deposits of the world’s finest lapis 
lazuli, a valuable azure-blue stone. Other gemstones 
mined in the country include amethysts and rubies. 

Manufacturing. Afghanistan has little industry. 
Skilled craftworkers in their homes or small shops make 
gold and silver jewelry, leather goods, rugs, and other 
handicraft items. A few mills produce textiles, and small 
factories turn out such products as cement, matches, 
and processed foods. 

International trade. Afghanistan's leading exports 
are cotton, fruits and nuts, natural gas, rugs, and Karakul 
sheep skins. Imports include machinery, motor vehicles, 
petroleum products, and textiles. Afghanistan conducts 
its international trade mainly over land, through the 
neighboring countries of Iran and Pakistan. 

Transportation and communication. Afghanistan 
has about 11,700 miles (18,800 kilometers) of roads. 
However, decades of war heavily damaged most paved 
roads, making many of them unusable. The country has 
no railroads. 

Afghanistan's most famous transportation route is the 
Khyber Pass, which crosses the border between 
Afghanistan and Pakistan. The pass cuts through the 
Safid Kuh mountains, which are part of the Hindu Kush 
range. Conquerors, such as Alexander the Great of 
Macedonia, crossed the pass to invade South Asia. The 
Khyber Pass has been an important trade route for cen- 
turies. See Khyber Pass. 

Several newspapers are published in Afghanistan. The 
country has one national television station and one na- 
tional radio station. Both stations broadcast from Kabul. 


History 


Prehistoric hunting people lived in what is now 
Afghanistan as early as 100,000 years aoo. After many 
thousands of years, the people learned how to farm and 
to herd animals. Agricultural villages then developed. By 
about 4000 to 2000 B.C., a number of these villages had 
grown into small cities. 

Early invasions. About 1500 B.C, the Aryans, a cen- 
tral Asian people, invaded the region. They killed many 
of the area’s inhabitants and intermarried with others. In 
the mid-500’s B.C, Persians invaded northern Afghan- 
istan, a region then called Bactria. The Persians ruled 
Bactria until about 330 B.C, when Greeks and Macedo- 
nians led by Alexander the Great conquered the region 
and much of the rest of Afghanistan. 

About 246 B.C,, the Bactrians revolted. They eventually 
conquered Bactria and other parts of Afghanistan. They 
formed a kingdom that lasted about 150 years, until the 
Kushans of central Asia seized Afghanistan. Sasanians 
from Persia invaded in the A.D. 200's, and White Huns 
from central Asia defeated the Kushans and Sasanians in 
the 400s. 

The coming of tslam. Arab Muslim armies swept 
into parts of what is now Afghanistan during the late 
600’s. Three Muslim dynasties—the Tahirid, the 
Samanid, and the Saffarid--controlled much of the re- 
gion during the 800's and 900s. Under these dynasties, 


Afghanistan 95 


ee Pc 


= - i Te 
P r , ad 






Cr tere Pe AR 
: rs 


me 





) ss 5 «Ww ” 
© Hulton Getty Images 


The Anglo-Afghan wars of the 1800's resulted largely from the 
United Kingdom's desire to protect its Indian empire. This photo- 
graph shows British troops at a fort in Kabul in 1879. 


most local inhabitants became Muslims. 

Turkic-speaking peoples from eastern Persia and cen- 
tral Asia ruled Afghanistan from about 900 to 1200. 
Afghanistan was conquered by Mongols led by Genghis 
Khan in the 1200's and led by Timur, also called Tamer- 
lane, in the 1300's. Safavids from Persia and Mughals 
from India struggled for control of Afghanistan from the 
mid-1500's to the early 1700's. 

United Afghanistan. In 1747, Ahmad Khan came to 
power. He took the title shah (king) and adopted the 
name Durrani (Pearl of the Age). Ahmad Shah Durrani 
united the many Afghan tribes for the first time, marking 
the beginning of modern Afghanistan. He gained con- 
trol of territory stretching far beyond the country’s cur- 
rent borders. 

Ahmad Shah was succeeded by his son Timur Shah. 
Around 1775, Timur Shah moved the capital from Kan- 
dahar to Kabul. Timur Shah and his successors strug- 
gled to keep the Afghan tribes united and lost control of 
most of the territory beyond the current borders of 
Afghanistan. 

In 1819, civil war broke out among rival tribes that 
wanted to rule the country. The war lasted until 1826, 
when Dost Muhammad Khan gained control. He took 
the title of amir (prince). Dost Muhammad's descendants 
ruled the country for the next 150 years. 

The Anglo-Afghan wars. During the 1800's, the Unit- 
ed Kingdom and Russia competed for control of 
Afghanistan. Russia wanted an outlet to the Indian 
Ocean and began to expand toward Afghanistan. The 
United Kingdom wanted to protect its empire in India, 
which was threatened by Russia’s expansion. In 1839, 
British troops invaded Afghanistan to reduce Russia's in- 
fluence in the region. The invasion set off the First An- 
glo-Afghan War, which lasted until the British withdrew 
in 1842. Russian influence near Afghanistan increased 
during the mid-1800's. 

In 1878, the United Kingdom invaded the country 
again, starting the Second Anglo-Afghan War. The 
British found it difficult to establish control of Afghan- 
istan. In 1880, Abdur Rahman Khan became amir. The 
British agreed to recognize his authority over the coun- 
try s internal affairs. In return, Abdur Rahman accepted 
the United Kingdom's control of Afghanistan s foreign 
relations. During his reign, Abdur Rahinan worked to 


96 Afghanistan 


strengthen the national government and to reduce the 
power of tribal leaders. After he died in 1901, his poli- 
cies were continued by his son Habibullah Khan. 

independence. Early in 1919, Habibullah Khan was 
assassinated. One of his sons, Amanullah Khan, then be- 
came amir and attacked British troops in India, begin- 
ning the Third Anglo-Afghan War. The United Kingdom 
had just finished fighting in World War | (1914-1918). It 
decided to end its involvement in Afghanistan rather 
than fight another war. In August 1919, Afghanistan be- 
came fully independent. 

Amanullah began many reforms to modernize 
Afghanistan, rapidly sweeping away centuries-old tradi- 
tions and customs. The nation’s first constitution was 
adopted in 1923, and Amanullah changed his title from 
amir to shah in 1926. But tribal and religious leaders re- 
sisted the reform movement and forced Amanullah 
Shah to give up the throne in 1929. 

Late in 1929, Muhammad Nadir Shah became king. In 
1931, Afghanistan adopted a new constitution. Under 
the new Constitution, Nadir Shah began a program of 
gradual reform. But he was assassinated in 1933, before 
many of the reforms were begun. Muhammad Zahir 
Shah, Nadir Shah's son, then became king. 

The mid-1900’'s. By the early 1950's, Afghanistan had 
developed good relations with the United States and 
many Western European nations. But the Afghans feared 
the intentions of the Soviet Union, their country’s pow- 
erful Communist neighbor. In 1953, Muhammad Daoud 
Khan, the king’s cousin and brother-in-law, took control 
of the government and made himself prime minister. 
Under Daoud, Afghanistan took no side in the Cold 
War, a period of hostility between Communist and non- 
Communist nations, and it received aid from both the 
United States and the Soviet Union. 

Border disputes with Pakistan and other problems led 
to pressures that forced Daoud to resign in 1963. In 
1964, under the leadership of Zahir Shah and Western- 
educated scholars and thinkers, Afghanistan adopted a 
constitution that provided for a democratic government. 
But many problems arose. Zahir Shah and the legisla- 
ture could not agree on the role of political parties with- 
in the reform program. Parliament often deadlocked on 





key issues. In addition, the Afghan people had little ex- 
perience with, or understanding of, democratic govern- 
ment. As a result, the new democratic system failed to 
bring about the progress that the framers of the Consti- 
tution had hoped for. 

In 1973, Daoud led a military revolt that overthrew Za- 
hir Shah. Afghanistan's military, aided by Afghan Com- 
munists, took control of the government and estab- 
lished the Republic of Afghanistan with Daoud as 
president and prime minister. 

The Soviet invasion. In 1978, rival left-wing military 
leaders and civilians in Afghanistan staged another re- 
volt, during which Daoud was killed. This group, which 
received much financial and military aid from the Soviet 
Union, took control of the government and established 
policies that had some features of Communism. 

Many in Afghanistan opposed the new government. 
They believed the government's policies conflicted with 
teachings of Islam. In addition, they resented Soviet in- 
fluence on the government. Large numbers of Afghan 
people joined in a rebellion against the government 
shortly after it came to power. Widespread fighting 
broke out between the rebels, who called themselves 
mujahideen (holy warriors), and government forces. 

The Soviet Union became concerned that the rebels 
might defeat the Afghan government forces. In 1979 and 
1980, the Soviet Union sent thousands of troops to join 
the fight against the rebels. The Soviets had far better 
equipment than their opponents. But the rebels, sup- 
plied by countries opposed to the Soviet Union, used 
guerrilla tactics to overcome the Soviet advantage. The 
Soviets and Afghan government forces bombed many 
villages. 

In 1988, the Soviet Union began withdrawing its 
troops from Afghanistan. The withdrawal was complet- 
ed in February 1989. But the fighting between the mu- 
jahideen and government forces continued until 1992, 
when the rebels overthrew the government. 

Afghanistan under the Taliban. After 1992, 
Afghanistan had several governments made up of vari- 
ous combinations of mujahideen groups. Continued 
fighting among the groups prevented the establishment 
of a stable government. In the mid-1990's, a new group, 


AP. Wide World 


Soviet troops retreated 
from Afghanistan in 1989. The 
Soviet Union invaded 
Afghanistan in 1979 and 1980 
to support the Communist 
government there. Despite 
their superior military 
strength, the Soviets failed to 
defeat the Afghan rebels, 
known as mujahideen. 


; a Ne N Sace 








AP Wide World 


Hamid Karzai, /eft led Afghanistan after the fall of the Taliban in 
2001. The former king of Afghanistan, Muhammad Zahir Shah, 
right, supported Karzai and helped unify the country. 


a conservative Islamic organization known as the Tal- 
iban, rose to power. 

Pashtun religious students who had fled to Pakistan 
during the Soviet invasion started the Taliban move- 
ment. The Taliban were supported by Pakistan's military 
and by militant Arab Islamic groups. By the late 1990's, 
the Taliban gained control of most of Afghanistan. They 
established a Council of Ministers to rule the country. 

The Taliban imposed their strict interpretation of !s- 
lam on the nation. For example, they banned television, 
popular music, and most other modern forms of enter- 
tainment, and they established rules for dress and 
grooming. All women were forced to cover themselves 
completely when in public, and men were required to 
grow beards. The Taliban also prohibited girls from at- 
tending school and forbade women from working out- 
side the home. 

The Taliban destroyed many artifacts of the country's 
heritage because they claimed they were anti-Islamic. 
For example, they demolished two ancient statues of 
Buddha carved into a mountainside near Bamian, 
Afghanistan. The Taliban also destroyed many works of 
art in the countrys museums. 

Through the decades of war in the late 1900's, millions 
of Afghans fled to neighboring Pakistan and !ran, and 
thousands more became refugees in their own country. 
Years of drought in the late 1990's and early 2000's left 
many Afghans in danger of starvation. 

Recent developments. In 2001, members of a terror- 
ist organization called al-Qaida attacked the World 
Trade Center in New York City and the Pentagon Build- 
ing near Washington, D.C. (see September 11 terrorist 
attacks). The United States accused the Taliban of har- 
boring and assisting al-Qaida, which was led by the 
Saudi-born millionaire Osama bin Laden. The Unitea 
States demanded that the Taliban arrest bin Laden and 
the other terrorists and shut down their training camps. 
The Taliban refused to do so, and the United States and 
its allies launched a military campaign against the Tal- 
iban. 

The campaign included air strikes in support of 
Afghan rebels who opposed the Taliban. This support 
enabled the rebels to drive the Taliban from power in 


Afghanistan 97 


late 2001. Meanwhile, the United Nations brought to- 
gether representatives of Afghanistan's leading groups 
to discuss the formation of a new and stable national 
government. The conference agreed on a plan that in- 
cluded the appointment of a temporary government and 
the eventual creation of a new constitution and a demo- 
cratically elected government. 

An international peacekeeping force arrived in Kabul 
in late 2001 and early 2002. In the absence of a strong 
central government, however, warlords and tribal 
groups continued to compete for territory and power. 
Also, small groups of Taliban and al-Qaida forces con- 
tinued to battle U.S. and allied troops. 

In April 2002, the former king of Afghanistan, Muham- 
mad Zahir Shah, returned to the country. He did not re- 
sume his role as king but attended a /oya jirga (grand 
council) of Afghan leaders. In June, the loya jirga met in 
Kabul and chose Hamid Karzai, leader of the Popalzai 
clan, as the country’s transitional president. 

Thomas E. Gouttierre 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Asia Kushan Empire 
Bin Laden, Osama Lapis lazuli 
Delhi Sultanate Muslims 
Hindu Kush Pashtuns 
India (History) Persia, Ancient 
Iran (History) Qaida, Al- 
Kabul September 11 terrorist 
Kandahar attacks 
Karakul Taliban 
Khan Turkestan 
Khyber Pass 
Outline 
I. Government 
Il. Peopie 
A. Ancestry E. Religion 
B. Ethnic groups and F. Education 
languages G. The arts 
C Way of life H. Recreation 
D. Women 


il. The land and climate 

A. The Northern Plains 

B. The Central Highlands 

C. The Southwestern Lowlands 
IV. Economy 

A. Agriculture 

B. Mining 

C. Manufacturing 

D. International trade 

E. Transportation and communication 
V. History 


Questions 


What are the largest ethnic groups in Afghanistan? 

What is a /oya jirga? 

What valuable stones are found in Afghanistan? 

What led to the Anglo-Afghan wars? 

What is the Hindu Kush? The Sistan Basiri? 

How do most Afghan workers earn their living? 

What is a burqa? 

Who first united the Afghan tribes? 

What is the chief common link among Afghans? 

What country tried to occupy Afghanistan from 1979 to 1989? 


Additional resources 


Ewans, Sir Martin. Afghanistan. HarperCollins, 2002. 

Rashid, Ahmed. Ta/iban. Yale, 2000. 

Rubin, Barnett R. The Fragmentation of Atghanistan. 2nd ed. Yale, 
2002. 

Vogelsang, Willem. Zhe Afghans. Blackwell, 2002. 


98 Africa 


e 


a2 OL 


paavee 
= peeeeest 


i | 


TT] 


2 


F yo (y | | ) ine 
at ated 
WY : 


= je ———— 


fs 





{eae | 


David Lomax. Robert Harding Acti Library 


‘ae f, 

w, 
(4 

4, 


Gerald Cubitt 


Grassland wildlife at watering hole 


Nairobi, the capital of Kenya 


The vast continent of Africa is a land of striking contrasts. Regions of untouched natural beauty 
and modern cities are both part of the African landscape. Old and new ways of life exist throughout 
Africa, and hundreds of ethnic groups have contributed to a rich cultural heritage. 


Africa 


Africa is the second largest continent in area and in 
population. Only Asia covers a larger area and has more 
people. Africa covers about a fifth of the world’s land 
area and has about an eighth of its people. 

Africa is divided into 53 independent countries and 
several other political units. The largest country, Sudan, 
has an area of 967,500 square miles (2,505,813 square 
kilometers). The smallest country, Seychelles, has a land 
area of only 176 square miles (455 square kilometers). 
The most heavily populated African nation, Nigeria, has 
more than 125 million people. However, about two-fifths 
of all African countries have fewer than 5 million people 
each. 

The African continent is an immense plateau, broken 
by a few mountain ranges and bordered in some areas 
by a narrow coastal plain. It is a land of striking contrasts 
and great natural wonders. In the tropical rain forests of 
western and central Africa, the towering treetops form a 


The contributors of this article are Samuel Decalo, Professor 
of Political Science at the University of Florida at Gainesville; Ken- 
nell A. Jackson, Jr., Associate Professor of History at Stantord Uni- 
versity; Kenneth J. Perkins, Professor of History at the University 
of South Carolina; and Hartmut S. Walter, Professor of Geogra- 
phy at the University of Calitornia at Los Angeles. 


thick green canopy. The world’s largest desert, the Sa- 
hara, stretches across northern Africa. It covers an area 
almost as large as the entire United States. Africa also 
has the world’s longest river—the Nile. It flows more 
than 4,000 miles {6,400 kilometers) through northeastern 
Africa. Much of the continent is grassland. Elephants, gi- 
raffes, lions, zebras, and many other animals live in the 
grasslands located in eastern and southern Africa. 

The African people belong to several population 
groups and have many cultural backgrounds. In the 
north, for example, most of the people are Arabs. South 
of the Sahara, where most Africans live, blacks form the 
great majority of the population. But they are divided 
into over 800 ethnic groups, each with its own lan- 


Facts in brief 


Area: 11,657,000 mi’ (30,190,000 km’). Greatest distances—north- 
south, 5,000 mi (8,047 km}; east-west, 4,700 mi (7,564 km). 
Coastline—22,921 mi (36,888 km). 

Population: Estimated 2002 population—831 437,000; density, 71 
per mi (28 per km’). 

Elevation: Highest—Kilimanjaro in Tanzania, 19,331 ft (5,892 m) 
above sea level. Lowest—Lake Assal in Djibouti, 509 ft (155 m) 
below sea level. 

Physical features: Chief mountain ranges—Ahaggar, Atlas, 
Drakensberg, Ruwenzori, Tibesti. Chief rivers—Congo, 
Limpopo, Niger, Nile, Orange, Zambezi. Chief lakes—Albert, 
Chad, Nyasa, Tanganyika, Turkana, Victoria. Largest deserts— 
Kalahari, Namib, Sahara. 

Number of independent countries: 53. 





A 
»M irs 
ve 


John Moss, Black Star 


A hunting party of the Masai people of Kenya 


guage, religion, and way of life. The large number of 
ethnic groups of uneven size has helped make it difficult 
for many African countries to develop into unified, mod- 
ern nations. In numerous cases, national boundaries cut 
across ethnic homelands. As a result, people may feel 
closer ties to neighbors in another country than to other 
groups in their own country. Ethnic differences have led 
to civil wars in several African countries. 

About two-thirds of all Africans live in rural areas, 
where they make a living growing crops or raising live- 
stock. In many parts of rural Africa, the people live much 
as their ancestors did hundreds of years ago. Since the 
mid-1900's, however, millions of rural Africans have 
flocked to the cities, where traditional life styles are 
being replaced by more modern ways. 

Africa has great mineral wealth, including huge de- 
posits of copper, diamonds, gold, and petroleum. It also 
has valuable forests. In addition, many African rivers and 
waterfalls could be used to produce hydroelectric pow- 
er. Africa produces most of the world’s Cassava, cocoa 
beans, and yams. But Africa has the least developed 
economy of any continent except Antarctica. 

Agriculture is the leading economic activity in Africa, 
but most farmers use outdated tools and methods to 
farm thin, poor soil. The development of manufacturing 
has been handicapped by a lack of money to build facto- 
ries, a shortage of skilled workers, and competition 
from industries on other continents. Many African coun- 
tries depend on only one or two farm or mineral prod- 
ucts for more than half their export earnings. In case of 
crop failures or drops in world market prices, a coun- 


Africa 99 


pet ——= ww? 

Oe) ees Ries Cay Be tet aN 
EES en ng Ss 
¢ Carl Frank, Phote Researchers 


A ceremonial dance of Berber women in Morocco 





trys economy suffers. The majority of African nations 
rely heavily on aid from countries outside the continent. 

One of the world’s first great civilizations—ancient 
Egypt—arose along the banks of the Nile River more 
than 5,000 years ago. Later, other powerful and culturally 
advanced kingdoms and empires developed in Africa. 
Even so, for many years some non-Africans called Africa 
the “Dark Continent.” They used this name because they 
knew little about Africa's interior geography, and they 
mistakenly believed that the people of the interior had 
not developed any important cultures. 

During the late 1400's and 1500's, Europeans began to 
establish trading posts in Africa. Gold and slaves be- 
came two of the continent's most valuable exports. By 
the late 1800's, the Europeans competed fiercely for con- 
trol of Africa's resources. By the early 1900's, they had 
carved almost all of Africa into colonial empires. 

Many Africans resisted colonial rule from the begin- 
ning. But the demands for independence did not be- 
come a powerful mass movement until the mid-1900s. 
Between 1950 and 1980, 47 African colonies gained in- 
dependence. But leaders in many of the new nations 
could not handle the social and economic problems that 
remained after independence. Military officers over- 
threw the governments of many nations. In a few coun- 
tries, military dictatorships emerged. In most other 
countries, a single political party became the ruling 
power. Today, ethnic rivalries and territorial disputes 
among nations continue to threaten the stability of Af- 
rica. Such problems as overpopulation, poverty, famine, 
and disease remain challenges for African leaders. 













AC = topes .ossbinoig ogog? «= WANIND ¥ 
fiobnopeben ala 
ene unos NVOGNS evewelg fh) ©) y wn ON : P hes oye wee g : pL! ind pnessig 
; Py JO F/O e A as & ® wihadus nohes | . yawvo 
Precul_> ayer y ' seputz* ipelew Aaweif) : « Finlueg 
je ay) ndow”* sedey® IWwoO3N3S 
N3WaA ene avH? L weyeg® 
*veuunpwg e L) 3 ~al : 
w3aDIN “Z8peby Trynquiy ipeey 
TVW @ 
*uepns uodg : yoyaxenoy 
2 VINVLINNYUW 
noquypenon 
wa jossesuewe) 
gen S31Vu " ee e 
VO HOTH NYMSY o 
UBMs | Aen, (1H¥3S510) VY¥VHVS VHVHVS - 
viavuy lanvs N¥3183M 
id ADIZ F @18U8S WIB]BOA, 
yVLYD \e nhs vAan wy) 8eidna20 pue 
4 \ } umey 43. ¢ gthiIB{ ODIOIOWy 
NIvuHY Ss ”* vina9D lv ? 
/ 
Jing 01}8) / ; ds) 
UETSIOS —— yegaann . 70nS ® 0 O29 / j sonvisi KaVNV 
os nwauor R pies? & \ Supuexery zeybueg | : YOY O10 4 
Wod . yaressiyy 
wavs! oa yoo visINNL OID00OW — 
OvVul Deas ® @ 2Ueiqeseg 
qeBnyeo 
Jd NVul Ppepyteg SNYdAD Inj xe4S ven “784 “ieqey SONVISI ¥ULSOVN 
vw aunueysuog uesg, _sbiBuey 
® if ® juieds) eynag® - 
® SION] “eqpuuy ssoibyy 
uesyoy susyy 
@ 
AayenL 393300 Nivds gos 
q NS . aS) VINYSTY pet © ; 
ata 0. 
NVLSINSWNYNL nusivauazy “eal aww) auloy — 
‘ wivona 
iy wiAwIsOONA yapooazuaH ATA Dae 
yt -VINSOS 
NVLsinsagsZzn 0 
VINYWOU VINARKOTS 39NVHS 
» ONWIYAZLIMS 
Oa 1ow vibLSny 
: wivnors 
aNIVEHN sueg® 
‘ 3adoun 3 ANVWH39 (wnisge / 
NVLSHHNVZVH ® YWig 
oo anyog ques DNWIUAHLIN uopuo} y NV ; 
snyuvias onviau UPBIO 
ViISlVv 
q iy et Bn! {3 V 
vINYAHIN g31i 
@muoosow wuvwnao Ny ‘ cf LION 
VWIALWI 
vissnu 
( vINOiISA N303MS 
MYON 
Vv AY: 
ONV INIA 
ar ni c Q i Gg q v £ ¢c L 








H 


4 


000° 00S'9 000'9 0039'S 000'S 000'p 


009°2 


000'8 00S'p 


000'S 000°¢ 00s't 





























LL OL 6 8 L 9 S v 
H é 
seyinby adey adoyy poog 
yleqgeziig Uod, ee: 
®umoy edey 
O VoINsV 
HiNOS 
Srrouojuiboig a 
ped % 
2 re ueqeqn %, 
onde; PR _-* @ Gingseuveyor we 
UOIsIWIag ge oO 
8101814 oD: 
(e0ues4) y ° ¥ : Zz 
q Noinnay uf J me * ARG SIAIEAA 
@snuinvw f = 
sino} UVISVOVOVN: a < vinyl 
reg gm oAueueveluy > e118g es Lg 
( : INDIGWYZOW = 
| *euiseweo) < avewijanp, a " Sav EZ sit *qewns) 
W 4 ly » ee @ oevey dds 
ebueleyey “¥ auuelg? ‘ 8 ee IAludv> 
d if aad Be Beyesm 
) ambos 
feaset : PATRON ejopy Viawy2 j 
v2) & F IM VIA te 
ae ~~ % hia oqueny® a 
{ J ° 
4 SOHNOWO9 Ph stovy : f usegu ‘ ae our) U p 3 4 O 
Nade mg ayep | isexiy” VIOONY { 
v weg eyes! ( 
dowd - SONVISI IIJURIIV 
YvHNDYS vusvoly 
— epuen]® YINOS 
$3713HDA3S We e/es $0 18g @ VINVZNVL x 
ePwopo iAeyy-sin 
e021, seqizuez® saat: | 4 ele - (RJoBuy) 
-e6ue) aeT, ebueuey J iertek 
x (@oujy Ut uIod jseyBIy) " eseysuly + VGNIayo 
esequoyy f {W S68'S) “4 OPe’6L (eseysury) _ Sai So non-aiuiog 
uBo9I0 a OUVENYWITIA — einguint E OONOD . ~ ailinezzeig 
ezuemMyy % se oN 
/ ‘ae 
ueIpU| ae,” j inven 
(QHfAezze2g) “0d 
a 2Puuinsiy c—_ "IS , { O9NO3D ied i ewol —_— 
" cup Peieduey/ iuebuesiy” < f BIAOIG] a “ES Oy, Alone 
cr “Bie 9600) |_” d ,GNY 3IN01 OVS 
nysipeboyy “aj A ae i PIU D yo pi 
 \ vanvon < VININD 
Y : SPUNDeA @ \ @: TWwrHo01vnos 
Ls ‘$ < gjenog® PW 
| n ®infueg red Staal 
y , . no ea auiege NOOY3sWY9 OAON 
( onanasy ——22nog" : 
VINVWOS NVIDIWAV IWHINSD 
| J Lb Mopunow, \ = 
i 4010} | —— @EdEGY Sippy x ; wes i . 
( eshabey” *emeg eg oe ag! “op } 4 


| 





00G sia 9Woly gO 


000'L 00S S8}IW 0 


9/898 adUeISI9 


c L 


VIOIHIAV 






7 


adOWNS 





vonralosyg Pady-jenbz jeyImuizy 
dew O08 GTAOM 


“LOGL JO JEM 1/8838)-Qezy 9y) eauIs j9BI8) Ag 
PaIdNII0 As0j1118) BpNyaur Jou Op seUepUNog 19818; ey) 


JOAIY 
uleuUnO-W:OCé 
AyD IMO * 


jeudes 


deus jeoniyod BOLLY 





IPes0¥2] -IPUoxaS 


~. 


wiw3en 








ARE, *usipay 





BIAQJUOW 
m 








{ 


ei fed 


Independent countries of Africa 

















Map Name Area Population Capital of inte 
key in me? inkm® pendence 
F 4 Algeria 919,595 2,381,741 32,813,000 Algiers 1962 
L 6 Angola 481,354 1,246,700 13,684,000 Luanda 1975 
1 4 Benin 43,484 112,622 6,422,000 Porto-Novo 1960 
N 7 Botswana 224,607 581,730 1,661,000 Gaborone 1966 
1g Hanes: Burkina Faso 105,792 274,000 12,600,000 Ouagadougou 1960 
K 8 Burundi 10,747 27,834 7,044,000 Bujumbura 1962 
eS Cameroon 183,569 475,442 15,855,000 Yaounde 1960 
t Cape Verde 1,557 4,033 447,000 Praia 1975 
1 6 Central African Republic 240,535 622,984 3,746,000 Bangui 1960 
H 6 Chad 495,755 1,284,000 8,081,000 N'Djamena 1960 
L 10 Comoros 863 fas fay 582,000 Moroni 1975 
) 6 Congo (Brazzaville) 132,047 342,000 3,105,000 Brazzaville 1960 
K 6 Congo (Kinshasa) 905,355 2,344,858 54,768,000 Kinshasa 1960 
ae: Cote d'Ivoire 124,504 322,463 15,417,000 Yamoussoukro 1960 
H 9 Djibouti 8,958 23,200 665,000 Djibouti 1377, 
F 7 Egypt (African) 363,220 940,735 70,464,000 Cairo 1922 
oes. Equatorial Guinea 10,831 28,051 475,000 Malabo 1968 
H 8 Eritrea 45,406 117,600 4,044,000 Asmata 1993 
eo Ethiopia 426,373 1,104,302 65,379,000 Addis Ababa t 
ae: Gabon 103,347 267,667 1,280,000 Libreville 1960 
H 1 Gambia 4,361 ies 1,372,000 Banjul 1965 
I 3 Ghana 92,098 236,533 21,318,000 Accra 1957 
H 2 Guinea 94,926 245,857 7,794,000 Conakry 1958 
H 1 Guinea-Bissau 13,948 36,125 1,264,000 Bissau 1974 
J) 9 Kenya 224,081 580,367 31,069,000 Nairobi 1963 
OT Lesotho 11,720 30,355 2,237,000 Maseru 1966 
| 2 Liberia 43,000 111,369 3,385,000 Monrovia 1847 
F 6 Libya 679,362 1,759,540 5,869,000 Tripoli 1951 
M10 Madagascar 226,658 587,041 16,811,000 Antananarivo 1960 
tL 8 Malawi 45,747 118,484 11,449,000 Lilongwe 1964 
G 3 Mali 478,841 1,240,192 11,810,000 Bamako 1960 
Cee Mauritania 395,956 1,025,520 2,814,000 Nouakchott 1960 
N11 Mauritius 788 2,040 1,177,000 Port Louis 1968 
tr? Morocco 172,414 446,550 29,248,000 Rabat 1956 
M 8 Mozambique 309,496 801,590 20,367,000 Maputo 1975 
N 6 Namibia 318,261 824,292 1,768,000 Windhoek 1990 
HD Niger 489,191 1,267,000 11,395,000 Niamey 1960 
1 5 Nigeria 356,669 923,768 128,886,000 Abuja 1960 
J) 8 Rwanda 10,169 26,338 8,063,000 Kigali 1962 
) 4 Sao Tome and Principe 372 964 153,000 Sao Tomé 19% 
gs] Senegal 75955 196,722 9,969,000 Dakar 1960 
K 11 Seychelles 176 455 79,000 Victoria 1976 
ar Sierra Leone 27,699 71,740 3,067,000 Freetown 1961 
1 10 Somalia 246,201 637,657 10,837,000 Mogadishu 1960 
O 7 South Africa 471,445 1,221,037 40,952,000 Cape Town; Pretoria; 
Bloemfontein 1931 
A 7 Sudan 967,500 2,505,813 30,742,000 Khartoum 1956 
N 7 Swaziland 6,704 17,364 1,064,000 Mbabane 1968 
K 8 Tanzania 341,247 883,749 35,090,000 Dar es Salaam 1964§ 
3 Togo 21,925 56,786 4,865,000 Lome 1960 
Eom 5 Tunisia 63,170 163,610 9,845,000 Tunis 1956 
) 8 Uganda 93,065 241,038 23,199,000 Kampala 1962 
a 7 Zambia 290,587 752,618 9,549,000 Lusaka 1964 
N 7 Zimbabwe 150,872 390,757 11,896,000 Harare 1980 
Dependencies in Africa’ 
Map Name Area Population Capital Status 
key inmé inkm: 
E 1 Madeira Islands 307 794 264,000 Funchal Autonomous region of 
Portugal 
L 10 Mayotte 144 EB) 149.000 Mamoudzou Territorial collectivity of 
France 
N11 Reunion 970 ZotZ 743,000 Saint-Denis Department of France 
# St. Helena Island Group 158 410 7,000 Jamestown British overseas territory 
Fo Western Sahara 102,700 266,000 256,000 None Occupied by Morocco™ 
“Each county and dépandenc in Atrica except for Mavotte has a separate article in }Vorld §Date of unton between Tanganyika and Zanzihar 
Book #Not shown on map Located southwest of Atnca in South Atlantic Ocean 
tNot shown on map Located in the Atlantic Ocean, about 400 mules (640 Kilometere west of “Qaimed hy Morocco and by the Polisano Front 
Dake Senegal Populations are 2002 estimates tor independent countnes and 2002 and earlier estimates tor 


sEthiopia has been independent for about 2.000 vears 


dependencies based on figures trom otticial government and United Nations sources. 








People 


Population. Africa has a population of about 830 mil- 
lion. Over 600 million people live south of the Sahara. 
About two-thirds of all Africans live in rural villages. The 
rest live in cities and towns. 

if all the people of Africa were evenly distributed 
throughout the continent, there would be only 71 peo- 
ple per square mile (28 per square kilometer). But Afri- 
cas population is far from evenly distributed. Large ar- 
eas of the Sahara and other desert regions have no 
people at all. Some dry grasslands and tropical forests 
are also very thinly settled. On the other hand, certain ar- 
eas are greatly overcrowded. The Nile River Valley in 
Egypt is one of the most heavily populated regions on 
the earth. It has an average of about 4,00C persons per 
square mile (1,550 per square kilometer). Other heavily 
populated areas include sections of the Mediterranean 
coast; parts of Nigeria and the west coast; the lakes re- 
gion of eastern Africa; and the southeast coast. 

Africa's population is increasing rapidly, partly be- 
cause of improvements in medical care for children. An- 
other reason for the rapid increase in population is a 
high birth rate—that is, the number of births in a given 
year per 1,000 people. Africa's rate of 38 births per 1,000 


Where the people of 
Africa live 

Africa ranks second in popula- 
tion—after Asia—among the 
world’s continents. This map 
shows where the people of 
Africa live and the location of 
its largest cities. Heavily popu- 
lated areas are shown in dark- 
er colors. 


Major urban centers 
@ Mare than 5 million inhabitants 
@ 1 millian to 5 millian inhabitants 


© Less thon 1] millian inhobstonts 


Persons per Persons per 
$q. mi. km? 


More thon 500 More thon 200 


100 to 500 40 to 200 
25 to 100 10 to 40 
sto 20 2 to 10 
Less thon 5 Less thon 2 


WORLD BOOK map 


Africa 103 


people is higher than the world average. But Africa's 
death rate—that is, the number of deaths in a given year 
per 1,000 people —is also higher than the world rate. The 
rate in Africa is 14 deaths per 1,000 people. 

The average /ife expectancy—that is, the average num- 
ber of years a group of people can expect to live—is 
about 52 years for Africans, compared with about 77 
years for Americans. However, life expectancy is much 
lower than the average in the poorer countries of Africa. 
For example, life expectancy in Zambia is 37 years, and 
in Mozambique, 40 years. In the more developed na- 
tions of Africa, life expectancy is higher than the average 
for the continent. For example, in Libya, life expectancy 
is about 75 years, and in Tunisia, 69 years. For more in- 
formation on life expectancy in African countries, see 
Life expectancy (table: Life expectancy at birth for select- 
ed countries). 

Several reasons account for Africa's high death rate. 
People in many parts of the continent suffer from mal- 
nutrition. Over the years, terrible famines have killed 
countless Africans, especially in the regions bordering 
the Sahara. In addition, poor sanitation and inadequate 
medical services contribute to widespread disease. The 





Cape Town 





104 Africa 


The peoples of Africa 


The peoples of Africa belong to a variety of ethnic, language, 
and religious groups. The pictures below give a general idea of 
some of the continent's many peoples. 





€ Robert Frerck Natl Tourism Office of Tunisia 


Black African technician Tunisian Arab 









@ Robert Frerck Edward S. Ross 


Farmer of Dutch descent Congolese Pygmy 


I, 
S he 


@ Robert Frerck 





indian merchant Botswana San 


most serious diseases include AIDS, malaria, schistoso- 
miasis, tuberculosis, sleeping sickness, and yellow 
fever. 

Peoples of Africa. The peoples of Africa have rich 
and varied cultures and ancestry. For example, there are 
more than 800 ethnic groups of dark-skinned Africans 
frequently called blacks or black Africans. Each group 
consists of people who have in common their history, 
language, religion, artistic traditions, and way of life. 
Blacks account for almost 75 per cent of Africa's total 
population. Most of them live south of the Sahara. Most 








Edward S. Ross 


of northern Africa's people are Arabs. Other important 
African populations include Berbers, Europeans, and 
Asians. 

Blacks were probably the original inhabitants of the 
continent. There are many variations in the physical fea- 
tures of black Africans. However, certain groups share 
special characteristics. One such group is the tall, slen- 
der Nilotes of eastern Africa. Some of the Nilotes are as 
tall as 7 feet (210 centimeters). 

Pygmies are an unusually short people with reddish- 
brown skin. Most adult Pygmies are from 4 feet to 4 feet 
8 inches (120 to 142 centimeters) tall. About 150,000 Pyg- 
mies live in Africa, mainly in the tropical forests of the 
Congo River Basin in central Africa. 

Khoisan peoples include the San, or Bushmen, and 
the Khoikhoi, or Hottentots. Both groups have yellowish- 
brown skin and tightly coiled black hair. The San and 
various Khoikhoi groups once lived throughout much of 
the southern and eastern parts of Africa. Today, only 
about 50,000 San remain in Africa. They live in the Kala- 
hari Desert of Botswana and Namibia. The only remain- 
ing Khoikhoi are the approximately 40,000 Nama people 
who five in Namibia. 

Arabs. Africa has about 80 million Arabs. Most of 
them live in Egypt, in northern Sudan, and along the 
Mediterranean coast. The first Arabs settled in northern 
Africa during the 600s. 

Berbers. There are about 20 million Berbers in Africa. 
They live mainly in Algeria and Morocco. The Berbers 
have lived in the northwestern part of Africa since pre- 
historic times. 

Europeans. During the 1600's, Europeans began to 
settle in parts of Africa. Today, the continent has over 5 
million people of European ancestry. Most are of British, 
Dutch, or French descent. The majority live along the 
Mediterranean coast, in the Republic of South Africa, 
and in Zimbabwe. 

Asians. About a million people of Asian ancestry live 
in southern and eastern Africa. Most of them are de- 
scendants of people who came to Africa from India dur- 
ing the 1800's. About 24 million people of Asian ances- 
try also live in Madagascar, an island country southeast 
of the African mainland. Their ancestors began to mi- 
grate to Madagascar from Indonesia about 2,000 years 
ago. 

Languages. Most African ethnic groups have their 
own language. In some cases, members of different 
groups speak the same language. But in most instances, 
language helps identify Africans as members of a partic- 
ular ethnic group. More than 800 languages are spoken 
in Africa. As a result, communication among Africans is 
difficult at times. But certain languages, such as Arabic, 
Swahili, and Hausa, are widely spoken. In addition, mil- 
lions of Africans speak more than one language, which 
they use when traveling or conducting business and 
government affairs. The languages spoken in Africa can 
be classified into three broad groups: (1) black African 
languages, (2) Afro-Asian languages, and (3) Indo- 
European languages. 

Black African languages are spoken by about 290 
million people, mainly those who live south of the Sa- 
hara and west of southern Sudan. The languages can be 








Africa 105 


grouped into three major families: (1) Niger Kordofanian, 
(2) Nilo-Saharan, and (3) Khoisan. 

The Niger-Kordofanian family is by far the largest of 
the black African language families. It includes about 
300 Bantu languages spoken in central, eastern, and 
southern Africa. The term Bantu refers to both the vari- 
ous languages and the groups who speak them. Swahili 
(also called Kiswahili) is the most widely spoken Bantu 
language. Among other important Bantu languages are 
Ganda (Luganda), Kikuyu (Kikikuyu), Kongo (Kikongo), 
Rundi (Kirundi), Sesotho, and Zulu (IsiZulu). The Niger- 
Kordofanian family also includes many non-Bantu lan- 
guages that are spoken mainly in western Africa. These 
languages include Akan; Igbo, or Ibo; and Yoruba. 

Nilo-Saharan languages are used by about 35 million 
people who live in parts of Chad, Kenya, Mali, Niger, Su- 
dan, Tanzania, and Uganda. Major languages in this fam- 
ily include Dinka, Kanuri, Maasai, and Nuer. 

About 100,000 people, including the San and Khoikhoi 
of southwestern Africa, speak Khoisan languages. Two 
small groups in Tanzania also speak these languages. 
Khoisan languages are sometimes called click languages 
because many words are expressed with unusual click 
sounds. The languages are unrelated to any other 
African language. 

Afro-Asian languages are spoken throughout the 
northern half of Africa. The Afro-Asian language family 
includes Arabic and Berber, the two major languages of 
northernmost Africa. About 100 million Africans speak 
Arabic, and nearly 20 million speak Berber. Other Afro- 
Asian languages include Amharic, Orominga or Oromo, 
Hausa, and Somali. 

Indo-European languages. Two Indo-European lan- 





= nai 


Sarah Errington Porlock. Alan Hutchison Library 


A Nigerian ethnic a:oup conducts a native religious ceremo- 
ny, shown here. Each ethnic group in Africa has its own tradi- 
tional religious beliefs and practices. 


guages—Afrikaans and English—are widely spoken in 
southern Africa. About 3 million people speak Afrikaans, 
a language developed by early Dutch settlers, and near- 
ly 3 million speak English. 

A large number of educated Africans speak English, 
French, or Portuguese in addition to their local lan- 
guage. The use of these European languages remains as 
a reflection of colonial rule in many African nations. Eng- 
lish, French, or Portuguese serves as the official lan- 
guage in many countries and helps unify the people. Eu- 
ropean languages are also important for communication 
in international business and government affairs. 

Other languages. The people of Niadagascar speak 
Matagasy Malagasy, a language of the Malayo-Polynesian family. 
aft The people of Asian descent who live in southern and 

eastern Africa speak various Indian languages. Most of 
fi Evrapecn them also know English. 
<= | Religions. Nearly 200 million Africans practice local 
Begg’? Patrnesion traditional religions. There are hundreds of local reli- 

———— WoRIDBOOAmap —«G ONS in Africa because each ethnic group has its own 
The major languages spoken in Africa are shown by labels on set of er and practices. In general, however, local 
this map. The colors on the map indicate the language families religions hav e many features in common. They explain 
to which the languages belong. how the universe was created and teach what is right 








Afro-Asian 
fa] Nila-Saharan 

a= Gi Niger-Kardafanian 
eee Khotsan 


106 Africa 


Islam is one of the leading re- 
ligions in Africa. Most people 
in the north practice Islam. 
But the religion is also prac- 
ticed by many other Africans, 
such as these Nigerians pray- 
ing to Allah, /eft. 


~<a 








Afnque Photo 


and wrong. They define relationships between human 
beings and nature and between the young and the old. 
They give the reasons for human suffering and instruct 
people in how to live a good !ife and in how to avoid or 
lessen misfortune. 

All African religions recognize the existence of a su- 
preme god. However, most of the African religions em- 
phasize that people should seek help by appealing to 
lesser gods or to the spirits of dead ancestors. People 
pray or offer sacrifices to the gods or the spirits to gain 
such things as good health or fertile land. Many reli- 
gions conduct ceremonies to celebrate a person's pas- 
sage from childhood to adulthood. 

The more complex African religions include those of 
certain peoples of western Africa, such as the Dogon of 
Mali, the Yoruba of Nigeria, and the Ashanti of Ghana. 
The religions of these peoples include elaborate sets of 
beliefs about a supreme being and many lesser gods. 
Women as well as men hold important religious posi- 
tions in western Africa. For additional! information on 
traditional! African religions, see Mythology (African my- 
thology). 

Nearly 150 million Africans are Muslims. Their reli- 
gion, Islam, is the state religion in the countries of 
northern Africa. Islam is also a strong force in many 
neighboring nations. In addition, large Muslim minori- 
ties have great influence in such countries as Nigeria 
and Tanzania. 

About 130 million Africans are Christians. Most of 
them belong to the Roman Catholic Church or to vari- 
ous Protestant churches. The Ethiopian Orthodox 
Church is the largest church of Ethiopia. In Egypt, a few 
million people belong to the Coptic Orthodox Church. A 





: i : Afnque Photo 
number of Africans belong to independent African The Coptic Orthodox Church is a major Christian church in 
churches that combine Christian beliefs with traditional! Egypt. In the picture above, an Ethiopian Orthodox priest reads 


African practices. from the Bible. 


Ways of life in northern Africa 





Colonfic Photo Library Ltd. 


Africa 107 





H K Brushe. Antstreet 


Nomadic herding and village farming are traditional ways of life in northern Africa. In the Sa- 
hara, /eft, nomads called Bedouins travel between regular grazing areas with their camels, goats, 
and sheep. In the Nile Valley, right, farmers work irrigated fields using age-old methods. 


The six countries of northern Africa— Mauritania, Mo- 
rocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, and Egypt—have many 
things in common. A large majority of the people speak 
the same language—Arabic; practice the same religion— 
Islam; and share the same history—that of the Arab peo- 
ple. Many of the cultural features of the region extend 
into parts of neighboring countries to the south. But in 
general, the six northern nations form a distinct region 
that differs from the rest of Africa south of the Sahara. 

Northern Africa lies along the Mediterranean Sea, 
and so the region has been in close contact with Europe 
and the Middle East throughout most of its history. 
France once controlled Algeria, Mauritania, Morocco, 
and Tunisia; Italy controlled Libya; and Great Britain 
ruled Egypt. However, the Middle East has shaped much 
of northern Africa’s history, and the region is an impor- 





Breat jones 


A rural village in Morocco has houses with flat roofs and 
thick adobe walls. Many houses in northern Africa have thick 
walls to help keep out the region's intense heat. 


tant part of the present-day Arab world. 

In addition to the Arab Muslim majority, northern Af- 
rica has minority groups that differ in language or reli- 
gion. For example, the Berbers of Algeria, Morocco, and 
Mauritania share the Islamic religion, but many maintain 
their own culture and speak various Berber dialects. 
Black Africans form another important minority group. 
Many of them speak Arabic as their native language and 
practice Islam. An important religious minority group is 
the Copts. They are Christians but speak Arabic and fol- 
low many Arab ways of life. 

The following discussion deals chiefly with the ways 
of life among the Arab Muslim majority in northern Af- 
rica. For more information, see the separate articles on 
the countries that make up the region. 

Rural life. About half the people of northern Africa 
live in rural areas. Most of them raise livestock or grow 
crops On small rented or family-owned farms. They do 
much of the work by hand. In some areas, farmers work 
on government-owned land and use machinery and 
modern techniques. Thousands of rural people have no 
land to work. 

In many rural parts of northern Africa, the people live 
in flat-roofed houses with thick adobe walls that help 
keep out the region's intense heat. In highland areas, 
some houses are made of stucco or stone. Most rural 
homes are simply furnished and lack such modern con- 
veniences as telephones and running water. 

Small groups of nomads called Bedouins tend cam- 
els, goats, and sheep in the Sahara. Most of northern Af- 
rica was Once populated chiefly by Bedouins, and Arab 
folklore is full of stories of their adventures. Today, less 
than 10 per cent of northern Africa's people are Bedou- 
ins. The Bedouins travel between regular summer and 
winter grazing areas and live in tents woven of animal 
hair. 

The way of life in rural areas of northern Africa fol- 
lows traditional patterns. Husbands are the providers, 
and wives raise the children and take care of the house- 
hold. Children work on the farm or in the home. When 


108 Africa 





Anne Bolt 


A city square in Algiers, Algeria, is lined with small shops 
and residences. The large building in the background with the 
twin towers is a mosque (Islamic house of worship). 


parents grow old, the children are expected to look 
after them. The concerns and interests of most rural 
people are limited to their families and villages. For 
many of them, a weekly trip to the village market place 
is their only experience outside the home and farm. 
City life. Cairo, the capital of Egypt, is the largest city 
in all Africa. It has about 6 million people. Other cities of 





northern Africa with more than a million people are Al- 
exandria, Egypt; Casablanca, Morocco; Giza, Egypt, and 
Algiers, Algeria. 

The architecture of most cities in the north reflects 
European and Islamic styles. Many mosques (islamic 
houses of worship) and souks (outdoor markets) are typ- 
ical features of the large cities. In older neighborhoods, 
houses and shops are crowded along narrow, winding 
streets. Broad boulevards, parks, and modern apartment 
and office buildings occupy newer sections. 

In many ways, city dwellers in northern Africa have a 
higher standard of living than rural people. Such con- 
veniences as automobiles, electricity, running water, 
and telephones are more widespread in the cities. The 
cities offer better medical facilities and schools, and 
most city workers earn more than rural people. 

The attractions of city life have led more and more 
rural people to move to the cities. Many move in with 
relatives or live in slum housing. Numerous cities are 
overcrowded and often suffer breakdowns in the elec- 
trical, telephone, and water supply systems. 

Marriage and the family. At one time, Islamic tradi- 
tions governed marriage practices throughout northern 
Africa. These traditions included po/ygyny—the right of 
a man to have more than one wife. They also required a 
bride's family to give a dowry of household goods or 
money to the bridegroom. In addition, parents usually 
selected a husband or wife for each of their children. 
Today, polygyny remains legal in every northern country 
except Tunisia, but few men practice it. Dowries and 
marriages arranged by parents are less common than in 
the past, especially among city dwellers. 


~ et 


tdward § Ross 


An Islamic wedding procession in Egypt leads the bride to the home of the groom. The bride, 
hidden from view in a tentlike covering, is riding the camel. Elaborate processions like this one are 


chiefly a rural tradition of the islamic wedding ceremony. 











Woodfin Cain Inc 
A Berber shepherd family In Morocco ends their meal with 


mint tea and pastries made of honey, fruit, and nuts. Mint tea is 
served after meals and offered as refreshment to visitors. 


In much of rural northern Africa, the typical house- 
hold consists not only of parents and children but also 
of grandparents, aunts, uncles, and cousins. These ex- 
tended families provide security, financial help, and so- 
cial life. In the cities, the nuc/ear family, which consists 
only of parents and their children, is more common. 

The traditional role of women in northern Africa has 
been to remain at home to care for their families. Most 
women in the region still follow this tradition. However, 
a growing number have taken advantage of educational 
and career opportunities that were not available in the 
past and now work outside the home. 

Food and clothing. Flat breads and other products 
made from grain are the basic foods in northern Africa. 
Couscous is a common dish in much of the region. It 
consists of coarse grains of wheat that are steamed and 
served with a spicy stew, consisting of vegetables and 
pieces of meat in a souplike sauce. The people also eat 
fruits and vegetables. Meat costs too much to be part of 
the daily diet of most people. But occasionally, they 
enjoy chicken, goat, or lamb. 

Many rural people in northern Africa and some city 
dwellers dress in traditional clothing. The men wear 
long, loose robes or shirtlike garments. Many men also 
wear a turban or skullcap. The women wear long, sim- 
ple dresses, sometimes with baggy trousers under- 
neath. Many women wear a dark cloak or shawl in pub- 
lic. Some follow the Islamic tradition of covering the 
face with a veil. Others consider the veil out of place in 





Africa 109 


modern times and do not wear it. Most men and women 
in the cities dress in Western-style clothing. 

Education. Traditionally, only religious scholars re- 
ceived more than an elementary school education in 
northern Africa. During the colonial period, European 
settlers established schools, but they chiefly served chil- 
dren of the well-to-do. Partly for these reasons, only 
about a third of the people can read and write. The /iter- 
acy rate (the percentage of people who can read and 
write) is much lower in rural areas than in the cities. 

The national governments in northern Africa are try- 
ing to improve education by building more schools and 
offering schooling to a greater number of people, espe- 
cially in rural areas. However, several major problems 
obstruct progress. The population is growing faster than 
new schools can be built, and the costs of education are 
constantly increasing. Many areas have a shortage of 
qualified teachers. Numerous students must drop out of 
school to work and help support their families. In some 
places, families must pay for their children’s education, 
which many families cannot afford to do. 

In general, the countries of northern Africa have had 
more success expanding education at the secondary 
and college level than at the elementary level. More and 
more students who finish elementary school are going 
on to high school and college. 


lim Holland Stock Boston 


Expansion of rural education has been a chief goal of govern- 
ments in northern Africa. But a shortage of schools and teachers 
has hampered progress. The class above is in Libya. 


110 Africa 





Ways of life south of the Sahara 


~, Ree sane 


Alan Hutchison Library 


Cattle herding is a proud tradition south of the Sahara for such groups as the Dinka, Fulani, Maa- 
sai, and Turkana. Cattle symbolize wealth for these people. Most groups use dairy products from 
the cattle but seldom eat meat. The people move with their herds to seasonal pastures. 


The great majority of people who live south of the Sa- 
hara are black Africans. Kingdoms, empires, and city- 
states ruled much of the region until the early 1900's, 
when European colonial powers gained control. France 
governed a large portion of western Africa. Portugal 
controlled parts of southern Africa. Britain had colonies 
in the west, east, and south. Today, Africans rule almost 
all Africa south of the Sahara. However, most schools 
still conduct classes in English, French, or Portuguese, 
and many educated Africans speak a European lan- 
guage. But for the most part, European influences do 
not affect the everyday lives of most Africans who live 
south of the Sahara. 

In general, Africans follow their traditional ways and 
observe the customs of their ancestors. Most Africans 


yt =A 
if. ; Ad) 

> Gaston Malherbe from Loors Mercier 
An outdoor market near Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire, features pro- 
duce sold by wholesalers, cooperatives, and farm families. Mar- 
kets are also centers for hearing news and socializing. 





¢ 





live in rural areas and make a living by farming the land. 
Among Certain groups in parts of eastern Africa, cattle 
herding is an old and proud tradition. For these people, 
cattle are a measure of a person's wealth and social po- 
sition as well as a major source of food and other neces- 
Sities. 

Mineral wealth has brought greater economic devel- 
opment to parts of southern Africa than to any other 
section of the continent. But much of the wealth from 
mineral production is held by whites, who form a pow- 
erful minority in those parts of Africa. 

This section mainly describes the ways of life among 
black Africans south of the Sahara. For additional infor- 
mation, see the separate Country articles. 

Rural life. About 70 percent of all Africans south of 
the Sahara live in rural areas, chiefly in villages. Some 
villages have only 40 to 50 people. But others have a 
population of hundreds or even thousands. Whatever its 
size, each village is a closely knit community of people 
who belong to the same ethnic group. In most villages, 
everyone is related through either birth or marriage. 

Among some ethnic groups, kings and chiefs com- 
mand great respect, though they may have limited politi- 
cal power. In most cases, the position of king or chief is 
inherited and serves as a means to link villages of the 
same ethnic group. Among ethnic groups that are more 
loosely organized, village elders may handle matters of 
local concern. 

Most villages are simply a cluster of houses, sur- 
rounded by farmland. Larger settlements may have a 
schoolhouse, a few shops, and perhaps such facilities as 
a medical dispensary or a courthouse, where local dis- 
putes can be settled and taxes collected. Most villages 
also have a central square. The people gather in the cen- 
tral square for visiting, entertainment, and ceremonies. 

Rural housing varies from village to village, depend- 
ing on climate, life style, and tradition. Many Africans 
live in houses built of sun-dried mud with roofs of 


A Eigen ee 








© ae Hoa Qui 
Modern farm machinery is used on large estates south of the 
Sahara that produce export crops. But most African farmers 
work their own small plots and use simple hand tools. 


straw, grass, or leaves. As villagers become wealthy, 
they may construct houses of concrete blocks with 
sheet-metal roofs. Almost all villages have several 
dwellings of this type. In parts of western Africa, some 
houses are covered with clay and decorated with sculp- 
tured designs. The houses of African Muslims may be 
built around a large courtyard so that the women can go 
about their tasks without being seen by people outside 
the family. This custom follows the traditions of Islam. 

In many villages, the way of life has changed little 
over the years. Most of the people farm the land and 
raise some livestock. Modern methods of agriculture 
are used in parts of South Africa, Kenya, and Zimbabwe 
and in some countries of western Africa, such as Cote 
d'Ivoire. However, the majority of farmers who live 





wa — 


\ ee 


= , 
ee ae ee 
| c 


ji boat 


Africa 111 


south of the Sahara use simple hand tools as their an- 
cestors did. 

The soil is thin and poor in much of Africa. The peo- 
ple have thus traditionally practiced shifting cultivation. 
A farm community clears the land of trees and bushes 
and plants crops for several years, until the land wears 
out. The community then moves to a new location. The 
abandoned land eventually returns to grass or forest 
and can be farmed again. Shifting cultivation is still com- 
mon in certain areas. But in some heavily populated re- 
gions, resettlement is not possible. As a result, the farm- 
ers continue to work land that becomes poorer and 
poorer. 

Most farm families grow food crops for their own use. 
In the grasslands of eastern and southern Africa, food 
crops include peanuts and such grains as corn, millet, 
and sorghum. In wetter areas, food crops include ba- 
nanas, rice, and such roots as yams and cassava. 

Farmers also grow various cash crops, including cof- 
fee; cacao, or cocoa beans; cotton; coconuts; and fruits. 
The farmers sell their cash crops for money to buy such 
items as bicycles, canned goods, clothing, kerosene, 
lamps, and matches. The farmers may also use the mon- 
ey from their cash crops to pay taxes as well as medical 
expenses and school fees. 

In addition to growing crops, almost all farmers raise 
chickens. Many keep goats and sheep. Farmers may also 
sell livestock or food crops for needed money. 

The typical farm family has several widely scattered 
plots outside the village. Each plot is planted with a dif- 
ferent crop. Families may also rent their land or farm on 
land that is owned by village elders and chiefs. Some 
farmers also work part-time on large estates or planta- 
tions that produce cash crops. Both men and women 
work long hours at farming to make a living. 

Rural women also spend much time doing such 
chores as collecting firewood, grinding grain, and ob- 
taining water. In many villages, however, the introduc- 
tion of such simple machines as water pumps and small 


© Agence Hoa-Qui 


A modern store in Dakar, 
Senegal, contrasts sharply 
with the traditional open-air 
markets of Africa. Traditional 
ways of life are changing as 
more and more rural Africans 
move to urban areas. 


112 Africa 


a = 
a >” 2 es 
PTY Ae Le 


« ‘s at. 
‘ i? ‘ . ; 7 
ye rr 4 PT 
r 1.4 3 


a 


} a 
¢ ' a 
re 
aa £74 


Mate pelos 
; y. ® 4 . . 


Victor Englebert, Black Star 


Soccer games draw large crowds in African cities. Soccer, also 
called association football, is popular throughout the continent 
The game above is being played in Accra, Ghana. 


hand- or machine-driven flour mills has given women 
more time to do other things. In most villages, everyone 
takes part in such major tasks as clearing new land and 
building houses. The people work together on such 
tasks, while sharing food and drink and socializing. 

Some African farmers—for example, those who live 
along the Nile River—irrigate their crops. But most farm- 
ers depend on seasonal rains. Work and other activities 
therefore follow a seasonal schedule. During the rainy 
season, farm families work long, hard days planting and 
tending their crops. Food may be in short supply at that 
time of year. In the dry season, after the crops have been 
harvested, food is more plentiful. The people also have 
more leisure time. They spend the extra hours repairing 
tools and houses, visiting with friends and relatives, and 
trading their crops for other goods. In western Africa, 
women have traditionally controlled trade activities. 
Some women have become wealthy as a result of their 
trading skill. In other areas of Africa, trade matters are 
handled either by men or women. 

Community ceremonies, which are often held in the 
village square, are an important part of rural African life. 
They mark such occasions as the first rains of the grow- 
ing season, the planting of crops, and harvesttime. Some 
groups have annual ceremonies in which secret soci- 
eties of elders dance to rid the community of evil forces 
and witches. Entire communities, as well as people from 
neighboring villages, may gather for ceremonies related 
to births, marriages, funerals, the curing of the sick, and 
the passage of children into adulthood. These communi- 
ty gatherings strengthen family ties and religious beliefs. 

In many parts of rural Africa, young men leave their 
villages and work at least a few years as migrant labor- 
ers. They travel to cities and towns in hope of earning 
enough money to get married, to set up a small busi- 
ness, or to go to school. In parts of central and southern 
Africa, many men get temporary jobs as miners. The 
women left behind in the villages must do much of the 
farm work themselves. 

Nomadic herding is a way of life for people in parts of 
Africa, particularly in dry areas near the Sahara and in 








the highland regions of eastern Africa. Such nomadic 
peoples as the Dinka, the Fulani, the Maasai, the 
Toubou, the Tuareg, and the Turkana follow well-estab- 
lished routes to find grazing land for their herds of cat- 
tle, sheep, goats, or in some Cases camels. 

The nomadic herders depend mainly on their live- 
stock for food. The men and boys tend the herds, and 
the women care for the household. Some nomadic 
groups, such as the Maasai of eastern Africa, build huge 
corrals for their livestock. Within the corrals, the people 
construct igloo-shaped houses of brush, mud, and dried 
manure. Other nomads live in tents made of animal 
skins or hair. 

City life. City dwellers make up only about 30 percent 
of Africa's total population south of the Sahara. But the 
percentage is much higher in some countries, such as 
Congo (Brazzaville), Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Mauri- 
tius, and South Africa. Throughout Africa, more and 
more rural people are moving to the cities to seek work 
Cities south of the Sahara with populations of more than 
a million include Addis Ababa, Ethiopia; Cape Town, 
South Africa; Johannesburg, South Africa; Kinshasa, 
Congo (Kinshasa); and Lagos, Nigeria. 

Some towns and cities south of the Sahara have exist- 
ed for centuries. The Ethiopian town of Aksum may have 
been founded more than 2,000 years ago. When the first 
Europeans reached western Africa during the 1400's, 
such cities as Timbuktu in Mali and Ibadan and Kano in 
Nigeria were thriving economic and cultural centers. Eu- 
ropeans established many other cities in Africa, starting 
in 1652 with the Dutch settlement at Cape Town in what 
is now the Republic of South Africa. 

In most cities south of the Sahara, the architecture re- 
flects both traditional and modern styles. The newer 
sections of the cities have parks, hotels, tall office and 
apartment buildings, and large stores. Many older 


€ Robert Frerck 
Rural housing varies according to climate, tradition, and avail- 
able materials. Houses of the Ndebele of South Africa, shown 
here, are made of dried mud and colortully painted. 





neighborhoods have houses and shops crowded along 
narrow streets. Open-air markets, where people buy 
food, clothing, and a variety of other goods, are com- 
mon in many cities. 

Like city people in northern Africa, most city dwellers 
south of the Sahara have a higher standard of living than 
rural people. The cities provide better schools and bet- 
ter medical facilities than the countryside. For people 
with the necessary skills, the cities may offer well-paying 
job opportunities in government, business, industry, 
and other fields. 

City life styles vary widely. Some people are wealthy 
and live in luxury apartments or large, modern houses. 
Most of the people, however, live in unplanned neigh- 
borhoods of small, one-story houses. Many houses are 
built of wood or concrete blocks and have corrugated 
iron roofs. 

Like cities in the north, most African cities south of 
the Sahara face serious problems. The sharp increase in 
city populations has made it difficult for governments to 
provide enough housing and efficient public transporta- 
tion. The water supply, sewerage, and electrical systems 
are overloaded. Many cities also have a large number of 
unemployed workers. 

Marriage and the family. Strong feelings of loyalty 
and cooperation bind African families closely together. 
Such feelings are shared among all family members, not 
only parents and children but also grandparents, aunts, 
uncles, and cousins. The family helps its members with 
business concerns, employment, legal matters, and vari- 
ous other affairs. The family also cares for members 
who are sick or elderly. Most Africans still seek the ad- 
vice and approval of their relatives before making any 
important decision. 

According to traditional African beliefs, marriage is 
more than an agreement between a man and a woman 
to live together. Marriage is also a way to acquire more 
relatives, both by gaining in-laws and by having chil- 





¢ Agence Hoa Qui 


Women in Mali grind grain into flour, above. Both sexes share 
the farm work in Africa, but certain chores are assigned to et- 
ther men or women. Food preparation is the work of women. 


Africa 113 


a a 
, NG 
gael A 
of b s 
3 a, i 
i 


J 


© Robert Frerck 
Community feasts like this one in Ghana celebrate such events 
as marriages and births. The gatherings help strengthen the 
common beliefs and kinship ties that unite African communities. 





dren. In general, the families of the bride and groom 
must consent to a marriage before it may take place. 
Among most African peoples, a man or his father or un- 
cles must give a brideweal/th in money, livestock, or 
other valuables to a woman’s family before the man may 
marry her. Africans do not consider this traditional! 
bridewealth as a payment for the bride but as a way to 
show her importance and the value they place upon the 
new ties with her relatives. 

Most African ethnic groups permit polygyny. Many 
men follow this custom and so have more than one wife. 
The husband is expected to divide his attention and pos- 
sessions equally among his various families. Each wife 
expects to have her own house, livestock, and other 
goods. Some Africans and foreign missionaries have 
tried to end the bridewealth and polygyny. But the tradi- 
tions remain important among most ethnic groups 
south of the Sahara. 

Africans trace their family ties in several ways. A few 
groups trace their ancestry through both the mother 
and the father. But most ethnic groups are organized as 
patrilineages—that is, relatives are linked by their de- 
scent through the male members of the family. Property 
is inherited only through the male side of the family, and 


114 Africa 





> Bemard Pierre \Volft Photo Researchers 


Westermstyle clothing is worn by many Africans in urban 
areas. The scene above is in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. Some city 
people and most villagers, however, wear traditional clothing. 


fathers have legal control over their children. Matriline- 
ages are Common among some groups, particularly in 
central Africa, Congo (Kinshasa), and the forests of west- 
ern Africa. In these groups, family members are linked 
through the women. Property is inherited through the 
female side of the family, and the brothers of a mother 
have legal control over her children. 

Each kinship system has its own names for relatives. 
These names classify family members into groups that 
differ from those commonly used in Western countries. 
In the United States, for example, a brother of a person's 
father and a brother of a persons mother are both 
called unc/e. But many Africans use a different name for 
a brother of one's father and a brother of one’s mother. 
In a similar manner, most Africans do not group all their 
cousins together under one term but refer to them by 
different terms according to the specific family ties in- 
volved. 

Among some African peoples, families form larger 
groups called c/ans. All the members of a clan consider 





themselves to be descended from the same ancestor. 
Many clans observe certain rules. For example, mem- 
bers of the same clan may not be allowed to marry. Like 
the family, the clan offers protection and security for its 
members. 

For some Africans, the strength of family ties has de- 
creased as more and more rural people have moved to 
the cities. But even in the cities, relatives may live in the 
same neighborhood, and most city dwellers keep in 
close touch with relatives in the country. 

Food and drink. South of the Sahara, most Africans 
in both the cities and the countryside eat one large meal 
daily, usually in the evening. They have only light snacks 
at other times of the day. The main meal is a time for so- 
cializing with relatives and neighbors. The men and 
boys generally eat separately from the women and girls. 
In many households, the people gather around a large 
bowl of food set on the ground and scoop up the food 
with their fingers or with pieces of bread. 

The typical African meal consists of a starchy food, 
such as rice, flour cooked into a porridge, or yams. The 
food is served with a sauce containing vegetables or 
bits of meat. A common food in tropical areas is the 
plantain, a large kind of banana. Plantains may be fried 
or cooked into a porridge. They may also be dried and 
ground into flour. 

Most African families eat meat only on special occa- 
sions. At such times, the men and the elderly receive 
bigger portions of meat than the women and children. 
The people eat chicken, goat, lamb, or beef. Fish are im- 
portant in the diet of people who live along seacoasts, 
rivers, and lakes. Africans who keep cattle live largely 
on milk, cheese, and a thick sour milk product that re- 
sembles yogurt. Some of them also draw blood from 
their cattle, mainly for ceremonial occasions. They drink 
the blood raw or eat it boiled or mixed with the yogurt 

Many Africans make beer from honey or from such 
grains as maize and millet. They also make wine from 
the sap of certain kinds of palm trees. 

In some parts of Africa, the people suffer from malinu- 
trition because of periodic food shortages or the lack of 
a balanced diet. Long droughts, particularly in regions 


Alan Hutchison Library 


Traditional clothing styles 
in Africa often feature bright 
colors and bold patterns. 
Elaborate costumes and jew- 
elry may be worn for special 
occasions. At the left, a village 
chief arrives at an Islamic fes- 
tival in Chad. He and his at- 
tendants wear long, flowing 
robes and turbans. 





near the Sahara, sometimes lead to terrible tamines and 
thousands of people may die of starvation. 

Clothing. Clothing styles vary throughout Africa 
south of the Sahara according to climate and custom. 
City dwellers often wear Western-style clothes. But 
other city people and most villagers prefer to wear Afri- 
can clothing, which often features bright colors and 
bold patterns. 

In western Africa and regions near the Sahara, many 
men wear a long flowing robe or baggy trousers and a 
loose shirt or tunic. A small cap or turban is also cus- 
tomary among many African men. Many African women 
take a length of cloth and wrap it around themselves 
into a dress. They may also wrap a cloth around the 
head in the style of a turban or scarf. Some Muslim 
women follow Islamic tradition and cover the face with 
a veil when they go out in public. Many rural men and 
women tie a piece of fabric around the waist or at the 
shoulder to form a cloak. Some African herders wear 
simple garments made of leather. Rural people gener- 
ally go barefoot or wear sandals. Colorful necklaces, 
bracelets, anklets, and earrings are part of the everyday 
clothing of some Africans. Among the Ashanti of Ghana 
and certain other ethnic groups, kings and their courts 
dress in gorgeous robes on special occasions. See 
Clothing (pictures: Traditional costumes). 

Education. Hundreds of years ago, Muslim scholars 
established near the edges of the Sahara some of the 
first schools in Africa. These schools taught Islam, the 
Arabic language, and science. But for most Africans, ed- 
ucation did not involve going to school. Parents taught 
their children what they needed to know to get along in 
society and to make a living. Some young people, espe- 
cially in areas of western Africa, served as apprentices 
in craft associations, where they were trained in such 
skills as metalworking, woodcarving, pottery making, or 
weaving. 

Christian missionaries taught some Africans south of 
the Sahara how to read and write as early as the 1500s. 
But large advances in education did not begin until the 
1900's, when the European colonial powers decided 
they needed more Africans to fill jobs in government 
and industry. Britain, France, and other colonial powers 
established schools in Africa. 

Today, many African governments south of the Sahara 
strive to build schools and to extend education to as 
many people as possible. A greater number of Africans 
than ever are attending elementary school and going on 
to high school and college. 

In spite of the progress in education, serious prob- 
lems remain. Most African adults who live south of the 
Sahara cannot read and write. However, the literacy rate 
varies greatly from country to country. In Gabon and 
Zimbabwe, for example, the literacy rate is higher than 
60 percent, and in Tanzania, about 90 percent. But in 
such countries as Benin, Burkina Faso, and Mali, the lit- 
eracy rate is only about 20 percent. In many places, es- 
pecially rural areas, there is a shortage of schools, edu- 
cational materials, and qualified teachers. A large 
number of children do not attend school at all, and 
many others leave after only a few years to help their 
families earn a living. 





Africa 115 


URN tee lia Me, Fin 
) as ers pe 3 se be 
Fait y1 


, eee scale ee wa et 
ny a te 


». 5 1 
ey 


* 
¢ 


SS ae 


7 


5e 
i 
% 
er. 
? 
+e 


29 


| 


eye pay 
Baht: AME wary ? 
Leon V. Kotod 
Traditional education in Africa provides children with the 
special skills they need to become productive members of their 


community. These boys are learning how to make a spearhead. 


a 


<s it ~~ 


care) 
fer 








© Beryl Goldberg 
Mission schools were founded in Africa by European mission- 
aries during the colonial period. Such schools remain important 
because of shortages of schools and qualified teachers. 


appr ¥ 


« Agence Hoa Quit 
College education is available in mos! African countries. Be- 
fore the 1940's, most Africans had to go abroad Io gel a college 
education. These students attend Dakar University in Senegal. 


116 Africa The arts | 


Various arts have been highly developed in parts of 
Africa for thousands of years. The oldest known African 
artworks are prehistoric paintings that have been found 
in Namibia, in the Sahara, and in other areas on rocks 
and on the walls of caves and rock shelters. The archi- 
tecture, painting, and sculpture of ancient Egypt are 
world famous. Today, many African peoples create fine 
examples of beadwork, basketry, pottery, leatherwork, 
metalwork, weaving, and textile dyeing. Excellent craft- 
work can be seen in tools and household items as well 
as in decorative ornaments and ceremonial objects. 

The art of northern Africa differs from that of the rest AR 
of the continent. In the north, artists create beautiful Detail of statue (A.D. 1100-1400); Nigerian Museum, Lagos (© Agence Hoa-Qui) 
works in a distinct style called /s/amic art Outstanding A metal sculpture from Nigeria is an image of a priest-king of 
examples of this style are the many magnificent a civilization once centered at Ife. The people used sculptures of 
mosques located throughout northern Africa. The artists former kings in ceremonies honoring the dead. 
of northern Africa are also known for their superb tex- 
tiles, metalwork, glassware, and other craftwork. 

Sculpture. African sculpture includes figures, masks, 
decorated boxes, and other objects for religious, cere- 
monial, and everyday use. Many early African sculptures 
were made of wood. Because wood is perishable, few 
of these works remain. Some excellent examples of early 
African sculpture are made of brass, ivory, and a kind of 
earthenware called terra-cotta. The oldest known African 
sculptures from south of the Sahara are terra-cotta fig- 
ures created about 500 B.C. by the Nok culture of central 
and northern Nigeria. Superb brass and terra-cotta 
heads were made in what is now Ife, Nigeria, especially 
from about the 1100's to the 1400's. Artists in the former 
kingdom of Benin, in western Africa, made high-quality 
ivory ornaments as well as brass figures, heads, and 
plaques from the 1400's to about the 1700's. 

Few people outside Africa knew about African sculp- 
ture until the 1900's. But it became a major influence on 
Western art. The imaginative designs and simple, dra- 
matic forms of African sculpture influenced such fa- 
mous artists as Georges Braque of France, Henry Moore 
of Britain, and Pablo Picasso of Spain. 

Today, African sculptors work in wood or various 
metals and follow the traditional styles of their ethnic 
group. Ethnic groups known for their sculpture include 
the Yoruba of Nigeria; the Dogon and Bambara of Mali; 
the Senufo, Baule, and Dan of Cote d'Ivoire; the Fang of 








Carved wooden mask, Nelson A. Rockefeller Collection (© Lee Boltin) 
A ceremonial mask reflects the artistry of the Songe of Congo 
(Kinshasa). Dancers wear such masks for certain royal events. 
Nelson A. Rockefeller Collection (© Lee Boltin! 








een 


tm, 








A wooden stool supported An ivory bracelet from the A wooden spoon like this The royal emblem of the . 
by an ancestor figure symbol- former Kingdom of Benin is one is used by the Dan of Li- Ashanti Empire was a lion lt 
izes Songe royal authority. from the 1600's or 1700's. beria to portion rice at feasts. made of gold, shown here. Be 


Gabon; and the Kongo, Kuba, Luba, and Lega of Congo 
(Kinshasa). For additional information, see Sculpture 
(African sculpture). 

Music. African music has a wide range of styles. In 
northern Africa, music follows Arab traditions. Arab reli- 
gious chants and the use of various northern instru- 
ments have also spread southward and influenced the 
music of peoples in parts of Chad, Ghana, Mali, Niger, 
Nigeria, Senegal, and Sudan. Ethiopian music devel- 
oped from ancient Coptic music. Traditional black Afri- 
can music includes choral singing, music performed for 
entertainment at royal courts, and songs and dances for 
religious events. Black African musicians use a variety of 
drums as well as such instruments as harps, horns, 
flutes, pipes, lyres, zithers, and xylophones. 

The complicated rhythms, responsive choral singing, 
and flattened, or b/ue, notes found in black American 
work songs and church music reflect African traditions. 
African music has also influenced Western popular mu- 
sic and jazz, West Indian calypso, and Latin American 
dance music. See Music (African music). 





Africa 117 


Literature. Africa has a rich tradition of oral litera- 
ture, which has been passed from one generation to an- 
other. The literature includes histories of ethnic and kin- 
ship groups, legends of cultural heroes, stories of 
tricksters, animal fables, proverbs, riddles, and songs of 
praise for chiefs and kings. Oral literature has a role in 
religious ceremonies and serves to record the past, to 
teach morals and traditions to young people, and to glo- 
rify political leaders. It is often recited to music before 
family groups or larger audiences. Today, scholars are 
recording African oral literature to preserve it. 

In the past, only a few areas of Africa had a written lit- 
erature. Scholars in the north produced works in Arabic 
or in Swahili and Hausa using Arabic script. A small ed- 
ucated minority in Ethiopia wrote in Coptic script. Since 
the 1900's, African writers have produced works in vari- 
ous African languages, including Hausa, Somali, Swa- 
hili, Yoruba, and Zulu. But most present-day written lit- 
erature is in English, French, or Portuguese, the 
languages of former colonial powers. African written lit- 
erature today includes plays, novels, and poetry. 


Robert Davis 


African architecture ranges from magnificent mosques to simple village houses. The 





Traditional! African dancing marks important events in every 
day life, such as births, deaths, and harvesttinie. The dancers 
above are Zulu people of South Africa. 


mosque above was built in Al Qayrawan, Tunisia, in 1860. Ata Dogon village in Mali, 
right the houses and granaries with cone-shaped roofs are built of mud and stone. 


© Hamilton Waght Photo Researvhers 





© Beryl Goldberg 





Onven Franken, Stock Baston 


Royal music of the Ashanti of Ghana, above, honors a new 
chief. Horns and trumpets are common musical instruments in 
Africa. They may be made of wood, ivory. or animal horns. 
















































N 
A \A 
b © Azores 
Madera is _ 
B 
Canary 
Islands + % 
Cape Bojator 
Ci} , 
, Froflewss: 
| COASTAL 19.20. no a | 
ag OF ‘ am f i 8 A +) { N. / 
| = (ga ee oe a 
LOWLANDS LOW AFRICA Kherovaaa 
Dakar 
ake, 
ESTERN 
D VV fy J 
iy, Es > 
E 
F 
° 
Africa 
terrain map 
GS | 
=| Lond region boundary 
| 
| Internationo!l boundary 
} 
° ! City 
a + Elevation obave > ens 
sea level Cape ot? Cave Aguinas 
| Good Hope 
v | Depressian he ake 
1 000 2.000 3 000 Miles 
WORLD BOOK map , ) 1000 2.000 3 000 4 000 Kilometers 
a ee . : po — Nee Ss 
i Co River —E 4 Kalahari Desert G 4 Li Desert B 5 Qattara Depression B 5 
Physical features Ghanad River F 4 Kariba Lake F 5 Eongore River G 5 Ras Dashen 
Mountains Contd Drakensberg Kilimanjaro —E 6 Low Africa ec 3 imountain) D 6 
Air sit imountains} H 5 Lake Albert B 5S Madagascar G 7 Red Sea ‘Cab 
(mountains) Cc 3 Emi Koussi Lake Assal D 6 Madeira islands B 1 Ruwenzori 
Atlas Mountains Pe 2 (mountain) Cc 4 Lake Chad D $3 herita Peak —E 5 Range —E 35 
Black Volta River Dp 2 Ethiopian Lake Edward re 5S iterranean Sea A 4 Sahara Desert B 3 
Blue Nile River D 6 Highlands .D 6 Lake Mweru 8 TS Mozambique Channel G 6 Sen River Cc 1 
Cameroon Mountain D 3 Creat Rift Valley D 6 Lake Nasser Ce 5 Mount Kenya EF 6 Suez Canal B 5 
Canary Islands B } Gulf of Aden D 7 Lake Nyasa F 6 Namib Desert G 4 Tibesti Mountains Cc 4 
Cape Agulhas H 4 Gulf of Guinea —E 3 Lake Tana D 6 Sa D 2 Ubangi River —E 4 
Cape of Good Ho H 4 High Africa F 5 fo hese a E 5 Nile Detta B 5 Vaal Ri G 5 
Champagne le indian Ocean H 6 Lake Tu EF 6 Nile River B 5 Victoria Falls G 5 
{mountain H 5 Jebel Toubkal Lake Victoria FE 5 Nubian Desert c 5 White Nile River D 5 
Congo Basin —E 4 (mountain) B 2 Lake Volta DBD 2 Orange River H 4 Zambezi River FO O5 


The land 


Africa covers approximately 11,657,000 square miles 
(30,190,000 square kilometers), about a fifth of tiie earth's 
total land area. The continent is an enormous plateau, 
most of which is covered by deserts, forests, and grass- 
lands. 

Land regions. Africa can be divided into two major 
land regions: {1) Low Africa and (2) High Africa. 

Low Africa consists of northern, western, and central 
Africa. Except for a few coastal plains and mountain 
ranges, most of the region lies from 500 to 2,000 feet 
(150 to 610 meters) above sea level. Low Africa can be 
subdivided into six smaller land regions. They are (1) the 
Coastal Lowlands, (2) the Northern Highlands, (3) the Sa- 
haran Plateau, (4) the Western Plateau, (5) the Nile Basin, 
and (6) the Congo Basin. 

The Coastal Lowlands form a narrow border along 
most of northern Africa and the bulge of western Africa. 
The area has fertile farmland, forests, sandy beaches, 
deserts, and swamps. 

The Northern Highlands are a mountainous region 
that stretches across parts of Algeria, Morocco, and 
Tunisia. The Atlas Mountains in this region have de- 
posits of phosphate rock, iron ore, and manganese. 

The Saharan Plateau covers most of northern Africa. 
The Sahara, in turn, occupies most of the plateau. !solat- 
ed clusters of mountains rise up from the plateau in 
places. Valuable deposits of petroleum and other miner- 
als lie beneath the Sahara. The desert merges with a dry 
grassland called the Sahel at the southern boundary of 
the Saharan Plateau. 

The Western Plateau lies south of the Saharan Plateau. 
It consists of forests and grasslands. The Niger and other 
rivers flow through the region. 

The Nile Basin is a flat, dry region that borders the 
Nile River and its tributaries in northeastern Africa. In ad- 
dition to fertile farmland along the Nile, the region has 
deserts in the north and a huge swamp called the Sudd 
in the south. 





© Victor Engleben. Photo Researchers 
Deserts cover about two-fifths of Africa. The oasis above is in 


the Sahara, the world’s largest desert. The Sahara stretches 
across northern Africa from the Atlantic Ocean to the Red Sea. 


Africa 119 


The Congo Basin, in west-central Africa, includes most 
of the land drained by the Congo River and its tribu- 
taries. Tropical rain forests cover much of the Congo 
Basin. 

High Africa consists of eastern and southern Africa. 
Most of the region is more than 3,000 feet (910 meters) 
above sea level. High Africa can be subdivided into five 
smaller land regions. They are (1) the Rift System, (2) the 
Eastern Highlands, (3) the Southern Plateau, (4) the 
Coastal Lowlands, and (5) Madagascar. 

The Rift System extends from Eritrea to Mozambique. 
The region consists of the Great Rift Valley, which is a 
series of parallel cracks in the earth that form deep, 
steep-sided valleys. Lakes and mountains add to the re- 
gions beauty. The region also has some of Africa's best 
farmland because of its rich volcanic soil. 

The Eastern Highlands are grassy plains that provide 
grazing land for livestock and many kinds of wild ani- 
mals. The Rift System cuts through the Eastern High- 
lands. 

The Southern Plateau covers most of southern Africa. 
Much of it is flat or rolling grassland used for crops and 
pasture. The region also has deserts, swamps, and 
forests. Rugged mountains and cliffs rim the plateau in 
the south and west. Deposits of diamonds and gold lie in 
the Southern Plateau. 

The Coastal Lowlands border the high plateaus of 
eastern and southern Africa. The lowlands include pro- 
ductive farmland, sandy beaches, and swamplands. 

Madagascar, the world's fourth largest island, lies 
about 240 miles (390 kilometers) southeast of the main- 
land in the Indian Ocean. Although the island is part of 
High Africa, it can be divided into two chief land regions. 
The Coastal Lowlands torm a narrow band along the east 
coast and broaden to a wide fertile plain on the west. 
The Central Highlaiids, which run almost the full length 
of the island, have some peaks over 9,000 feet (2,700 me- 
ters) above sea level. 





© Agence Hoa Qui 
The Congo River is Africas second longest river. Only the Nile 
River is longer, The Congo rises in southern Congo (Kinshasa) 
and flows 2,716 miles (4,371 kilometers) to the Atlantic Ocean. 


120 Africa 





© M. Philip Kahl, fr, Photo Researchers 





Norman Meyers, Bruce Coleman Ltd. 


Africa’s spectacular sights include Victoria Falls, /eft, and Kilimanjaro, right, a towering dormant 
volcano. Victoria Falls is on the Zambezi River, between Zambia and Zimbabwe. Kilimanjaro rises 


19,331 feet (5,892 meters) in Tanzania. It is Africa's highest point 


Deserts, grasslands, and forests. Deserts cover 
about two-fifths of Africa. The Sahara, the world’s 
largest desert, stretches across northern Africa from the 
Atlantic Ocean to the Red Sea. It covers about 3 } mil- 
lion square miles (9 million square kilometers). The Sa- 
hara is a region of bare rock, boulders, gravel, and sand 
dunes, broken only by a few oases and the fertile Nile 
Valley. The Namib Desert borders the Atlantic coast of 
southwestern Africa. The Kalahari Desert lies inland 
from the Namib. 

Grasslands called savannas occupy more than two- 
fifths of Africa. They form a broad curve that extends 
from the Atlantic coast just south of the Sahara, across 
eastern Africa, and back westward to the Atlantic south 
of the Congo Basin. Tall grasses, thorny bushes, and 
scattered trees grow in this area. Thicker woodlands 
cover areas with more rainfall. But closer to the deserts, 
there are fewer trees and shorter grasses. 

Forests cover less than a fifth of Africa. Many people 
outside the continent think that much of Africa is a jun- 
gle, which must be hacked through with an ax or knife. 
But true jungle is rare in Africa. Most of the forests are 
tropical rain forests. These forests, with their many 
kinds of broadleaf evergreen trees, grow in the Congo 
Basin and in parts of western Africa and Madagascar. 
The floors of the forests tend to be fairly open and clear. 
Pockets of dense and tangled mangrove swamps fringe 
some coastal areas in the west and east and in Mada- 
gascar. Other forests grow in the highlands of eastern 
Africa, in the mountains of the northwest, and in parts of 
the south. 

Rivers and waterfalls. The Nile River, the world’s 
longest river, flows 4,160 miles (6,695 kilometers) north- 
ward from east-central Africa to the Mediterranean Sea. 
Most of Africa’s other major rivers, including the Congo 
and the Niger, empty into the Atlantic. Rivers that flow 
into the Indian Ocean include the Limpopo and the 
Zambezi. 


Rapids and waterfalls make navigation difficult on 
many African rivers. But they provide the continent with 
about 15 percent of the world’s potential water power. 
Hydroelectric power projects have been built on a num- 
ber of rivers. Some projects also provide irrigation wa- 
ter and flood control. Several waterfalls, including spec- 
tacular Victoria Falls on the Zambezi, are popular tourist 
attractions. 

Lakes. Most of Africa's large lakes lie in the east, 
where chains of long, deep lakes have formed in the 
bottoms of the rift valleys. One of these lakes, Tanganyi- 
ka, is the longest freshwater lake in the world. It is 420 
miles (680 kilometers) long and more than 4,700 feet 
(1,430 meters) deep. Other large rift lakes include Nyasa, 
Albert, and Turkana. Africa's largest lake, Victoria, lies in 
a Shallow basin between two chains of rift valleys. It 
covers 26,828 square miles (69,484 square kilometers) 
and is second in size only to Lake Superior among the 
world’s freshwater lakes. 

Mountains. Volcanic activity created most of Africa's 
highest mountains. The two tallest peaks—19,331-foot 
(5,892-meter) Kilimanjaro and 17,058-foot (5,199-meter) 
Mount Kenya—were formed in this way. Although they 
rise near the equator in eastern Africa, both mountains 
have glaciers and are covered with snow much of the 
year. Volcanic activity also produced the Ethiopian 
Highlands; the isolated Tibesti Massif in the Sahara; and 
Mount Cameroon, the highest peak in western Africa. 
Volcanic rock covers the Drakensberg, a mountainous 
region where the plateau of southeastern Africa drops 
sharply to the sea. 

Two major nonvolcanic mountain ranges of Africa are 
the Ruwenzori Range and the Atlas Mountains. The 
Ruwenzori Range rises on the border of Uganda and 
Congo (Kinshasa). The Atlas Mountains extend from Mo- 
rocco to Tunisia and form Africa’s longest mountain 
chain. The Atlas Mountains are part of the same moun- 
tain system as the European Alps. 


 —- 


Climate 


Most of Africa has a warm or hot climate, but the hu- 
midity and amount of rainfall vary dramatically from area 
to area. The map below illustrates Africa's climate pat- 
terns. The maps on the next page indicate the average 
January and July temperatures and the average yearly 
precipitation (rain, melted snow, and other forms of 
moisture). 

Africa has the largest tropical area of any continent. 
The equator runs through the middle of Africa, and 
about 90 per cent of the continent lies within the tropics. 
In countries south of the equator, the seasons are oppo- 
site those of countries that lie north of the equator. But 
temperatures are high the year around almost every- 
where in Africa. The variations between summer and 
winter temperatures are slight. In fact, the difference be- 
tween daytime and nighttime temperatures in most 
parts of the continent is greater than the difference in 
the average temperatures between the coldest and 
warmest months. For this reason, some people say that 
nighttime is the “winter” of the tropics. 

Africa's highest temperatures occur in the Sahara and 
in parts of Somalia. The highest temperature ever re- 
corded in the world was 136’ F. (58° C) in the shade at Al 


What Africa's 
climate is like 


Much of Africa has a tropical 
or desert climate. The map 
and legend show what the cli- 
mate is like throughout the 
continent. 


Casablanca 


Tropical Wet: Alwoys 
hot, always wet. Heavy 
precipitation well distrib- 
uted throughout the year. 


Tropical Wet and Dry: 
| Alwoys hot. Both wet and 
dry seasons. Heovy pre- 
Cipitatien in wet season. 


Semlarid: Hot to cold. 
Great changes in daily 
temperoture except near 
coost. Light precipitation. 


Desert: Hot to cool. Great 
changes in daily tempero- 
ture except neor coast. 
Very little precipitation. 


Subtropical Dry Sum- 
Be mer: Hot, dry summers 

ond mild winters. Moder- 

ate precipitotion in winter. 


[_] Subtropical Moist: 

4 Worm to hot summers and 
mild winters. Moderate 
precipitation in oll seasons. 


Highland: Becouse of 
Ee] altitude, highlands ore 

generally cooler and wet- 

ter thon adjocent areas. 





WORLD BOOK map 





Africa 12] 


Aziziyah, Libya, on Sept. 13, 1922. At I-n-Salah, Algeria, 
and along the north coast of Somalia, July temperatures 
soar to 115° F. (46° C) or higher almost every day. Night- 
time temperatures, however, may drop sharply. The Sa- 
hara also has the greatest seasonal range of tempera- 
tures in Africa. Winter temperatures in the Sahara 
average from 50° to 60° F. (10° to 16° C). Near the equator, 
temperatures may average 75° F. (24° C) or more the year 
around. But temperatures of more than 100” F. (38° C) are 
rare. 

The coolest regions in Africa are the northwest, the 
highland areas of the east, and parts of the south. In Jo- 
hannesburg, South Africa, for example, the average tem- 
perature in January, the warmest month, is 68° F. (20° C). 
Frost and snowfall are common in the mountains of Af- 
rica. 

Rainfall is distributed very unevenly in Africa. Most 
areas receive either too much rain or too little. In parts 
of the west coast, for example, annual rainfall averages 
more than 100 inches (250 centimeters). In Monrovia, Li- 
beria, an average of more than 40 inches (100 centime- 
ters) of rain falls during the month of June alone. In con- 
trast, more than half of Africa receives less than 20 





122 Africa 


inches (50 centimeters) of rainfall yearly. The Sahara and 
the Namib Desert receive an average of less than 10 
inches (25 centimeters) a year. In parts of the deserts, 
rain may not fall for six or seven years in a row. Then 
when it does rain, many children are startled because 
they have never seen rain before. 

Rain falls the year around in the forests of the Congo 
Basin and the coastal regions of western Africa. But al- 
most all the rest of Africa has one or two seasons of 
heavy rainfall separated by dry periods. In some regions 
of Africa, the amount of rainfall varies sharply from year 
to year rather than from season to season. Since the late 
1960's, droughts have caused much suffering in Africa. 
Millions of Africans have died of starvation and related 
causes. The hardest-hit areas include Ethiopia and the 
Sahel region on the southern edge of the Sahara. 






Average yearly 
precipitation 


(Rain, melted snow, 
and other moisture) 





a ; ; 1 Inches Centimeters 
Africa's climate has made agricultural improvement Marcanee Wee tha 
difficult. In areas with limited and unreliable rainfall, ae oe reas — 
farmers may be uncertain of what crops to plant. Some 
: - - 30 to 60 75 to 150 
farmers grow a number of crops with different moisture : 
: 10 to 30 25 to 75 : 
needs in the hope of having at least one successful har- : a Cape Town 
; 10, 5 to 25 
vest. Other farmers may grow only one or two kinds of .—_"° 
Less than 2 


crops and risk starvation if not enough rain falls. In areas 
with too much rainfall, heayy downpours wash away 
nourishing substances in the soil. The hot, humid cli- 
mate in much of Africa encourages the spread of insects 
that destroy livestock and cause various diseases in peo- 


ple. 














Average January 





Less than 5 } 


WORLD BOOK map 
Rainfall is unevenly distributed in Africa. Equatorial regions re- 
ceive 60 inches (150 centimeters) or more annually. The Sahara 
receives less than 2 inches (5 centimeters). 





Average July 





temperatures temperatures 

Degrees Degrees Degrees Degrees ——— ’ 
Fahrenhert Celsius Fahrenheit Celsius < 
Over 80 Over 27 Over 90 Over 32 — = 
70 to 80 21 to 27 80 to 90 27 to 32 te ee 
60 to 70 16 to 21 70 to 80 21 to 27 con OY 
50 to 60 10 to 16 60 to 70 16 to 21 a 

Cape Town Cape Town: 
Below 50 | Below 10 50 to 60 10 to 16 
| ee 
Below 50 | Below 10 


WORLD BOOK map 








WORLD BOOK map 


Temperatures are high all year throughout most of Africa. The maps above show the average Janu- 
ary and July temperatures across the continent January is a winter month in the north and a sum- 
mer month in the south. But in July, the north has summer, and the south has winter. 





Animals and plants 


Ss 








xx 
ee 
™. 





© George Holton, Photo Researchers 


Gorilla Gnus 






Africa 123 





se witn Bsns La 
Sip 


M. D. England. Ardea London 





Peter Davey, Bruce Coleman Ltd. 


Leopard 


African animal life consists of thousands of species of mammals, birds, insects, and other ani- 
mals. The pictures above show three kinds of Africa‘’s most famous mammals. 


—— — a, 
= 





Sd 
«tA 





© Carl Frame Photo Researchers 


Bamboo Baobab tree 





Gerald Cubstt 





}. A. L Cooke, Oxford Scientific Films 
Welwitschia 


African plant life varies according to climate. For example, bamboo grows in tropical forests, the 
baobab tree in savannas, and the Welwitschia in southwestern desert areas. 


Native animals. Africa’s wild animals are world fa- 
mous. The continent has thousands of species of mam- 
mals, reptiles, amphibians, fishes, birds, and insects. In 
the east and south, huge herds of antelope, buffaloes, 
giraffes, and zebras roam the grasslands. They are 
preyed on by such animals as cheetahs, hyenas, jackals, 
leopards, and lions. A few remaining large herds of ele- 
phants live in the east and the southeast. Baboons are 
common in many parts of Africa. Crocodiles and hippo- 
potamuses live in tropical rivers and swamps, and chim- 
panzees and monkeys dwell in the forests. Such large 
water birds as flamingos, pelicans, and storks can be 
found in eastern and southern Africa. Ostriches live in 
the south and east parts of Africa and in the western Sa- 
hara. Lemurs live in Madagascar. 

Africa once had many more wild animals than it has 
today, and they were much more widespread. Ancient 
paintings on rocks show that hippopotamuses and gi- 
raffes once lived in regions that are now deserts. Grad- 
ual changes in climate partly caused the reduced num- 
ber and smaller range of Africa's animals. But the most 
important cause has been people, who have overhunted 
the animals and destroyed much of their natural envi- 
ronment to make room for farms and cities. Such ani- 
mals as the black rhinoceros, the gorilla, and the ele- 
phant will eventually die out completely unless they are 
protected from human interference. 


African countries have taken steps to save their rich 
wildlife heritage. The killing of certain animals is prohib- 
ited in many areas. A number of African countries have 
established game reserves and national parks. Hunting 
is forbidden in these areas, and modern methods of 
wildlife conservation are practiced to protect the ani- 
mals. Some hunters go on carefully regulated safaris 
(hunting expeditions). Many people today go on photo- 
graphic safaris to take pictures of the animals in their 
natural environments. However, poaching (illegal hunt- 
ing) continues to be a problem. 

Many rural Africans have opposed wildlife conserva- 
tion efforts. In some areas, for example, wild animals 
compete with farmers and herders for scarce land. Wild 
animals can destroy an entire crop or threaten the lives 
of villagers and their farm animals. Wild animal meat is 
important in the diet of some Africans, and people ac- 
cused of illegal hunting may actually be struggling to 
feed their families. 

Native plants. Africa's plant life varies according to 
climate and altitude. The spectacular rain forests of 
western and central Africa have hundreds of kinds of 
trees. They include oil palms; fruit trees; ebony, mahog- 
any, and other hardwood trees; and softwood okoumé 
trees, which are used to make furniture, plywood, and 
veneers. Mangrove trees stand on stiltlike roots in 
swampy areas along tropical coasts. Olive and oak trees 


124 Africa 


and such evergreen bushes as myrtle grow inthe north- _ (dry riverbeds), there are date palms, doum palms, tama- 
western parts of Africa and at the southern tip of the risks, and some kinds of acacias. Certain kinds of 
continent. grasses and shrubs may appear briefly in the deserts 
Plants that withstand drought and fire cover the grass- _ after a rare rain. 
lands. In addition to various grasses, grassland plants in- In the mountainous highlands of Africa, bamboo 
clude thick-trunked baobab trees, acacia trees, and thickets, podocarpus trees, tree ferns, and cedar trees 
thorny euphorbia bushes. Steppes, the very dry grass- grow on the lower slopes. On the upper slopes, mead- 
lands near the deserts, have shorter grasses and fewer ows are covered with grasses, buttercups, and violets. 
varieties of other plants. In the desert oases and waais Mosses and lichens grow near the mountaintops. 


Animals of Africa — This map shows some of the mammals, birds, and reptiles of Africa. Wild animals were once much 
more numerous and widespread there than today. Hunting and expanding settlement have greatly 
reduced the animal population and have put some species in danger of extinction. 








3 Barbary Ape ——- 


Parcupine 
}: & 


en ee 
Darcas Gazelle Fennec 










Doma 


Bs Gazelle 










Jerboa | 


Dramedary = 


Ibis 


a 


ture . . 
Baboon a. 


—" 


— = Ce 


koe Giraffe 
Garilla -. a) 

Cheetah 

Bo , 

ee ee ee 


Hippopotamus 






Diana 


Markey Elephant 


Lecypende’ 





Okapi 





Guereza 


Mankey 
} P Fecaen > 
ch 






Rhinoceras | 


Gnu 





Cape 
Buffale 





Rack Pythan 


Cape Seal | i 
ea “Jackass Penguin 


WORLD BOOK map | 











People have destroyed much of Africa's natural plant 
life. Farmers have cleared forests for cropland. Hunters 
have burned grasslands to drive out game animals. The 
overgrazing of livestock has turned some steppes al- 
most into deserts. 

Introduced species. Numerous plants and animals 
that are common in Africa were introduced from other 
parts of the world by traders and colonists. They 
brought many of Africa's most important food crops. 


Africa 125 


These food crops include bananas, cassava, and corn, as 
well as such cash crops as cocoa beans and tea. Euca- 
lyptus trees, which originated in Australia, now grow in 
many parts of Africa and are widely used for firewood 
and building construction. European settlers introduced 
most African farm animals. Such animals include cattle, 
goats, and sheep. Camels, which provide food and other 
necessities in much of northern Africa, originated in 
Asia. 


Some of Africa’s trees, shrubs, and other plants are pictured on this map. Much of Africa has a 


tropical climate. However, the land regions of the continent vary dramatically, ranging from 
deserts to tropical rain forests. As a result, Africa has a wide variety of plant life. 









Plants of Africa 
Atlos Cedar Cork Ook 
African Pol 
Mohogony VoumuBoln 


- 





Bubingo 













Africon 
= Rosewood 
a Acocio 
f Ss 
Yellow 


Mangrove <4:5. 


Welwitschio 


oe” 


Pochypadium 


Clonwilliom 


Cedor 


WORLD BOOK map 


if 


Dote Polm 





Elephont Grass 


<< Sotinwood 2 : , "s s 








ios 


Popyrus 














Euphorbio 


&..... 
® Giont 
Groundsel 
Lobelia 


- 





Myrrh 







Incense 
Tree 


Stopelia 





Silver Tree 





Podocorpus 


126 Africa 


The Republic of South Africa is the only African na- 
tion generally classified as economically developed. All 
other African countries have a developing economy. 
These countries have an especially low gross national 
product (GNP). GNP is the value of all goods and serv- 
ices produced in a country yearly. A country's per capita 
(per person) GNP is determined by dividing the GNP by 
the population. Among most African countries, the per 
capita GNP is less than $400, compared with about 
$21,900 in the United States. 

Agriculture employs more workers and contributes 
more to the total value of production in Africa than does 
any other economic activity. Africa leads the world in 
the production of cacao, or cocoa beans; cassava; cash- 
ews; Cloves; palm kernels; vanilla beans; and yams. It is 
also a major producer of bananas, coffee, cotton, pea- 
nuts, rubber, sugar, and tea. Africans raise more than 
two-thirds of the world’s camels, nearly a third of its 
goats, and about a seventh of its cattle and sheep. 

For their own use, African farmers grow a variety of 
food crops. In the wet tropical areas of western and cen- 
tral Africa, the chief food crops include bananas, plan- 
tains, rice, and such roots as yams and Cassava. In 





Agriculture and fishing 
in Africa 


This map shows the major 
uses of land in Africa. It lo- 
cates the chief agricultural | 
products and shows the most 
important crops in large type. 

The map also shows the 

major fishing areas and kinds 

of fish caught. 





vw 


Peanuts 






Forest 
Products 


una 





an . = 
| | Intensive or commerciol 
| croplond 


Chiefly subsistence 
croplond 


| _ Grozing lond 
[ar Chiefly forestiond 


Generolly unproductive fond 


(S| Fishing 


WORLD BOOK map 





Peanuts, < 
Waiter Savane / Uh 
=F - —" 
= 


>R 
Palm Oul,’“Pal 
Palm Kernels, Cacag 
Cacao | 


Economy 





© Georg Gerster, Photo Researchers 
Cotton is raised in the Nile River Valley, a fertile farming region 
in northeastern Africa. High-quality, long-fiber cotton ts an im- 
portant crop in Egypt and Sudan. 









; f atton 
~ > Coin, \ 
\_. Dairy Produc 


. 


Citrus Fruits , 






















ee 
Camels /Serghums 
Sheep pednute 


Gum Arabic i} 










assava, 






otee 
m Oil 














/_ Pater Oil. 
; Pat Kernels 
ee < 





j 








4c 








PY —— 
“Cassava. 


NU SS 








—— ee” 


_ 


the grasslands of the east and south, farmers grow corn, 
millet, and sorghum. In northern Africa, farmers raise 
barley and wheat and use irrigation to grow fruits and 
vegetables. Farmers in the oases of the Sahara grow 
dates and small crops of barley and wheat. 

About three-fifths of Africa's cultivated land is used 
mainly for subsistence agriculture—that is, for growing 
food crops for a farmer's own use. However, subsis- 
tence agriculture has been decreasing as more and 
more African farmers produce only cash crops, which 
are grown mainly for export. In addition, most subsis- 
tence farmers use at least some of their land to raise 
cash crops. The shift from subsistence agriculture to the 
growing of cash crops is causing problems. For exam- 
ple, food shortages occur in some areas because fewer 
farmers are growing food crops. In addition, some for- 
mer farmers have moved to cities to find work. Another 
problem is that farmers who grow only cash crops can- 
not depend on a steady income because of frequent 
changes in prices on the world market. 

In the past, almost all African farmland was owned co- 
operatively by members of the various ethnic groups. 
Today, individual land ownership is widespread. But the 
cooperative tradition remains strong. Many farmers 
combine their lands, buy equipment and seed as a 
group, and join cooperatives to sell their crops. 

In northern Africa, many farmers rent their land. Af- 
rica also has numerous large estates and plantations that 
produce such cash crops as coconuts, palm products, 
rubber, sisal, sugar, and tea. Thousands of laborers 
work full time or part time on these farms. 

Overall, agricultural productivity in Africa is low for 
several reasons. Most African farmers work small plots 
and use inefficient methods. Most of Africa's soil is thin 
and poor. Heavy rains in parts of western and central Af- 
rica wash away precious topsoil. In some areas, periodic 
droughts, floods, or insect invasions destroy crops or 
sharply reduce crop yields. Cattle cannot be raised in 
many parts of Africa because of the unfavorable climate 
and tropical diseases. In addition, the types of cattle that 
can be raised in Africa produce less meat and milk than 








Africa 127 


‘al 


i oo 
i 





© Georg Gerster, Photo Researchers 


Petroleum production is important in several African coun- 
tries. Algeria, Libya, and Nigeria are the leading producers. 
These men are drilling for oil in Nigeria. 


cattle in North America and Europe. 

Mining accounts for more than half the total value of 
Africa's exports, but it employs fewer than 1 million 
workers. Africa's mineral wealth is unevenly distributed. 
Five countries— South Africa, Libya, Nigeria, Algeria, and 
Zambia— produce about four-fifths of all the minerals Af- 
rica exports. The government controls the mining indus- 
try in several African nations and uses the income to 
help finance various government projects. 

South Africa is the world’s largest producer of gold. 
Libya and Nigeria both rank among the leading produc- 


Alan Hutchison Library 


Industrial development has 
been a chief goal of most Afri- 
can countries since winning 
independence from European 
colonial powers. This automo- 
bile assembly plant is in Nai- 
robi, Kenya. 


128 Africa 


ers of petroleum in the world. In addition, Algeria is an South Africa is the most highly industrialized country 
important oil producer. Africa also produces about in Africa. It produces nearly two-fifths of the continent's 
three-fourths of the world’s cobalt and platinum, more manufactured goods. South Africa's factories turn out a 
than two-fifths of its vanadium, and about a third of its wide range of products, including automobiles, chemi- 
chromite. In addition, Africa is a leading source of cop- cals, clothing, processed foods, and iron and steel. The 
per, diamonds, phosphates, and uranium. Other impor- next most important industrial countries of Africa are 
tant mineral products of Africa include antimony, iron Egypt, Algeria, Morocco, and Nigeria. 
ore, manganese, natural gas, and tin. Forestry and fishing. Africa has about a fourth of the 
Manufacturing has a small role in Africa's economy. world’s forests. However, less than 15 percent of the 
In the past, colonial rulers emphasized agricultural and forests are used to provide timber and other products. 
mineral production to obtain raw materials for indus- The most valuable trees include such hardwoods as 
tries in their home countries. Today, therefore, even African walnut and mahogany and such softwoods as 
new nations with abundant raw materials have few ma- eucalyptus and okoume. The forest industry is especially 
jor industries. Many African countries cannot afford to important in Cameroon, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Kin- 
build costly factories and have a shortage of skilled shasa), Cote dIvoire, Gabon, Ghana, and Nigeria. 
workers, managers, and technicians. In addition, compe- Fishing fleets along Africas seacoasts bring in large 
tition from American and European industries has dis- quantities of anchovies, mackerel, sardines, tuna, and 
couraged major industrial growth in Africa. other fishes. Africa exports much of this catch in the 
Since the mid-1900's, large cities and towns in most of — form of fish oil and fish meal. Rivers and lakes provide 
Africa have developed small industries that produce plentiful freshwater fish, which are important in the pro- 
such consumer goods as beer, cigarettes, furniture, tein-poor diet of many Africans. Major freshwater fish- 
shoes, soap, and soft drinks. Some African factories also ing grounds include the lakes of eastern Africa and the 
make such products as automobile parts and textiles. swamps around Lake Chad and the upper Nile River. 
Mining and 
manufacturing in 
Africa 


This map shows the location 
of Africa's chief mineral re- 
sources and manufacturing 
centers. Major mineral-pro- 
ducing areas are shown in 
large type, and lesser ones in 
small type. Manufacturing 
centers are in red. 





Manganese Petroleum 


Petroleum ¢ 


@Gold Majar mineral deposit 
elead Other mineral deposit 


¢ Manufacturing center 


Cape Town 





WORLD BOOK map ES 





Transportation. Africa has more than 600,000 miles 
(1,300,000 kilometers) of roads, but only about 60,000 
miles (97,000 kilometers) are paved. In many areas, roads 
become impassable during the rainy seasons. Less than 
2 per cent of all Africans own an automobile, and almost 
all these people live in cities. In much of Africa, buses 
and trucks follow regular routes to transport people and 
goods between villages and towns. Many people simply 
walk or ride a bicycle. In many parts of the continent, 
donkeys or other animals are used to carry goods and 
people. Camels are the most reliable means of transpor- 
tation in the Sahara. 

Africa has about 59,000 miles (95,000 kilometers) of 
railroad track. South Africa has the continent's best rail- 
way system, and a good network of track links parts of 
northern Africa. In other areas, the rail lines are mainly 
single-track routes used to carry minerals and farm 
products to seaports that handle foreign trade. Most of 
Africa's railroads were built in colonial times. 

The African coasts have few good natural harbors, 
but engineers have built harbors with modern shipping 
facilities in almost every coastal country. Inland water- 
ways serve as transportation routes in relatively few 
parts of Africa. Rapids and waterfalls block navigation 
on many rivers. In addition, rivers and lakes in areas of 
limited seasonal rainfall often become too shallow to 
travel on for part of the year. In tropical rain forests, 
many villagers use dugouts or other small craft for 
transportation on the rivers. Railroads and roads link 
navigable sections of the Congo, Niger, and Nile rivers 
with ocean ports. 

Most African countries have their own airline, which 
provides domestic and international service. The major 
African cities are also served by foreign airlines. 

Communication. The cities of Africa have far better 
communication services than the rural areas. Newspa- 
pers and magazines from Europe and the United States 
are available in most large cities, and cities throughout 
Africa also publish local newspapers. Most African 
countries provide television service. But there is an aver- 
age of only about 1 television set for every 25 people in 
Africa. Few rural people ever see TV. Radio is the chief 
means of tnass communication. Radio stations broadcast 
in every African country. Africa has about 1 radio for 
every 5 people. Even in remote areas, there is at least 
one radio in most villages. Villagers often gather before 
the radio to listen to news programs and other broad- 
casts. 

Telephone service in Africa is limited mainly to the 
cities and larger towns. The continent has about 7 mil- 
lion telephones, compared with about 180 million in the 
United States. South Africa has more than half of all the 
telephones in Africa. In most African countries, tele- 
phone service was originally installed by colonial rulers 
to assist in colonial administration. As a result, even 
today telephone service between Africa and Europe is 
often better than between or within African countries. 

International trade. Africa accounts for only about 4 
per cent of the total value of imports and exports in in- 
ternational trade. But trade plays a major role in the con- 
tinent's economy. About a fourth of Africas total produc- 
tion is exported. Foreign trade has influenced the 


Africa 129 


development of transportation and communication sys- 
tems, the location and expansion of cities, and the 
growth of cash crop agriculture. 

Africa trades chiefly with Europe, Japan, and North 
America. Very little trade occurs between African coun- 
tries. Africa's major imports include food, iron and steel, 
machinery, and motor vehicles. 

Petroleum accounts for more than half the total value 
of African exports. Other leading exports include cocoa, 
coffee, gold, and natural gas. A number of African coun- 
tries rely on only one product for most of their export 
income. Libya and Nigeria, for example, depend chiefly 
on petroleum; Botswana on diamonds; Gambia on pea- 
nuts; Ghana on cocoa; Guinea on bauxite; Uganda on 
coffee; and Zambia on copper. 

The importance of foreign trade and the dependence 
on a small number of export products have made Afri- 
can economies highly sensitive to changes in world 
market prices. Rapid changes in prices make economic 
planning difficult. As a result, Africa has been active in 
international efforts to control price changes and im- 
prove trade terms. Algeria, Gabon, Libya, and Nigeria 
belong to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting 
Countries (OPEC), an association of oil-producing na- 
tions that has a great deal of influence over the world 
market for oil. Other African countries that depend 
heavily on a single product for export income are join- 
ing similar exporting organizations. 

Foreign aid. Almost every African country depends 
to some extent on foreign aid. Such aid consists of 
grants of money; loans; and technical assistance in such 
areas as agriculture, education, and health. 

Individual nations and various international organiza- 
tions provide Africa with aid. France, Britain, and the 
United States, in that order, are the leading individual 
contributors. The United Nations (UN), through various 
affiliates, provides huge amounts of aid. Other major 
contributors include the World Bank and its affiliate, the 


‘International Development Association; the Economic 


Development Fund and other funds of the European 
Union; and the African Development Bank and its affili- 
ate, the African Development Fund. 

Egypt receives more foreign aid than any other coun- 
try in Africa. Other African countries that receive large 
amounts of foreign aid include Ethiopia, Kenya, Mo- 
rocco, Mozambique, Sudan, and Tanzania. 

Foreign aid has helped African countries establish in- 
dustries, improve agricultural productivity, and build 
houses, roads, and schools. Foreign aid also has pro- 
vided African countries with food and supplies in times 
of drought and other natural disasters. 

However, foreign aid has not always been wholly 
beneficial. Many loans call for high interest payments. 
As a result, several countries receiving aid are finding it 
extremely difficult to repay the loans. Some loans re- 
quire that the country receiving aid buy materials from 
the donor country. In many cases, the donor countries 
thus end up with more financial benefits than the receiv- 
ing countries. In addition, large amounts of aid some- 
times are used to build impressive government struc- 
tures such as dams, superhighways, or other projects 
that do not help most of the people. 


130 Africa 





Reproducton of a rock panting 3500-3000 B.C); 
Musee de THomme, Paris © Ench Lessing, Magnum! 


Rock paintings on the walls of caves and rock shelters were 
made thousands of years ago by peoples who lived in Africa. 
This painting was found in the Tassili-n-Ajjer region of Algeria. 


Africa has been called the “birthplace of the human 
race. The oldest evidence of humanlike creatures and 
people found anywhere in the world is bones and other 
fossils discovered at many sites in eastern and southern 
Africa. From this evidence, most scientists have conclud- 
ed that the earliest human beings lived about 2 million 
years ago in eastern Africa. The crude stone tools made 
by these people gave the Stone Age its name. In time, 
the Stone Age culture spread to other continents. For 
detailed information on the earliest people and the 
Stone Age, see the article Prehistoric people. 

This section discusses the broad outlines of African 
history. For the history of a particular country, see the 
World Book article on that country. See also the articles 
listed under “History and ‘People’ in the Related articles 
at the end of this article. 

The coming of agriculture was a revolutionary de- 
velopment in early Africa. In time, it led to great eco- 
nomic, social, and political changes. Most Stone Age 
Africans had lived by hunting wild animals and by gath- 
ering such plant foods as berries, seeds, and roots. Peo- 
ple who lived near lakes and rivers ate chiefly fish. 

The hunters and gatherers lived in small groups. As 
the seasons changed, the groups could thus move easily 
from place to place to follow the migrations of animals 
and to search for plant foods. But after people learned 
how to grow crops and how to tame and raise animals, 
they no longer had to move about to get food. They 
could then establish permanent settlements. 

The spread of agriculture in Africa occurred over 
thousands of years. No one knows for certain when or 
where it began on the continent. In parts of Africa, agri- 
culture probably was introduced by people who had 
migrated from other places. In some other areas, the 


History 


people may have experimented with native wild grasses 
and eventually figured out how to grow the grasses as 
cultivated grains. Many experts believe that farming be- 
gan in the Middle East and then spread westward into 
northern Africa. By about 5000 B.C, people in the north 
knew how to tame and raise animals and how to grow 
such crops as barley and wheat. Some experts believe 
that Africans in other areas, including what are now 
Ethiopia and Kenya, may have developed agriculture on 
their own even earlier. 

Scientists believe that various groups of people were 
living in many parts of Africa when agriculture was de- 
veloping there. Light-skinned peoples lived in the north. 
Pygmies roamed the central forests, and yellowish- 
skinned Khoisan peoples lived in much of the south. 
Black Africans lived in the Sahara and neighboring 
grasslands. The Sahara was nota desert at that time. It 
was a grassland, where hunters tracked game, fishing 
communities lived on the catch from many lakes and 
rivers, and farmers grew grain and raised livestock. 

About 4000 B.C, Africa's climate gradually became 
drier and drier. Many farmers of the Sahara moved 
southward and began to grow such crops as rice and 
yams. By about 1500 B.C, the Sahara had become a vast 
desert and a barrier to the easy movement of people be- 
tween northern Africa and the rest of the continent. 
However, trade routes that eventually crossed the desert 
kept some links open for communication between the 
north and the south. 

Early civilizations. The fertile soils of the Nile Valley 
supported some of the earliest and richest farming com- 
munities in Africa. In time, some of these communities 
developed into small states. Cities within the states 
served as centers of government and trade. About 3400 
B.C, the small states combined into two large states— 
Upper Egypt and Lower Egypt. Menes, king of Upper 
Egypt, united the two states about 3100 B.C This united 
kingdom was to become the first great African civiliza- 
tion and one of the greatest civilizations in history. Egypt 
reached the height of its power about 1400 B.C Later, it 
became part of the Persian Empire and the empire of 
Alexander the Great. Roman armies conquered Egypt in 
30 B.C. and made it a province of the Roman Empire. By 
that time, Rome controlled the north coast of Africa. 

South of Egypt, a kingdom called Kush arose after 
1000 B.C It lasted until about A.D. 350. Kush was strongly 
influenced by Egypt and became a major center of art, 
learning, and trade. 

Trade between Africans and other peoples and be- 
tween Africans themselves helped spread the use of 
metals. The Egyptians were probably the first Africans to 
use bronze tools instead of stone tools. The use of 
bronze spread to Egypt from the Middle East about 3000 
B.C. By about 1000 B.C, people in northern Africa were 
using iron. Kush became one of the continents first im- 
portant centers of iron mining and iron manufacturing. 

Southward migrations. About the time of Christ, 
black peoples who spoke Bantu languages began one 
of the great migrations in all history. They moved south- 
ward from what is now the Nigeria‘Cameroon border 
region into the forests of central Africa. From there, the 
migrations continued for more than 1,000 years. Bantu- 





speaking peoples eventually settled throughout central, 
eastern, and southern Africa. Their way of life was based 
on farming and the use of iron tools. 

Historians believe that the migrations began—and 
continued—because of the constant need for more land 
to support a growing population. The migrations had 
major effects on the vast region they covered. As the 
peoples migrated, they spread their knowledge of farm- 
ing and ironworking. In time, Bantu languages became 
the chief language group south of the Sahara. 

Historians believe the migrations were peaceful. As 
the Bantu-speaking peoples moved south, they met 
such hunting peoples as the Pygmies of the central 
forests and the Khoisan peoples of the east and south. 
Some hunters married Bantu-speakers and adopted 
their way of life. Others retreated into the forests or 
deserts of central and southern Africa. 

The influence of Christianity. During the A.D. 300's, 
Christianity became the state religion of the Roman Em- 
pire, which included Egypt and the rest of the north 
coast of Africa. A Germanic tribe called the Vandals in- 
vaded the empire during the 400's. The tribe followed an 
outlawed Christian belief called Arianism. The Vandals 
ended Roman rule along most of the north coast. In the 
500’s, the area fell under orthodox Christian influence 
again, when it became part of the Byzantine Empire. 

Two areas just south of Egypt—Aksum (or Axum) and 
Nubia—were strongly influenced by the Roman Empire 
and early Christianity. The kingdom of Aksum had been 
founded before the time of Christ in what is now Eritrea 
and northern Ethiopia. It prospered as the crossroads 
for trade between the Roman Empire and India and be- 
came a Christian state during the 300's. By the mid-300s, 
Aksum controlled the major land and sea routes that 





Africa 131 


linked Africa with Europe and Asia. Aksum declined af- 
ter the 500’s, but its Christian traditions survived and 
formed the basis for the Ethiopian Christian Church. 

After the fall of Kush, anumber of small kingdoms 
grew up in the Nile Valley region of Nubia. These king- 
doms were prosperous agricultural states that kept in 
close contact with Christian Egypt through trade. Egyp- 
tian missionaries converted the Nubians to Christianity 
during the 500’s. Christianity flourished in Nubia for hun- 
dreds of years, and Nubian religious influence extended 
westward over much of the neighboring territory. 

The rise of Islam became one of the most important 
developments in African history. Islam emerged in Ara- 
bia during the early 600's. Within 100 years, Arab Mus- 
lims had built a huge empire that stretched from the 
Middle East, across northern Africa, and into Spain. The 
Muslims invaded Egypt in 639 and completed the con- 
quest of all northern Africa by 710. The empire later 
broke up into smaller states, but ties of religion and 
trade continued to link the Muslims. 

At first, most people under Muslim rule in northern 
Africa did not accept Islam. The conversion of northern 
Africans from Christianity or local religions to Islam took 
hundreds of years. South of the Sahara, Islam was 
spread mainly by Muslim merchants and traveling 
scholars. Camel caravans that crossed the Sahara 
brought the northern Muslims into contact with western 
Africa. Muslim traders who sailed the Indian Ocean con- 
verted the peoples living along the coasts of what are 
now Somalia, Kenya, and Tanzania. 

The Muslims had far-reaching influence in Africa 
aside from the teaching of Islam. They honored learning 
and had collected and preserved much of the world’s 
accumulated knowledge in such fields as science, phi- 


Timothy Kendall 


The civilization of Kush de- 
veloped after 1000 B.C and 
lasted until about A.D. 350 
along the Nile River in what is 
now northern Sudan. Kush 
was an important trade cen- 
ter. It also served as a center 
for the exchange of ideas 
among peoples from the 
north and south and peoples 
from southwestern Asia. The 
Kush temple at the left shows 
the influence of Roman and 
Egyptian architecture. 


132 Africa 


losophy, geography, and history. The Muslims intro- 
duced into Africa their distinctive art forms. They taught 
reading and writing in Arabic to many Africans who 
could not read or write. Arabic became a common lan- 
guage Shared by Africans of various ethnic groups. 
Muslim scholars established religious schools that at- 
tracted students from many parts of Africa. 

Kingdoms in western Africa began to flourish 
about 1000, largely because of the growth of trade 
across the Sahara. Traders brought gold and kola nuts 
from western Africa to northern kingdoms such as those 
of the Hafsid, Marinid, and Ziyanid rulers. The traders 
exchanged the gold and kola nuts for salt and copper 
from Saharan mines, dried fruits from northern Africa, 
textiles from Europe, and finely crafted objects from the 
Middle East. Kingdoms at the southern edge of the Sa- 
hara gained power and wealth through the control of 
the Saharan trade. Such cities as Gao and Timbuktu be- 
came busy commercial centers. As the trade routes ex- 
tended farther south, such kingdoms and states as 
Ashanti, Benin, Mossi, Oyo, and the Hausa city-states 
also became trade centers. 

Ghana, one of the first great kingdoms of western Af- 





Africa in the 1400's 


Many highly organized states 
existed in Africa long before 
the European colonial period. 
This map shows the main 
states and trade routes of the 
1400s. 


= Islamic state | 
[pet | West African state 

ate Bantu state 

(eae Christian state 


Berbers Major ethnic graup 
GOLD Impartant trading product 
Land trade raute 


Sea trade raute 


0 1 000 Miles 
err 
0 1,000 Kilometers 


WORLD BOOK map 


rica, had probably been founded during the 300s. The 
kingdom reached its height about 1000, when it covered 
parts of what are now Mali and Mauritania. During the 
1200's, the Mali Empire replaced Ghana as the most 
powerful state in the west. It included parts of what are 
now Gambia, Guinea, Senegal, Mali, and Mauritania. By 
1500, most of Mali came under the control of the 
Songhai Empire, a vast state that stretched from the At- 
lantic Ocean to what is now central Nigeria. East of Mali 
and Songhai lay Kanem. It had been founded during the 
700's and lasted more than 1,000 years. 

Eastern, central, and southern kingdoms. About 
1100, a growing number of Arab Muslim traders began 
to settle on the Indian Ocean coast of what are now 
Kenya, Mozambique, Somalia, and Tanzania. They 
helped develop a thriving sea trade that linked eastern 
Africa with China, India, and Indonesia, and with coun- 
tries bordering the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf. East 
coast ports exported gold, ivory, and other products in 
exchange for such goods as silk, cotton cloth, and por- 
celain. The east coast settlements eventually developed 
into a string of prosperous city-states, including Kilwa, 
Mogadiscio, Mombasa, and Sofala. The peoples of 





Mogadiscio 





a 






To India 











these city-states spoke Swahili. Their culture became a 
blend of local black African and Islamic traditions. 

Many kingdoms grew up in the forests and grass- 
lands of central and southern Africa. Some of the most 
powerful kingdoms established elaborate systems of 
government and rich traditions in sculpture, music, and 
oral poetry. One of the largest kingdoms, the Kongo, 
began to spread out from the mouth of the Congo River 
during the 1400's. The Kongo lasted until the early 
1700's. Another major kingdom that arose in the 1400's 
was Luba, in what is now southern Congo (Kinshasa). 
Also during the 1400's, the Karanga people established 
the Mwanamutapa Empire in what are now Mozam- 
bique and Zimbabwe. The Changamire Empire con- 
quered the Mwanamutapa during the late 1400's. The 
city of Zimbabwe served as the capital of both empires. 

The beginnings of European control. During the 
1400's, the Portuguese began to explore the west coast 
of Africa. They were interested in Africas gold trade and 
so established trading posts in Gambia, the Gold Coast 
(now Ghana), and other west coast lands. They also tried 
to convert the rulers of the Kongo and other kingdoms 
to Christianity. Soon after the Portuguese arrived in 


European exploration 
of Africa 


Sea Explorers 





Dias (Portuguese) 1487-88 


Do Goma (Portuguese) 
1497-98 


Land Explorers 
—--— Bruce (Scattish) 1768-73 


—— Pork (Scottish) 1805-06 


Cloppertan (Scattish) 
1822-24 


——— Laing (Scottish) 1825-26 





————— Coaillié (French) 1827-28 
Livingstone (Scattish) 
1841-56, 1866-71 
Burton ond Speke (English) 
1857-59 

Nachtigal (German) 
1869-74 

Stanley (Welsh) 1871, 
1874-77 


ee 


1 000 Miles 


te. 
ten 
ee 
Pt cen 
ee 


1 000 Kilometers 


WORLD BOOK map 


Africa 133 


western Africa, they began to ship black Africans to Eu- 
rope as slaves. In 1497 and 1498, Vasco da Gama led a 
Portuguese expedition that sailed around the Cape of 
Good Hope, along the east coast of Africa, and on to Jn- 
dia. The Portuguese won control of the city-states of 
eastern Africa during the 1500's. During the 1600's, the 
Dutch took over many of Portugal's west coast trading 
posts. They also established Cape Town at the southern 
tip of Africa in 1652. 

Africa had shipped slaves to Asia and Europe long 
before the Portuguese arrived. But the establishment of 
European plantations in North and South America dur- 
ing the 1500's led to a much greater demand for slaves. 
By the 1800's, Europeans had brought as many as 10 mil- 
lion slaves from western Africa to the Americas. About 
500,000 of the slaves were shipped to what is now the 
United States. Arab and African traders on Africa's east 
coast shipped slaves to Zanzibar and countries border- 
ing the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf. See African 
Americans (Beginning of the slave trade); Slavery. 

The trade in gold and slaves brought more wealth 
and power to some African forest kingdoms, such as 
Ashanti in what is now Ghana. European traders intro- 


- 
ae” 
o* 


* 
o-* 
-- 


- 
_ 
* 
ro 
- 


=o sas 1487-88 
1 Salling rowte 
sound Alc» 





134 Africa 


duced cassava and corn into Africa. These foods be- 
came important crops. The traders also introduced Afri- 
cans to guns, which the Africans eventually used in wars 
against one another or against the Europeans. 

During the late 1700's, Europeans began to explore 
the African interior. They wanted to spread Christianity 
and to develop new trade ties based on minerals, palm 
oil, and other raw materials for industry. Europeans who 
opposed slavery hoped that the new trade products 
would help end the slave trade. Great Britain outlawed 
the slave trade in 1807. In 1808, the United States began 
prohibiting the import of slaves from Africa. 

European influence and control in Africa also grew 
through military means. Much of northern Africa had 
been part of the Turkish Ottoman Empire since the 
1500s. But as Turkish power declined, European powers 
fought for control of the region. During the 1800s, 
France gained Algeria and Tunisia, and Britain won 
Egypt. In southern Africa, the Dutch began to move in- 
land from their settlement at Cape Town after 1700. As 
the Dutch spread out, they fought and conquered the 
local black Africans. 

In spite of the growing European presence, large 
parts of Africa had little or no contact with Europe until 
the mid-1800s or the late 1800's. Many major events in 
African history did not involve Europeans. During the 
1700's and 1800's, Muslim religious reformers led a se- 
ries of “holy wars’ in western Africa to strengthen the in- 
fluence of Islam. By 1860, new Muslim empires ruled 
most of the western grasslands. In southern Africa, well- 
trained Zulu armies won a series of wars against neigh- 
boring peoples during the early 1800s. 

Colonial rule. As Europeans became increasingly in- 
volved in African economic affairs, mainly through 
trade, they gained more and more political control over 
parts of the continent. By the 1880s, there were intense 
rivalries among the European powers as they staked out 
claims to profitable parts of Africa. By 1914, Belgium, 
France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Portugal, and Spain 
had divided almost all Africa among themselves. Only 
Ethiopia and Liberia remained independent. 

In some parts of Africa, colonial rule was established 
peacefully by treaties between the Europeans and Afri- 
can chiefs. But other Africans resisted European control. 
For example, they staged violent uprisings against the 
British in Nigeria and what is now Ghana, against the 
French in western and northern Africa, and against the 
Germans in what are now Tanzania and Namibia. By the 
mid-1920's, however, Europeans strongly controlled 
most of Africa. 

Colonial rule lasted a relatively short time— only until 
the 1960's in most of Africa. However, it brought major 
changes to Africa. Colonial rule created new political 
units with boundaries that cut across ethnic homelands 
in some cases. It gave foreigners control over African 
government affairs. The Christian missionaries that ac- 
companied colonial rule challenged religious and social 
traditions that had long been part of African life. Colo- 
nial rule tied Africa to an economic system based on 
world needs rather than on local needs. African farmers 
and miners had to produce goods for world markets 
and raw materials for European industries. 


Many Africans look upon the period of colonial rule 
as a humiliating experience in their history. But some Af- 
ricans believe that the period brought improvements. 
For example, Europeans provided additional medical 
services and helped control certain diseases. Colonial 
schools taught millions of Africans how to read and 
write in European languages. 

The movement to independence. Many Africans 
resisted colonial rule from the beginning. During the 
early 1900's, organized groups in some African colonies 
had already begun to demand self-government. But not 
until after World War II (1939-1945) did the demands for 
independence become a powerful mass movement. 

In many colonies, Africans who had been educated in 
Europe led the organizations that called for self-govern- 
ment. Supported by the masses, these organizations 
staged strikes, boycotts, and rallies. In some cases, the 
anticolonial feelings erupted in riots, terrorist attacks, 
and armed rebellions. A revolt against the French in Al- 
geria broke out in 1954. But because of the large num- 
ber of French settlers there, the revolt lasted eight years 
before the country won independence. In 1957, the Gold 
Coast became the first black African colony to gain its 
freedom. It won independence from Britain and took the 
name Ghana. By the mid-1960s, Britain, Belgium, and 
France had freed most of their African colonies. 

Southern Africa presented the most serious obstacles 
to the independence movement. Portugal fought costly 
wars in Angola and Mozambique before granting them 
freedom in 1975. In Rhodesia, blacks fought for years 
against white-minority rule. A government with a major- 
ity of blacks was finally elected in 1979. The following 
year, Britain recognized Rhodesia's independence, and 








Spanish a ig 
Morocca cs 






Madeira 
fri 







l 
‘Canary Is 


. : 
eS British 
Fa y East 


—_ 
S_ Rhod 





Ny 
: echuanalan d 






a 
= 





fai Partuquese Wards 
Bay 

fae Spanish 
; i Independent 


non of _ ‘Swaziland 
Cae 3 
a Basutoland 











WORLD BOOK map 
Africa in 1914 had only two independent countries— Ethiopia 
and Liberia. The rest of the continent was under colonial rule by 
European powers. 





the country was renamed Zimbabwe. South Airica’s con- 
trol over the territory of Namibia (called South West 
Africa until 1968) became an international issue during 
the mid-1900's. Most nations considered South Africa's 
control of Namibia to be illegal. In March 1990, Namibia 
became an independent country. 

South Africa itself had become fully independent of 
the United Kingdom in 1931. Black Africans formed a 
large majority of the population of South Africa. Howev- 
er, white people controlled the country’s government 
and excluded black Africans from government affairs. 
The white government also developed a rigid system of 
racial separation called apartheid. Most of the black 
Africans believed that they still suffered trom a form of 
colonialism. 

The South African governments apartheid policies of 
discrimination and segregation enraged black African 
nations and drew criticism from most other countries in 
the world. Beginning in the 1970's, the South African 
government gradually ended the social segregation and 
legal aspects of apartheid. But black Africans remained 
politically excluded and were not even allowed to vote. 
In the early 1990's, however, South Africa repealed most 


Important dates in Africa 


c. 2,000,000 B.C. The earliest human beings may have lived in 


eastern Africa. 
c. 5000 B.C. People in northern Africa practiced farming. 
c. 4000 B.C. The Sahara began to turn into a desert. 
c. 3100 B.C. Upper and Lower Egypt became one country. 
c. 2000 B.C. The Kingdom of Kush arose south of Egypt 
30 B.C. The Roman Empire controlled northern Africa. 
c. A.D. 1 Bantu-speaking peoples began southward migrations. 
300’s The Kingdom of Aksum became a Christian state. 
500’s The Nubian kingdoms were converted to Christianity. 
639-710 Arab Muslims conquered northern Africa. 


1000-1500 Large kingdoms were established in Africa south of 
the Sahara. 


1400's The Portuguese began to explore Africa's west coast. 
1652 The Dutch founded Cape Town. 

Late 1700's Europeans began to explore the African interior. 
1880's European governments began to claim parts of Africa. 
1920's European colonial rule was firmly established in Africa. 


1950's-1960’s Most European colonies in Africa became inde- 
pendent. 


1975 Portugal, the last European country with large African 
holdings, gave up its remaining colonies. 


1979 Black Africans in Rhodesia (now known as Zimbabwe) 
gained control of the country’s government, ending whiie- 
minority rule there. 


1980's One of the worst droughts in history struck Africa. Ethio- 
pia was especially hard-hit 


1990 Namibia gained independence, ending its white-minority 
rule by South Africa. 


1994 Blacks in South Africa gained control of the countrys gov- 
ernment, ending white-minority rule there. 


Africa 135 


of its remaining apartheid laws. In April 1994, South 
Africa held elections in which black Africans were al- 
lowed to vote. In the elections, black Africans gained 
control of the government. 

Africans who won independence rejoiced, but they 
soon found that freedom did not solve all their prob- 
lems. Leaders in many of the new nations could not han- 
dle crises that arose in political, social, and economic af- 
fairs. Military officers overthrew civilian governments in 
many countries and set up military governments. New 
civilian governments often followed these military gov- 
ernments. In a few countries, military dictatorships 
emerged. Civil wars broke out in Congo (Kinshasa), Ni- 
geria, Chad, and other countries. 

Africa today continues to face serious problems, in- 
cluding poverty, illiteracy, disease, and food shortages. 
Severe droughts contribute greatly to the food shortage. 
One of the worst droughts in history struck Africa in the 
early 1980's. Many Africans died of starvation and relat- 
ed causes. The drought was particularly devastating in 
Ethiopia. Another drought in the early 2000's led to 
widespread food shortages in southern Africa. 

In the 1990's and early 2000's, the AIDS epidemic 
reached disastrous levels in Africa, especially in areas 
south of the Sahara. The disease has become the conti- 
nent's leading cause of death. By the early 2000's, more 
than 17 million AIDS-related deaths had occurred in 
Africa, and more than 26 million Africans were living 
with the AIDS virus. 

In many African countries, economic and social devel- 
opment is handicapped by a dependence on one or two 
products as sources of national income. Inflation in in- 
dustrialized nations has caused Africa to pay more for 
the manufactured goods it imports than it receives for 
the raw materials it exports. Ethnic rivalries continue to 
divide many countries. Territorial disputes have led to 
frequent wars between nations. 

Many people see signs of hope in Africa in spite of all 
its problems. More Africans than ever are attending 
school and developing skills needed to improve their 
standard of living. Valuable mineral resources in Ango- 
la, Gabon, Nigeria, and other countries may lead to 
greater economic strength. 

African nations are also trying to work together to 
solve common problems. Cooperation is the ideal be- 
hind the movement of pan-Africanism, which promotes 
the unity of African countries. The Organization of 
African Unity (OAU), an association of African states, 
worked to build ties among African peoples and helped 
end colonial and white minority rule. It existed from 
1963 to 2002, when it was replaced by the African Union 
(AU). The AU, which includes almost all African coun- 
tries, works to achieve greater political, social, and eco- 
nomic cooperation among African countries and peo- 
ples. Africans have also formed several regional groups, 
including the Southern African Development Communi- 
ty and the Economic Community of West African States, 
to promote cooperation in economic affairs. In addition, 
in the early 2000's, African leaders began implementing 
an economic development plan called the New Partner- 
ship for Africas Development. Although these various 
efforts cannot solve all of Africa's problems, they offer 


136 Africa 





oo 


y) ae 
yi A Ad Hig ds 


ey ET Ce 
Oe a oe 
: = i ° = ° & ji : 


b q - i 


AP Wide World 


South Africa’s first elections open to all races, held in 1994, drew long lines of voters to the 
polls. In the elections, blacks gained control of the government from the white minority. Previ- 
ously, blacks, who make up a majority of the nation’s population, could not vote. 


hope that cooperation will lead to progress and greater 
stability throughout the continent. After independence, 
one-party political systems were established in many 
African countries. But in the early 1990's, a number of 
these countries adopted multiparty systems. 


Decalo; Kennell A. Jackson, Jr.; Kenneth J. Perkins; and Hartmut S. Walter 


Samuel 


Study aids 


Related articles in World Book include: 


Countries and other political units 


See the separate articles on African countries and other politi- 


cal units listed in the table with this article. 


History 

African Americans Exploration Nubia 

(The African French West Numidia 

background) Africa Organization of 
African Union Funj Sultanate African Unity 
Aksum Ghana Empire Park, Mungo 
Barbary States Guinea Rhodes, Cecil J. 
Benin Ife Shaka 
Berlin Conference Jenne Songhai Empire 
Burton, Sir Rich- Kanem Stanley and Living- 

ard F. Kongo stone 
Carthage Kush Utica 
Dias, Bartolomeu Mali Empire Walata 
Egypt, Ancient Nok World War tl 

People 

Afrikaners Dinka Khoikhoi Moors Tuareg 
Arabs Fulani Kikuyu Nuer Tutsi 
Ashanti Ganda Luba Pygmies Xhosa 
Bantu Hamites Lunda San Yoruba 
Berbers Hausa Maasai Semites Zulu 
Copts Hutu Mandingo = Swahili 


Physical features 


See Desert; Island; Lake; Mountain; River; and Waterfall and 
their lists of Re/ated articles. See also. 


Aswan High Dam Great Rift Valley Red Sea 
Cape of Good Mediterranean Suez Canal 
Hope Sea 
Other related articles 
Bank (Africa) Races, Human 
Bemba Sculpture (African sculpture) 


Conservation (Africa) 

Flag (pictures: Flags of Africa 
Music (African music) 
Mythology (African mythology) 


Outline 


Television (In Africa) 

Third World 

United Nations (Working for 
self-government) 


I. People 

A. Population C Languages 
B. Peoples of Africa D. Religions 

ll. Ways of life in northern Africa 
A. Rural life D. Food and clothing 
B. City life FE. Education 
C Marriage and the family 

lll. Ways of life south of the Sahara 


A. Rural life D. Food and drink 

B. City life E. Clothing 

C Marriage and the family F. Education 
IV. The arts 

A. Sculpture — B. Music C. Literature 
V. The land 


C. Rivers and waterfalls 
D. Lakes 
E. Mountains 


A. Land regions 
B. Deserts, grasslands, 
and forests 
Vi. Climate 

Vil. Animals and plants 
A. Native animals 
B. Native plants 

Vill. Economy 
A. Agriculture 


C. Introduced species 





F. Communifation 
G. International trade 


B. Mining 
C. Manufacturing 


D. Forestry and fishing H. Foreign aid 
E. Transportation 
IX. History 
Questions 


What functions does oral literature serve in Africa? 

Who are the Bedouins and how do they live? 

How has Airicas climate made agricultural progress difficult? 

What major changes did colonial rule bring to Africa? 

What are click languages? Where in Africa are they spoken? 

What are some problems caused by the shift from subsistence 
agriculture to the growing of cash crops in Africa? 

Which African country is the most highly industrialized? 

Why is Africa's death rate so high? 

What are some problems African countries face today? 


Additional resources 


Level I 

Africa. Stryker-Post, published annually. 

Diagram Group. Peoples of Africa. 6 vols. Facts on File, 1997. 

Haskins, James, and Benson, Kathleen. African Beginnings. 
Lothrop, 1998. 

Knight, Virginia C, ed. African Biography. 3 vols. UXL, 1999. 

Sayre, April P. Africa. 21st Century Bks., 1999. 


Level Il 

Beckwith, Carol, and Fisher, Angela. African Ceremonies. 2 vols. 
Abrams, 1999. 

Blier, Suzanne P. The Royal Arts of Africa. Abrams, 1998. 

Diagram Group. Encyclopedia of African Peoples. Facts on File, 
2000. 

Gates, Henry L, Jr. Wonders of the African World. Knopf, 1999. 

Reader, John. Africa: A Biography of the Continent Knopf, 1998. 


African American literature is literature written by 
black Americans of African descent. Its themes include 
the exploration of black identity, the condemnation of 
racism, and the celebration of the unique aspects of 
African American culture. 

Early works. The earliest surviving works of African 
American literature date from the mid-1700's and were 
written by Africans brought to America as slaves. The 
oldest example is considered to be “Bars Fight,” a poem 
about an Indian raid on a Massachusetts town. Lucy Ter- 
ry. a young New England slave, composed the poem, 
which was handed down orally, in 1746. In the late 
1700s, Phillis Wheatley. a Boston slave, became the first 
important black poet. Her Poems on Various Subjects, 
Religious and Moral (1773) was the first book by an 
African American to be published. 

The 1800's. Before the American Civil War (1861- 
1865), many black writers were fugitive slaves. They de- 
scribed their experiences on plantations in an attempt to 
convince readers that slavery was immoral and to show 
the courage, humanity. and intelligence of the slaves. 
The most important slave autobiography of the period is 
the Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass (1845). 
Douglass became the leading spokesman for American 
blacks in the 1800's. /ncidents in the Life of a Slave Girl 
(1861), by Harriet Ann Jacobs, is the only autobiography 
about the unique hardships suffered by women slaves. 

The first published African American fiction appeared 
in the mid-1800's. This fiction included such novels as 
Clotel, or The President's Daughter (1853), by William 
Wells Brown; and Our Nig (1859), by Harriet E. Wilson. 
They were similar in content to slave autobiographies. 
The Garies and Their Friends (1857), by Frank J. Webb, is 
a novel that describes the problems of a free family liv- 


African American literature 136a 


ing in the North. Blake (1861-1862), by Martin Robinson 
Delany, is a novel about a free black man who organizes 
a slave rebellion. 

After slavery was abolished in 1865, African American 
authors wrote in many literary forms to protest race dis- 
crimination. In the 1890's and early 1900's, Paul Laurence 
Dunbar was acclaimed for his romantic poems in black 
dialect. However, some of his verses imply bitter social 
criticism. Charles Waddell Chesnutt sought to revise the 
negative images of former slaves by portraying them as 
intelligent and resourceful in his realistic short stories 
and novels. Chesnutt is considered to be the first major 
African American writer of fiction. Such black women 
writers as Frances Harper and Pauline Hopkins chal- 
lenged both racism and sexism in their novels. 

The 1900's. African American ethnic pride and cre- 
ativity flourished during the 1920's. The period's excep- 
tional outpouring of black literature came to be called 
the Harlem Renaissance because it began in Harlem, a 
district of New York City. The movement was also called 
the New Negro, after the title of a book by educator and 
writer Alain Locke. Important African American writers 
of the time include Sterling A. Brown, James Weldon 
Johnson, Countee Cullen, Langston Hughes, Claude 
McKay, Jean Toomer, Jesse Redmon Fauset, and Zora 
Neale Hurston. 

In the mid-1900's, much African American literature 
exposed the bleak conditions of black life and con- 
demned discrimination against the poor of all races. 
Richard Wright's Native Son (1940) and Ralph Ellison's /n- 
visible Man (1952) both describe a black man’s quest for 
identity in a hostile world. James Baldwin explored the 
same theme in novels, essays, and dramas set primarily 
in the urban North. 

In 1950, Gwendolyn Brooks became the first African 
American to be awarded a Pulitzer Prize for poetry. Like 
many black writers of the time, Brooks examined the im- 
pact of race and poverty on the African American's pur- 
suit of the American dream. 

During the 1960's and 1970's, many blacks gave up 
hopes of an integrated society and began to call fora 
separate black culture. A number of poets and drama- 
tists rejected traditional literary techniques and themes 
and developed their own forms of self-expression. 
These writers include LeRoi Jones (now Amiri Baraka), 
Don L Lee (now Haki Madhubuti), Nikki Giovanni, Sonia 
Sanchez, Etheridge Knight, Douglas Turner Ward, and 
Ed Bullins. 

Recent developments. In the late 1900's, many black 
novelists produced works of myth, ritual, and magic re- 
alism to reflect on the legacies of slavery and racial prej- 
udice. In 1983, Alice Walker won the Pulitzer Prize for 
The Color Purple, a novel about an unwed mother 
forcibly separated trom her children. August Wilson 
emerged as a leading playwright. His major plays trace 
the black experience in the United States in the 1900's. In 
1993, Toni Morrison became the first African American 
to be awarded the Nobel Prize for literature. Yusef Ko- 
munyakaa won the 1994 Pulitzer Prize for poetry for 
Neon Vernacular. From 1993 to 1995, Rita Dove served 
as the first African American poet laureate. 

Joycelyn K Moody 

See also African Americans with its list of Related ar- 
ticles, including those on African American writers. 


136b African Americans 


i 
2 | 





The Contnbution of the Negro to American Democracy 1943), a tempera painung on plaster by Charles White: courtesy of Hampton Insbtute, Hampton, Va 
The history of African Americans is largely the story of their struggle for equality and freedom. 
This mural of black Americans includes slave leader Nat Turner, upper /eft, Revolutionary War sol- 
dier Peter Salem (below Turner), bearded abolitionist Frederick Douglass, agricultural researcher 
George Washington Carver (with test tube), and singer Marian Anderson, far right center. 


African Americans 


African Americans are Americans mostly or partly of 
African descent Approximately 35 million African Amer- 
icans live in the United States. They make up 12 percent 
of the nation’s total population and, in number, trail only 
Hispanic Americans among minority groups. About half 
of all black Americans live in the Southern States. Most 
of the rest live in large cities in the East, Midwest, and 
West. 

Most African Americans have used five terms to refer 
to themselves. The terms Negro (which means black in 
Spanish and Portuguese) and co/ored were commonly 
used until the mid-1960's. These terms referred to the 
dark brown skin color of many black Americans. Since 
then, most black Americans have chosen to express 
deep pride in their color or origin by calling themselves 
blacks, Afro-Americans, or African Americans. 

The majority of American blacks trace their origin to 


Alton Hornsby, Jr, the contributor of this article. is Fuller E 
Callaway Professor of History at Morehouse College and editor 
of The Journal of Negro History 





an area in western Africa that was controlled by three 
great and wealthy black empires from about the AD. 
300's to the late 1500's. These empires—Ghana, Mali, and 
Songhai—thrived on trade and developed efficient gov- 
ernments. During the early 1500's, European nations be- 
gan a slave trade in which blacks from western Africa 
were brought to European colonies in the Americas. For 
about the next 300 years, millions of enslaved black 
Africans were shipped across the Atlantic Ocean to 
North and South America. About 500,000 of the Africans 
were brought to what is now the United States. 

The history of African Americans is largely the story of 
their struggle for freedom and equality. From the 1600's 
until the American Civil War (1861-1865), most black 
Americans worked as slaves throughout the South. They 
did much to help Southern agriculture expand. At the 
same time, free blacks helped develop industry in the 
North. After 1865, when slavery was finally abolished in 
the nation, black Americans briefly gained their civil 
rights during a period called Reconstruction. But after 
Reconstruction, they again lost those rights and suffered 
from widespread segregation and poverty. The deter- 
mined efforts of African Americans to achieve equality 
and justice led to the start of a strong civil rights move- 
ment in the United States in the 1950's. 


The lives of African Americans have improved since 
the 1950's. But many still suffer from segregation and 
poverty, discrimination in jobs and housing, and other 
problems. At the same time, however, more black Amer- 
icans are making important contributions in all areas of 
American life. 

This article describes the African background of black 
Americans and traces their history since their arrival in 
North America. The section at the end of the article lists 
the many related articles in World Book. 


The African background 


The cultural heritage. The ancestors of most Ameri- 
can blacks came from an area of Africa known as the 
Western Sudan. This area was about as large as the 
United States, not including Hawaii and Alaska. !t ex- 
tended from the Atlantic Ocean in the west to Lake Chad 
in the east and from the Sahara in the north to the Gulf 
of Guinea in the south. 

From about the A.D. 300s to 1591, three highly devel- 
oped black empires, in turn, controlled all or most of 
the Western Sudan. They were Ghana, Mali, and 
Songhai. Their economy was based on farming, on min- 
ing gold, and on trade with Arabs of northern Africa. 

Ghana ruled much of the Western Sudan from the 
300s to the mid-1000's. The Ghanaians became the first 
people in western Africa to smelt iron ore. They made 


The North American slave trade 


The map at the right shows 
the route ships used to carry 
slaves from western Africa to 
North America. On the map 
below, the red type indicates 
the groups from which most 
slaves were taken. The groups 
that captured the most Afri- 
cans for European and Ameri- 
can slave traders are shown in 
bold black type. 





WORLD BOOK maps 









Equator 


Atlantic 
Ocean 
Oo 1000 M 
(@)] 1000 Krlometers 





African Americans 136c 


arrows, swords, and other weapons of iron, which 
helped them conquer nearby nations. 

In 1235, the Malinke people of Mali began to develop 
the second great black African empire of the Western 
Sudan. By 1240, they controlled all Ghana. The Mali Em- 
pire’s most famous ruler was Mansa Musa, who reigned 
from 1312 to about 1337. Mansa Musa encouraged the 
practice of Islam, the religion of the Muslims. Under his 
rule, Mali reached its height of wealth, political power, 
and cultural achievement. 

Beginning in the 1400's, the Songhai Empire gained 
control of most of northwestern Africa south of the Sa- 
hara, including much of Mali. Under Askia Muhammad, 
who ruled Songhai from 1493 to 1528, the empire had a 
well-organized central government and excellent uni- 
versities in such cities as Timbuktu and Jenne. Like 
Mansa Musa, Askia encouraged his people to practice 
the Islamic faith. Invaders from Morocco conquered 
Songhai in 1591. 

Some ancestors of black Americans lived in smaller 
nations in the Western Sudan. These nations included 
Oyo, Benin, Dahomey, and Ashanti. Their economies 
also depended on farming, trade, and gold mining. For 
more details on the major black African empires, see 
Ghana Empire; Mali Empire; Songhai Empire. 

Beginning of the slave trade. Africans had prac- 
ticed slavery since ancient times. In most cases, the 





Granger Collection 
Africans marched captured enemies, above, to coastal slave 
markets. The cutaway drawing below shows the tight packing 
system used on ships delivering the slaves to North America. 


Schomburg Collection, New York Public Library 








136d African Americans 


slaves had been captured in warfare and sold to Arab 
traders of northern Africa. Portugal and Spain became 
increasingly involved in the African slave trade during 
the early 1500's, after they had established colonies in 
the Americas. Portugal acquired African slaves to work 
on sugar plantations that its colonists developed in 
Brazil. Spain used slaves on its sugar plantations in the 
West Indies. During the early 1600's, the Netherlands, 
France, and England also began to use African slaves in 
their American colonies. 

The Europeans obtained slaves from black Africans 
who continued to sell their war captives or trade them 
for rum, cloth, and other items, especially guns. The Af- 
ricans needed the guns for use in their constant warfare 
with neighboring peoples. 

The slave trade took several triangular routes. Over 
one route, ships from Europe transported manufactured 
goods to the west coast of Africa. There, traders ex- 
changed the goods for slaves. Next, the slaves were car- 
ried across the Atlantic Ocean to the West Indies and 
sold for huge profits. This part of the route was called 
the Middle Passage. The traders used much of their 
earnings to buy sugar, coffee, and tobacco in the West 
Indies. The ships then took these products to Europe. 

On another triangular route, ships from the New Eng- 
land Colonies carried rum and other products to Africa, 
where they were exchanged for slaves. The ships then 
transported the slaves to the West Indies to be sold. The 
slave traders used some of their profits to buy sugar 
and molasses, which they took back to New England 
and sold to rum producers. 

The slave trade was conducted for profit. The cap- 
tains of slave ships therefore tried to deliver as many 
healthy slaves for as little cost as possible. Some cap- 
tains used a system called /oose packing to deliver 
slaves. Under that system, captains transported fewer 
slaves than their ships could carry in the hope of reduc- 
ing sickness and death among them. Other captains pre- 
ferred tight packing. They believed that many blacks 
would die on the voyages anyway and so carried as 
many slaves as their ships could hold. 

Most slave ship voyages across the Atlantic took sev- 
eral months. The slaves were chained below deck all 





Granger Collection 


Slave trading became increasingly profitable throughout the 
South from the time the first slaves arrived in the early 1600's. 

Buyers often paid more than $1,000 for a skilled, healthy slave. 
Many slaves were sold at auctions like this one in Virginia. 


day and all night except for brief periods of exercise. 
Their crowded conditions led to the chief horrors of the 
Middle Passage—filth, stench, disease, and death. 

The Atlantic slave trade operated from the 1500's to 
the mid-1800's. No one knows how many Africans were 
enslaved during this period. The most reliable estimates 
suggest about 10 million blacks. Of this total, what is 
now the United States received about 5 percent. 


The years of slavery 


Some scholars believe that the first blacks in America 
came with the expeditions led by Christopher Colum- 
bus, starting in 1492. Black slaves traveled to North and 
South America with French, Portuguese, and Spanish 
explorers throughout the 1500's. 

The best-known black to take part in the early explo- 
rations of North America was a slave named Estevanico. 
In 1539, he crossed what are now Arizona and New 
Mexico on an expedition sent by Antonio de Mendoza, 
ruler of Spain's colony in America. 

Colonial times. The first blacks in the American Col- 
onies were brought in, like many lower-class whites, as 
indentured servants. Most indentured servants had a 
contract to work without wages for a master for four to 
seven years, after which they became free. Blacks 
brought in as slaves, however, had no right to eventual 
freedom. The first black indentured servants arrived in 
Jamestown in the colony of Virginia in 1619. They had 
been captured in Africa and were sold at auction in 
Jamestown. After completing their service, some black 
indentured servants bought property. But racial preju- 
dice among white colonists forced most free blacks to 
remain in the lowest level of colonial society. 

The first black African slaves in the American Colo- 
nies also arrived during the early 1600's. The slave pop- 
ulation increased rapidly during the 1700's as newly es- 
tablished colonies in the South created a great demand 
for plantation workers. 

By 1750, about 200,000 slaves lived in the colonies. 
The majority lived in the South, where the warm climate 
and fertile soil encouraged the development of planta- 
tions that grew rice, tobacco, sugar cane, and later cot- 
ton. Most plantation slaves worked in the fields. Oth- 





Granger Collection 


Crispus Attucks, cenfer, was a leader of the patriot mob that 
was fired upon by British troops in the Boston Massacre of 1770. 
Attucks and many other free blacks who lived in the North op- 
posed British rule in the American Colonies. 








ers were craftworkers, messengers, and servants. 

Only 12 percent of slaveowners operated plantations 
that had 20 or more slaves. But more than half of all the 
country's slaves worked on these plantations. Most of 
the other slaveowners had small farms and only a few 
slaves each. Under arrangements with their masters, 
some slaves could hire themselves out to work for other 
whites on farms or in city jobs. Such arrangements 
brought income to both the slaves and the masters. 

The cooler climate and rocky soil of the Northern and 
Middle colonies made it hard for most farmers there to 
earn large profits. Many slaves in those colonies worked 
as skilled and unskilled laborers in factories, homes, and 
shipyards and on fishing and trading ships. 

During the mid-1600's, the colonies began to pass 
laws called s/ave codes. In general, these codes prohib- 
ited slaves from owning weapons, receiving an educa- 
tion, meeting one another or moving about without the 
permission of their masters, and testifying against white 
people in court. Slaves received harsher punishments 
for some crimes than white people. A master usually re- 
ceived less punishment for killing a slave than for killing 
a free person for the same reason. Slaves on small farms 
probably had more freedom than plantation slaves, and 
slaves in urban areas had fewer restrictions in many 
cases than slaves in rural areas. 

By 1770, there may have been 40,000 or more free 
blacks in the American Colonies. They included runaway 
slaves, descendants of early indentured servants, and 
black immigrants from the West Indies. Many free 
blacks opposed British rule. One of the best-known Afri- 
can American patriots was Crispus Attucks, who died in 
the Boston Massacre of 1770 while mocking the pres- 
ence of British soldiers. 

During the Revolutionary War in America (1775-1783), 
most blacks probably favored the British. They believed 
that a British victory would offer them their earliest or 
best chance for freedom. But about 5,000 blacks fought 
on the side of the colonists. Most of them were free 
blacks or slaves from the Northern and Middle colonies. 
Black heroes of the war included Peter Salem and Salem 
Poor of Massachusetts, who distinguished themselves 
in the Battle of Bunker Hill in 1775. 





Granger Collection 


African Americans 136e 


The growth of slavery. By the early 1800's, more 
than 700,006 slaves lived in the South. They accounted 
for about a third of the region's people. Slaves outnum- 
bered whites in South Carolina and made up over half 
the population in both Maryland and Virginia. 

Slavery began to develop even deeper roots in the 
South after Eli Whitney of Massachusetts invented his 
cotton gin in 1793. This machine removed the seeds 
from cotton as fast as 50 people working by hand and 
probably contributed more to the growth of slavery than 
any other development. Whitney's gin enabled farmers 
to meet the rapidly rising demand for cotton. As a result, 
the Southern cotton industry expanded, and cotton be- 
came the chief crop in the region. The planters needed 
more and more workers to pick and bale the cotton, 
which led to large increases in the slave population. The 
thriving sugar cane plantations of Louisiana also used 
many slaves during the first half of the 1800's. By 1860, 
about 4 million slaves lived in the South. 

Numerous slaves protested against their condition. 
They used such day-to-day forms of rebellion as de- 
stroying property, running away, pretending illness, and 
disobeying orders. Major slave protests included armed 
revolts and mutinies. The most famous of about 200 
such revolts was led by Nat Turner, a slave and preach- 
er. The revolt broke out in 1831 in Southampton County 
in Virginia. The rebels killed about 60 white people be- 
fore being captured. The best-known slave mutiny oc- 
curred in 1839 aboard the Amistad, off the coast of 
Cuba. A group of Africans, led by Cinqué, brought the 
vessel to Long Island in New York. The slaves were 
given their freedom soon afterward. 

Slaves received beatings or other physical punish- 
ment for refusing to work, attempting to run away, or 
participating in plots or rebellions against their owners. 
Some slaves were executed for rebelling. 

Free blacks. The Revolutionary War helped lead to 
new attitudes about slavery, especially among whites in 
the North. The war inspired a spirit of liberty and an ap- 
preciation for the service of the black soldiers. Partly for 
this reason, some Northern legislatures adopted laws 
during the late 1700's that provided for the inimediate or 
gradual end of slavery. Another reason for such laws 





Granger Collection 


The production of cotton increased rapidly in the South after Eli Whitney invented a faster way 
of cleaning cotton in 1793. Whitney cotton gin, lett, could clean as much cotton ina day as could 
50 people working by hand and helped meet the growing demand for cotton. More workers were 
needed on plantations, right, which led to a huge growth in the slave population. 


136f African Americans 


was simply that slaves had no essential role in the main 
economic activities of the North. 

The census of 1790 revealed that the nation had about 
59,000 free blacks, including about 27,000 in the North. 
By the early 1800's, most Northern states had taken steps 
to end slavery. Besides former slaves freed by law, free 
blacks included those who had been freed by their mas- 
ters, who had bought their freedom, or who had been 
born of free parents. 

After the Revolutionary War, numerous free blacks 
found jobs in tobacco plants, textile mills, and other fac- 
tories. Some worked in shipyards, on ships, and later in 
railroad construction. Many free blacks became skilled 
in carpentry and other trades. Some became merchants 
and editors. The best-known editors were Samuel Cor- 
nish and John Russwurm, who helped start the first 
black newspaper, Freedom's Journal, in 1827. 

Most whites treated free blacks as inferiors. Many ho- 
tels, restaurants, theaters, and other public places 
barred them. Few states gave free blacks the right to 
vote. The children of most free blacks had to attend sep- 
arate schools. Some colleges and universities, such as 
Bowdoin and Oberlin, admitted black students. But the 
limited number of admissions led to the opening of 
black colleges, including Lincoln University in Pennsyl- 


vania in 1854 and Wilberforce University in Ohio in 1856. 


In both the North and the South, churches either 
banned blacks or required them to sit apart from white 
people. As a result, some blacks set up their own 
churches. In 1816, Richard Allen, a black Philadelphia 
minister, helped set up the African Methodist Episcopal 
Church, the first black denomination in the country. 

The rising number of free blacks alarmed many 
whites and led to further restrictions on their activities. 
In parts of New England, free blacks could not visit any 
town without a pass. They also needed permission to 
entertain slaves in their homes. In the South, free blacks 
could be enslaved if caught without proof that they 
were free. Fears that free blacks would lead slave revolts 
encouraged almost all states to pass laws severely limit- 
ing the right of free blacks to own weapons. 

Increasing concern over the large number of free 
blacks led to the founding of the American Colonization 
Society in 1816. The society was sponsored by well- 
known supporters of slavery, including U.S. Representa- 
tives John C. Calhoun of South Carolina and Henry Clay 
of Kentucky. Their plan was to lessen ‘the race problem” 
by transporting free blacks on a voluntary basis to Af- 
rica. In 1822, the society established the black American 
colony of Liberia on the continents west coast. In 1847, 
Liberia became the first self-governing black republic in 
Africa. Although free blacks suffered from discrimina- 
tion, most felt that the United States was their home. As 
a result, only about 12,000 of them had volunteered to 
settle in Liberia by 1850. 

In spite of their inferior position, a number of free 
blacks won wide recognition during the late 1700's and 
early 1800's. For example, Jupiter Hammon and Phillis 
Wheatley gained fame for their poetry. Newport Gard- 
ner distinguished himself in music. Benjamin Banneker, 
a mathematician, published outstanding almanacs. Nota- 
ble black ministers included Absalom Jones in the North 
and George Liele and Andrew Bryan in the South. Paul 
Cuffe and James Forten gained great wealth in business. 


Tom Molineaux became known for his boxing skills. 

By 1860, the nation had about 490,000 free blacks. But 
most of them faced such severe discrimination that they 
were little better off than the slaves. 

The antislavery movement. Many white Americans, 
particularly Northerners, felt that slavery was wicked 
and violated the ideals of democratic government. How- 
ever, plantation owners and other supporters of slavery 
regarded it as natural to the Southern way of life. They 
also argued that Southern culture introduced the slaves 
to Christianity and helped them become “civilized.” Most 
white Southerners held such beliefs by 1860, though 
less than 5 percent of them owned slaves and only 
about half the slaveowners had more than five slaves. In 
addition, Southern farmers insisted that they could not 
make money growing cotton without cheap slave labor. 

The Southern States hoped to expand slavery as new 
states were admitted to the Union. However, the North- 
ern States feared they would lose power in Congress 
permanently if more states that permitted slavery were 
admitted. The North and the South thereby became in- 
creasingly divided over the spread of slavery. 

The slavery issue created heated debate in Congress 
after the Territory of Missouri applied for statehood in 
1818. At the time, there were 11 slave states, in which 
slavery was allowed, and 11 free states, in which it was 
prohibited. Most Missourians supported slavery, but 
many Northern members of Congress did not want Mis- 
souri to become a slave state. In 1820, Congress reached 
a settlement known as the Missouri Compromise. This 
measure admitted Missouri as a slave state, but it also 
called for Maine to enter the Union as a free state. Con- 
gress thus preserved the balance between free and 
slave states at 12 each. 

New, aggressive opponents of slavery began to 
spring up in the North during the 1830s. Their leaders 
included William Lloyd Garrison, Lucretia Mott, Lewis 
Tappan, and Theodore Dwight Weld. During the 1830's 
and 1840s, these white abolitionists were joined by 
many free blacks, including such former slaves as Fred- 
erick Douglass, Henry Highland Garnet, Harriet Tubman, 
and Sojourner Truth. 

Most of the abolitionist leaders attacked slavery in 
writings and public speeches. Garrison began to publish 
an antislavery newspaper, /he Liberator, in 1831. Doug- 
lass, the most influential black leader of the time, started 
an abolitionist newspaper called the North Star in 1847. 
Tubman and many other abolitionists helped Southern 
slaves escape to the free states and Canada. Tubman re- 
turned to the South 19 times and personally led about 
300 slaves to freedom. She and others used a network of 
routes and housing to assist the fleeing blacks. This net- 
work became known as the underground railroad. 

The deepening division over slavery. After 1848, 
Congress had to deal with the question of whether to 
permit slavery in the territories that the United States 
gained from Mexico as a result of the Mexican War 
(1846-1848). The territories covered what are now Cali- 
fornia, Nevada, Utah, and parts of four other states. Fol- 
lowing angry debates among the members of Congress, 
Senators Henry Clay of Kentucky and Daniel Webster of 
Massachusetts helped work out a series of measures 
that became known as the Compromise of 1850. The 
Compromise allowed slavery to continue but prohibited 





the slave trade in Washington, D.C. A key measure in the 
Compromise admitted California to the Union as a free 
state. Another agreement gave the residents in the other 
newly acquired areas the right to decide for themselves 
whether to allow slavery. The Compromise included a 
federal fugitive slave law that was designed to help 
slaveowners get back runaway slaves. 

The Compromise of 1850 briefly ended the heated ar- 
guments in Congress over the slavery issue. However, 
the abolitionist movement and the hostility between the 
North and the South continued. The publication of Har- 
riet Beecher Stowe’'s antislavery novel Uncle Tom's 
Cabin (1851-1852) greatly increased the tensions be- 
tween Northerners and Southerners. tn addition, at- 
tempts by Northerners to stop enforcement of the fugi- 
tive slave law further angered Southerners. 

The quarrel over slavery flared again in Congress in 
1854, when it passed the Kansas-Nebraska Act. This law 
created two federal territories, Kansas and Nebraska, 
and provided that the people of each territory could de- 
cide whether to permit slavery. Most Nebraskans op- 
posed slavery. However, bitter, bloody conflicts broke 
out between supporters and opponents of slavery in 
Kansas. In 1856, for example, the militant abolitionist 
John Brown led a raid against supporters of slavery ina 
small settlement on Pottawatomie Creek in Kansas. 
Brown's group killed five men and focused the nation’s 
attention on the conflict in the territory, which became 
known as “Bleeding Kansas.” tn the end, Kansas joined 
the Union as a free state in 1861. 

Supporters of slavery won a major victory in 1857, 
when the U.S. Supreme Court issued its ruling in the 
case of Dred Scott v. Sandford. \n the Dred Scott Deci- 
sion, the court denied the claim of Scott, a slave, that his 
residence in a free state and territory for a time made 
him free. The court also declared that no black—free or 
slave—could be a U.S. citizen. In addition, it stated that 
Congress had no power to ban the spread of slavery. 

Tension in the South increased again in 1859, when 
John Brown led another abolitionist group in seizing the 
United States arsenal at Harpers Ferry in Virginia (now 
West Virginia). Federal troops quickly captured Brown, 
and he was executed later that year. But his raid helped 





UPI Benimann Archive 


Frederick Douglass, right, was the most intluential black 
leader in the United States during much of the 1800s. He started 
an abolitionist newspaper, the North Star, in 1847 and advised 
government leaders on the problenis of tree blacks in the North. 


African Americans 136g 


convince many Southerners that the slavery issue would 
lead to fighting between the North and the South. 


The end of slavery 


Slavery became a major issue in the U.S. presidential 
election of 1860. Many Democrats in the North opposed 
the spread of slavery, but Democrats in the South fa- 
vored it. Each group nominated its own candidate for 
President, thereby splitting their party. Most Republi- 
cans opposed the expansion of slavery. They chose 
Abraham Lincoln of Illinois as their presidential candi- 
date. In November 1860, he was elected President. 

The Civil War. Southerners feared that Lincoln 
would limit or end slavery. On Dec. 20, 1860, South Car- 
olina seceded (withdrew) from the Union. Early in 1861, 
six other Southern states seceded. The seceded states 
took the name Confederate States of America. On April 
12, 1861, Confederate troops attacked Fort Sumter, a 
United States military base in South Carolina, and the 
American Civil War began. Four more slave states 
joined the Confederacy soon afterward. Four other slave 
states— Missouri, Kentucky, Maryland, and Delaware— 
remained loyal to the Union. 

At the start of the Civil War, Lincoln's chief concern 
was to preserve the Union, not to end slavery. He there- 
fore refused requests of African Americans to join the 
Union Army. He felt that their participation in the war 
could lead more slave states to secede. Lincoln also 
knew that many Northerners were hostile toward blacks 
and so might oppose the use of black troops. 

A number of developments gradually persuaded Lin- 
coln to make the war a fight against slavery. For exam- 
ple, some Union military commanders, without the Pres- 
idents consent, had freed the slaves in areas they had 
conquered. Furthermore, abolitionists and black leaders 
urged that the war be fought to end slavery, and they 
demanded the use of black troops. Most importantly, 
the war was going badly for the Union. By fighting 
against slavery, Lincoln hoped to strengthen the war ef- 
fort in the North and weaken it in the South. 

In March 1862, Lincoln gave Congress a plan for the 
gradual freedom of slaves. The plan included payment 
for the slaveowners. In April, Lincoln approved legis- 


Schomburg Collecton New York Public Libran 
Bloody conflicts broke oul during the 1850s between support- 
ers and opponents ot a proposal to allow slavery in the Territory 
ot Kansas. Because of shootings like this one. which occurred in 
1858. the territom became known as Bleeding Kansas. 


136h African Americans 


lation that ended slavery in the District of Columbia and 
provided funds for any freed slaves who wished to 
move to Haiti or Liberia. In June, Lincoln signed a bill 
that ended slavery in all federal territories. 

By July 1862, Lincoln was ready to accept African 
Americans in the Union Army. In September, he issued 
a preliminary order to emancipate (free) the slaves. It de- 
clared that all slaves in areas or states in rebellion 
against the United States on Jan. 1, 1863, would be for- 
ever free. The order excluded areas still loyal to the 
Union, meaning that they might retain slaves. The order 
had no immediate effect in the Southern-controlled 
areas, but it meant that each Union victory brought the 
end of slavery closer. The final order was issued on Jan. 
1, 1863, as the Emancipation Proclamation. African 
Americans referred to that day as the Day of Jubilee. 
Bells rang from the spires of most Northern black 
churches to celebrate the day. 

Over 200,000 African Americans fought on the side of 
the Union. They were discriminated against in pay, as- 
signments, and rank. Nevertneless, many of them con- 
tributed greatly to the war effort. Robert Smalls of South 
Carolina, a harbor pilot, was one of the first black he- 
roes. In 1862, he sailed a Confederate ship, the Planter, 
out of Charleston Harbor and turned it over to the 
Union. Smalls then joined the Union Navy. In 1863, black 
regiments played an important role in the attack on Port 
Hudson, La. The fall of Port Hudson helped the Union 
gain control of the Mississippi River. Altogether, 23 
blacks won the Medal of Honor, the nation’s highest mil- 
itary award, for heroism during the Civil War. 

The Confederate States did not decide to use blacks 
as soldiers until 1865, the last year of the war. About 
40,000 black troops— nearly all of them Union troops— 
died during the war. In April 1865, the main Southern 
army surrendered. In December 1865, the adoption of 
the 13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution officially 
ended slavery throughout the nation. 

The first years of freedom. The period of rebuild- 
ing that followed the Civil War became known as Re- 
construction. A major concern during Reconstruction 
was the condition of the approximately 4 million freed- 
men (freed slaves). Most of them had no homes, were 








Schomburg Collectton NYPt 
Harriet Tubman, /eft, was 
the most famous leader of the 
underground railroad, which 
helped slaves flee to freedom. 


Uibran of Congress 


The Emancipation Proclamation, is- 
sued on Jan. 1, 1863, freed the slaves in 
Confederate areas. Advancing Union 
troops told slaves they were free. 


desperately poor, and could not read and write. 

To help the freed slaves and homeless whites, Con- 
gress established the Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, 
and Abandoned Lands. The agency, better known as the 
Freedmen’s Bureau, operated from 1865 until 1872. It is- 
sued food and supplies to blacks; set up more than 100 
hospitals; resettled more than 30,000 people; and 
founded over 4,300 schools. Some of the schools devel- 
oped into outstanding black institutions, such as Atlanta 
University (now Clark Atlanta University), Fisk University, 
Hampton Institute, and Howard University. 

In spite of its achievements, the Freedmen’s Bureau 
did not solve the serious economic problems of African 
Americans. Most of them continued to live in poverty. 
They also suffered from racist threats and violence and 
from Jaws restricting their civil rights. All these prob- 
lems cast a deep shadow over their new freedom. 

The legal restrictions on black civil rights arose in 
1865 and 1866, when many Southern state governments 
passed laws that became known as the b/ack codes. 
These laws were like the earlier slave codes. Some black 
codes prohibited blacks from owning land. Others es- 
tablished a nightly curfew for blacks. Some permitted 
states to jail blacks for being jobless. 

The black codes shocked a powerful group of North- 
ern congressmen Called Radical Republicans. These 
senators and representatives won congressional ap- 
proval of the Civil Rights Act of 1866. The act gave Afri- 
can Americans the rights and privileges of full citizen- 
ship. The 14th Amendment to the Constitution, adopted 
in 1868, further guaranteed the citizenship of blacks. 
However, most Southern whites resented the new status 
of blacks. The whites simply could not accept the idea of 
former slaves voting and holding office. As a result, at- 
tempts by Southern blacks to vote, run for public office, 
or enjoy other civil rights were met by increasing vio- 
lence from whites in the South. In 1865 and 1866, about 
5,000 Southern blacks were murdered. Forty-six blacks 
were killed when their schools and churches were 
burned in Memphis in May 1866. In July, 34 blacks were 
killed during a race riot in New Orleans. 

Some law enforcement officers encouraged or partic- 
ipated in assaults on blacks. But lawless groups carried 





Chicago Histoncal Society 


African American troops made important contri- 
butions to the Union victory in the Civil War. Over 
200,000 blacks served in segregated Northern units, 
such as the 2nd U.S. Colored Artillery, above. 





out most attacks. One of the largest, the Ku Klux Klan, 
was organized in 1865 or 1866 in Pulaski, Tenn Bands of 
hooded Klansmen rode at night and beat and murdered 
many blacks and their white sympathizers. The Klan did 
much to deny blacks their civil and human rights 
throughout Reconstruction. 

The federal government tried to maintain the rights of 
African Americans. In 1870 and 1871, Congress passed 
laws authorizing the use of federal troops to enforce the 
voting rights of blacks. These laws were known as the 
Enforcement Acts or the Ku Klux Klan Acts. In addition, 
President Ulysses S. Grant signed a proclamation de- 
manding respect for the civil rights of all Americans. 

Temporary gains. The policies of the Radical Re- 
publicans enabled African Americans to participate 
widely in the nation’s political system for the first time. 
Congress provided for black men to become voters in 
the South and called for constitutional conventions to 
be held in the defeated states. Many blacks attended the 
conventions held tn 1867 and 1868. They helped rewrite 
Southern state constitutions and other basic laws to re- 
place the black codes drawn up by whites in 1865 and 
1866. In the legislatures elected under the new constitu- 
tions, however, blacks had a majority of seats only in the 
lower house tn South Carolina. Most of the chief legisla- 
tive and executive positions were held by Northern 
white Republicans who had moved to the South and by 
their white Southern allies. Angry white Southerners 
called the Northerners carpetbaggers to suggest that 
they could carry everything they owned when they 
came South in a carpethbag, or suttcase. 

African Americans elected to important posts during 
Reconstruction included U.S. Senators Hiram R. Revels 
and Blanche K. Bruce of Mississippi and U.S. Represent- 
atives Joseph H. Rainey of South Carolina and Jefferson 
Long of Georgia. Others were Oscar J. Dunn, lieutenant 
governor of Louisiana; Richard Gleaves and Alonzo J. 
Ranster, lieutenant governors of South Carolina; P. B. S. 
Pinchback, acting governor of Louisiana; Francis L. Car- 
dozo, secretary of state and state treasurer of South Car- 
olina; and Jonathan Jasper Wright, an associate justice of 
the South Carolina Supreme Court. Most of them had 
college educations. 





Historical Pictures Sermice 


Schools for blacks were established by the Freed: 
men’s Bureau during Reconstruction, the period of re- 
building after the Civil War. Some of the schools the 
bureau opened became outstanding blac k colleges 





Ku Klux Klan members 
were white terrorists who 
tried to deny blacks their 
rights after the Civil War. 


African Americans 136i 


By the early 1870's, Northern whites had lost interest 
in the Reconstruction policies of the Radical Republi- 
cans. They grew tired of hearing about the continual 
conflict between Southern blacks and whites. Most 
Northern whites wanted to put Reconstruction behind 
them and turn to other things. Federal troops sent to the 
South to protect blacks were gradually withdrawn. 
Southern whites who had stayed away from elections to 
protest black participation started voting again. White 
Democrats then began to regain control of the state 
governments from the blacks and their white Republi- 
can associates. In 1877, the last federal troops were 
withdrawn. By the end of that year, the Democrats held 
power in all the Southern state governments. For more 
details on the Reconstruction era, see Reconstruction. 


The growth of discrimination 


During the late 1800's, blacks in the South increas- 
ingly suffered from segregation, the loss of voting 
rights, and other forms of discrimination. Their condi- 
tion reflected beliefs held by most Southern whites that 
whites were born supertor to blacks with respect to in- 
telligence, talents, and moral standards. In 1881, the 
Tennessee legislature passed a law that required rail- 
road passengers to be separated by race. In 1890, Mis- 
sissippt adopted several measures that in effect ended 
voting by African Americans. These measures included 
the passing of reading and writing tests and the pay- 
ment of a poll tax before a person could vote. 

Several decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court enabled 
the Southern States to establish “legal” segregation prac- 
tices. In 1883, for example, the court declared the Civil 
Rights Act of 1875 to be unconstitutional. That act had 
guaranteed blacks the right to be admitted to any public 
place. In addition, the Civil Rights Act of 1866 and the 
14th Amendment to the Constitution, ratifted in 1868, 
had forbidden the states to deny equal rights to any per- 
son. But in 1896, the Supreme Court ruled in the case of 
Plessy v. Ferguson that a Louisiana law requiring the 
separation of black and white railroad passengers was 
constituttonal. The court argued that segregation in it- 
self did not represent inequality and that separate pub- 
lic facilities could be provided for the races as long as 





Histoncal Pictures Sernice Histoncal Prctures Senice 


African American voters helped the 
Republican Party win control of all the 
state governments in the South during 
the Reconstruction period. 


136; African Americans 

the facilities were equal. This ruling, known as the “sepa- 
rate but equal doctrine,” became the basis of Southern 
race relations. In practice, however, nearly all of the sep- 
arate public facilities provided for blacks were far inferi- 
or to those provided for whites. 

In spite of the increasing difficulties for African Ameri- 
cans, anumber of them won distinction during the late 
1800's. For example, Samuel Lowery started a school for 
blacks in Huntsville, Ala, in 1875 and won prizes at inter- 
national fairs for silk made at the school. In 1883, Jan E. 
Matzeliger invented a revolutionary shoe-lasting ma- 
chine that shaped the upper part of a shoe and fastened 
it to the sole. In 1887, Joe Clark and a group of other 
blacks founded Eatonville, Florida. It was the first African 
American settlement in the United States to be incorpo- 
rated. Mary Church Terrell helped found the National 
Association of Colored Women in 1896 and advised 
government leaders on racial problems. Charles Wad- 
dell Chesnutt wrote 7he Conjure Woman, published in 
1899. He became the first major African American novel- 
ist and short-story writer. 

During the early 1900's, discrimination against 
Southern blacks became even more widespread. By 
1907, every Southern state required racial segregation 
on trains and in churches, schools, hotels, restaurants, 
theaters, and other public places. The Southern States 
also adopted an election practice known as the white 
primary. The states banned blacks from voting in the 
Democratic Party's primary elections by calling them 
“private affairs.” But the winners of the primary elections 
were certain of victory in the general elections because 
Republican and independent candidates got little sup- 
port from whites and rarely ran for office. By 1910, every 
Southern state had taken away or begun to take away 
the right of African Americans to vote. 

The Ku Klux Klan also attempted to keep blacks from 
voting through an increased use of threats, beatings, 
and killings. More than 3,000 blacks had been lynched 
during the late 1800's, and the Klan and members of sim- 
ilar groups lynched hundreds more throughout the 
South during the early 1900's. 

African Americans had little opportunity to better 
themselves economically. Some laws prohibited them 





Library of Congress 


George Washington Carver, cen- 
ter, won worldwide fame for agri- 
cultural research. He taught at 
Tuskegee (Alabama) Institute. 





Historical Pictures Service 


Booker T. Washington, princi- 
pal of Tuskegee Institute, was the 
most influential African American 
leader of the early 1900's. 


from teaching and from entering certain other business- 
es and professions. Large numbers of blacks had to take 
low-paying jobs as farm hands or servants for white em- 
ployers. Many other blacks became sharecroppers or 
tenant farmers. They rented a small plot of land and paid 
the rent with money earned from the crops. They had to 
struggle to survive, and many ran up huge debts to their 
white landlords or the town merchants. 

The rise of new black leaders. By the early 1900's, 
educator Booker T. Washington had become the most 
influential African American leader. Washington, a for- 
mer slave, had been principal of Tuskegee Institute (now 
Tuskegee University) since 1881. He urged blacks to stop 
demanding political power and social equality and to 
concentrate on economic advancement. Washington es- 
pecially encouraged blacks to practice thrift and respect 
hard labor. He asked whites to help blacks gain an edu- 
cation and make a decent living. Washington believed 
his program would lead to progress for blacks and 
would keep peace between the races. 

Many African Americans agreed with Washington's 
ideas. But many others strongly rejected them. The chief 
opposition came from W. E. B. Du Bois, a sociologist and 
historian at Atlanta University. Du Bois’ reputation rested 
on such works as The Suppression of the African Slave- 
Trade to the United States of America, 1638-1870 (1896) 
and The Souls of Black Folk (1903). 

Du Bois argued that Washington's approach would 
not achieve economic security for African Americans. In- 
stead, Du Bois felt Washington's acceptance of segrega- 
tion and the rest of his program would strengthen the 
beliefs that blacks were inferior and could be treated 
unequally. As evidence for their position, Du Bois and 
his supporters pointed to the continuing lynching of 
blacks and to the passage of additional segregation laws 
in the South. In 1905, Du Bois and other critics of Wash- 
ington met in Niagara Falls, Canada, and organized a 
campaign to protest racial discrimination. Their cam- 
paign became known as the Niagara Movement. 

Bitter hostility toward blacks erupted into several race 
riots during the early 1900's. Major riots broke out in 
Brownsville, Tex., and Atlanta, Ga., in 1906 and in Spring- 
field, IIl., in 1908. The riots alarmed many white North- 


From A Pictonal History of the Negro in America, 
by Langston Hughes and Milton Meltzer 


W.E. B. Du Bois, second from right, a sociologist and 
historian, helped lead the black struggle for equality 
during the early 1900's. He directed the publications of 
the NAACP from 1909 until 1934. 











erners as well as many blacks. In 1909, a number of 
white Northerners joined some of the blacks in the Ni- 
agara Movement to form the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). The 
NAACP vowed to fight for racial equality. The organiza- 
tion relied mainly on legal action, education, protests, 
and voter participation to pursue its goals. 

The black migration to the North. The efforts of 
new black leaders and of the NAACP did little to end the 
discrimination, police brutality, and lynchings suffered 
by Southern blacks during the early 1900s. In addition, 
Southern farmers had great crop losses because of 
floods and insect pests. All these problems persuaded 
many Southern blacks to move to the North. 

During World War [| (1914-1918), hundreds of thou- 
sands of Southern blacks migrated to the North to seek 
jobs in defense plants and other factories. The National 
Urban League, founded in New York City in 1910, 
helped the newcomers adjust to city life. Over 360,000 
African Americans served in the armed forces during 
World War }. They were put in all-black military units. 

Between 1910 and 1930, about 1 million Southern 


blacks moved to the North. Most of them quickly discov- 


ered that the North did not offer solutions to their prob- 
lems. They lacked the skills and education needed for 
the jobs they sought. Many of them had to become la- 
borers or servants and thus do the same kinds of work 
they had done in the South. Others could find no work 
at all. Numerous blacks were forced to live crowded to- 
gether in cheap, unsanitary, run-down housing. Large 
all-black slums developed in big cities throughout the 
North. The segregated housing promoted segregated 
schooling. Poverty, crime, and despair plagued the 
black communities, which became known as ghettos. 
After World War |, race relations grew increasingly 
tense in the Northern cities. The hostility partly reflected 
the growing competition for jobs and housing between 
blacks and whites. In addition, many African American 
veterans, after fighting for democracy, returned home 
with expectations of justice and equality. The mounting 
tension helped the Ku Klux Klan recruit thousands of 
members in the North. In the summer of 1918, 10 people 
were killed and 60 were injured in racial disturbances in 


African Americans 136k 


Chester and Philadelphia, Pa. A series of riots erupted in 
the summer of 1919. By the end of the year, 25 race riots 
had broken out across the country. At least 100 people 
died and many more were injured in the riots. 

The Garvey movement offered new hope for many 
African Americans deeply disturbed by the race riots of 
1918 and 1919 and the economic and social injustice 
they encountered. The movement had begun when 
Marcus Garvey founded the Universal Negro Improve- 
ment Association in Jamaica in 1914. In 1917, Garvey 
brought the movement to Harlem, a black community in 
New York City. By the mid-1920's, he had established 
more than 700 branches of the association in 38 states. 

Garvey tried to develop racial pride among blacks. 
But he doubted that their life in the United States would 
ever be much improved. As a result, Garvey urged the 
establishment of a new homeland in Africa for dissatis- 
fied black Americans. His plans collapsed, however, 
when he was sent to prison in 1925 after having been 
convicted of using the mails to commit fraud. 

The Harlem Renaissance and other achieve- 
ments. The Harlem Renaissance was an outpouring of 
African American literature chiefly in Harlem in the early 
1900's, particularly in the 1920s. It demonstrated that 
some blacks had acquired talents within American soci- 
ety which whites as well as blacks could appreciate. The 
writers drew their themes from the experiences of 
blacks in the Northern cities and the rural South. The 
best-known writers included James Weldon Johnson, 
Langston Hughes, Nella Larsen, Claude McKay, Countee 
Cullen, Jessie Redmon Fauset, and Jean Toomer. 

African American musicians also gained fame among 
whites as well as blacks during the early 1920s. A black 
bandleader named W. C. Handy, who had composed ‘St. 
Louis Blues” in 1914, became known as the father of the 
blues. Jazz grew out of black folk blues and ballads. Afri- 
can American bandleaders Louis Armstrong and Duke 
Ellington became the country’s leading jazz musicians. 

Another noted black of the early 1900's was the great 
agricultural researcher George Washington Carver. Car- 
ver created hundreds of products from peanuts, sweet 
potatoes, and other plants and revolutionized Southern 
agriculture. Other famous African Americans of the early 





1969 by fames Van Der Zee 


Marcus Garvey founded the Universal Negro Im 
provement Associalion, which worked Io creale a 
new homeland in Africa for black Americans. He 
wore a plumed hat for this parade in 1924 


Langston Hughes contrib- 
uled to the Harlem Renais- 
sance, an outpouring of black 
liwerature in the early 1900s. 


Schomburg Collection 
New York Public Libran 


UP Betmann Archne 


Duke Ellington, playing the piano in 
his scene from the movie Cabin in the 
Sky (1943), became one of the greales! 
jazz Musicians. 


136/ African Americans 


1900's included labor leader A. Philip Randolph, journal- 
ist Ida Wells-Barnett, singer Paul Robeson, dancer Bill 
Robinson, U.S. Representative Oscar DePriest of Illinois, 
runner Jesse Owens, and heavyweight boxing champi- 
ons Jack Johnson and Joe Louis. 

The Great Depression. In October 1929, a sudden, 
sharp drop in the value of stocks in the United States 
marked the beginning of a worldwide business slump 
known as the Great Depression. The depression 
brought hard times for most Americans, but especially 
for blacks. Blacks became the chief victims of job dis- 
crimination. They adopted the slogan ‘Last Hired and 
First Fired” to express their situation. 

To help ease the poverty in the ghettos, African 
Americans organized cooperative groups. These groups 
included the Colored Merchants Association in New 
York City and ‘Jobs for Negroes’ organizations in St. 
Louis, Chicago, Cleveland, and New York City. The 
groups bought food and other goods in large volume to 
get the lowest prices. They boycotted stores that had 
mostly black customers but few, if any, black workers. 

Most African Americans felt that President Herbert 
Hoover, a Republican, had done little to try to end the 
Depression. In the elections of 1932, some black voters 
deserted their traditional loyalty to the Republican Party. 
They no longer saw it as the party of Abraham Lincoln 
the emancipator but of Hoover and the Depression. In 
1936, for the first time, most African Americans sup- 
ported the Democratic Party candidate for President, 
Franklin D. Roosevelt, and helped him win reelection. 

Roosevelt called his program the New Deal. It in- 
cluded measures of reform, relief, and recovery and 
benefited many blacks. A group of blacks advised Roo- 
sevelt on the problems of African Americans. This 
group, called the Black Cabinet, included William H. 
Hastie and Mary McLeod Bethune. Hastie served as as- 
sistant solicitor in the Department of the Interior, as a 
U.S. district court judge in the Virgin Islands, and as a ci- 
vilian aide to the secretary of war. Bethune, founder of 
Bethune-Cookman College, directed the black affairs di- 
vision of a federal agency called the National Youth Ad- 
ministration. As a result of the New Deal, African Ameri- 
cans developed a strong loyalty to the Democratic Party. 





UPI Benmann Archive 


Marian Anderson sang at 
the Lincoln Memorial in 1939 
after the DAR would not let 


her sing in Constitution Hall. as the 92nd Division, above. 





Signal Corps Photo 


During World War IL, nearly 1 million Afri- 
can Americans served in the U.S. armed 
forces. Most were in such segregated units 


African Americans deeply admired President Roose- 
velts wife, Eleanor, for her stand in an incident in 1939 
involving the great concert singer Marian Anderson. 
The Daughters of the American Revolution (DAR), a pa- 
triotic organization, denied the singer permission to 
perform at Constitution Hall in Washington, D.C, be- 
cause she was black. Eleanor Roosevelt then resigned 
from the DAR and helped arrange for Anderson to sing, 
instead, at the Lincoln Memorial on Easter Sunday. Over 
75,000 blacks and whites attended the concert. 

During the early 1940's, the NAACP began to step up 
its legal campaign against racial discrimination. The 
campaign achieved a number of important victories, in- 
cluding several favorable rulings by the U.S. Supreme 
Court. In 1941, for example, the court ruled that separate 
facilities for white and black railroad passengers must 
be significantly equal. In 1944, the court declared that 
the white primary, which excluded blacks from voting in 
the only meaningful elections in the South, was uncon- 
Stitutional. 

Besides taking legal action, African Americans used 
new tactics to attack segregation in public places. In 
1943, for example, the Congress of Racial Equality 
(CORE) launched a sit-in at a Chicago restaurant. In this 
protest, blacks sat in places reserved for white people. 

World War If (1939-1945) opened up new economic 
opportunities for African Americans. Like World War I, 
it led to expanding defense-related industries and en- 
couraged many rural Southern blacks to seek jobs in 
Northern industrial cities. During the 1940's, about a mil- 
lion Southern blacks moved to the North. Discrimination 
again prevented many of them from getting work. In 
1941, blacks led by A. Philip Randolph of the Brother- 
hood of Sleeping Car Porters threatened to march in 
Washington, D.C, to protest job discrimination. Presi- 
dent Roosevelt then issued an executive order forbid- 
ding racial discrimination in defense industries. 

Nearly 1 million African Americans served in the U.S. 
armed services during World War Il, mostly in segre- 
gated units. In 1940, Benjamin O. Davis became the first 
black brigadier general in the U.S. Army. His son, Benja- 
min O. Davis, Jr., later became the first black lieutenant 
general in the Air Force. Desegregation of the armed 





UPI Bettmann Arche 


Jackie Robinson of the Brooklyn Dodgers be- 
came the first black player in modern major 
league baseball in 1947. He helped break down 
racial barriers in professional sports. 





forces began on a trial basis during the war. It became a 
permanent policy in 1948. 


The civil rights movement 


The beginning. After World War II, three major fac- 
tors encouraged the beginning of a new movement for 
civil rights. First, many African Americans had served 
with honor in the war. Black leaders pointed to the rec- 
ords of these veterans to show the injustice of racial dis- 
crimination against patriots. Second, African Americans 
in the urban North had made economic gains, increased 
their education, and registered to vote. Third, the 
NAACP had attracted many new members and received 
increased financial support from whites and blacks. It 
also included a new group of bright young lawyers. 

Rulings by the U.S. Supreme Court during the 1940's 
and 1950's brought major victories for African Ameri- 
cans. In several decisions between 1948 and 1951, the 
court ruled that separate higher education facilities for 
blacks must be equal to those for whites. Largely be- 
cause of federal court rulings, laws permitting racial dis- 
crimination in housing and recreation also began to be 
struck down. Many of these rulings came in cases 
brought by the NAACP. An increasing number of blacks 
began to move into all-white areas of Northern cities. 
Many whites then moved out of the cities to suburbs. 

The NAACP and the NAACP Legal Defense and Educa- 
tional Fund won a historic victory in 1954. That year, the 
U.S. Supreme Court ruled in the case of Brown v. Board 
of Education of Topeka that segregation in the public 
schools was in itself unequal and thus unconstitutional. 
The suit had been filed because the school board had 
not allowed a black student named Linda Brown to at- 
tend an all-white school near her home. The court's de- 
cision rejected the separate but equal ruling of 1896 and 
inspired African Americans to strike out against other 
discrimination, particularly in public places. 

Rosa Parks, a seamstress and civil rights activist in 
Montgomery, Alabama, became a symbol of African 
Americans’ bold new action to attain their civil rights. In 
1955, she was arrested for disobeying a city law that re- 
quired blacks to give up their seats when white people 
wished to sit in their seats or in the same row. Mont- 





Cart Iwasaki, 
life magazine. & Time tine 


Linda Brown was the focus of 
a 1954 case in which the U.S. 
Supreme Court outlawed segre- 
gation in public schools. 





Rosa Parks was arrested in 1955 when 
she refused to give up her seat ona 
bus in Montgomery, Alabama, to ac- 
commodate a white person. 


African Americans 136m 


gomery’s blacks protested her arrest by refusing to ride 
the buses. Their protest lasted 382 days, ending when 
the city abolished the bus law. The boycott became the 
first organized mass protest by blacks in Southern his- 
tory. It also focused national attention on its leader, Mar- 
tin Luther King, Jr.,a Montgomery Baptist minister. 

Many Southern communities acted slowly in desegre- 
gating their public schools. Governor Orval E. Faubus of 
Arkansas symbolized Southern resistance. In 1957, he 
defied a federal court order to integrate Little Rock Cen- 
tral High School. Faubus sent the Arkansas National 
Guard to prevent black students from entering the 
school, but President Dwight D. Eisenhower used fed- 
eral troops to enforce the court order. 

The growing movement. In 1957, King and other 
black Southern clergymen formed the Southern Chris- 
tian Leadership Conference (SCLC) to coordinate the 
work of civil rights groups. King urged African Ameri- 
cans to use peaceful means to achieve their goals. In 
1960, a group of black and white college students or- 
ganized the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Commit- 
tee (SNCC) to help in the civil rights movement. They 
joined with young people from the SCLC, CORE, and the 
NAACP in staging sit-ins, boycotts, marches, and free- 
dom rides (bus rides to test the enforcement of desegre- 
gation in interstate transportation). During the early 
1960s, the combined efforts of the civil rights groups 
ended discrimination in many public places, including 
restaurants, hotels, theaters, and cemeteries. 

Numerous cities and towns remained unaffected by 
the civil rights movement. African American leaders 
therefore felt the United States needed a clear, strong 
federal policy that would erase all remaining discrimina- 
tion in public places. To attract national attention to that 
need, King and such other leaders as A. Philip Randolph, 
Roy Wilkins of the NAACP, James L. Farmer of CORE, 
and Whitney M. Young, Jr., of the Urban League organ- 
ized a march in Washington, D.C, in August 1963. More 
than 200,000 people, including many whites, took part in 
what was called the March on Washington. 

A high point of the March on Washington was a stir- 
ring speech by King. King told the crowd that he had a 
dream that one day all Americans would enjoy equality 





SS as 


D EU Oe oe 
a MTBE 3OQA. CENA RAL AGH 


Larn Obsitrnk 
Arkansas Cazefte 


United States troops enforced 
a federal court order to inte- 
grate Little Rock Central High 
School in Arkansas in 1957. 


AP Wide World 


136n African Americans 


and justice. Afterward, President John F. Kennedy pro- 
posed strong laws to protect the civil rights of all U.S. 
citizens. But many people, particularly Southerners, op- 
posed such legislation. 

Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963, and 
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson became President. 
Johnson persuaded Congress to pass Kennedy's pro- 
posed laws in the Civil Rights Act of 1964. This act pro- 
hibited racial discrimination in public places and called 
for equal opportunity in employment and education. 
King won the 1964 Nobel Peace Prize for leading nonvio- 
lent demonstrations for civil rights. 

African American celebrities not directly involved 
with civil rights groups also contributed to the growing 
civil rights movement. Author James Baldwin criticized 
white Americans for their prejudice against blacks. 
Other noted African Americans who promoted civil 
rights causes included gospel singer Mahalia Jackson, 
dancer Katherine Dunham, artist Charles White, singer 
Harry Belafonte, and comedian Dick Gregory. 

Political gains. In the South, many elected officials 
and police officers refused to enforce court rulings and 
federal laws that gave blacks equality. In some cases, 
this opposition extended to the right to vote. 

In 1965, a major dispute over voting rights broke out 
in Selma, Alabama. King had gone there in January to as- 
sist African Americans seeking the right to vote. He was 
joined by many blacks and whites from throughout the 
country. In the next two months, at least three people 
were killed and hundreds were beaten as opposition to 
Kings efforts increased. But authorities continued to 
deny blacks their voting rights. In late March, King led 
about 30,000 people, guarded by federal troops, from 
Selma to the State Capitol in Montgomery. There, he de- 
manded that African Americans be given the right to 
vote without unjust restrictions. 

Largely as a result of the activities in Selma, Congress 
passed the Voting Rights Act of 1965. The act banned 
the use of a poll tax as a requirement to vote and for- 
bade major changes in Southern voting laws without ap- 
proval of the Department of Justice. In addition, it pro- 
vided for federal officials to supervise voter registration 
wherever the right to vote had been unjustly denied. 





oy. 


Pictorial Parade 


Martin Luther King, Jr., spoke to over 200,000 civil 
rights demonstrators after a march in Washington, 
D.C. in 1963. His appeal for racial equality won wide 
support for the civil rights movement. 





Author James Baldwin became 
a leading critic of racial discrimi- 
nation in the United States in the 
mid-1900's. 


The act gave the vote to thousands of Southern blacks 
who had never voted and led to a huge increase in the 
number of black elected officials. 

African Americans began to take an increasingly im- 
portant role in the national government during the mid- 
1900's. In 1950, U.S. diplomat Ralph J. Bunche became 
the first black person to win the Nobel Peace Prize. In 
1966, Robert C. Weaver became the first black Cabinet 
member as secretary of housing and urban develop- 
ment. In 1967, Thurgood Marshall became the first black 
justice on the Supreme Court. In 1969, Shirley Chisholm 
of New York became the first black woman to serve in 
the U.S. House of Representatives. 

Economic and social progress. !n 1965, President 
Johnson declared that it was not enough simply to end 
de jure segregation—that is, separation of the races by 
law. It was also necessary to eliminate de facto 
segregation—that is, racial separation in fact and based 
largely on custom. Johnson called for programs of “af- 
firmative action’ that would offer blacks equal opportu- 
nity with whites in areas where discrimination had a 
long history and still existed. Many businesses and 
schools then began to adopt affirmative action pro- 
grams. These programs, some of which were ordered 
by the federal government, gave hundreds of thousands 
of blacks new economic and educational opportunities. 

The new economic opportunities enabled many Afri- 
can Americans to increase their incomes significantly 
during the mid-1900's. This development, in turn, greatly 
expanded the black middle class. 

Racial barriers fell in several professional sports and 
in the arts during the mid-1900s. In 1947, Jackie Robin- 
son of the Brooklyn Dodgers became the first black 
player in modern major league baseball. He had an out- 
standing career and became a national hero. Other 
black sports heroes of the mid-1900's included Willie 
Mays, Henry Aaron, and Frank Robinson in baseball; Jim 
Brown and Gale Sayers in football; and Oscar Robert- 
son, Bill Russell, and Wilt Chamberlain in basketball. In 
1966, Russell became the first black head coach in major 
league professional sports. He was named coach of the 
Boston Celtics of the National Basketball Association. 

In the arts, Gwendolyn Brooks became the first Afri- 





AP Wide World 


United Press int 


Black Muslim leaders of the 
1950's and the 1960's included 

Malcolm X, /eft, and Elijah Mu- 
hammad, rigAt. 


can American to win a Pulitzer Prize. She 1eceived the 
award in 1950 for a collection of poems titled Annie 
Allen. \n 1955, Marian Anderson became the first black 
to sing a leading role with the Metropolitan Opera in 
New York City. In 1958, Alvin Ailey formed one of the 
finest dance companies in the United States. Sidney Poi- 
tier won the 1963 Academy Award for best actor for his 
work in Lilies of the Field. 

Unrest in the cities. Since the start of the civil rights 
movement, various court decisions, laws, and protests 
had clearly removed the great legal injustices long suf- 
fered by African Americans. But many blacks continued 
to be discriminated against in jobs, law enforcement, 
and housing. They saw little change in the long-held rac- 
ist attitudes of numerous white Americans. 

During the 1960's, unrest among ghetto blacks ex- 
ploded into a series of riots that shook the nation. The 
first riot occurred in Harlem in the summer of 1964. In 
August 1965, 34 people died and almost 900 were in- 
jured in an outburst in the black ghetto of Watts in Los 
Angeles. During the next two summers, major riots 
erupted in numerous cities across the nation. 

The race riots puzzled many people because they 
came at a time when African Americans had made tre- 
mendous gains in the campaign for full freedom. In 
1967, President Johnson established a commission 
headed by Governor Otto Kerner of Illinois to study the 
causes of the outbreaks. In its March 1968 report, the 
Kerner Commission put much of the blame on racial 
prejudice of whites. It stated that the average black 
American was still poorly housed, clothed, paid, and ed- 
ucated and still often suffered from segregation, police 
abuse, and other forms of discrimination. The commis- 
sion recommended vast programs to improve ghetto 
conditions and called for greater changes in the racial 
attitudes of white Americans. 

Less than a month after the Kerner Commission re- 
port was issued, race riots broke out in at least 100 black 
communities across the nation. The rioting followed the 
assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr., on April 4 in 
Memphis, Tenn. James Earl Ray, a white drifter, was con- 
victed of the crime and sentenced to 99 years in prison. 
King’s murder helped President Johnson persuade Con- 





John Matmin os Angeles Times 


A riot in Watts, a black neighborhood in Los Ange- 
les, shocked the nation in 1965. The California Na- 
tional Guard, above, helped curb the outburst, which 
led to 34 deaths and about $40 million in damage. 





Thurgood Marshall became the 
first black associate justice of the 
Supreme Court of the United States 
in 1967. 


African Americans 1360 


gress to approve the Civil Rights Act of 1968. This law, 
also known in part as the Fair Housing Act of 1968, pro- 
hibited racial discrimination in the sale and rental of 
most of the housing in the nation. 

Black militancy. During the height of the civil rights 
movement, some blacks had charged it was almost im- 
possible to change white racial attitudes. They saw the 
movement as meaningless and urged blacks to live 
apart from whites and, in some cases, to use violence to 
preserve their rights. Groups promoting these ideas in- 
cluded the Black Muslims, the Black Panthers, and mem- 
bers of the Black Power Movement. 

The Black Muslims had been led since 1934 by Elijah 
Muhammad, who called whites “devils.” He also criti- 
cized racial integration and urged formation of an all- 
black nation within the United States. But the most elo- 
quent spokesman for the Black Muslims during the 
1950's and 1960's was Malcolm X. Malcolm wanted to 
unite black people throughout the world. He was assas- 
sinated in 1965 after forming a new organization to pur- 
sue his goal. Three black men, at least two of whom 
were Black Muslims, were convicted of the murder. 

The Black Panther Party was founded in 1966. Its two 
main founders, Huey P. Newton and Bobby Seale, had 
been inspired by Malcolm X. At first, the party favored 
violent revolution as the only way to end police actions 
that many blacks considered brutal and to provide op- 
portunities for blacks in jobs and other areas. The Pan- 
thers had many clashes with police and others. Later, the 
party became less militant and worked to achieve full 
employment for blacks and other peaceful goals. 

The Black Power Movement developed in 1966 after 
James H. Meredith, the first African American to attend 
the University of Mississippi, was shot during a march. 
The shooting and other racial violence made Stokely 
Carmichael, H. Rap Brown, and other members of the 
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee doubt the 
sincerity of white support for black rights. 

Carmichael and other African Americans called for a 
campaign to achieve Black Power. They urged blacks 
to gain political and economic control of their own com- 
munities and to reject the values of whites and form 
their own standards. They also stressed that “black is 





United Press Int ] L Atlan, Svgma 


Jesse Jackson ran for the Demo- 
cratic presidential nomination in 
1984 and 1988, drawing attention 
to minority issues. 


136p African Americans 


beautiful” and suggested that black Americans no 
longer refer to themselves as Negroes or colored peo- 
ple but as blacks, African Americans, or Afro-Americans. 


Developments since 1970 


Achievements since the 1970's include great 
progress in education and politics. Many blacks have 
won recognition in such fields as sports and the arts. 

Education gains have been significant. From 1970 to 
the early 1990's, college enrollments among African 
Americans rose from about 600,000 to about 1,300,000. 
This gain resulted in part from affirmative action pro- 
grams by predominantly white colleges and universities. 
By the early 1990's, about 13 percent of all blacks 25 
years of age or older had completed college. About 
three-fourths of that group had finished high school. 

A black studies movement emerged on college cam- 
puses throughout the nation during the 1970's and drew 
increasing attention to the heritage of African Ameri- 
cans. In addition, black musical and theater groups and 
African American museums were established in almost 
every U.S. city with a fairly large black population. 

Business. The number of black-owned businesses in 
the United States increased from about 190,000 to about 
620,000 between 1970 and the mid-1990's. About 95 per- 
cent of these companies were small, one-owner firms. 

Politics. The Voting Rights Act of 1965 led to the re- 
moval of restrictions on voting in most places. As a re- 
sult, African Americans were able to help elect a greater 
number of blacks to public offices. In 1973, Thomas 
Bradley was elected the first black mayor of Los Ange- 
les. That same year, Maynard H. Jackson was elected the 
first black mayor of a major Southern city, Atlanta, Geor- 
gia. In 1983, Harold Washington became the first black 
mayor of Chicago. David N. Dinkins was elected the first 
black mayor of New York City in 1989. That same year, 

L. Douglas Wilder became the first black to be elected 
governor of a U.S. state when he was elected governor 
of Virginia. In 1991, Sharon Pratt Dixon became the first 
black woman mayor of a large American city. She was 
elected mayor of Washington, D.C. Later that year, she 
married and changed her name to Sharon Pratt Kelly. In 
1992, Carol Moseley-Braun became the first black wom- 





© Trippett, Sipa Press 
Colin Powell became the first black 
chairman for the Joint Chiefs of Staff in 
1989. In 2001, he became the first African 
American secretary of state. 1992. 


Carol Moseley-Braun, center, of Illinois, 
became the first black woman elected to 
the U.S. Senate when she won a Seat in 


an to win election to the United States Senate. 

African Americans gained considerable influence in 
the Administration of Jimmy Carter, who was president 
of the United States from 1977 to 1981. Under him, An- 
drew Young became the first black U.S. ambassador to 
the United Nations (UN). Carter named Patricia Roberts 
Harris secretary of housing and urban development. She 
was the first black woman to hold a Cabinet post. 

Sports. Many African Americans have become fa- 
mous sports figures. Black sports heroes include foot- 
ball players Walter Payton and Jerry Rice; basketball 
players Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Magic Johnson, Julius 
Erving, and Michael Jordan; baseball stars Reggie Jack- 
son, Tony Gwynn, and Frank Thomas; boxing champion 
Muhammad Ali, and track stars Carl Lewis, Florence 
Griffith Joyner, and Jackie Joyner-Kersee. Frank Robinson 
became the first black manager of a major league base- 
ball team when he was named manager of the Cleve- 
land Indians in 1974. In 1989, Bill White became the first 
black to head a major U.S. sports league when he was 
named president of baseball’s National League. In 1995, 
Lenny Wilkens, head coach of the Atlanta Hawks, set a 
National Basketball Association record for career 
regular-season coaching victories with 939. In 1997, 
Tiger Woods became the first golfer with African Ameri- 
can ancestry to win the Masters Tournament. 

The arts. African Americans won recognition in all 
major art forms during the late 1900's and early 2000's. 
Leading writers included Maya Angelou, who received 
praise for her autobiography and her poetry. Alice 
Walker won a Pulitzer Prize in 1983 for her novel The 
Color Purple. Rita Dove served as poet laureate of the 
United States from 1993 to 1995. Toni Morrison, whose 
novel Beloved earned a Pulitzer Prize in 1988, received 
the Nobel Prize for literature in 1993. Plays by August 
Wilson won the Pulitzer Prize in 1987 and 1990. George 
C. Wolfe emerged as an outstanding director of plays. 

In motion pictures, African American stars included 
Halle Berry, Morgan Freeman, Whoopi Goldberg, Eddie 
Murphy, and Denzel Washington. Filmmaker Spike Lee 
won praise for Do the Right Thing (1989) and Malcolm X 
(1992), as did filmmaker John Singleton for Boyz N the 
Hood (1991), Many blacks starred on television. “The 





Jan Collsioo, Pressens Bild 


Toni Morrison received the Nobel Prize 
for literature in Stockholm, Sweden, in 
1993. A novelist, she had won a Pulitzer 
Prize for her novel Beloved in 1988. 


© Ralf-Finn Hestoft, SABA 








Cosby Show,’ featuring Bill Cosby, was a top-rated TV 
program in the United States from 1984 to 1992. 

In music, opera singers Kathleen Battle and Jessye 
Norman became internationally recognized. Celebrated 
jazz musicians included Geri Allen, Roy Hargrove, Chris- 
tian McBride, and Wynton Marsalis. Singer Michael 
Jackson became a superstar in popular music. His album 
Thriller (1982) sold over 45 million copies—more than 
any other album in history. African American performers 
used musical essays in verse called rap music to de- 
scribe inner-city life. Leading ‘rappers’ included Ice-T, 
Public Enemy, Run-DMC, and Queen Latifah. In 1996, 
George Walker became the first African American com- 
poser to win the Pulitzer Prize for music. He won for a 
work he wrote for voice and orchestra. 

Other achievements. |n 1983, Guion S. Bluford, Jr., be- 
came the first black U.S. astronaut to go into space. Mae 
C. Jemison became the first African American woman 
astronaut to do so in 1992. United States Army General 
Colin L Powell was named the first black chairman of 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff in 1989. In 2001, Powell became 
the first African American secretary of state. 

Disappointments and controversy. Several devel- 
opments that began in the late 1970's have lessened the 
hopes of many African Americans for continued eco- 
nomic and social progress. For example, Supreme Court 
decisions from the 1970's to the 1990's sharply limited 
the scope of affirmative action programs. In 1978, the 
court ruled that racial quotas could not be used in ad- 
mitting students to colleges and universities. In 1995, it 
ruled that federal programs requiring preferences for 
certain individuals based on their race are unconstitu- 
tional unless preferences are designed to make up for 
specific instances of past discrimination. This meant that 
affirmative action could no longer be used to counteract 
racial discrimination by society as a whole. In 1989, the 
court had made a similar decision regarding state and 
local affirmative action programs. 

The 1995 ruling was supported by Supreme Court Jus- 
tice Clarence Thomas, an African American who re- 
placed Thurgood Marshall on the court when Marshall 
retired in 1991. Thomas had long been an outspoken op- 
ponent of affirmative action. He based his opposition on 
the principie that the government may not treat individ- 
uals differently based on their race. Many other blacks, 
however, continued to believe that broad affirmative ac- 
tion programs were needed to help minorities over- 
come past discrimination and eventually compete on an 
equal basis with whites. 

In 1989, a study by the National Research Council indi- 
cated that the standard of living for blacks continued to 
lag far behind that for whites. The study showed that in 
1984, the average income for blacks was only 57 percent 
of the average for whites. This percentage was the same 
as in 1971. The study also indicated that the difference in 
unemployment rates for blacks and whites had widened 
since the early 1970's. In the late 1980's, the rate for 
blacks was about 2 | times that for whites. The study 
also showed that since the 1960's, there had been al- 
most no progress in housing integration. . 

By 2000, the income gap between blacks and whites 
had narrowed somewhat. The average income for 
blacks in 2000 was 64 percent of that for whites. Howev- 
er, about 22 percent of black families still had incomes 


African Americans 136q 


below the government's official poverty line, and the 
jobless rate for blacks was 2 } times that for whites. 

In 1991, Rodney G. King, a black motorist, was 
stopped after a pursuit and beaten by four white police 
officers in Los Angeles. As a result of the incident, the 
officers faced criminal charges, including assault. Al- 
though the beating was recorded on videotape, a jury 
declared three officers not guilty of all charges in 1992. 
One officer was acquitted of all charges except one, on 
which the jury was indecisive. This charge was later 
dropped. Many blacks felt the trial proved the U.S. court 
system treated blacks unfairly. The verdict sparked riot- 
ing in Los Angeles and other U.S. cities. Fifty-three peo- 
ple died and about 2,400 were injured in the Los Ange- 
les riots. Later that year, all four officers were indicted 
under federal laws for violating King’s civil rights. Two 
of the officers were convicted in 1993. 

Developments in education. In the 1980's and 
1990's, courses of study based on an approach called 
Afrocentrism gained popularity. These programs aim to 
encourage awareness of African culture and history and 
pride in the richness of African heritage. Most of the 
programs also emphasize past and present accomplish- 
ments of black people. Supporters of Afrocentrism be- 
lieve the approach builds the self-esteem of African 
American children and improves their success in 
school. Opponents say that some Afrocentric teaching 
materials are based on faulty scholarship. 

Another trend is the use of a variation of English 
known as black English, Ebonics, or African American 
vernacular English. Characteristics of black English in- 
clude extensive use of the verb to beand omissions of 
verbs. Some language experts think that some patterns 
of Ebonics are based on west African languages. 

The use of black English in schools gained national at- 
tention in 1996 and 1997 when the Oakland, California, 
school district adopted and later dropped a plan to rec- 
ognize it as a language. Some schools employ it as an 
aid in the teaching of standard English. Proponents of 
black English say that African American students learn 
better when it is used in this manner. Opponents of 
black English claim that it could discourage students 
from learning standard English. 

Black politics today. Many African American leaders 
today stress the use of political means to solve the prob- 
lems of blacks. They urge more African Americans to 
vote and to run for public office. 

In 1984, Jesse L Jackson, a black civil rights leader and 
Baptist minister, waged a strong campaign to register 
new black voters and win the Democratic presidential 
nomination. Jackson's bid failed, but he became a hero 
to most African Americans. He made an even stronger 
run for the nomination in 1988. Although his bid again 
failed, Jackson gained the support of more convention 
delegates than any other candidate except Michael S. 
Dukakis, who won the nomination. 

In the early 2000's, blacks held about 8,900 of some 
500,000 elective offices in the nation. Thirty-eight served 
in the U.S. House of Representatives, including two non- 
voting delegates. None served in the Senate. 

Many African Americans feared that Supreme Court 
rulings would reduce the number of blacks serving in 
the House. In these rulings, the court declared that race 
could not be used as the main factor in drawing the 


136r African Americans 


boundaries of congressional districts. An increasing 
number of states had created black-majority districts by 
redrawing such boundaries. Many of the new districts 
had elected blacks to the House. 
In the 1990's, many African Americans focused on 
building up black communities, particularly in cities. 
Many reformers supported self-help programs to deal 
with crime, drug abuse, poverty, and substandard edu- 
cation. In 1995, hundreds of thousands of black men 
marched in Washington, D.C, to declare their determi- 
nation to improve conditions in black communities. The 
event, called the Million Man March, was organized 
chiefly by Louis Farrakhan, leader of the Nation of Islam, 
a Black Muslim group. The Million Woman March, a 
similar event, drew several hundred thousand black 
women to Philadelphia in 1997. It was organized chiefly 
by Phile Chionesu and Asia Coney. In 2000, Farrakhan 
led another march in Washington, the Million Family 
March, with a focus on family unity. 


Related articles in World Book include: 


Bond, Julian 
Bradley, Thomas 
Brooke, Edward 
William 
Brown, Jesse 
Brown, Ronald H. 
Bruce, Blanche K. 
Chisholm, Shirley 
Coleman, William 
Thaddeus, Jr. 
Dinkins, David 
Espy, Mike 
Harris, Patricia R. 
Hastie, William H. 


Political figures 


Hatcher, Richard 
Gordon 
Jordan, Barbara C. 
Kelly, Sharon P. 
Mfume, Kweisi 
Moseley-Braun, 
Carol 
O!Leary, Hazel R. 
Pierce, Samuel 
Riley, Jr. 
Pinchback, P. B. S. 
Powell, Adam C, 
Jr. 
Powell, Colin L 


Alton Hornsby, Jr. 


Price, Hugh 
Bernard 

Revels, Hiram R. 

Stokes, Carl B. 

Sullivan, Louis W. 

Washington, 
Harold 

Watts, J.C, Jr. 

Weaver, Robert C 

Wilder, L Douglas 

Young, Andrew J., 
fe 

Young, Coleman 
A. 


Athletes and sports leaders 


Aaron, Henry 
Abdul-Jabbar, 
Kareem 
Ali, Muhammad 
Ashe, Arthur 
Barkley, Charles 
Baylor, Elgin 
Brown, Jim 
Bryant, Kobe 
Chamberlain, Wilt 
Erving, Julius 
Gibson, Althea 
Gibson, Josh 
Griffey, Ken, Jr. 
Henderson, Rickey 
Iverson, Allen 


Abernathy, Ralph 
D 


Carmichael, 
Stokely 
Chavis, Benjamin 
Franklin, Jr. 
Du Bois, W. E. B. 
Evers, Medgar 
Evers-Williams, 
Myrlie 
Farmer, James L 
Gregory, Dick 


Bethune, Mary McLeod 


Cary, Mary Ann S. 


Johnson, Jack 
Johnson, Magic 
Joyner-Kersee, 
Jackie 
Jordan, Michael 
Leonard, Sugar 
Ray 
Lewis, Carl 
Louis, Joe 
Mays, Willie 
Olajuwon, Ha- 
keem 
O'Neal, Shaquille 
Owens, Jesse 
Paige, Satchel 
Payton, Walter 


Civil rights leaders 


Hamer, Fannie Lou 
Hooks, Benjamin 


Jackson, Jesse L 
Jacob, John E. 
Jordan, Vernon E. 
King, Coretta Scott 
King, Martin 
Luther, Jr. 
Malcolm X 
MckKissick, Floyd 
B. 


Educators and scholars 
Clark, Kenneth B. 


Rice, Jerry 
Robertson, Oscar 
Robinson, Eddie 
Robinson, Frank 
Robinson, Jackie 
Robinson, Sugar 
Ray 
Rudolph, Wilma 
Russell, Bill 
Sanders, Deion 
Simpson, O. J. 
Tyson, Mike 
White, Bill 
Williams, Serena 
Williams, Venus 
Woods, Tiger 


Meredith, James 
H. 

Parks, Rosa Louise 

Randolph, A. 
Philip 

Rustin, Bayard 

Terrell, Mary C 

Wells-Barnett, Ida 

White, Walter F. 

Wilkins, Roy 

Young, Whitney 
Moore, Jr. 


Franklin, John Hope 


Frazier, Edward F. 
Hope, John 
Johnson, Charles S. 
Locke, Alain L 


Mays, Benjamin E. 
Moton, Robert R. 


Nabrit, James M., Jr. 


Quarles, Benjamin 


Washington, 
Booker T. 

Woodson, Carter 
G: 


Jazz musicians and singers 


Armstrong, Louis 
Basie, Count 
Bechet, Sidney 
Coltrane, John W. 
Davis, Miles 
Ellington, Duke 
Fitzgerald, Ella 
Gillespie, Dizzy 
Hampton, Lionel 


Hancock, Herbie 
Handy, W. C. 
Hawkins, Coleman 
Henderson, 
Fletcher 
Hines, Earl 
Holiday, Billie 
Joplin, Scott 
Lewis, John A. 


Marsalis, Wynton 
Monk, Thelonious 
Morton, Jelly Roll 
Parker, Charlie 
Smith, Bessie 
Tatum, Art 
Vaughan, Sarah 
Waller, Fats 
Young, Lester W. 


Other singers and entertainers 


Ailey, Alvin 
Aldridge, Ira 
Anderson, Marian 
Baker, Josephine 
Belafonte, Harry 
Berry, Chuck 
Berry, Halle 
Brown, James 
Burleigh, Harry T. 
Charles, Ray 
Cole, Nat “King” 
Cosby, Bill 


Attucks, Crispus 

Christophe, Henri 

Davis, Benjamin 
O., Jr. 


Banneker, Benjamin 
Carver, George W. 
Drew, Charles R. 


Angelou, Maya 

Baldwin, James 

Baraka, Amiri 

Bontemps, Arna 
W. 

Brooks, Gwendo- 
lyn 

Chesnutt, Charles 
Waddell 

Cleaver, Eldridge 

Cullen, Countee 

Dove, Rita 


Abbott, Robert S. 
Allen, Richard 
Bearden, Romare 
Beckwourth, 
James 
Bland, James A. 
Bluford, Guion 
Stewart, Jr. 
Bunche, Ralph J. 
Cuffe, Paul 
Divine, Father 
Douglass, Freder- 
ick 
Du Sable, Jean 
Baptiste Point 
Estevanico 
Farrakhan, Louis 
Forten, James 
Gabriel 


Dunham, Kath- 
erine 
Franklin, Aretha 
Gaye, Marvin 
Hayes, Roland 
Horne, Lena 
Jackson, Mahalia 
Jackson, Michael 
King, B. B. 
Lee, Spike 
Maynor, Dorothy 
Mitchell, Arthur 


Military figures 


Delany, Martin R. 

Dessalines, Jean- 
Jacques 

James, Daniel, Jr. 


Scientists 


Poitier, Sidney 
Price, Leontyne 
Robeson, Paul 
Robinson, Bill 
Turner, Tina 
Washington, 
Denzel 
Waters, Ethel 
Waters, Muddy 
Williams, Bert 
Winfrey, Oprah 
Wonder, Stevie 


Miller, Dorie 

Salem, Peter 

Toussaint 
L’‘Ouverture 


Julian, Percy L 
Lawless, Theodore K. 
Williams, Daniel Hale 


Writers 


Dunbar, Paul L 
Ellison, Ralph 
Giovanni, Nikki 
Haley, Alex 
Hamilton, Virginia 
Hansberry, 
Lorraine 
Harper, Frances 


Himes, Chester 
Hughes, Langston 


Other biographies 


Garvey, Marcus 
Hall, Prince 
Healy, James A. 
Henson, Matthew 
A. 
Jemison, Mae C 
Johnson, John H. 
Jones, Absalom 
Latimer, Lewis H. 
Lawrence, Jacob 
Love, Nat 
Marino, Eugene A. 
Marshall, Thur- 
good 
Matzeliger, Jan E. 
McCoy, Elijah 
Morgan, Garrett A. 
Muhammad, Elijah 
Pickett, Bill 


Hurston, Zora N. 
Johnson, James 
Weldon 
McKay, Claude 
Morrison, Toni 
Taylor, Mildred D. 
Toomer, Jean 
Walker, Alice 
Wheatley, Phillis 
Wilson, August 
Wright, Richard 


Pippin, Horace 
Rillieux, Norbert 
Rowan, Carl T. 
Russwurm, John B. 
Smalls, Robert 
Still, William Grant 
Sullivan, Leon H. 
Tanner, Henry O. 
Thomas, Clarence 
Truth, Sojourner 
Tubman, Harriet 
Turner, Nat 
Vesey, Denmark 
Walker, David 
Walker, Madam 
Cc}: 
Woods, Granville 
if 


Abolition 
movement 
Amistad Rebellion 
Black codes 
Black Seminole 
Brown v. Board of 
Education of 
Topeka 
Buffalo Soldiers 
Carpetbaggers 
Civil Rights Act of 
1964 


Association for the Study of 
African-American Life and 


History 


Black Caucus, Congressional 


Black Panther Party 


Congress of Racial Equality 


History 


Civil War (Blacks 
and the war) 
Dred Scott 
Decision 
Emancipation 
Proclamation 
Freedmen’'s 
Bureau 
Grandfather clause 
Jim Crow 
Ku Klux Klan 
Lynching 


Organizations 


Missouri 
Compromise 
Niagara 
Movement 
Proslavery 
movement 
Reconstruction 
Scalawags 
Scottsboro Case 
Slavery 
Underground 
railroad 


National Medical Association 
Southern Christian Leader- 


ship Conference 


Student Nonviolent Coordi- 


nating Committee 


United Negro College Fund 


National Association for the Ad- Urban League 
vancement of Colored People 


African Methodist Episcopal 


Church 


African Methodist Episcopal 


Zion Church 
Black Muslims 
Nation of Islam 


African American lit- 
erature 

American literature 
(The Harlem Re- 
naissance; The 
black experience; 
Works by minori- 
ty writers) 

Black History Month 

Blues 

Bradford, Roark 

Civil rights 


Religion 


National Baptist Convention, 


U.S.A., Inc. 


National Baptist Convention 


of America, Inc. 
National Primitive Baptist 
Convention in the U.S.A. 


Other related articles 


Cowboy (The early 
cowboys) 

Dialect 

Ethnic group 


Hampton University 


Henry, John 
Howard University 
jazz 

Kwanzaa 


Martin Luther King, 


jr., Day 
Minority group 


Outline 


1. The African background 

A. The cultural heritage 

B. Beginning of the slave trade 
ll. The years of slavery 


A. Colonial times 
B. The growth of slavery 


C. Free blacks 


Museum of 
African Ameri- 
can History 

Opera (Porgy and 
Bess) 

Races, Human 

Racism 

Rap music 

Segregation 

Sickle cell anemia 

Spingarn Medal 

Spiritual 


D. The antislavery 
movement 


E. The deepening division 
over slavery 


Ill. The end of slavery 


A. The Civil War 


A. The beginning 

B. The growing 
movement 

C. Political gains 


C. Temporary gains 
B. The first years of freedom 
IV. The growth of discrimination 
A. During the late 1800's 
B. During the early 1900's 
C. The rise of new black leaders 
D. The black migration to the North 
E. The Garvey movement 
F. The Harlem Renaissance and 
other achievements 
G. The Great Depression 
H. World War II (1939-1945) 
V. The civil rights movement 


D. Economic and social 


progress 
FE. Unrest in the cities 
F. Black militaney 


Vi. Developments since 1970 


African hunting dog 136s 


A. Achievements 

B. Disappointments and controversy 
C. Developments in education 

D. Black politics today 


Questions 


When did the first black African slaves arrive in the American 
Colonies? 

What were the achievements of Harriet Tubman, George Wash- 
ington Carver, and Thurgood Marshall? 

How did the Voting Rights Act of 1965 help African Americans? 

What was the Emancipation Proclamation? 

When was slavery abolished in the United States? 

Why did African American leaders organize the March on 
Washington in 1963? 

On slave ships, what was /oose packing? Tight packing? 

How did the cotton gin contribute to the growth of slavery in 
the United States? 

How did the United States government help the freed slaves af- 
ter the Civil War? 

What was the “separate but equal doctrine?” _ 

What was the Harlem Renaissance? 


Additional resources 


Level 

Altman, Susan. Encyclopedia of African-American Heritage. 2nd 
ed., Facts on File, 2000. 

Katz, William L Black Pioneers. Simon & Schuster, 1999. 

Kranz, Rachel, and Koslow, P. J. The Biographical Dictionary of 
African Americans. Facts on File, 1999. 

Patrick, Diane. The New York Public Library Amazing African 
American History. Wiley, 1998. 


Level Il 

Appiah, Kwame A., and Gates, H. L, jr., eds. Africana: The Ency- 
clopedia of the African and African American Experience. Ba- 
sic Bks., 1999. 

Gates, Henry L, Ir., and West, Cornel. The African-American Cen- 
tury: How Black Americans Have Shaped Our Country. Free 
Pr., 2000. 

The New York Public Library African American Desk Reference. 
Wiley, 1999. 

Salzman, Jack, and others, eds. Encyclopedia of African-Ameri- 
can Culture and History. 5 vols. Macmillan Lib. Reference, 
1996. Supplement. 2000. 


African hunting dog is a wild dog known for its 
large, round ears and sparse, tricolored coat. This coat 
consists of irregular patches of black, brown, and white 
fur. The dog also has long legs, a deep chest, and pow- 
erful jaws and teeth. An aduli weighs from 45 to 67 





Len Rue. fr. Animals Animals 


The African hunting dog is an endangered species. 


136t African lion hound 


pounds (20 to 30 kilograms) and stands 24 to 30 inches 
(60 to 75 centimeters) tall at the shoulders. 

African hunting dogs usually live in packs of about 10 
to 40 animals. A dominant male and female, who form a 
breeding pair, lead each pack The dominant female 
gives birth in a den to a litter of 6 to 16 pups. The pack 
assists in grooming, feeding, and protecting the litter. 
African hunting dogs usually hunt gazelles and ante- 
lope, but they may also kill zebras and gnus. They hunt 
during the day in packs, often surrounding their victim 
and chasing it until it is exhausted. 

These dogs once roamed in large numbers through- 
out much of Africa. Today, however, they are an endan- 
gered species. Only a few thousand dogs remain, most- 
ly on wildlife parks and reserves in eastern and southern 
Africa. Increasing human population, disease, competi- 
tion from hyenas, and other factors have greatly re- 
duced the dogs population. Duane A Schlitter 

Scientific classification. The African hunting dog belongs to 
the dog family, Canidae. Its scientific name is Lycaon pictus. 
African lion hound. See Rhodesian ridgeback. 
African Methodist Episcopal Church (A.M.E.) is 
one of the largest Methodist denominations in the Unit- 
ed States. It was founded by African American Method- 
ists who withdrew in 1787 from St George Methodist 
Episcopal Church in Philadelphia to protest segregation. 
Blacks then made up a large percentage of the Metho- 
dists in the United States. Two free blacks, Richard Allen 
and Absalom Jones, led the withdrawal. The church 
name was chosen to indicate it was formed by people of 
African descent. But the church has never had a policy 
of discrimination and has members of all races. 

Twenty bishops serve the church in the 50 states, Can- 
ada, 14 African countries, the Caribbean, and South 
America. The church operates six senior colleges and 
two junior colleges. Critically reviewed by the AM.E. Church 

See also Allen, Richard. 

African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church 
(A.M.E. Zion) is a large Methodist denomination in the 
United States. It was formed in 1796 by a group of 
African Americans who withdrew from the John Street 
Methodist Episcopal Church in New York City. The John 
Street church had both white and black members. Many 
leaders of the abolitionist movement of the 1800's were 
members of the A.M.E. Zion Church. They included Har- 
riet Tubman, Sojourner Truth, and Frederick Douglass. 

A general conference is the church's supreme admin- 
istrative body. Between meetings of the conference, the 
church is administered by the Board of Bishops. The de- 
nomination operates Livingstone College in Salisbury, 
North Carolina, and two junior colleges. Its missionaries 
serve in North and South America, Africa, and the Car- 
ibbean region. Critically reviewed by the AM.E. Zion Church 
African National Congress (ANC) is a political party 
in South Africa. It played a major role in winning politi- 
cal and civil rights for the country’s blacks, who make up 
about three-fourths of the population. Until 1994, South 
African law denied them the right to vote in national 
elections and to participate in the national government 
Most ANC members are black, though whites, Asians, 
and people of mixed ancestry are also members. 

The ANC was founded in 1912 by South African 
blacks to defend their political rights. In 1948, the South 
African government started a policy of rigid racial segre- 


gation called apartheid. Young ANC members, led by 
lawyer Nelson Mandela, began to resist the govern- 
ment, chiefly through civil disobedience. In 1960, the 
government outlawed the ANC. The ANC then began a 
policy of violent resistance to apartheid. Numerous 
members, including Mandela, were imprisoned. Some 
were killed or exiled. Many nations opposed apartheid, 
and South Africa grew isolated in the world community. 

In February 1990, South Africa legalized the ANC and 
released Mandela and other ANC leaders from prison. 
In May 1990, the ANC and the government began talks 
aimed at giving nonwhites the same rights to vote and 
participate in government that whites had. In August, 
the ANC declared it would abandon the use of violence. 
In 1991, the government repealed the last of the laws 
that formed the legal basis of apartheid. 

In 1994, South Africa held its first national elections in 
which blacks were allowed to vote. The ANC won a ma- 
jority of seats in the new National Assembly. The Assem- 
bly, in turn, elected Mandela president of South Africa. 
In elections held in 1999, the ANC again won a majority 
of seats in the Assembly, which then elected ANC leader 
Thabo Mbeki president of South Africa. Mandela had 
stepped down as head of the ANC in 1997 and had re- 
tired as South Africa's president in 1999. Bruce Fetter 

See also Apartheid; Mandela, Nelson; Mbeki, Thabo; 
Xhosa. 

African Union (AU) is an organization that works to 
achieve greater political, social, and economic coopera- 
tion among African governments and peoples. The AU 
consists of 52 independent countries and a government- 
in-exile. The AU replaced a previous group, the Organi- 
zation of African Unity (OAU), in 2002 (see Organization 
of African Unity). The structure of the AU is to be similar 
to that of the European Union (see European Union). 


Members of the African Union 


Algeria Libya 

Angola Madagascar 

Benin Malawi 

Botswana Mali 

Burkina Faso Mauritania 
Burundi Mauritius 
Cameroon Mozambique 

Cape Verde Namibia 

Central African Republic Niger 

Chad Nigeria 

Comoros Rwanda 

Congo (Brazzaville) Saharawi Arab Democratic 
Congo (Kinshasa) Republic” 5 
Céte d'Ivoire Sao Tomé and Pancte # 
Djibouti Senegal a ’ 
Egypt Seychelles a 
Equatorial Guinea Sierra Leone | 
Eritrea Somalia 

Ethiopia South Africa F 
Gabon Sudan 

Gambia Swaziland 

Ghana Tanzania 

Guinea Togo 
Guinea-Bissau Tunisia | 
Kenya Uganda 

Lesotho Zambia 

Liberia Zimbabwe 


“The Saharawi Arab Democratic Rept 1s a government-in-eule that was formed by the 
Polisano Front, an organization seeking independence for the northwest African termtory of 
Wester Sahara 





OAU leaders signed the Constitutive Act of the Afri- 
can Union in 2000. The act entered into force in 2001, 
and the AU officially replaced the OAU on July 9, 2002. 
The act outlines several AU objectives. These include 
working toward further political and economic integra- 
tion of Africa; defending the independence of member 
states; promoting peace, cooperation, security, and sta- 
bility in Africa; promoting democratic principles and hu- 
man rights; raising the living standards of Africa's peo- 
ple; encouraging scientific and technological research; 
and working to eradicate diseases and promote good 
health. The act calls for participation of African peoples 
in AU activities. It also says the AU will reject unconstitu- 
tional changes of government in African countries. 

The AU's supreme body is the Assembly of the Union, 
which consists of the member countries’ heads of state 
and heads of government or their recognized represent- 
atives. It will meet at least once a year. An Executive 
Council, made up of ministers of foreign affairs and oth- 
er authorities representing the member states, will 
make administrative decisions on behalf of the Assem- 
bly. The AU has a peace and security council that is 
modeled after the United Nations (UN) Security Council. 
The AU also will include a Pan-African Parliament, a 
Court of Justice, financial institutions, and a number of 
other administrative bodies. The headquarters of the AU 
are in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Mammo Muchie 
African violet, also called Saintpaulia, is a tropical 
plant with beautiful flowers and heart-shaped, fuzzy 
leaves. !t is not a true violet. A native of Africa, it is wide- 
ly cultivated as a house 
plant. It thrives in moder- 
ate temperatures and soil 
rich in humus (decayed 
matter). The African violet 
grows from 3 to 5 inches 
(8 to 13 centimeters) tall. 

The flowers, up to } 
inch (2.5 centimeters) 
across, grow in clusters of 
three or more on slender 
stalks. They range in color 
from white to pink to vio- 
let. The name Saintpaulia 
comes from Baron Walter 
von Saint Paul-lllaire, a 
German nobleman who discovered the plant in 1892. 

Thomas B. Croat 

Scientific classification. African violet belongs to the gesne- 
ria family, Gesneriaceae. It is classified as Saintpaulia ionantha. 
Afrikaners, af ruh KAH nuhrz, are people of Dutch, 
German, or French ancestry who live in South Africa. 
Most Afrikaners are of Dutch descent The first Afrika- 
ners were colonists sent to South Africa in 1652 by the 
Dutch East India Company, a trading firm. Many of the 
colonists became farmers. Afrikaners are also called 
Boers (pronounced bawrz/ Boeris a Dutch term mean- 
ing farmer. Afrikaners speak the Afrikaans language, 
which is derived from Dutch. 

The British occupied the colony the Afrikaners found- 
ed in 1795, but withdrew in 1802. They seized the land 
again in 1806 and held it. In 1836, some Afrikaners left 
the colony to gain freedom from British rule. They 
moved northeast into lands that became known as Natal, 


© Derek Fell 
African violet 





Agassi, Andre 137 


the Orange Free State, and the Transvaal. On this “Great 
Trek,” the Afrikaners faced grave dangers and hardships. 
Later, they lost to the British in the Anglo-Boer War of 
1899-1902. Today, Afrikaners outnumber people of 
British descent in South Africa. T. O. Beidelman 

See also Boer War. 
Afro-Americans. See African Americans. 
AFS Intercultural Programs is a nonprofit organi- 
zation that promotes worldwide learning and living ex- 
periences for secondary school students, young adults, 
and families. It was formerly known as the American 
Field Service. AFS is active in about 70 countries. Most 
AFS programs involve the international exchange of stu- 
dents 16 to 18 years old. The student lives with a family 
in another country for a summer or for a year and at- 
tends a local school. AFS also runs programs for young 
professionals in education, journalism, economics, 
banking, law, agriculture, and language. 

The American Field Service was founded in 1914 as a 
volunteer ambulance corps during World War I. In 1947, 
it established the exchange program for students. AFS 
adopted its present name in 1987. It has headquarters in 
New York City. Critically reviewed by AFS Intercultural Programs 
Agamemnon, 4G uh MEHM nahn, in Greek mytholo- 
gy, led the Greek army that conquered Troy in the Tro- 
jan War. Agamemnon was the king of Mycenae (or 
Argos). He married the princess Clytemnestra. Their chil- 
dren included Electra, Iphigenia, and Orestes. 

Agamemnon assembled the Greek forces at Aulis be- 
fore sailing for Troy. But the goddess Artemis refused to 
send favorable winds because Agamemnon had offend- 
ed her. At Artemis’s command, Agamemnon sacrificed 
his daughter Iphigenia so that the army could sail for 
Troy. One version tells that Iphigenia died in the sacri- 
fice. Another tells that Artemis rescued her. 

In the last year of the Trojan War, Agamemnon an- 
gered the god Apollo because he refused to return the 
captured maiden Chryseis to her father, a priest of Apol- 
lo. As punishment, Apollo sent a plague to afflict the 
Greek army. Agamemnon then returned Chryseis but, in 
exchange, he demanded the captive maiden Briseis 
from his rival, the warrior Achilles. The bitter quarrel 
that resulted between Achilles and Agamemnon be- 
came a major theme of the Greek epic the //iad. 

After Troy fell, Agamemnon returned to Mycenae 
with the Trojan princess Cassandra as his captive. Cly- 
temnestra, aided by her lover, Aegisthus, killed Aga- 
memnon and Cassandra out of revenge for what she 
thought was the death of Iphigenia. Orestes killed his 
mother and Aegisthus to avenge the murder of Aga- 
memnon. F. Carter Philips 

See also Iliad; Iphigenia; Trojan War. 

Agana. See Hagatnha. 

Agassi, AC uh see, Andre (1970- ), became one of 
the dominant American tennis players of the late 1900's 
and early 2000's. He is known for his powertul forehand 
and two-handed backhand strokes as well as his ability 
to return an opponents serve. Agassi is one of the most 
colortul players in men’s tennis and one of the most 
popular. He has made many commercial endorsements 
that have spread his fame beyond the sports world. 

Agassi became the fifth man to win all four grand 
slam tournaments during his career. He won the Wim- 
bledon tournament in England in 1992, the U.S. Open in 


138 Agassiz, Louis 


1994 and 1999, the Australian Open in 1995, 2000, and 
2001, and the French Open in 1999. Agassi also won the 
gold medal as men’s singles champion at the 1996 Sum- 
mer Olympic Games. In 2001, he married German tennis 
star Steffi Graf. Andre Kirk Agassi was born on April 29, 
1970, in Las Vegas, Nevada. Dave Nightingale 

Agassiz, AG uh see, Louis (1807-1873), was a Swiss- 
born naturalist who studied many kinds of animals in 
Europe and America. He became noted for his work on 
both modern and fossil forms of fishes. He established a 
zoological laboratory on an island in Buzzards Bay off 
the coast of Massachusetts to study animals in their nat- 
ural surroundings. Agassiz believed that animal species 
do not change, and he criticized Charles Darwin's theo- 
ries on evolution. As a geologist, Agassiz showed that 
glaciers once covered large areas of the earth. 

Jean Louis Rodolphe Agassiz was born on May 26, 
1807, in Motier-en-Vuly, Switzerland. He studied at the 
universities of Zurich, Heidelberg, and Munich. Agassiz 
came to the United States in 1846. In 1848, he became a 
professor of zoology and geology at Harvard University 
(see Geology [Experimental geology]). He died on Dec. 
14, 1873. Carolyn Merchant 
Agate, AC jht, is a banded form of chalcedony, a fine- 
grained, porous type of quartz. It occurs primarily as lay- 
ers in the cavities of sedimentary rocks (see Sedimenta- 
ry rock). Most types of agates are dully colored. Their 
bands vary from white through gray to black. In some 
cases, the bands may be pale red, yellow, or blue. The 
colors result from the presence of such impurities as 
iron oxide and manganese 
oxide. Agates differ in the 
pattern of their bands. 
Onyx is a type of agate 
distinguished by parallel 
bands that lie in a plane. 
The bands of eve agate 
form circles that spread 
out from the center. Moss 
agate has delicate moss- 
like patterns. 

Agate is used chiefly in 
making ornaments, such 
as pins and brooches. 
Most agate that is used for 
ornaments must be col- 
ored artificially. Agate's 
hardness and ability to re- 
sist acids also make it valuable in the manufacture of 
mortars and pestles. Mortars and pestles are tools used 
to crush and mix chemicals. Most agate comes from 
quarries in Brazil and Uruguay. Idar-Oberstein, which is 
in southwestern Germany, has been the main center for 
cutting and polishing agate for several hundred years. 

Robert W. Charles 

See also Chalcedony; Quartz; Sardonyx. 

Agate Fossil Beds National Monument is in 
northwestern Nebraska (see Nebraska [physical map)). It 
has the fossil bones of extinct animals that lived about 20 
million years ago. The fossils include those of two- 
horned rhinoceroses and of animals that had horselike 
heads, rhinoceroslike forelegs, bearlike hindlegs, and 
clawed feet. The monument was authorized in 1965. For 
its area, see National Park System (table: National monu- 


Lizzadro Museum of Lapidary Art 
(WORLD BOOK photo) 


Moss agate 





ments). Critically reviewed by the National Park Service 

Age of Reason was a period in history when philoso- 
phers emphasized the use of reason as the best method 
of learning truth. The period of the Age of Reason be- 
gan in the 1600's and lasted until the late 1700's. The Age 
of Reason is also called the Enlightenment or the Age of 
Rationalism. \ts leaders included several French philoso- 
phers—the Marquis de Condorcet, René Descartes, De- 
nis Diderot, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and Voltaire—and 
the English philosopher John Locke. 

The leaders of the Age of Reason relied heavily on the 
scientific method, with its emphasis on experimentation 
and careful observation. The period produced many im- 
portant advances in such fields as anatomy, astronomy, 
chemistry, mathematics, and physics. Philosophers of 
the Age of Reason organized knowledge in encyclope- 
dias and founded scientific institutes. The philosophers 
believed that the scientific method could be applied in 
the study of human nature. They explored issues in edu- 
cation, law, philosophy, and politics and attacked tyran- 
ny, social injustice, superstition, and ignorance. Many of 
their ideas were taken up as the ideals of the American 
and French revolutions during the late 1700s. 

The worship of reason. The philosophers of the 
Age of Reason believed human beings have a unique 
advantage over all other creatures because they can rea- 
son. The philosophers credited reason for all achieve- 
ments in science and philosophy. They contrasted rea- 
son with ignorance, superstition, and uncritical accept- 
ance of authority—all of which they felt had dominated 
the Middle Ages. They blamed people in authority, par- 
ticularly Roman Catholic leaders, for keeping others in 
ignorance to maintain their own personal power. 

The philosophers of the Age of Reason were greatly 
influenced by discoveries in the physical sciences, such 
as the law of falling bodies discovered by Galileo in Italy 
and the laws of gravitation and motion formulated by Sir 
Isaac Newton in England. The philosophers saw that 
great discoveries like these were made through mathe- 
matics. They believed that mathematics yielded ab- 
solutely certain conclusions because the process started 
with simple axioms (self-evident truths) and moved from 
one self-evident step to another. Using this method, 
scholars discovered laws of nature that otherwise would 
have remained unknown. As a result, the philosophers 
of the Age of Reason believed that mathematics was the 
model which all other sciences should follow. 

Reason was thought to be the power that enables 
people to “see’ mathematical truths just as clearly as 
they can see a hand before their eyes by visual percep- 
tion. However, visual perception yields only particular, 
or contingent truths. For example, it is not necessary 
that every hand have five fingers because one or more 
fingers could be lost in an accident. Only reason yields 
necessary, or universal truths. An example of sucha 
truth is that 5 plus 5 will always equal 10. 

The philosophers of the Age of Reason believed that 
each person has a rational! will, which makes it possible 
to make and carry out plans. Animals, they declared, are 
slaves of their emotions. When an animal is afraid of 
something, it tries to escape. When an animal is angry, it 
fights. However, people can figure out the best course 
of action when they are afraid, angry, or in trouble. In 
addition, people can make themselves do the right 


a 


thing, instead of doing only what may seem easier or 
more appealing. 

The philosophers realized that people do not always 
plan ahead but often act on impulse, which they attrib- 
uted to inadequate education. All people, the philoso- 
phers believed, are born with the capacity to reason. 
Descartes wrote that “the power of forming a good 
judgment and of distinguishing the true from the false, 
which is properly speaking what is called good sense or 
reason, is by nature equal in all men.” Descartes there- 
fore thought that to become rational, a person need 
only acquire an education that teaches a good method 
of reasoning. 

Locke wrote that reason is “the candle of the Lord set 
up by Himself in men’s minds’ and “must be our last 
judge and guide in everything. Locke believed reason 
teaches that people must unite and form a state to pro- 
tect their ‘lives and liberty and property.” He noted that 
although people must give up some rights when they 
form a state, they gain more in protection than they lose. 

Locke believed that anyone can reason, providing the 
capacity is allowed to develop. He therefore emphasized 
the importance of education and insisted on the right of 
free speech and on toleration for conflicting ideas. 

The orderliness of nature. Philosophers of the Age 
of Reason believed that nature is vast and complex but 
well ordered. The English poet Alexander Pope de- 
scribed nature as “a mighty maze, but not without plan.” 
The philosophers of the period felt that everything in 
the universe behaves according to a few simple laws, 
which can be explained mathematically. Their favorite 
example of such a law was Newton's law of gravity. 

Human nature, the philosophers believed, is as well 
ordered as the physical universe. In 7he Spirit of the 
Laws (1748), the French philosopher Montesquieu 
wrote: “The material world has its laws, the intelligences 
superior to man have their laws, the beasts their laws, 
and man his laws.” Montesquieu thought that a science 
of human nature was possible, and he became one of 
the first philosophers to try to formulate the basic uni- 
formities of all human behavior. 

Montesquieu believed that climate has an important 
influence on temperament and thus on conduct. Ac- 
cording to Montesquieu, different kinds of government 
are appropriate for peoples who are living in different 
parts of the world. The best government for each nation 
could be planned, he felt, by considering the country’s 
climate. Montesquieu thought, for example, that free 
governments are possible in northern latitudes. “People 
are more vigorous in cold climates,” he wrote, and they 
have a “greater share of frankness and sincerity. But, 
Montesquieu said, the only workable form of govern- 
ment in a hot climate is despotism (rule by a dictator. 
Although his conclusions were discarded as mere spec- 
ulation, they are typical of the Enlightenment: faith in 
reason. 

Literature in the Age of Reason questioned accepted 
thinking. Writers portrayed human life as changeable 
and human understanding as partial. Much of the litera- 
ture was written with self-consciousness and irony. It 
called attention to conventions and provoked skeptical 
awareness. The period reached its peak with works such 
as Pierre de Laclos’ Dangerous Liaisons (1782) and the 
Marquis de Sade’s Philosophy in the Bedroom \\ 795). In 


Age of Reason 139 


these novels, rational thought goes as far as possible to- 
ward separating the thinking individual from conven- 
tional influences and limitations. 

Deism. The philosophers of the Age of Reason were 
convinced tnat the universe can be understood by the 
human mind. This is not an accident, the philosophers 
emphasized, because God could have created a uni- 
verse too complex to be grasped by human beings. In- 
stead, God created a universe ideally adjusted to the 
reasoning powers of people. 

Most of the philosophers believed that after God had 
created the universe, He left it strictly alone. This theory, 
called deism, rules out the possibility of miracles or 
other special acts by God. According to deism, God reg- 
ulated nature so that it proceeds mechanically. Future 
events are therefore fully predictable on the basis of 
earlier events. The philosophers liked to think of the uni- 
verse as a Clock that keeps perfect time because it was 
designed by a superior clockmaker. See Deism. 

Influence of the Age of Reason. The thinkers of the 
Age of Reason formulated ideals of human dignity and 
worth. In France, unjust social and political conditions 
were criticized by a group of philosophers known as the 
philosophes. This group, which included Diderot, Rous- 
seau, and Voltaire, greatly influenced leaders of the 
French Revolution. The philosophes and, more impor- 
tantly, Locke also influenced the leaders of the Revolu- 
tionary War in America. 

Philosophers of the Age of Reason sometimes dis- 
agreed on minor matters, but they all accepted the idea 
of the English philosopher Francis Bacon that “knowl- 
edge is power.’ Because they aimed, in Bacon's phrase, 
at “the improvement of man’s estate,” they concentrated 
their efforts on the advancement of knowledge. Their 
action explains why so many scientific institutes, includ- 
ing the famous Royal Society in England, were founded 
during the Age ci Reason. 

The urge to advance knowledge also explains why 
great effort was made to organize and circulate the re- 
sults of the scientific research of the time. Many schol- 
ars gathered, organized, and published this knowledge. 
In fact, the Age of Reason could be called the “age of the 
encyclopedia.” The most famous reference work was the 
French Encyclopédie, edited by Diderot and Jean 
d'Alembert, and completed between 1751 and 1772. 

To the philosophers of the Age of Reason, progress 
in human affairs seemed assured. It was only a question 
of time, they believed, until people learned to let 
reason—not ignorance, emotion, or superstition—guide 
them. When people did so, they would be happy. Con- 
dorcet expressed this optimism in his Sketch for a His- 
torical Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind (1793- 
1794). 

Criticism of the Age of Reason. Today, many be- 
liefs of the Age of Reason seem rather naive. Most phi- 
losophers now believe that truths discovered by reason 
are universal only because they are fauto/ogies. A tautol- 
ogy is a statement that merely repeats an idea in differ- 
ent words, without giving any new information. We can 
say, for example, that ‘all cats are felines.” The statement 
is universally true, but only because ‘cat’ means “feline.” 

If the rational truths of the Age of Reason are tautolo- 
gies, they do not tell us anything about nature. They tell 
us only how words are used. Most philosophers of the 


140 Agee, James 


1900's believe that factual statements about the world 
are never certain. Such statements are only probable at 
best, and they may even be false. 

The philosophers of the Age of Reason felt it was self- 
evidently true that governments should preserve their 
citizens property. But in the 1800's, the German philoso- 
pher Karl Marx argued that this view merely reflected 
the prejudices of the middle class. These people own 
the property, said Marx, and thus want to preserve it. 

The argument that universal truths are only tautolo- 
gies was stated early in the Age of Reason by the Eng- 
lish philosopher Thomas Hobbes. He wrote that reason- 
ing is ‘nothing but reckoning, that is, adding and 
subtracting of the consequences of general names.’ But 
few people paid any attention to Hobbes's views, except 
to condemn them. 

The Age of Reason’s optimistic belief in a rational hu- 
man will has also been chalienged. In the early 1900's, 
for example, the Austrian physician Sigmund Freud stat- 
ed that what we like to consider as “sound reasons’ for 
our actions are only excuses. We act the way we do, 
Freud said, because of unconscious drives arising from 
a part of our subconscious mind called the id We then 
attribute socially acceptable motives to ourselves to 
please another part of our subconscious, the superego. 

The Age of Reason, however, ended long before 
Marx and Freud attacked its basic beliefs. Toward the 
end of the 1700's, a great change in people's outlook oc- 
curred. They came to value feeling rather than reason 
and to prefer passion, individuality, and spontaneity to 
discipline, order, and control. This change marked the 
beginning of the Romantic movement and the end of 
the Age of Reason. James Creech 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Biographies 


Diderot, Denis 
Hobbes, Thomas 
Locke, John 
Montesquieu 


Bacon, Francis 

Condorcet, 
Marquis de 

Descartes, Rene 


Rousseau, Jean- 
Jacques 
Voltaire 


Other related articles 


French literature (The Age of 
Reason) 
Philosophes 


Philosophy (Modern 
philosophy) 

Rationalism 

Science (The Age of Reason) 


Additional resources 


Gay, Peter. The Enlightenment 2 vols. 1966, 1969. Reprint. Peter 
Smith, 1996. 

Reill, Peter H., and Wilson, E. J. Encyclopedia of the Enlighten- 
ment Facts on File, 1996. 

Spencer, Lloyd. /ntroducing the Enlightenment. Totem Bks., 1997. 


Agee, AY jee, James (1909-1955), was an American 
writer. His Tennessee childhood provided the setting for 
his novel The Morning Watch (1951). A Death in the Fam- 
ily is a poetic novel based on his earliest years in Knox- 
ville, his hometown. The work was published in 1957, af- 
ter he died. It won the 1958 Pulitzer Prize for fiction. Tad 
Mosel adapted the novel into a play, A// the Wav Home 
(1960), which won the 1961 Pulitzer Prize for drama. 

Agee collaborated with photographer Walker Evans 
ona study of white tenant farmers during the Great 
Depression. Evans's pictures and Ageess text were pub- 
lished as Let Us Now Praise Famous Men (1941). During 
the 1940's, Agee reviewed movies tor 7ime and The 
Nation magazines. Beginning in 1948, he wrote several 


screenplays, including scripts for The African Queen 
(1951) and The Night of the Hunter (1955). His film re- 
views and essays were published in Agee on Film (1958). 
A second Agee on Film volume, published in 1960, has 
five of his screenplays. Collections of Agee’s writings in- 
clude Collected Poems (1968), Collected Short Prose 
(1968), and Se/ected Journalism (1985). Victor A. Kramer 
Agency for International Development is an 
independent agency of the United States government 
that administers most of the nation’s economic, techni- 
cal, and humanitarian foreign aid programs. These pro- 
grams are designed to improve the quality of life in de- 
veloping countries tn Africa, Asia, Latin America, and 
central and eastern Europe. The agency, which is com- 
monly referred to as USAID or simply AID, helps these 
nations use their resources to become self-supporting. 

USAID works to improve education, farm and indus- 
trial production, health care, nutrition, and population 
planning. It gives loans and grants to build hospitals, 
housing, and schools, and to set up small businesses. It 
also funds communications systems, small factories, 
power plants, and rural roads. USAID also provides 
famine and disaster relief, including food, medical aid, 
and temporary housing, to any needy nation. 

Congress created the agency in 1961. From 1979 to 
1999, it was part of the International Development Coop- 
eration Agency. 

Critically reviewed by the Agency for International Development 
Agent is a person who represents someone else in le- 
gal, business, or other matters. The person who em- 
ploys the agent is called the principal, The agents au- 
thority may be express or implied. Express authority 
involves doing exactly what the principal says to do. Im- 
plied authority involves doing anything that is a normal 
part of the agent's duties on behalf of the principal. For 
example, the president of a corporation is an agent of 
the corporation. He or she has implied authority to per- 
form the customary acts of a president, even without ex- 
press authority. 

If the principal allows an agent to appear as if he or 
she has more authority than the agent really has, the 
principal is bound by what the agent does. If the agent 
acts without authority, the principal is under no obliga- 
tion unless the principal takes advantage of the act or 
approves it in some other way. If the principal does not 
approve the act, the agent may be liable for damages to 
the person the agent misled. Edward J. Kionka 
Agent Orange is the military code name for a weed- 
killer used by the United States during the Vietnam War 
(1957-1975). In the 1960's and early 1970's, the United 
States armed forces sprayed Agent Orange over jungles 
and farms in South Vietnam and Laos. Agent Orange 
was used to defo/iate {cause the leaves to fall off) trees 
and shrubs and to kill crop plants. The spraying revealed 
enemy hiding places and destroyed food crops. 

Agent Orange consisted of two weedkillers—2,4-D 
and 2,4,5-T. Some veterans blamed Agent Orange for 
health problems. In 1990, the Centers for Disease Con- 
trol (now Disease Control and Prevention), a U.S. govern- 
ment agency, said it found no evidence that Agent 
Orange increased the risk of cancer among Vietnam vet- 
erans. That same year, a Congressional committee de- 
clared the study flawed. In 1991, Congress passed a bill 
providing disability benefits for Vietnam veterans suffer- 





ing from certain illnesses said to have been caused by 
exposure to Agent Orange. See Dioxin. 

[In 1993, the Institute of Medicine, an adviser to the 
U.S. government, released a study that linked exposure 
to Agent Orange to three kinds of cancer and two skin 
diseases. The study based its conclusions on civilians 
exposure in their jobs or in job-related accidents. it rec- 
ommended more studies before the effects of Agent Or- 
ange on veterans could be determined. Gary F. Bennett 
Ageratum, 4/ uh RAY tuhm or uh JEHR uh tuhm, is a 
popular, low-growing, annual plant of flower gardens. It 
is native to tropical regions of Central and South Ameri- 
ca. Its pale blue, white, or pink flowers bloom all sum- 
mer. Each flower head has many tiny, tube-shaped flow- 
ers, crowded closely together. Ageratum plants may be 
grown from seeds started indoors in early spring, or 
planted later outdoors. W. Dennis Clark 





W Atlee Burpee Co. 


The ageratum is a popular garden plant that blooms all sum- 
mer. Each flower head has many tiny, tube-shaped flowers. 


Scientific classification. Ageratum plants are in the compos- 
ite family, Compositae. A common ageratum is Ageratum hous- 
tonianum. 


Aggression is a term psychologists use to refer to be- 
havior intended to hurt others. Aggression may take a 
direct form, such as verbal abuse or a physical attack 
against peuple or their possessions. indirect methods of 
aggression include spreading rumors and stealing. 

People become aggressive for various reasons. Expe- 
riencing pain or danger can lead to aggression. in other 
cases, people behave aggressively to gain status, mon- 
ey, pleasure, or control over others. 

Different approaches to understanding aggression 
emphasize different determining factors (causes). Biolog- 
ical factors, such as genes and hormones, and personali- 
ty characteristics, such as dominance or hostility, can 
lead to aggressive behavior. So can a persons develop- 
mental history—that is, how the person was raised. So- 
cial factors, including the presence of an audience and 
the sex, race, or other characteristics of the target, can 
also influence aggression. 

Most theories of aggression recognize the relation: 
ship between emotions and aggression. People who ex: 
perience frustration, anger, or fear may act aggressin ely. 
Some theories focus on social learning, the process by 
which individuals learn the behavior society expects oO! 
them. According to these theories. people may learn to 


Aging 141 


be aggressive by witnessing aggressive behavior, such 
as family arguments and violent television programs. 
They may also learn aggression through direct rewards 
(getting what they want after acting aggressively). Social 
learning theories also emphasize the importance of gen- 
der roles, society's expectations about appropriate be- 
havior for males and females. Deborah South Richardson 

See also Child (Aggressive and antisocial behavior); 
Child abuse; Domestic violence; Personality (Freud's 
psychoanalytic theory; Emotional reactions); Psychology. 
Agincourt, Aj ihn kawrt Battle of, took place be- 
tween English and French armies near the village of 
Agincourt, in northern France, in 1415. The English had 
only about 6,000 troops. But its archers, firmly disci- 
plined and backed by cavalry, routed a French army that 
probably consisted of about 20,000 to 30,000 troops. The 
battle marked the third great English victory in the Hun- 
dred Years’ War. The English went on to conquer Nor- 
mandy and to sign the favorable Treaty of Troyes in 
1420. The English playwright William Shakespeare 
wrote about the battle in his history play Henry V. 

CT. Allmand 

See also Hundred Years War; Shakespeare, William 
(Shakespeare's plays /Henry Vi) 

Aging is the process of growing old. As adults age, 
they become increasingly vulnerable to injury, illness, 
and death. Aging is a characteristic of almost all living 
things. The rate at which it occurs, however, varies with- 
in and across species. The biological changes associat- 
ed with aging begin at the moment of conception (fertil- 
ization). In most human beings, the changes do not 
become visible until individuals reach 30 to 40 years of 
age. Age-related changes include graying or loss of hair, 
weakened muscles, wrinkled skin, and diminished 
sense of hearing and vision. 

Why people age. Early scientists and philosophers 
viewed aging as a natural process that removed the el- 
derly to make room for the young. This idea suggests 
that the natural lifespan of an organism is fixed and de- 
termined by genetic instructions that are present at 
birth. However, many scientists now believe that aging 
is the result of various natural biological processes 
rather than a predetermined genetic program. Most sci- 
entists think that aging and death occur at different rates 
and times among individuals because of a combination 
of genetic variation, differences in the way in which peo- 
ple live their lives, and the random nature of the biologi- 
cal processes that contribute to aging. 

For most organisms, the timing of death is linked to 
the time in the life span when reproduction occurs. The 
timing of puberty and menopause is particularly impor- 
tant. After the reproductive period, the cells, tissues, and 
other components of the body have accumulated 
enough damage so that they can no longer function as 
well as before. This loss of function is expressed in the 
form of a wide range of diseases and disorders associat- 
ed with aging. 

How aging occurs. Scientists do not fully understand 
the precise biological changes in cells, tissues, and or- 
gans that contribute to aging. One important mecha- 
nisin involved in aging is the damage that accumulates 
in cells from unstable molecules called tree radicals. 
These molecules are produced from the natural biologi- 
cal processes as the body works to maintain a constant 


© Chuck Savage, Corbis 


Exercise can help elderly people maintain or improve physical 
fitness. Although the process of aging cannot be prevented, reg- 
ular physical activity can produce benefits at any age. 


temperature and level of functioning. 

The human body has many biological defense mecha- 
nisms designed to prevent or minimize free radical 
damage and repair the damage that does occur. Over 
time, however, the damage caused by free radicals ac- 
cumulates and contributes to the many processes asso- 
ciated with aging. Scientists are looking for ways in 
which they can reduce or postpone the damage caused 
by free radicals and possibly delay the aging process. 

Overcoming aging. Some of the effects of aging can 
be masked through the use of cosmetics, creams, lo- 
tions, and plastic surgery. Many people claim that vita- 
mins, antioxidants, hormones, and various other sub- 
stances have antiaging properties. Scientific research on 
these claims has yet to be completed, and most scien- 
tists doubt that they will work. However, scientific exper- 
iments have shown that it is possible to make some ani- 
mals live longer by reducing their intake of food. 
Researchers are trying to understand how and why this 
method, called ca/oric restriction, works. Most scien- 
tists, however, believe that it is impossible to stop or re- 
verse the process of aging. S. Jay Olshansky 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Antioxidant Old age 
Life expectancy Palliative care 
Middle age Progeria 


Additional resources 


Connally, N. Thomas. The Third Third: A Physician's Guide to a 
Healthy, Happy, Longer Life. Bright Sky Pr., 2001. 





Creagan, Edward T., ed. Mayo Clinic on Healthy Aging. Mayo 

Found., 2001. 

Kirkwood, Tom. 7ime of Our Lives: The Science of Human Aging. 

1999. Reprint Oxford, 2000 
Maddox, George L. The Encyclopedia of Aging. 2 vols. 3rd ed. 

Springer Pub. Co., 2001. 

Wei, Jeanne Y., and Levkoff, Sue. Aging Well: The Complete 

Guide to Physical and Emotional Health. Wiley, 2000. 
Agnew, Spiro Theodore (1918-1996), became the 
only vice president of the United States to resign his of- 
fice while under criminal 
investigation. In 1968 and 
1972, Agnew had won 
election as vice president 
under President Richard 
M. Nixon. Agnew resigned 
in 1973 after a federal 
grand jury began hearing 
charges that he had partic- 
ipated in graft as an office- 
holder in Maryland. 

Agnew had been elect- 
ed governor of Maryland 
in 1966. He was the first 
man of Greek descent to 
serve as governor of an 
American state, or as vice president. He became the sec- 
ond vice president to resign. In 1832, Vice President 
John C. Calhoun resigned after being chosen to fill a U.S. 
Senate seat from South Carolina. 

Early life. Agnew was born on Nov. 9, 1918, in Tow- 
son, Maryland. His father, Theodore Spiro Agnew, had 
come to the United States in 1897. Theodore Agnew be- 
came a leader of the city’s Greek community. 

Agnew studied chemistry for three years at Johns 
Hopkins University, and then transferred to the law 
school of the University of Baltimore. He served in the 
Army in Europe during World War II (1939-1945). 

Agnew switched from the Democratic to the Republi- 
can Party after the war. He married Elinor Isabel Judefind 
in 1942. They had three daughters and a son. Agnew re- 
ceived a law degree in 1947 and began practicing in Bal- 
timore County. 

Political career. Agnew entered politics in 1957, 
when he was appointed to the Baltimore County Board 
of Appeals. In 1962, he was elected county executive, the 
chief official of Baltimore County. In 1967, Agnew be- 
came the fifth Republican governor in Maryland history. 

Agnew was little known outside Maryland in 1968 
when the Republican National Convention, at Nixon's re- 
quest, nominated him for vice president. In the election, 
Nixon and Agnew defeated the Democratic candidates, 
Hubert H. Humphrey and Edmund S. Muskie. Agnew 
soon became well known and highly controversial. He 
often accused some newspapers and TV networks of 
presenting news in a way that was prejudiced against 
the administration. He also criticized student radicals 
and other dissenters. In 1972, Nixon and Agnew won a 
landslide victory over their Democratic opponents, 
George S. McGovern and Sargent Shriver. 

In 1973, federal officials began to investigate charges 
that Agnew had accepted bribes from contractors in re- 
turn for helping them get state government work in 
Maryland. The investigation covered the period Agnew 
had served as Baltimore County executive, Maryland 





Office of the Vice President 
Spiro T. Agnew 





f 
| 


Fe eenee 


governor, and United States vice president. 

Agnew repeatedly denied any wrongdoina. But on 
October 10, he resigned as vice president under an 
agreement with the Department of Justice. Agnew 
pleaded nolo contendere (no contest) to a single 
charge—that he had cheated the government of $13,551 
on his federal income tax payment for 1967. The judge 
declared that the plea was ‘the full equivalent of a plea 
of guilty.” Agnew was fined $10,000 and sentenced to 
three years of unsupervised probation. 

House Minority Leader Gerald R. Ford succeeded Ag- 
new as vice president. Ford was sworn into the office on 
Dee.6, 1973. 

In 1974, the Maryland Court of Appeals disbarred Ag- 
new because of his no/o contendere plea. The court's 
action prohibited Agnew from practicing law in the 
state. In 1981, another Maryland court ordered Agnew 
to pay the state the amount of the bribes it declared he 
had accepted, plus interest. In 1983, Agnew paid Mary- 
land $268,482. The former vice president died on Sept. 
17, 1996. Earl Mazo 

See also Ford, Gerald R.; Nixon, Richard M.; Vice 
President of the United States. 

Agnon, AHG nahn, Shmuel Yosef (1888-1970), was 
an Israeli author. He shared the 1966 Nobel Prize in liter- 
ature with German-born author Nelly Sachs. 

Agnon wrote novels and short stories about Jewish 
life in Europe and Israel. His fiction has profound mysti- 
cal and psychological overtones, combining social satire 
with religious themes. Agnon, who wrote in Hebrew, 
used language and storytelling techniques drawn from 
Jewish religious texts and folk literature. 

Shmuel Yosef Czaczkes was born on July 17, 1888, in 
eastern Galicia, now part of Ukraine. He first went to 
Palestine in 1907 and later changed his name to Agnon, 
which he took from the title of his first published story, 
“Agunot’ (‘Deserted Wives,” 1909). Agnon’s major novels 
include The Bridal Canopy(1931), A Simple Story (1935), 
A Guest for the Night (1937), and Yesteryear(1945). Some 
of the author's short stories were collected in /wenty- 
One Stories (1970). Agnon died on Feb. 17, 1970. 

Stanley L Nash 
Agnosticism, ag NAHS tuh sihz uhm, is the belief that 
ultimate questions, especially those about the existence 
of God, cannot be answered. The term comes from the 
Greek word agnostos, which means not knowing. It was 
first used by the British naturalist Thomas Henry Huxley 
in 1869. Agnosticism reflects the point of view that rea- 
son and scientific evidence should be the sole guides to 
finding truth. During the mid-1900's, the German- 
American theologian Paul Tillich argued that a period of 
agnosticism—in the form of doubt—is a necessary stage 
before one can accept a meaningful faith. See Atheism; 
Ingersoll, Robert Green. Mark Juergensmeyer 
Agouti, uh GOO tee, is a rodent that lives in dense 
forests from southern Mexico to northern Argentina, 
and in the West Indies. Agoutis measure almost 2 feet 
(60 centimeters) long. They have small rounded ears, 
long legs, and either a short tail or no tail at all. Most 
agoutis have brown, blackish-brown, or orange fur. The 
hair on the back is grayish. Agoutis run with a jumping 
motion, like deer. | 

Agoutis eat fruit, leaves, and roots. Most temales bear 
their young in litters of two. The young have full coats of 


Agribusiness 143 





© Guseppe Mazza 


The agouti is a rodent that lives in forests of Central and South 
America and the West Indies. It eats fruit, leaves, and roots. 


fur at birth, and their eyes are open. They can move 
about and take care of themselves soon after birth. How- 
ever, they remain with their parents for as long as 20 
weeks. Coatis, mountain lions, and jaguars prey on 
agoutis. In the tropics, people hunt agoutis for their 
meat. Agoutis make affectionate pets. Charles A. Long 

Scientific classification. Agoutis belong to the paca and 
agouti family, Dasyproctidae. They belong to the genus 
Dasyprocta. 

See also Rodent. 

Agra, AH gruh (pop. 1,259,979), is one of the largest 
cities in Uttar Pradesh, a state in northern India (see In- 
dia [political map)). It is also one of the oldest cities on 
the Indian Peninsula. Agra is famous as the site of the Taj 
Mahal. In the 1600's, Emperor Shah Jahan ordered this 
magnificent marble tomb built as a memorial to his wife, 
Mumtaz-i-Mahal. Agra lies on the Yamuna River. The city 
centers around Agra Fort, which was built by the Mu- 
ghal emperor Akbar about 1566. The northern part of 
the city has business and market districts. Modern facto- 
ries lie north of the city along the river. Agra is an impor- 
tant trading center for cotton, grain, sugar, and tobacco. 
The city is well known for the gold lace and delicate in- 
laid mosaics that its people make chiefly by hand. 

P. P. Karan 

See also India (picture: The art treasures of India); Taj 
Mahal. 

Agribusiness, AG ruh siz nihs, is the group of indus- 
tries involved in producing, transporting, processing, 
distributing, and selling farm products. It also includes 
those businesses that supply farmers with such goods 
and services as machinery, seeds, fertilizers, agricultural 
chemicals, credit, and management information. 

Agribusiness is one of the most rapidly growing in- 
dustries in the United States. Although farmers make up 
only about 3 percent of the U.S. labor force, nearly 1 
American worker out of every 4 is employed in some 
branch of agribusiness. 

Improved technology and specialization have con- 
tributed to the growth of agribusiness. In the past, farm 
families produced nearly everything they needed on the 
farm itself. But farmers today buy many of the products 
they use from others. For example, as farmers began to 
use pesticides and herbicides, a need for more workers 


in the chemical industry was created. Warren F Lee 


144 Agricola, Gnaeus Julius 


Agricola, uh GRIHK uh luh, Gnaeus Julius, NEE uhs 
(A.D. 372-93), was an able Roman general. He was given 


command in Britain by the emperor Domitian about A.D. 


77 and ordered to complete the conquest of England. 
Seven years later, Agricola had conquered all of Eng- 
land and a part of Scotland. He also sent ships around 
the island of Great Britain to draw maps. Agricola then 
prepared to invade Ireland. But Domitian was dis- 
pleased by the high cost of Agricola’s operations. Agri- 


cola was relieved of his command and recalled to Rome. 


Agricola was born in what is now Frejus, France. He 
owes much of his fame to the writings of his son-in-law, 
the historian Tacitus. Arther Ferrill 

Agricultural Adjustment Administration 
(AAA). See New Deal; Parity. 

Agricultural education is instruction about crop 
production, livestock management, soil and water con- 
servation, and various other aspects of agriculture. Agri- 
cultural education includes instruction in food educa- 
tion, such as nutrition. Agricultural and food education 
improves the quality of life for all people by helping 
farmers increase production, conserve resources, and 
provide nutritious foods. 

There are four major fields of agricultural education: 
(1) elementary agriculture, (2) vocational agriculture, (3) 
college agriculture, and (4) general education agricul- 
ture. Elementary agriculture is taught in public schools 
and deals with such subjects as how plants and animals 
grow and how soil is farmed and conserved. Vocational 
agriculture trains people for jobs in such areas as pro- 
duction, marketing, and conservation. College agricul- 
ture involves training of people to teach, conduct re- 
search, or provide information to advance the field of 
agriculture and food science in other ways. General ed- 
ucation agriculture informs the public about food and 
agriculture. 


In the United States 


There are three chief sources of agricultural educa- 


CRE Sa a 
' me fe =) 3 gan | ‘ 
es } © we ; . = 
tre F Sted aT iy » = ie > 
sf i r-: Lea ae 
4’ 
- ee \ 
- 





tion in the United States. They are (1) high schools, (2) 
colleges and universities, and (3) youth organizations. 

High schools in every state, the District of Columbia, 
Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands provide vocational 
agriculture training. Most high school agriculture cours- 
es offer both classroom instruction and practical experi- 
ence. For example, a student might raise a crop or an an- 
imal, work on a farm, or work for an agriculture 
business, such as a machinery dealer. Many schools of- 
fer adult education courses to help people improve 
their production, management, and computer skills. 

Colleges and universities award bachelor's, mas- 
ters, and doctor's degrees in agriculture. 

Land-grant universities award more than three- 
fourths of all agricultural degrees. These state schools 
receive federal aid under legislation that followed the 
Morrill Act of 1862, which granted public lands to sup- 
port agricultural or mechanical education. Land-grant 
universities have three chief functions: (1) teaching, (2) 
research, and (3) extension service. 

Teaching. Colleges of agriculture prepare students 
for careers in all aspects of the food and agriculture sys- 
tem. Some career choices include food science and vet- 
erinary science, farming, ranching, teaching, marketing, 
management, and social services. 

Research. Each land-grant university has an agricul- 
tural experiment station equipped with laboratories and 
experimental farms. There, agricultural scientists work 
to develop better farming methods, solve the special 
problems of local farmers, and provide new technology. 

Extension service. The Cooperative Extension System 
is a partnership of the federal, state, and county govern- 
ments. This service distributes information gathered by 
the land-grant universities and the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture to farmers, families, and young people. 
County extension agents, who work in most counties, 
train and support volunteer leaders. Agents and volun- 
teers carry out extension programs through meetings, 
newsletters, radio, television, and visits. 


David Frazier 


Agricultural education pre- 
pares students for careers in 
livestock management, crop 
production, and other areas 
of agriculture. In this photo- 
graph, a teacher shows stu- 
dents how to evaluate the 
quality of hay used for live- 
stock feed. 





Youth programs and organizatioris involved in 
agricultural education include 4-H and FFA (Future 
Farmers of America). Members of 4-H participate in 
projects dealing with conservation, food and agricul- 
ture, health and safety, and other subjects. The 4-H pro- 
gram in the United States is part of the Cooperative 
State Research, Education, and Extension Service. 

FFA is an integral part of the program of vocational 
agriculture in many high schools. Local chapters take 
field trips and conduct projects to develop leadership, 
citizenship, patriotism, and excellence in agriculture. 

History. The rapid growth of agricultural education 
began during the late 1800's. In 1862, Congress created 
the Department of Agriculture to gather and distribute 
agricultural information. The Morrill Act, which provid- 
ed for the land-grant schools, became law that same 
year. The Hatch Act of 1887 gave federal funds to estab- 
lish agricultural experiment stations. 

Government support for agricultural education in- 
creased during the 1900's. For example, the Smith-Lever 
Act of 1914 created what is now the Cooperative Exten- 
sion System. The Smith-Hughes Act of 1917 and the 
George-Barden Act of 1946 financed high school in- 
struction in farming. The Vocational Education Act of 
1963 funded training in other fields of agriculture. 

Agricultural science and education expanded after 
1900 in response to a need for more technical knowl- 
edge and skill. This development led to the use of mod- 
ern farming methods that required fewer farmworkers. 
Another major result of this change was the creation of 
larger farms and ranches. This development increased 
the need for more agriculture science and education. 


In other countries 


Agricultural education in other countries resembles 
that in the United States. Canada has its own 4-H pro- 
gram. Agriculture Canada distributes information on 
new farming methods and maintains experimental farms 
and research institutions throughout the country. In Aus- 
tralia, each state has several agricultural research sta- 
tions and an extension service. The United Kingdom has 
a program of youth clubs called Young Farmers Clubs. 
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations works to train people throughout the world in 
modern farming. The United States aids farmers in de- 
veloping nations through its Agency for International 
Development {AID). Raymond J. Miller, Jr 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Agricultural experiment FFA 
station 4-H 
County agricultural extension Land-grant university 
agent 


Agricultural experiment station is a research cen- 
ter that conducts scientific investigations to solve prob- 
lems and suggest improvements in the food and agri- 
culture industry. Experiment station scientists work with 
farmers, ranchers, suppliers, processors, and others in- 
volved in food production and agriculture. Station scien- 
tists also work with natural resource and environmental 
organizations and with rural communities. Agricultural 
experiment stations have made outstanding contribu- 
tions to the development of food and agriculture in the 
United States and Canada. 

The United States has dozens ot stations, including 


Agricultural Stabilization Service 145 


stations in the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico. Each state 
has at least one main station at a state school called a 
land-grant university. Many states have branch stations 
to meet the needs of different climate and geographic 
zones in these states. 

The United States stations are state institutions, but 
the federal and state governments cooperate in funding 
the research done at the stations. The states provide 
most of the government money. Additional income 
comes from grants, contracts, and the sale of products. 

Station scientists study biological, economic, and so- 
cial problems of food, agriculture, and related industries 
in each state. They investigate such subjects as crop vari- 
ations, soil testing, livestock processing, and animal ra- 
tions. They also work to develop and apply computers, 
biotechnology, and other advanced technology to food 
and agriculture. The scientists work with specialists 
called extension agents, who teach farmers about devel- 
opments in agriculture. Most station scientists are facul- 
ty members of the land-grant universities. 

The first state agricultural experiment station in the 
United States was organized in 1875 at Wesleyan Uni- 
versity in Middletown, Connecticut. It was supported by 
private donations and state funds. Federal aid for experi- 
ment stations across the country began with the Hatch 
Act of 1887. The provisions of this act and later legisla- 
tion providing increased funds were combined in the 
Hatch Act of 1955. The Mcintire-Stennis Act of 1962 au- 
thorized forestry research at experiment stations. The 
federal government takes part in the experiment station 
program through the Cooperative State Research, Edu- 
cation, and Extension Service of the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture. The department coordinates research activi- 
ties among the state experiment stations. 

In Canada, about 50 percent of the experiment sta- 
tions are controlled by the Canadian government. The 
Central Experimental Farm in Ottawa is the headquarters 
of the federal system. Private industries, universities, and 
agricultural colleges control the remainder of the sta- 
tions. Each province has a number of provincial stations. 

James R. Fischer 

See also County agricultural extension agent; Land- 
grant university. 

Agricultural extension work. See Cooperative Ex- 
tension System. 

Agricultural machinery. See Farm and farming 
and its list of Re/ated articles. 

Agricultural Revolution. See Agriculture (The 
Agricultural Revolution). 

Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation 
Service (ASCS) was an agency of the United States De- 
partment of Agriculture from 1961 to 1994. The service 
administered programs concerning farm products and 
agricultural conservation. It granted loans to farmers; 
purchased farm products from farmers and processors; 
administered acreage allotment and marketing quota 
programs; shared the cost of conservation and environ- 
mental protection measures with farmers and ranchers; 
and supervised civil defense activities relating to food. It 
also managed the inventories of the Commodity Credit 
Corporation (see Commodity Credit Corporation). The 
service was incorporated into the Department of Agri- 
culture's Farm Service Agency in 1994. 


Critically reviewed by the Department ot Agnculture 


———ws ete ee 


146 Agriculture 


Harvesting wheat in Canada 





M. Stone, DPI 


Miller Services 


Herding sheep in Australia 


The vast and varied world of agriculture provides us with nearly all our food, with fibers for 
clothing, and with raw materials for industry. Half the world’s workers are farmers, and about a 


third of the earth’s land area is used for agriculture. 


Agriculture 


Agriculture is the world’s most important industry. It 
provides us with almost all our food. It also supplies ma- 
terials for two other basic human needs—clothing and 
shelter. Jn addition, agriculture provides materials used 
in making many industrial products, such as paints and 
medicines. About half the world’s workers are employed 
in agriculture—far more than in any other industry. 

Agriculture is one of the world’s oldest industries. It 
began to develop about 10,000 years ago in the Middle 
East. At that time, certain Middle Eastern tribes discov- 
ered how to grow plants from seeds and how to raise 
animals in captivity Soon after the tribes mastered these 
skills, they began to depend chiefly on farming for food. 

Before the development of agriculture, people got all 
their food by gathering wild plants, hunting, and fishing. 
They had to search for food continually, which left them 
little time for other activities. But as agriculture devel- 
oped and farm output increased, fewer people were 
needed to produce food. The nonfarmers could then 
develop the arts, crafts, trades, and other activities of 
civilized life. Agriculture therefore greatly affected the 
food supply and made civilization possible. 

Farmers provided more food than hunters and gath- 
Larry D. Trede, the contributor of this article, is an Associate 
Professor in the Department of Agricultural Education and Stud- 

ies at lowa State University. 


erers could supply. But for many centuries, improve- 
ments in agriculture came slowly. Farming depended 
heavily on human and animal labor, and farmers had 
few tools to make their land and labor more productive. 
Then in the late 1600's, inventors began to develop ma- 
chines for planting, cultivating, and harvesting crops. 
Over the years, farm machinery has been steadily im- 
proved. 

Since the early 1900's, scientists have developed bet- 
ter breeds of livestock, better varieties of plants, and 
highly effective fertilizers and pesticides. All these im- 
provements have greatly reduced the need for farm la- 
bor and have enormously increased farm output 

However, nearly all the scientific improvements in 
agriculture have occurred in industrialized nations. In 
many nonindustrial countries, people farm much as 
their ancestors did many years ago. Countries that use 
old-fashioned farming methods have great difficulty in- 
creasing their production of food. But increased food 
production is necessary to keep up with today’s rapid 
population growth. Helping the nonindustrial nations 
modernize their agriculture is one of the major chal- 
lenges of the industrial nations. 

This article discusses the world’s chief agricultural 
products, the various kinds of agriculture that farmers 
practice, and the characteristics of agriculture around 
the world. The article also traces the history of agricul- 
ture. To learn about modern farms, see Farm and farm- 
ing. For information on particular agricultural subjects, 
see the Related articles at the end of this article. 


~~. 





Leon V. Kofod 


Tapping rubber trees in Indonesia 





Agriculture 147 


Jean-Claude Lejeune. Stock. Boston 


Picking tea leaves in Sri Lanka 


Chief agricultural products 


Food is by far the most important farm product. But 
farms also provide many other products, from natural 
fibers to ornamental flowers and trees. Some crops are 
used only to feed livestock. These forage crops include 
alfalfa; clover; and many grasses, such as brome grass 
and timothy. Forage crops are important because they 
make commercial livestock production possible. 

Food products. Farms provide almost all the world's 
food, including some fish and game. Most food prod- 
ucts come from crops. The rest come from animals, es- 
pecially cattle, hogs, poultry, sheep, and other livestock. 

From crops. The world’s farmers grow about 85 major 
food crops. They can be divided into eight groups. The 
main group is cerea/ grains. Grain is grown on half the 
world’s cropland and supplies much of the nourishment 
in the human diet. The chief grains are barley, corn, mil- 
let, oats, rice, rye, sorghum, and wheat. 

Various root crops make up the second most impor- 
tant group of food crops. Like cereal grains, root crops 
are grown throughout the world and are a basic food 
for many people. The leading root crops are potatoes, 
sweet potatoes, and a tropical plant called cassava 

The six remaining groups of major food crops are: (1) 
pulses, which consist mainly of dry beans and dry peas; 
(2) fruits and vegetables other than root crops and puls 
es; (3) oil-bearing crops, such as soybeans and coconuts, 
(4) sugar-bearing crops, especially sugar cane and sugar 
beets; (5) nuts; and (6) cocoa beans, coffee, and tea. 
Some oil crops, especially soybeans, are used to make 
flour and meal as well as oil 


From animals. Cattle, chickens, goats, hogs, sheep, 
turkeys, and other livestock are the main animals raised 
for food. Livestock are raised in every country and sup- 
ply nearly all the world’s meat, eggs, and milk. Farmers 
also raise other animals for food. For example, many 
farmers keep bees for honey. Farmers on fish farms 
raise freshwater food fish, such as catfish and trout, and 
saltwater shellfish, such as mussels and oysters. 

Natural fibers come from a variety of plants and ani- 
mals raised on farms. Mills and factories use the fibers 
to make fabrics, yarn, and other textile products. 

Cotton, flax, hemp, jute, and sisal are the chief plant 
fibers. Wool, the principal animal fiber, comes mainly 
from sheep but also from such animals as goats and 
members of the camel family. Silk fibers are obtained 
from the cocoons of silkworms. Farms in Japan and 
China raise most of the world’s silkworms. The develop- 
ment of nylon and other synthetic fibers since the early 
1900's has reduced the demand for natural fibers in 
some countries. 

Other agricultural products. Many farms provide 
other raw materials for industry besides fibers. These 
materials include natural rubber; animal hides, which 
are used to make leather; and such vegetable oils as cas- 
tor oil and linseed oil. These oils are used in a variety of 
products, from paints to medicines. Some farmers grow 
trees for timber, though most timber comes from natu- 
ral forests. Many farmers raise tobacco. Others grow or- 
namental flowers, trees, and shrubs. A few farmers raise 
such animals as foxes and mink tor their fur. 


148 Agriculture 


Leading groups of agricultural products 


Product groups Production Leading countries 
in tons’ in metric tons" 
Cereal grains 2,253,295,000 2,044,155,000 
Corn 661,358,000 599,974,000 Brazil, China, United States 
Rice 645,506,000 585,593,000 Bangladesh, China, India, Indonesia, Vietnam 
Wheat 624,837,000 566,843,000 China, France, India, Russia, United States 
Sugarbearing crops 1,650,492,000 1,497,301 ,000 
Sugar cane 1,376,846,000 1,249,054,000 Brazil, China, India, Mexico, Thailand, Pakistan 
Sugar beets 273,646,000 248,247,000 France, Germany, Turkey, Ukraine, United States 
Fruits and vegetables 1,267,748,000 1,150,082 ,000 
Tomatoes 108,712,000 98,622,000 China, Egypt, Italy, Turkey, United States 
Melons 91,825,000 83,302,000 China, Egypt, Iran, Turkey, United States 
Bananas 73,968,000 67,103,000 —_— Brazil, China, Ecuador, India, Philippines 
Oranges 73,594,000 66,763,000 —_ Brazil, China, India, Mexico, United States 
Root crops 750,602,000 680,935,000 
Potatoes 339,357,000 307,860,000 China, India, Poland, Russia, United States 
Cassava 193,585,000 175,617,000 —_ Brazil, Congo (Kinshasa), Indonesia, Nigeria, Thailand 
Sweet potatoes 157,692,000 143,055,000 China, Indonesia, Nigeria, Uganda, Vietnam 
Milk (cow, buffalo, sheep, and goat) 638,480,000 579,219,000 Germany, India, Pakistan, Russia, United States 
Oil-bearing cropst 464,123,000 421,046,000 
Soybeans 189,429,000 171,847,000 Argentina, Brazil, China, United States 
Cottonseed 62,310,000 56,526,000 China, India, Pakistan, United States, Uzbekistan 
Coconuts 54,853,000 49,762,000 _ India, Indonesia, Philippines 
Meat 261,749,000 237,454,000 
Pork 102,746,000 93,210,000 China, France, Germany, Spain, United States 
Poultry 75,615,000 68,596,000 —_ Brazil, China, France, Mexico, United States 
Beef and veal 62,688,000 56,870,000 Argentina, Australia, Brazi!, China, United States 


“The figures for products within a group do not add up to the group total Only the leading products are listed 


tUsed to make flour and meal as well as oil. 
Figures are for 2001. 
Source. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 


Kinds of agriculture 


Farmers practice many kinds of agriculture. Each kind 
can be classed in a number of ways. Climate is a com- 
mon basis for classification. For example, the kinds of 
farming practiced in the tropics can be classed as tropi- 
ca/agriculture. Similarly, many of the kinds of farming 
practiced in cooler regions can be classed as middle- 
latitude agriculture. Most kinds of agriculture can also 
be classed according to the amount or value of the 
goods produced per unit of land. Classified in this way, 
agriculture is /ntensive or extensive. 

Intensive agriculture is practiced chiefly where farm- 
land is scarce. It requires large amounts of fertilizer, la- 
bor, or other resources. Each unit of land is thus made 
as productive as possible. Small truck farms (vegetable 
farms) and orchards are examples of intensive agricul- 
ture. A truck farm may cover only 1 acre (0.4 hectare). But 
it may produce thousands of dollars’ worth of vegeta- 
bles yearly. 

Farmers practice extensive agriculture where land is 
plentiful, rainfall is light, and the soil is not especially 
fertile. Extensive agriculture requires relatively little in- 
vestment in equipment and supplies per unit of land, 
and each unit yields a relatively low return. The vast 
sheep ranches of Australia are an example of extensive 
agriculture. A ranch may cover 40,000 acres (16,000 
hectares) or more and raise thousands of sheep. But 
each animal needs about 4 acres (1.6 hectares) of land 
for grazing. The return per unit of land is therefore only 
a few dollars’ worth of wool or meat yearly. 

The many kinds of agriculture can also be classified as 


either commercial or subsistence. Commercial farms 
produce crops and animals chiefly for sale. Subsistence 
farmers produce goods mainly for themselves. The fol- 
lowing discussion deals with this classification. 


Commercial agriculture 


The great majority of farms in industrialized countries 
are commercial farms. They can be divided into two 
main groups: (1) specialized farms and (2) diversified (va- 
riety) farms. 

Specialized farms earn all or most of their income 
from the sale of one kind of crop or livestock. Many of 
these farms use mass-production methods and require 
a large investment in equipment and supplies. 

Specialized crop production. Crops produced for 
sale are called cash crops. Many commercial farms raise 
only one cash crop. These farms are known as one-crop, 
or single-crop, farms. Much of the world’s wheat is 
grown on huge one-crop farms on the North American 
Great Plains and in Ukraine. Large single-crop farms in 
tropical and subtropical areas are often called p/anta- 
tions. Plantations raise such crops as bananas, coffee, 
rice, sugar cane, and tea. Other specialized farms raise 
two or more cash crops, though most of their income 
comes from one crop. Major crops raised on such farms 
include cotton, tobacco, oilseeds, and various grains. 

Specialized livestock production. The main kinds of 
specialized livestock farms include cattle and sheep 
ranches, and dairy, poultry and egg, and hog farms. 

Most cattle and sheep ranches consist mainly of graz- 





ing land. In some major beef-producing couniries, such 
as Argentina and Australia, cattle are kept on ranches 
until they are to be slaughtered. In the United States, 
Canada, and a few other countries, most ranchers ship 
their cattle to feed lots after the animals are 5 to 12 
months old. Feed lots can feed cattle for market much 
faster than the animals can be fattened on the range. The 
typical feed lot practices highly intensive agriculture and 
can feed thousands of cattle on a very small area of land. 
The animals are kept in pens and given large amounts of 
grain and other high-energy feed. 

Dairy farms specialize in raising milk cows. The typical 
dairy farm is much larger than a poultry farm but far 
smaller than a ranch. Most dairy farmers raise their own 
feed crops. But many others buy their feed. 

Most poultry and egg farms are also highly intensive. 
Such a farm may cover only about 1 acre (0.4 hectare). 
Yet it may raise 20,000 or more laying hens or broiler 
chickens at a time. The birds are kept in temperature- 
controlled buildings and given high-energy feed. 

At ahog farm, the animals may be kept in buildings 
and concrete yards, or in dirt yards or pastures. A hogs 
diet consists primarily of corn and other grains. 

Diversified farms raise a variety of crops and live- 
stock. Such farms produce crops to sell and to feed their 
livestock. Most farms in Europe and many in the Mid- 
western United States are diversified farms. 

Diversified farming is less risky than specialized farm- 
ing. Bad weather, insects, or disease may ruin a years 
output on a specialized farm. Or the market price for a 
particular product may decline sharply. But on a diversi- 
fied farm, losses from one product may often be cov- 
ered by profits from other products. 


Subsistence agriculture 


Millions of farm families in Africa, Asia, and Latin 
America produce barely enough food to subsist on— 
that is, to meet their own needs. Subsistence farming 
depends heavily on human labor and requires only the 
most basic farm tools. Although subsistence farmers 





Agriculture 149 


produce goods chiefly for themselves, they may also 
raise small amounts for sale. This type of farming is 
often called semisubsistence agriculture. 

Most subsistence farmers have one or more small 
plots of land, which they farm year after year. Such 
farms are common in the rice-growing regions of south- 
ern Asia and in parts of Africa and Latin America. 

In some countries, many subsistence farmers do not 
have permanent farms. Instead, they live in groups that 
move from place to place within a large area fixed by 
custom. At each stop, the members of the community 
establish temporary farms. The number of such commu- 
nities has declined since the mid-1900's. But large com- 
munities still exist in certain parts of the world. They 
practice two main kinds of farming: (1) shifting cultiva- 
tion and (2) nomadic herding. 

Shifting cultivation is an ancient farming method. It 
is widely used on the grasslands and in the forests of 
central Africa, northeastern South America, and parts of 
Southeast Asia. The soil in most of these regions is not 
particularly fertile. But to keep it as fertile as possible, a 
farm community grows crops on the same land for only 
a year or two. The community then cultivates an adjoin- 
ing area or moves to a different part of its territory. At 
each new location, the grass and trees are cut down and 
burned. For this reason, shifting cultivation is also called 
slash-and-burn agriculture. Ashes from the burned grass 
and trees fertilize the soil. The abandoned land returns 
to grass or forest and can be farmed again. 

Nomadic herding has long been practiced in desert 
regions of Africa and Asia. These regions are far too dry 
to grow crops. But they have enough wild grasses to 
support small herds of camels, sheep, goats, and other 
livestock. Tribes of desert nomads keep such herds to 
provide the necessities of life. The nomads depend on 
their animals for milk, cheese, and meat. And they live in 
tents and wear clothing made from the skins and hair of 
the animals. A tribe settles in an area until their livestock 
have stripped it of grass. The tribe and its herd then 
move on to a fresh grazing area. 


R C Hunt 


Intensive agriculture is 
practiced mainly where farm- 
land is scarce, as in this rice- 
growing area Outside Beijing. 
By usiag large amounts of 
such resources as labor and 
water, Chinese farmers make 
each unit of land as produc- 
tive as possible. 


150 Agriculture 


About 12 billion acres (4.8 billion hectares) of land— 
more than a third of the earth's total land area—are used 
for farming. Farmers grow crops on about a third of this 
land. Farmers use the rest of this land for raising live- 
stock. 

To grow crops, farmers need fairly level land and ti//- 
able (workable) soil. In addition, the climate must pro- 
vide a certain amount of warmth and moisture. For ex- 
ample, most crops need a frost-free period, or growing 
season, of at least 90 days to develop from seeds into 
mature plants. Many crops require much longer. Except 
for the Far North and Antarctica, most regions of the 
world have a growing season long enough for at least 
some crops. However, many of these regions receive 
less than 10 inches (25 centimeters) of rain a year. Few 
crops Can grow in such dry climates without irrigation. 

Climate also largely determines the kinds of crops a 
farmer can grow. Such crops as bananas and cocoa 
beans grow well only in a tropical climate. Other crops, 
such as potatoes and apples, need a cooler climate. 
Many plants, including both bananas and potatoes, re- 
quire much moisture. However, some plants, such as 
sorghum and wheat, grow best in a climate that is fairly 
dry. 

Over the centuries, many methods have been devel- 
oped to grow crops in unfavorable areas. By using irri- 
gation, for example, farmers can raise crops even in 
some extremely dry places. Where the land is hilly, farm- 
ers build terraces by carving strips of level land out of 
the hillsides. Greenhouses enable farmers in areas with 
cold winters to grow certain fruits and vegetables the 
year around. Since the early 1900's, scientists have devel- 
oped many plant varieties and livestock breeds to suit 
the soil or climate of particular areas. 

This section discusses agriculture in North America 
and the other major regions of the world. For additional 
information, see the Agriculture section of individual 
continent and country articles. 


The United States 


Farmland covers about half the area of the United 
States—that is, nearly 1 billion acres (405 million 
hectares). The United States has about 465 million acres 
(188 million hectares) of cropland, more than any other 
country in the world. The remaining U.S. farmland is 
used for raising livestock. 

Only about 2 percent of all American workers are em- 
ployed on farms. Yet the United States produces much 
of the world’s farm output, including 25 percent of the 
beef and 15 percent of the grain, milk, and eggs. Ameri- 
can farmers can produce such great quantities of food 
for two main reasons. These reasons are (1) the United 
States has vast areas of fertile soil, and the climate in 
many of these areas is ideal for agriculture, and (2) 
American farmers use scientific farming methods and 
much farm machinery. 

Major agricultural regions. Certain regions of the 
United States are known for particular farm products. 
The Midwestern States, for example, are famous as the 
center of U.S. corn and hog production. More than two- 
thirds of the nation’s wheat is grown in the Great Plains 
region and the Pacific Northwest. But because of the 


Agriculture around the world 


many scientific improvements in agriculture, many farm 
goods that were formerly associated with a particular 
region of the United States are now produced over a 
much wider area. 

The center of cotton production, for example, has 
shifted from the Southern States to irrigated farmland in 
the Southwest. The broad grasslands of the West were 
once the nation’s chief cattle-grazing areas. But the de- 
velopment of special breeds of cattle and new species 
of grass has helped create major grazing areas in the 
Southern States. Dairy farming was once concentrated 
in a region that extended from New York to Minnesota. 
But large, productive dairy farms are now found in 
every state of the nation. 

The organization of U.S. agriculture. The United 
States has about 2,100,000 farms. They average about 
473 acres (191 hectares) in size. Most farmland in the 
United States is privately owned. The federal govern- 
ment owns much grazing land in the Rocky Mountain 
and Great Plains regions. The government leases most 
of this land to ranchers. 





Where the world’s 
crops and livestock 
are raised 








Since the 1920's, the number of farms in the United 
States has decreased steadily, while the average size has 
increased. The number of full-time farmers has also de- 
clined. Today, most operators of small farms also have 
nonfarm jobs. About two-thirds of all American farmers 
receive more than half of their total income from such 
sources. 

About 500,000 U.S. farms—less than a fourth of the to- 
tal number—account for over 80 percent of the cash re- 
ceipts from the sale of farm products. Many farmers sell 
their products under an arrangement called contract 
farming. \n contract farming, a farmer signs a contract 
with a food-processing or grain-marketing firm. Under 
most contracts, the farmer agrees to supply the contrac- 
tor with a certain amount of the farm's output at a speci- 
fied price. Most of the nation’s broiler chickens and 
milk—as well as much of its beef, eggs, fruits, and veg- 
etables—are produced under contract. 

Organized support for U.S. agriculture is provided 
by farm organizations, government agencies, and exten- 
sion services. A large number of farmers belong to mar- 
keting cooperatives, which work to find profitable mar- 





Citrus fs 





Sugar cane 


as fruits 


This map shows the worlds major agricultural areas and some of the chiet kinds of 


Agriculture 151 


kets for their members products. Since the early 1960's, 
commodity organizations have also become important 
among farmers. Each organization represents the eco- 
nomic interests of farmers who specialize in a particular 
product, such as cattle, hogs, corn, soybeans, or wheat. 
Commodity organizations try to improve market condi- 
tions through product promotion, by funding research, 
and by promoting favorable legislation. 

A number of general farm organizations also work to 
advance the interests of farmers. These groups include 
the American Farm Bureau Federation, the National 
Farmers Organization, the National Farmers Union, and 
the National Grange. Since the late 1960's, several labor 
unions have tried to organize U.S. farmworkers. But ex- 
cept in the Pacific Coast States, the drive has had only 
limited success. 

Government plays an important role in United States 
agriculture. Federal and state laws deal with such mat- 
ters as minimum farm prices preservation of the envi- 
ronment, quality standards for farm products, and the 
inspection of food. Government agencies enforce these 
laws and administer government farm programs. The 


+ 


ft an : 
y ‘ <A 3 “3 a > 
| di sare culnvat 7 
7%, D 
quae fane ’ ar 
= ie! , f J] 
a d ; w. .* 














crops and livestock they produce. Some of the areas shown as mostly nonagricul- “4 
tural are too cold, too dry. or too mountainous for farming. But other areas consist . 
of tropical forests and dry grasslands where jarmers practice certain kinds of sub- 


sistence agriculture, including nomadic herding and shifting cultivation. 


WORLD BOOK map | 
— 


152 Agriculture 


Leading agricultural states 


Annual cash receipts from farming 


California SOCSsSSESECEDOS 
$25,452,000,000 
Texas Ve sgn 
$14,969,000,000 
lowa eeeee< 
$71,592,000,000 
Nebraska HHaeEe 
S 9,877,000,000 
Kansas 9@e e: 
S 8,999,000,000 
Illinois ete ae 
S 8,469,000,000 
Minnesota Fees 
$ 8,317,000,000 
Florida SEC: 
S 7,143,000,000 
North Carolina Tr 7 
S 6.973,000,000 
Wisconsin eed 
5 6,080,000,000 





Figures are for 1999 and include government payments 
Source: US. Department of Agriculture 


United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) is the 
chief federal agricultural agency (see Agriculture, De- 
partment of). Other federal agencies sponsor special 
agriculture programs. Almost every state also has its 
own department of agriculture. 

Every state has an extension service, and nearly every 
county has extension agents, both of which are part of 
the Cooperative Extension System. These services and 
agents provide farm families with up-to-date information 
about farming techniques and methods of farm manage- 
ment The Cooperative Extension System is a partner- 
ship of the federal, state, and county governments. 

The state and county extension services are operated 
in connection with /and-grant universities. Every state 
has at least one of these schools. Over the years, land- 
grant universities have become the nation s chief cen- 
ters of agricultural education. Each land-grant university 
also operates an agricultural experiment station with the 
help of the federal government The stations are the 
leading centers of agricultural research in the United 
States. 

Careers in U.S. agriculture. Many agricultural ca- 
reers are directly related to farming and ranching. But 
the number of U.S. farms and farmers has declined over 
the past few decades. Even so, many specialized areas in 
agriculture are growing very rapidly. These areas in- 
clude biotechnology, communications, education, man- 
agement, sales, and science. 

Farmworkers include self-employed farmers and 
hired managers, supervisors, and laborers. Many peo- 
ple who plan to become farmers or farm managers at- 
tend an agricultural college. Some young people pre- 
pare for agricultural occupations by taking special 


courses in high school and participating in such extra- 
curricular activities as 4-H and FFA (Future Farmers of 
America) groups (see Agricultural education; FFA; 4-H). 
A majority of supervisors receive their training on the 
job. 

Many U.S. farm laborers are migrants—that is, they 
move into a region at harvesttime to help pick and 
process the crops. After the harvest is completed, the 
migrants move to another location. 

Scientists and professionals of almost every type are 
employed in agriculture. For example, engineers de- 
velop improved methods of irrigation and more efficient 
farm machinery. Chemists produce safe and effective 
pesticides. Genetic engineers scientifically alter genetic 
material in order to produce desirable new traits in 
crops and livestock Veterinarians protect the health of 
livestock 

Business people involved in agriculture include 
bankers and loan officers. Buyers and brokers buy or 
negotiate the sale of crops and other agricultural prod- 
ucts. Sales representatives sell agricultural goods, in- 
cluding machinery, seed, and feed. 

Agricultural educators include high-school and voca- 
tional teachers, adult education specialists, and college 
faculty. They work with both young people and estab- 
lished agriculturists. Their jobs take them into traditional 
classroom settings or to farms, homes, and businesses. 
Agriculture educators teach new methods and ideas. 
They help farmers solve problems and devise manage- 
ment plans for wise use of resources. 

Communications specialists who are knowledgeable 
about agriculture work in industry, education, and gov- 
ernment They include advertising representatives, edi- 
tors, photographers, public relations specialists, and 
radio and television producers. 


Canada 


Canada's farmland covers about 7 percent of the 
country's total land area. Most of the country's farmland 
lies in the provinces that border the United States. 
About half of Canada's farmland is used to grow crops. 
The nation has about 250,000 farms. They average about 
665 acres (270 hectares) in size. 

Canada has two major farming regions. The larger 
one extends through the Prairie Provinces—Manitoba, 
Saskatchewan, and Alberta. The other region lies in 
southeastern Canada. The Prairie Provinces grow most 
of Canada’s wheat, rapeseed, and barley. These prov- 
inces also produce about two-thirds of Canada’s most 
valuable farm product—beef cattle. Farms in the south- 
east produce corn, dairy products, eggs, fruits, and veg- 
etables. 

Agriculture is organized and supported in Canada 
much as it is in the United States. Almost all the farms 
are privately owned. Most owners live and work on 
their farm, and many of them also hold a part-time job 
off the farm. Contract farming has become increasingly 
important Many farmers belong to the Canadian Feder- 
ation of Agriculture and the National Farmers Union. 
Both organizations work to advance the economic inter- 
ests of Canada s farmers. 

Agriculture Canada, an agency of the federal govern- 





The agricultural labor force 

The percentage of workers engaged in agriculture varies greatly 
throughout the world. in Asia and Africa, for example, about 60 
percent of all workers are farmers. But farmers make up only 
about 2 percent of the total U.S. and Canadian labor force. 


WP Agricultural workers ——_ Nonagricultural workers 


57.5% 


42.5% 


Africa 
Total labor force: 342,561,000 


56.3% 
a 
Total labor force: 1,846,274,000 


19.8% 80.2% 
i= fo SCO 


Total labor force: 222,800,000 


Latin America 


18.7% 81.3% 
= — 1) 


Total labor force: 15,170,000 


Oceania 


8.6% 91.4% 
Europet 


Total labor force: 359,588,000 


United States 2.1% 


and Canada — —— 


Total labor force: 161,664,000 





“Excluding Asian part of Russia 

tincluding Asian part of Russia 

Figures are for 2000. 

Sources: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, World Book estimates. 


ment, is the country’s chief agricultural agency. Each 
province also has its own department of agriculture. 


Latin America 


About 36 percent of the land in Latin America has 
been developed for farming. Much of the region lies in 
the tropics, and the tropical soils and climate are not 
well suited to many of the crops grown in cooler re- 
gions. The largest and most fertile farming areas are in 
Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay, and southern Brazil. 

Most farmers in Latin America are subsistence farm- 
ers who live mainly on such crops as cassava, corn, dry 
beans, or potatoes. Commercial agriculture is also im- 
portant in Latin America, however. Wealthy families own 
most of the region's commercial farms, and hired work- 
ers or tenant farmers supply the labor. But since the 
mid-1900’s, many Latin American countries have begun 
land-reform programs. These programs have broken up 
many large estates and distributed the land among poor 
farmers. 

Plantations in tropical Latin America grow most of the 
world’s commercial supplies of bananas and coffee, 
about a third of the cocoa beans, and more than a fourth 
of the sugar cane. Large farms and ranches in Argentina 
and Brazil produce great quantities of food and other 
agricultural products. Both countries are among the 
world’s top producers of beef cattle and soybeans. 
Brazil is also the world’s leading producer of oranges, 





Agriculture 153 


and Argentina is one of the chief wool-producing coun- 
tries. 


Europe 


About 50 percent of the land in Europe, excluding 
Russia, is farmland. Most of this land is level and re- 
ceives abundant rainfall. As a result, approximately 60 
percent of Europe's farmland is used to grow crops. 
Farmers in most European countries use modern farm- 
ing methods and equipment. 

Russia has the largest land area of any country in the 
world. It ranks among the leading countries in area of 
farmland. But farmland makes up only about 15 percent 
of Russia's land. The majority of this farmland is in Eu- 
rope. Most of the Asian part of Russia is too dry or has 
too short a growing season for farming. Some of the 
land in this region is suitable for raising livestock, how- 
ever. 

Western Europe has only about 4 percent of the 
world’s farmland. Yet it is one of the most productive 
farming regions on the earth. Western European farms 
produce about 15 percent of the world’s potatoes and 
wheat; about 20 percent of the eggs; about 30 percent of 
the milk and sugar beets; and about 35 percent of the 
barley. About 5 percent of all workers are employed in 
farming. 

Agriculture in Western Europe is highly intensive. For 
example, most of the region's wheat is grown on small 
farms, and the farmers use large amounts of fertilizer on 
each unit of land. This intensive operation, combined 
with abundant rainfall, results in wheat yields that often 
average about 40 percent higher than those in the 
United States. 

Western European farms are usually smaller and 


Regional contributions to world crop production 


This graph shows how much each major world region con- 
tributes to the world’s crop output Europe and the United States 
and Canada, taken together, account for 41 percent of the total 
production. But these regions have only about 3 percent of the 
world’s farmers. 


Asia® 34.2% \ 


Europet 
J, B2% 


Oceania ~ 
4.5% 


~ United States 


and Canada 
17.8% 


Africa 

6.6% | 
Latin America 
13.7% 


“Excluding Asian part of Russia tincluding Asian part of Russia 
Figures are for 2001. Source Food and Agacutture Organization of the United Nations 


154 Agriculture 


much more diversified than those in the United States 
and Canada. The typical farm covers only 35 to 40 acres 
(14 to 16 hectares). It is used to raise alfalfa, barley, pota- 
toes, sugar beets, and wheat, as well as various kinds of 
livestock, such as cattle and hogs. Specialized farms pro- 
duce great quantities of citrus fruits, grapes, milk, olives, 
poultry, and vegetables. Most Western European farms 
are privately owned. 

About 16 percent of the workers in Eastern Europe 
work on farms. Farmers in Eastern Europe raise many of 
the same kinds of crops and livestock that Western Eu- 
ropean farmers raise. Most farms in Eastern Europe are 
owned by individual farmers or by companies. Some of 
these farms are much larger than those in Western Eu- 
rope. Some are run as joint-stock companies. Managers 
and farmers on these farms are part owners who own 
stock in their farms. They buy their own equipment and 
decide what to grow and how to market their products. 
Farmers on joint-stock farms receive a share in profits 
and sometimes a small wage. 

During the period of Communist rule, national gov- 
ernments owned most of the farmland in Eastern Eu- 
rope. The main kinds of government-owned farms were 
state farms and collective farms. State farms were man- 
aged entirely by the government. The government paid 
wages and collected profits for the farm products. Col- 
lective farms were controlled by the government but 
managed partly by workers. Workers were paid wages 
and shared in profits. 

In the late 1980's, non-Communist governments began 
to replace Communist governments in Eastern Europe. 
Many Eastern European countries passed laws allowing 
government-owned land to be distributed to or pur- 
chased by individual farmers. Some state-owned farms 
were broken up and sold to individual farmers or to 
agricultural companies. 


Asia 


Approximately 45 percent of the land in Asia is used 
for agriculture. Asia’s farmland is extremely varied. It 
ranges from the high, dry plateaus of eastern Turkey to 
the hot, wet lowlands of Indonesia and Malaysia. The 
continent has more than 100 million farms. Most of 
these farms cover less than 1 acre (0.4 hectare) and are 
subsistence farms. Asia also has many large commercial 
farms that are operated with scientific methods. 

The state owns most of the farms in the Communist 
countries of Asia. In Israel, most of the farms are cooper- 
atively or collectively owned by the farmworkers (see 1s- 
rael [Agriculture]). In other countries, the majority of 
farms are privately owned. In the past, much of the pri- 
vately owned farmland in many Asian countries was 
worked by poor tenant farmers. The rents generally 
were so high that most tenant families barely survived. 
But since the mid-1900's, land reform programs in such 
countries as India and Pakistan have helped many tenant 
families gain title to their land. 

About 60 percent of Asia’s workers are farmers. Sub- 
sistence farmers grow such crops as Cassava, rice, 
sweet potatoes, wheat, or yams. Many subsistence farm- 
ers also raise some livestock, usually a few chickens, 
goats, hogs, or sheep. Commercial farming is important 


in Asia's few industrial countries, such as Israel and 
Japan, and in China and Malaysia. 

China is the world’s leading producer of cotton and 
rice, and it ranks second only to the United States in the 
production of corn. Malaysia leads all other nations in 
the production of palm oil. Thailand, Indonesia, and 
Malaysia are all major producers of natural rubber. India 
produces more tea than any other country. The Philip- 
pines ranks as the leading producer of coconuts and co- 
conut products. Plantations and many small farms 
throughout tropical Asia raise such export crops as ba- 
nanas, coconut, sugar cane, and tea. 


Australia and New Zealand 


Farmland covers about 60 percent of Australia and 
more than 50 percent of New Zealand. In both countries, 
more than 90 percent of the farmland is pasture or rela- 
tively dry grazing land and is used mainly for raising cat- 
tle and sheep. Australia leads the world in wool produc- 
tion and is an important producer of beef, lamb, mutton, 
and dairy products. New Zealand also ranks high in 
wool, lamb, and mutton production. 

Most of the cropland in Australia and New Zealand 
lies along the east coasts of both countries and in the 
southeastern and southwestern parts of Australia. Farms 
in these regions are operated in much the same way as 
farms in the major crop-growing areas of North Ameri- 
ca. Grains are the most important crops in both Australia 
and New Zealand. Australia produces large quantities of 
wheat. 

About 5 percent of the workers in Australia and about 
10 percent of the workers in New Zealand are employed 
in agriculture. Australian farms average nearly 5,000 
acres (2,000 hectares) in size. New Zealand farms aver- 
age about 750 acres (305 hectares). But the average farm 
size in both countries is much smaller if large livestock 
ranches are not included. Thus, the typical Australian 
farm, for example, covers about 335 acres (135 hectares). 
Most farms in both countries are privately owned com- 
mercial operations. 


Africa 


Deserts and tropical rain forests cover much of Africa. 
Only about a third of the land is used for farming. But 
about 60 percent of all workers are farmers. As in Latin 
America and Asia, subsistence agriculture is common in 
Africa. The main subsistence crops include bananas, 
barley, cassava, corn, sorghum, sweet potatoes, and 
yams. 

Commercial agriculture centers in a few widely scat- 
tered areas. Irrigated farms along the coast of the Med- 
iterranean Sea and in the Nile River Valley produce cot- 
ton, dates, grapes, olives, and wheat. Plantations and 
small farms in the tropics produce cocoa beans, coffee, 
cotton, palm kernels and oil, peanuts, sisal, tea, and to- 
bacco. 

Africa's richest farming country is South Africa. Unlike 
most other African countries, South Africa has large 
areas of fertile soil and a middle-latitude climate that is 
well suited to large-scale farming. Commercial farmers 
there are major producers of beef cattle, citrus fruits, 
corn, sheep, and sugar cane. 





History of agriculture 


For hundreds of thousands of years, prehistoric peo- 
ple lived by hunting, fishing, and gathering wild plants. 
Then about 8000 B.C, people took the first steps toward 
agriculture. Some tribes discovered that plants can be 
grown from seeds. They also learned that certain ani- 
mals could be tamed and then raised in captivity. These 
two discoveries marked the beginning of the domestica- 
tion of plants and animals. Scholars believe that domes- 
tication began in the Middle East and then spread to 
surrounding areas. Later, people in other parts of the 
world independently learned how to domesticate plants 
and animals. Some time after the development of do- 
mestication, groups of people living in what are now Is- 
rael and Jordan began to depend chiefly cn farming for 
food, even though they still hunted. 

Agriculture developed independently in northern and 
southeastern Asia between 5000 and 4000 B.C. and in 
central Mexico by 1500 B.C. It spread to other parts of 
the world from these areas and from the Middle East. 
For more information on the beginning of agriculture, 
see Prehistoric people (The rise of agriculture); Indian, 
American (The first farmers). 


Ancient times 


People who farmed no longer had to travel in search 
of food. They could thus build permanent settlements. 
Some of these settlements developed into the first cities. 
Some of the cities, in turn, produced the worlds first 
civilizations. 

The Middle East. The first great civilizations arose in 
two regions of the Middle East. One region was the Nile 
River Valley of Egypt The other was Mesopotamia, 
which lay northeast of Egypt between and around the 
Tigris and Euphrates rivers. Both regions had fertile soil, 
but neither received enough rain for crops to grow. 
Farmers discovered, however, that they could raise 
crops during most of the year if they used river water 
for irrigation. By about 3000 B.C, Egypt and Mesopo- 
tamia had developed the world’s first large-scale irriga- 
tion systems. Also by about 3000 B.C, Egyptian and 
Mesopotamian farmers invented a plow that oxen could 
pull. Earlier farmers had pulled their plows by hand. The 
ox-drawn plows worked much better and faster and re- 
quired much less human labor. 

The large-scale irrigation projects and ox-drawn 
plows helped Egyptian and Mesopotamian farmers pro- 
duce much more food than their families needed. The 
food surpluses enabled more and more people to give 
up farming and move to the cities. Classes of builders, 
craftworkers, merchants, and priests began to appear— 
and systems of writing were improved. These dramatic 
developments contributed greatly to the growth of civi- 
lization. 

The Roman Empire began as a country of small 
farms on the Italian peninsula before 500 B.C By the AD. 
200's, Rome had conquered much of Europe and the 
Middle East and the entire Mediterranean coast of 
Africa. As Rome grew, farms within the empire in- 
creased in size and became highly specialized. Most 
large farms specialized in raising wheat, which formed 
the basis of the Roman diet 

The Romans introduced into Europe the advanced 


Agriculture 155 


farming techniques of the Middle East, such as the ox- 
drawn plow and methods of irrigation. The Romans also 
developed new farming methods. For example, they be- 
gan the practice of leaving half of every field fa/low(un- 
planted) each year. The fallow soil could store nutrients 
(nourishing substances) and moisture for a crop the fol- 
lowing year. The Romans also developed systems of 
crop rotation. In one system, they used legumes, or 
pulses, as a rotation crop. Legumes enrich the soil with 
nitrogen, one of the chief nutrients that all crops need to 
grow. By building terraces, Roman farmers were able to 
grow such fruits as grapes and olives along the Mediter- 
ranean Seas steep shoreline. In various parts of the em- 
pire, Roman engineers built long irrigation canals and 
huge structures to store grain. 

The selective breeding of plants and livestock began 
in Europe during Roman times. For example, farmers in 
the part of Europe that is now the Netherlands pro- 
duced the first specialized breed of dairy cattle, the Hol- 
stein, about 100 B.C 


The Middle Ages 


During the A.D. 400's, barbarian tribes swept into the 
West Roman Empire. By the end of the 400’s, the empire 
had fallen to the invaders, marking the start of the 1,000- 
year period known as the Middle Ages. 

The barbarian invasions triggered civil wars through- 
out Europe. These wars, in turn, led to the collapse of 
Europe's economic system, including the use of money. 
A new economic system called manorialism gradually 
developed in many areas. Under this system, farms be- 
came part of large estates known as manors. The man- 
ors were controlled by rich lords. In most cases, they 
were worked by peasants known as serfs. The serfs sup- 
plied the lord of their manor with goods and services in 
return for use of the land. Serfs could not be denied use 
of the land as long as they fulfilled their duties to their 
lord. But they were not allowed to own land. See Mano- 
rialism. 

European farmers invented a three-field system of 
crop rotation during the Middle Ages. In many areas, it 





Detar! of a clay seal about 2900 B.C! trom Mesopotamia: 
the Lourte Pans Ronald Shendan 


Agriculture began to develop in the Middle East about 
10,000 years ago. Early farm products included grain. 


156 Agriculture 


replaced the Roman two-field system. Under the new 
system, farmland was divided into three fields rather 
than two. Farmers left one field fallow and raised a dif- 
ferent crop in each of the two remaining fields. !n this 
way, two-thirds of the land was farmed each year, in- 
stead of half of it 

During the 900's, a new and important kind of harness 
was introduced into Europe. Unlike earlier harnesses, it 
could be used to hitch a horse to a plow. A horse can 
pull a plow three or four times faster than an ox can. 
Thereafter, horses gradually replaced oxen as the chief 
source of power on many European farms. 

European farmers continued to improve plants and 
livestock by selective breeding during the Middle Ages. 
Many special-purpose livestock breeds were devel- 
oped. For example, a breed of dairy cow that gave espe- 
cially rich milk was developed in northwestern Europe 
about 1100. This breed, called the Guernsey, is still a ma- 
jor source of milk used to make butter. 

Manorialism had begun to die out in western Europe 
by the 1200's, as money again came into use for payment 
of goods and services. More and more peasants re- 
ceived wages for their work and paid rent for their land. 
But until the 1700's and 1800's, peasants still could not 
own land in most European countries. 


Colonial agriculture 


The European voyages of discovery that began in the 
1400's greatly affected agriculture throughout the world. 
Crops and livestock that had been developed in isolated 
regions became widely known. Potatoes, for example, 
were unknown in Europe until Spanish explorers 
brought them from Peru in the 1500's. 

American Indians had developed advanced systems 
of agriculture by the time the first European explorers 
arrived. In various parts of the Americas, Indian farmers 
grew cocoa beans, corn, peanuts, peppers, rubber 
trees, squash, sweet potatoes, tobacco, and tomatoes. 
Europeans first learned of these crops, and how best to 
grow them, from the Indians. The Europeans, in turn, 
brought their seeds, livestock, and farming tools and 


—_ _ = f | - | 


Detail from a copy of a wall painting (about 1275 B.C); Metropolitan Museum of Art. New York 
City. Egyptian Expedition Rogers Fund, 1930 


An irrigation device called a shadoofwas used by the ancient 
Egyptians to draw water from the Nile River for their crops. 





methods to the regions they explored and settled. 

By the late 1600's, England, France, the Netherlands, 
Portugal, and Spain had colonies throughout the Ameri- 
cas. In tropical regions, the colonists established planta- 
tions that specialized in growing such crops as cocoa 
beans, coffee, and sugar for export Labor was supplied 
by black slaves imported from Africa or by the native- 
born Indians, who were forced to work at low wages. 

In most of England's North American colonies, how- 
ever, the settlers started family farms. Each family had its 
own plot of land, which produced enough food and 
other products to meet the family’s needs. Plantation 
agriculture became important only in England's Chesa- 
peake Colonies (Maryland and Virginia) and Southern 
Colonies (North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia). 
By the mid-1700's, plantations in these colonies were 
growing rice, sugar cane, tobacco, and a dye-producing 
plant called indigo. By the time cotton became a major 
plantation crop in the late 1700's, the Chesapeake and 
Southern colonies had imported thousands of black 
Africans for slave labor. 

Agriculture developed more slowly in the French 
colonies in what is now eastern Canada. The French, 
who controlled most of eastern Canada from the late 
1500's until 1763, did little to encourage farming. Much 
of the land was owned by nobles or merchants called 
seigneurs (pronounced seen YURZ) The settlers them- 
selves could not own land. But they could rent small 
plots from the seigneurs. By the mid-1600's, many 
French settlers had started small subsistence farms on 
rented land along the St. Lawrence River in Quebec. 
These farms, and similar ones in Nova Scotia and Prince 
Edward Island, remained almost the only farms in Cana- 
da until Britain gained control of the country in 1763. 
Settlers then began to clear the heavily forested lands of 
Ontario for farming. For more information about Ameri- 
can colonial agriculture, see Colonial life in America 
(The economy); Seigneurial system. See also Plantation; 
Slavery. 

Europeans established plantations in parts of Asia 
during the 1600's and after. But except on the planta- 





Detail of an illuminated manuscnpt !1400s) (Bettmann Archive: 


The use of horses for farm work began in Europe during the 
Middle Ages and helped farmers increase their output 





tions, few Asian farmers adopted European farming 
methods. Instead, they continued to use—and improve— 
the methods that had developed in their countries over 
hundreds of years. Rice growers, for example, continual- 
ly improved the methods of irrigating their fields. As a 
result, such heavily populated countries as China, India, 
and Japan greatly increased their rice production from 
the 1600's through the 1800's. But in the 1600's, wealthy 
landowners throughout Asia began a system of tenant 
farming, which lasted almost unchanged until land re- 
forms of the mid-1900's. The system kept the vast majori- 
ty of Asian farmers in constant poverty. 


The Agricultural Revolution 


During the early 1700's, a great change in farming 
called the Agricultural Revolution began in Britain. The 
revolution resulted from a series of discoveries and in- 
ventions that made farming much more productive than 
ever before. By the mid-1800's, the Agricultural Revolu- 
tion had spread throughout much of Europe and North 
America. One of the revolution’s chief effects was the 
rapid growth of towns and cities in Europe and the 
United States during the 1800's. Because fewer people 
were needed to produce food, farm families by the 
thousands moved to the towns and cities. 

The Agricultural Revolution was brought about main- 
ly by three developments. They were (1) improved crop- 
growing methods; (2) advances in livestock breeding; 
and (3) the invention of new farm equipment. 

Improved crop-growing methods. In the early 
1700's, a retired English politician named Charles Town- 
shend began to experiment with crop rotation. He found 
that turnips could be used as one of the four crops ina 
four-field rotation system. The other crops consisted of 
two grains, especially varieties of wheat; and a legume, 
such as alfalfa or clover. Each crop either added nutri- 
ents to the soil or absorbed different kinds and amounts 
of nutrients. Farmers therefore did not have to leave any 
land fallow, as in two- and three-field rotation systems. 

Townshend's experiments did not become well 
known during his lifetime, except to earn him the nick- 








Detarl of an engraving trom Horse: Hoesng Musdandry me) 
by jethro Tull, Histo al Pictures Service 


The first modern farm machine was a seed drill, or planter It 
was invented by Jethro Tull of England about 1700. 


Agriculture 157 


name ‘Turnip’ Townshend. But in the late 1700's, an Eng- 
lish nobleman named Thomas Coke produced greatly 
increased yields using Townshend's system. Coke en- 
couraged other farmers to adopt the method, and it 
soon became widely used in England. The system en- 
abled farmers to grow crops on all their land each year, 
which made farmland much more productive. Both 
Townshend and Coke lived in the county of Norfolk, and 
so the four-field rotation system became known as the 
Norfolk system. 

Before the development of the four-field system, 
farmers could not raise enough forage to feed livestock 
through the winter. Most livestock therefore had to be 
slaughtered in the fall, and the meat was preserved with 
salt. But the four-field system greatly increased the pro- 
duction of forage crops, especially turnips and clover. 
As a result, farmers could produce fresh meat through- 
out the year, not only during the months when livestock 
could be turned out to pasture. 

Advances in livestock breeding. In the late 1700's, 
an English farmer named Robert Bakewell showed how 
livestock could be improved by intensively breeding an- 
imals with desirable traits. Bakewell produced improved 
breeds of cattle, horses, and sheep. He became best 
known for developing a breed of sheep that could be 
raised for meat as well as for wool. Earlier breeds of 
sheep were expensive to raise for meat because they fat- 
tened too slowly. As a result, most sheep were raised 
for wool only. But Bakewell’s breed, called the Leicester, 
fattened quickly. It could therefore be raised for slaugh- 
ter at a reasonable cost. The cost was so low, in fact, that 
mutton soon became the most popular meat in England. 

The invention of new farm equipment. The first 
important inventor of the Agricultural Revolution was 
jethro Tull, an English gentleman farmer. Tull lived dur- 
ing the late 1600's and early 1700's. But his inventions 
were not widely used until the late 1700's. 

When Tull began his career, farmers still planted seed 
by sowing—that is, by hand scattering. To conserve seed 
and increase yields, inventors had tried to build a ma- 
chine that would dig small furrows (grooves) in the soil 


* re so ~ =, 
(par werse 






Detail of an engraving 1869) in Hampers bWeekiA based on 
4 drawing bv Willtam L Sheppard ‘Library: of Congress 


The cotton gin that Eli Whitney of the United States invented in 
1793 saved workers the labor of cleaning cotton by hand. 





158 Agriculture 


and deposit seeds in them. About 1700, Tull built the 
first such seed dri//that worked. Actually, it was the first 
successful farm machine with inner moving parts, and 
so it became the ancestor of all modern farm machinery. 

One of the most important inventions of the Agricul- 
tural Revolution was the cotton gin that Eli Whitney of 
the United States built in 1793. Before Whitney's inven- 
tion, farmers grew little cotton because of the difficulty 
of separating the fiber from the seeds. Whitney's gin 
simplified this work and so made large-scale production 
of cotton possible. During the early 1800's, cotton re- 
placed tobacco as the leading plantation crop in the 
Southern United States. 

During the late 1700's and early 1800's, inventors be- 
gan to work on machines to harvest and process the 
ever-increasing amount of grain being produced by U.S. 
farmers. In 1834, Cyrus McCormick, an American inven- 
tor, patented the first successful harvesting machine, or 
reaper. Also in 1834, two American brothers, Hiram and 
John Pitts, patented a combined portable threshing ma- 
chine and fanning mill. Their machine became the mod- 
el for most modern threshers. During the early 1800's, 
inventors began work on developing a combined har- 
vester and thresher, called a combine. But combines 
were not widely used until the early 1900's. 

Equally important to increased grain production was 
a steel plow invented by John Deere, an Illinois black- 
smith, in 1837. Earlier plows were made of cast iron and 
wood and did not easily turn the thick soil that covered 
much of the American Midwest. The soil would stick to 
the face of the plow and clog the furrows (narrow 
grooves). But the soil fell away easily from the steel face 
of Deere’s plow, permitting it to cut a clean furrow. 


Expansion in the United States 


The invention of the reaper, the thresher, and the 
steel plow encouraged the development of farming in 
the well-watered eastern half of the American prairies. 
But farmers were not attracted to the dry prairie to the 
west—the region known as the Great Plains. 

In 1862, Congress passed the Homestead Act to pro- 





Engraving (1800s! by an unknown 
American arnst. Culver 


The first successful harvesting machine, or reaper, was 
patented by the American inventor Cyrus McCormick in 1834. 


« 


mote settlement of undeveloped, publicly owned land. 
The act granted 160 acres (65 hectares) of such land to 
anyone who lived on it for five years and developed it 
for farming. Or settlers could buy the land for $1.25 per 
acre after living on it for six months and making im- 
provements on it Congress also encouraged the build- 
ing of railroads to speed settlement of undeveloped ter- 
ritories. The first railroad that linked the Great Plains 
with the eastern half of the United States was completed 
in the late 1860's. 

From 1862 to 1900, about 500,000 families obtained 
land under the Homestead Act. Much of the land was in 
the Great Plains. The plains were covered with grass and 
so were ideal for grazing livestock. But because rainfall 
was light and undependable, crop yields were always 
low. To help solve this problem, Great Plains farmers de- 
veloped a crop-growing method that was suited to the 
regions dry climate. This method, called dryland farm- 
ing, generally requires that a field be left fallow every 
other year. The soil can thus store up moisture for a 
crop the following year. 

Great Plains farmers found that wheat is better suited 
to dryland farming than are most other crops. The farm- 
ers soon began to produce plentiful wheat crops nearly 
every year. By the early 1900's, the plains had become 
one of the world’s major wheat-producing regions. 

In addition to the Homestead Act, Congress passed 
another bill in 1862 that greatly affected agriculture in 
the United States. This bill was the Morrill Act. It granted 
the states large areas of land to sell. The proceeds were 
to be invested and the income used to establish col- 
leges of agriculture and the mechanical arts. The act 
thus led to the founding of many land-grant colleges. 
These schools, in turn, produced many of the remark- 
able advances in U.S. agriculture during the 1900's. 


The development of modern agriculture 


Since the 1800's, science and technology have helped 
make agriculture more and more productive. About 
1850, for example, each U.S. farmer produced, on the av- 
erage, enough food to feed 5 people. Today, each 





Detail of a photograph (about 1906! taken near Belo. Wis. 
State Histoncal Society of Wisconsin 


An early gasoline-powered tractor did only light work. But it 
signaled the beginning of a new age of power for farming. 





farmer produces enough to feed 78 peopie. Science and 
technology have contributed to the great increase in 
farm production in three main ways. They have (1) pro- 
vided farmers with labor-saving technologies; (2) pro- 
duced improved plant varieties and breeds of livestock; 
and (3) developed new agricultural chemicals. 

Labor-saving technologies. Steam-powered tractors 
were developed in the mid-1800's, and some farmers in 
Europe and the United States began to use them. But the 
tractors were expensive, and they were difficult to oper- 
ate. As aresult, most farmers continued to use horses 
and mules to power farm machines. 

The first successful gasoline-powered tractors were 
made in the United States in the early 1890's. However, 
they were not powerful enough for most farm work. By 
the early 1900's, engineers had designed models power- 
ful enough to pull a plow. The first all-purpose tractors 
appeared in the 1920's. They could be used to power a 
variety of farm machinery, from combines to cotton 
pickers. The new tractors gradually replaced work ani- 
mals and steam-powered machines on almost all U.S. 
farms. Today, there are millions of farm tractors in use 
throughout the world. 

In Japan and several European countries, most farms 
had electric power service by the mid-1930's. The exten- 
sion of electric service to rural areas of the United States 
was slow until the federal government established the 
Rural Electrification Administration (REA) in 1935. At that 
time, only about 10 percent of all U.S. farms had electric 
power. The REA helped expand service by granting low- 
interest loans for rural electric power development. By 
1960, more than 97 percent of all farms in the United 
States had electric power. 

Today, farmers use electric motors to run milking ma- 
chines, irrigation pumps, and many other farm ma- 
chines. Farmers also use electric power to operate elec- 
tronic and automated equipment. This equipment 
includes devices that fill feeding troughs or collect and 
grade eggs automatically. 

Many farmers use computers to aid in farm opera- 
tions and to keep track of finances. They often use their 
computers to gain access to the Internet, the worldwide 
network of computers. Using the Internet, farmers may 
make use of data provided by agricultural colleges or 
other information centers. For example, they may use 
such information to determine the correct mixture of in- 
gredients to use in livestock feed or to estimate the prof- 
it that can be expected from a particular crop. 

Plant and livestock breeding. During the mid- 
1800's, an Austrian botanist and monk named Gregor 
Mendel discovered the principles of heredity. Mendel 
thus laid the groundwork for genetics—the science that 
explains how characteristics are inherited. The develop- 
ment of genetics has made it possible to breed plants 
and animals scientifically. 

In the early 1900's, plant breeders in the United States 
developed a hybrid corn that produced unusually high 
yields. Various corn hybrids became commercially avail- 
able in the 1920's. By the early 1960's, more than 95 per- 
cent of all U.S. corn acreage was planted with hybrid 
seed. Average corn yields in the United States increased 
dramatically. They nearly doubled between the early 


Agriculture 159 


1920's and the early 1960's, and they have continued to 
increase significantly since that time. 

During the 1960's, scientists introduced varieties of 
wheat and rice that gave much higher yields than earlier 
varieties. The new varieties were intended mainly to 
help various poor nations, such as India and Mexico, in- 
crease their food supply. This effort proved so success- 
ful that it has been called the Green Revolution. 

Livestock breeders have developed many improved 
lines since the early 1900's. They have also devised inten- 
sive selection techniques to speed genetic develop- 
ment. Nutrition specialists have developed better live- 
stock feeds, and veterinarians have improved methods 
of health care. All these advances continue to make live- 
stock more and more productive. For example, today’s 
broiler chickens grow much faster than earlier breeds 
or lines, on much less feed. And the average annual milk 
production of cows in the United States is continually 
increasing. 

Agricultural chemicals. Almost since the beginning 
of agriculture, farmers have used various substances to 
enrich the soil and to kill insect pests. For example, they 
have used wood ash and manure as fertilizers since pre- 
historic times. Arsenic, pyrethrum, and other natural 
poisons have long served as insecticides. Such sub- 
stances were used because they worked. But little was 
known about why or how they worked. 

Since the beginning of modern chemistry in the late 
1700's, scientists have produced many kinds of synthetic 
chemicals for use in agriculture. These chemicals in- 
clude (1) fertilizers; (2) insecticides; (3) herbicides, or 
weed killers; and (4) chemicals to control plant and ani- 
mal diseases. All these chemicals have helped increase 
farm production dramatically. However, improper or ex- 
cessive use of these chemicals can be hazardous and 
cause damage to the environment. In the United States, 
federal and state laws limit such practices and prohibit 
the use of chemicals that have been proved harmful. 

Fertilizers. During the 1800's, scientists began to iden- 
tify the chemicals that crops need to grow. They estab- 
lished, for example, that legumes are useful rotation 
crops because the plants incorporate atmospheric nitro- 
gen into the soil. Scientists also identified other ele- 
ments that crops need, such as phosphorus and potassi- 
um. Mixed fertilizers that contained the necessary 
elements soon became commercially available. But their 
use was often limited by high cost. 

An economical commercial method of capturing at- 
mospheric nitrogen was developed in 1909 by Fritz 
Haber, a German chemist. Nitrogen is such an important 
fertilizer element that the development of low-cost nitro- 
gen greatly affected the use of fertilizer. Farmers 
throughout the world are using ever-increasing 
amounts of fertilizer. See Fertilizer. 

Insecticides. \n 1939, scientists in Switzerland devel- 
oped a powerful chemical, called DDT, for use as an in- 
secticide. By the early 1950's, farmers were using great 
quantities of DDT on their crops. However, scientists 
later discovered that although DDT killed insect pests, it 
also endangered other animal life. During the 1970s, the 
governments of many countries banned most uses of 
DDT. Today, most farmers use insecticides made of the 





160 Agriculture 


chemical compounds organophosphate and carbamate. 
For more information on methods of insect control, see 
Insect (Insect control); Insecticide. 

Herbicides. Farmers have always had to fight against 
weeds. But until the mid-1900's, hand weeding, hoeing, 
and machine cultivating were almost the only methods 
farmers had to control weed growth. The first chemical 
herbicide, called 2,4-D, was patented in the United 
States in 1945. It quickly became the most widely used 
herbicide. See Weed (Weed controll). 

Chemicals to control diseases. Like weed growth, 
plant and animal diseases have always been difficult and 
costly problems for farmers. Many plant diseases are 
caused by tiny organisms called fungi. Since the mid- 
1800's, scientists have developed a number of chemicals 
known as fungicides to help fight these diseases. Some 
plant diseases are caused by viruses or bacteria. Chemi- 
cals have also been developed to help control these dis- 
eases. In addition, scientists continually develop plant 
varieties that have greater resistance to disease. For fur- 
ther information on fungi and fungicides, see Fungi {The 
importance of fungi); Fungicide. 

Most animal diseases are caused by bacteria or virus- 
es. Some are controlled by vaccines. The great French 
scientist Louis Pasteur created the first livestock vac- 
cines in the 1800's. They were developed against such 
diseases as anthrax and chicken cholera. Since 1900, 
chemists have introduced additional vaccines as well as 
antibiotics and other substances to help fight livestock 
diseases. See Veterinary medicine (On farms). 

Recent developments. The demand for food 
throughout the world is constantly increasing. To help 
meet this demand, farmers have expanded their food 
output enormously. The largest increase in food de- 
mand has occurred in the nonindustrial, or developing, 
countries. Rapid population growth in these countries 
has been chiefly responsible for the increase. But most 
developing countries produce barely enough food to 
meet their present needs. And few can afford to import 
the additional supplies they need to feed their rapidly 
growing population. The developing countries there- 
fore must expand their food production greatly or face a 
severe food shortage. Most developing countries, how- 
ever, lack the resources that scientific farming requires. 

Many industrial countries sponsor programs that pro- 
vide farmers in developing countries with low-interest 
loans and technical training to help modernize their 
farm operations. The Food and Agriculture Organization 
(FAO)—an agency of the United Nations—helps coordi- 
nate the various national programs. The FAO also spon- 
sors assistance projects of its own. See Food supply. 

Throughout the 1970's, demand in other countries for 
U.S. farm products increased rapidly. As a result, many 
U.S. farmers borrowed large sums of money to expand 
production. But in the early 1980's, American farmers 
faced a severe farm debt crisis. Interest rates for bor- 
rowed money increased sharply, and worldwide de- 
mand for U.S. farm products decreased. This reduced 
demand led to lower prices for farm products. Thus, 
many farmers were unable to repay loans and prepare 
for a new growing season, and some had to sell their 
farms. Banks and other lenders foreclosed on loans that 
were not repaid—that is, they took over the farms. Many 
banks were forced out of business because they could 


not recover money they had loaned to the farmers. 

In 1996, the U.S. government passed a law intended to 
eliminate or reduce price support payments that had 
been established in the 1930's for some crops. It made 
farm income for many crops more dependent on market 
prices. But high production and low farm prices in the 
late 1990's resulted in an increase in government pay- 


ments to farmers. 


Larry D. Trede 


Study aids 


Related articles. See Farm and farming. See also the Agri- 
culture section of the state, province, country, and continent arti- 
cles. Additional related articles include: 


Biographies 
Bailey, Liberty H. McCormick, Ruffin, Edmund 
Borlaug, Cyrus H. Townshend, Vis- 
Norman E. Mendel, Gregor }. count 
Burbank, Luther Morton, Julius S. Tull, Jethro 
Carver,George W. _ Pinckney, Eliza- Wallace, Henry A. 
Deere, John beth L Whitney, Eli 
Lysenko, Trofim D. 
Kinds of farming 
Aquaculture Fur (Fur ranching) Plantation 
Collective farm Gardening Ranching 
Dairying Horticulture Tenant farming 
Dry farming Hydroponics Tree farming 
Floriculture Nursery Truck farming 
Major crops 
Alfalfa Corn Oats Soybean 
Barley Cotton Potato Sugar 
Bean Flax Rice Sweet potato 
Cassava Fruit Rye Vegetable 
Coffee Hemp Sorghum Wheat 
Chief kinds of livestock 
Cattle Duck Hog Poultry Sheep 
Chicken Goat Horse Rabbit Turkey 


Methods and problems 


Conservation Fertilizer Migrant labor 
Cropping system Fungicide Pest control 
Drainage Herbicide Rainmaking 
Erosion Insecticide Shelterbelt 
Environmental Irrigation Weed 
pollution Land reform 
(Agriculture) 


Education and research 


Agricultural education County agricultural extension 


Agricultural experiment agent 

Station Hybrid 
Agronomy International Fund for Agri- 
Breeding cultural Development 


Census (Kinds of censuses) 
Cooperative Extension 
System 


Land-grant university 
Nutrition 


History of agriculture 


Prehistoric people (The rise of 
agriculture) 
Rome, Ancient (Agriculture) 


Aztec (Agriculture) 
Babylonia (Way of life) 
Colonial life in America 


{Farming} Serf 
Egypt, Ancient (Agriculture) Villein 
Feudalism Western frontier life in 


America (The cattle boom; 
Homesteading on the 
Great Plains) 

Yeoman 


Greece, Ancient (Farming) 
Indian, American (Farming) 
Middle Ages 

Persia, Ancient (Economy) 





Other related articles 


Agribusiness Insect (The importance of 


Animal (The importance of insects) 
animals) Livestock 
Crop Marketing 
Food and Agriculture Organi- Plant (The importance of 
zation plants) 
Food supply Soil 
Grain elevator 
Outline 


I. Chief agricultural products 
A. Food products 
B. Natural fibers 
C. Other agricultural products 
ll. Kinds of agriculture 
A. Commercial agriculture 
B. Subsistence agriculture 
ill, Agriculture around the worid 
A. The United States 
B. Canada 
C Latin America 
D. Europe 
E. Australia and New Zealand 
F. Asia 
G. Africa 
IV. History of agriculture 


Questions 


How does climate determine the kinds of crops that can be 
grown in a particular region? 
When and where did agriculture begin? 


What are some of the products besides food products that agri- 


culture provides? 
What is subsistence agriculture? Where is it widely used? 
Why is agriculture the world’s most important industry? 
What are forage crops? Why are they important? 
How did agriculture affect the development of civilization? 
How do intensive and extensive agriculture differ? 
Why is mixed farming less risky than specialized farming? 
What was the Agricultural Revolution? 


Additional resources 


Level | 

Coster, Patience. Farming and Industry. Children’s Pr., 1998. 

Peterson, Cris. Harvest Year. Boyds Mills, 1996. 

Wolfman, Judy. Life on a Cattle Farm. Carolrhoda, 2002. Life ona 
Crop Farm. 2001. 


Woods, Michael and Mary B. Ancient Agriculture. Runestone Pr., 


2000. 


Level Il 

Arntzen, Charles J., and Ritter, E. M., eds. Encyclopedia of Agri- 
cultural Science. 4 vols. Academic Pr., 1994. 

Paarlberg, Don and Philip. The Agricultural Revolution of the 
20th Century. 2000. Reprint la. State Univ. Pr., 2001. 

Smith, Bruce D. The Emergence of Agriculture. Scientific Am. 


Lib., 1998. 
Stephens, Alan, ed. Dictionary of Agriculture. Rev. ed. Fitzroy 


Dearborn, 1998. 
Agriculture, Department of, is an executive de- 
partment of the United States government. It works to 
maintain adequate supplies of farm products and te ex- 
pand overseas markets for such products. It helps en- 
sure reasonable incomes for farmers and reasonably 
priced farm products for consumers. The department 
also works to combat hunger in the United States and 
abroad and to improve the economy of rural America. 

The secretary of agriculture, a member of the presi- 


dent's Cabinet, heads the department. The president ap- 
points the secretary with the approval of the U.S. Senate. 


Functions. The Department of Agriculture, also 
called the USDA, serves farmers and consumers in 


Agriculture, Department of 161 


many ways. It works to 
safeguard the food supply 
by inspecting meat and 
poultry in slaughtering 
and processing plants. It 
grades meat, poultry, and 
dairy products to indicate 
their quality. It establishes 
standards of quality for 
grain exported from the 
United States and admin- 
isters a nationwide system 
of grain inspection. The 
department's regulatory 
programs help protect animals and plants from pests 
and diseases. 

The department runs food assistance programs to 
fight the problems of hunger and to improve the diet of 
Americans. These programs include the Food Stamp 
Program, which helps needy people purchase food; the 
National School Lunch Program; and a program to pro- 
vide certain foods for pregnant women and for nursing 
mothers and their infants. 

The USDA finances research in its own laboratories 
and in agricultural experiment stations at land-grant uni- 
versities and other institutions. This research deals with 
such topics as plant and animal diseases, crop produc- 
tion, marketing of agricultural products, nutrition, pest 
control, and soil conservation. Together with state and 
county governments, the department sponsors a nation- 
wide program of agricultural education. 





The seal of the Department of 
Agriculture 


Secretaries of agriculture 


Name Took Under 
office president 
Norman J. Colman 1889 Cleveland 
Jeremiah M. Rusk 1889 Harrison 
*Julius S. Morton 1893 Cleveland 
james Wilson 1897 McKinley, 
T. Roosevelt 
1909 Taft 
David F. Houston 1913 Wilson 
Edwin T. Meredith 1920 Wilson 
Henry C. Wallace 1921 Harding, 
Coolidge 
Howard M. Gore 1924 Coolidge 
William M. Jardine 1925 Coolidge 
Arthur M. Hyde 1929 Hoover 
"Henry A. Wallace 1933 F. D. Roosevelt 
Claude R. Wickard 1940 F. D. Roosevelt 
Clinton P. Anderson 1945 Truman 
Charles F. Brannan 1948 Truman 
Ezra Taft Benson 1953 Eisenhower 
“Orville L Freeman 1961 Kennedy, 
LB. Johnson 
Clifford M. Hardin 1969 Nixon 
Earl L Butz 1971 Nixon, Ford 
john A. Knebel 1976 Ford 
Robert S. Bergland 1977 Carter 
John R. Block 1981 Reagan 
Richard E. Lyng 1986 Reagan 
Clayton K Yeutter 1989 G. H.W. Bush 
Edward R. Madigan 1991 G. H. W. Bush 
"Mike Espy 1993 Clinton 
Dan Glickman 1935 Clinton 
Ann M. Veneman 2001 G. WV. Bush 


“Has a separate biography in bard Rook 


162 Agrimony 


The Department of Agriculture provides other servic- 
es as well. It reports On crop production, crop prices, 
and farm operating costs. It gathers world agricultural 
data and provides technical assistance to help develop- 
ing nations improve food production. The department's 
Forest Service manages national forests. The depart- 
ment also provides financial aid and other assistance to 
communities, businesses, and utilities in rural areas. 

History. Congress established the Department of Ag- 
riculture in 1862. In 1889, it became a Cabinet-level de- 
partment headed by a secretary of agriculture. 

From the start, the department devoted much of its at- 
tention to developing and distributing information that 
would help increase agricultural production. Later, as 
improved farming methods led to larger crop yields, the 
department increased its emphasis on marketing farm 
products and supporting prices. In the 1960's, the USDA 
began to give more attention to expanding the agricul- 
tural markets at home and abroad and to ensuring an 
adequate diet for all Americans. 

Critically reviewed by the Department of Agriculture 

Related articles in World Book include: 

Agricultural experiment County agricultural extension 
station agent 
Agricultural Stabilization and Farmers Home Administration 

Conservation Service Food for Peace 
Commodity Credit Food Stamp Program 

Corporation Forest Service 
Cooperative Extension System — Rural Electrification 

Administration 
Agrimony, AG ruh Mou nee, is the common name for 
a group of about 18 species of woodland plants that 
grow in North America, Europe, Asia, and the Andes 
Mountains of South America. The hairy leaves are feath- 
erlike and consist of both small and large leaflets. The 
small yellow flowers occur in clusters on along spike. 
The fruit is a cone-shaped bur with hooked bristles. 

Kenneth R Robertson 

Scientific classification. Agrimony plants are in the rose 
family, Rosaceae. They are genus Agrimonia. 

Agrippa, wh GRIHP uh, Marcus (63-12 B.C), was a 
Roman general who was the chief adviser and military 
leader of Augustus, the first emperor of Rome. Agrippa 
was also a lifelong friend and loyal supporter of Augus- 
tus. 

Agrippa rose to prominence during the civil wars that 
followed the assassination of the Roman leader Julius 
Caesar in 44 B.C. In these wars, Octavian, as the future 
Emperor Augustus was then known, struggled against a 
number of enemies for control of Rome. Agrippa be- 
came Octavian's best commander, both on land and sea. 
His most important victory was the Battle of Actium, 
fought off the west coast of Greece in 31 B.C There, a 
fleet led by Agrippa defeated the forces of Mark Antony, 
co-ruler of Rome with Octavian, and Cleopatra, queen of 
Egypt. This victory cleared the way for Octavian to be 
named sole emperor of Rome, in 27 B.C 

Agrippa helped the new emperor in the reordering of 
Roman politics and society under one-person rule. 
When Augustus fell ill in 23 B.C, he gave Agrippa his 
seal ring. Augustus recovered, but the gift of the ring 
meant that Agrippa would have become emperor if Au- 
gustus had died. Agrippa married the emperor's daugh- 
ter Julia in 21 B.C, another sign that he was the chosen 
successor. Agrippa held wide powers for the next 10 


years but died before he could become emperor. 

Arthur M. Eckstein 
Agrippina the Younger, 4c ruh PY nuhor AG ruh 
PEE nuh(AD. 15-59), was one of the most powerful 
women in ancient Rome. She was the great-grand- 
daughter of the emperor Augustus and sister of the em- 
peror Caligula. She greatly influenced two other Roman 
emperors—her husband Claudius and her son Nero. 

In A.D. 39, Caligula banished Agrippina from Rome 
for her part in a plot against him. She returned after her 
uncle Claudius became emperor in A.D. 41. She married 
Claudius in A.D. 49. The following year, she was hon- 
ored by the founding of a Roman colony, Colonia Agrip- 
pinensis, at her birthplace in what is now Cologne, Ger- 
many. Agrippina persuaded Claudius to adopt Nero, her 
son by a previous marriage, as guardian of Claudius s 
son, Britannicus. Many Romans believed Agrippina poi- 
soned Claudius in A.D. 34 so Nero could succeed to the 
throne. In the first year of Nero's reign, she had great 
political power. She retired from the imperial court after 
Britannicus died—probably by poison at Nero's order— 
in A.D. 55. Nero had Agrippina murdered four years lat- 
ef. Judith P. Hallett 
Agronomy, uh GRAHN uh mee, is a branch of agricul- 
tural science that deals with the study of crops and the 
soils in which they grow. Agronomists work to develop 
methods that will improve the use of the soil and in- 
crease the production of food and fiber crops. They 
conduct research in crop rotation, irrigation and drain- 
age, plant breeding, molecular biology, soil classifica- 
tion, soil fertility, weed control, and other areas. 

Agronomy involves selective breeding of plants to 
produce the best crops under various conditions. Plant 
breeding has increased crop yields and has improved 
the nutritional value of several crops, including corn, 
rice, soybeans, and wheat It also has led to the develop- 
ment of new types of plants. For example, a hybrid grain 
called triticale was produced by crossbreeding rye and 
wheat. Triticale contains more usable protein than does 
either rye or wheat. See Triticale. 

Agronomists study ways to make soils more produc- 
tive. They classify soils and test them for substances vital 
for plant growth. In addition, agronomists develop 
methods to preserve the soil and to decrease the effects 
of erosion by wind and water. For example, a technique 
called contour plowing may be used to prevent soil ero- 
sion and conserve rainfall. Researchers in agronomy 
also seek ways to use the soil more effectively in solving 
other problems. Such problems include the disposal of 
wastes; water pollution; and the build-up in the soil of 
chemicals that are used to kill insects and weeds. 

Most agronomists are researchers, consultants, or 
teachers. Many work for agricultural experiment sta- 
tions, federal or state government agencies, industrial 
firms, universities, or international organizations. 

Tavlor J. Jnhnstnn 

See also Agricultural experiment station; Cropping 
system; Soil. 


Additional resources 


Basra, Amarjit S., ed. Crop Sciences. Food Products Pr., 1997. 

Cooper, Elmer L. Agriscience 2nd ed. Delmar Pubs., 1997. 

Harlan, Jack R. Crops & Man. 2nd ed. Am. Soc. of Agronomy, 
1997; 

Parker, Rick. /ntroduction to Plant Science. Delmar Pubs., 2000. 





a ea ete ety acai 


Aguinaldo, a/ gee NAHL doh, Emilie, eh MEE lyoh 
(1869-1964), was a leader in the fight for Philippine inde- 
pendence. In 1896, he took part in an unsuccessful re- 
volt against Spanish rule. In 1898, he led a Filipino army 
against Spain in the Spanish-American War. In June of 
that year, the Filipinos set up a revolutionary govern- 
ment and made Aguinaldo president. He declared Phil- 
ippine independence from Spain that same month. In 
December 1898, Spain gave up the Philippines to the 
United States for $20 million. In January 1899, Aguinaldo 
established the Philippine Republic, and his troops 
began fighting U.S. forces in February. United States 
forces captured him in March 1901. In April, Aguinaldo 
took an oath of allegiance to the United States and re- 
tired. He was born on March 23, 1869, near Cavite, Lu- 
zon. See also Philippines (History). Socorro L Reyes 
Ahmadabad, 44 muhd ah BAHD (pop. 3,515,361. met. 
area pop. 4,519,278), is the largest city in Gujarat, a state 
in western India. It lies on the Sabarmati River in India’s 
cotton-growing region (see India [political map). 

The city is a manufacturing and trade center for the 
nation’s cotton textile industry. Anmadabad’s chemical 
industry produces drugs, dyes, pesticides, and plastics. 
Chemical plants have caused widespread air pollution. 

Ahmadabad was named after Ahmad Shah I, the sul- 
tan of Gujarat who founded the city in 1411. The over- 
crowded, older section of the city lies on the east bank 
of the Sabarmati. Ahmadabad has many historic monu- 
ments as well as busy shopping areas. Weaving mills 
and other factories stand near this section. The west 
bank of the river includes many upper-class neighbor- 
hoods and Gujarat University. P.P. Karan 
Ahura Mazda. See Zoroastrianism. 

AID. See Agency for International Development. 
AIDS is the final, life-threatening stage of infection with 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). AIDS stands for 
acquired ¢mmunoceficiency syndrome. The name refers 
to the fact that HIV severely damages the immune sys- 
tem, the body's most important defense against disease. 
Cases of AIDS were first identified in 1981 in the United 
States, but researchers have detected HIV in a specimen 
collected in 1959 in central Africa. Millions of AIDS 
cases have been diagnosed worldwide. 


How AIDS affects the body 


Cause. AIDS is caused by two viruses that belong to a 
group Ccailed retroviruses. The first AIDS virus was isolat- 
ed by researchers in France in 1983 and researchers in 
the United States in 1984. This virus became known as 
HIV-1. In 1985, scientists in France identified another 
closely related virus that also produces AIDS. This virus, 
named HIV-2, occurs mainly in west Africa. HIV-1 occurs 
throughout the world. 

HIV infects certain white blood cells, including 7- 
helper cells and macrophages, that play key roles in the 
immune system (see Immune system [Parts of the im- 
mune system). The virus attaches to CD4 receptor mole- 
cules on the surface of these cells, which are often 
called CD4 cells. HIV enters CD4 cells and inserts its 
own genes into the cell’s reproductive system. The cell 
then produces more HIV, which spreads to other CD4 
cells. Eventually, infected cells die. The immune system 
produces millions of CD4 cells every day, but HIV de- 
stroys them as fast as they are produced. 


AIDS 163 


Symptoms. People infected with HIV eventually de- 
velop symptoms that also may be caused by other, less 
serious conditions. With HIV infection, however, these 
symptoms are prolonged and often more severe. They 
include enlarged lymph glands, tiredness, fever, loss of 
appetite and weight, diarrhea, yeast infections of the 
mouth and vagina, and night sweats. 

HIV commonly causes a severe “wasting syndrome,” 
resulting in substantial weight loss, a general decline in 
health, and, in some cases, death. The virus often infects 
the brain and nervous system. There HIV may cause de- 
mentia, a condition characterized by sensory, thinking, 
or memory disorders. 

Opportunistic illnesses. HIV makes infected people 
susceptible to infections and other conditions that do 
not normally occur or that are normally not serious. 
These illnesses are called opportunistic because they 
take advantage of the damaged immune system. With 
the onset of an opportunistic infection or one of several 
other severe illnesses or a marked decline in the num- 
ber of CD4 cells, an HIV-infected person is considered 
to have AIDS. 

There are many opportunistic illnesses that typically 
affect AIDS patients. In North America and Europe, 
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, yeast infections of the 
esophagus (tube that carries food to the stomach), cyto- 
megalovirus retinitis, Kaposi's sarcoma, and tuberculo- 
sis are the most common. People with AIDS may con- 
tract several of these diseases. 

Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP), which is an in- 
fection of the lungs, is a leading cause of death among 
AIDS patients. Yeast infections of the esophagus cause 
severe pain when swallowing and result in weight loss 
and dehydration. Cytomegalovirus retinitis is an eye in- 
fection that can cause blindness. Kaposi's sarcoma is a 
form of cancer that usually arises in the skin. The tumors 
may look like bruises, but they grow. 

A major illness that defines AIDS in HIV-infected peo- 
ple is tuberculosis, a severe bacterial infection that usu- 
ally affects the lungs. Throughout the 1900's, the number 
of cases of tuberculosis in the United States declined 
steadily. However, in the mid-1980's, doctors noticed a 
growing number of cases of tuberculosis in HIV pa- 
tients. People with HIV are especially vulnerable to tu- 
berculosis because of their damaged immune systems. 

An HIV-infected person may develop AIDS from 2 to 
15 or more years after becoming infected. In children 
born with HIV infection, this interval is usually shorter. 
Medical treatment can increase the interval by inhibiting 
the growth of HIV, preserving the immune system, and 
delaying the onset of opportunistic infections. An infect- 
ed person can transmit the virus to another person 
whether or not symptoms are present. Infection with 
HIV appears to be lifelong in all who become infected. 


How HIV is transmitted 


Researchers have identified three ways in which HIV 
is transmitted: (1) sexual intercourse, (2) direct contact 
with infected blood, and (3) perinata/ (transmission from 
an infected woman to her fetus or baby). The most com- 
mon wav of becoming infected is through sexual inter- 
course with an HIV-infected person. In the United States, 
seaual transmission of HIV has occurred mainly among 
homosexual and bisexual men, but it is becoming more 


164 AIDS 


frequent among heterosexual men and women. HIV is 
transmitted through all forms of sexual intercourse, in- 
cluding genital, anal, and oral sex. 

People who inject drugs into their bodies can be ex- 
posed to infected blood by sharing needles, syringes, or 
equipment used to prepare drugs for injection. In the 
past, transfusion and transplant recipients and people 
with hemophilia contracted the virus from the blood, 
blood components, tissues, or organs of infected 
donors. But screening and testing of donated blood and 
of potential organ donors have virtually eliminated this 
hazard. Health-care workers can become infected with 
HIV by coming into direct contact with infected blood. 
This infection may occur through injury with a needle or 
other sharp instrument used in treating an HIV-infected 
patient. A few patients became infected while receiving 
treatment from an HIV-infected American dentist and 
from a French surgeon. 

An infected pregnant woman can transmit the AIDS 
virus to her fetus even if she has no symptoms. Trans- 
mission may also occur from an HIV-infected mother to 
her baby through breast-feeding. 

Studies indicate that HIV is not transmitted through 
air, food, or water, or by insects. No known cases of 
AIDS have resulted from sharing eating utensils, bath- 
rooms, locker rooms, living space, or classrooms. 


Medical care for HIV infection and AIDS 


Diagnosis. Tests for detecting evidence of HIV-1 in 
the blood became widely available in 1985. Tests for de- 
tecting HIV-2 became widely available in 1992. These 
HIV tests identify antibodies to the AIDS virus. Antibod- 
ies are proteins produced by certain white blood cells 
to react with specific viruses, bacteria, or foreign sub- 
stances that enter the body. The presence of antibodies 
to HIV indicates infection with that virus. There is also an 
oral test for HIV-1 antibodies in mouth fluids. 

Other tests directly measure the amount of HIV in the 
blood. These tests enable doctors to measure a patient's 
response to treatment, predict the future health of peo- 
ple with HIV, and estimate their survival time. 

People with HIV infection are diagnosed as having 
AIDS when tests show that they have fewer than 200 
CD4 cells per microliter (0.000001 liter) of blood or when 
they develop one or more opportunistic illnesses. All 
HIV-infected patients should have their health closely 
monitored by a doctor and get periodic blood tests to 
measure the levels of virus and CD4 cells in their blood. 

Treatments have been developed, but no cure for 
HIV infection or AIDS has yet been found. Ever since 
AIDS was identified, scientists have worked to under- 
stand how HIV infects and damages human cells. In one 
important discovery, researchers learned that HIV uses 
an enzyme called reverse transcriptase to reproduce. 
Because this enzyme is not normally found in cells, sci- 
entists focused on developing drugs that block its ac- 
tion. These efforts led to development of a class of an- 
tiviral drugs called reverse transcriptase inhibitors. The 
first of these drugs, called zidovudine, commonly 
known as AZT, was licensed in the United States in 1987. 

AZT and other reverse transcriptase inhibitors some- 
times produce toxic side effects, including severe ane- 
mia that requires blood transfusions. HIV also develops 
resistance to these drugs when they are given singly. 


Doctors combine the drugs and vary the order in which 
they are given to improve their effectiveness. 

In 1995 and 1996, the first three protease inhibitors— 
indinavir, ritonavir, and saquinavir—were approved for 
treating HIV. Other such medicines followed. These an- 
tiviral drugs block the action of protease, another HIV 
enzyme not found in human cells. Protease inhibitors 
block a later step in HIV reproduction than reverse tran- 
scriptase inhibitors do. Additional antiviral medicines 
may be developed with new ways of blocking the virus. 

In 1996, several studies showed that certain combina- 
tions of antiviral drugs could decrease HIV in the blood 
to undetectable levels. Although HIV appears to persist 
inside CD4 cells, the studies raised hope that combina- 
tion therapy can control reproduction of the virus. The 
research also raised hope for an eventual cure. But the 
drugs must be taken in large quantities for a long time, 
and HIV may develop resistance to them. Doctors need 
to determine which combinations of drugs are safest 
and most effective over the long term. 

Physicians also prevent and treat opportunistic infec- 
tions in AIDS patients. PCP can be prevented with specif- 
ic antibiotics. Physicians use biological substances 
called interferons and chemotherapy to treat Kaposi's 
sarcoma. They use interferon plus antiviral medicines to 
treat hepatitis C (see Interferon). Researchers believe 
any eventual cure for AIDS must stop the growth of the 


Stages of HIV infection 


People infected with human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) go through three stages of infection. These stages 
are: (1) acute retroviral syndrome and asymptomatic pe- 
riod, (2) symptomatic HIV infection, and (3) AIDS. The 
length of time any person stays in each stage varies 
greatly and depends on many factors, including med- 
ical treatment HIV can be transmitted during all stages 
of infection, even when no symptoms occur. 


Acute retroviral syndrome and asymptomatic 
period. Most people get a flulike or mononucleosislike 
illness within 12 weeks after becoming infected with 
HIV. This illness, known as acute retroviral syndrome, 
usually goes away without treatment From this point 
on, the infected persons blood tests positive for HIV 
antibodies even though symptoms usually do not devel- 
op for 2 to 15 years or more. During this early stage of 
infection, the patient maintains a near normal number 
of CD4 cells—that is, more than 500 CD4 cells per mi- 
croliter of blood. CD4 cells are the white blood cells _ 
that are infected by HIV. 


Symptomatic HIV infection. In this stage, a wide vari- 
ety of mild or severe symptoms may appear. Common 
symptoms include tiredness, enlarged lymph glands, 
yeast infections, skin rashes, and dental disease. This 
stage of the infection may last from a few months to 

many years. During this time, the patient s CD4-cell [ 
count gradually declines, typically ranging between 500 
to 200 CD4 cells per microliter of blood. 


AIDS is characterized by severe damage to the immune © 
system and such opportunistic infections as Pneumo- 
cystis carinii pneumonia and Kaposi s sarcoma. The pro- 
gressive breakdown of the immune system eventually 
leads to death, usually within a few years. Most people 
with AIDS have fewer than 200 CD4 cells per microliter 
of blood, with most deaths occurring in patients with 
CD4-cell counts below 50. 





virus, prevent opportunistic illnesses, and restore nor- 
mal function to the immune system. 

Prevention. To prevent transmission of HIV, a person 
must avoid sexual contact with anyone who is or might 
be infected with the virus. The most effective preventive 
strategies are to refrain from all sexual intimacy or re- 
strict sexual intimacy to one uninfected person. Health 
authorities recommend that a condom be used every 
time sexual intercourse occurs with a person who is in- 
fected with HIV or whose infection status is unknown. 
Drug users should seek help to stop taking drugs and 
should never share hypodermic needles, syringes, or 
other injection equipment Research has shown that 
AZT reduces the risk of transmission from an infected 
woman to her fetus or baby. Physicians administer AZT 
and other antiviral drugs to HIV-infected women during 
pregnancy and labor, and to their newborn babies. Doc- 
tors advise HIV-infected women not to breast-feed. 
Physicians, dentists, and other health-care workers now 
wear gloves, masks, and other protective clothing dur- 
ing many examinations and procedures. 

The tests to detect evidence of HIV-1 have been used 
to screen all blood donated in the United States since 
1985. These tests have greatly increased the safety of 
transfusions. Screening for HIV-2 began in 1992. 

Researchers are working to develop safe, effective, 
and economical vaccines against HIV infection. But even 
if HIV transmission ended, AIDS cases would still occur, 
since millions of people already have HIV. As a result, 
scientists are working to develop vaccines that would 
boost the immune systems of HIV-infected people. 


Social issues 


AIDS causes concern because it is a new, life- 
threatening disease, spread largely by sex and drugs, 


Percentage of adults with HIV or AIDS 


AIDS 164a 





Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 


AIDS viruses reproduce in CD4 cells and circulate in the blood. 
In this electron micrograph of a white blood cell, AIDS viruses 
can be seen as the small white dots covering the cell's surface. 


that mainly affects young adults. Some efforts to deal 
with AIDS or prevent HIV transmission have provoked 
controversy. 

Education. Educating people about AIDS, both in 
schools and in the community, has become the chief ap- 
proach to preventing infection. Some schools have set 
up health clinics that distribute condoms to students. 
However, some people oppose even classroom discus- 
sion of condom use because they believe it implies ac- 
ceptance of sexual intimacy outside of marriage. 

Preventing drug abuse and educating drug users 
about AIDS are important approaches to controlling HIV 


By 2000, an estimated 36 million people throughout the world had HIV or AIDS. The highest rates of intection were in 
central and southern Africa, where public health and education programs lacked resources to combat the epidemic. 





aa 
= 


2 





Equat 


| 


| | No data available * 


s » 
WORLD BOOK map: based on data ten hes Ni . 











‘ 


ae | 15 to 36 a | 5to 149 eo 110 4.9 011009 Sa Less than 0.1 


164b AIDS 


Estimated number of 
new HIV infections by 
year worldwide 


New HIV infections per year 
4,500,000 
4,000,000 
3,500,000 
3,000,000 
2,500,000 
2,000,000 
1,500,000 
1,000,000 

500,000 


1984 


Source: Joint United Nations Program on HIV’ AIDS. 


infection. Efforts to prevent HIV infection among drug 
users include health and sex education as well as needle 
and syringe exchange programs. But such programs 
have been criticized as seeming to imply acceptance of 
drug use. 

In the United States, federal, state, and local govern- 
ments have provided funds for AIDS education, treat- 
ment, and research. Public health clinics offer counsel- 
ing and HIV-antibody testing to people who have 
symptoms or are at risk of infection. In addition, these 
clinics may privately and confidentially notify an infected 
person's sexual or needle-sharing partners of their risk. 
Once notified, they, too, can receive preventive counsel- 
ing, testing, and medical services. 

Public awareness. Many individuals and organiza- 
tions, including community-based groups and the 
American Red Cross, have worked to increase public 





© f.t Atlan, Svgma 


The AIDS quilt memorializes people who have died of AIDS. 
The quilt is a moving symbol of the epidemic s human cost. 





The number of people infected with HIV has risen dramatically, especially among people living in 
poverty. But efforts to control the spread of HIV have had some success. Education about HIV pre- 
vention has led to declines in the rate of new infection in some areas. 


— Sub-Saharan Africa 

—— Southern and Eastern Asia 

— Eastern Europe and Central Asia 
— Latin America and the Caribbean 
— North Africa and Middle East 
— Highly industrialized countries 


2000 


awareness of AIDS. They hope that greater awareness 
will result in more compassion and support for people 
with AIDS and adequate funding for AIDS prevention, 
research, and treatment One project that has brought 
attention to the crisis is the AIDS quilt. Begun in 1986 by 
an organization called the NAMES Project, this quilt con- 
sists of thousands of individually designed panels, each 
of which memorializes a person who died of AIDS. The 
quilt has been displayed throughout the world. 

Celebrities have helped raise public consciousness of 
AIDS. Many well-known entertainers, athletes, and oth- 
ers have participated in education and fund-raising ef- 
forts. The epidemic also has gained attention as a result 
of well-known people becoming infected with HIV or 
dying from AIDS. These people include actor Rock Hud- 
son, who died of AIDS in 1985, and tennis champion 
Arthur Ashe, who died in 1993. Basketball star Magic 
Johnson announced he was infected with HIV in 1991, 
and Olympic diver Greg Louganis announced his infec- 
tion in 1995. 

The United Nations has designated December 1 each 
year as World AIDS Day. Public agencies and schools 
around the world sponsor education and prevention 
programs. Many individuals wear a red ribbon to show 
support for people with AIDS. 

Discrimination. Some people infected with HIV have 
unjustly lost or been denied jobs, housing, medical 
care, and health insurance. Children with AIDS have 
been kept from attending school or playing on sports 
teams. To prevent discrimination, the federal govern- 
ment and many states include AIDS patients and people 
infected with HIV under laws protecting the rights of 
people with disabilities. Some states have strengthened 
laws that safeguard the confidentiality of medical 
records relating to HIV infection and AIDS. 

Preventing discrimination against AIDS patients is im- 
portant not only for moral reasons but also to help main- 
tain public health. When people are not afraid of dis- 
crimination, they will more likely seek counseling and 
get tested for HIV. In many cases, these measures lead 
to less risky behavior and earlier diagnosis. 


Providing medical care for the hundieds of thou- 
sands of people with HIV infection or with AIDS is ex- 
pensive. Paying and planning for this care is a major 
health economics issue. The problem may be partly 
solved by increasing prevention efforts and by finding 
less costly antiviral medicines and alternatives to hospi- 
tal care. Such alternatives include expanded home care 
services and hospice care. 

Antiviral drugs are effective in prolonging the life of 
AIDS patients, but the cost of the drugs exceeds what 
nearly all individuals can pay. Patients in developing na- 
tions, who often have only limited access to medical 
care, cannot afford these medications. Experts view this 
issue, as well as the public health impact of AIDS itself, 
as a major challenge to social and economic progress in 
developing nations. 


AIDS around the world 


AIDS occurs in every nation. In Africa, India, and 
Southeast Asia, transmission of HIV has occurred mostly 
among heterosexual men and women. Heterosexual 
transmission of HIV, particularly among teens and 
young adults, has risen dramatically. HIV infection has 
become epidemic in many developing nations. In some 
parts of Africa, the epidemic has reached disastrous lev- 
els. According to the United Nations, 25 percent of the 
adults in some African countries are infected. The per- 
centage is even higher in some large African cities. The 
number of young adults dying of AIDS in Africa has 
caused an overall decrease in life expectancy through- 
out the continent. Increasing numbers of people are in- 
fected in countries with growing drug abuse problems, 
such as the nations of central Europe, Russia, and China. 
Public health departments in many of these countries 
lack the resources to treat patients effectively or to con- 
trol the epidemic through education. 


History of AIDS 


Scientists are not certain how, when, or where the 
AIDS virus evolved and first infected people. Research- 
ers have shown that HIV-1 and HIV-2 are more closely 
related to simian immunodeficiency viruses, which in- 
fect monkevs and apes, than to each other. Thus, it has 
been suggested that HIV evolved from viruses that origi- 
nally infected monkeys and apes in Africa and was 
somehow transmitted to people. In 1999, researchers in 
the United States found evidence that HIV-1 most likely 
originated in a population of chimpanzees in west 
Africa. The virus appears to have been transmitted to 
people who hunted, butchered, and consumed the 
chimpanzees for food. HIV was then transmitted sexually 
and perinatally to others, thus beginning the chains ot 
transmission that have reached around the world. 

Scientists believe HIV infection became widespread 
after significant social changes took place in Atrica dur- 
ing the 1960's and 1970's. Large numbers of people 
moved from rural areas to cities, resulting in crowding, 
unemployment, and prostitution. These conditions 
brought about an increase in cases of sexually transmit- 
ted diseases, including AIDS. HIV may have been intro- 
duced into industrialized nations several times betore 
transmission was sustained and became widespread 

AIDS was first identified as a new disease by physi 
cians in Los Angeles and New York City In 1980 and 


Aiken, Conrad Potter 165 


1981. The doctors recognized the condition as some- 
thing new because all the patients were previously 
healthy, young homosexual men suffering from other- 
wise rare forms of cancer and pneumonia. The name 
AIDS was adopted in 1982. Scientists soon determined 
that AIDS occurred when the immune system became 
damaged, and that the agent that caused the damage 
was spread through sexual contact, shared drug nee- 
dles, and infected blood transfusions. 

Researchers developed tests to detect HIV infection. 
These tests have also been used to analyze stored tis- 
sues from several people who died from the late 1950's 
through the 1970s. Scientists have concluded that some 
of these people died from AIDS. 

Cases of HIV infection reported worldwide rose dra- 
matically during the 1980's and 1990's. By 2001, an esti- 
mated 36 million people throughout the world were liv- 
ing with HIV infection or AIDS. This number represents 
an increase of about 50 percent since 1991, when an es- 
timated 24 million people were living with HIV or AIDS. 

Efforts to control the spread of AIDS have had some 
success. For example, among homosexual men in the 
United States, HIV infection is spreading more slowly 
than it did in the early 1980's. This is due entirely to edu- 
cation about prevention and the resulting changes in 
sexual behavior, such as decreased numbers of sexual 
partners and increased use of condoms. HIV blood tests 
caused a gradual decline in transfusion-related cases in 
the late 1980's. The rate of AIDS in other groups rose, 
however, during the 1980's and 1990's. These groups 
include heterosexual men and women, people who in- 
ject drugs, and younger homosexual men. 

D. Peter Drotman 

Related articles in World Book include: 

Adolescent {Risk taking) 
Antiviral drug 
Disease (picture: Viruses) 


Elion, Gertrude Belle 
Herpes, Genital 


Medicine (Unequal distribu- 
tion of medical care) 

Pneumonia 

Sexually transmitted disease 

Tuberculosis 


Additional resources 


Hyde, Margaret O., and Forsyth, E. H. A/DS: What Does It Mean 
to You? 5th ed. Walker, 1996. 

Leone, Daniel A., ed. The Spread of AIDS. Greenhaven, 1997. 

Roleff, Tamara L, and Cozic, C P., eds. A/DS. Greenhaven, 1998. 

Schoub, Barry D. A/DS & HIV in Perspective. Cambridge, 1999. 


Aiken, AY Auhn, Conrad Potter (1889-1973), was an 
American poet, novelist, and critic. He was a sympa- 
thetic ally of Ezra Pound, T. S. Eliot, and others who used 
new methods in poetry. Aiken s verse, however, is rela- 
tively conservative and deeply personal, and especially 
influenced by the Austrian psychiatrist Sigmund Freud. 
Aiken s central poetic concern was the problem of 
achieving personal identity in an unstable world of 
change. The greatest strength ot his poetry is its musi- 
cality, which often overwhelms the poems ideas. His Se- 
lected Poems won the 1930 Pulitzer Prize for poetry. 
Aiken was born in Savannah, Georgia, but grew up in 
New Bedtord, Massachusetts. In addition to several nov- 
els and collections of stories and essays, Aiken wrote 
U/shant (1952), an autobiographical fantasy. This work 
provides an eloquent account of the writer's develop- 
ment as an artist, despite personal setbacks and uncer- 
tainties. Aiken's Collected Poems 1916-1970 was pub- 
lished in 1971. 


Bonme Costello 


166 Ailanthus 


Ailanthus, ay LAN thuhs, is a hardy tree that thrives in 
cities and places where other trees fail to grow. It is also 
called the tree of heaven. Although native to the forests 
of China, the tree grows throughout much of the world. 

An ailanthus has smooth brown-gray bark and small 
greenish flowers. Male flowers give off an unpleasant 
odor. During spring and summer, the tree produces 
compound leaves (leaves with more than one blade) that 
smell like peanut butter when broken. In autumn, ailan- 
thuses develop attractive, reddish-brown, winged fruits. 

Because the ailanthus can live in most soils and many 
climates, people often call ita “weed tree.’ It resists in- 
jury from insects, diseases, and pollution. Seedlings car- 
ried by the wind sprout almost anywhere they land. 
Many ailanthuses grow at roadsides and forest edges. 
They also flourish in vacant city lots and sidewalk cracks. 
The tree develops rapidly. From seed, it may grow 8 feet 
(2.4 meters) in one year. A mature ailanthus stands about 
60 feet (18 meters) tall. 

Scientific classification. The ailanthus belongs to the quas- 
sia family, Simaroubaceae. It is Aflanthus altissima. 

Ailey, AY /ee, Alvin (1931-1989), was an American cho- 
reographer (creator of dances) and director of the Alvin 
Ailey American Dance Theater. Ailey's modern dances 
strongly reflected his Southern background. He com- 
posed many of them to black folk music and jazz. His 
works include Revelations (1960), Mary Lou's Mass 
(1971), and Cry (1971). He based Survivors (1986) on the 
antiapartheid movement in South Africa. 

Ailey was born in Rogers, Texas. He studied and per- 
formed with the American choreographer Lester Hor- 
ton. In 1958, Ailey formed his own dance company and 
in 1965, he retired from performing to devote himself to 
choreography. In addition to works created for his own 
company, Ailey composed dances for ballet, television, 
and opera. Revelations, an autobiography, was pub- 
lished in 1995, after his death. Katy Matheson 
AIM. See American Indian Movement. 

Ainu, EYE noo, are a group of people who may have 
been the first inhabitants of what is now Japan. There are 
about 15,000 Ainu. Most of the Ainu live on Hokkaido, 
Japan's northernmost main island. Until the mid-1900's, 
some Ainu also lived on Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands. 
Sakhalin is a part of Russia. Russia claims and occupies 
all the Kurils, but Japan claims the southernmost ones. 

Scientists are uncertain about the ancestry of the 
Ainu. Some anthropologists think the Ainu are related to 
European peoples. Other anthropologists believe they 
are related to Asian peoples or Australian Aborigines, 
the original inhabitants of Australia. The Ainu language 
has not been clearly classified. 

Through the centuries, many Ainu have intermarried 
with the Japanese and other neighboring peoples. The 
village was once the basic unit of Ainu society. Each vil- 
lage was headed by a leader and consisted of 5 to 30 
one-room houses. Hunting, fishing, and gathering plants 
provided food for the community. The Ainu practiced a 
complicated set of religious ceremonies. 

The Ainu have long been victims of discrimination. 
However, they have started a movement to achieve fair 
treatment in Japan. The Japanese government has begun 
a program of economic aid for the Ainu. 

Emiko Ohnuki- Tierney 

See also Japan (People [picture)). 


Norman L Christensen, Jr. 


Air 


Air is the mixture of gases that surrounds the earth. It is 
often called the atmosphere. Air covers the land and sea 
and extends far above the earth’s surface. We cannot 
see, smell, or taste air. Yet itis as real as land or water. 
When the wind blows, it is the air you feel against your 
face. Wind is simply moving air. You can also see the ef- 
fect of wind in drifting clouds, pounding waves, and 
trembling leaves. Moving air can turn windmills and 
blow large sailboats across the ocean. 

Without air, there could be no life on the earth. All liv- 
ing things—animals and plants—need air to stay alive. 
You are breathing air now. You must breathe air, or you 
will die. People have lived more than a month without 
food and more than a week without water. But a person 
can live only a few minutes without air. 

Air does much more than make it possible for us to 
breathe. Air shields the earth from certain harmful rays 
from the sun and other objects in outer space. At the 
same time, it traps the heat that comes from the sun. In 
this way, air helps keep the earth warm enough to sup- 
port life. Air protects us from meteors, most of which 
burn up in the atmosphere before they can strike the 
earth's surface. Clouds that form in the air bring us water 
in the form of rain and snow. All living things must have 
water to live, just as they must have air. 

We also need air to hear. Sound must travel through 
the air or some other substance. Most of the sounds we 
hear travel through the air. Thus, the world would be 
silent if there were no air. Air has weight. This weight 
enables balloons filled with a light gas or heated air to 
rise high above the earth because they are lighter than 
the air around them. Air moving past the wings of air- 
planes, birds, and insects enables them to fly. 

The earth has plentiful air. But the quality of the air de- 
pends largely on the amount of industrial wastes and 
other pollutants (impurities) that people add to the at- 
mosphere. Air pollution is a serious problem in most of 
the world’s big cities. Polluted air harms our health. It 
also injures plants and animals, damages building mate- 
rials, and even affects the weather. For a detailed discus- 
sion of the problem of air pollution, see the World Book 
article Air pollution. See also Environmental pollution 
(Air pollution). 


What is air? 


Air consists of a mixture of gases that extends from 
the earth's surface to outer space. The earth's gravity 
holds the air in place around the earth. The gases of the 
air move about freely among one another. As sunlight 
passes through the earth's atmosphere, it strikes mole- 
cules of the gases. The molecules scatter the sunlight, 
which is a mixture of all colors, in every direction. The 
sky appears blue because much more blue light is scat- 
tered than any other color. See Sky. 

Many small particles of dust are suspended among 
the gases of the air. The air also carries tiny water drop- 


Stanley David Gedzelman, the contributor of this article, is 
Professor ot Meteorology at the City College of New York He is 


also the author of The Science and Wonders of the Atmosphere. 











lets and ice crystals in the form of clouds. However, sci- 
entists do not consider the dust, water droplets, and ice 
crystals to be part of the air. 

Gases of the air. The principal gases of the air are ni- 
trogen and oxygen. Other gases include argon, water 
vapor, carbon dioxide, neon, helium, krypton, hydrogen, 
xenon, and ozone. The water vapor in the air is water in 
the form of an invisible gas. Nitrogen makes up about 78 
percent of dry air—that is, air from which all water vapor 
has been removed. Oxygen accounts for about 21 per- 
cent of dry air. The remaining 1 percent consists chiefly 
of argon, with only extremely small amounts of the other 
gases. 

Some gases of the atmosphere are particularly impor- 
tant. Wher we breathe, we take in oxygen from the air 
and give off carbon dioxide. Green plants take in carbon 
dioxide and give off oxygen in a food-making process 
called photosynthesis (see Photosynthesis). Oxygen 
from the air plays a part in such chemical processes as 
the rusting of iron and the formation of vinegar trom 
cider. Most fuels must have oxygen to burn. Certain bac- 
teria turn nitrogen that has passed into the soil from the 
atmosphere into chemicals that fertilize plants. 

Water vapor and carbon dioxide are two of the gases 
in the air that help keep the earth warm. They prevent 
some of the surface heat created by sunlight from es- 
caping back into space. This behavior of the gases is 
known as the greenhouse effect \(see Greenhouse etf- 
fect). Water vapor is also needed to produce rain and 
snow. Ozone, a form of oxygen, absorbs many of the 
sun’s harmful u/traviolet rays, an invisible torm of light 
(see Ultraviolet rays). 

Moisture in the air takes the form of water vapor 
and tiny particles of water and ice. Vapor enters the at- 
mosphere when water evaporates from oceans, lakes 
rivers, and soil, or is given oft from the leaves of plants 


Air 167 


Artstreet Dave Woodward, Atoz Images 
The air around us is invisible. But we can feel the air when it pushes against us as gusts of wind. 

Wind is simply moving air. We can also tell that air has weight. This weight enables hot-air bal- 

loons to rise above the earth because they are lighter than the surrounding air. 


The amount of vapor in the air depends on location. For 
example, air near the equator usually contains much 
more vapor than air near the North and South poles. Air 
near sea level usually contains much more vapor than 
air several miles above sea level. The amount of water 
vapor in the air also depends on weather. Air usually 
contains more vapor on cloudy days than on clear days. 

Warm air can hold much more water vapor than cold 
air. Scientists express the ability of air to hold water va- 
por in terms of refative humidity—the airs vapor content 
divided by its vapor capacity. Vapor capacity is often de- 
fined as the maximum amount of vapor the air could 
hold (see Humidity). According to this definition, air that 
is holding as much moisture as possible has a relative 
humidity of 100 percent. Air just above water surfaces, 
such as the ocean, often has a relative humidity near 100 
percent Air over dry surfaces, such as deserts, usually 
has a low relative humidity. 

However, air in clouds can actually have a relative hu- 
midity greater than 100 percent: if air is cooled enough, 
its vapor Capacity decreases. The excess vapor can then 
change to tiny water droplets or ice crystals in a process 
called condensation. The temperature at which water va- 
por begins to condense is called the dew point Air 
cools as it rises, and clouds form when masses of moist 
air rise and cool below the dew point. The vapor in 
clouds condenses on tiny particles of matter. 

Most droplets form when vapor condenses on tiny 
particles of sea salt or of a chemical compound such as 
ammonium sulfate or magnesium sulfate. Most ice crys- 
tals form when droplets containing other particles of 
dust freeze. After ice crystals form, vapor condenses 
more rapidly on them than on the droplets. 

every cloud consists ot air filled with countless water 
droplets or ice crystals. Rain or snow is produced after 
the droplets or crystals become heavy enough to fall out 








168 Air 


The gases of the air 


Nitragen 78% 





= ee and 


other gases 1% 


Oxygen 21% =), 


— 





Air consists chiefly of nitrogen and oxygen. They make up about 
99 percent of dry air—air from which all water vapor has been 
removed. Argon and other gases account for about 1 percent 


of the clouds. Fog is a cloud near the earth's surface. 
See Rain (Formation of rain); Snow; Fog. 

Particles in the air. Air always contains many tiny sol- 
id particles called aerosols. Most aerosols measure only 
about 525 699 inch (0.1 micrometer) in diameter. They are 
therefore invisible, except when crowded together in 
extremely large numbers. 

Many aerosols enter the air from active volcanoes, au- 
tomobile exhaust, forest and brush fires, and factory 
smoke. The wind carries particles of dust and sand up 
from the ground into the atmosphere. Other aerosols in- 
clude pollen from plants, salt from the oceans, ashes of 
meteoroids, and tiny living things called microbes. 
Aerosols are always being added to the air. But they do 
not remain in the atmosphere forever. Rain and snow 
wash out many aerosols, which is why air is fresher after 
it rains or snows. Other aerosols slowly fall to the earth. 

Near the earths surface, the number of aerosols in the 
air varies greatly from place to place. The air over the 
oceans contains about 30 million aerosols per cubic foot 
(1 billion per cubic meter). However, the polluted air 
over a large city may contain about 3 billion aerosols 
per cubic foot. Fewer aerosols float in the higher re- 
gions of the atmosphere. 


How air behaves 
Weight and pressure. We do not usually notice the 
weight of air because air is much lighter than solids or 
How air pressure decreases with altitude 


Altitude Pressure 


I n r i 
In feet In meters eabaee oahe Kiko ecle 
50,000 15,000 18 1244 
40,000 12,000 2.8 19.4 
30,000 9,000 4.5 30.8 
20,000 6,000 6.8 472 
10,000 3,000 10.2 70.1 
Sea level Sea level 14.7 101.3 


liquids. At sea level, each cubic foot of air weighs only 
about 1 { ounces, a measurement equivalent to about 
1.2 kilogram per cubic meter. But the weight of all the 
air around the world is more than 5,700,000,000,000,000 
tons (5,200,000,000,000,000 metric tons). The weight of 
the air pressing from the top of the atmosphere upon 
the layers of air below produces air pressure, also called 
atmospheric pressure. The air pressure at sea level aver- 
ages 14.7 pounds per square inch (101.3 kilopascals). The 
air pressing down on your shoulders weighs about 1 
ton (0.9 metric ton). You do not feel this weight because 
you are supported by equal air pressure on all sides. 

An instrument called a barometer is used to measure 
air pressure. Barometers indicate air pressure in inches 
or millimeters of mercury or in units called bars and mil- 
libars. The bar is a unit of pressure in the metric system, 
equal to 100 kilopascals, and a millibar equals ; 75 of a 
bar. On a barometer, the average atmospheric pressure 
at sea level is 29.92 inches (760 millimeters) of mercury, 
or 1,013 millibars. The atmospheric pressure changes a 
little each day with the weather. The pressure is usually 
lower on stormy, wet days than on clear, dry days. Thus, 
a falling reading on a barometer often indicates that a 
storm is approaching. See Barometer. 

The upper atmosphere has less pressure than the air 
near the earth, simply because there is less air pressing 
down from above. When you ride up a tall building in a 
fast elevator, you can feel the air pressure changing. The 
pressure of the air inside the elevator decreases, but the 
air pressure inside your ears remains the same. This dif- 
ference in pressure Causes your eardrums to bulge out- 
ward slightly until some air finally forces its way out of 
your ears. You then feel your ears “pop.” 

We use the pressing force of air in various ways. 
When we suck a soft drink through a straw, for example, 
we do not pull the liquid up through the straw. Instead, 
by sucking on the straw, we remove some of the air 
from inside it. As a result, the air pressure inside the 
straw becomes less than the pressure of the air on the 
liquid outside the straw. The greater pressure of the air 


Air pressure 


The weight of the air pressing down all around us produces air 
pressure. The diagrams here show one common way we use the 
force of the air—to drink through a straw. Sucking on the straw 
creates a partial vacuum inside it The greater air pressure out- 
side then pushes the liquid in the glass up through the straw. 
WORLD BOOK illustrations by Oxford Illustrators Limited 








Equal air pressure Unequal air pressure 





outside then pushes the liquid in the giass up through 
the straw and into our mouths. Suction pumps and vacu- 
um Cleaners also work by means of air pressure (see 
Pump; Vacuum cleaner). 

Air movement Air moves across the surface of the 
earth in the form of wind. The sun causes the wind be- 
cause it heats the earth's surface unevenly. Air above 
warm areas of the earth expands and becomes lighter. It 
then rises, Creating an area of low pressure near the sur- 
face. Wind is produced when cooler, heavier air flows 
toward the low-pressure area, replacing the rising air. 
Wind often develops along an ocean shore during the 
day because land heats up more quickly than water 
does. The air over the shore is thus warmer than the air 
over the water. As the warm air over the shore rises, the 
cooler air from the sea moves inland and replaces it, 
producing a sea breeze. At night, the air over the shore 
becomes cooler than the air over the water. Thus, the 
wind direction reverses, and a breeze blows out to sea. 

The warm air above the equator is usually rising. 
Cooler air from north and south of the equator blows in 
steadily, replacing the rising air. This movement of air 
creates two vast belts of winds called the trade winds. 
The trade winds do not blow straight toward the equa- 
tor because of the earth's rotation. The trade winds 
north of the equator are twisted to the right of their 
original direction, or toward the southwest. The trade 
winds south of the equator are shifted to their left, or to- 
ward the northwest. This effect of the earth's rotation on 
the paths of winds is called the Coriolis effect or Coriolis 
force. The Coriolis effect also shifts the paths of four oth- 
er great belts of winds that circle the earth. These winds 
are the prevailing westerlies and polar easterlies in each 
hemisphere north and south of the equator. See Trade 
wind; Coriolis effect; Wind. 

Bands of fast-moving winds occur about 6 to 9 miles 
(10 to 15 kilometers) above the earth. These bands are 
known as jet streams. Winds in the core of a jet stream 
may exceed 200 miles (320 kilometers) per hour. Systems 
of swirling winds, called cyclones and anticyclones, also 


Coal air 





WORLD BOOKA dlustration by Oxtord Ilustrators Lmited 


Air movement. Wind results from differences in the tempera: 
ture of the air. For example, on a sunny day, the air above an 
ocean shore is warmer than the air over the water. The warmer 
air over the shore expands, becomes lighter, and rises. T he cool 
er air from the sea moves in, producing a sea breeze. 





Air 169 


Air resistance 


Air resists the motion of objects traveling through it This resist- 
ance slows a parachute jumper's fall, shown here. The jumper 
meets minimum air resistance and falls rapidly until the para- 
chute is opened. The greater resistance acting on the surface of 
the parachute enables the jumper to float safely to the ground. 
WORLD BOOK illustrations by Oxford Illustrators Limited 


Air 
resistance 


Minimum resistance Maximum resistance 


form in the air. The winds of cyclones swirl inward to- 
ward a center of low pressure. Anticyclones whirl out- 
ward around a center of high pressure. See Jet stream; 
Weather (Synoptic-scale systems). 

Air resistance. Air resists the motion of objects trav- 
eling through it. This resistance occurs because moving 
objects rub against the atoms and molecules of the gas- 
es that make up the air. A piece of paper in the air floats 
slowly to the ground because of the air resistance acting 
on its surface. Air resistance slows down the speed of a 
parachute jumpers fall. 

During the early days of aviation, airplanes flew slow- 
ly partly because such parts as the wing braces and 
landing wheels rubbed against the air. Aviation engi- 
neers found that they could reduce air resistance and 
thus increase the speed of a plane by streamlining its 
shape. They removed outside wing supports and in- 
stalled landing wheels that could be pulled up into the 
plane. They found that even smoothing down rivet 
heads helped reduce air resistance. See Aerodynamics. 

The faster objects move through the air, the more re- 
sistance they meet. For example, the faster you ride a bi- 
cycle, the stronger the air resistance against you will be. 
As you increase your speed, you can feel the air pushing 
harder and harder against you. Air resistance generates 
heat. Meteoroids move through the atmosphere at such 
great speeds that they encounter enormous air resist- 
ance and so become very hot. As a result, most mete- 
oroids glow brightly, producing streaks of light known 
as meteors, and disintegrate before hitting the surface 
of the earth. Rockets traveling through the earth's atmos- 
phere must be made of materials that can withstand the 
intense heat created by air resistance. 

Air compression. Air can be pumped into steel cylin- 
ders or tanks until the air pressure is several hundred 
times greater than normal atmospheric pressure. Such 
air is called compressed air. When air is being com- 
pressed, the atoms and molecules of the air speed up. 
As their speed increases, the air gets warmer. 

People use compressed air to intlate tires and air mat- 





170. Air 


“——— Ballaons 
Rubber bands 


34-inch diam. 
flexible tubing 










A World Book science project 


The effects of air pressure 


This project demonstrates that air pressure depends on the 
number of air molecules per cubic inch of space. The two jars, 
left, are linked together so that the air space in each one can be 


varied to increase or decrease the pressure. 





mannan Sa P MN EP EO NRE SE 



















¥%-inch diam. 
copper tube 


¥Yg-inch diam. 
copper tubes You will need two one-quart Mason jars with 
rubber washers, lids, and screw tops. Get a 
36-inch-long piece of copper tubing with a 
23-inch inside diameter. Cut the tubing into four 
equal parts. You will also need flexible rubber or 
plastic tubing. It, too, must have a 2-inch inside 
diameter, and should be about 14 inches long. 
Other equipment includes a pencil, paper, 
thumb tack, rubber bands, silicone sealant, and a 
wooden block or cardboard box about 3 inches 
high. 


\ 
yl Se Preparing the materials 





Pencil 


Waaden block 


Assembling the materials 


¥,-inch diam. 
capper tube 


44-inch diam. 
copper tube 












34-inch diam. 
flexible tubing 












To insert the tubes, drill two holes in 
each lid. Insert a piece of copper tub- 
ing in each hole, positioning the 
tubes as shown. Use silicone sealant 
to hold the tubes in place and to give 
an airtight seal. Crimp the upper 
tubes. To assemble the parts, pour 











Silicane 


Silicone water into each jar until it is about 
i sealant half full. Then put on the rubber sealant 
lid =) —~ washers and lids, and screw on the 
— tops. Push each end of the flexible 
il tube well down over the tops of the 


two short copper tubes. 
=” %-inch diam. 
~~ capper tube 


34-inch diam. *& 
capper aa 


r3 
i¢] 
wn 
s 
it) 
7 





Turbine wheel 


Mason 4 Mason 
jar . \ a jar 
Pencil 





Water Water 


Making the turbine wheel. Cut L-shaped notches ina 
circular piece of paper. Fold the notches over, all in the 
same direction. Fasten the wheel to the top of the pencil 
with a tack. It must be loose so that the wheel will turn. 


Demonstrating the project 


To conduct a demonstration, slip a balloon over the tup of one 
of the copper tubes with crimped ends. Fasten the balloon in 
place with a rubber band. Blow into the other tube until water 
flows from one jar to the other, completely filling the flexible 
tubing. Then cap the tube with the remaining balloon and twist 
a rubber band around it to hold it securely in place. 


, 


Changing the pressure. Place one of the jars on a wooden 
block or cardboard box. As the water drains from this jar, the air 
molecules have more room and the pressure decreases, letting 
the balloon collapse. The water added to the other jar takes up 
space originally held by air molecules. The air molecules are 
squeezed together. The increased pressure inflates the balloon. 










a 
Bolloons 







Empty 


pop bottles 
as a 


Pon of hot 
woter 

















) 
§ 


! 
Working the turbine. Leave one jar raised. Remove the bal- 
loon from the raised tube to allow more air into the jar so that 
the water will flow freely. Take the balloon off the other jar also, 
and hold the paper turbine wheel over the open tube. Water 
flowing into this jar increases the pressure, pushing air out of 
the tube. This escaping air causes the turbine wheel to turn. 


~~ 


Turbine —~> 
S 


How temperature affects air pressure 


To use temperature to change air pressure, fas- 
ten a balloon on top of each of two pop bottles, 
and put the bottles in deep pans. Fill one pan 
with ice, and the other with hot water. The ice 
will cool the air in the bottle, causing the air to 
contract and deflate the balloon. The hot water 
will warm the air in the other bottle, causing the 
air to expand and inflate the balloon. 


Pan of ice 
ond woter 


Mlustrated by Art Lutz tor WORLD BOOK 


172 Air 


tresses. Scuba divers breathe from tanks of compressed 
air strapped to their backs. Submarines carry cylinders 


of air compressed to about 5}, its normal volume. A sub- 


marine dives as compartments called ballast tanks are 
flooded with water. It rises to the surface as the water is 
forced out of the ballast tanks by compressed air. Com- 
pressed air is also used to operate air brakes, certain in- 
secticide and paint sprayers, and air hammers and other 
pneumatic tools (see Pneumatic tool). 


Structure of the atmosphere 


Scientists divide the earth's atmosphere into five lay- 
ers according to differences in temperature. The layers, 
from lowest to highest altitude, are (1) the troposphere, 
(2) the stratosphere, (3) the mesosphere, (4) the thermos- 
phere, and (5) the exosphere. The atmosphere becomes 


The layers of the atmosphere 


thinner with increasing height above the earth. The out- 
er atmosphere gradually fades into space, where it 
meets the solar wind—that is, a continuous stream of 
charged particles from the sun. See Solar wind. 

The troposphere is the layer of the atmosphere clos- 
est to the earth—the layer in which we live. The tropos- 
phere contains more than 75 percent of the earth’s at- 
mosphere. Nearly all the earth’s weather 
conditions—including most clouds, rain, and snow—oc- 
cur in this layer. Scientists forecast the weather by study- 
ing the troposphere. The troposphere also contains 
most of the aerosols and water vapor in the air. Jet 
streams blow in the upper part of the troposphere. 

The temperature of the troposphere decreases about 
3.5 °F for every 1,000 feet (6.5 °C for every 1,000 meters) 
of increase in altitude. The temperature stops decreas- 


Scientists divide the earth's atmosphere into five layers, according to differences in the tempera- 
ture of the air. These layers are the troposphere, the stratosphere, the mesosphere, the thermos- 
phere, and the exosphere. The outer atmosphere gradually fades into interplanetary space. 


Divisions of 
the atmosphere 


Altitude 
600 mi. 
(960 km) 


550 mi. 
(890 km) 








500 mi. 
(800 km) 


400 mi. 
(640 km) 


350 mi. 
(560 km) 


300 mi. 
(480 km) 


250 mi. 
(400 km) 











200 mi. —ie ied fom 
(300 km) ly 


150 mi. =] | 


4 : 
(2 0 km) | Thecmospnere 





| 
100 mi. —4 
(160 Im) | 





_—_ 





q 


50 mi. - — 
(80 km) 


=="—Mesosphere / 











Detailed enlargement of the 
divisions of the atmosphere 








Cirrus clouds 


Stratosphere ‘es 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Oxford Wlustrators Limited 
Temperature 
extremes 


s-120 mi. 
(200 km) 





Reflected radio waves 





. _ os  Mesopause | peablae | 
eM \eteortraiiss, 29%. (113. | 
, al) (80 km) ; 


a y oe | rs | 
ff ( f 
_s 


—Stratopause 
30 mi. 
(48 km) 





-112,F 
(-80 C) 


~Tropopause 
10 mi. 
(16 km) 


i oe 








ing at the tropopause, the upper boundary of the tro- 
posphere. The tropopause lies about 6 miles (16 kilome- 
ters) over the North and South poles and about 10 miles 
(16 kilometers) over the equator. At the tropopause, the 
air has become too thin to support life. 

The troposphere is usually warmest near the earth's 
surface because sunlight that passes through the air 
heats the ground and seas. The ground and seas, in 
turn, warm the air directly above. Sometimes, especially 
at night and during the winter, the air near the earth's 
surface becomes cooler than the air above it. The tem- 
perature in a thin layer of the troposphere then in- 
creases with altitude. This abnormal situation is called a 
temperature inversion. The worst outbreaks of air pollu- 
tion occur during temperature inversions because the 
cold air near the ground traps the pollutants, preventing 
them from rising and scattering. An inversion lasts until 
sunlight heats the air below or wind breaks up the over- 
lying layer of warm air. 

At the tropopause, the air is so cold that the clouds 
consist of ice crystals. The coldest part of the tropo- 
sphere is at the tropopause over the equator. There, the 
air has risen so high that its temperature drops as low as 
—112 °F (-—80 ©). The tropopause over the equator can 
be as much as 54 Fahrenheit degrees (30 Celsius de- 
grees) colder than the tropopause over the poles. 

The stratosphere extends from the tropopause to 
about 30 miles (48 kilometers) above the earths surface. 
Very little moisture enters the stratosphere, so clouds 
are rare. Airline pilots prefer to fly in the stratosphere to 
avoid weather disturbances in the troposphere. 

The stratosphere usually has a lower layer of nearly 
steady temperature and an upper layer in which tem- 
perature increases with altitude. The temperature of the 
lower layer is about —67 F(—55 C). The upper layer's 
temperature increases to about 28 F{—2 C)at the top 
of the stratosphere, called the stratopause. The strato- 
sphere contains most of the atmosphere’s ozone. Ozone 
heats the air by absorbing the suns ultraviolet rays. 

The mesosphere extends from the stratopause to 
about 50 miles (80 kilometers) above the earth. The tem- 
perature of the mesosphere decreases with altitude. The 
lowest temperatures in the earth's atmosphere occur at 
the top of the mesosphere, called the mesopause. At the 
mesopause over the poles, the air temperature drops as 
low as —171 °F (—113 C) during the summer. Trails of 
hot gases left by meteors can be seen in the meso- 
sphere. Extremely strong winds blow in this layer. 

The thermosphere begins at the mesopause and ex- 
tends to about 300 miles (480 kilometers) above the 
earth. The air in the thermosphere is extremely thin. 
More than 99.99 percent of the atmosphere lies below it. 
The chemical composition of the thermosphere differs 
from that of the lower layers. In the lower regions of the 
thermosphere, many of the oxygen molecules in the air 
are broken into oxygen atoms. The outer layer of the 
thermosphere consists chiefly of hydrogen and helium. 

The thermosphere is completely exposed to the suns 
ultraviolet radiation, which heats the thin air there to ex- 
tremely high temperatures. Ordinarily, the temperature 
climbs rapidly from the mesopause to about 1100 F 
(600 "C) at 120 miles (200 kilometers) above the earth and 
then levels off. But during so/ar storms, more radiation 
and particles strike the thermosphere (see Sun [Solar ac- 


Air 173 


tivity]). It then becomes much hotter, reaching a temper- 
ature as high as 3600 °F (2000 “C) at the top of the ther- 
mosphere, called the thermopause. 

The lower part of the thermosphere and the upper 
part of the mesosphere are called the sonosphere. When 
radiation from the sun and from other sources in outer 
space strikes the air in this region, it /onizes (charges 
electrically) some of the atoms and molecules of the air. 
These charged atoms and molecules are called fons. The 
ionosphere plays an important part in radio communica- 
tion. It reflects back to earth radio waves that would oth- 
erwise travel into space. See lonosphere. 

Light displays called auroras occur in the thermo- 
sphere. Auroras are produced when charged particles 
given off by the sun are captured by the earth's magnet- 
ic field. The particles strike the atmosphere ina ring 
around each of the earth's magnetic poles, releasing en- 
ergy in the form of light. The display in the Northern 
Hemisphere is called the aurora borealis or the northern 
lights (see Aurora). The display in the Southern Hemi- 
sphere is the aurora australis or southern lights. 

The exosphere begins at the thermopause and even- 
tually merges with the solar wind. The exosphere has so 
little air that satellites and spacecraft orbiting the earth 
in the region encounter almost no resistance. The atoms 
and molecules of the air in the exosphere move ex- 
tremely fast. Some travel so fast that they overcome the 
force of the earths gravity and escape into space. The 
earth is thus slowly losing its atmosphere. However, the 
process will take billions of years before all the air 
around the earth disappears. 


Origin of the atmosphere 


Most scientists believe that the earth was formed ap- 
proximately 4 5 billion years ago and probably did not 
then have an atmosphere. Slowly, gases that escaped 
from the developing earth began to accumulate around 
it. For example, numerous volcanoes on the young earth 
released such gases as ammonia, carbon dioxide, car- 
bon monoxide, hydrogen, methane, nitrogen, sulfur 
dioxide, and water vapor. These volcanic gases made up 
a large part of the earth's earliest atmosphere. 

Much of the water vapor from the volcanoes con- 
densed, forming rivers, lakes, and oceans. Some of the 
other gases in the early atmosphere dissolved in the 
oceans or combined with rocks on the earth's surface. 
But most of the nitrogen stayed in the air. Additional 
gases, such as argon and xenon, were added by the de- 
cay of radioactive elements in the earth. 

The earth's earliest atmosphere probably did not con- 
tain much oxygen. But after blue-green algae, also called 
cyanobacteria, and some simple green plants appeared 
in the oceans before 3 } billion years ago, the amount of 
oxygen Started to increase as a result of photosynthesis. 
As plants spread over the earth, more and more oxygen 
built up in the atmosphere. As oxygen increased, carbon 
dioxide in the atmosphere decreased. By about 400 mil- 
lion years ago, the air probably contained as much owy- 
gen as it does today. See Earth (History of Earth). 


Changes in the atmosphere 


Human activity has caused small but important 
changes in the composition of the air. The amounts of 
many gases in the air, such as carbon dioxide, are in- 


174 Air 


gle 
Natrona! Center for Atmospheric Research 


A research balloon is inflated with helium in preparation for its 
launch, shown here. Scientific instruments aboard such balloons 
collect data about the earth's atmosphere. 


creasing at significant rates. Carbon dioxide enters the 
atmosphere whenever coal, oil, or other fuels contain- 
ing carbon are burned. Since the early to mid-1800's, the 
use of enormous amounts of these fuels has led to a 25 
percent increase in the amount of carbon dioxide in the 
air. Levels of methane and nitrous oxide have more than 
doubled, and there were no ch/orofluorocarbons 
(CFCs) in the atmosphere before 1930. CFCs are synthet- 
ic substances that were formerly used widely as refrig- 
erants in air conditioners and refrigerators and as pro- 
pellants in aerosol spray products. 

Many scientists believe that the increases in the gases 
and the introduction of CFCs has strengthened the 
greenhouse effect. A strengthening of this effect would 
produce global warming, an increase in the average 
temperature of the earth's surface. See Global warming. 

CFCs are also involved in the weakening of the pro- 
tective layer of ozone in the stratosphere and tropos- 
phere. CFCs are harmless near the ground, but cause 
damage when they drift up into the stratosphere and 
troposphere. There, they break apart and release chlo- 
rine atoms. The chlorine reacts with the ozone, convert- 
ing it into ordinary oxygen molecules. This conversion 
enables an increased amount of harmful ultraviolet radi- 
ation to reach the earth's surface. In 1990, the United 
States and most other industrialized countries agreed to 
stop production of most CFCs. 


The study of air 


Since ancient times, people have known that air is im- 
portant to life. During the 400's B.C, Empedocles, a 
Greek philosopher, suggested that four elements—air, 
earth, fire, and water—combined in various proportions 
to make up all objects in the universe. Many other Greek 
scholars accepted this theory. In the 300's B.C, the Greek 
philosopher Aristotle wrote Meteoro/ogy, a collection 
of observations about the nature of air and the forma- 





tion of weather. 

Early philosophers and scientists could not test their 
theories about the air because they had no instruments 
to measure the airs properties. Around 1600, scientists 
began to use a type of thermometer to study air. Evange- 
lista Torricelli, an Italian mathematician and physicist, in- 
vented the mercury barometer in 1643. In the mid- 
1600's, the Irish chemist Robert Boyle used the 
barometer to formulate the relationship between the 
volume of air and its pressure. 

During the 1700's, scientists began to study atmos- 
pheric gases. Oxygen was discovered by the Swedish 
chemist Carl Scheele in the early 1770's and independ- 
ently by the English chemist Joseph Priestley in 1774. 

In 1777, Antoine Lavoisier, a French chemist, realized 
that oxygen in the air enables objects to burn. Daniel 
Rutherford, a Scottish physician, discovered nitrogen in 
1772. In 1894, the Scottish chemist Sir William Ramsay 
and the English physicist Baron Rayleigh together isolat- 
ed argon. By the late 1800's, scientists had found that the 
composition of the air is the same all over the earth. 

During the early 1900's, Norwegian researchers head- 
ed by the physicist Vilhelm Bjerknes discovered that the 
movement of enormous bodies of air, called air masses, 
helps determine weather conditions. The researchers 
showed that when a warm air mass and a cold air mass 
meet, a zone of rapidly changing weather, which they 
called a front develops. Their model of weather systems 
vastly improved the accuracy of weather forecasting. 

Since the mid-1900's, scientists have made much 
progress in developing equipment for studying the at- 
mosphere. Today, weather balloons, radars, satellites, 
and lasers monitor atmospheric conditions, air pollution 
levels, and changes in the composition of the air. Mete- 
orologists can analyze the data supplied by these de- 
vices to prepare detailed weather forecasts. 

In December 1999, the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration (NASA) launched Terra, the first 
satellite of an extensive program known as the Earth Ob- 
serving System. Terra can monitor 16 factors that deter- 
mine climate, including aerosols, air temperature, 
clouds, and water vapor. Stanley David Gedzelman 


Related articles in World Book For a discussion of the at- 
mosphere of other planets, see the separate articles on the plan- 
ets, such as Venus and Mars. See also: 


Aerodynamics Lavoisier, Pressure Torricelli, 

Air pollution AntoineL Priestley, Evangelista 

Barometer Mesosphere Joseph Trade wind 

Climate Nitrogen Radiosonde Troposphere 

Gas Oxygen Stratosphere Weather 

lonosphere Ozone Thermosphere Wind 
Outline 


Il. Whatis air? 
A. Gases of the air 
B. Moisture in the air 
C Particles in the air 
ll, How air behaves 
A. Weight and pressure CC Air resistance 
B. Air movement D. Air compression 
ll. Structure of the atmosphere 
A. The troposphere D. The thermosphere 
B. The stratosphere E. The exosphere 
C The mesosphere 
IV. Origin of the atmosphere 
V. Changes in the atmosphere 
VI. The study of air 


Questions 
Which layer of the atmosphere is closest to Earth? 
How is a sea breeze produced? 
What holds the air in place around Earth? 

How do most scientists believe Earths earliest atmosphere 
formed? How was oxygen added to the early atmosphere? 
How does the humidity of the air depend on temperature, loca- 

tion, and the weather? 
What causes meteoroids to burn up in the atmosphere? 
What is an aeroso? What are common sources of aerosols? 
Why do airline pilots prefer to fly in the stratosphere? 
Why does the upper atmosphere have less pressure than the air 
near Earth? 
How is Earth slowly losing its atmosphere? 


Additional resources 


Allaby, Michael. Air. Facts on File, 1992. 

Barry, Roger G., and Chorley, R. J. Atmosphere, Weather, and 
Climate. 7th ed. Routledge, 1998. 

Dann, Sarah. The Science of Air. Gareth Stevens, 2000. Younger 
readers. 

Denny, Mark W. Air and Water: The Biology and Physics of Lifes 
Media. Princeton, 1993. 

Gardner, Robert. Science Project Ideas About Air. Enslow, 1997. 
Younger readers. 

Sauvain, Philip. A/r. Discovery Bks., 1992. 


Air, Liquid. See Liquid air. 

Air bag is an inflatable automobile safety device that 
helps protect a driver or passenger in a collision. An air 
bag is most effective used with lap and shoulder belts. 

An air bag system consists of one or more cloth air 
bags, an inflator, and devices called sensors. The sen- 
sors can detect a sudden slowdown, which would occur 
in a frontal collision, or the jarring force of a side impact. 
Sensors to detect frontal collisions are usually mounted 
at the front of the vehicle and in the passenger compart- 
ment. Those that detect side collisions are usually in the 
door and in the center pillar at the side of the vehicle. 
The sensors run on energy from the vehicle's battery or 
from a computerized control unit, a device that also 
monitors the system for malfunctions. 

Air bags are designed to inflate in frontal or front-an- 
gle impacts in which the automobile strikes an immov- 
able object at more than about 10 miles (16 kilometers) 
per hour or another car at about twice that speed. A 





Lenewal Motors 


A cloth air bag helps protect the driver in a head-on collision. 
The bag inflates within a fraction of a st ond after a frontal or 


front-angle impact. 


Aircleaner 175 


side-impact air bag can be triggered by less impact. 

After an impact, sensors send an electric current to an 
igniter system or, in some cases, to the computerized 
control unit. This unit evaluates the situation and then 
sends an electrical impulse to the igniter system. The 
electric current heats a filament (wire), which in turn ig- 
nites a capsule. This ignition capsule supplies the heat 
to ignite gas-generating pellets. 

In most systems, the pellets are made of sodium 
azide, which produces nitrogen gas when it burns. The 
gas expands quickly and inflates the air bag, which then 
breaks through a plastic cover in the steering wheel, the 
dashboard, or a door panel. The whole process takes 
about 0.1 second from the moment a frontal impact is 
detected, and even less time in the event of a side im- 
pact. The air bag starts to deflate immediately, venting 
the harmless gas through holes in the back of the bag or 
through the fabric itself. 

Safety experts have raised concerns that air bags can 
injure children, pregnant women, and adults of below- 
average height by hitting them on the head or neck. Au- 
tomobile manufacturers are developing systems that 
can adjust the position and inflation speed of an air bag 
based on the position and size of the person in the seat 
The United States National Highway Traffic Safety Com- 
mission recommends placing all children 12 years old 
and younger in the back seat. William H. Haverdink 
Air brake. See Brake (Air brakes). 

Air cleaner is a device that removes contaminants (im- 
purities) from a stream of gas or air. Solid contaminants 
include dust, lint, smoke, and pollens. Liquid contami- 
nants include mist and fog. Other contaminants come in 
the form of vapors and gases. 

Uses. Air cleaners serve many different purposes. In 
homes, they improve the cleanliness of the air and re- 
duce housekeeping time. Special types of air cleaners 
help to eliminate pollens and dust, and thereby bring re- 
lief to individuals who suffer from hay fever and other 
allergies. Department stores may use air cleaners to 
keep merchandise clean, and to reduce fire hazard by 
collecting lint or other burnable material that may be 
deposited in the ventilation system. Hospitais use air 
cleaners to reduce or eliminate the spread of infection. 

Without air cleaners, many industries could not oper- 
ate efficiently. For example, food processing and elec- 
tronic equipment manufacturing require relatively dust- 
free air. Air cleaners can lower expense by recirculating 
conditioned air from heating and air-conditioning sys- 
tems. Air-cleaning systems also keep exhausted contam- 
inants from reentering the factory. Sometimes industrial 
dust or odors must be removed to keep the air from 
harming people in the area nearby. Air cleaners also 
protect internal-combustion engines and other machin- 
ery from excessive wear. 

Types of air cleaners. The type of air cleaner used 
depends on the size and the amount of particles to be 
removed and on the characteristics of the contaminant. 
Cost is also important because some air-cleaning sys- 
tems cost more to buy, operate, and maintain than oth- 
ers. Air cleaners are classified according to their princi- 
ple of operation. The chief types of air cleaners are (1) 
filtration, (2) electrostatic precipitator, and (3) inertial. 

Filtration air cleaners use a dry, uncoated filter made 
of such materials as wool felt, cotton batting, or cellu- 





176 Air cleaner 


lose fiber. They come in both cleanable and throwaway 
types. Dry filters can hold large amounts of int. But large 
accumulations can clog the filter pores, slowing the air 
flow through the filter and disturbing effectiveness. The 
most familiar dry filters are those used in the air clean- 
ers of automobiles and in the heating and cooling sys- 
tems of homes. 

Special dry filters, called HEPA, ultra, or absolute, 
have an efficiency as high as 99 percent. They contain 
such material as pleated cellulose-fiber paper, deep 
sand beds, a combination of fiberglass and wool, ora 
compressed fiberglass. Slightly less efficient versions 
used in the home remove pollen, smoke, and tiny dust 
particles from the air. These filters actually increase in 
efficiency as they accumulate contaminants, until they 
reach their maximum effectiveness. 

Electrostatic precipitators are among the most impor- 
tant air cleaners in use today because they run so effi- 
ciently and have so many different uses. They are espe- 
cially useful for removing particles of dust and smoke, 
but they also remove bacteria and pollen. 

Some types of electrostatic precipitators are designed 
only for cleaning ventilating air in such places as homes, 
offices, hospitals, and stores. Other types of electrostatic 
precipitators are widely used in industry to clean air and 
gas. 

An electrostatic precipitator consists of an /onizer, 
through which air passes; a cell, or collector, which re- 
moves the contaminant; and a power pack, which pro- 
vides direct-current electric energy. A fan blows the 
contaminated air past a number of small, electrically 
charged wires in the ionizer. In most electrostatic pre- 
cipitators, the particles receive a positive electric 
charge. The charged particles are said to be ionized (see 
lon). The particles then pass to the cell, which consists of 
a series of metal plates. Some of the plates carry a posi- 
tive charge, but others carry a negative charge. The pos- 
itively charged dust particles are attracted to the nega- 
tively charged metal plates because opposite charges 
attract one another, and like charges repel each other. 
The dust particles stick to the metal plates until the 
plates are cleaned, usually by washing them in deter- 
gent and water. 

Inertial air cleaners use the principle of centrifugal 
force (see Centrifugal force). They change the direction 
of the air flow so that dirt particles are thrown out of the 
air stream. Inertial air cleaners are primarily used in in- 
dustry for the continuous removal of dust, granular ma- 
terial, and other contaminants. 

Other types of air cleaners. Absorber cleaners use 
simple absorbing agents, such as water or alkali. Ab- 
sorber cleaners are used to remove soluble gases in 
various industrial processes. In some industries, certain 
combustible gases or vapors become dangerous. Com- 
bustion cleaners burn these gases at a high temperature 
and ensure safety. They also burn gases or vapors that 
have an unpleasant odor. Adsorption cleaners are used 
to recover solvents where large amounts of solvent va- 
por are given off. The adsorbing material is powdered 
charcoal, silica gel, or some other substance that does 
not change physically or mechanically during the ad- 
sorption process. Some scrubber cleaners wash the air 
with an air washer, such as a stream of steam. Scrubber 
cleaners also absorb gases or collect solid particles with 


wet filters or containers full of ceramic material. 
Another type of air cleaner, the viscous-impingement 

cleaner, was once commonly used in automobiles. Air 

entering the carburetor was usually forced through a 

metal mesh screen wetted with oil. It then passed 

through a pool of oil to help collect any remaining dust. 
Sarwan S. Sandhu 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Air conditioning (Cleaning the air) 
Air pollution 
Filter 
Gasoline engine (Fuel system) 
Ventilation 


Air compressor is any device used to compress air. A 
common type works on the same principle as a pump. It 
has a piston that moves back and forth within a hollow 
cylinder, compressing the air and forcing it into a closed 
chamber. Pipes or hoses connected to the chamber 
channel the air to tools and other devices that run on 
compressed air. 

Air compressors do many important jobs. Trains and 
heavy road vehicles have air compressors that supply 
the air used to power their brakes (see Brake [Air 
brakes). 

Air compressors also provide the air that runs pneu- 
matic (air-powered) tools in manufacturing plants, con- 
struction sites, and home workshops (see Pneumatic 
tool). Such compressors may be driven by electric mo- 
tors or by gasoline or diesel engines. Compact com- 
pressors powered by electric motors are used in the 
home to operate paint sprayers. Rotary (fan-type) com- 
pressors are used in gas turbines, jet engines, and other 
devices. 

See also Free-piston engine; Pump (Axial-flow 
pumps); Turbine (Gas turbines; diagram). 

Air conditioning controls the temperature, moisture, 
cleanliness, and movement of indoor air. It cools the air 
when the weather is hot. It warms the air when the 
weather is cold. Comfort depends partly on humidity, 
and air conditioning removes moisture from the air or 
adds it as needed. Removing dirt and dust from air 
makes the air more healthful. By controlling air move- 
ment, air conditioning brings fresh air into a room and 
pushes out stale air. In all these ways, air conditioning 
provides air that makes people comfortable at work, at 
play, and while sleeping. 


Evan Powell 


How we use air conditioning 


For comfort. When the weather is hot, most people 
enjoy eating in cool, air-conditioned restaurants. They 
sleep better in air-conditioned bedrooms. Airplanes, 
trains, ships, buses, and automobiles that are air condi- 
tioned make traveling more pleasant. Air conditioning 
helps keep homes clean by taking dirt from the air. It of- 
ten relieves the discomfort of hay-fever victims, because 
it removes pollen from the air. Air-conditioned hospitals 
protect the health and improve the comfort of patients 
and hospital staffs. 

During cold weather, air conditioning performs much 
the same services. It supplies clean, moist air that is 
warmed to the most comfortable temperatures for 
working and sleeping. 

In business and industry, air conditioning improves 
the efficiency of workers. Employees stay more alert 


| 
2 


and become less tired in air-conditioned offices and fac- 
tories. They make fewer mistakes and have fewer acci- 
dents. Air conditioning also protects workers against 
high temperatures and harmful dust, smoke, and fumes. 
In stores and shops, air conditioning keeps merchan- 
dise clean. It also increases sales, because people like to 
shop in comfort. 

Several industries, such as the electronics industry, 
work with delicate parts and therefore require air- 
conditioned clean rooms, which are free of dust or 
germs. Companies in these industries make or assemble 
equipment in such rooms because the tiniest speck of 
dust could prevent the equipment from working prop- 
erly. 

Large computers become warm when in use and are 
sensitive to dust. A computer may break down unless air 
conditioning removes this heat and keeps the surround- 
ing air clean. 

Metals and other materials expand as the temperature 
rises, and contract as the temperature drops. For this 
reason, air conditioning is used to control the tempera- 
ture in factories that manufacture tools or parts for in- 
struments, watches, cameras, and other precision prod- 
ucts. Changes in temperature would change the size of 
such products. 

Many nonmetallic materials, including textiles, paper, 
and tobacco, absorb moisture from the air. Too much 
moisture may make these materials stretch out of shape. 
Too little moisture in the air makes these materials dry 
and brittie. 

Almost all textile mills use air conditioning to control 
moisture so they can produce strong, uniform threads 
and fabrics. Some fibers, such as nylon and rayon, could 
not be made and woven into cloth without air condition- 
ing. Even the sewing machines that mass-produce nylon 
stockings require proper temperature control. The nee- 


How a window air 


Air conditioning 177 


dles of these machines are so small, and operate in such 
tiny spaces, that sudden temperature changes could 
cause them to jam and break. 

Paper stretches in wet weather, and becomes brittle 
in dry weather. Air conditioning helps control moisture 
in printing plants so the paper will remain flexible and 
stay the same size. This makes possible high-speed 
printing of newspapers, magazines, and books through- 
out the year. 

In bakeries, air conditioning controls the rising of 
bread dough. It also keeps flour from molding. Bread 
that is cooled in air-conditioned rooms has crack-free 
crusts. 

In drug and chemical plants, air conditioning not only 
provides clean air but also removes germs from air. Air 
conditioning keeps moisture at the proper level so that 
powders, salts, and other chemical substances stay dry. 

Air-conditioning systems in commercial buildings are 
being used increasingly for smoke control during fires. 
By controlling the airflow, the systems provide smoke- 
free areas for evacuation and fire-fighter access. 


How air conditioners work 


There are three main kinds of air-conditioning sys- 
tems. Summer air conditioning cleans, cools, and re- 
moves moisture from air. Winter air conditioning 
cleans, heats, and adds moisture to air. Year-round air 
conditioning cleans and controls the temperature and 
moisture content of air throughout the year. All air- 
conditioning systems have some way of blowing, or cir- 
culating, the conditioned air through rooms. 

Cleaning the air can be done in several ways. Some 
air conditioners force the air through fi/ters. The filters 
usually consist of closely packed fiberglass wool or 
metal fibers that have been coated with a sticky oil or 
some other type of adhesive (see Fiberglass). As the air 


A window air conditioner cools room air by means of a refrigerant. The liquid refrigerant absorbs 


conditioner works heat from the air and becomes a vapor as it flows through the evaporator. A compressor pumps 
the vapor to the condenser, which discharges the heat and turns the vapor back to liquid. 


DLL nia 


Outside Outside air 


Liquid 
refrigerant 





WORLD BOOK diagram by Ramon Goas 


oy Cool dry air 


Insulated barrier 


Condenser 
see Warm humid 
[Y air 
— Evaporotar 
Refrigerant 
vapar 
= - a> ! - Moisture 
fram air 
l 
— —————- — —4-—- —- -+— = = 1 : : : 
a = 
Evaporating moisture Outside air — i Blawer 





178 Air conditioning 


How home central air conditioning works 


In a home central air conditioner, the refrigerant carries heat outside just as it does in a window 
unit. A system of ducts (pipes) and a blower on a furnace move the air cooled by the evaporator to 
all the rooms in the building. The compressor and condenser are in a separate unit outside. 








Outside : 


Liquid 
refrigerant 


Condenser 


Outside air 


Campressor 












Pokey et, een eee ee 


cP Cas 


BRE ee 


Valve 


passes through, the dirt, dust, and soot in the air stick to 
the fibers. Air can also be cleaned by blowing it through 
sprays of water called air washers. A central air condi- 
tioner that uses this method has a row of nozzles that 
squirt a fine mist of water into the air. The water rinses 
out the dirt. Central air conditioners may also be 
equipped with e/ectrostatic filters, or electrostatic pre- 
cipitators. These devices put a positive electric charge 
on the particles of dirt in the air. Negatively charged col- 
lector plates attract the positive particles out of the air 
(see Air cleaner). Some central air conditioners force 
the air through porous pieces of carbon, which absorb 
odors. 

Drug firms and hospitals require extremely pure air. 
They usually have air conditioners equipped with spe- 
cial filters. These filters remove all dirt particles down to 
a size of st inch (0.0003 millimeter). Air conditioners 
may also have special lamps that kill germs in the air 
with ultraviolet rays (see Ultraviolet rays). 

Controlling the temperature. After an air condi- 
tioner cleans the air, it must cool it in summer and heat 
it in winter. Most people feel comfortable when the 
temperature of the air is between 68 °F (20 °C) and 75 °F 
(24 °C) in the winter and between 73 °F {23 °C) and 79 °F 
(26 °C) in the summer. 

To cool the air, some air conditioners blow it through 
sprays of cold water. The same sprays that clean the air 
may also cool it. Most air conditioners blow the air over 
coils (large groups of tubes) that are filled with cold 
water or a chemical refrigerant. Refrigeration machines 
may be used to chill the water or refrigerant that flows 
through these coils (see Refrigeration [Mechanical 
refrigeration|). Other air conditioners may use cold 
water that comes from a well, a river, or a city’s water 
system. 

Most air conditioners used in large buildings heat air 





Inside 


Mak 4 hm bei Hiab ay Lett | ee 
CYR Ae ° 


WORLD BOOK diagram by Ramon Goas 





Evaparator 


Refrigerant vapor 







Warm air 


| 


Filter 





Blawer 


by blowing it over coils filled with hot water or steam. A 
boiler heated by a gas or oil burner produces the hot 
water or steam. In some air conditioners, electric heat- 
ers warm the air. These heaters have a screen of wires 
heated by electricity. The air is warmed as it passes 
through the screen. 

Controlling the moisture. The evaporation of mois- 
ture from our skin helps cool our bodies. But in sum- 
mer, air often becomes Aumid (moist). Humid air cannot 
pick up as much extra moisture as dry air can. We find it 
difficult to cool off in humid weather, because the air 
does not absorb the perspiration from our bodies. The 
amount of moisture that people lose as perspiration de- 
pends on their activities and emotions. For example, a 
crowd at a basketball game perspires more than an au- 
dience in a motion-picture theater. An air conditioner 
must remove warm, moist air from a room and supply 
cool, dry air. Otherwise, the air becomes sticky and we 
feel uncomfortable. 

The amount of moisture in air compared with the 
amount it can hold is called the re/ative humidity (see 
Humidity). People usually feel most comfortable when 
the relative humidity is kept between 30 and 60 per cent. 

Air conditioners can dehumidify (remove moisture 
from) air in several ways. Cold air cannot hold as much 
moisture as warm air can. When air conditioners cool 
air by passing it over cooling coils, the water or refriger- 
ant in the coils can be made cold enough to cause the 
moisture in the air to condense (turn into a liquid). The 
same process occurs when the outside of a drinking 
glass becomes moist as it is filled with ice water. 

Air conditioners also can remove moisture from air 
by passing it through sprays of cold water. These sprays 
cool the air enough to condense some of the moisture. 

Moisture control is important in winter, too. Cold out- 
side air contains little moisture. When this air is heated, 





= re oe ee ——l 


it becomes extremely dry. Such air dries the skin and 
may irritate the nose, throat, and lungs. To prevent these 
discomforts, air conditioners add moisture to the air in 
cold weather. They do this by passing air through sprays 
of water or over pans of heated water. The water evapo- 
rates into the air. 

Circulating the air is important because most peo- 
ple feel uncomfortable in motionless air. The air ina 
room often becomes filled with moisture and odors. 
This air must be removed as conditioned air is blown in. 

Fans blow conditioned air through the room. The air 
may be blown in directly or through ducts (pipes) that 
lead to various parts of a building. In large commercial 
buildings, other fans suck out used air. To eliminate 
smoke and odors, the fans exhaust some of the used air 
by blowing it out of the building. The remaining used air 
is returned to the air conditioner, where it is mixed with 
ventilation air drawn in from outside. This mixture of in- 
side and outside air is then conditioned and returned to 
the cooled room. Eventually, an air conditioner replaces 
all the air in a room or building with ventilation air 
drawn in from outside. An air conditioner can circulate 
air through a room at a rate of about 15 to 40 cubic feet 
(0.4 to 1.1 cubic meters) per minute. The amount of air 
circulated through a room depends on the size and 
speed of the fan used in the air conditioner. 


Kinds of air conditioners 


Room air conditioners operate on electricity or gas, 
and are located partly in the room to be cooled. They 
are enclosed in a single cabinet. They blow the condi- 
tioned air directly into the room and do not have air 
ducts leading to and from them. The three chief types 
are (1) window air conditioners, (2) consoles, and (3) self- 
contained air conditioners. 

Window air conditioners fit into the lower part of a 
window and can be moved from window to window. In 
the air-conditioning industry, these units are called 
room air conditioners. 

Consoles are larger than window air conditioners and 
stand on the floor in the room. They must be near a win- 
dow or a wall opening in order to obtain outside air. 

Self-contained air conditioners are the largest room 
air conditioners. They may stand 7 feet (2 meters) tall, 
and can cool an entire large room, such as a restaurant. 

Central air conditioners use electricity or gas. They 
can supply conditioned air to a number of rooms or to 
an entire building from one central source. Fans blow 
the conditioned air through air ducts from the air condi- 
tioner to the rooms. 

Central conditioners have a number of advantages 
over other kinds. For example, all the equipment for air 
conditioning a large area is located in one place. This re- 
dices the cost of cleaning and repairing. Central condi- 
tioners can also be zoned. That is, they can supply air of 
different temperatures to different parts of a building. A 
doctor with a crowded waiting room might want cooler 
air than a lawyer in a smaller office. Zoning makes it 
possible to serve both their needs. 

Combination room and central air conditioners 
are used in large bui!dings. They combine the advan- 
tages of both types. One kind of combination system has 
a central conditioner to condition outside air. !t circu- 
lates the conditioned air to a unit in each room. The 


Air conditioning 179 


room unit controls the temperature and moisture- 
content of the air. 

Another type of combination system furnishes cold 
water or a refrigerant from a central refrigeration ma- 
chine to a conditioner in every room. Each room condi- 
tioner has a fan, filter, and cooling coils to condition and 
circulate the air. 

A third variety of combination system conditions a 
mixture of outside and inside air. This system supplies 
each room with cool, conditioned air through one duct, 
and warmed, conditioned air through another duct. A 
mixing-box unit in each room mixes the two air streams 
to provide the right temperature. Combination systems 
have the advantage of supplying conditioned air or a 
cooling fluid from a central source. This cuts the cost of 
maintaining them. At the same time, the individual room 
units allow the people in each room to adjust the tem- 
perature to suit their wishes. 

Air conditioners for vehicles. !n automobiles, the 
refrigeration unit is located under the hood near the en- 
gine. The engine drives the unit by means of a belt con- 
nected to the engine. Air ducts feed the conditioned air 
into the car. 

Buses often have a separate motor to drive the refrig- 
erating equipment. This equipment may be located ei- 
ther in the rear of the bus or under one side near the 
luggage compartment. The air conditioner is in the roof 
of the bus. Jt supplies cool, conditioned air to the seats 
through ducts running along the roof. 

In a railroad passenger car, an electric motor ora 
gasoline engine drives a refrigeration unit located 
under the car. The air conditioner is mounted over the 
entrance at one end of the car. Fans in the conditioner 
blow the air through ducts to outlets that are located in 
the car. 

Airplanes require special air-conditioning units. 
Much of the equipinent is made of aluminum to save 
weight. The refrigeration and air-conditioning units for 
large airplanes are usually located in the wings. In 
smaller aircraft, these units may be in the body of the 
airplane. Air turbines drive the refrigeration equipment. 
Air ducts feed the conditioned air to different parts of 
the airplane. 

On ships, the refrigeration equipment is installed in 
the engine room or in a mechanical equipment room. 
The air-conditioning units are located throughout the 
ship. Air-conditioning equipment for ships must be extra 
strong to withstand the rolling and pitching motion of 
the water. Special metals are used to resist corrosion by 
seawater. 


Choosing a window air conditioner 


Two facts should be kept in mind when selecting a 
window air conditioner. (1) The capac‘éty (cooling power) 
of the air conditioner should be suitable for the room. 
(2) The electric power requirements for the air condi- 
tioner must match the electric system available for it. 

Capacity of air conditioners. The size of a room 
and the number of people using it help determine the 
capacity of the air conditioner needed. So do the num- 
ber, size, and direction of the windows in a room, the 
wattage of appliances and lights, and the amount of wall 
insulation. 

An air conditioner that has a lower capacity than 








180 Air conditioning 








Coilector 





lonizer 





Filter 








WORLD BOOK diagram by Ramon Goas 


An electrostatic filter, also called an e/ectrostatic precipitator, 
removes particles of dust and smoke from the air. The ionizer 
gives the particles a positive electric charge. The negatively 
charged collector then attracts and holds the particles. 


needed will not keep a room cool. An oversized unit will 
control the temperature, but it may not reduce excess 
humidity. Such a unit will run only a short time before 
the temperature falls. It may not even run long enough 
to remove much moisture from the air. 

Manufacturers rate the capacity of air conditioners in 
four ways: (1) British thermal units, (2) watts and kilo- 
watts, (3) tons of refrigeration, and (4) horsepower. 

British thermal units. One British thermal unit (Btu) 
equals the amount of heat needed to raise the tempera- 
ture of 1 pound (0.45 kilogram) of water from 59 °F to 
60 °F (15 °C to 15.56 °C). The Btu per hourrating is the 
basic measurement for air conditioning, and should al- 
ways be used to specify the capacity of an air condi- 
tioner. An air conditioner with a capacity of 12,000 Btu's 
per hour can remove enough heat from the air it is con- 
ditioning to raise 12,000 pounds (5,440 kilograms) of 
water one degree Fahrenheit each hour. The cooling ca- 
pacities of room air conditioners range from 4,000 to 
36,000 Btu's per hour. 

Watts and kilowatts are the units used to measure air- 
conditioner capacity in the metric system. One watt 
equals 3.4 Btu's per hour. 

Tons of refrigeration. One ton of refrigeration re- 
moves the amount of heat needed to melt 1 short ton 
(0.9 metric ton) of ice at 32 °F (0 °C) in 24 hours. A one-ton 
air-conditioning unit can remove 288,000 Btu's of heat in 
24 hours, or 12,000 Btu's per hour (3,510 watts). A two- 
ton air-conditioning unit can remove twice this amount, 
and so on. 

Horsepower measures the power needed to run the 
refrigeration equipment that cools the air. One horse- 
power equals 745.7 watts. 

Electric power requirements. Local electrical 
codes govern the kind of motor that can be connected 
to different kinds of electrical systems. Most air condi- 
tioners that have a capacity rating of up to 14,000 Btu's 


per hour operate on 110-volt, single-phase current. 
Larger air conditioners need either 220-volt or 220-440- 
volt, three-phase current. See Electric generator (Kinds 
of AC generators). 

Different air conditioners use various amounts of 
electricity to remove the same amount of heat. Engi- 
neers use a number, called the Energy Efficiency Ratio 
(EER), to measure how economically an air conditioner 
uses electricity. To find an air conditioner's EER, its Btu 
per hour rating is divided by the number of watts of 
electricity used by the unit. For example, an air condi- 
tioner that uses 600 watts to remove 5,000 Btu's per hour 
has an EER of 5,000 divided by 600, or 8.33. Most air con- 
ditioners have an EER of from 8 to 9. The higher the EER 
of a unit, the less electricity it uses—and the less it costs 
to operate. 


History 


The ancient Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans used wet 
mats to cool indoor air. They hung the mats over the 
doors to their tents and other dwellings. When wind 
blew through the mats, evaporation of the water cooled 
the air. The people of India later used this method to 
cool the royal palaces. About 1500, Leonardo da Vinci, 
the great Italian artist and scientist, built the first me- 
chanical fan to provide ventilation. Water power turned 
the fan. In 1553, the English developed a rotary fan to 
ventilate mines. 

Textile manufacturers made the first attempts at air 
conditioning. In 1719, a silk company in Derwent, Eng- 
land, installed a central system to heat and ventilate its 
mill. Early cloth makers in New England boiled water in 
huge pots near their looms to keep the air moist. Unfor- 
tunately, the heat injured the health of the workers and 
this method was discontinued. 

About 1838, David B. Reid, an English scientist, pro- 
vided the British House of Commons with a system to 
ventilate and humidify the air. In the mid-1800's, John 
Gorrie, an American, invented a cold-air machine to 
cool hospital rooms. 

During the late 1800's, textile manufacturers in New 
England began using sprays of water to condition the air 
in their mills. In 1897, joseph McCreery of Toledo, Ohio, 
received a patent for the type of spray now used in air 
conditioners. 

By 1902, Alfred R. Wolff, a consulting engineer, had 
designed air-cooling systems for Carnegie Hall and sev- 
eral other buildings in New York City. That same year, 
Willis H. Carrier, a research engineer, designed the first 
scientific system to clean, circulate, and contro] the tem- 
perature and humidity of air. 

In 1906, Stuart W. Cramer, a textile engineer from 
Charlotte, N.C, used the term air conditioning for the 
first time. Air conditioning became a recognized branch 
of engineering in 1911. 

The Baltimore & Ohio Railroad installed the first air- 
conditioning system for trains in 1931. Air conditioning 
of apartments and homes also began during the 1930s. 
In 1939, Packard Motors introduced air-conditioning 
units for automobiles. The Greyhound Corporation in- 
stalled the first bus air-conditioning systems in 1940. By 
the 1990's, about 70 percent of all of the housing in the 
United States had some form of air conditioning. In ad- 
dition, most of the new single-family homes that were 


—_—_——— cc a iS ll —_—_— — 


hoUEETS eet te ee ee ee 


built in the United States were equipped with central air 
conditioning. 


Careers in air conditioning 


Careers in air conditioning can be divided into five 
main fields: (1) designing, (2) manufacturing, (3) selling, 
(4) installing and servicing, and (5) teaching and re- 
search. College-educated engineers research and de- 
sign air-conditioning systems. Skilled machinists, tool- 
makers, cabinetmakers, and similar craftworkers help 
manufacture air conditioners. Technical training, such as 
a degree in engineering, is often essential for positions 
in the selling and executive branches of air conditioning. 
Specially trained technicians, and operating and service 
engineers, install and maintain air conditioners. 


James E. Hill 

Related articles in World Book include: 
Air Heat pump Refrigeration 
Air cleaner Heating Solar energy 
Air pollution Humidifier Thermostat 
Dehumidifier Humidity Ventilation 
Heat 


Air-cooled engine. See Gasoline engine (Cooling). 
Air cushion vehicle (ACV) is a craft that travels on a 
layer of compressed air just above any kind of surface— 
land or water. The compressed air serves as an invisible 
cushion that eliminates almost all friction between the 
vehicle and the surface. ACV's, which are also known as 
hovercraft, can carry passengers, vehicles, and freight. 
Some ACV‘s can travel as fast as 80 miles (130 kilome- 
ters) per hour. 

How an ACV works. An air cushion vehicle has one 
or more fans that suck air into the craft. The fans force 
the air underneath the vehicle, creating an air cushion 
between the ACV and the surface. ACVs are sometimes 
called ground effect machines because they use the sur- 
face to help trap the air. 

A flexible rubberized skirt surrounds the lower edge 
of most ACVs. It fills with air forced in by the fans. The 
skirt enables the vehicle to travel over such rough ob- 
stacles as rocks and waves. Some ACV‘s have skirts only 
across the bow and stern. Rigid sidehulls run along the 
length of the craft. Such ACV's are called surface effect 
ships (SES’s). They can be used only in water. 

Gas turbines or lightweight diesel engines provide 
the power for the fans, and propellers drive the ACV 
forward. Most ACV's have small doors called puff ports 





Textron Marine Raaas 
An air cushion vehicle can travel on land or on water. This ve- 
hicle is a U.S. Navy Landing Craft, Air Cushion (LCAC. It can 
cross rough shores to land troops and equipment. 


Airembolism 181 


Rudder 
Propeller 
Aur flaw 





Air intake vent 
Lift fan 





Flexible skirt 





WORLD BOOK diagram 


A “cushion” of air under pressure supports an air cushion ve- 
hicle. A powerful fan creates the cushion by blowing air beneath 
the vehicle's flexible skirt. A propeller drives the craft forward. 
The pilot steers the vehicle with an airplane-type rudder. 


and either rudders or propellers for steering. These 
three devices enable the vehicle to travel backward, for- 
ward, or sideways, or to hover or turn. 

History. ACV principles were recognized as early as 
the mid-1800's, but the technology did not exist for 
building a practical model. In the early 1900s, a limited 
number were built. The Austrian Navy demonstrated 
one in 1916. In the mid-1950's, Christopher Cockerell, an 
English inventor, improved the basic design. In the early 
1960's, Britain, Japan, the Soviet Union, the United 
States, and other countries all tested ACV's. 

In the late 1960's, the U.S. Navy and Army began to 
use ACV in the Vietnam War for patrol duty and rescue 
missions. In 1968, the British began to use ACV‘'s to carry 
passengers and cars across the English Channel. Devel- 
opment of Aoverbarges—that is, ACV's that are pulled or 
pushed by another vehicle—began in the 1960s. In 1972, 
Canadian researchers discovered that ACV's could be 
used to break ice on waterways. 

Today, manufacturers produce a number of models 
that vary in size, speed, and power. Modern ACVs ac- 
complish many tasks. However, most ACVs are used for 
military missions. Russia and the United States are the 
world’s largest users of the craft. 

In the late 1950s, Jean Bertin, a French engineer, in- 
vented a special train called a tracked air cushion vehi- 
cle (TACV) or air train. This train runs only on land, and it 
requires tracks. It does not actually touch the tracks but 
uses them asa guide. The train has a /inear electric 
motor, which includes electromagnets in the underside 
of the vehicle (see Linear electric motor). The tracked 
air cushion vehicle is powered by magnetic forces be- 
tween the track and the electromagnets. It may also be 
powered by a jet engine. 

A vehicle called a magnetic levitation train, or maglev 
train, resembles the TACV. But a maglev train relies on a 
magnetic force between the vehicle and the guide rail— 
rather than on a cushion of compressed air—to hold the 
vehicle above the track. 

See also Ship (picture: Air cushion vehicles). 

Air embolism. See Diving, Underwater (Dangers of 
underwater diving). 


John D Bogus 


182 Air force 





Department of National Defence of Canada 


Fighter planes attack enemy aircraft and ground targets. In this photograph, three CF-18 Hornet 
fighters from the Canadian Air Force practice a maneuver. A Hornet fighter can carry missiles and 
other weapons at the tips of its wings and under its wings and main body. 


Air force 


Air force is the branch of a nation’s armed forces re- 
sponsible for military operations in the air. An air force 
consists of pilots and other personnel, aircraft, support 
equipment, and military bases. Some air forces also 
have guided missiles and spacecraft. 

Most countries have some type of air force. More 
powerful nations have an independent air force equal in 
rank to the other branches of the nation’s armed forces. 
These countries usually also have an air force unit in 
their army and navy. Many smaller, less powerful na- 
tions have an air unit as part of their army or navy. 

Air forces differ greatly in size and fighting strength, 
depending on a nation’s wealth, technology, and na- 
tional defense needs. The large air forces of industrial- 
ized nations have modern bombers, fighters, transport 
planes, helicopters, and other aircraft. Most developing 
nations cannot afford the advanced technology required 
to build a modern air force. But some have assembled 
relatively strong air forces through loans and trade with 
industrialized nations. Many smaller developing nations 
have air forces that consist of older aircraft. 

The United States and Russia have the most powerful 
and complex air forces. These forces include thousands 


Timothy M. Laur, the contributor of this article, is a consultant 
and lecturer on military issues. He is a retired lieutenant colonel! 
in the United States Air Force and author of An Encyclopedia of 
Modern Military Weapons. 


of aircraft and long-range missiles, some with nuclear 
warheads. Other powerful nations, including China, 
France, and the United Kingdom, also have such mis- 
siles. 

Until the development of airplanes and guided mis- 
siles in the 1900s, nations relied on armies and navies 
for military power. The operations of these forces, how- 
ever, are limited by land and sea barriers. Today, armies 
and navies remain extremely important. But the main 
striking force of the most powerful nations consists of 
airplanes and guided missiles. 


The role of air forces 


A nation’s air force may have several different roles 
depending on the country's security needs. Air forces 
within an army or navy support the operations of that 
branch. A navy’s air force, for example, may operate at- 
tack and reconnaissance (observation) planes from air- 
craft carriers to obtain information about operations in 
enemy territory. A navy's air force may also patrol its 
country’s coastline. An air force that serves as a separate 
military branch, however, usually has several roles re- 
lated to establishing control of the air. These roles in- 
clude (1) combat, (2) defense, and (3) transport. 

Combat missions involve fighting directly against an 
enemy force. The two chief types of combat missions 
are strategic and tactical. \n strategic missions, air forces 
operate over long distances, usually traveling from one 
continent to another. The most common strategic mis- 
sions involve attacks with bombs and long-range mis- 
siles against specific targets in enemy cities and indus- 


trial areas. Strategic attacks are designed to destroy the 
enemy's ability and desire to fight. 

Tactical missions are short- or medium-range opera- 
tions carried out in cooperation with ground or sea 
forces in battle. Such missions include attacks on enemy 
ground forces and counter air tactical missions. \n these 
missions, fighter planes may attack enemy aircraft to 
gain control of the air over a battle area. In interdiction 
attacks, aircraft strike transportation networks and other 
targets behind enemy lines. Such attacks prevent enemy 
forces and supplies from reaching the battlefield. 

Defense missions protect a nation’s territory from 
enemy attack. Advanced air forces use radar stations 
and satellites to detect surprise attacks by enemy bomb- 
ers or missiles. In case of such an attack, an air force 
uses missiles and fighter planes to shoot down enemy 
bombers and missiles. 

The threat of a counterattack can also serve as part of 
a nation’s air defenses, especially among nations that 
have nuclear weapons. Nations may avoid launching a 
nuclear attack because of their fear of a counterattack. 

Transport missions, also called a/r/ifts, support a 
nation’s combat operations by moving troops and 
equipment quickly by air. In a strategic airlift, aircraft 
transport troops and equipment over long distances. A 
tactical airlift provides air support to battlefield opera- 
tions. For example, aircraft may drop paratroopers and 
supplies in a battle area or behind enemy lines. In 
peacetime, air forces may transport food and other sup- 
plies to areas struck by disaster. 

Other missions include reconnaissance and air res- 
cue. Reconnaissance missions gather military informa- 
tion using visual observation, or cameras, radar, and 
other sensing devices aboard aircraft and satellites. Air 
rescue missions use small airplanes or helicopters to 
rescue people trapped in dangerous areas. 


The organization of air forces 


The leader of an independent air force may be a chief 
of staff or air marshal and hold the rank of general. In 
the U.S. Air Force, however, the highest authority is the 
secretary of the Air Force, a civilian appointed by the 
President. Air forces of smaller countries often come 
under the command of the army or navy. 

The squadron is the basic administrative unit of air 
forces. A squadron usually consists of aircraft of one 
type or model. Most fighter and attack squadrons have 
18 to 24 assigned aircraft, which are usually grouped 
into smaller units of 2 to 4 planes called fights. Bomber 
squadrons typically have from 10 to 19 assigned aircraft. 
Two or more squadrons form units called groups or 
wings. \n large air forces, these units may combine to 
form larger divisions or commands. 


Aircraft and missiles 


Aircraft are usually classified by their function. The 
main types of aircraft are (1) attack and fighter aircraft, (2) 
bombers, (3) transport aircraft, and (4) reconnaissance 
aircraft. 

Attack and fighter aircraft are designed tor speed and 
maneuverability in combat. They usually have a crew of 
one or two and carry missiles or bombs, depending on 
their mission. These aircraft attack enemy planes and 
ground targets or defend against air attacks. 


Airforce 183 








Shaun Harris, Photo Press 


Paratroopers drop from planes into battle areas or behind 
enemy lines, often surprising the enemy. Above, paratroopers 
from Britain's Royal Air Force train for an assault by air. 


Bombers are usually large, medium-range or long- 
range planes that carry a combination of bombs and 
guided missiles for striking strategic targets. Only a few 
nations with powerful air forces have bombers. Bomber 
crews range in size from about four to six people. 

Transport aircraft carry troops or cargo. The crew of a 
typical transport plane includes a pilot, copilot, naviga- 
tor, flight engineer, and one or more /oadmasters re- 
sponsible for the cargo or passengers. 

Reconnaissance aircraft carry cameras or electronic 
sensors to gather information about enemy forces. Re- 
connaissance aircraft include both airplanes specifically 
designed for reconnaissance and modified versions of 
other aircraft. 

Other aircraft include trainers, tankers, and helicop- 
ters. Trainers are used to train pilots. Tankers refuel 
other aircraft in flight. Helicopters serve a variety of 
functions. Some, called gunships, carry guns and mis- 
siles and are used in combat. Others transport troops 
and equipment over short distances. 

Missiles used by air forces may be launched from the 
ground or from aircraft. Ground-launched strategic mis- 
siles include intercontinental ballistic missiles (1CBM‘s} 
and intermediate-range ballisiic missiles (IRBM’'s). 
ICBMs can deliver a nuclear warhead to a target up to 
9,200 miles (15,000 kilometers) away. IRBM’s can reach 





Sovtoto 


Russian-made MIG aircraft, such as this MIG-29k fighter from 
the Russian Air Force, are common in the worlds air forces. 
India, Iraq. Poland, and many other countries fly MIG’. 





184 Airforce 


from about 1,700 to 3,400 miles (2,700 to 5,500 kilome- 
ters). In some nations, such as in the United States, the 
air force is responsible for ICBM‘s. But in others, includ- 
ing China and Russia, these missiles fall under a sepa- 
rate command. Air forces defend against ballistic missile 
attacks with ground-launched antiballistic missiles 
(ABMs). 

Air-launched missiles include both strategic and tacti- 
cal missiles. Bombers carry air-launched strategic mis- 
siles, such as the cruise missile, that can hit targets hun- 
dreds of miles or kilometers away. Fighter and attack 
aircraft and helicopters fire tactical air-to-air missiles 
{(AAM‘s) at enemy aircraft and air-to-surface missiles 
(ASM‘s) at ground targets. 


Major air forces of the world 


The power of an air force depends on the quality of 
its technology, training, and equipment. The world’s 
most powerful air forces have advanced aircraft, well- 
trained crews, and efficient maintenance and supply sys- 
tems. They include the air forces of the United States, 
Russia, China, Ukraine, France, India, the United King- 
dom, Germany, and Israel. Other important air forces in- 
clude those of Italy, North Korea, and Turkey. However, 
these forces are smaller and less technologically ad- 
vanced. 

The United States Air Force has about 2,500 active 
fighter and attack aircraft and about 200 bombers. The 
Air Force also operates several satellite and radar sys- 
tems. It has about 350,000 members, along with more 
than 70,000 in the Air Force Reserve. An additional 
110,000 people serve in Air National Guard units, which 
are administered by the states. The U.S. Air Force com- 
mands about 700 ICBM’s but no IRBM‘s. Under a 1987 
treaty, the United States and the Soviet Union agreed to 
eliminate their IRBM's. 

The U.S. Army, Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard 
all have their own air force units. The U.S. Navy has the 
world’s largest air arm with more than 1,400 combat air- 
planes and more than 500 armed helicopters. The U.S. 
Army air unit includes about 1,500 armed helicopters. 

The Russian Air Force has about 2,700 active com- 
bat aircraft, including about 2,300 fighters. The Air Force 
has more than 180,000 members. A separate strategic 





force controls about 700 ICBMs in Russia and about 70 
in Ukraine. Another force for space operations launches 
and operates military satellites. The Russian Navy's avia- 
tion branch has about 250 combat airplanes and about 
100 armed helicopters. 

The Chinese Air Force has more than 3,000 fighter 
and attack planes and about 350 bombers. Many of its 
planes are based on Russian designs. About 420,000 
people serve in the Air Force. China's Navy operates 
about 550 additional combat aircraft. China also has 
about 20 ICBM’s and 100 IRBM’'s under a separate strate- 
gic force. 

The Ukrainian Air Force has about 900 combat air- 
craft and 25 bombers. It has about 95,000 members. 

The French Air Force has about 500 combat aircraft, 
mostly fighter and attack planes. The force has about 
60,000 members. A separate strategic air force operates 
about 60 bombers equipped with IRBM’s. The French 
Navy has about 50 combat airplanes and 30 armed heli- 
copters. 

The Indian Air Force has about 800 combat aircraft, 
including about 350 fighters and more than 30 attack he- 
licopters. Indias Air Force also controls a large arsenal 
of surface-to-air missiles. About 150,000 people serve in 
the Air Force. India’s naval air force has about 40 addi- 
tional combat airplanes and about 70 armed helicopters. 

The British air force, called the Royal Air Force 
(RAF), has more than 400 active combat aircraft, mostly 
fighter and attack airplanes. It has about 55,000 mem- 
bers. The Royal Navy's air arm has about 30 additional 
combat airplanes and more than 100 armed helicopters. 

The German Air Force, called the Luftwaffe, in- 
cludes about 450 active attack and fighter aircraft, with 
about 50 additional combat airplanes and 50 armed heli- 
copters in the navy’s air unit. About 73,000 people serve 
in the Luftwaffe. 

The Israeli air force has about 450 active fighter and 
attack aircraft and about 36,000 members. It is one of the 
largest and most capable air forces in the Middle East, 
with highly experienced pilots. 


History 


Early air forces. The first air force was established by 
France in 1794, during a war against several other Eu- 


Wu Senhut, Xinhua News Agency 


Skilled pilots are essential to 
an effective air force. Like all 
military pilots, this pilot from 
the Chinese Air Force must 
spend many hours training 
before he can fly sophisticat- 
ed aircraft into dangerous 
combat areas. 


a a ce a te ts Ate tt, 











Bettmann 


The first air force was a French balloon corps, formed in 1794. 
Before airplanes were invented in 1903, warring nations used 
balloons to observe enemy troops and to drop bombs. 


ropean nations. The air force flew large balloons filled 
with hot air or gas. The French used the balloons to ob- 
serve movements of enemy troops. 

The first air attack took place in 1849. Austria con- 
trolled much of Italy at that time, and the people of Ven- 
ice revolted. The Austrians sent unmanned balloons car- 
rying time bombs over the city. Some of the bombs 
exploded as planned. But the wind changed direction 
and blew several balloons back over the Austrian 
troops, where the rest of the bombs exploded. 

During the American Civil War (1861-1865), both the 
Union and Confederate armies used balloons. The 
Union Army organized a balloon corps to direct artillery 
fire and observe Confederate troop movements. Almost 
every major army in the world soon established a bal- 
loon corps. 

Balloons became much less important in warfare after 
Orville and Wilbur Wright made the world’s first air- 
plane flight in 1903. By 1909, France, Germany, Britain, 
Russia, and the United States had purchased planes for 
their armed forces. In 1912, Britain established the Royal 
Flying Corps as the air arm of the Royal Army and Navy. 
In 1918, the corps became the Royal Air Force, the first 
independent air force. 

World War I began in 1914. In the war, the Allies, 
who included Britain, France, Russia, and the United 
States, fought the Central Powers, who included Ger- 
many and Austria-Hungary. At that time, most airplanes 


Airforce 185 


flew at a maximum speed of about 75 miles {120 kilome- 
ters) per hour. They could reach an altitude of about 
10,000 feet (3,000 meters). By 1918, when the war ended, 
the maximum speed of aircraft had reached about 120 
miles (190 kilometers) per hour, and maximum altitude 
had more than doubled. Planes also had become much 
more maneuverable. 

At the beginning of the war, the fighting nations used 
planes only for observing enemy ground movements. 
Aircraft soon began to exchange gunfire, but many 
could not shoot forward because the plane's propeller 
was in front. Bullets might shatter the spinning blades of 
the propeller. In 1915, a Dutch designer, Anthony Fok- 
ker, developed a machine gun for the Germans that 
fired only when the propeller blades were not blocking 
the muzzle. The Allies began to use a similar gun in 
1 eee 

During the war, pilots fought air battles called dog- 
fights, and fliers who shot down five or more enemy 
planes became known as aces. Toward the end of the 
war, battles between squadrons of airplanes replaced 
most combat between single pilots. Early in the war, pi- 
lots had dropped bombs by hand. Later, they used me- 
chanical devices to release the bombs. By 1917, some 
planes could carry up to 3,000 pounds (1,400 kilograms) 
of bombs. 

In September 1918, American officer Billy Mitchell di- 
rected the largest air assault of the war. He commanded 
about 1,500 Allied aircraft in a mission over St.-Mihiel in 
France, where the Germans had advanced. The Allied 
planes gained control of the air, dropped bombs behind 
the German lines, and attacked enemy ground forces. 
Two months later, the Allies won the war. 

The growth of national air forces. Although many 
nations reduced their armed forces after World War I, 
the success of the airplane caused them to gradually de- 
velop their airpower. This policy often produced com- 
petition between a country's new air service and older 
army and navy. In the United States, for example, Billy 
Mitchell and other aviation leaders arqued vigorously 
for greater emphasis on airpower. Mitchell became so 
bitter in his criticism of the U.S. defense program that he 
was court-martialed for defying his superior officers. In 
1946, after events had confirmed many of Mitchell's pre- 
dictions, he was awarded the Medal of Honor, the na- 
tions highest military decoration. During the 1920's and 
early 1930s, France, Germany, Italy, and Sweden formed 
independent air forces. 

World War Ul. Airpower played a vital role in decid- 
ing the outcome of World War II. In the war, Germany, 
Italy, Japan, and other Axis powers fought the Allies, 
who included Britain, Canada, China, the Soviet Union, 
and the United States. 

The war began in 1939 when Germany invaded Po- 
land. The Germans used a new method of warfare called 
blitzkrieg (lightning war). Germany's air force, the Luft- 
waftfe, bombed Polish troops, destroyed airfields, and 
struck at key cities, highways, and railroads. On the 
ground, tanks and infantry overwhelmed the Polish 
forces. Between April and June 1940, Germany attacked 
and defeated Denmark, Norway, Luxembourg, the Neth- 
erlands, Belgium, and France. 

The Germans planned to invade Britain next, but first 
they had to defeat the Royal Air Force. In July 1940, the 





186 Airforce 


Luftwaffe started to bomb British ships and ports. Ger- 
man air raids on London began in September. The RAF 
was outnumbered, but it had better planes and pilots 
than the Luftwaffe. The British also had developed radar 
and a decoding device that enabled them to read coded 
German messages. Both developments were carefully 
guarded secrets that helped the RAF intercept Luftwaffe 
raids. By October, the RAF had shot down more than 
1,700 attacking planes and had lost about 900 of its own. 
Germany postponed its plans to invade the United King- 
dom, but air raids on British cities continued. 

The United States entered the war on Dec. 8, 1941, 
the day after about 360 Japanese aircraft attacked the 
U.S. fleet at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii. The attack destroyed 
or damaged 21 ships and more than 300 planes, tem- 
porarily crippling the Pacific Fleet and Hawaii's air de- 
fense. 

In mid-1942, American airpower halted Japanese ad- 
vances in the Pacific in two important battles at sea. In 
the Battle of the Coral Sea, in May, planes based on air- 
craft carriers did all the fighting. The opposing warships 
did not fire a shot at one another. Japan lost more 
planes, but fewer ships, than the United States lost in 
the battle. Neither side won, but the battle prevented a 
Japanese assault on New Guinea. A month later, in the 
Battle of Midway, Japan lost 4 aircraft carriers and more 
than 200 planes. The United States lost 1 carrier and 
about 150 airplanes. The battle blunted Japan's naval 
strength for the rest of the war and ended the threat of a 
Japanese attack on Hawaii and the United States. 

By mid-1942, Japan had captured large parts of China 
and had cut off the country’s main supply routes. To 
help China continue fighting Japan, Allied forces flew 
supplies from India to China over the Himalaya, the 
world's tallest mountain range. This dangerous route 
was called the “Hump.” During this airlift, which lasted 
almost three years, the Allies carried about 650,000 tons 
(590,000 metric tons) of supplies to China. 

The Allies attacked Germany in 1943, when the Unit- 
ed Kingdom and the United States started a bombing of- 
fensive that lasted almost until the end of the war. The 
RAF bombed German cities at night, and American 
planes attacked enemy industries during the day. In 
1944, the Luftwaffe began to use jet fighter planes. These 
planes could fly nearly 550 miles (885 kilometers) per 
hour, compared with about 400 miles (640 kilometers) 
per hour for propeller-driven fighters. Germany also de- 
veloped the first guided missiles, the V-1 and V-2. In 
1944 and 1945, the Germans fired more than 12,000 mis- 
siles at enemy cities. But these technological advances 
came too late to affect the outcome of the war. Germany 
surrendered in May 1945. 

In August 1945, American B-29 bombers dropped 
atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki. The bombers had flown from Tinian Island, 
1,360 miles (2,189 kilometers) away. Japan surrendered 
in September, and the war ended. 

The development of jet aircraft in the late 1930's 
and early 1940's greatly increased the range and speed 
of attacking planes. In 1939, a German Heinkel He 178 
made the first successful jet-powered flight. By 1944, 
Germany had developed the Messerschmitt Me 262, the 
first jet to fly combat missions. The first American jet 
plane, the Bell XP-59, flew in 1942 but was little used in 


World War II. After the war, several nations, including 
the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and the United 
States, rapidly developed jet-powered air forces. Soon 
each of these nations operated a fleet of jet fighters and 
long-range bombers. By the late 1950's, France and Chi- 
na also began developing jet-powered air forces. 

Air forces in the nuclear age. The United States 
emerged as the most powerful nation at the end of 
World War Il. It was the only nation with atomic weap- 
ons and the aircraft to use them. But the Soviet Union 
soon began to challenge the United States, competing 
for power and international influence in a struggle 
known as the Cold War. In 1949, the Soviet Union tested 
its first atomic bomb. Several other nations have devel- 
oped nuclear weapons since then. 

The Soviet Union successfully tested its first ICBM in 
1957, several months before the first successful United 
States test. The Soviets also launched the first space 
satellite in 1957. The United States and the Soviet Union 
competed for supremacy in missiles and space. They 
also developed antiballistic missiles (ABMs) designed to 
destroy enemy missiles in flight. To provide warning of 
a missile attack, the two nations set up missile detection 
systems on the ground and in space. 

By the late 1960's, the number of missiles and nuclear 
warheads had grown alarmingly large. In 1969, the Unit- 
ed States and the Soviet Union began a series of confer- 


ences in an effort to limit each country's missile strength. 


After several more conferences in the 1970's and 1980's, 


they agreed to eliminate their IRBM’s. See Arms control. 


Many smaller nations established strong air forces 
during the 1980's by obtaining aircraft from the United 
States or the Soviet Union. These nations included Fin- 
land, Hungary, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia. 

The Soviet Union began withdrawing its forces from 
Eastern Europe in 1990. In 1991, the United States and 
the Soviet Union agreed to reduce their long-range mis- 
siles and bombers, including their ICBM forces, by 
about a third. They also ended a continuous alert for 
long-range bombers carrying nuclear weapons and 
took other steps to reduce the threat of a nuclear air at- 
tack. This alert had been in effect in the United States 
since 1957. In late 1991, the Soviet Union broke up. 
These developments reduced the threat of nuclear war 
and the need for huge armed forces. As a result, most 
major air forces made cuts in personnel and equipment 
during the 1990's. 

Air forces in limited wars. Fear of a massive nuclear 
war has helped prevent nations with nuclear weapons 
from using them. In all wars fought since World War II, 
nations restricted the weapons they used, the targets 
they attacked, and the areas of battle in order to avoid a 
nuclear conflict. In such wars, called /imited wars, air 
forces played an important role. 

The Korean War (1950-1953) brought the first combat 
between jet aircraft. The United States and other mem- 
bers of the United Nations aided South Korea, and the 
Soviet Union and China assisted North Korea. United 
States military leaders limited attacks on military targets, 
but airplanes often fought each other. As many as 150 jet 
fighters took part in some air battles. Each side adopted 
the principle of asy/um, which allowed aircraft to with- 
draw from the battle zone without being pursued. Nei- 
ther side won complete victory in this war. 





During the Vietnam War (1957-1975) the United 
States supported South Vietnam, and the Soviet Union 
and China backed North Vietnam and the Viet Cong 
rebels of South Vietnam. From 1965 to 1968, the U.S. Air 
Force and the air arm of the U.S. Navy conducted fre- 
quent bombing raids against North Vietnam and later at- 
tacked targets in South Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos. 
The U.S. Air Force used helicopter gunships to locate 
and attack enemy forces in the jungles and mountains. 
United States helicopters also rescued downed aviators, 
transported the wounded, and carried supplies and 
troops. In 1969, the United States began withdrawing its 
troops from Vietnam. The United States removed the 
last of its troops and stopped its air attacks in 1973. Two 
years later, the war ended with a North Vietnamese and 
Viet Cong victory. 

Wars in the Middle East. \n 1967, the Israeli Air Force 
destroyed most of the air forces of Egypt, Jordan, and 
Syria in the Six-Day War. Egypt rebuilt its air force and, 
in 1973, staged a surprise attack with Syria against Israel. 
For a brief period, Egypt established control of the skies. 
Israel's airpower, however, regained control and helped 
drive back the attackers. An airlift of supplies from the 
United States also helped Israel win the war. 

In the Persian Gulf War in 1991, airpower played a de- 
cisive role. In that war, a coalition of nations led by the 
United States drove Iraq out of Kuwait. Before the war 
began, the coalition moved huge amounts of equipment 
to the Persian Gulf region in one of the largest airlifts in 
history. 

Coalition air forces began the war in mid-January 1991 
with massive bombing of targets in Iraq and Kuwait. The 
United States Air Force used precision-guided “smart 
bombs and the F-117 “stealth” fighter-bomber. The spe- 
cial design and surface materials of “stealth” bombers 
make them difficult to detect with radar. The coalition 
quickly gained control of the air, destroying many Iraqi 
aircraft on the ground and forcing many others to flee to 
Iran. When the coalition launched a ground attack in late 
February, the air war had so devastated the Iraqis that 
they surrendered within days. Timothy M. Laur 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Wars 
Korean War World War I 
Persian Gulf War World War II 


Vietnam War 


Weapons and equipment 


Aircraft, Military Bomb Parachute 7 
Airplane (Military Bomber Radar (In the mili- 
planes) Guided missile tary) 
Airship Helicopter Rocket (Military 
Balloon (Balloons Machine gun use} 
in war) Nuclear weapon V STOL 


Other related articles 


Ace Aviation 
Aerospace medicine Logistics 
Air Force, U.S. Luftwaffe 


National Guard 


Airborne troops | 
Space exploration 


Aircraft carrier 
Amphibious warfare 


Outline 
|. The role of air forces 
A. Combat 
B. Defense 


Air Force, Department of the 187 


C. Transport 
D. Other missions 
ll. Organization of air forces 
il. Aircraft and missiles 
A. Aircraft 
B. Missiles 
IV. Major air forces of the world 
A. The United States Air Force 
B. The Russian Air Force 
C. The Chinese Air Force 
D. The Ukrainian Air Force 
E. The French Air Force 
F. The Indian Air Force 
G. The British air force 
H. The German Air Force 
|. The Israeli air force 
V. History 


Questions 


How do strategic missions differ from tactical missions? 

What makes an air force powerful? 

What type of aircraft is used to gather military information? 

Which country had the first independent air force? 

What is a dogfight? 

What is an airlift? 

Which country has the largest air force? 

What type of aircraft was the first to be used in war? 

What is the basic administrative unit of air forces? 

How do the air forces of industrialized nations and developing 
nations differ? 


Additional resources 


Bowie, Christopher J., and others. Trends in the Global Balance 
of Airpower. Rand Corp., 1995. 

Cooksley, Peter, and Robertson, Bruce. Air Warfare. Arms & Ar- 
mour, 1997. 

Gooch, John, ed. Airpower: Theory and Practice. Frank Cass, 
1995! 

Hallion, Richard P., ed. Air Power Confronts an Unstable World. 
Brassey's, 1997. 


Air Force, Department of the, is one of the three 
military departments within the Department of Defense 
of the United States government. It is located in Wash- 
ington, D.C, and operates as Air Force headquarters. 
The department provides support for national and inter- 
national policy by organizing, training, and equipping 
the Air Force. Its major divisions include the secretariat 
and the air staff. 

The secretary of the Air Force, a civilian, heads the de- 
partment under the direction of the secretary of de- 
fense, and ranks equally with the secretaries of the Army 
and Navy. The principal civilian aides to the secretary of 
the Air Force include an undersecretary and three assist- 
ant secretaries. 

The chief of staft of the Air Force, a general, is the sec- 
retarys chief military adviser. The chief of staff heads the 
air staff; supervises such members and units of the Air 
Force as are determined by the secretary; and is a mem- 
ber of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a military group that ad- 
vises the U.S. president. A vice chief of staff assists the 
chief of staff. 

Congress set up the department as an executive 
agency within the National Military Establishment in 
1947. Before then, the Department of War controlled 
military aviation. In 1949, the Department of the Air 
Force became a military agency. 

Critically reviewed by the Department of Oefense 

See also Air Force, United States; Defense, Depart- 
ment of. 


188 Air Force, United States 


ae che 





General Dynamics Corporation 


U.S. Air Force demonstration pilots, called Thunderbirds, fly their F-16 jets in close formation. 
The Thunderbirds perform at air shows in the United States and other countries. 


United States Air Force 


Air Force, United States, is the branch of the U.S. 
armed forces responsible for most military operations in 
the air and in space. Air Force reconnaissance (informa- 
tion-gathering) satellites and aircraft constantly scan the 
earth for signs of hostile activity. The Air Force is ready 
to attack immediately with conventional or nuclear 
weapons. The Air Force also supports ground troops in 
battle and protects them from air attack. Air Force trans- 
port planes deliver troops and supplies. 

Because the Air Force needs to use advanced technol- 
ogy, it has a large research and development organiza- 
tion, with laboratories and testing centers throughout 
the United States. In addition, thousands of civilian sci- 
entists and engineers at universities and in corporations 
conduct research for the Air Force. The Air Force has 
cooperated with the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA) to send astronauts and satellites 
into space. The Air Force also tracks hurricanes, fore- 
casts weather, and carries help to disaster victims. 

The Air Force has about 350,000 men and women on 
active duty throughout the world. In addition, about 
190,000 people serve in the Air Force Reserve or the Air 





Wayne Thompson, the contributor of this article, is a historian 


at Headquarters United States Air Force. 











National Guard. The Air Force also employs about 
140,000 civilians. The Air Force has about 3,600 active 
aircraft and about 600 intercontinental ballistic missiles 
(ICBMs), long-range missiles that can reach targets up 
to 9,200 miles (15,000 kilometers) away. 

The Air Force's official colors are ultramarine blue 
and Air Force yellow. Its official song is the “United 
States Air Force Song,’ which begins, “Off we go into 
the wild blue yonder.” 

The Air Force is the youngest branch of the United 
States armed forces. Congress created the Air Force in 
1947 by reorganizing the Army Air Forces as a separate 
branch. The Army Air Forces developed from an Aero- 
nautical Division that the Army Signal Corps set up in 
1907. 


Life in the Air Force 


Men and women who serve in the United States Air 
Force give up some of the freedoms they protect for 
their country. They must go wherever they are sent, 
even on missions that may put their lives in great dan- 
ger. The United States Air Force has about 90 major 
bases, many of which are overseas. Most Air Force 
members serve abroad at some time. 

Recruit training. After enlisting in the Air Force, re- 
cruits receive six weeks of basic military training at Lack- 


Air Force, United States 189 


Grade insignias for officers Air Force officers wear insignias made of metal or of thread or wire embroidery. insignias 
decorate cans, shirt collars, or shoulders. Shoulder-board insignias are shown here. 


—~! 


General Lieutenant General Major General Brigadier General 


=e 


Colonel Lieutenant Captain First Second 
Colonel Lieutenant Lieutenant 





Grade insignias for enlisted men and women 


The insignias of enlisted personnel, shown here, are worn on 
the sleeves of the uniform. Similar insignias are worn on the col- 
lar or shoulder of certain uniforms. 





Senior 
Master Sergeant 


Technical Sergeant Staff Sergeant 








U.S Air Force 
Dress uniforms for Air Force enlisted personnel are shown cenine Aleman Aina Fire like eee 
here. The uniforms for Air Force officers are similar, but officers | 
uniforms have grade insignias on the shoulder. 
Badges® Air Force badges, displayed here, show the qualifications and area of specialization of 


personnel. Aircraft crews wear wing badges. Missile crews wear missile badges. 





Flight Surgeon Astronaut 


"Some badges are not snow? 












190 Air Force, United States 


land Air Force Base near San Antonio. Through march- 
ing, exercise, and classroom studies, recruits learn 
about teamwork in a military environment. Graduates of 
basic training learn a job specialty. They may reenlist af- 
ter their minimum four or six years of service. See Lack- 
land Air Force Base. 

Officer training. The Air Force offers several pro- 
grams for training officers. The programs include those 
of the Air Force Academy near Colorado Springs, Col- 
orado; Air Force Reserve Officers Training Corps 
(AFROTC) in colleges and universities; and the Officer 
Training School (OTS) at Lackland Air Force Base. 

Air Force women are trained, administered, and 
paid under the same policies as are Air Force men. Be- 
fore the establishment of the Air Force in 1947, many 
members of the Women’s Army Corps (WAC) were as- 
signed to the Army Air Forces. 

During World War II (1939-1945), more than 40,000 
“Air Wacs’ served at air bases in the United States and in 
other parts of the world. More than 1,000 civilians 
served as Women Airforce Service Pilots, also known as 
WASP ss, under the leadership of aviation pioneer 
Jacqueline Cochran (see Cochran, Jacqueline). The 
WASP s flew aircraft from factories to air bases in the 
United States. 

In 1948, women became a permanent part of the 
armed forces. Women in the Air Force became known 
as WAFs. The Air Force dropped this term in the 1970s. 
The term airman is now used for all Air Force enlisted 
military personnel. About 17 percent of Air Force mili- 
tary personnel are women. 

Careers in the Air Force provide opportunities for 
advanced education and promotion. Enlistment may 
prepare a person for a civilian job or an Air Force ca- 
reer. The Air Force offers jobs in more than 40 career 
fields. Applicants must be at least 17 years of age and 
not older than 34. They also must pass the Air Force's 
physical and written examinations. Air Force military 
personnel may retire after 20 years of service. But many 
personnel stay on active duty for 30 years and some 
even longer. 

Members of the Air Force receive a base pay that is 
determined by their rank and length of service. They 
may receive extra money for special tasks, such as flying 
a plane or taking part in combat. The Air Force also pays 
for quarters (housing) or subsistence (food) when airmen 
are unable to live or eat on base. All Air Force personnel 
on active duty are eligible for 30 days’ /eave (vacation) a 
year. The Air Force provides free medical care to airmen 
and their families. 


The purpose of the Air Force 


Since World War I (1914-1918), the most powerful 
countries have built large air forces. Air forces are the 
best defense against enemy airpower, and they can do 
great harm to enemy ground and sea forces. Air forces 
can attack targets anywhere in the opening minutes of a 
War. 

Defense and deterrence. The people of every na- 
tion understand the terrible destructive power of nu- 
clear and conventional weapons. As long as a potential 
enemy is unwilling to risk an exchange of attacks, the Air 
Force serves its primary purpose —to deter war. Howev- 
er, the Air Force must remain on alert for an enemy mis- 


sile or bomber attack and must be prepared to respond 
to such an attack. 

The U.S. Air Force has developed an extensive warn- ) 
ing system to give the United States time to launch its 
offensive air weapons before they could be destroyed 
by a missile or bomber attack. The U.S. early warning 
system is managed by the North American Aerospace 
Defense Command (NORAD), which maintains a com- 
mand center under Cheyenne Mountain near Colorado 
Springs. The most important parts of the system are re- 
connaissance satellites that orbit over various parts of 
the world. 

On the ground, the Ballistic Missile Early Warning 
System (BMEWS) radars in Alaska, Greenland, and the 
United Kingdom have been upgraded and supplement- 
ed by radars in Massachusetts, Georgia, Texas, and Cali- 
fornia. Enemy bombers or cruise missiles flying over 
Alaska or Canada might be detected first by the North 
Warning System line of radars. Cruise missiles are jet- 
powered missiles that fly at low altitudes to avoid radar 
detection. A radar system in Maine can detect aircraft 
and cruise missiles approaching the east coast of the 
United States. See North Warning System. 

The Air Force also carries radar aboard its Airborne 
Warning and Control System (AWACS) planes. In addi- 
tion to performing its early warning function, an 
AWACS plane can fly to another part of the world and 
control U.S. air strikes. AWACS planes flew such mis- 
sions in 1991, during the Persian Gulf War. 

Offense. The most important use of the Air Force 
during war is to attack the enemy. Air attack can hit un- 
expectedly, at long range, and with devastating power. 
Each flight a combat plane makes against the enemy is 
called a sortie. An attack by one or more planes is a 
combat mission. lf 10 planes fly in a group, the group 
flies 1 combat mission, but 10 sorties. 

Tactical air attacks are the direct help given to 
ground or sea units in battle. Tactical air units fight to 
control the air over a battle area by destroying planes in 
the air and on the ground. They attack enemy troops 
and supplies to interdict them—that is, keep them from 
reaching the battlefront. They provide close support for 
ground troops, attacking specific targets for them. 

Strategic air attacks hit far behind the battle lines. 
Such attacks destroy the enemy's industries and war ma- 
terials. They also ruin the enemy's transportation net- 
work so troops and supplies cannot be moved into bat- 
tle. Strategic air attacks are designed to destroy the 
enemy's Capability to make war or its will to fight. 

Peacetime emergencies. Prompt action by the Air 
Force may at times relieve emergencies that are short of 
war. The Berlin Airlift was a good example of such ac- 
tion. In 1948, the Soviet Union tried to force the Allies 
out of West Berlin with a ground blockade. The plan 
was defeated when the U.S. Air Force, the French Air 
Force, and the Royal Air Force of the United Kingdom 
created an effective aerial supply line to the city. The U.S. 
Air Force also charts the courses of hurricanes and 
gives advance warning to people living in the path of 
such storms. In times of disaster, the Air Force has flown . 
emergency medical supplies into the affected areas. . 


i a lee Be) 


ss ee —— 


Planes and weapons of the Air Force 


The United States Air Force has many kinds of aircraft. 


ae 


A few are driven by propellers, but jet engines drive 
most Air Force planes today. Many planes carry only a 
pilot. Others have a crew of several members that may 
include a copilot, navigator, and flight engineer. Some 
aircraft are guided only by electronic devices. 

Planes of the Air Force are designated by both letters 
and numbers. A letter in front of the numbers refers to 
the basic mission of the plane, and the numbers desig- 
nate the model. Basic missions include A, attack; B, 
bomber; C cargo transport; F, fighter; H, helicopter; K, 
tanker; R, reconnaissance; and /, trainer. For example, 
an F-15 is a fighter aircraft. 

A letter following the numbers indicates a general 
modification of the design. The original design is desig- 
nated A, but often this letter is not used. The first modifi- 
cation is designated 8;the second, Cand so on. Thus, 
the fourth modification (the fifth general design) of the 
F-15 is the F-15E. Some designations have an additional 
letter indicating a special modification. This letter ap- 
pears in front of what would otherwise be the first letter. 
For example, an AC-130 is a C-130 to which guns have 
been added to convert it to an attack aircraft. 

Bombers drop explosives on enemy targets. They are 
equipped with radar and bombsights to find the target 
and direct bombs to it. The navigator guides the pilot 
over the target, then releases the bomb. Bombers also 
launch missiles. The B-52 is the oldest American bomber 
in service. Its maximum range without refueling is more 
than 7,500 miles (12,000 kilometers), and its top speed is 
nearly 600 miles (970 kilometers) per hour. American 
bombers also include the B-1, which is smaller than a B- 
52 but carries a heavier bomb load. A third type of 
bomber, the B-2 “stealth” bomber, is a sleek plane de- 
signed to be nearly invisible to radar. 

Fighters shoot down enemy aircraft and attack 
ground targets. They are smaller and generally faster 
than bombers. However, many fighters perform bomb- 
ing missions. In fact, the leading precision bombers in 
the Persian Gulf War were F-117, F-111, and F-15E fight- 
ers. The F-117 “stealth” fighters penetrated heavy air de- 
fenses around Baghdad, Iraq, without being hit. The 
two-seat F-15E lacks the “stealth” of the F-117, but it is 
faster and can reach a speed of Mach 2.5. Mach 2.5 is 2.5 
times the speed of sound. Sound travels about 760 miles 
(1,220 kilometers) per hour at sea level. Equally fast is the 
single-seat F-15C, which has been the Air Force's best 
fighter for shooting down enemy aircraft. Lighter and 
slower than the two-engine F-15 is the single-engine F- 
16, which can be used in air-to-air combat or against 
ground targets. The Air Force’s newest fighter, the F-22, 
combines stealth and speed. 

Other aircraft include attack and reconnaissance 
planes, tankers, and transports. Attack planes, such as 
the A-10, are designed to provide low-flying air support 
for ground troops, particularly against armored targets. 
Reconnaissance planes observe and photograph enemy 
forces and installations. Tanker aircraft refuel other 
planes in flight. 

Transport aircraft carry personnel and equipment and 
can evacuate wounded soldiers in battle. The C-5 Galaxy 
can carry tanks or helicopters. The C-5 and the smaller 
C-141 can fly long distances. The C-17 can carry a bigger 
load and land on a shorter runway than the C-141 can. 
The C-130 Hercules is used on shorter flights. 





Air Force, United States 191 





US. Air Force 


A jet fighter shoots down enemy aircraft and attacks ground 
targets. This fighter, the single-seat F-15 Eagle flies at more than 
twice the speed of sound. 


Missiles are a major weapon of the U. S. Air Force. 
They can be equipped with a conventional or nuclear 
warhead. 

Surface-launched missiles are fired from the ground 
at enemy ground or air targets. The largest of these are 
intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM’s), which can 
travel from one continent to another. The Minuteman 
ICBM can carry 3 nuclear warheads. The Peacekeeper 
can Carry 10 and is more accurate than the Minuteman. 

Air-launched missiles are carried by bombers and 
fighters. Air-to-ground missiles (AGM‘s) are fired at tar- 
gets on the ground. The Maverick is an AGM guided by 
a television or infrared (heat) image of a target on the 
ground. Other AGM's include the High-speed Anti- Radi- 
ation Missile (HARM) and the Shrike, which destroy ene- 
my radar by following the radar signal to its source. Air 
interceptor missiles (AIM‘s) are used against enemy 
planes. The Advanced Medium-ange Air-to-Air 





LS. Air Force 
A-10 Thunderbolt attack planes provide low-flying air support 
for ground troops, especially against armored targets. The sin: 
gle-seat planes are armed with guns and carry bombs. 


192 Air Force, United States 


Different types of U.S. Air Force planes carry out various missions. The KC-10 tanker refuels oth- 
er planes in flight. The B-2 “stealth” bomber is designed to avoid detection by radar. The F-22 com- 
bines stealth and speed. The F-16 Fighting Falcon fighter is armed with guided missiles. The 
AWACS airplane can use its radar dome to detect aircraft and missiles. The C-5A Galaxy transport 
carries tanks and other heavy equipment. 





SUS! Air Force 


KC-10 tanker refueling C-5A Galaxy transport 





F-22 Photo Team from Lockheed Martin 


F-22 jet fighter 
= US. Air Fone 
B-2 “stealth” bomber 
Missile (AMRAAM) and the Sparrow are AIM's guided The Air Force has a headquarters at the Pentagon 
by radar. Another AIM called the Sidewinder seeks the Building near Washington, D.C, and eight major com- 
heat of the enemy aircraft's engine. mands. These units can be roughly grouped into com- 


bat commands and support commands. 


SITIES 2 ghd NT ATES Combat commands provide forces that carry out the 


The Department of the Air Force operates under fighting assignments of the Air Force. A four-star gener- 
the secretary of the Air Force, a civilian directly respon- al usually heads a major command. These major com- 
sible to the secretary of defense. The chief of staff, a mands are divided into successively smaller units called 
four-star general, is the top military officer of the Air air forces, wings, and squadrons. A squadron usually 
Force. However, the chief of staff does not command the __ has 20 to 25 aircraft. 

Air Force in wartime. In peacetime, all combat-ready missiles, bombers, 

When Air Force units go to war, they are part of joint fighters, attack aircraft, and reconnaissance aircraft of 
commands that include all branches of the armed the active Air Force belong to one of five commands. 
forces. The Air Force chief of staff and his or her subor- They are the Air Combat Command, headquartered at 
dinates are known formally as Headquarters United Langley Air Force Base, Virginia; Pacific Air Forces, 
States Air Force and informally as the ar staff headquartered at Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii; 





Ps sr Se tp 


F-16 Fighting Falcon jet fighters 





Boeing Aerospace & Etectronics 


Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) aircraft 


United States Air Forces in Europe, headquartered at 
Ramstein Air Base, Germany; Air Force Special Opera- 
tions Command, headquartered at Hurlburt Field, Flori- 
da; and Air Force Space Command, headquartered at 
Peterson Air Force Base, Colorado. 

These Air Force combat commands make their forces 
available in wartime to joint commands. Joint commands 
include the Central Command for war in the Middle East 
and the Strategic Command for nuclear war. Air Combat 
Command was set up in 1992 by merging much of the 
Strategic Air Command with the Tactical Air Command. 
Air Force Special Operations Command has helicopters 
and gunships (airplanes or helicopters armed with 
guns). Air Force Space Command, a part of NORAD. has 
intercontinental ballistic missiles. The command also 
controls satellites and ground radar sites. 





Air Force, United States 193 





U.S. Air Force 





US At Force 


C-5 Galaxy jet transport 


Support commands help the combat commands of 
all the services. Air Mobility Command transports 
troops and supplies and also extends the range of 
bombers and fighters by refueling them in the air. This 
command was formed in 1992 wher. its predecessor, 
Military Airlift Command, gained most of the air refuel- 
ing aircraft that had belonged to the Strategic Air Com- 
mand. The Air Force Materiel Command, formed in 
1992, buys planes, missiles, and supplies. In 1993, the Air 
Training Command and the Air University joined to form 
the Air Education and Training Command. 


Components of the Air Force 


The regular Air Force supplies the professional 
core of Air Force personnel. Its size is fixed by Congress. 
Regular Air Force personnel include regular officers 


194 Air Force, United States 


who have graduated from an officer training program 
and regular airmen who enlist in the service. 

Air Force reserves provide additional personnel and 
aircraft in times of emergency. Even in times of peace, 
most junior Air Force officers on active duty are re- 
servists, and reserve units perform important functions, 
such as air transport. 

The Ready Reserve consists of units and individuals 
trained and equipped to be called to duty in any emer- 
gency. The Standby Reserve includes personnel who 
can be called to duty in time of war. The Air National 
Guard is administered by the individual states, but can 
be called to duty by the president in emergencies. 

Civil Air Patrol (CAP) is a civilian auxiliary of the Air 
Force. It trains young people in the science of aviation 
and conducts search and rescue missions. 


History 


United States military leaders sent up balloons to ob- 
serve the enemy during the American Civil War (1861- 
1865) and the Spanish-American War (1898). But military 
officials did not begin to consider the airplane an impor- 
tant weapon until early in World War I. 

Early years. On Dec. 17, 1903, two brothers, Wilbur 
and Orville Wright, flew the first successful engine-pow- 
ered airplane to carry a pilot In early 1905, the Wright 
brothers offered to sell planes to the U.S. government, 
but the government did not take them seriously at first 
Finally, in 1907, President Theodore Roosevelt showed 
interest in the airplane. That year, an Aeronautical Divi- 
sion was established in the office of the chief signal offi- 
cer of the U.S. Army to look into the new “air machines.’ 

The Army bought its first airplane from the Wright 
brothers in 1909. In 1911, Congress appropriated the 
first funds for aviation—S125,000. However, by 1914, 
when World War | broke out in Europe, the United 
States Army's air force owned only five planes. 

The airplane's military role had grown much faster in 
Europe. Germany had about 250 planes. France, Russia, 
and the United Kingdom each had more than 100. 

World War I pitted France, Russia, the United King- 
dom, and other Allies against the Central Powers, in- 
cluding Germany and Austria-Hungary. Under the pres- 
sure of war, the European nations air forces grew 
rapidly to several thousand airplanes. When the United 
States entered the war in April 1917, the Army had fewer 
than 300 training planes and no combat planes. Only 
American pilots who already had been flying in British 
and French units had significant combat experience. The 
Lafayette Escadrille, a French squadron which included 
some American pilots, already boasted several aces, avi- 
ators who had shot down at least five enemy aircraft. 

Not all aircraft in the war were planes. Observation 
balloons were used for reconnaissance. Huge, dirigible 
(steerable) airships—most notably the German zep- 
pelins—could drop bombs. See Airship. 

At the start of the war, opposing armies used planes 
only to scout out enemy positions. Enemy pilots waved 
to each other when they passed in the sky. But soon they 
began to carry pistols and rifles and took potshots at 
each other. In 1915, a Dutch engineer, Anthony H. G. 
Fokker, perfected a machine gun that could fire be- 
tween the revolving propeller blades. He transformed 
aerial warfare by making the airplane a true fighting ma- 


chine. Now pilots sought enemy planes and tried to de- 
stroy them in airborne battles called dogfights. 

Most of the airplanes used in World War | were small 
wood and canvas biplanes that had one wing above and 
one below the open cockpit Plane design improved 
rapidiy during the war. In 1914, most machines could fly 
only about 75 miles (i20 kilometers) per hour. By 1918, 


planes were flying at 120 miles (190 kilometers) per hour. 


As planes improved, pilots began to use them on 
bombing missions. At first, the pilot carried a sack of 
bombs in the cockpit and simply dropped them over the 
side. Later, mechanical devices released the bombs 
from under the fuselage. American pilots flew mostly 
French-built planes, such as Spads, Salmsons, and Nieu- 
ports. Ihe United States produced a version of the 
British de Havilland D.H.4, though most of these planes 
did not reach the tront lines. The United States entered 
the war with almost no airpower, but Congress quickly 
appropriated S640 million for military aviation. Flying 
schools trained 8,688 flying cadets. Another 1,800 were 
trained in Europe. The 94th Pursuit Squadron entered 
combat in April 1918. American pilots destroyed about 
750 enemy planes and 70 balloons. The leading Ameri- 


Important dates in Air Force history 


1907 The Army set up an Aeronautical Division in the Office of 
the Chief Signal Officer. 

1909 The Army bought its first airplane from the Wright broth- 
ers. 

1914 The Aviation Section of the Signal Corps took charge of 
aviation operation and training. 

1917 The First Aero Squadron arrived in France during World 
War I. 

1926 Congress established the U.S. Army Air Corps. 

1940 President Franklin D. Roosevelt requested 50,000 planes 
for the Army and Navy. 

1941 Congress set up the Army Air Forces. 

1945 AB-29 dropped the first atomic bomb used in warfare, on 
Hiroshima, Japan. 

1947 The United States Air Force was created as a separate 
service. 

1947 Captain Charles E. Yeager piloted an X-1 rocket-powered 
aircraft through the sound barrier. 

1948 The Berlin Airlift began. 

1950 [he U.S. Air Force was ordered into action in Korea. Dog- 
tights between jet fighters occurred for the first time. 

1957 The Air Force successfully fired its first intercontinental 
ballistic missile (ICBM). 

1959 The U.S. Air Force Academy graduated its first class. 

1962 Air Force U-2 reconnaissance aircraft took photographs 
indicating that Soviet ballistic missiles were being in- 
stalled in Cuba. 

1965 Air Force and Navy fighter planes bombed North Vietnam 
to begin Operation Rolling Thunder. 

1968 ihe C-5 Galaay jet transport, the world’s largest aircraft at 
the time, niade its first flight. 

1971 Jeanne M. Holm became the first woman in the Air Force 
to be promoted to the rank of general. 

1976 \Vomen were admitted to the U.S. Air Force Academy for 
the first time. 

1986 Air Force F-111's bombed the headquarters of Libya's 
jeader Muammar al-Qadhafi. 

1988 The Air Force unveiled its “stealth” bomber and fighter 
planes designed to be nearly invisible to radar. 

1991 The Air Force helped drive Iraqi forces out of Kuwait dur- 
ing the Persian Gulf War. 

1995 The Air Force helped end a war between Bosnian Serbs 
and government forces in the former Yugoslav republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 





can ace, Captain Eddie Rickenbacker, shot down 22 ene- 
my planes and 4 balloons. The Allies won the war. 

Between world wars. The most prominent Ameri- 
can air combat leader of World War ! was Brigadier 
General Billy Mitchell. In September 1918. Mitchell had 
commanded nearly 1,500 American. British, French, and 
Italian aircraft during the Battle of St-Mihiel in France. 
The air assault had helped Allied ground forces win an 
easy victory at St-Mihiel. 

Mitchell's wartime experience convinced him that air 
units needed to be independent of ground units so that 
airpower could be concentrated where it was most 
needed. In July 1921, he demonstrated the power of the 
airplane by sinking a former German battleship with aer- 
ial bombs. Mitchell's criticism of the governments de- 
fense program was so outspoken that he was court-mar- 
tialed for insubordination. He chose to resign from the 
Army rather than accept a five-year suspension. In 1946, 
after developments had confirmed many of Mitchell's 
ideas, he was awarded the Medal of Honor, the nations 
highest military decoration. 

The Air Service was renamed the Army Air Corps in 
1926. In 1931, the first all-metal bomber was built. In 
1935, the Army tested the first B-17, the Flying Fortress 
that would be important in World War Il. 

World War Il was a huge war in which Germany, 
Italy, Japan, and other Axis powers fought the Allies, 
who included Canada, China, the Soviet Union. and the 
United Kingdom. The U.S. Army Air Forces (AAF) was 
formed in 1941. The United States entered the war in 
December of that year, after Japan attacked the U.S. 
naval base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. By the time of the at- 
tack, the United States had begun a program of building 
planes and training pilots. 

General Henry H. “Hap” Arnold was the first comman- 
der of the AAF. Under Arnold, the AAF grew to its top 
strength during World War II of 2,411,000 members and 
80,000 planes. Aircraft used by the AAF during World 
War Il included the P-51 Mustang long-range fighter 
and such bombers as the B-17, the B-24 Liberator, the B- 
25, and the B-29. 

During the war, the AAF dropped more than 2 niillion 
tons (1.8 million metric tons) of bombs and destroyed 
over 40,000 enemy planes. The most destructive raids 
were the firebombing of Tokyo in March 1945 and the 
atomic bombing of Hiroshima in August 1945. The 
Tokyo raid killed an estimated 80,000 to 125,000 people, 
and the bombing of Hiroshima killed an estimated 
70,000 to 100,000 people. The fact that a single atomic 
bomb could destroy a large city made nuclear weapons 
a dominating factor in U.S. military planning. 

The AAF lost about 23,000 planes, about half of them 


Air Force, United States 195 


The first U.S. Army plane, 
shown here, was built by the 
Wright brothers in 1909. The 
aircraft, which cost $30,000, 
flew 42.5 miles (68.4 kilome- 
ters) per hour in a record 
flight that lasted 1 hour 12 
minutes 40 seconds. 


U.S At Force 


in combat. Others were lost in training or other non- 
combat operations. About 88,000 U.S. Army airmen died 
in the war, which ended in an Allied victory. 

Separate Air Force. On Sept. 18, 1947, Congress cre- 
ated the United States Air Force as an equal partner with 
the Army and Naw. It also established the Department 
of the Air Force. Stuart Symington became the first sec- 
retary of the Air Force, and General Carl Spaatz became 
the first Air Force chief of staff. 

The Berlin Airlift was the first big job of the new Air 
Force. After World War II, the Western Allies occupied 
western Germany, and the Soviet Union occupied the 
east. Berlin, in the east, was divided into Allied-occupied 
West Berlin and Soviet-occupied East Berlin. On June 26, 
1948, Soviet troops blockaded all ground routes 
through the Soviet zone of occupation to West Berlin, 
stopping all food and supplies. The Air Force, with 
British and French units, supplied the city by air. Soon 
Allied planes were landing at Tempelhof airport every 
3 5 minutes. During the 462 days of “Operation Vittles,” 
as U.S. airmen called it, Allied planes flew 277,000 flights 
carrying about 2,325,000 tons {2,109,000 metric tons) of 
supplies into West Berlin. 

The Korean War (1950-1953) was a local war in Ko- 
rea. The United States and other members of the United 
Nations aided South Korea, and the Soviet Union and 
China assisted North Korea. The war brought the first 
dogfights between jet fighters. In November 1950, Air 
Force F-86 fighters clashed with Soviet-made MiG fight- 
ers near the Chinese border along the Yalu River. Air 
Force pilots called this area “MiG Alley.” They shot down 
10 times as many jets as they lost there. When the Kore- 
an War ended, the Air Force had downed about 900 en- 
emy planes and had lost 139 of its own planes in aerial 
combat. The Korean War ended without either side win- 
ning a complete victory. 

The nuclear Air Force. After Korea, the Air Force 
found itself undergoing rapid change. It soon had ther- 
monuclear hydrogen bombs thousands of times more 
powerful than the atomic bombs that ended World War 
I]. Propeller aircraft rapidly became obsolete for most 
jobs. Newer planes, such as the B-52 bomber, had jet 
engines and carried nuclear weapons. Intercontinental 
ballistic missiles could be launched from the United 
States and the Soviet Union. 

The Vietnam War (1957-1975) was a drawn-out con- 
flict in Southeast Asia. In that war, the United States sup- 
ported South Vietnam, and the Soviet Union and China 
backed North Vietnam and the Viet Cong rebels of 
South Vietnam. From 1961 to 1973, the United States 
dropped a much greater tonnage of conventional 
bombs in Southeast Asia than had been dropped by 


eR 





196 Air Force, United States 


both sides in World War Il. Most of this bombing was 
conducted in the jungles of South Vietnam by B-52’s and 
fighter aircraft against Communist rebels and their North 
Vietnamese allies. The simultaneous bombing of North 
Vietnam was done mostly by F-105 and F-4 fighters. Be- 
fore the end of the war, the Air Force had developed 
laser-guided bombs, which rarely missed their targets. 
The war ended with a North Vietnamese and Viet Cong 
victory. 

The Persian Gulf War. After Iraq occupied Kuwait in 
August 1990, the U.S. Air Force began its most extensive 
airlift. In six months, the Air Force transported more than 
577,000 tons (523,000 metric tons) of supplies and 
498,000 military passengers as far as 7,000 miles (11,000 
kilometers) to points in the Middle East. After the war 
began in January 1991, the Air Force flew more than 
37,000 combat sorties and lost only 14 aircraft. In their 
first extensive use, 42 F-117 “stealth” fighter-bombers 
dropped hundreds of laser-guided bombs without los- 
ing a plane. The air assault so devastated the Iraqis that 
they surrendered in February. 

The Balkans. In 1991, a war began in Bosnia- 
Herzegovina between Bosnian Serb rebels and the 
countrys government, which was dominated by Bosnian 
Muslims. The war continued for several years. In 1995, 
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) inter- 
vened. As part of the NATO operation, the U.S. Air Force 
attacked Bosnian Serb forces to help provide relief to 
Bosnian Muslims under siege. Later that year, the 
groups involved in the conflict agreed to a peace treaty. 
In 1999, the Air Force participated in NATO air strikes 
against Serbia to end Serbian attacks on ethnic Albani- 
ans in its province of Kosovo. Wayne Thompson 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Biographies 
Arnold, Henry H. LeMay, Curtis E. 
Balchen, Bernt Mitchell, Billy 
Chennault, Claire L Rickenbacker, Eddie 
Doolittle, James H. Spaatz, Carl 


James, Daniel, Jr. Yeager, Charles E. 


Air Force installations 


Patrick Air Force Base 

Scott Air Force Base 

United States Air Force 
Academy 

Vandenberg Air Force Base 


Andrews Air Force Base 
Edwards Air Force Base 
Hickam Air Force Base 
Lackland Air Force Base 
Langley Air Force Base 
Offutt Air Force Base 


History 
Ace Midway Island World War | 
Cold War Pearl Harbor World War 1! 
Korean War Persian Gulf War 


Organization 


Air Force, Department of the 
Civil Air Patrol 

NORAD 

Strategic Air Command 


Other related articles 


Aircraft, Military Guided missile 
Armed Forces Statt College Medals, decorations, and 
Cape Canaveral orders 
Defense, Department of National Guard 
Flag (picture: Flags of the Rand Corporation 
armed forces) Rank, Military 
General Space exploration 


Outline 


1. Life in the Air Force 

A. Recruit training 
B. Officer training 
C. Air Force women 
D. Careers in the Air Force 

ll. The purpose of the Air Force 
A. Defense and deterrence 
B. Offense 
C. Peacetime emergencies 

11. Planes and weapons of the Air Force 
A. Bombers 
B. Fighters 
C. Other aircraft 
D. Missiles 

IV. Organization of the Air Force 
A. The Department of B. Combat commands 

the Air Force C. Support commands 

V. Components of the Air Force 
A. The regular Air Force 
B. Air Force reserves 
C. Civil Air Patrol 

VI. History 


Questions 


What are the risks and benefits of belonging to the Air Force? 

Who sold the United States its first military plane? 

What types of planes make up the Air Force? 

Where was “MiG Alley’? 

When did the Air Force become a separate service? 

Why is the B-2 called the “stealth” bomber? 

How does the Peacekeeper missile differ from the Minuteman? 

How many planes must a pilot shoot down in wartime to be 
considered an ace? 

How are combat commands organized? 

What are the differences between attack craft and bombers? 


Additional] resources 


Boyne, Walter J. Beyond the Wild Blue: A History of the United 
States Air Force, 1947-1997. St. Martin's, 1997. 

Nalty, Bernard C,, ed. Winged Shield, Winged Sword:A History 
of the United States Air Force. 2 vols. U.S. Government Print- 
ing Office, 1997. 

Watson, Bruce W. and S. M., eds. The United States Air Force: A 
Dictionary. Garland, 1992. 


Air Force Academy, United States. See United 
States Air Force Academy. 

Air Line Pilots Association is the largest labor 
union and professional organization of airline pilots in 
North America. It represents more than 60,000 pilots for 
nearly 50 United States and Canadian airlines with 
scheduled flights. The association seeks to improve pay, 
working conditions, seniority rights, pensions, and other 
benefits for airline pilots. It also establishes standards 
for safety, aircraft performance, accident investigations, 
flight operations, and security. 

The association was founded in 1931. Its full name is 
Air Line Pilots Association, International. It is affiliated 
with the American Federation of Labor and Congress of 
Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO). Headquarters are in 
Washington, D.C. 

Critically reviewed by the Air Line Pilots Association, International 
Air lock is a device that permits people or materials to 
pass in or out of a structure called a pneumatic caisson. 
The caisson contains compressed air. Air locks are used 
in digging underwater tunnels or other projects that re- 
quire caissons. Air pressure in the caisson balances out- 
side water pressure, keeping water out of the working 
area. Caissons cannot be opened directly to the outer air 
because the air pressure in the caisson is much 


ce A ee ee ee a a a 


ee ao 


How an air lock works 


Air in 
caisson 





WORLD BOOK illustration by David Cunningham 


Air locks enable people to enter caissons containing com- 
pressed air. When a person enters an air lock, /eft, its air pres- 
sure is the same as that outside. Air pressure in the air lock is 
slowly increased, right, to equal that inside the caisson. This ac- 
tion permits a person to enter the caisson without danger. 


greater than the pressure of the outer air. All move- 
ments to and from the caisson must take place through 
an air lock. This is a large airtight chamber equipped 
with valves. Compressed air is forced into the air lock 
through these valves until the pressure within the air 
lock equals the pressure in the caisson. The valves are 
also used to withdraw compressed air from the air lock 
until its pressure equals the pressure of the normal out- 
side air. 

To enter the caisson, the workers first step into the air 
lock. Compressed air holds the inner door of the air lock 
tightly shut. The outer door is then closed, and com- 
pressed air slowly introduced. When pressures within 
the air lock and the caisson are the same, the inner door 
may be opened into the caisson. When workers leave 
the caisson, pressure in the air lock is reduced to nor- 
mal, and the workers may then go out. This lowering of 
the air pressure, or decompression, must be done 
slowly. If the pressure drops too rapidly, the workers 
may develop a painful and dangerous condition called 
bends. Separate air locks are usually provided for peo- 
ple and for materials. A third air lock is often added to 
permit rapid escape in emergencies. 

See also Bends; Caisson. 

Air mail. See Airmail. 

Air mass. See Weather (Air masses; map). 

Air Patrol, Civil. See Civil Air Patrol. 

Air piracy. See Hijacking. 

Air plant. See Epiphyte. 

Air pollution occurs when wastes dirty the air. People 
produce most of the wastes that cause air pollution. 
Such wastes can be in the form of gases or particulates 
(particles of solid or liquid matter). These substances re- 
sult chiefly from burning fuel to power motor vehicles 
and to heat buildings. Industrial processes and the burn- 
ing of garbage also contribute to air pollution. Natura! 
pollutants (impurities) include dust, pollen, soil parti- 
cles, and naturally occurring gases. 

The rapid growth of population and industry, and the 
increased use of automobiles and airplanes, have made 
air pollution a serious problem. The air we breathe has 
become so filled with pollutants that it can cause health 
problems. Polluted air also harms plants, animals, build- 
ing materials, and fabrics. In addition, it causes damage 
by altering the earth's atmosphere. 


Larry W. Mays 





Air pollution 197 


The damage caused by air pollution costs the people 
of the United States billions of dollars each year. This in- 
cludes money spent for health care and increased main- 
tenance of buildings. Air pollution also causes damage 
to the environment that cannot be reversed. 


Chief sources of air pollution 


People depend on the atmosphere to dilute and re- 
move pollutants as they are produced. But weather con- 
ditions called thermal inversions can trap the pollutants 
Over a certain area until they build up to dangerous lev- 
els. A thermal inversion occurs when a layer of warm air 
settles over a layer of cool air that lies near the ground. 
This condition traps the impurities and prevents them 
from rising until rain or wind breaks up the layer of sta- 
tionary warm air. 

Forms of transportation, such as automobiles, air- 
planes, ships, and trains, are the leading source of air 
pollution in the United States, Canada, and most other 
industrial nations. The major pollutants produced by 
these sources are carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, Ay- 
drocarbons (compounds of carbon and hydrogen), and 
nitrogen oxides (compounds of nitrogen and oxygen). 
Nitrogen oxides can react with hydrocarbons in the 
presence of sunlight to produce a form of oxygen called 
ozone. Ozone is the chief component of photochemical 
smog, which is a common form of air pollution (see 
Smog). 

Fuel combustion for heating and cooling homes, of- 
fice buildings, and factories contributes significantly to 
air pollution. Electric power plants that burn coal or oil 
also release pollutants into the atmosphere. The major 
pollutants from these sources are nitrogen oxides, sul- 
fur oxides (compounds of sulfur and oxygen), particu- 
lates, and carbon dioxide. 

industrial processes produce a wide range of pollu- 
tants. Oil refineries discharge ammonia, hydrocarbons, 





© Joe Sterting Click Chicago 
Air pollution is a serious problem in many of the world’s large 
cities. Heavy concentrations of air pollutants, which are often in 
the form of smog, settle over a city, creating a health hazard for 
its people. 


198 Air pollution 


organic acids, and sulfur oxides. Metal smelting plants 
give off large amounts of sulfur oxides and particulates 
containing lead and other metals. Plants that make alu- 
minum expel fluoride dust. By 1996, most industrialized 
countries, including the United States, had ended pro- 
duction of chlorofluorocarbons \CFC's), compounds of 
chlorine, fluorine, and carbon. However, many older re- 
frigerators and air conditioners produce CFCs during 
normal operation. 

Burning of solid wastes often creates a very visible 
form of air pollution—thick, black smoke. It also pro- 
duces invisible pollution in the form of toxic chemicals 
called dioxins. Many cities and towns enforce bans on 
the burning of garbage, leaves, and other refuse. 

Other sources of pollution include chemical sprays 
and organic chemicals used to start fires on charcoal 
grills. Forest fires and structural fires also contribute to 
air pollution. In rural areas and in developing countries, 
the burning of forests and grasslands to clear areas for 
farming is a major source of air pollution. 

Natural sources also contribute to air pollution. Vol- 
canoes emit large amounts of sulfur oxides and particu- 
lates. Microbes in the digestive tracts of cattle and in 
rice fields break down plant materials and release an 
odorless gas called methane, a type of hydrocarbon. 


Major air pollutants 
and their sources 


Indoor air pollution occurs when energy-efficient 
houses and office buildings trap pollutants inside. As a 
result, some pollutants found outdoors are found in- 
doors in even higher concentrations. Some plastic prod- 
ucts, processed wood products, paints, and adhesives 
can give off hydrocarbons. Many cleaning products emit 
poisonous gases such as ammonia and chlorine. Soil 
and rocks release an odorless gas called radon into the 
atmosphere. The gas enters buildings through cracks in 
the foundation (see Radon). 


Effects of air pollution 


Health. When people breathe polluted air, the impu- 
rities can irritate their air passages and their lungs. Par- 
ticulates often remain in the lungs, and they can worsen 
such respiratory ailments as asthma and bronchitis. 
Radon can cause lung cancer if inhaled in large quanti- 
ties. Certain chemical compounds can cause cancer and 
birth defects. Ozone reduces resistance to colds and 
pneumonia and can aggravate emphysema. Carbon 
monoxide interferes with the transfer of oxygen from 
the lungs to body tissues. 

In London in 1952, about 4,000 people died of respira- 
tory diseases during a ‘killer smog.” More than 600 peo- 
ple died as a result of thermal inversions that occurred 


Most air pollution results from human activity. These pie graphs represent the total emissions of 
each of the five major air pollutants in the United States in 1996. The legend identifies the sources of 


air pollution by color. Each graph shows how much each source contributed to that kind of air pol- 
lution. All natural sources of air pollution are included in “Miscellaneous, as well as other sources. 








Sources of pollutants 


peas (airplanes, motor 
vehicles, ships, and trains! 


A! Fuel combustion in homes, offices 
and electric power plants 


—_ Industna! processes (chemica! pro 
2 duction, oil refining, and smetting) 


Solid waste disposal ‘burming gar 80% i 
bage. dead leaves, and refuse! 


Miscellaneous ‘chemical sprays, 
forest fires, and structural fires) 


| Nitrogen oxides 


19.2% 








ce ee 
Figures are for 1996 Source U.S. Environmental Protechon Agency 














Carbon monoxide 





Particulates 





Volatile organic compounds 


78.7% 





41.5% 


Sulfur dioxide 





© Peter Vadnai, The Stock Market 


A carbon monoxide detector is used in manufacturing facili- 
ties to test for leakage from tanks that store the gas. Carbon 
monoxide has many uses in industry, but it is a deadly poison. 


in New York City in 1953 and 1963. Today, such extreme 
events are rare in many countries because of govern- 
ment emission standards, which limit the amounts of 
pollutants that factories and other sources may release. 
However, air pollution still contributes to a large num- 
ber of deaths each year. 

Agriculture. Air pollutants can stunt the growth of 
crops, harm livestock, and destroy crops. Such damage 
can prove costly to farmers. Forests also have been dam- 
aged by air pollution. 

Atmosphere. Some pollutants are not poisonous but 
can cause damage by altering the earth's atmosphere. 
For example, the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmos- 
phere has been increasing since the early to mid-1800's, 
chiefly as a result of the burning of coal, oil, and other 
carbon-containing fuels. Carbon dioxide allows sunlight 
to reach the earth and warm its surface, but it prevents 
some surface heat from escaping out of the atmosphere. 
This greenhouse effect can produce significant climatic 
changes, which will result in great environmental chal- 
lenges. See Greenhouse effect. 

CFCs break down the layer of ozone in the earth's up- 
per atmosphere. This layer protects plants and animals 
from harmful ultraviolet rays {see Ozone}. 

Other effects. Most materials deteriorate faster when 
exposed to the pollutants present in the air. Concrete 
and stone are dissolved by air pollutants. Metals cor- 
rode faster than usual. Plastics, rubber, and fabrics are 
also damaged by air pollutants. 

Air pollution is closely related to other forms of pollu- 
tion. Sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides can react with 
water droplets in the air to produce acid rain. Acid rain 
pollutes lakes and streams and, in high concentrations, 
can harm soil fertility (see Acid rain). 


Control of air pollution 


In the United States, all levels of government~feder- 
al, state, and local—have passed laws designed to con- 
trol pollution. Congress passed the Air Quality Act in 


Air pollution 199 





© Chris Jones, The Stock Market 


A platinum catalyst scrubber is used in an industrial smoke- 
stack to remove pollutants before they can be released into the 
air. The pollutants stick to metal oxide crystals in the scrubber. 


1967. Under this act, the federal government sets goals 
called air quality standards for achieving cleaner air. The 
states must enforce air pollution controls to meet the 
goals. When states fail to enforce the regulations, the 
federal government can act against polluters by impos- 
ing fines. 

The Clean Air Act of 1970, and its amendments, have 
set strict standards for air quality and emissions. It has 
required fuel producers to develop cleaner-burning fu- 
els. It also requires automobile manufacturers to equip 
new vehicles with pollution control devices called cat- 
alytic converters. |n addition, the smokestacks of many 
electric power plants, incinerators, and factories must 
have scrubbers installed to remove pollutants before 
they can reach the air. New standards will remove most 
sulfur from fuels and reduce emissions of particulates. 
However, industry groups have repeatedly opposed 
Stricter standards. 

States may set stricter air standards than the federal 
government requires. Since 1970, California has set the 
strictest standards for motor-vehicle emissions. Several 
States require that a certain percentage of vehicles sold 
annually must be non-polluting. 

Efforts to control air pollution in the United States 
have been generally successful. Between 1970 and 1997, 
federal regulation resulted in a 98-percent reduction in 
lead emissions. During this same period, pollution by 
dust particles decreased by 75 percent. Pollution by sul- 
tur dioxide decreased 35 percent. Both carbon monox- 
ide and ozone emissions were reduced by more than 30 
percent. Efforts to reduce nitrogen oxide pollution have 
met with the least success. Nitrogen oxide emissions de- 
creased by only about 10 percent between 1970 and 
1997. They increased for a number of years during this 
period before finally decreasing. 

In other countries. The lack of controls on automo- 
bile emissions in Western Europe has contributed to ex- 
tensive damage to forests there. Countries in Eastern Eu- 
rope have lacked pollution controls altogether and asa 





200 Air rights 


result, have suffered enormous environmental damage. 
David E. Henderson 
Related articles in World Book include: 


Acid rain Incinerator 
Automobile (Environmental Iron and steel (picture: Con- 
impact) trolling air pollution) 
Catalytic converter Los Angeles (Recent develop- 
Coal (Coal as a fuel) ments) 
Environmental pollution Ozone 
Gasoline engine (Air pollution =Smog 
controls) Smoke 
Global warming Soot 


Greenhouse effect 


Additional resources 


Blewett, Stephen E. What's in the Air: Natural and Man-Made Air 
Pollution. Seaview Pub., 1998. 

Holgate, Stephen T., ed. Air Pollution and Health. Academic Pr., 
Ufo pets 

Kidd, Jerry S. and Renee A. Into Thin Air. The Problem of Air Pol- 
lution. Facts on File, 1998. 

Miller, E. Willard and Ruby M. /ndoor Pollution. ABC-Clio, 1998. 


Air rights are the rights to use the space above a 
piece of real estate. In the United States, a person ora 
company that owns land also owns the air rights above 
it. The use of air rights increases the value of land. For 
example, some companies construct buildings in leased 
air rights over railroad tracks. In this way, companies 
use space that would otherwise be wasted. 

Since the early 1900's, many large buildings have 
been constructed in air rights over railroad tracks. These 
buildings include the Merchandise Mart in Chicago and 
the Terminal Tower in Cleveland. Buildings constructed 
over railroad tracks must have a large chimney or airway 
to carry off the smoke and foul air of the trains below. 
The buildings also must have special sound insulation to 
reduce the noise from the trains. 

Air rights over highways can provide additional space 






Tr 


EWS 7 SOF WS 7GE > 


ere 


WORLD BOOK photo by Artstreet 
Air rights permit builders to use space above real estate. An ex- 
tension of Chicago s Art Institute, shown here, was built in air 
rights over Illinois Central Gulf Railroad tracks. 





for apartment buildings, office buildings, parking 
garages, and schools. In some states, the law does not 
clearly determine who owns the air rights over high- 
ways and railroad tracks. As a result, the sale and use of 
these air rights have been limited. Zoning laws that limit 
building height also affect the use of air rights. 

Landowners cannot prevent aircraft from flying over 
their land at a legal height. But they have the right to 
protection from noise caused by aircraft. In the late 
1960's, the Federal Aviation Administration began to set 
limits for aircraft noise levels. 

Every nation owns the air rights over its territory. A 
country may control this air space and deny the aircraft 
of other nations the right to fly over its territory. But in- 
ternational law has not yet determined if such air rights 
extend into outer space. Jean Appleman’ 

Air route. See Aviation (Aviation agencies). 

Air sac. See Bird (The respiratory system); Human 
body (The air passages); Lung (Parts of the lungs). 

Air traffic control center. See Airplane (Safety). 
Air Transport Association of America (ATA) is 
an organization of scheduled airlines of the United 
States. ATA works to improve air safety, to help produce 
economical, efficient air service, and to coordinate the 
airlines’ role in national defense. The organization was 
founded in 1936. Its headquarters are located in Wash- 
ington, D.C. 

Critically reviewed by the Air Transport Association of America 
Air turbulence is a disturbance of the air that is often 
felt by the passengers and crew of aircraft. Air turbu- 
lence may produce only a slightly bumpy ride. But in 
some cases, luggage and even passengers have been 
tossed about the cabin. 

A major source of air turbulence is convective heat- 
ing. This phenomenon begins when the sun heats the 
ground. The ground, in turn, heats the air just above it. 
Because warm air is less dense than cool air, parcels of 
warm air rise ina convection current. Cooler air then 
moves downward and inward, filling the space beneath 
the rising air. We can see an up-and-down movement of 
air parcels in puffy cumulus clouds. Air travelers who fly 
through even a small cumulus cloud usually feel some 
turbulence. 

Much air turbulence is not readily visible and so is 
known as C/lear-air turbulence. Convective heating can 
create clear-air turbulence where there is not enough 
moisture to form clouds. Clear-air turbulence also oc- 
curs at extremely high altitudes, where clouds are rarely 
present. 

An example of turbulence at high altitudes is a dis- 
turbance created by a fet stream. Jet streams are bands 
of fast-moving air that circle the earth at altitudes of 
about 30,000 to 45,000 feet (9,000 to 15,000 meters). Air- 
flow in the core of the jet stream is usually smooth. 
However, near the stream’s outer edge, the high-speed 
air rubs against the surrounding low-speed air. This in- 
teraction creates pockets of air turbulence. 

In the Northern Hemisphere, aircraft flying in an east- 
erly direction frequently ride in a jet stream to reduce 
travel time. As an airplane crosses the stream’s outer 
boundary, the occupants of the craft usually feel turbu- 
lence. 

Air turbulence is also associated with weather fronts, 
narrow zones between huge volumes of air that differ in 


temperature or humidity. These air inasses move over 
the earth's surface much like blobs of molasses on an 
apple. Where air masses bump and rub against one an- 
other, pockets of air turbulence form. 

Airflow over mountain ranges creates air turbulence 
at virtually all altitudes. Certain cloud formations some- 


times indicate the presence of low-altitude disturbances. 


But clear-air turbulence also occurs over mountain 
ranges. The movement of an air mass over a range may 
create several disturbances at the same time. This turbu- 
lence can often be felt at altitudes as high as 60,000 feet 
(18,000 meters). 

See also Cloud; Weather (Weather systems). 
Airbag. See Air bag. 

Airborne troops are soldiers trained for assault by 
air. They may be dropped to the ground by parachute, 
or transported to combat areas by airplanes. Airborne 
troops of the United States Army are volunteers. The 
chief center for training U.S. airborne troops is at Fort 
Bragg, North Carolina. 

Volunteers must undergo a difficult three-week train- 
ing course. In combat, airborne troops land behind ene- 
my lines, blow up bridges, destroy communications, 
and cut off supplies and reinforcements. They often take 
the enemy by surprise and engage in fierce hand-to- 
hand fighting. Airborne troops carry heavy packs of 
equipment, including an automatic rifle, a machine gun, 
grenades, a medical kit, and radio equipment. 

In World War II, both the Allies and the Germans 
used airborne troops. The Germans first employed sky 
soldiers in the Netherlands in 1940 and in capturing the 
island of Crete in 1941. The Allies made the most effec- 
tive use of paratroops. They formed a complete army of 
sky soldiers and coordinated parachute attacks with air, 
land. and naval operations. United States Army para- 
troopers spearheaded attacks in Sicily, Normandy, and 


Brian M. Argrow 





Airborne troops drop by parachute trom an airplane into a bat 
tle area or behind enemy lines 


Aircraft, Military 201 


the Netherlands. In the Philippines, airborne troops re- 
captured Corregidor from Japanese forces. 

Airborne troops have taken part in all major military 
operations since World War II. United States airborne 
troops are often called paratroops, paratroopers, and 
sky soldiers. David R. Kiernan 

See also Parachute. 

Airbrush is a tool used by photographers and com- 
mercial artists to apply color or shading to drawings, 
prints, and photographs. Photographers find it useful to 
bring out highlights and to supply backgrounds. The air- 
brush looks something like a pencil. It has a length of 
tubing at one end and a fine nozzle at the other. An elec- 
tric pump or tank with a pressure gauge supplies a cur- 
rent of compressed air. The air enters the nozzle 
through the tubing and sends a stream of fine particles 
of liquid coloring matter out through the nozzle. The 
artist controls the air pressure by means of a valve to 
create different effects. 





Kongsgaard Studio WORLD BOOK photo by Steinkamp Ballogg) 


The airbrush blows out a mist of coloring matter that creates 
images with delicate tones and a smooth-looking surface. 


The spray gun is a tool that works in the same way as 
an airbrush, but it takes less skill to operate. Painters use 
it to apply a coat of paint, varnish, shellac, and other fin- 
ishing materials to all types of manufactured articles. 

Andrew j. Stasik, Jr 
Aircraft. See Aircraft, Military; Airplane; Airship; Au- 
togiro; Balloon; Glider; Guided missile; Helicopter; 
Rocket; V/STOL 
Aircraft, Military. Military aircraft are airplanes, heli- 
copters, and other flying machines used for military pur- 
poses. Most military aircraft are operated by pilots. But 
aircraft called unmanned aerial vehicles (\UAV's), which 
carry no crew, are guided by electronic devices. 

Armed forces use military aircraft for a wide variety of 
tasks in both combat and peacetime. During a war, 
these aircraft attack enemy forces, protect and transport 
troops and supplies, defend territory, and carry out 
many other types of missions. Peacetime uses include 
rescue operations and scientific expeditions. 

Military aircraft range from UAVs the size of small 





202 Aircraft, Military 


= 


ie ~ » 


= ; = i ; r 
Nae = q 3 7 
t 3 = 
lil Zl ' - a _ 
J 
Es - = i = —— . = a : =%. : = “) 


B-1B bomber 





US. Air Force 


TR-1 reconnaissance aircraft 





U S. Air Force 





US. Air Force 
KC-10 tanker 





neg ge ee 


Photn 
Blackhawk UH-60 helicopter 


Military aircraft, such as the United States aircraft shown here, are designed to perform various 
tasks. For example, bombers attack targets with bombs, missiles, rockets, and other weapons. 
Tankers refuel aircraft in flight. Reconnaissance aircraft observe and photograph enemy forces and 


bases. Transport helicopters are used to carry cargo. 


model airplanes to huge transport planes that carry 
tanks and trucks. Their speeds also vary greatly, reach- 
ing more than 2,000 miles per hour (mph), or 3,200 kilo- 
meters per hour (kph), for some jet planes. Some aircraft 
are designed for specialized duties. For example, some 
military planes take off and land vertically, enabling 
them to operate from ships and rough terrain. Others 
can fly at extremely high altitudes to escape enemy mis- 
siles or at low altitudes to avoid detection by radar. 


Types of military aircraft 


Most military aircraft are fixed-wing aircraft (airplanes) 
or rotary-wing aircraft (helicopters). They are classified 
by their function. Those that can perform more than one 
type of mission are designated by their original or prin- 
cipal use. Military planes include (1) bombers, (2) fight- 
ers, (3) reconnaissance aircraft, (4) transports, (5) tankers, 
and (6) special-mission aircraft. Some of these classifica- 
tions are also used for helicopters. 

Bombers attack targets with bombs, missiles, rock- 
ets, and other weapons. The two main kinds of bombers 


are strategic bombers and fighter-bombers. Most strate- 
gic bombers are large, long-range airplanes that can at- 
tack targets deep inside enemy territory. They have two 
or more jet engines and a crew of two to six people. 
One such strategic bomber, the American-made B-1B, 
can fly up to about 7,500 miles (12,000 kilometers) with- 
out refueling. Its top speed is Mach 7.25, which is 1 5 
times the speed of sound. The American B-2 “stealth” 
bomber has special features that make it difficult to de- 
tect by radar. These features include surface materials 
that absorb radar energy and a winglike shape that de- 
flects radar beams. See Air Force, United States (pic- 
ture: B-2 “stealth” bomber). 

Most fighter-bombers, also called attack planes, are 
small, short- to medium-range aircraft with one or two 
jet engines and a crew of one or two people. These 
planes are used primarily to attack ships and ground 
forces. One of the most advanced fighter-bombers is the 
American F-117 ‘stealth’ fighter. Features much like 
those of the B-2 bomber make the F-117 difficult to de- 
tect by radar. 


Fighters are used chiefly to intercept and attack other 
aircraft, but they also hit ground targets. Tiiese planes 
must be fast and easy to maneuver. Most fighters carry 
cannons, rockets, and missiles. The American F-14 Tom- 
cat has an electronic weapons system that automatically 
detects and tracks enemy aircraft. It allows a pilot to fire 
at enemy aircraft long before seeing them. The F-14 has 
variable-sweep wings, which can be spread out or 
swept back according to the flight speed. 

Most fighters have one or two jet engines and a crew 
of one or two people. Many have swept-back wings, 
which slant backward from the plane's body to the tip of 
the wing, or triangle-shaped delta wings to provide 
great speed. Two widely used fighters, the Russian MiG- 
29 and the French Mirage, can fly faster than Mach 2. 

Reconnaissance aircraft are equipped with cam- 
eras or electronic sensing devices for collecting infor- 
mation about enemy forces. The TR-1, one of the few 
American reconnaissance aircraft, is used to locate ene- 
my forces during wartime. The plane’s sensing devices 
can detect signals from enemy radars, communications, 
and other electronic equipment. Some reconnaissance 
aircraft photograph enemy forces and bases. However, 
artificial satellites that orbit the earth carry out most pho- 
tographic reconnaissance today. 

Transports carry military personnel and equipment. 
Almost any aircraft can be used as a transport, but some 
combat situations require specially designed planes. 
Most such specialized transports have oversized tires 
on their landing gear and high-lift devices on their 
wings that enable the planes to use short, unpaved run- 
ways. The largest transport, the Russian Antonov An-124, 
can carry more than 330,000 pounds (150,000 kilograms). 
Some transports are equipped with guns to convert 
them to attack aircraft called gunships. 

Tankers refuel other aircraft in flight. A tanker must 
be able to fly at the same speed and altitude as the 
planes it refuels. The planes approach from behind and 
below and pick up refueling tubes that trail from the 
tanker. Nearly all tankers are modified bombers, cargo 
aircraft, or commercial airliners. The U.S. Air Force uses 
the KC-135, a version of the Boeing 707 airliner, and the 
KC-10, a version of the McDonnell Douglas DC-10. 


US Arr Force 
The F-117 “stealth” American fighter is designed mainly to attack 


ground forces and ships. Flat surfaces on its fuselage deflect 
radar beams, making the plane difficult to detect. 





Aircraft, Military 203 


Special-mission aircraft include electronic support 
aircraft, trainers, and UAV's. Electronic support aircraft 
contain sensitive electronic instruments. Some of these 
aircraft are used to interfere with enemy radar and other 
electronic equipment. Others guard against air or 
ground attack and serve as command centers in a war. 
The U.S. Air Force uses the Airborne Warning and Con- 
trol System (AWACS) aircraft. A radar dome on top of 
this plane can detect and track aircraft and missiles. 

Trainers are used to train pilots and are designated by 
the stage of training in which they serve—primary, basic, 
or advanced. They range from planes with piston en- 
gines to jet aircraft that can be used for both training 
and combat. UAV's of various sizes are used for haz- 
ardous reconnaissance missions and as targets in com- 
bat practice. 

Helicopters play an important role in military opera- 
tions because they can be used in a variety of missions. 
They have the ability to take off and land almost any- 
where, and they can hover over one spot. Helicopters 
serve chiefly as attack aircraft, reconnaissance aircraft, 





U.S Air Force 
The French Mirage 2000 is a fighter airplane designed mainly 
to intercept enemy planes. The missiles attached under its wings 
can be fired at enemy aircraft 





The Boeing Company 
The C-17 Globemaster Ill is a United States transport plane. It 
can carry about 205 troops or 160,000 pounds (72,500 kilograms) 
of cargo a distance of about 2 750 miles (4,450 kilometers). 








204 Aircraft, Military 


and transports. Some attack helicopters are called heli- 
copter gunships. A gunship, such as the American-made 
AH-64 Apache, can carry cannons and missiles to attack 
targets on the ground and in the air. Other helicopters 
are specially equipped for antisubmarine warfare. The 
American-made OH-58 Kiowa, the British Lynx, and oth- 
er small helicopters are used for reconnaissance and 
light transport duty. The largest transport helicopters 
can pick up and carry planes, tanks, or trucks by using 
cables suspended from the helicopters. 


History 


The first military aircraft were balloons filled with 
gas or hot air. In 1794, the French Army sent up soldiers 
in balloons to observe enemy troop movements. During 
the 1800's, most major armies set up a balloon corps. 

Heavier-than-air aircraft gained military importance 
after 1903, when the Wright brothers made the first suc- 
cessful plane flight. Early planes were made of cloth, 
wood, and wire and had a low-powered gasoline en- 
gine. Most of these aircraft were called biplanes be- 
cause they had two main wings, one above and one be- 


Early military 
aircraft 





L’Entreprenant balloon 
France, 1794 
Diameter—About 27 ft. 6 in. (8 m) 









Fokker DR-1 triplane 
Germany, 1917 


Length~ 18 ft. 11 in. (5.77 m) 











Wingspan—23 ft 7 4 in. (7.2 m) 


low the body of the plane. By 1914, biplanes could fly at 
an average of 75 mph (121 kph) and reach an altitude of 
about 10,000 feet (3,000 meters). Military use of the 
planes was limited largely to reconnaissance. 

World War I (1914-1918) brought great changes in the 
design and performance of military aircraft. For exam- 
ple, the German Army used the engine-powered airship, 
a lighter-than-air aircraft, for reconnaissance and bomb- 
ing missions. In addition, both sides recognized the pos- 
sible advantages of using airplanes for attack as well as 
for reconnaissance. Engineers designed larger, more 
powerful planes that could carry bombs over long dis- 
tances. The introduction of these bombers created a 
need for fighter aircraft to intercept them. As the war 
continued, fighters were armed with more effective 
weapons and became faster and easier to maneuver. 

During the 1920's and 1930's, further improvements 
were made in military aircraft design. Biplanes were re- 
placed by aluminum monoplanes. The monoplanes had 
one main wing, which extended outward from both 
sides of the body of the plane. Increasingly powerful en- 
gines and a streamlined design enabled monoplanes to 


The first military aircraft were balloons used for reconnaissance. Heavier-than-air aircraft, devel- 
oped during the early 1900's, played a major role in World War I (1914-1918). Some important early 
military aircraft are shown below. The dates indicate when the aircraft were first built. 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Tony Gibbons, Linden Artists Ltd. 
a. 


Wright A flyer 
United States, 1908 
Wingspan— 36 ft. 5 in. (11.1 m) 
Length—32 ft. 8 in. (9.96 m) 


S.P.A.D. 13 
France, 1917 
Wingspan—26 ft. 11 in. (8.2 m) 
Length—20 ft 8 in. (6.3 m) 





United Kingdom, 1917 


Wingspan — 28 ft. (8.53 m) 
Length— 18 ft. 9 in. (5.72 m) 





= a 





reach speeds of more than 300 mph (480 kph). 

World War Il (1939-1945) sped up the development 
of piston-engined aircraft and marked the first use of jet 
planes. One of the most advanced fighters was the 
British Spitfire, which could fly faster than 350 mph (563 
kph) and higher than 40,000 feet (12,000 meters). Late in 
the war, Germany began to use the Messerschmitt 
Me 262, the first jet to fly in combat. This plane had a 
top speed of almost 550 mph (885 kph). 

The jet age. Aircraft technology made further rapid 
progress in the 1950's, 1960's, and 1970's. For example, 
new types of wings and other structural improvements 
greatly increased the speed and maneuverability of jet 
planes. The United States and the Soviet Union devel- 
oped jet bombers that could fly nonstop from their own 
country to the other country in only a few hours. 

At the same time, ground warfare was transformed 
by the wide use of helicopters. Military helicopters 
were introduced on a large scale in the Korean War 
(1950-1953), chiefly for transporting supplies and 
wounded troops. In the late 1950's, the use of jet en- 
gines boosted the speed and lift capacity of helicopters. 


Later military 
aircraft 





B-17G Flying Fortress bomber 
United States, 1943 

Wingspan—103 ft 9 in. (31.62 m) 
Length—74 ft 9 in. (22.78 m) 


Messerschmitt Me 262 fighter 
Germany, 1944 

Wingspan—41 ft. (12.5 m) 

Length—34 ft 9; in. (10.6 m) 


F-14 Tomcat fighter 
United States, 1970 
Maximum Wingspan—64 ft. 1) in. (19.55 m) 
Minimum Wingspan — 38 ft. 2 in. (11.63 m 
Length—62 ft. (18.9 m) 









Aircraft, Military 205 


During the Vietnam War (1957-1975), the United 
States Army, Navy, and Air Force used helicopters for 
attack, reconnaissance, and transport. Helicopters were 
also used to rescue pilots shot down in enemy territory. 

Recent developments in military aircraft include im- 
provements in design and materials. Surfaces that de- 
flect radar beams and materials that absorb radar ener- 
gy make “stealth” aircraft difficult to detect by radar. The 
supercritical wing, which is thinner and flatter than a 
standard wing, increases the speed and range of 
planes. In some supersonic aircraft, titanium and other 
heat-resistant materials have replaced aluminum, which 
melts at speeds higher than Mach 2.5. 

Floyd D. Kennedy, Jr. 

See also Air force, with its list of Re/ated articles. 


Additional resources 


Fredriksen, John C. Warbirds: An Illustrated Guide to U.S. Mili- 
tary Aircraft, 1915-2000. ABC-CLIO, 1999. Warbirds fl: An Ilus- 
trated Guide to the World's Military Aircratt. 2001. 

Janes All the World’s Aircraft. \ane’s, published annually. 

Oliver, David, and Ryan, Mike. Warplanes of the Future. MBI 
Pub. Co., 2000. 


Through the years, military aircraft have been improved to increase their speed and maneuverability. For 
example, the use of jet engines enabled planes to fly much faster than before. The Messerschmitt Me 
262, built by Germany during World War fi, was the first jet plane to fly in combat 





A6M2 Zero fighter 
Japan, 1939 
Wingspan—39 ft 4} in. (12 m) 
Length—29 ft 9 in. (9.07 m) 


























P-51D Mustang fighter 
United States, 1940 
Wingspan—37 ft (11.28 m) 
Length—32 ft 3 in. (9.83 m) 


MiG-21F fighter 

Soviet Union, 1955 
Wingspan—23 ft. 5} in. (7.15 m} 
Length= 44 ft. 2 in. (13.46 m) 


Avro Vulcan B.Mk.2 


bomber 
United Kingdom, 1952 
Wingspan 111 ft (33.83 mi) 


Length= 99 ft. 11 in. (30.45 m) 





206 Aircraft carrier 


Aircraft carrier is a ship used as a mobile base for 
airplanes. With its aircraft striking force, the carrier is 
the most powerful surface warship. Carriers are often 
called flattops because of their wide, flat decks. The only 
ships bigger than carriers are the largest oil tankers. 

Aircraft carriers are equipped with only a minimum 
number of antiaircraft guns or defensive missiles. Carri- 
ers usually steam (travel) with other ships. Cruisers, de- 
stroyers, and submarines protect aircraft carriers from 
enemy missiles, planes, surface ships, and submarines. 
Such a fleet is called a carrier task force or battle group. 

Airplanes take off from and land on the flight deck. 
They are repaired and stored on the hangar deck just 
below it. Large elevators move the planes from one 
deck to the other. The superstructure of the ship, called 
the island, includes the command and navigation 
bridges, communications equipment, radar antennas, 
and smokestacks, unless the ship has nuclear power. 
The island rises on the flight deck’s starboard side (right 
side facing forward). The rest of the deck is left clear for 
planes. A carrier also houses maintenance shops for the 
planes and living quarters and mess (cooking and eating 
areas) for the pilots, air crews, and ship's crew. It has 
storage space for bombs, ammunition, fuel, and food. 

The United States Navy operates the world’s largest 
carrier fleet, consisting of 12 ships. The navies of Brazil, 
France, India, Italy, Russia, Spain, Thailand, and the Unit- 
ed Kingdom each have at least one aircraft carrier. 

Flight operations. Conventional airplanes, heli- 
copters, and V/STOL ( Vertical/Short Take-Off and Land- 
ing) aircraft operate from aircraft carriers. Only the 
navies of Brazil, France, Russia, and the United States 
have carriers that launch and land conventional aircraft. 
The carriers operated by the navies of other nations car- 
ry only V/STOL aircraft and helicopters. 

Conventional airplanes are too heavy and require too 
great an airspeed to take off from a carrier entirely un- 
der their own power. For this reason, they are launched 
by a catapult from the take-off areas (see Catapult). The 
carrier steams into the wind at high speed during take- 
offs. Wind speed plus the ship’s speed helps lift the 
planes as they take off. 

The carrier also heads into the wind when planes 
land. If a carrier steams at 25 knots (nautical miles per 
hour} into a wind blowing 25 knots, then the wind speed 
over the carrier's deck is 50 knots. A plane flying at 100 


= 7 ‘ 
- = = y e - 
A, ain %; 
5 


5 





knots thus has a relative landing speed of only 50 knots. 
Arresting gear, four steel cables stretched across the 
rear landing area of the deck, catch a tail hook lowered 
from the plane. The plane is brought to a stop over a 
distance of about 300 feet (90 meters). 

Modern carriers for conventional aircraft have angled 
landing sections on their flight decks. The landing sec- 
tion, which takes up the rear two-thirds of the deck, an- 
gles toward the carrier's port side (left side facing for- 
ward) and extends over the water. A plane that makes a 
bad approach or misses the arresting wires with its tail 
hook may keep going and fly off the deck. Helicopters 
and VTOL aircraft take off and land vertically and so re- 
quire no runway. 

The United States carrier fleet. Aircraft carriers are 
the U.S. Navy's principal warships. They carry jet fighters 
and jet bombers. They also have radar, reconnaissance, 
and tanker planes, and antisubmarine aircraft. Each carri- 
er usually carries six helicopters. 

The Navy groups its carriers by class. The name of 
each class is the name of the first ship built in that class. 
The four classes of carriers are, from the newest to the 
oldest, Nimitz, John F. Kennedy, Kitty Hawk, and Enter- 
prise. Ships of the Nimitz and Enterprise classes are nu- 
clear-powered. Those of the John F. Kennedy and Kitty 
Hawk classes are oil-powered. 

The Nimitz class consists of the Nimitz, the Dwight D. 
Eisenhower, the Carl Vinson, the Theodore Roosevelt, 
the Abraham Lincoln, the George Washington, the John 
C Stennis, and the Harry S. Truman. Nimitz class ships 
are the world’s largest warships measured in displace- 
ment tonnage. This measurement refers to the number 
of long tons or metric tons of water displaced (occupied) 
by a ship. Each Nimitz class ship displaces 97,000 long 
tons when fully loaded. A long ton is equal to 2,240 
pounds or 1.016 metric tons. Each ship is 1,092 feet (333 
meters) long and has a flight deck 252 feet (77 meters) 
wide. Each can carry 85 aircraft and about 5,700 people. 

The John F. Kennedy class consists of one ship, the 
John F. Kennedy. This ship displaces 82,000 long tons 
when fully loaded, and can carry 85 aircraft and about 
5,600 people. 

The Kitty Hawk class consists of the Kitty Hawk and 
the Constellation. Both ships displace 80,800 long tons 
when fully loaded and can carry 85 aircraft and about 
5,600 people. 


US. Navy 


An aircraft carrier is a war- 
ship that serves as a mobile 
base for jet bombers, fighters, 
and other types of military 
planes. The nuclear-powered 
carrier Carl Vinson, shown 
here, is part of the Nimitz 
class of U.S. Navy carriers. 


The Enterprise class consists of ore ship, the Enter- 
prise. This ship, which was commissioned in 1961, was 
the world's first nuclear-powered aircraft carrier. It dis- 
places 89,600 long tons when fully loaded. The Enter- 
prise can Carry 85 aircraft and about 5,800 people. 

History. Beginning in 1910, British and American pi- 
lots experimented with take-offs and landings from 
ships. In 1917, the Furious, a British Royal Navy cruiser, 
was outfitted with a flight deck. The first ship to have a 
full, unobstructed flight deck was the Royal Navy's Ar- 
gus, completed in 1918. The first aircraft carrier in the 
United States Navy was the Langley, a converted collier 
(coal ship). It went into service in 1922. The Ranger, com- 
missioned by the U.S. Navy in 1934, was the first ship 
built especially for aircraft. 

During World War Il (1939-1945), the warring nations 
built more than 150 aircraft carriers. They were the most 
important ships of the war. Planes launched from Japan- 
ese carriers attacked the U.S. naval base at Pearl Harbor, 
Hawaii, and the first United States air raid on Japan was 
made by bombers from the Hornet British aircraft carri- 
ers escorted supply convoys in the Atlantic Ocean and 
the Mediterranean Sea, and also took part in fleet ac- 
tions such as the sinking of the German battleship Bis- 
marck. 

After the war, many carriers were scrapped. By the 
1960's, only the United States maintained a large fleet of 
carriers. Among these ships were those of the Forrestal 
class—the Forrestal, the Saratoga, the Ranger, and the /n- 
dependence. The Forrestal, commissioned in 1955, was 
the first U.S. carrier to have an angled flight deck and to 
carry jet fighters. Forrestal class ships carried more air- 
craft than previous carriers, and they were sometimes 
called supercarriers. Norman Polmar 

See also Navy, United States; World War II (The war 
in Asia and the Pacific; picture: The aircraft carrier). 
Airedale terrier, A/R 04¥z, is the name of a breed of 
large terriers. It weighs 50 to 60 pounds (23 to 27 kilo- 
grams) when full-grown. Its coat of wiry hair is black or 
grizzled on its back, and a rich tan on the other parts of 
its body. 

The Airedale was named for the Aire Valley in north- 


Parts of an 
aircraft carrier 


Aircraft take off from and land 
on the flight deck of a carrier. 
This deck has catapults and 
arresting wires that assist 
planes. Elevators move aircraft 
to and from the hangar deck, 
where they are stored. The /s- 
landhouses communications 
and radar equipment. 


Parking and 
loke-aff area 





Airmail 207 
ern England. This breed was developed in England 
about 1880. One of its ancestors was the otter hound. 
The Airedale is fearless, a good watchdog, and affec- 
tionate toward its owner. It also is a good swimmer. 

Critically reviewed by the Airedale Terrier Club of America 

See also Dog (picture: Terriers); Terrier. 

Airfoil. See Aerodynamics (Lift). 

Airline. See Aviation; Airport. 

Airliner. See Airplane (Commercial transport planes). 
Airmail is mail sent by aircraft. It is the fastest way to 
send packages and many other types of mail to distant 
places. Airliners carry the mail between large cities. 
Some cities offer helicopter service between central and 
suburban post offices. Nearly all first-class mail going 
more than 200 miles (320 kilometers) travels by air. 

Early balloonists and pioneer airplane pilots some- 
times carried airmail as stunts. Earle Ovington flew the 
first official airmail in the United States in 1911 between 
Garden City and Mineola, New York. The first continu- 
ous regular airmail service in the world started on May 
15, 1918, with United States Army pilots flying between 
New York City, Philadelphia, and Washington, D.C 

On Aug. 12, 1918, the Post Office Department (now the 
United States Postal Service) began making contracts 
with private airlines to carry the mail. The first night air- 
mail was flown from Omaha, Nebraska, to Chicago in 
1921. Regular night airmail flights and regular transconti- 
nental mail service began in 1924. The American Railway 
Express Company began shipping air express packages 
on airlines in 1927. 

The cancellation of all airmail contracts in 1934 
marked the beginning of airmail rate regulation. Rates 
were regulated by the Civil Aeronautics Administration 
(now part of the Federal Aviation Administration). The 
regulation of airmail rates and service ended on Dec. 31, 
1984. In 1985, the U.S. Postal Service returned to con- 
tracting with a variety of both passenger and freight air- 
lines to transport mail. 

Critically reviewed by the United States Postal Service 

See also Airplane (The golden age); Aviation (Aviation 
progress; picture); Postal Service, United States (Tech- 
nological advancements). 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Robert Keys 


Radar 


antennas 


Arresting 
wires 


Catapults 


Elevatar 





208 Airplane 





The Boeing Company 


A giant commercial airliner can bring all parts of the world within easy reach of one another by 
flying hundreds of passengers long distances. The Boeing 777-300, the world’s largest twin-engine 
passenger jet, can fly about a fourth of the way around the world without refueling. 


Airplane 


Airplane is an engine-driven machine that can fly 
through the air supported by the flow of air around its 
wings. Hundreds of thousands of airplanes are used 
throughout the world. Millions of people depend on air- 
craft for swift transportation. Businesses rely on quick 
airmail and air express service, and many industries ship 
their products by air. Airplanes have many other uses, 
from helping fight forest fires to carrying emergency 
aid. In addition, airplanes are a major weapon of war. 
Airplanes provide the world’s fastest practical means 
of transporting passengers and freight. Most large trans- 
port planes routinely fly 500 to 600 miles per hour (mph), 
or 800 to 970 kilometers per hour (kph). The fastest air- 
planes are supersonic, which means they can fly faster 
than sound travels. At sea level, sound has a speed of 
760 mph (1,225 kph). A supersonic transport plane (SST) 


President of the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association, and 

F. Robert van der Linden, Curator of Aeronautics at the National 
Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution. The draw- 
ings throughout this article, unless otherwise credited, were pre- 
pared tor World Book by Tom Morgan. 


The contributors of this article are Drew Steketee, Senior Vice 


can roar through the air at about 1,350 mph (2,180 kph). 
Such planes carry passengers between London or Paris 
and New York City in less than four hours. 

Airplanes range in size from training planes, which 
have only two seats, to jumbo jets, which can carry hun- 
dreds of passengers. In the United States, about 90 per- 
cent of all airplanes have one or two engines and Carry 
only a few passengers at a time. Many people use such 
airplanes for short business or pleasure trips. 

Manufacturers build airplanes according to the prin- 
ciples of aerodynamics, the study of the forces acting on 
an object as it moves through the air. An airplane has 
wings, one or more engines, and various control sur- 
faces. The wings extend from either side of the plane's 
body. The wings are fixed—that is, they do not move— 
and curved on top. As the plane moves forward, the air 
flowing around the curved wings creates an area of low- 
er air pressure above the wings, resulting in a lifting 
force. An airplane's engines give it the power to move 
fast enough through the air to produce the lift needed 
for flight. The control surfaces are movable sections on 
the back edge of the wings and tail that the pilot moves 
to control the plane's flight path. The activity of design- 
ing, building, and flying aircraft is called aeronautics. 

An airplane is a heavier-than-air aircraft, meaning it is 
heavier than the air it displaces. An airplane achieves 


Airplane 209 


Ae 





© Chris Sorensen, The Stock Market 


A powertul jet cargo plane can carry tons of goods nonstop for thousands of miles or kilometers. 
Privately operated package delivery services use planes like the one above to deliver almost any 
kind of merchandise within a few days to customers throughout the world. 


flight in a different way than an airship, also called a 
blimp, which is a fighter-than-air aircraft. A typical airship 
rises and floats in the air because it is filled with a gas 
that is lighter than the surrounding air. 

During the late 1700's, people made their first flights 
into the air using balloons, which were an early form of 
airship. After the first balloon flights, inventors tried to 
develop a heavier-than-air flying machine. Some inven- 
tors experimented with gliders (engineless planes). They 
studied birds’ wings and discovered that the wings are 
curved. By building gliders with curved wings instead of 
flat ones, they could make the vehicles fly hundreds of 
feet or meters. But long-distance flight in a heavier-than- 
air machine did not become possible until the invention 
of an engine light enough but powerful enough to keep 
a plane in flight. The first such engines were four-stroke 
gasoline engines, developed during the 1880's and ini- 





tially used to power bicycles, boats, and carriages. Henley & Savage: Uiiphoto 
= . alla - Afi A/ri = / b : : 

In 1903, the brothers Orville and W ilbur Wright—two Light planes make up most of the world’s privately owned air- 
American bicycle makers—made the first successful planes. Most light planes are propeller driven, have a single en- 
powered airplane flights in history near Kitty Hawk, gine, and are small enough to land and take off at small airports. 

Outline IV. Principles of flight 
A. Gravity and lift C. Changing altitude 


I. Types of airplanes 

A. Commercial transport planes + 
B. General aviation planes 
C. Military planes 
D. Seaplanes 
E. Special-purpose planes 

ll. The parts of an airplane 
A. The wing 
B. The fuselage re 
C. The tail 
D. The landing gear 
E. The controls and instruments 
F. Propellers 

ll. Power for flight 


B. Drag and thrust D. Changing direction 
. Flying an airplane 

A. Basic movements and controls 

B. Proper use of the controls 

C. Stalling 

D. Flying by instruments 

E. Measuring flying speed 

F. Learning to fly 
. Air navigation 

A. Pilotage 

B. Dead reckoning 

C. Radio navigation 

D. Navigating across oceans 


E. Safety 
CIDrocé ngines ; ee) 
a ro okt iia i Vil. Building an airplane 
C Ry ae ee ines A. Design and testing B. Mass production 
oe Vill. History 


210 Airplane 


North Carolina. After the Wright brothers success, pilots 
and inventors worked continually to improve airplane 
design. By the Jate 1950's, passenger planes with jet en- 
gines had brought all countries within easy reach of one 
another, and the world seemed much smaller than it had 
just a few years before. 

This article provides an overview of airplanes and 
how they work. To learn about the aviation industry and 
careers in aviation, see the World Book article on 
Aviation. 


Types of airplanes 


There are many kinds of airplanes that vary greatly in 
size, speed, and function. Today's airplanes can be di- 
vided into five main groups: (1) commercia! transport 
planes, (2) general aviation planes, (3) military planes, (4) 
seaplanes, and (5) special-purpose planes. 

Commercial transport planes are Jarge planes 
owned by airline companies. Most of these planes are 
airliners—planes that are designed to carry passengers 
and some cargo. Some commercial transports are de- 
signed to carry cargo only. The largest transport planes 
commonly used weigh about 400 short tons (360 metric 
tons) when fully loaded. 

Most large airliners can carry from 100 to 250 passen- 
gers. However, some can Carry more. For example, the 
Boeing 747 has room for over 400 passengers. It has 12 





Passenger jets range in size from the enormous Boeing 747 
jumbo jet, above, which can carry more than 400 people, to small 
business jets such as the Cessna Citation Bravo, right, which 
seats a maximum of 6 passengers. The 747 is the world’s largest 
commercial airliner. Business executives use small jets like the 
Citation Bravo to fly to out-of-town assignments or meetings. 





washrooms and 6 galleys and carries more than 47,000 
gallons (178,000 liters) of fuel. 

Most airliners routinely fly 500 to 600 mph (800 to 970 
kph). Supersonic transport planes can travel at 1,350 
mph (2,180 kph). 

Most airliners are powered by jet engines, which en- 
able the planes to travel long distances at high speeds 
without refueling. Most four-engine jets, such as the 
Boeing 747, can fly nonstop 6,000 miles (9,700 kilome- 
ters) or more—farther than the distance between New 
York City and Tokyo, and can travel faster than 600 mph 
(970 kph). Four-engine jet transports fly at an altitude of 
30,000 to 45,000 feet (9,100 to 13,700 meters), and so they 
stay above most storms. 

Most three-engine jets are designed for shorter flights 
than four-engine jets. They can also use shorter runways. 
Some three-engine jetliners, such as the McDonnell 
Douglas DC-10, can carry as many passengers as most 
four-engine jets can Carry. 

Many twin-engine jetliners carry fewer passengers 
than three- or four-engine jets and are used for shorter 
trips to serve small and medium-sizeo cities. Other twin- 
engine jets fly long trips. The Boeing 777, for example, 
can carry more than 300 passengers over 7,200 miles 
(11,600 kilometers). Twin-engine, propeller-driven 
planes, such as the SAAB 2000, travel at less than 400 
mph (640 kph) and make mostly short flights. 


The Boeing Company 


Cessna Aircraft Company 


General aviation planes are smaller than most com- 
mercial transports and can thus land and take off at 
smaller airfields. Most of these planes are /ight planes, 
which generally weigh less than 2,000 pounds (900 kilo- 
grams) when empty and have two to six seats. 

Most light planes are single-engine, propeller-driven 
planes owned by individuals. Many people fly such 
planes for personal transportation and enjoyment. Light 
planes have hundreds of other uses. For example, they 
are used to inspect pipelines and power lines, to spot 
and fight forest fires, and to deliver emergency aid. 
Some light planes are used to haul light cargo, to take 
pictures from the air, and to teach student pilots to fly. 
Farmers use light planes to help them plant seeds, check 
soil erosion, and count livestock. 

The largest general aviation planes have two engines. 
Air taxi services and commuter airlines use such planes 
to transport passengers—usually fewer than 20—be- 


+ 


« 





WecITARY AIRLIFT COMMAND 





US. Air Force 


Four-engine jet transports are designed for long nonstop 
flights. Commercial airlines own and operate most of these 
planes. But some, such as the Lockheed C-5A Galaxy, above, are 
military transports. The Galaxy is one of the world's largest air- 
planes. It carries battle tanks and other military equipment. 





Airplane 211 





McDonnell Douglas Corporation 


A three-engine jet transport, such as the DC-10, above, gener- 
ally makes shorter flights than four-engine jets do. But some car- 
ry nearly as many passengers as jumbo jets carry. 





Raytheon Aircraft 


Propeller-driven light planes are used to carry passengers and 
lightweight or perishable goods. They also perform many other 
tasks, from scattering seeds to carrying emergency aid. 


US Ar Force 


Military planes carry out spe- 
cial duties for a nation’s armed 
forces. Jet fighters, such as the 
U.S. Air Force s F-16, /eft, are 
used chiefly to intercept and 
attack enemy aircraft. 





212 Airplane 





tween small airports and the large airports that serve 
larger airliners. 

Many businesses own single- or twin-engine air- 
planes. Such business planes, also called corporate 
planes, are used to fly employees to out-of-town assign- 
ments or meetings. 

Extremely light aircraft are flown for recreation. In the 
United States, where they are called u/tralights, these 
one-seat, single-engine aircraft weigh no more than 254 
pounds (115 kilograms) and carry only 5 gallons (19 liters) 
of fuel or less. Ultralights are allowed to fly only below 
10,000 feet (3,000 meters) and at a speed of 63 mph (101 
kph) or less. In other countries, these light aircraft are 
commonly called microlights and usually have two seats. 
They may weigh up to 496 pounds (225 kilograms) and 
carry up to 15 gallons (57 liters) of fuel. They are allowed 
to fly only below 10,000 feet and at a speed of 40 mph (65 
kph) or less. 

Military planes carry out a variety of duties for a na- 
tion's armed forces. Some military planes are special 
models of transports or light planes that the armed 
forces have bought from aircraft manufacturers. For ex- 
ample, the United States armed forces use special mod- 
els of the Boeing 707 as tankers for refueling other 
planes in the air. Many other kinds of military planes are 
custom-made. Most are bombers, which mainly attack 
ground targets, or fighters, which mainly attack other 
aircraft. Fighter-bombers can both fight and drop 
bombs. One of the most advanced fighter-bombers is 
the Lockheed F-117A ‘stealth’ fighter, a sleek plane de- 
signed to be nearly invisible to radar. 

Some military planes are designed for tasks other than 
attacks on an enemy. For example, the Lockheed C-5A 
Galaxy is an enormous transport plane that can carry two 
battle tanks weighing 50 short tons (45 metric tons), or 
about 350 troops. Another Lockheed plane, the SR-71A, 
is designed to survey enemy forces and installations. It 
carries Cameras and other equipment. The SR-71A flies 
as high as 100,000 feet (30,000 meters) and has a speed 
of more than 2,000 mph (3,200 kph), which makes it one 
of the fastest planes in the world. For more information 
on military planes, see Aircraft, Military; Air Force, 
United States (Planes and weapons of the Air Force). 

Seaplanes can touch down and take off on water. 
There are three kinds of seaplanes: (1) floatplanes, (2) fly- 
ing boats, and (3) amphibians. Floatplanes are equipped 
with big floats instead of wheels. Flying boats have a wa- 


Aerobatic planes perform 
difficult maneuvers, such as 
flying in close formation. 
These military jets are flown 
by the Blue Angels, the U.S. 
Navy's famous aerobatic team. 


David R. Frazier Photolibrary 


tertight body that floats in the water like the hull of a 
ship. Amphibians, which can land and take off on both 
land and water, are flying boats with retractable wheels 
attached to their floats or hull. The pilot raises the 
wheels when operating the plane on water and lowers 
the wheels on land. 

Special-purpose planes. Many airplanes are built for 
particular jobs. For example, farmers use agricultural 
spray planes to spray their fields with liquid fertilizer or 
insecticide. These planes are built to fly slowly and to 
carry large tanks filled with chemicals. An amphibian 
plane made in Canada is designed for fighting forest 
fires. This plane can fly just above a lake and draw more 
than 1,000 gallons (3,800 liters) of water into its tanks. The 





Andy Sacks, Tony Stone Images 
Agricultural spray planes, also known as crop dusters, are 
used to spray farm Crops with liquid fertilizer or insecticide. 
These planes are built to carry large tanks of liquid chemicals. 





Northrop Crnumman Corporation 
An amphibian plane can operate from land or water. An am- 


phibian designed to fight forest fires, above, can draw lake water 
into tanks in its hull and spray the water on a fire from the air. 








Vince Streano, The Stock Market 


Ultralight planes, such as the one shown above, are flown for 
recreation. In the United States, ultralights weigh no more than 
254 pounds {115 kilograms) and have one seat and one engine. 


plane then flies to the fire and drops its load of water. 

Special-purpose planes also include planes used for 
air races or aerobatics (air acrobatics). These are light 
planes that can perform difficult maneuvers. Another 
large category of special-purpose planes consists of 
home-built airplanes, which are built from plans or man- 
ufactured in kits for assembly by the owner. 

Aircraft called V/S7TOL's are designed to take off and 
land vertically or on a short runway. The term V/STOL 
stands for Vertical/Short Jake- Off and Landing. V/STOL's 
have great military value because they can land on small 
airfields near battlefields and on ships smaller than air- 
craft carriers. See V/STOL. 


The parts of an airplane 


All airplanes, except for a few experimental planes, 
have the same basic parts. They are (1) the wing, (2) the 
fuselage (pronounced FYOO zuh lahzh/—that is, the body 
of the plane, (3) the tail, (4) the landing gear, and (5) the 
engine. All these parts—except the engine—make up a 
plane's airframe. 

This section of the article discusses the basic parts of 
the airframe, as well as airplane controls and instru- 
ments and types of propellers. The airplane engine is de- 
scribed in the next section. For information about how 
the parts of an airplane work to move the plane through 
the air and how a pilot uses airplane controls and instru- 
ments, see the section called Principles of flight. 





Airplane 213 


The wing. People usually think of an airplane as hav- 
ing two wings, but modern planes actually have only 
one. This wing is a single, continuous structure that ex- 
tends outward from each side of the fuselage. A wing 
has a nearly flat bottom and a curved top. This shape 
helps create the lift that raises an airplane off the ground 
and keeps it in the air. 

Most airplane wings are metal. They have a skeleton 
of lengthwise spars and crosswise ribs. The skeleton has 
a thin covering, usually of an aluminum a//oy (mixture of 
metals). Most planes have a cantilever wing, which is 
completely supported by its internal structure. 

An airplane wing has a root, tip, leading edge, and 
trailing edge. The root is the part of the wing attached to 
the fuselage. The tip is the edge of the wing farthest 
from the fuselage. The leading edge is the curved front 
edge of the wing. The top of the wing thickens from the 
leading edge and then slopes back to the knifelike trail- 
ing edge. On most airplanes, the wing tips are slightly 
higher than the wing roots. Such wings are called dihe- 
dral wings. Many planes have a /ow-wing design—that is, 
the wing is joined to the lower part of the fuselage. In 
planes of mid-wing design, the wing is attached about 
halfway up the side of the fuselage. High-wing planes 
have the wing near the top. In planes of straight-wing de- 
sign, the wing's leading edge and the fuselage form a 
right angle. Most planes have this design because it per- 
forms well at both high and low speeds. 

Many high-speed airplanes, especially jets, have a 
sweptwing. Such a wing, also called a swept-back wing, 
slants backward from the root to the tip. A few planes 
have a wing that is swept forward. A delta wing is 
shaped like a triangle. The root may be almost as long as 
the fuselage, and the leading edge is deeply swept-back. 
This design provides for both high speed and great lift. 

Most airplane wings have movable control surfaces 
that help balance the plane in flight. The af/erons are 
hinged sections along the trailing edge of the wing. 
They can be moved up or down to control the plane's 
lateral stability (balance from side to side). The ailerons 
are used to make the plane bank (tilt) to the right or to 
the left for a turn. When one aileron is raised, the other 
is lowered. On most planes, each aileron has a small 


McDonnell Douglas Corporation 


V/STOL’s, or Vertical Short 
Take- Off and Landing planes, 
can take off and land without 
runways or on short ones. 
These planes can land easily 
on ships and can also use 
small airfields in large cities 
or in rural areas, /eft 





214 Airplane 


The parts of an airplane 


This drawing shows the parts of a light plane, a Piper Cherokee. The basic parts are the wing, fuse- 


lage (body), tail, landing gear, and engine. Some other parts, such as the ribs and spars in the wing, 
are structural. Still other parts, including the ailerons, flaps, rudder, and stabilator, are used to con- 
trol the plane. The drawing also shows the wing's root, tip, and leading and trailing edges. 


Wing as 


™ 


——Right aileron 


Right flap 


Antenna 


Leading edge \ == Trailing edge 


Propeller 


Main spar PE 


Engine a7 
anding gear 





hinged section called a trim tab. A pilot uses the trim 
tabs to regulate the pressure that must be applied to 
other controls in keeping the plane in trim (balance) in 
flight. There are usually trim tabs on the movable parts 
of the tail as well as on the ailerons. 

Many airplanes have flaps. These hinged sections 
along the trailing edge of the wing are near the root. The 
flaps are lowered to help increase the plane's lift during 
take-off and to increase the plane’s drag during landing. 

Some planes have additional wing controls. A spoiler 
is a plate on the upper part of each side of the wing. A 
pilot can raise both spoilers to act as air brakes. If the pi- 
lot raises the spoiler on one side only, it makes the plane 
bank in that direction. Some airplanes have spoilers in- 
stead of ailerons. A s/atis a hinged section on the lead- 
ing edge of the wing. At low speeds, the slats automati- 
cally slant forward and help the wing provide extra lift. A 
slotis an opening behind the leading edge near each 
wing tip. Slots also help produce more lift at low speeds. 

Many airplanes have their engines on or in the wing. 
The engines are enclosed in metal casings called na- 
celles (nuh SEHLZ) Most wings also have space inside 
for fuel tanks and landing gear. Various lights are also lo- 
cated on the plane's wing. For example, each wing tip 
has a colored navigation light also called a position light 
The light on the plane’s left wing tip is red, and the light 
on the right wing tip is green. By noting the position of 


Ribs “SS a 


WORLD BOOK tllustration by Tom Morgan, courtesy of Piper Aircraft Corp. 


Rotating 
beacon 
light 


Stabilator 
(stabilizer and elevator) 


Fuselage 


_—_— 


SS. Left flap 


7 Navigation light 


these two lights, a person can tell the direction in which 
a plane is traveling. 

The fuselage of an airplane extends from the nose to 
the tail. Most airplane bodies have a tubelike shape and 
are covered with a lightweight aluminum skin. The name 
fuselage comes from the French word fuselé, which 
means spindle-shaped. The engine ot most single-en- 
gine planes is in the front part of the fuselage. However, 
some multiengine jet planes have their engines at the 
rear of the fuselage. 

The fuselage houses the controls, crew, passengers, 
and cargo. In the smallest airplanes, the fuselage con- 
tains a cockpit with room for only the pilot, or for the pi- 
lot and one passenger. In most planes that carry from 
two to six people, the pilot and passengers sit together . 
in a single cabin. Most large planes have a cockpit for | 
the crew and a cabin for the passengers and cargo. In | 
enormous planes, such as the Boeing 747 and the | 
McDonnell Douglas MD-11, the cabin has separate 
decks (floors) for the passengers and cargo. 

The tail, also called the empennage fehm PEHN ahj), is 
the rear part of an airplane. It helps guide the plane and | 
keep it balanced in flight, much as feathers do on an ar- 
row. Most tails consist of a vertical finand rudder and a 
horizontal stabilizer and elevator. The fin stands upright 
and does not move. It keeps the rear of the plane from 


swinging to the left or right. The rudder is hinged to the 
Text continued on page 216. 


eee 


Airplane 215 


Wing, tail, and landing gear designs 


WORLD BOOK diagrams 


Wings have various shapes, depending on the planes for which they are designed. Straight wings 
perform the best at both high and low speeds. Sweptwings (also called swept-back wings), swept- 
forward wings, and delta wings are used on high-speed jets. Delta wings also provide great lift. 








| Straight wing Swept-back wing Swept-forward wing Delta wing 


Tails. The fin and rudder, which make up the vertical surfaces of the tail, may be at a right angle to 
the fuselage or swept-back. Some planes have twin or triple fins. The stabilizer and elevator, the 
horizontal surfaces of the tail, are near the top of the vertical surfaces in a T-tail and attached to the 
fuselage in an anhedral tail. A V-tail has two fins in a V shape, each with an elevator and trim tab. 












Twin 
assembly 









Swept-back 
assembly 


Right-angle 
assembly 


T assembly ae 
V assembly 





Anhedral 
assembly 


Landing gears. Some planes have a faf/-wheel landing gear—1 wheel under the tail and 1 under 
each side of the fuselage or wing. Most planes have a tricycle landing gear—1 to 4 wheels under the 
nose and 2 to 20 under the midfuselage or 1 or 4 wheels under the nose and 1 to 10 under each 
side of the wing. 


Tricycle, or nose-wheel, landing gear 


Tail-wheel landing gear 
(side view and bottom view) 


(side view and bottom view) 





216 Airplane 


rear edge of the fin and can be moved from side to side. 
It helps control the plane during a turn. 

The stabilizer is like a small wing in the tail. It prevents 
the tail from bobbing up and down and so keeps the 
plane flying at a steady altitude. The elevator is hinged to 
the rear edge of the stabilizer. A pilot moves the elevator 
up or down to raise or lower the plane's nose. 

Many modern airplanes have a stab//ator instead of a 
stabilizer and an elevator. A stabilator is a single solid 
unit that moves up or down. Almost all planes have a 
trim tab on the elevator or stabilator, and some have a 
trim tab on the rudder. 

Tails have various shapes and arrangements. On some 





planes, the fin and rudder stand upright at a right angle 
to the fuselage. On other planes, they slant back at a 
sharp angle. Most jet planes with engines at the rear of 
the fuselage have their horizontal stabilizer and elevator 
mounted across or near the top of a tall vertical fin and 
rudder. Some light airplanes have a V-tail. This type of 
tail consists of two fins in a V-shape with an elevator and 
a trim tab attached to each fin. 

The landing gear, also called the undercarriage, con- 
sists of the wheels or floats upon which an airplane 
moves on the ground or water. The landing gear also 
supports the weight of a plane on the ground or water. 

Landplanes have two main types of landing gear. In 


Raytheon Aircraft 


Instrument panels range 
from a relatively compact pan- 
el in the cockpit of a single- 
engine plane, /eft to a vast 
array of dials, switches, and 
electronic displays that ex- 
tend over the front, ceiling, 
and side walls of the flight 
deck of a Boeing 747 jumbo 
jet, below left 


The Boeing Company 





some light planes, landing gear consists of a wheel un- 
der each side of the wing or front part of the fuselage 
and a third wheel under the tail. Most airplanes, howev- 
er, have a tricycle landing gear. On light planes, it con- 
sists of a wheel under the nose and two wheels under 
the midfuselage or one under each side of the wing. 
Many large airplanes have a tricycle landing gear made 
up of (1)a main gear with from 1 to 10 wheels under 
each side of the wing or from 2 to 20 wheels under the 
midfuselage and (2) a nose gear with 2 or 4 wheels. 

Landing gear may be fixed or retractable. Fixed land- 
ing gear remains extended in flight. The extended gear 
increases air resistance and thus slows down the plane. 
Retractable landing gear can be retracted (drawn back) 
into either the wing or the fuselage after take-off. Most 
high-speed planes use retractable landing gear. 

The watertight body of a flying boat serves as both 
landing gear and cabin. Floats serve as the landing gear 
for floatplanes. Amphibians, which operate from land or 
water, have retractable wheels in their floats or hull. 

The controls and instruments. Inside the cockpit, 
ithe pilot has a variety of controls, instruments, and navi- 
gation aids. Most planes have a yoke (control wheel) that 
operates the ailerons and elevator. A few special types of 
planes, such as fighters and spray planes, have a control 
stick instead of a yoke. Two rudder pedals on the floor 
control the rudder. Various engine instruments display 
information on the fuel supply, oil pressure, and other 
conditions affecting the engine. Flight instruments show 
the plane’s speed, altitude, and attitude (position in rela- 
tion to the horizon). 

Some airplanes have an automatic pilot, also called an 
autopilot This device is connected to the airplane's con- 
trols and automatically keeps the plane on course. 

Propellers, also called airscrews, move turboprop 
planes and planes with reciprocating engines through 
the air. On most such planes, each propeller has its own 
engine. However, a few planes have coaxial propellers— 
two propellers turned by a single engine. On most sin- 
gle-engine planes, the engine and a single propeller are 
mounted at the front of the fuselage. Most propeller- 
driven planes with more than one engine have their en- 
gines and propellers on the wing. 

Small planes have a two- or three-bladed propeller. 
Larger planes have propellers with up to six blades. 
Many planes have controllable-pitch propellers. A pilot 
can change the angle of the blades on these propellers 
in flight. A particular blade angle is best suited to a par- 
ticular speed or maneuver. With the blades at the proper 
angle, the plane operates most efficiently. On fixed-pitch 
propellers, the angle of the blades cannot be changed. 
Constant-speed propellers adjust their blade angle auto- 
matically and so keep the plane's engine speed steady 
during any maneuver. 

The blades of feathering propellers can be turned to a 
right angle so that their edges are parallel to the plarie’s 
flight path. If a plane’s engine is disabled, a pilot angles a 
feathering propeller to decrease air resistance. This ac- 
tion also keeps the wind from spinning the propeller 
and so prevents possible damage to the engine. 


Power for flight 


An airplane's engine produces the power that makes 
the plane move fast enough to fly. Airplanes use three 








Airplane 217 


Airplane propellers 
WORLD BOOK diagrams; courtesy of Hartzell Propeller, Inc. 


Propeller designs vary according to the type of plane. 
On most light planes, propellers have two or three 
blades. On large planes, they have three to six blades. 


Two-bladed propeller Four-bladed propeller 


4 
@ 
\ 
u 


A propeller blade resembles a plane wing. Like a wing, 
it has a tip, root, leading edge, and trailing edge. The 
blades are attached to an engine-driven shaft by a Aub. 






Three-bladed 
propeller 


Tip Trailing edge 





Leading edge 


A feathering propeller has blades that can be turned 
on edge if the engine fails. This action reduces air resist- 
ance and stops the propeller from spinning. 






Before feathering Feathered 






Leading edge 


main types of engines: (1) reciprocating engines, (2) jet 
engines, and (3) rocket engines. Reciprocating engines 
are the heaviest and least powerful of these engines, and 
rocket engines are the most powerful. Most small air- 
planes and many large ones have reciprocating engines. 
Nearly all newer airliners and some private planes have 
jet engines. Rocket engines are used mainly for research. 
Reciprocating engines, also called piston engines, 
are the most widely used type of airplane engine. Air- 
planes that use reciprocating engines also have one or 
more propellers. The engine turns the propeller, which 


moves the plane through the air. 
Text continued on page 220 


—E———— a  aSSSSS.SaSa.aa__qc 


















218 Airplane SS 
Parts of a passenger jet airplane Lo 
Aileron 


A large jet airliner can fly hundreds of passengers long distances. This drawing 
shows the features of a Boeing 777-200, one of the largest twin-engine jetliners. 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Kim Downing 


The tail Flap 
The tail helps guide the plane and keeps it 

balanced in flight. The fin keeps the rear of 

the plane from swinging to the left or right. 


The rudder helps control the plane during a Wing control surfaces 
turn. The stabilizers prevent the tail from Each side of a jetliner’s wing has movable surfaces 
bobbing up and down. that help control the plane in flight The a/lerons are 
used to make the plane bank (tip) to the right or left 
Fin for a turn. The flaps can be lowered to increase the 
plane's lift during take-off or its drag during landing. 
<i The pilot can raise the spoilers to act as air brakes. 


Passenger 







Le 


Emergency 


door 
Horizontal 
stabilizer 


Baggage 

Baggage handlers pile suitcases and other checked 
luggage into large luggage containers, which are 
then loaded into the cargo hold of the aircraft. The 
777-200 carries 32 luggage containers that hold more 


| 2a than 5,000 cubic feet (140 cubic meters) of baggage. 


Luggage 
container 


Elevator 














Facts in brief about the Boeing 777-200 


Length: 209 ft 1 in. (63.7 m) 

Wingspan: 199 ft. 11 in. (60.9 m) 

Maximum weight at take-off: 632,500 Ib. (286,900 kg) 
Range: 7,230 nautical mi. (13,390 km) 

Cruising speed: 550 mph (890 kph) 





Two classes 


Flexible seating 


Seating arrangements vary among airlines. A 777-200 may carry 
up to 440 passengers. But the maximum number varies depend- 





30 first class 345 economy class 


ing on the seating plan. These diagrams show three common 
seating plans. 375 passengers 
One class The Boeing Company = Three classes 

7405 3A: 












24 first class 54 business class 227 economy class 
418 passengers 305 passengers 


















Airplane 219 


Flight deck 

Instrument panels in the flight deck display 
Fuel tanks information that helps the pilot and copilot 
A jetliner’s main fuel tanks are in- Engines keep the airplane on course and monitor the 
side the right and left wing and in Most jetliners have turbofan engines, jet operation of the engines. The 777-200 has six 
the center section of the plane. The — engines with a propellerlike fan at the large display screens that provide navigation 
777-200's tanks hold 31,000 gallons _—‘ front that draws in huge amounts of air. information and engine data. 
(117,000 liters) of aviation fuel. The 777-200 has two large turbofan en- Flight deck 










gines that produce up to 84,000 pounds 
(374,000 newtons) of thrust each. 


2 \\ Engine 










Nose landing 
gear 





Landing gear 
Most jetliners have retractable 
landing gear, which tucks away 
during flight. The 777-200’s main 
landing gear is under the wing and 
not shown here. It has 12 wheels. 


Meals in the air 
Airline catering companies prepare and re- 
frigerate hundreds of meals and load them 
onto the plane at the airport. At mealtime, 
flight attendants reheat the food in mi- 
crowave ovens in the galleys. 






rgejetiners | 
The twin-engine Boeing 777-200 is slightly larger than two other 
wide-bodied jets that serve similar markets, the four-engine Air- 
bus A340-200 and three-engine McDonnell Douglas MD-11. 






Boeing 777-200 





220 Airplane 


A reciprocating engine in an airplane works much like 
One in an automobile. Both burn a mixture of gasoline 
and air inside cylinders. The burning fuel-air mixture 
forms a fine spray, which explodes. The explosion drives 
pistons inside the cylinders up and down. This pumping 
motion rotates a crankshaft. In an airplane, the rotating 
crankshaft turns the propeller. In an automobile, the 
crankshaft turns other parts of the car that make the 
wheels spin. 

Reciprocating engines in airplanes differ from those 
in automobiles in some ways. in most airplane engines, 
for example, the cylinders are arranged ina circle or 
Opposite each other. in automobile engines, they are 
arranged ina single line or a V-shape. In addition, most 
airplane engines are cooled by air, but most automobile 
cooling systems use a mixture of water and antifreeze. 

The power of reciprocating engines is measured in 
units of horsepower or kilowatts. Most reciprocating en- 
gines made for airplanes range from 65 horsepower (50 
kilowatts) for small single-engine planes to about 400 
horsepower (300 kilowatts) for larger two-engine planes. 
The most powerful reciprocating engines ever used on 
an airplane were the 3,650-horsepower (2,722-kilowatt) 
engines of the huge B-36 bomber of the late 1940's. 
Large, high-speed airplanes no longer use such power- 
ful reciprocating engines. These airplanes are powered 
by jet engines, which weigh less than reciprocating en- 
gines but produce much greater power. Reciprocating 
engines are still used for most light airplanes because 
they work better than jet engines at low speeds. 

Jet engines enable large airplanes to travel long dis- 
tances at high speeds. But to be useful in an airplane, a 
jet engine must also operate well at low speeds for safe 
take-off and landing. Airplanes use three main types of 
jet engines. They are (1) turbojets;(2) turbofans, also 
called fanjets; and (3) turboprops. 

The turbojet was the first successful jet engine and is 
still used on some airplanes. Like other jet engines, the 
turbojet takes air in through the front and burns it with 
fuel. This process forms a powerful jet exhaust. The ex- 
haust moves backward through the engine at tremen- 
dous speed, which causes the engine to move forward 
at an equally high speed. Before the jet exhaust passes 
out the engine's tail pipe, it spins a device called a fur- 
bine, which consists of a set of blades attached to a shaft. 
The turbine runs the various parts of the engine. See Jet 
propulsion (How jet propulsion works). 

Almost all new airliners have turbofan engines, which 
are an improvement On the turbojet. A turbofan works 
much like a turbojet, but it has a fan at the front that 
draws in huge amounts of air. Only part of the air is 


Four forces act on an airplane in flight: (1) 
gravity, (2) lift, (3) drag, and (4) thrust. Gravity is 
the natural force that pulls a plane toward the 
ground. Lift opposes gravity and pushes the 
plane upward. Drag is the natural force of air 
opposing a plane's forward movement. 
Thrust opposes drag and moves the plane 
forward. 


(a Drag 


burned with the fuel to form the jet exhaust. The rest is 
added to the exhaust as it passes out the tail pipe. The 
resulting exhaust is much more powerful and much 
cooler than that of a turbojet. In addition, turbofans use 
less fuel than turbojets do, make much less noise, and 
operate better at low speeds. 

Turboprop planes use turbojet engines to turn pro- 
pellers. The name is a combination of the words turbojet 
and propeller. Turboprop planes combine the tremen- 
dous power of the jet engine with the propeller’s useful 
ability to fly at low speed. 

Rocket engines work much like jet engines, except 
that they do not need a supply of oxygen from outside 
the engine. A rocket engine operates best at extremely 
high speeds. it also burns much fuel, and so it is expen- 
sive to operate. In addition, the possibility of explosion 
makes rocket engines too dangerous to power passen- 
ger airplanes. But a few jet and turboprop military 
planes use small rockets to help them take off quickly 
with heavy loads or on short runways. The rockets are at- 
tached to the plane's body or under its wing. This system 
is called Rocket-Assisted Take-Off (RATO). Rocket en- 
gines have powered many supersonic test planes, such 
as the Bell X-1 and North American X-15. See Rocket. 


Principles of flight 


Four basic forces govern the flight of an airplane: (1) 
gravity, (2) lift, (3) drag, and (4) thrust. Gravity is the natural 
force that pulls a plane toward the ground. Lift is the 
force that pushes a plane upward against the force of 
gravity. It is created by the plane's wing as it moves 
through the air. Drag is the natural force of air that re- 
sists an airplane's forward movement. Thrust is the force 
that moves a plane forward. Thrust is created by a 
plane's propeller or by its jet engines. 

Gravity and lift are opposing forces, as are drag and 
thrust. When a plane's lift equals the force of gravity and 
its thrust equals the drag, the plane is in level, cruising 
flight. When one or more of the four forces change, the 
plane begins to change its altitude, direction, or speed. 

Gravity and lift. Gravity tends to keep an airplane on 
the ground or to pull it to the earth when in flight The 
force of gravity on the ground equals the weight of the 
plane on the ground. Fora plane to become airborne 
and to stay in the air, its wing must create a lifting force 
greater than the downward force of gravity. 

Lift is created by a change of air pressure around an 
airplane's wing as the plane moves. When a plane stands 
on the ground, the air pressure above and below its 
wing is the same. As the plane starts to move forward, 
air begins to flow over and under the wing. The air mov- 







WORLD BOOK diagram 
~~ o— 
Lift 
<> ‘es Thrust a 7: 
| @ 









ing over the curved upper surface must flow in a curve 
and, as a result, must travel farther. Because this air trav- 
els farther, its speed increases and its pressure drops. 
The air moving under the flat bottom of the wing moves 
in a straight line. Its speed and pressure are not changed 
by the wing. Because air in a high-pressure area always 
moves toward a low-pressure area, the air under the 
wing tries to move upward to the air over the wing. It is 
unable to do so, however, because the wing is in the 
way. Instead of meeting the low-pressure area, the air 
creates a pushing force that lifts the wing upward. 

The faster the airplane moves, the greater the lift its 
wing produces. As an airplane increases its speed down 
the runway before take-off, its wing builds up more and 
more lift. The air pressure beneath the wing finally be- 
comes greater than the weight of the plane, and so the 


How thrust is produced 


Propellers produce thrust in gasoline-powered and turboprop 
airplanes. Jet engines produce thrust in jet planes. 
WORLD BOOK dtagrams 


Direction of airflow 
around the blade 











Air pressure 
drops 


Thrust 


Air pressure 
remains the 
same 


Propeller blades have a front surface curved like the 
upper surface of an airplane wing. As the propeller spins, 
the air pressure in front of the blades drops. The air in 
the high-pressure area behind the blades moves toward 
the low-pressure area in front and so produces thrust 
The faster the propeller spins, the greater the thrust. 


Combustion chamber Compressor 


_—=ac mM 
High- Air enters 
velocity at low 
jet velocity 
exhaust | 

L__ aS 


= Thrust 





Turbine 


A jet engine takes in air at low ve/ocity(speed). A com- 
pressor increases the pressure of the air. The com: — 
pressed air is then burned with jet fuel ina combustion 
chamber, forming a high-velocity exhaust. The exhaust 
moves rapidly backward through the engine, which caus 
es the engine to move forward. The exhaust also spins a 
turbine, which runs the engine parts. 


Airplane 221 


Lift 


8 See 9 ee ee 


¢<————— Air pressure remains the same 
¢ ee 


Direction of airflow 


Direction of flight 


WORLD BOOK diagram 


Lift is created by a drop in air pressure over a plane's wing. The 
wing has a curved upper surface. As the plane moves forward, 
the pressure of the air that rushes over this curved surface falls. 
Air in a high-pressure area always moves toward a low-pressure 
area. The air in the high-pressure area below the wing thus rises 
toward the low-pressure area above it and lifts the airplane. 


force of the lift becomes greater than the force of gravi- 
ty. The plane then takes off. 

Drag and thrust. A wing can produce lift only if it is 
moving forward through the air. A plane needs thrust to 
create the required forward movement 

In a jet airplane, the rapid movement of gases through 
the jet engine produces thrust. Propellers produce 
thrust in turboprop planes and planes powered by re- 
ciprocating engines. Propeller blades are shaped much 
like airplane wings. As the propeller spins, the air pres- 
sure on the front surface of the blades is reduced. The 
higher pressure air on the back of the blades pushes to- 
ward the lower pressure area on the front, moving the 
plane forward. The faster the jet engine works or the 
propeller spins, the greater the force of thrust. 

To reduce drag, engineers design airplane bodies to 
be as streamlined as possible. They make the bodies 
sleek and trim, and they design every part on the outside 
of the aircraft so that it will slip through the air easily and 
smoothly. 

Changing altitude. An airplane cruising in level flight 
has lift balanced against gravity and thrust balanced 
against drag. To enable the airplane to descend, the pilot 
must decrease engine power. The propeller or engines 
slow down, reducing the plane's thrust. The reduction in 
thrust also reduces lift, and the airplane begins to de- 
scend. At the same time, drag increases its effect, which 
further slows the airplane and thus adds to the rate at 
which the plane descends. 

To climb, the pilot increases the engine power, creat- 
ing more thrust. As a result, the plane moves faster 
through the air. The faster speed increases lift, and the 
airplane begins to climb. However, climbing adds more 
drag, and so the plane needs still more lift. To get addi- 
tional lift, the pilot increases the airplane's ang/e of 
attach—that is, the angle at which the wing cuts through 
the air. The pilot uses the controls to make the aircraft s 
nose point up slightly so that the wing is at an upward 
angle to the path of the plane s flight. The flow of air 
over the upper part of the wing gains speed and pro- 
duces added lift. 





222 Airplane 


An airplane's 


An airplane has three basic movements: (1) pitch, (2) rofl, and (3) yaw. The airplane makes each move- 
basic movements 


ment on an imaginary axis. Pitch is the plane's movement on its /atera/ axis as the nose Moves up or 
down. Roll is the plane's movement on its /ongitudinal axis as one wing tip dips lower than the oth- 
er. Yaw is the plane s movement on its vertical axis as the nose turns left or right. 


WORLD BOOK diagrams 


Pitch Roll 


= 






Lateral 
axis 


Changing direction. A pilot turns a plane by banking 
(tilting) the wing left or right. Lift always occurs at a right 
angle to the surface of the wing. It is the lifting force of 
the wing, occurring at an angle to the horizon, that 
makes the airplane turn. The rudder is not used to turn 

- the plane but only to balance the turn. 

When a plane makes a turn, the amount of lift oppos- 
ing the force of gravity is reduced. Unless the pilot 
brings lift and gravity back into balance, the plane be- 
gins to lose altitude. To produce greater lift, the pilot 
raises the nose slightly to increase the angle of attack. In 
making a steep turn, a pilot increases the angle of attack 
and the engine power at the same time to keep the 
plane from losing altitude. 

For more information on how an airplane flies and on 
how basic forces of gravity, lift, drag, and thrust act ona 


Horizon indicator Altimeter Vertical-speed 


indicator 


Air-speed indicator 

Clock 
Turn-and-bank 
indicator 


Gyrocompass 


Yoke 


Contrals 


Radio and 
navigation 
equipment 


Tachometer 


Flight instruments 


Right rudder pedal 


Engine instruments Left rudder pedal 















re Vertical axis 
Longitudinal 
axis 


plane in flight, see the World Book article on Aero- 
dynamics. 


Flying an airplane 


An airplane is a mechanical device that obeys me- 
chanical laws. To become a skilled airplane pilot, a 
person must understand these laws and the laws of 
aerodynamics. The person must also have training and 
experience in flying an airplane. 

Flying an airplane differs from driving an automobile 
in many ways. To make a turn in an automobile, for ex- 
ample, the driver simply turns the steering wheel. But to 
make a turn in an airplane, the pilot must operate several 
controls at once. 

Basic movements and controls. An airplane has 
three basic movements: (1) pitch, (2) roll, and (3) yaw. 


Magnetic compass 


Throttle 


————— = = 


Left rudder pedal — Right rudder pedal 


WORLD BOOK diagram, courtesy Piper Aircraft Corp. 


Basic cockpit controls and instruments. Both the pilot's and copilots yokes control the ailerons 
and elevator. Their pedals operate the rudder. The throttle controls engine power and speed. Flight 
instruments, such as the air-speed indicator and altimeter, help keep the plane on course. Engine in- 
struments, such as the oil-pressure gauge and tachometer, measure engine operations. 








Pitch is the motion of a plane as its nose moves up or 
down. A plane rolls when it banks—that is, when one 
wing tip dips lower than the other. Yaw is a plane’s mo- 
tion as the nose moves left or right. A pilot uses the con- 
trols to make these movements and to adjust for them. 

An airplane has many controls, but four of them are 
basic. They are (1) the elevator, (2) the rudder, (3) the 
ailerons, and (4) the throttle. The elevator and rudder are 
parts of the tail assembly. The ailerons are on each side 
of the wing. A system of cables, rods, and pulleys leads 
from these outside flight controls to the pilot's controls 
in the cockpit. The pilot's yoke or stick controls the 
ailerons and elevator. The rudder pedals control the rud- 
der. The pilot uses the throttle to control the engine 
speed and power. 








Elevator neutral Elevator down 


Downward pitch 


Airplane 223 


The yoke and rudder pedals make the plane pitch, 
roll, or yaw. The yoke moves forward and backward and 
turns from side to side. Pushing the yoke forward or 
pulling it backward moves the elevator up or down and 
makes the plane pitch up or down. When the yoke is 
pushed forward, the elevator lowers and the nose drops. 
When the yoke is pulled back, the elevator moves up, 
forcing the nose up. Turning the yoke from side to side 
raises or lowers the ailerons and makes the plane roll. 
When the yoke is turned to the right, the right-wing 
aileron goes up and the left-wing aileron goes down. 
The plane then rolls to the right. Turning the yoke to the 
left makes the plane roll to the left. The pilot operates 
the two rudder pedals to make the plane yaw. Pushing 


on the left pedal swings the rudder to the left, causing 
Text continued on page 225, 


Upward pitch 





Elevator up 
WORLD BOOK diagrams 


To make a plane pitch, the pilot lowers or raises the elevator. The pilot lowers the elevator by 


pushing the yoke forward and raises it by pulling the yoke back. 


Left bank 
Right aileron 






Left aileron up 


Straight and level flight 


Ailerons neutral 


Left aileron Seeoan 


down 





Right aileron up 


WORLD BOOK diagrams 


To make a plane roll, or bank, the pilot operates the ailerons. To make a left bank, for example, 
the pilot turns the yoke to the left, which raises the left aileron and lowers the right one. 








Straight and 
level flight 


Rudder turned 


Rudder neutral to the right 








Rudder turned 
to the left 


WORID BOOK diagrams 


To make a plane yaw, the pilot operales the two pedals that control the rudder. The pilot presses 
the right pedal to swing the rudder to the right and the left pedal to swing it to the left. 


le 


224 Airplane 


How a pilot uses angle of attack 


Level flight at low speed, high angle of attack 
High angle of attack 










Chord line 
Angle — 


Flight path Flight path 
Moderate angle of attack 


angie Flight path 


Low angle of attack 





Level flight at cruising speed, low angle of attack 


Angle of attack is the angle formed by a plane's 
flight path and an imaginary chord line through 
the wing. A pilot raises the elevator to increase 
the angle of attack. In so doing, the pilot gives the 
plane added lift. But if the angle becomes too 
great, lift decreases dangerously. 


af 
Flight path 


For level flight, a plane must keep lift balanced against gravity. If its speed is re- 
duced, the plane loses lift To regain lift, the pilot increases the angle of attack. 
As speed increases, the angle of attack can be reduced. 


Climbing before leveling off 
Full power 

Elevator halfway up 
Flaps neutral 


Take- off Ke SZ 
Nose lift off Full power & 
Moving down the runway Full power Elevator halfway up 
Full power Elevator up Flaps lowered slightly 


Elevator neutral Flaps down 
Flaps lowered slightly 


(eee Wind direction 


I 


Fightpath <> Coo 












Runway 
For take-off, a plane moves down the runway at high speed. The wind rushes around the wing, 
building up lift. To get more lift, the pilot raises the elevator, increasing the angle of attack The pilot 
may also lower the flaps. When lift becomes greater than gravity, the plane takes off. 
Approach glide 
C7 Power reduced to glide speed 
Elevator neutral 
\ Flaps dawn meee Wind direction 
Steeper approach glide 
Power further reduced 
Elevator slightly raised Final glide, or flare-out 
Flaps down Power nearly off 
Elevator nearly up Touching down 
Flight path Flaps down Power off 
Elevator up 
Flaps down 


———_* . | 


Runway 


WORLD BOOK diagrams 


For landing, a plane's speed must be reduced as much as possible, and so the pilot decreases the 
engine power. But reducing speed also reduces lift The plane must recover enough lift to counter- 
act gravity. To recover lift, the pilot increases the angle of attack and lowers the flaps. 












the plane's nose to swing left also. Pushing on the right 
pedal swings the rudder and nose to the right. 

The pilot also has cockpit controls for the trim tabs on 
the ailerons, elevator, and rudder. The trim tabs help 
keep a plane balanced in spite of changes in the plane's 
air speed or its center of gravity. A plane's center of 
gravity changes many times in flight. For example, the 
center of gravity changes as the fuel in the plane's tanks 
is used. To keep the plane from pitching up or down be- 
cause its center of gravity is changing, the pilot would 
have to keep constant pressure on the yoke. But if the pi- 
lot adjusts the elevator trim tabs, they adjust the elevator 
to handle the change in the center of gravity and thus 
help keep the plane balanced. 

Proper use of the controls. To make any maneuver, 
an airplane pilot never uses only one basic control. To 
make a left turn, for example, a pilot does not simply 
press down on the left rudder pedal. Using only this one 
control would send the airplane into a left skid. An air- 
plane in a skid does not complete its turn. It returns to its 
original course of flight as soon as the pilot releases the 
rudder pedal. 

To make a left turn in level flight, a pilot must (1) turn 
the yoke to the left to raise the left aileron and lower the 
right aileron for a left bank; (2) press down on the left 
rudder pedal to make the plane's nose swing to the left; 
and (3) pull back on the yoke to bring up the elevator 
and raise the nose, which increases the wing's angle of 
attack. In a steep turn, the pilot might also need to push 
the throttle forward to increase engine power. The pilot 
makes all these movements at the same time, but they 
soon become second nature for an experienced pilot. 


How an airplane 
is turned 


Airplane 225 


For all other airplane maneuvers —from taking off to 
landing—a pilot must also keep all the forces of flight in 
balance, just as in making a turn. By using all the basic 
controls at once, a pilot balances lift against gravity and 
thrust against drag. 

Stalling occurs when the wing's angle of attack be- 
comes so great that the plane loses lift and begins to fall. 
If a pilot brings the plane's nose up so that the wing is at 
an angle of more than 15 to 20 degrees to the flight path, 
the air flowing over the wing will bubble wildly. As a re- 
sult, the plane stalls. The pilot can bring the plane out of 
the stall by lowering the nose and letting gravity build 
up the speed needed for lift. The pilot can also increase 
engine power to regain flying speed. 

Flying by instruments. A pilot can maneuver a plane 
without being able to see anything but the plane's instru- 
ments. This skill is necessary when flying in clouds, fog, 
or heavy rain. If a pilot cannot see the horizon or the 
ground below, it is difficult to know if the plane is on 
course, flying straight or turning, and losing or gaining 
altitude. Cockpit instruments provide this information. In 
addition, the instruments help pilots carry out various 
maneuvers without losing altitude or speed and help 
them land safely. 

Measuring flying speed. A plane's speed is meas- 
ured in several ways. The indicated air speed is the 
speed a pilot reads on an instrument called an air-speed 
indicator. But an air-speed indicator is affected by the 
changes in temperature and air pressure at different alti- 
tudes. As a result, a plane's indicated air speed differs 
from its true air speed and its ground speed. True air 
speed is the speed of the plane in relation to the air 


A pilot must use several controls to make a turn. This plane is beginning a right turn. The pilot has 
raised the right aileron to bank the wing to the right and has also turned the rudder to the right to 


steady the plane's nose. The lift on the left side of the wing has increased and is pulling the plane 
around the turn. But in turning, a plane loses lift The pilot has therefore raised the elevator to in- 
crease the angle of attack. The pilot may also need to increase engine power for added thrust 


Rudder turned 
partly to the right ———— 





Flight » 
path 





Stabilator 
(elevator) 


partly 
raised 


NIN 








Right aileron up 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Tom Morgan; courtesy of Piper Aircraft Corp. 













Left aileron down 


P 


es 


aie 
ee 
! ee, 
Engine power increased wy 





226 Airplane 


through which it is moving. Ground speed is the speed 
of the plane in relation to the earth. A pilot can figure 
true air speed by checking the indicated air speed and 
the outside air temperature. Because the air is usually 
colder at higher altitudes, true air speed increases over 
indicated air speed about 2 percent for every 1,000 feet 
(300 meters) of altitude. For example, if a plane is flying at 
10,000 feet and its air-speed indicator reads 100 mph, the 
plane's true air speed will probably be about 120 mph. A 
pilot can use true air speed to figure the ground speed if 
he or she knows the direction and speed of the wind. 
For example, if the true air speed is 120 mph and the 
plane is flying into a 30-mph headwind, the ground 
speed will be 90 mph. 

A plane's maximum speed, also called top speed, is 
the fastest speed it can reach in level flight. Its best rate 
of climb speed is the speed at which it climbs the fastest. 
Cruising speed is the most suitable speed for long-dis- 
tance flight. Maneuvering speed is the fastest speed at 
which an airplane can be flown in maneuvers or in tur- 
bulence (irregular air flow, often due to stormy weather) 
without endangering its structure. 

Every plane also has a yellow arc speed and a red line 
speed, which are shown on the air-speed indicator. The 
area marked in yellow is a caution area. A pilot should 
not carry out sudden maneuvers or enter turbulence 
while flying at speeds in this range. The area marked in 
red indicates the fastest speed at which the plane can be 
flown under any conditions. 

Every plane has a sta// speed—the speed at which the 
wing loses lift. However, the indicated stall speed tells 
only the speed at which the airplane will stall in level 
flight. If the plane is turning, its stall speed will be higher 
than it is in level flight. 

Learning to fly. The Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) issues private pilot certificates to qualified United 
States citizens who are at least 17 years old. A private pi- 
lot certificate authorizes a person to fly a plane carrying 
passengers without payment for his or her services. 

A person who wants to learn to fly must first get a stu- 
dent pilot certificate by passing a simple medical exami- 
nation. Student pilots may be any age, but they must be 
at least 16 to fly so/o (alone). 

Student pilots must successfully complete a course of 
flight instruction consisting of a minimum of 35 to 40 
hours of flying time. About half the time is spent in dual 
flight instruction, with an instructor accompanying the 
student in the plane. The rest of the time is solo practice 
flight, with only the student pilot in the plane. Students 
must complete about half their solo hours in cross-coun- 
try flights outside their local airport area. Before every 
cross-country flight, students check the weather and plot 
their course. Student pilots must also pass both a written 
examination and a flight examination before being is- 
sued a private pilot certificate. 

In Canada, the Department of Transport issues private 
pilot licenses to people who are at least 17 years old and 
who pass Certain physical, written, and flight examina- 
tions. A student pilot must have a student pilot permit 

Many student pilots take ground instruction as well as 
flight instruction. Ground instruction includes courses in 
aerodynamics, meteorology (the study of the weather), 
navigation, and flying regulations. Students must have 
good knowledge ofall these subjects to pass their pilot 


examinations. However, students are not required to 
take formal instruction in these subjects and may, in- 
stead, use home-study materials. 


Air navigation 


Air navigation is the means by which pilots determine 
their plane's location in the air and direct its route of 
flight. Pilots use charts, compasses, radio systems, and 
computerized instruments to navigate accurately. 

The three chief methods of air navigation are (1) pi- 
lotage, (2) dead reckoning, and (3) radio navigation. Most 
pilots use a combination of all three methods. 

Pilotage, also called piloting, is the simplest and most 
common method of air navigation. Using this method, a 
pilot keeps on course by following a series of landmarks 
on the ground. Before take-off, the pilot plots his or her 
course on an aeronautical chart, a map that shows the lo- 
cation of various landmarks, such as bridges, highways, 
railroad tracks, rivers, and towns. An aeronautical chart 
also shows routes for aircraft, landing fields, and radio 
stations that broadcast air navigation signals. The U.S. 
Department of Commerce publishes such charts for all 
parts of the United States. 

As the plane flies over each landmark on the plotted 
course, the pilot checks it off on the chart. If the plane 
does not pass over a landmark, the pilot must adjust the 
path of flight to resume its preplanned course. 

Dead reckoning is a way of navigating when there 
are few or no visible landmarks. It demands more skill 
and experience than pilotage does. An aviator uses dead 
reckoning when flying over forests, deserts, large bod- 
ies of water, or heavy clouds. This method of navigation 
requires an aeronautical chart, an accurate clock, a com- 
pass, and a calculator for figuring time, speed, and dis- 
tance. Working with the chart, the pilot plots a route in 
advance. The pilot also figures how long it should take 
to reach the destination while flying at a constant speed. 


a 
rs S Pa 
® ea = 
° 
® ® Pid 
ee ~ e 
5 ° 
*e. = a 
e e 
Plane off course . e 
rm e . e 
| e ° 
e = ® 
i e : .° 
2) | A . ae @ e 
~ _—¥ Se ® Pes 
~ ° © e 
e 2 ® 
© ° 
UJ rq ‘ 
r 
Plane on course i 
rue . i Sy 
GE eecececee ‘er evcoeeeseee = _ > 





an | 
Plane on course | 


) a | 
| | 


= ae lal 
f 
| 


sale 


Plane off course 


e 
® 
e 
e 
| 


feoeaetenvnesene 


WORLD BOOK diagram 


A VOR station sends out rays of radio signals, or radials, in 360 
directions. Eight radials are shown here. A pilot selects a radial to 
follow to or from the station. The plane s VOR equipment indi- 
cates whether the plane is on or off the selected course. 

















The pilot adjusts the course to allow for the wind. 

In the air the pilot watches the compass to keep the 
plane headed in the right direction. The plane should ar- 
rive at the destination when it has flown exactly the 
length of time planned. Dead reckoning is not always a 
successful method of navigation because changing 
winds may drive a plane slightly off course. 

Radio navigation uses signals broadcast from spe- 
cial radio stations. Electronic equipment on the plane 
uses these signals to indicate the location and direction 
of the plane with respect to the transmitting station. 
Radio navigation is used by almost all pilots, especially 
in the United States. There are more than 1,000 radio 
navigation stations throughout the country that guide 
aircraft en route, plus many other stations for navigation 
near airports. When pilots fly in or above the clouds, 
they use the IFR (Mstrument Aight Rules) chart, a map of 
routes between radio navigation stations. 

To navigate by radio, pilots first find out from an aero- 
nautical chart what radio station they should tune to ina 
particular area. The plane’s navigation equipment picks 
up the signal. An indicator needle on the equipment in- 
dicates when the plane is flying on a direct course to or 
from the station. The needle also shows when the plane 
drifts off course so the pilot can correct its direction. 
This system, which is designed for civi/(nonmilitary) air- 
craft, is called VOR (Very High Frequency Omnidirec- 
tional Range). Most VOR stations also transmit signals 
for DME (Distance Measuring Equipment). DME tells the 
pilot how far the aircraft is from the VOR station. Military 
aircraft use a similar system called TACAN (7ACtical Air 
Navigation). A combined civil and military system, called 
VORTAC, is used by both civil and military planes. 

Navigating across oceans requires the use of spe- 
cial systems. Three commonly used systems are (1) iner- 
tial guidance, (2) loran(/ong range navigation), and (3) 
satellite navigation. Many planes also use loran and satel- 
lite navigation for any flight. 

Inertial guidance systems do not rely on any informa- 





Airplane 227 


tion from outside the vehicle. Instead, a computer and 
other devices on board provide the guidance informa- 
tion. The devices measure changes in the plane's speed 
and direction. The computer uses this information to cal- 
culate the vehicle's position and to guide it on course. 

Loran systems use radio signals sent out continuously 
from various maritime transmitting stations. Electronic 
equipment aboard the airplane picks up the signals from 
at least three stations to determine the plane’s location. 

Satellite navigation systems use radio signals that are- 
broadcast from artificial satellites orbiting the earth. The 
signals from at least three satellites are picked up by re- 
ceivers located on the aircraft. The equipment uses this 
information to calculate the plane's location based on 
the distances between the satellites and the receiver. 
Navigation satellites enable airplanes to determine their 
locations within 100 feet (30 meters) or better. In the 
1990's, thousands of planes began to be outfitted with 
receivers that provide access to a satellite system called 
the Global Positioning System (GPS). In the 2000's, satel- 
lite navigation will gradually replace loran. 

Safety. Airplane pilots follow two sets of rules when 
flying. When the weather enables them to see clearly, pi- 
lots usually follow Visual Flight Rules (VFR). They ob- 
serve Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) when they cannot see 
the ground or other aircraft in the sky. However, the U.S. 
government requires all jet airliners to operate under 
Instrument Flight Rules at all times. 

Pilots have various navigation aids that help them take 
off, fly, and land safely. In the United States, one of the 
most important aids is a series of air route traffic control 
centers operated by the federal government. Each cen- 
ter uses radar to make sure all the planes in its vicinity 
are clear of other traffic. In addition, airplanes carry a 
special receiver and transmitter called a radar transpon- 
der. This device receives a radar signal from a control 
center and transmits back a code assigned to the plane 
by the control center. When the signal reaches the 
ground, it identifies the plane and makes the aircraft 


The Boeing Company 


A wind tunnel enables air- 
craft designers and engineers 
to test how a plane will per- 
form under various flying con- 
ditions. Air is forced through 
the tunne! at high speeds to 
study the effects of wind and 
air pressure on a scale model 
of the plane. This wind tunnel 
is operated by Britain's 
Defence Research Agency in 
Farnborough, near London. 





228 Airplane 





The Boeing Company 


Aircraft assembly takes place in some of the largest manufacturing plants in the world, such as 
this huge facility near Everett, Washington, where the Boeing 777 is manufactured. 


show up more clearly on a radar screen, regardless of 
the plane's size. 

Most large and medium-sized airports also have air 
traffic control towers. In the towers, air traffic controllers 
use radio communications and often radar to direct 
planes that are approaching and landing or taking off 
and departing. Most larger airports also have an 
Instrument Landing System (ILS) to guide pilots to the 
runway in bad weather. This system uses horizontal and 
vertical radio beams from the ground to operate an in- 
strument in the cockpit of an airliner. By watching this in- 
strument, pilots can tell their exact position in relation to 
the runway and so can make a safe landing. 


Building an airplane 


In the United States, the Federal Aviation Administra- 
tion makes rules for the design and manufacture of air- 
planes. The agency sets standards that every airplane de- 
signer and manufacturer must meet. A manufacturer 
may not sell a plane until the aircraft receives certifica- 
tion from the FAA. The certification states that the plane 
meets FAA standards for “design, materials, workman- 
ship, construction, and performance. 

Some people build their own airplanes. The FAA sets 
different standards for home-built planes. Such a plane 
receives a certification that specifies (1) where and when 
it may fly and (2) how many passengers it may Carry. 

Design and testing. Designers and engineers begin 
to plan and test a new airplane long before it is ready for 


mass production. Transports and other large planes re- 
quire at least 8 to 10 years of planning. The design de- 
pends largely on how the plane is to be used. Transports 
must be able to carry heavy loads great distances, using 
as little fuel as possible. Light planes must be able to ma- 
neuver easily and to land on shorter runways. All planes 
must have a wing that gives great lift at low speed and 
little drag at high speed. The FAA requires that a wing be 
joined to the fuselage so firmly that it can produce lift 
four to six times the force of gravity on the plane. For ex- 
ample, if a plane weighs 2,000 pounds (910 kilograms), 
its wing must withstand a force of gravity of at least 8,000 
pounds (3,600 kilograms). 

Engineers carefully test the metal, plastics, wood, and 
other materials to be used in a plane. All the materials 
must be able to withstand tremendous air pressures and 
extreme weather conditions. Engineers may use a struc- 
ture called a wind tunne! to test the effects of air flowing 
over the plane at various speeds and altitudes. Today, 
however, many airplane designs are tested using com- 
puters instead of wind tunnels. In addition to these tests, 
engineers build full-sized mock-ups (models) of aircraft 
from wood or metal—often complete in every detail—to 
test the arrangement of seats and equipment. 

After years of planning and research, engineers build 
a prototype (full-sized test model) of the plane. They test 
it thoroughly on the ground, running the engines at high 
speed and taxiing the model along a runway as fast as it 
will go. Usually, engineers build several prototypes to 


a eS ee 


Airplane 229 










—— 


: Flight of Daedalus and Fall of Icarus (1493), a woodcut 
by an unknown German artist: the Science Museum, London 


An ancient Greek story told how Daedalus and his son Icarus 
flew with wings of feathers and wax. But Icarus flew too near the 
sun. His wings melted, and he fell into the sea and drowned. 













fo 
eZ An early design for a flying ma- 
Dae ae chine was drawn about 1500 by 
‘ . Leonardo da Vinci. The machine 


~ 1 had flapping wings. 


the Science Museum, London 


The first human flights were in balloons filled 
with hot air. This balloon, built by the Montgolfier 


ae brothers of France in 1783, carried two passen- 
/ PIR gers about 5 miles (8 kilometers) across Paris. 
¥ 
discover how much wear the plane can take and to test place, the finished airplane rolls off the assembly line. 
various systems. The engine and other parts on some Each new plane receives a complete inspection, and a 
prototypes are tested until they fail. The manufacturer test pilot flies it to make sure the engines and controls 
then tests an experimental plane in flight. Following are in perfect working order. After the plane passes 
these procedures, the FAA reviews every aspect of the these final tests, it is ready for delivery to a customer. 
design, construction, and testing of the aircraft, includ- ros 
ing the flight testing. If the plane meets the FAA‘s strict a 
requirements, the agency gives the manufacturer a type For thousands of years, people dreamed of flying. 
certificate, which allows the plane to be sold. Some even tried to fly by tying feathers to their arms and 
The Boeing 777, which entered service in 1995, was flapping them like wings. But most people believed that 
completely planned with computers. Instead of making flying was beyond the powers of ordinary human be- 
paper drawings or building models, engineers used ings. They told stories of godlike people who could fly 
computers to electronically design and test the entire or who were carried through the air by winged animals. 
plane and ensure that the parts would fit together. The ancient Greeks told a story about an inventor named 
Mass production. Only a few companies manufac- | Daedalus and his son Icarus, both of whom flew with 
ture airplanes. But thousands of factories supply airplane — wings made of feathers and wax. But Icarus flew too 
manufacturers with the parts they need to assemble the close to the sun. The sun's heat melted his wings, and he 
planes. Some suppliers specialize in making such parts fell into the sea and drowned. See Daedalus. 
as fasteners, landing gears, or instruments. Others build Early experiments and ideas. About 400 B.C, a 
the larger parts of the aircraft, including the wing, fuse- Greek scholar named Archytas built a wooden pigeon 
lage, and tail. that moved through the air. No one knows how Archytas 
An airplane assembly plant operates much like an au- made his pigeon fly. He may have attached the bird to a 
tomobile assembly plant, with workers stationed along revolving arm and used steam or gas to move it in a cir- 
an assembly line, also called a production line, Large cle. During the 300’s B.C, the Chinese discovered how to 
plants also have subassembly lines, where workers put make kites. A kite is really a form of glider. Later, large 
together large parts of the plane, such as the fuselage kites lifted people into the air. 
and wing, before sending them on for final assembly. During the 200s B.C, the great Greek mathematician 
The fuselage moves slowly along the final assembly line. and inventor Archimedes discovered how objects float 
It stops at various locations along the line, and workers in tiquids. For hundreds of years, people thought their 
install or attach the engine, wing, and other parts. bodies would float or fly in the air, too, if they equipped 
After all the parts of the airplane have been putin themselves with such devices as flowing cloaks or artifi- 


_ a 


230 Airplane 






An “aerial steam carriage” was patented by 
William S. Henson of the United Kingdom in 
1843. It had fixed wings, a steam engine, two 
propellers, and a passenger cabin. But 
Henson's “airliner” was never built. 





The first glider flights in which a person ac- 
tually piloted the glider were made in the 
early 1890's by Otto Lilienthal of Germany. 
But his gliders were difficult to control. 


cial wings. But all of their attempts failed. About A.D. 
1290, an English monk named Roger Bacon wrote that 
air, like water, has something solid about it. Bacon had 
studied the ideas of Archimedes and concluded that if 
people could build the right kind of machine, the air 
would support it, as water supports a ship. About 1500, 
the Italian artist and inventor Leonardo da Vinci made 
drawings of ornithopters, flying machines with wings 
designed to flap like those of a bird. In 1680, Giovanni A. 
Borelli, an Italian mathematician, showed that people 
cannot fly by flapping wings. Borelli proved that peo- 
ple’s muscles are too weak to flap the large surfaces that 
would be needed to support their weight in the air. 

First human flights. In 1783, two Frenchmen—a doc- 
tor named Jean F. Pilatre de Rozier and a nobleman, the 
Marquis d Arlandes—made the first free flight in an artifi- 
cially created device. They floated for more than 5 miles 
(8 kilometers) over Paris in a large linen and paper bal- 
loon. Two French papermakers—the brothers Jacques 
Etienne Montgolfier and Joseph Michel Montgolfier— 
had made the balloon, which was filled with hot air from 
burning wool and straw. The hot air made it rise. 

The Montgolfiers made other successful balloons. The 
flights of these balloons excited other inventors, who 
soon began to fill their balloons with hydrogen, a gas 
lighter than air, to make them rise. The balloons were 
hard to control. But inventors continued their balloon ex- 
periments and, during the mid-1800's, developed the air- 
ship. The airships had engines and propellers and so 


Smithsonian Institution 


Improved gliders were built and tested by Orville and Wilbur Wright of the 
United States. Their first glider, /eft, was a large, two-wing kite built in 1899. After 
experiments with this and other gliders, the Wright brothers built a glider in 1902 
that the pilot could control in the air, might 


were easier to handle than free-floating balloons, whose 
course could not be controlled. See Airship; Balloon. 

Meanwhile, other inventors had turned their attention 
to gliders, which are heavier-than-air aircraft without en- 
gines. In 1804, Sir George Cayley, a British inventor, built 
the first successful glider. It was a small craft that flew 
without a passenger. Cayley later built successful full- 
sized gliders. One of these carried his unwilling coach- 
man across a small valley. Cayley also founded the sci- 
ence of aerodynamics and was probably the first person 
to describe a fixed-wing airplane powered by propellers. 

From 1891 to 1896, Otto Lilienthal of Germany made 
the first successful glider flights in which a person actu- 
ally piloted the glider. Before the end of the 1800's, other 
inventors, including Percy Pilcher of Britain and Octave 
Chanute of the United States, made similar flights. Some 
of these early gliders were so well built that they carried 
their pilots hundreds of feet or meters through the air. 
But gliders were often hard to control. In addition, they 
were not designed to carry passengers or cargo and so 
were not a practical means of transportation. 

Powered flight. In 1843, William S. Henson, a British 
inventor, patented plans for the first plane with an en- 
gine, propellers, and a fixed wing. But after building one 
unsuccessful model, he gave up the project. In 1848, his 
friend John Stringfellow built a small model plane using 
Henson s design. The model was successfully launched 
but could stay in the air only a short time. In 1890, 
Clement Ader, a French engineer, took off in a steam 


The Wright brothers’ Flyer, which they 
built and flew in 1903, became the world’s 
first successful airplane. It had a light- 
weight gasoline engine that turned two 
propellers located behind the wings. 


Wingspan—40 ft. 4 in. 12.29 m)} 
Length—21 ft. 1 in. (6.43 m) 


powered plane that he had built. But he could not con- 
trol the plane or keep it in the air. About the same time, 
the inventor Hiram Maxim—an American who had be- 
come a British citizen—built a huge steam-powered fly- 
ing machine. It had two wings, two engines, and two 
propellers. Maxim tested the plane in 1894. It lifted off 
the ground briefly but did not actually fly. 

During the 1890's, Samuel P. Langley, an American sci- 
entist, built a steam-powered model airplane. Langley 
called his plane an aerodrome. |n 1896, it flew more than 
$ mile (0.8 kilometer) in about 13 minutes. Langley then 
built a full-sized aerodrome powered by a gasoline en- 
gine. A pilot attempted to fly the airplane on Oct. 7 and 
on Dec. 8, 1903. Both times Langley’s plane was launched 
into the air from a houseboat on the Potomac River, and 


Important dates in airplane development 


c. 1500 The Italian artist and inventor Leonardo da Vinci made 
drawings of flying machines with flapping wings. 

1783 Two Frenchmen—Jean F. Pilatre de Rozier and the Marquis 
d’‘Arlandes—made the first free lighter-than-air ascent. They 
made the ascent in a hot-air balloon. 

1804 Sir George Cayley of Britain flew the first successful model 
glider. 

1843 William S. Henson, a British inventor, patented plans for a 
steam-driven airplane that had many of the basic parts of a 
modern plane. 

1848 John Stringfellow of Britain built a smail model based on 
Henson’s plane. It remained in the air only briefly. 

1891-1896 Otto Lilienthal of Germany became the first person to 
successfully pilot gliders in flight. 

1896 Samuel P. Langley of the United States flew a steam-pow- 
ered model plane. 

1903 Onille and Wilbur Wright of the United States made the 
first engine-powered, heavier-thanair flights, near Kitty Hawk, 
North Carolina. Their first flight went 120 feet (37 meters) and 
lasted only about 12 seconds. 

1906 Trajan Vuia, a Romanian inventor, built the first full-sized 
monoplane, but it could not fly. 

1909 Louis Blériot of France became the first person to fly across 
the English Channel. 

1913 Igor |. Sikorsky, a Russian inventor built and flew the first 
four-engine piane. 

1915 The first flight of an all-metal, cantilever-wing plane, the 
Junkers J 1, took place in Germany 


Airplane 231 










both times the airplane crashed into the water. 

The Wright brothers. During the 1890's, Orville 
Wright and Wilbur Wright became interested in flying 
while operating their bicycle-manufacturing shop in 
Dayton, Ohio. The brothers read every book about flying 
they could find. They started building gliders in 1899. 
The next year, they began making glider flights near Kitty 
Hawk, North Carolina, an area known for its steady 
winds and high sand dunes. After conducting many ex- 
periments, the brothers worked out a system for control- 
ling an aircraft in flight. 

In 1903, the Wright brothers built their first airplane, 
named the Flyer. It was a biplane (two-wing plane) with 
a 12-horsepower (9-kilowatt) gasoline engine that the 
brothers also built. The wings, which measured 40 feet 4 

Text continued on page 233. 


1927 The Lockheed Vega, a single-engine transport, flew for the 
first time. It became one of the most popular transport planes 
of the 1920's and early 1930's. 


1936 Douglas DC-3 transport planes entered airline service in 
the United States. They were the most widely used airliners in 
the mid-1900's. 

1939 The first successful flight of a jet-engine airplane took place 
in Germany. 

1947 Charles E. Yeager, a U.S. Air Force captain, made the first 
supersonic flight, in a Bell X-1 rocket plane. 

1952 De Havilland Comets, the world's first large commercial jet- 
liners, began service. 

1953 The North American F-100 Super Sabre jet fighter became 
the first operational supersonic fighter. 

1958 The Boeing 707 began the first U.S. jet transport service be- 
tween the United States and Europe. 

1968 Russian pilots test-flew the world’s first supersonic trans- 
port plane, the Tu-144. 

1970 The first jumbo jet, the Boeing 747, entered service. The 
747 became the most widely used airliner of the late 1900's. 

1976 The Concorde, a supersonic transport plane built by the 
United Kingdom and France, began passenger service. 

1983 A Rockwell Sabreliner became the first plane to cross the 
Atlantic Ocean with a pilot guided only by a satellite naviga- 
tion system. 

1995 The Boeing 777 airliner, the world s largest twin-engine jet, 
began passenger service. 


TCO LL EE, 


232 Airplane 





















The Blériot XI, built and flown by Louis 
Bleriot of France, in 1909 became the first | 
plane to fly across the English Channel. | 


Wingspan—235 ft 7 in. (7.8 m) 
Length 26 ft 3 in. (8 m) 


Culver Pretures 


Wingspan—42 ft 6 in. (13.89 m) 
Length— 30 ft (9.1m 


The june Bug was designed by Glenn H. 
Curtiss. In July 1908, Curtiss used the plane to 
make the first official public airplane flight in 
the United States. But it was only a short, 


haky flight. 
Shaky Mig The Deperdussin racer, built in France in 


1912, was one of the first planes with a mono- 
coque \tubelike) body, reducing the need for 
body braces and so lightening the plane. 


Wingspan—21 ft 10 in. (6.65 m) 
Length— 20 ft (6.1 m) 


Wingspan— 18 ft (5.5 m) 
Length—20 ft (6.1 m) 


The Demoiselle of 1909 was one of a series 
of small lightweight planes built in France by 
Alberto Santos-Dumont, a Brazilian. The 
Demoiselles were among the first planes 
used for personal and pleasure flying. 


Wingspan—%1 ft 11 in. (28.02 m) 
Length—65 ft 8 in. (20.02 m) 


KK ANA 
The Grand of 1913, built by Russia s Igor I. =, Oe a 


Sikorsky, was the first four-engine plane. The | 
engines were paired back to back 









The Junkers J 1, built in Germany in 1915, 
was the first plane with an all-metal body and 
a cantilever wing, which is supported by an 


internal framework instead of outside braces. ; ae 
Wingspan—55 ft (168 m) 


Length— 29 ft. 8 in. (9.04 m) 


Speed records 


Speed Year Aviator Country Speed Year Aviator Country 

In mph In kph In mph in kph 

38.0 61.2 1905 W. Wright U.S. 82226 =: 1,323.3 1955 H. A. Hanes iS: 
108.18 174.1 1912 J. Vedrines France 1,132.13 1,82199 1956 L P. Twiss U.K 
2225 358.84 1922 W. Mitchell U.S. 1,207.6 1,943.44 1957 A. E. Drew We. 
294.38 473.76 1932 J. H. Doolittle LS: 1,404.09 2,25966 1958 W. W. Invin US. 
304.98 490.82 1933 J. Wedell U.S. 1,483.85 2,388.03 1959 G. Mosolov US:S.R: 
469.22 755.14 = 1939 F. Wendel Germany 152596 2,455.79 1959 J. W. Rogers us: 
606.25 975.66 1945 H. J. Wilson U.K. 1,606.32 2,585.12 1961 R. B. Robinson U.S. 
670.98 1,079.84 1948 R. L Johnson U.S. 1,665.89 2,680.99 1962 G. Mosolov U.S.S.R. 
698.5 1,024.13 1952 J. S. Nash U.S. 2,070.1 3,331.5 1965 R.L Stephens US. 
755.14 1,215.28 1953 F.K Everest, Jr. U.S. 2.193.16 3,529.56 1976 E. W. Joersz U.S. 
Source National Aeronautw Association 


—— 







The Ford Tri-Motor of 1926, a three-engine 
plane produced by Henry Ford, was the first 
successful all-metal U.S. transport plane. 





Wingspan—74 ft. (22.6 m) 





The Dornier Do-X, a German flying boat 
with 12 engines paired back to back, first flew 
in 1929. By far the largest airplane built to that 
time, the Do-X could carry 150 passengers, 
but it never went into service. 


Wingspan--157 ft. 5 in. (47.98 m) 
Length—131 ft. 4 in. (40.03 m) 


inches (12.29 meters) from tip to tip, were wooden 
frames covered with cotton cloth. The pilot lay in the 
middle of the lower wing. The engine, mounted to the 
pilot's right, turned two wooden propellers located be- 
hind the wings. Instead of wheels, the plane had wood- 
en runners. Most important of all, it had the successful 
control system that the brothers had developed for their 
gliders. A main feature of this system, called a wing warp 
system, was a device for twisting the wing tips to pre- 
serve balance in flight. The device consisted of a wire 
strung from each wing tip to a “cradle” that fitted around 
the pilot's hips. By moving their hips, the brothers could 
twist one wing tip or the other in order to maintain the 
plane’s balance and control while in flight. 

On Dec. 17, 1903, Orville Wright became the first per- 
son to successfully fly an engine-driven, heavier-than-air 
machine. The flight took place near Kitty Hawk. The 
brothers launched the plane from a 60-foot (18-meter) 
rail on a sand flat. The plane took off and flew 120 feet 
(37 meters) at about 30 mph (48 kph). The flight lasted 
only about 12 seconds. The Wright brothers made three 
more flights that day. Wilbur made the longest one~ 852 
feet (260 meters) in 59 seconds. 

Except for a few inventors, most people took little no- 
tice of the Wright brothers’ achievement. But the men 
continued to improve their planes. By the end of 1905, 
they had built and flown the first plane that was fully ma- 
neuverable and could fly for more than a half hour ata 
time. But no important officials had seen the plane fly, 
and so the flights were not officially recognized. In 1908, 


The Lockheed Vega of 1927 became one of 
the most popular U.S. transport planes. Lock- 
heed Vegas also made long-distance flights. 


Airplane 233 


Wingspan— 29 ft. 4 in. (8.94 m) 
Length—23 ft. (7.01 m) 


The Fokker D VIL, a 1918 German fighter 
plane used in World War I, was known for its 
fast climbing ability. 












Wingspan—4]1 ft. (12.5 m) 
Length—27 ft. 6 in. (8.38 m) 





oer ry ee 
eoee8 =——— 
o—— DORNIER 


Wilbur made the first official public flights in France and 
amazed the world with the plane’s flying ability. 

Other pioneer planes and fliers. Alberto Santos- 
Dumont, a Brazilian who lived in France, became the 
third person to fly an airplane. In 1906, he made a few 
brief flights in a plane patterned after a box kite. He later 
built a series of planes that were among the first used 
for personal and pleasure flying. Also in 1906, Trajan 
Vuia, a Romanian inventor living in France, constructed 
the first full-sized monoplaiie (single-wing plane). It had 
the propeller mounted in front of the wing rather than 
behind. Although the plane was unsuccessful, it influ- 
enced the design of later airplanes. 

Glenn H. Curtiss, an American inventor, made the first 
important airplane flight in the United States after the 
Wright brothers. On July 4, 1908, he became the first 
American to make an official public flight of more than 1 
kilometer (0.6 mile). He flew his biplane, the /une Bug, 
5,090 feet (1.55 kilometers) at 34 moh (55 kph). Henri 
Farman, an English flier living in France, had made a cir- 
cular flight of 1 kilometer earlier in 1908. Then, on Oct. 
30, 1908, Farman flew 163 miles (27.0 kilometers) directly 
across the French countryside in the first cross-country 
flight. The Wright brothers had made longer circular 
flights. Curtiss, Farman, and the Wright brothers all be- 
came successful airplane manufacturers. John A D. 
McCurdy, a Canadian engineering student, made the 
first successful airplane flight in Canada. On Feb, 23, 
1909, he flew his biplane—the SiWver Dart—over 3 mile 
(0.8 kilometer] across Bras d Or Lake in Nova Scotia. 


OO 


234 Airplane 


The Taylor Cub, later called the Piper Cub, 
first appeared in 1931. It was the best-known 
light plane in the United States. 





Wingspan—35 ft. 2 in. (10.72 m) -) 
Length—22 ft. 6 in. [6.86 m) 


m = 
The Douglas DC-3, built in the —. Sa 
United States, began service in ~ ; 












1936. It became the most widely 
used airliner of the mid-1900's. 


The Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress was a 
widely used U.S. bomber in World War IL 
Improvements in the design of B-17's and oth- 
er bombers enabled planes to fly farther, 
higher, and faster with heavier loads. 


The Messerschmitt Me 262, a German fight- 
er, was the first jet combat plane. It flew mis- 
sions over Europe in 1944 and 1945. 


Thomas E. Selfridge, a lieutenant in the U.S. Army 
Signal Corps and the first officer trained to fly, was the 
first person killed in a plane crash. The Army had decid- 
ed to test the military value of the Wright brothers  air- 
plane. On Sept. 17, 1908, Selfridge went up in a plane 
with Orville Wright. At an altitude of 75 feet (23 meters), 
one of the two propellers broke. The plane crashed, 
killing Selfridge and injuring Wright. But the Wrights 
were not discouraged. In 1909, they won an Army con- 
tract to build the world’s first military plane. 

A French inventor, Louis Blériot, made the first inter- 
national airplane flight. In 1909, he flew his B/ériot X/ 
monoplane 233 miles (37.8 kilometers) across the English 
Channel from France to England. The plane had a long, 
enclosed body, a tail for contro] at the rear, anda 
wheeled landing gear. Other successful monoplanes of 
the period included the Antoinette series designed by 
the French inventor Leon Levavasseur. 

In 1911, Calbraith P. Rodgers made the first airplane 
flight across the United States—from Sheepshead Bay, 
New York, to Long Beach, California. During the 84-day 
journey, Rodgers landed—or crashed—his Wright air- 
plane about 70 times. He had to replace almost every 
part of the plane before he reached Long Beach. His ac- 
tual flying time was 3 days 10 hours 24 minutes. 

In 1912, the Deperdussin Company of France built the 
Deperdussin monoplane racer, the first successful air- 
plane of monocoque construction (pronounced maw 
naw KAWK or MAHN uh kohk/ In this type of construc- 
tion, the fuselage of the plane consisted ot a structure 


Wingspan—103 ft 9 in. (31.62 m) 
Length—74 ft 9 in. (22.78 m) 








NADA AIR LINES 


=] a — — ——, a 


Wingspan—%$ ft {29 m) 
Length—64 ft 53 in. (19.65 m) 





Wingspan—4] ft (125 m) 
Length 34 ft. 95 in. (10.6 m) 


strong enough to bear the stresses of flight, reducing 
the need for external bracing. The monocoque design 
produced a streamlined aircraft that was lighter and cre- 
ated less drag. Meanwhile, two-engine planes had been 
developed. In 1913, a Russian inventor, Igor I. Sikorsky, 
flew his Russky Vityaz (Russian Knight), also called The 
Grand, the first four-engine plane. Most planes still had 
one engine. 

The early fliers and their planes participated in many 
air races and air circuses. These tests of flying skill did 
much to improve airplane design and to make flying 
more popular. In 1913, a French pilot, Adolphe Pégoud, 
became noted for his skill at air acrobatics. 

World War 1 (1914-1918) greatly advanced airplane 
development. Early in the war, both sides discovered the 
value of the airplane for locating enemy forces and mili- 
tary bases. Engineers designed more powertul engines 
to put swift fighter planes and heavy bombers into the 
skies. Germany, France, and Britain began to turn out 
thousands of these planes. Dogfights (air battles be- 
tween fighters) became common. Seaplanes were used 
for taking pictures of enemy naval forces and for bomb- 
ing enemy submarines. For the story of how airplanes 
were used in World War I, see Air Force (World War I); 
World War I. 

At the beginning of the war, most planes could fly 60 
to 70 mph (97 to 110 kph). By the war's end, inany could 
go 130 mph (209 kph) or faster. Hugo Junkers, a German 
inventor and manufacturer, created one of the most in- 
fluential airplane designs of the war. His plane, called 


ee a 








Wingspan—30 ft. 6 in. (9.3 m) 
Length—19 ft. 5 in. (5.92 m) 


Wingspan— 114 ft. 10 in. {35 m) 
Length—111 ft. 6 in. (33.99 m) 


The de Havilland Comet, a British plane, be- 
came the first jet airliner. Comets began pas- 
senger service in 1952. But they had serious 
structural flaws and were grounded in 1954. 
De Havilland engineers designed an im- 
proved Comet—the Comet 4, above—which 
entered airline service in 1958. 


The North American F-100 Super Sabre, 
a U.S. fighter, flew for the first time in 1953 
and became the first jet fighter that could 
be operated at supersonic speeds. 


the Junkers J 1, made its first flight in 1915. The plane was 
the first to be made entirely of metal and the first to have 
a cantilever wing, which is completely supported by an 
internal framework. Earlier airplane wings were support- 
ed by struts (braces) between the body and wings, which 
created drag and reduced the airplanes speed. 

The golden age in the development of the airplane 
occurred during the 1920's and 1930's. During this peri- 
od, rapid advances were made in airplane design, and 
airlines began large-scale operations. It was also a time 
when daring pilots amazed the world with feats of flying 
skill and endurance. 

In 1914, an American flier named Tony Jannus was the 
pilot of the world’s first scheduled airline. Jannus used a 
small seaplane to carry passengers and freight across 
Tampa Bay between St. Petersburg and Tampa, Florida. 
The plane had room for one passenger, who paid $5 for 
the 22-mile (35-kilometer) flight. The airline had financial 
difficulties and lasted only a few months. In 1919, small 
airlines began to operate in Europe. They used rebuitt 
World War | bombers to carry passengers and mail on 
short flights between European cities. The cabins of 
some of the planes were elegantly decorated and fur- 
nished with comfortable armchairs. But the passengers 
could barely make themselves heard above the roar of 
the engines, and the cabins were unheated. 

After World War |, the U.S. government offered thou- 
sands of surplus warplanes for sale at bargain prices. 
Although these planes were stronger than those built 


235 


Airplane 


The Messerschmitt Me 163 Komet was the 
first operational rocket plane. Germany used 
the Komet as a fighter plane near the end of 

World War Il. 
















Wingspan 28 ft. (8.5 m) 
Length 31 ft. {9.4 m) 


The Bell X-1 became the first plane to fly 
faster than the speed of sound. The experi- 
mental U.S. rocket plane made the super- 
sonic flight in 1947. 


Wingspan— 38 ft. (11.6 m) 
Length — 47 ft. (14.3 m) 


before the war, they still were not always safe. They 
were made mostly of wood and cloth and lacked satis- 
factory navigation equipment. But many former military 
pilots bought the planes and used them for an exciting 
and dangerous type of flying called barnstorming. 
Barnstormers toured the United States in the 1920's and 
put on daring air shows at county fairs and other events. 
The pilots flew the planes in wild acrobatics. Performers 
called wing walkers stepped from wing tip to wing tip in 
flight, or leaped from the wing of one flying plane to an- 
other. Many of the planes crashed, and a number of 
barnstormers were killed. 

The United States Post Office, the forerunner of the 
U.S. Postal Service, also used modified military planes to 
fly mail between a few large cities. The Post Office began 
airmail service in 1918, operating its own planes. By 
1927; the Post Office gave up operating its own planes 
and contracted with the airlines to carry airmail. Airmail 
greatly aided the growth of commercial aviation. 

Meanwhile, engineers were working to design safer, 
more powerful transport planes. German engineers de- 
veloped an all-metal, trimotor (three-engine) transport, 
the Junkers G 23. It flew for the first time in 1924 and was 
the first of a series of all-metal, trimotor planes made in 
Europe. The first such plane in the United States was de- 
veloped from the ideas of William B. Stout, an aircraft 
manufacturer. Henry Ford, the automobile maker, 
bought Stouts company and began producing a trimo- 
tor plane in 1926. The Ford Tri-Motor could carry 10 pas- 


TNO 


236 Airplane 








Wingspan—27 ft 8 in (8.43 m) 
Length—32 ft 3 in (9.83 m) 


The Boeing 707 became the first U.S. jet 
transport. The plane began test flights in 1954 
and entered airline service in 1958. 


Wingspan—130 ft 10 in (39.88 m) 
Length—144 ft 6 in (44.04 m) 


sengers at 100 mph (160 kph) or more. In 1927, the Lock- 
heed Company (now Lockheed Martin Corporation) pro- 
duced the Vega, a single-engine transport that carried 
up to six passengers. It could fly 135 mph (217 kph) and 
travel 500 miles (800 kilometers) or farther without refu- 


Notable airplane flights 


1908 Henri Farman of France made the first official circular flight 
of 1 kilometer (0.6 mile). He also flew 16.75 miles (27.0 kilome- 
ters) in the first cross-country flight. 


1908 Glenn H. Curtiss made the first official public flight of more 
than 1 kilometer in the United States. 


1911 Calbraith P. Rodgers made the first flight across the United 
States. He flew from Sheepshead Bay, New York, to Long 
Beach, California, in a series of short flights that took 84 days. 


1919 Two British fliers, John Alcock and Arthur Whitten Brown, 
made the first nonstop transatlantic flight They flew 1,950 
miles (3,138 kilometers) from St. John’s, Newfoundland, to Clif- 
den, Ireland. 


1924 Two U.S. Army planes made the first round-the-world 
flight. They took nearly six months to complete the 26,345-mile 
(42,398-kilometer) journey. 


1926 American explorers Richard E. Byrd and Floyd Bennett 
claimed the first airplane flight over the North Pole. 


1927 Charles A. Lindbergh, a U.S. pilot, made the first solo non- 
stop transatlantic flight. He flew 3,610 miles (5,810 kilometers) 
from Garden City, New York, to Paris in 33 hours 31 minutes. 


1928 Charles Kingsford Smith and his crew made the first flight 
across the Pacific— from Oakland, California, to Brisbane, Aus- 


The Convair XFY-1, or “Pogo,” was an ex- 
perimental fighter that could take off and 
land vertically. The aircraft was built for the 
United States Navy and test-flown in 1954, 
but it did not enter service. 


The Morane-Saulnier M.S. 760 of 1954, a 
French-built light plane with two jet en- 

gines, was the first jet plane sold especially 
for business travel. It held four passengers. 





Wingspan—33 ft 3 in (10.13 m) 
Length—33 ft (10.1 m) 


eling. The Ford Tri-Motor and the Lockheed Vega were 
among the most popular transport planes of the late 
1920's and early 1930's. 

Races helped encourage improvements in airplane 
design during the 1920's and 1930's. Important races in 


tralia, with stops at Honolulu, Hawaii, and Suva, Fiji. 


1929 Richard E. Byrd of the United States and his crew made the 
first flight over the South Pole. 


1931 Two U.S. pilots, Clyde Pangborn and Hugh Herndon, made 
the first nonstop airplane flight across the Pacific. They flew 
from Tokyo to Wenatchee, Washington. 


1932 Amelia Earhart of the United States was the first woman to 
fly across the Atlantic Ocean alone. She flew from Harbour 
Grace, Newfoundland, to a pasture near Londonderry, North- 
ern Ireland, in 15 hours 18 minutes. 


1933 Wiley Post, a U.S. pilot, made the first solo round-the-world 
flight, traveling 15,596 miles (25,099 kilometers) in 7 days 18 
hours 49 minutes. 


1949 A U.S. Air Force crew made the first nonstop round-the- 
world flight, covering 23,452 miles (37,742 kilometers) in 3 
days 22 hours 1 minute. 


1992 French pilots Claude Delorme and Jean Boye flew an Air 
France Concorde around the world in a record 32 hours 49 
minutes 3 seconds. 


2001 A solar-powered, propeller-driven airplane set an unoffi- 
cial altitude record of 96,500 feet (155,302 meters). The craft, 
owned by NASA, was remotely piloted from the ground. 






























. oo aa 


Length—96 ft 9 in. {29.49 m) 


Wingspan—195 ft 8 in. (59.64 m) 
Length—231 ft. 4 in.{70.51 m) 


cluded the Pulitzer Trophy races for small planes and 
the Schneider Trophy races for seaplanes. In 1920, the 
winner of the Schneider Trophy race flew at 107 mph 
(172 kph). The 1931 winner reached 340 mph (547 kph). 

Fliers of the golden age. A number of American pi- 
lots made daring long-distance flights during the 1920's 
and early 1930's. Richard E. Byrd and Floyd Bennett are 
credited with flying the first plane to the North Pole, in 
May 1926. They flew a trimotor plane designed by the 
Dutch engilieer Anthony Fokker. Fokker had built planes 
in Germany during World War | but moved his plant to 
the Netherlands after the war. In 1929, Byrd and Bernt 
Balchen made the first flight over the South Pole, in a 
Ford Tri-Motor. In 1927, Charles A. Lindbergh made the 
first solo nonstop flight across the Atlantic Ocean. His 
3,610-mile (5,810-kilometer) flight—from Garden City, 
New York, to Paris—took 33 } hours. Lindbergh's plane, 
the Spirit of St. Louis, was a specially built Ryan mono- 
plane with a Wright engine. It was a little larger than the 
Wright brothers first airplane. It also had the most ad- 
vanced aircraft instruments of the day, which helped 
Lindbergh find his way across the ocean without a radio. 

In 1931, Hugh Herndon and Clyde Pangborn made 
the first nonstop flight across the Pacific. The next year, 
Amelia Earhart, flying an improved Lockheed Vega, be- 
came the first woman to cross the Atlantic solo and non- 
stop. In 1933, a foriner parachute jumper named Wiley 
Post flew a Vega in the first solo round-the-world flight. 

Engineering improvements during the 1930's made 
it possible to build bigger planes that could fly faster, 


Wingspan—56 ft. 10 in. {17.32 m) 


Airplane 237 


The Convair B-58 Hustler, built for the U.S. 
Air Force, was the first supersonic bomber. It 
flew for the first time in 1956 and set several 
world speed, altitude, and distance records. 


The Boeing 747, the first jumbo jet, began 
airline service in 1970. Its long, wide body 
had room for more than 400 passengers. 







The Concorde, designed by Britain and 
France, was one of two supersonic transports 
(SST's) that began commercial service in the 
mid-1970's. The other one was the Tupolev 
Tu-144, built by the Soviet Union. 


Wingspan—83 ft. 10 in. (25.6 m) 
Length—203 ft 9 in. (62.1 m) 


farther, and higher—and could carry heavier loads. Ad- 
vances in aerodynamics helped engineers streamline 
planes so they coutd cut through the air with as little 
drag as possible. Engineers designed controllable-pitch 
propellers, with which pilots could set the propeller 
blade at the best angle for a particular air speed or alti- 
tude. Improved radio equipment enabled pilots to re- 
ceive flight directions from the ground. Automatic pilot 
devices also came into use during the 1930's. These de- 
vices made possible more accurate navigation and en- 
abled pilots to take rest breaks during long flights. 

All the major advances in airplane design went into 
making the Douglas DC-3. This twin-engine transport 
made its first passenger flights in 1936. The DC-3 could 
carry 21 passengers and fly smoothly at 200 mph (320 
kph). It soon became the most widely used airliner. 

During the 1930's, many airline passengers traveled 
on flying boats, large, watertight seaplanes that could 
float in the water like the hull of a ship. Flying boats 
were used mainly for flights across oceans. One of the 
largest commercial flying boats was an enormous 12- 
engine plane built in Germany—the Dornier Do-x. It flew 
for the first time in 1929 but never became a popular air- 
liner. One of the last and most famous flying boats was 
the Boeing 314 Clipper, which could carry up to 74 pas- 
sengers. In 1939, 314's started the first regular passenger 
service across the Atlantic Ocean. But the development 
of more powertul landplanes—and of more airports 
with runways long enough to handle them—ended the 
day of the flying boats in most parts of the world. 


= eeeeeeEeEESE : a 


238 Airplane 


As planes flew higher and higher, pilots and passen- 
gers had increased difficulty breathing in the thin air at 
high altitudes. So engineers designed pressurized cab- 
ins, in which the air inside is compressed at high alti- 
tudes to make breathing easier. Pressurized cabins be- 
came common in the late 1940's. 

During World War II (1939-1945), Britain, Germany, 
Japan, the United States, and other countries turned out 
thousands of military planes. As in World War 1, engi- 
neers made great advances in the design of bombers 
and fighters. Bombers developed during World War II 
could carry twice as heavy a load and travel nearly twice 
as far without refueling as prewar bombers could. Early 
in the war, fighter planes could reach a top speed of 300 
mph (480 kph) and climb to about 30,000 feet (9,100 me- 
ters). By the end of the war, they were flying more than 
400 mph (640 kph) and climbing to over 40,000 feet 
{12,000 meters). Jet fighters could fly even faster, though 
they were not used until late in the war. In 1939, Ger- 
many made the first successful jet plane flight. The 
Messerschmitt Me 262 was the first jet to fly combat 
missions. It flew them over Europe in 1944 and 1945. 
This fighter could fly nearly 550 mph (885 kph). The Bell 
Aircraft Company (now a division of Textron Incor- 
porated) built the first U.S. jet plane in 1942. 

German scientists had experimented with rocket 
planes as far back as 1928. Early in World War Il, they de- 
veloped the prototype Messerschmitt Me 163. This rock- 
et-powered plane could fly at over 600 mph (970 kph). 
German engineers used it as a model for a fighter, the 
Me 163 Komet, which flew missions late in the war. 

Transoceanic transports. Near the end of World 
War Il, manufacturers began to develop nonstop trans- 
oceanic transports for commercial airlines. Four-engine 
transports developed during the war, such as the pres- 
surized Douglas DC-4 and the Lockheed Constellation, 
were widely used for long-distance commercial passen- 
ger service after the war. But they had to stop for refuel- 
ing on the longest ocean flights. Nonstop transoceanic 
flights required more powerful engines. By 1945, jet en- 
gines had the necessary power, but they used so much 
fuel that a jet plane could fly only a short distance with- 
out refueling. Instead of waiting for improved jet en- 
gines, the airlines built more powerful reciprocating en- 
gines. Two U.S. manufacturers created reciprocating 
engines of more than 3,000 horsepower (2,200 kilowatts) 
for the new transoceanic transports. These engines were 
used in the Douglas DC-7, the Lockheed Super Constel- 
lation, and the Boeing 377 Stratocruiser. Each plane 
could carry about 100 passengers nonstop between 
New York City and Paris at over 300 mph (480 kph). 

The jet age. During the late 1940's, engineers worked 
to improve the crude jet engines built during World 
War Il. The Soviet Union and the United States wanted 
jet engines to increase the power and speed of their 
bombers and fighters. By the time of the Korean War 
(1950-1953), both countries had highly effective jet 
planes. These planes included two famous fighters—the 
U.S. Air Force F-86 Sabre and the Soviet MiG-15. 

In Britain, engineers produced the world’s first large 
commercial jet airliner, the de Havilland Comet. Comets 
began passenger service in 1952. They flew at nearly 500 
mph (800 kph) with little vibration or noise. The cabin 
was pressurized for safety and comfort. Then, in two 


separate accidents in January and April 1954, Comets 
tore apart in the air, killing everyone aboard. The fault 
proved to be in the plane's metal skin, which was too 
weak to withstand the stress of pressurization. The disas- 
ters led to the development of fuselage designs and 
structures more suited to pressurization in all airliners, 
including new Comets. Meanwhile, Britain had also pro- 
duced the Vickers Viscount, a transport plane with pro- 
pellers driven by jet engines. These turboprop planes 
began to carry passengers in 1953. 

By the mid-1950's, U.S. engineers were also designing 
commercial jet airliners. In 1958, the Boeing 707, a four- 
engine jetliner, began passenger service between the 
United States and Europe. By 1960, two other U.S. jet 
transports—the Douglas DC-8 and the Convair 880—had 
begun passenger service. United States manufacturers 
also began to design a large jet that could carry several 
hundred passengers or 50 to 100 short tons (45 to 90 
metric tons) of cargo. The first of these giants, the Lock- 
heed C-5A Galaxy military transport, began service in the 
U.S. Air Force in 1969. The world’s first commercial jum- 
bo jet, the Boeing 747, began service in 1970. It could 
carry more than 400 passengers. Newer versions of the 
Boeing 747 can travel longer distances, flying 14 hours 
or more without refueling. 

Supersonic airplanes are among the newest devel- 
opments in air transportation. These planes can fly faster 
than sound. At sea level, sound has a speed of about 760 
mph (1,225 kph). But the speed of sound declines with al- 
titude. At about 50,000 feet (15,250 meters), for example, 
sound normally travels at about 660 mph (1,060 kph). No 
early jet plane was powerful enough or sturdy enough 
to fly faster than sound. A few approached this speed. 
When they did, shock waves tore the planes apart. 

About 1943, U.S. engineers began work on rocket re- 
search planes for supersonic flight. These planes had to 
withstand the terrific air pressures at Mach / (the speed 
of sound). In 1947, the Bell X-1 rocket plane, piloted by 
Charles E. Yeager, a U.S. Air Force captain, made the first 
supersonic flight in history. In 1962, the North American 
X-15 rocket plane soared 314,750 feet (95,936 meters)— 
over 50 miles (80 kilometers) above the earth. Robert H. 
White, an Air Force major, piloted the plane. White thus 
became the first pilot to qualify as an astronaut by flying 
an airplane into space. In 1963, the X-15 raised the alti- 
tude record to 354,200 feet (107,960 meters)—about 67 
miles (108 kilometers) above the earth. Later, it flew faster 
than Mach 6 {six times the speed of sound). Speeds of 
Mach 5 (five times the speed of sound) or higher are 
called Aypersonic. 

Meanwhile, engineers had developed jet engines ca- 
pable of supersonic speeds. In 1953, the North American 
F-100 Super Sabre jet fighter became the first jet that 
could be operated at supersonic speeds in level flight. 
The first supersonic bomber was the U.S. Air Force's 
Convair B-58 Hustler. It flew for the first time in 1956. 

At first, all the new supersonic jets were military 
planes. Then in 1968, Soviet test pilots flew the world’s 
first supersonic transport (SST), the Tupolev Tu-144. 
Britain and France cooperated to build an SST, the 
Concorde, which made its first test flight in 1969. 

The Soviet Union began cargo service with the 
Tupolev Tu-144 in 1975 and started passenger service in 
1977. But in 1983, the Soviet Union withdrew the plane 





came et | ee ce ee ee 


from service because of technical and operational prob- 
lems. Britain and France began passenger service to the 
United States with the Concorde in 1976. But all flights 
were suspended in 2000 after the crash of a Concorde in 
France following take-off. Traveling by supersonic airlin- 
er has been very expensive because the planes have car- 
ried few passengers and have used large amounts of 
fuel. The planes were also very noisy, so some coun- 
tries, including the United States, had restricted the 
Concorde to oceanic flights only. 

Future developments. Engineers continue to search 
for ways to make airplanes faster, safer, quieter, and 
more efficient. One possible type of future airplane, 
called a spaceplane or reusable launch vehicle (RLV), 
would be powered by rocket engines. Spaceplanes 
could be launched into Earth's orbit and return to Earth 
and land on a runway. While in orbit, they would cruise 
at speeds of up to Mach 15 (15 times the speed of 
sound). Drew Steketee and F. Robert van der Linden 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Biographies 


Alcock and Brown 
Balchen, Bernt 
Bennett, Floyd 
Blanchard, Jean-Pierre 


Hughes, Howard R. 
Langley, Samuel P. 
Leonardo da Vinci 
Lindbergh, Charles A. 


Blériot, Louis Link, Edwin A. 
Boeing, William E. Mitchell, Billy 

Byrd, Richard E. Montgolfier brothers 
Cayley, Sir George Post, Wiley 


Coanda, Henri-Marie 
Cochran, jacqueline 
Curtiss, Glenn H. 
De Seversky, 
Alexander P. 
Doolittle, james H. 
Earhart, Amelia 
Fokker, Anthony H. G. 


Saint-Exupeéry, Antoine de 
Santos-Dumont, Alberto 
Sikorsky, Igor 1. 

Wilkins, Sir Hubert 
Wright brothers 

Yeager, Charles Elwood 
Zeppelin, Ferdinand von 


Parts of an airplane 


Automatic flight control system 
Gasoline engine 

Gyroscope 

Jet propulsion 

Magneto 

Propeller 

Rocket 

Starter 


Other related articles 


Global Positioning System 
Helicopter 

Hijacking 

inertial guicance 

Jet propulsion 

jet stream 

National Aeronautics and 


Aerodynamics 
Aerospace medicine 
Air force 

Air Force, U.S. 

Air turbulence 
Aircraft, Military 
Aircraft carrier 


Airport Space Administration 
Airship Navigation 
Autogiro Parachute 
Aviation Radar — 
Balloon Starter (Airplane starters) 
Civil Air Patrol Streamlining 
Contrail Test pilot 
Ducted propeller V/STOL 
Federal Aviation Weather (Measuring the 
Administration weather) 
Glider Wind shear 
Outline 


I. Types of airplanes 
A. Commercial transport planes 


Airplane 239 
B. General aviation planes 
C Military planes 
D. Seaplanes 
E. Special-purpose planes 
Ill. The parts of an airplane 
A. The wing 
B. The fuselage 
C. The tail 
D. The landing gear 
E. The controls and instruments 
F. Propellers 
Ill. Power for flight 
A. Reciprocating engines 
B. Jet engines 
C Rocket engines 
IV. Principles of flight 
A. Gravity and lift 
B. Drag and thrust 
C Changing altitude 
D. Changing direction 
V. Flying an airplane 
A. Basic movements and controls 
B. Proper use of the controls 
C. Stalling 
D. Flying by instruments 
E. Measuring flying speed 
F. Learning to fly 
VI. Air navigation 
A. Pilotage 
B. Dead reckoning 
C. Radio navigation 
D. Navigating across oceans 
E. Safety 
Vil. Building an airplane 
A. Design and testing 
B. Mass production 
VIII. History 


Questions 


What are ailerons? What are they used for? 

Who made the first solo nonstop flight across the Atlantic 
Ocean? 

What government agency sets standards for the design and 
manufacture of airplanes in the United States? 

What three main types of engines are used to produce power 
for airplane flight? 

In what ways did World War | and World War II contribute to 
airplane development? 

What four forces act on a plane in flight? 

What are an airplane's three basic movements? 

What are the chief methods of air navigation? 

Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? 

What is a V/STOL plane? 


Additional resources 


Level I 

Harris, Nicholas. Rand McNally Airplanes: A Fold-Out Book 
Rand McNally, 1995. 

Holland, Gini. A/rplanes. Benchmark Bks., 1996. 

Johnstone, Michael. Planes. Dorling Kindersley, 1994. 

Parker, Steve. Whats Inside Airplanes? Bedrick, 1995. 

The Story of Flight Scholastic, 1995. 

Weiss, Harvey. Strange and Wonderful Aircraft. Houghton, 
1995: 


Level li 

Berk, William A. and Frank Guide to Airport Airplanes. 2nd ed. 
Plymouth Pr., 1996. 

Janes All the World's Aircraft Jane's, published annually. 

Siuru, Bill, and Busick, J. D. Future Flight The Next Generation of 
Aircraft Technology. 2nd ed. McGraw, 1994. 

Tennekes, Henk Jhe Simple Science of Flight From Insects to 
Jumbo fets. MIT Pr., 1996. 

Welch, John F.. ed. Van Sickle s Modem Airmanship. 7th ed. TAB, 
WII. 


ee 


240 Airplane, Model 





Control-line model airplanes, above, have long wires attached to them. A person controls the 
flight of such a plane by holding onto the wires as the model whirls around. 


Airplane, Model, is a miniature airplane. It may be a 
copy of a full-sized plane or have an original design. 
Building model airplanes is a popular hobby. There are 
flying and nonflying miniature aircraft of all types, in- 
cluding gliders, helicopters, and commercial and mili- 
tary planes. Scientists also use scale models of aircraft 
for testing before full-sized planes are built. They test 
the models in wind tunnels, which duplicate the air 
pressure and weather conditions of actual flight. See 
Airplane (Design and testing); Wind tunnel. 

Models may be powered by twisted rubber bands, 
electric motors, gas or diesel engines, carbon dioxide, 
or compressed air. Most model planes take off under 
their own power, but some are thrown into the air. 

In the mid-1980's, over 100,000 people and more than 
1,900 model airplane clubs belonged to the Academy of 
Model Aeronautics (AMA). This organization regulates 
official model airplane contests in the United States. It 
also certifies flying records. Contest events include com- 
petitions for distance, height, speed, and time aloft. 

Hobbyists generally build model airplanes from kits 
sold by hobby stores. Most kits of nonflying models 
consist of plastic parts that the modeler glues together. 
Balsa wood ranks as the most popular material for flying 
models because it is so light, strong, and easy to work 
with. Various kinds of synthetic materials may be used 
for parts of a model that require extra strength, such as 
the propeller and engine mounts. Hobbyists also build 
models from plans published in books and magazines. 
Advanced modelers may design their own planes. Some 


planes can be purchased assembled and ready to fly. 
There are five main kinds of model airplanes. They 
are (1) display, (2) indoor, (3) free-flight, (4) control-line, 
and (5) radio control. 
Display models cannot fly. Hobbyists build them 
with the goal of duplicating the appearance of full- 





WORLD BOOK photos 


A free-flight model airplane, above, has no wires. A small en- 
gine powers this and many other flying model planes. 











sized aircraft in every possible detail. Some display 
models have movable propellers, doors, and landing 
gear. Hobbyists take care in painting these models to 
make them look authentic. The models are judged at ex- 
hibitions on the basis of workmanship and accuracy of 
detail. Display models make attractive decorations ina 
home. Modelers may display their planes by arranging 
them on shelves, hanging them from the ceiling by 
wires, or exhibiting them in display cases. 

indoor models are flown only inside a building. 
They fly slowly, and some can stay aloft as long as 45 
minutes. An indoor model is powered by twisted 
strands of rubber that turn the propeller as they unwind. 
These airplanes have a balsa frame covered by thin 
paper or a substance called microfilm. Microfilm is 
made by mixing lacquer and castor oil and floating the 
mixture on water to form a clear, thin film. The modeler 
removes the film with a wire loop and applies it to the 
plane's frame. Such models weigh + ounce (1 gram) or 
less. They are too fragile to be flown outdoors, where 
they might collapse at the slightest movement of air. In- 
door gliders are typically made entirely of balsa. 

Free-flight models may be powered by rubber 
strands or have a piston engine. Engine-powered free- 
flight models run on a mixture of methyl alcohol, ni- 
tromethane, and a lubricant. Diesel engines, using a mix- 
ture of kerosene, ether, and castor oil, are also used and 
so are electric motors with rechargeable batteries. Such 
models built for competitive flying typically have wings 
from 3 to 6 feet (0.9 to 1.8 meters) long. After launching, 
a free-flight model climbs straight up for 5 to 15 sec- 
onds. A timing device then turns the engine off, and the 
plane goes into a slow glide for 3 to 5 minutes. Some 
engine-powered free-flight models that do not have a 
timing device can fly in a circular pattern for hours. Fly- 
ing in rising air currents called therma/s helps them re- 
main airborne. 

A free-flight glider may be hand-launched or it may 


Airplane pilot 241 


A radio control glider 
called a sailp/ane is about to 
go airborne, /eft. Radio con- 
trol models are controlled by 
a transmitter that sends radio 
signals to a tiny receiver in 
the model. The receiver de- 
codes the signals and feeds 
the information to electric 
motors. The motors control 
the surfaces on the wings and 
tail assembly, allowing the 
model to maneuver. 


Academy of Model Aeronautics 


be towed at the end of a cord—100 feet (30 meters) or 
more—and released. Such gliders have remained air- 
borne for many hours by flying in rising thermals. 

Control-line models have piston or jet engines and 
fly at the end of wires. Most control-line models have 
two Dacron or steel wires that measure from 25 to 75 
feet (8 to 23 meters) long. One end of each wire is at- 
tached to the model and moves the plane's e/evator, a 
control surface on the tail assembly. The other end is 
fastened to a handle that the modeler uses to control 
the plane's altitude and flight path. When the hobbyist 
tilts the handle up, one wire raises the elevator, pointing 
the nose of the plane upward. Tilting the handle down 
causes the other wire to lower the elevator and point 
the plane's nose downward. 

Some control-line models have only one line, which 
both raises and lowers the elevator. Others have a third 
line that controls the engine power and thus the speed 
of the plane. Jet-powered control-line models have 
flown nearly 250 miles (400 kilometers) per hour. 

Radio control models are controlled by means of a 
transmitter that sends radio signals to the airplane. The 
model carries a tiny radio receiver that decodes the sig- 
nals and passes the information to electric motor de- 
vices Called servos. The servos move control surfaces on 
the wings and tail assembly, enabling the model to rise, 
sink, or turn. Servos also control the speed of the plane's 
engine, lift and lower the landing gear, and open 
hatches from which parachutes can be dropped. 

Some radio control gliders rank among the largest 
model airplanes. Their wings measure from 9 to 16 feet 
(3 to 4.9 meters) long. These long wings enable the 
plane to stay aloft for extended periods when steered 
into rising air Currents. Radio control is also used to 
pilot model helicopters and racing and acrobatic model 
aircraft. John Worth 
Airplane pilot. See Air Line Pilots Association; Air- 
plane (Flying an airplane). 


= : | 


242 Airport 


—s SP ae” 
pe ea, 


= = 





AP Wide tVorid 


A major airport, such as Los Angeles International, shown here, may handle more than 200 take- 
offs and landings per hour at peak times. Thousands of passengers pass through the airport daily. 


Airport 


Airport is a place where airplanes and other aircraft 
take off and land, and load and unioad passengers and 
cargo. Air travel has become the chief means ot long- 
distance transportation, and modern aircraft provide the 
safest means of travel. Every day, the world’s airports 
handle millions of passengers flying on thousands of 
commercial airplanes for business and leisure travel. 

Airports are exciting places to see commercial airlin- 
ers, general aviation aircraft, and sometimes even mili- 
tary aircraft. Overhead, planes approach or depart. On 
the ground, one plane after another takes oft or lands. 
Automobiles, buses, taxis, and even trains carry travelers 
to and from the passenger terminal. Thousands of peo 
ple fill the terminal area. Most of them are passengers. 
Others are employees of the airport, airlines, or com- 
mercial establishments operating in the airport. 

The largest airports resemble smail cities. Many have 
hotels, restaurants, banks. post offices, and shops, as 
weil as their own police force, fire departments, medical 
facilities, and utility plants and facilities. These services 
and facilities are important and useful for passengers 
and employees at an airport. In addition, some of them 
help produce the income necessary for the airport to 
operate successfully. During lengthy flight delays or 





Paul P. Bollinger Jr_ the contributor ot this article, is Vice Pres 
ident ot Aviation Client services ior HNTB Corpo 
sulting firm that plans and designs anports aid oli 


dilGdi, d COs 


faciitie 


emergencies. these services can become vital. 

Airports ditter trom other transportation terminals, 
such as bus or train stations, in two important ways: 

(1) airports require more land, and (2) most airports are 
far from the centers of the cities they serve. An airport 
needs much more land to accommodate the same num- 
ber of passengers as a bus or train station. A medium- 
sized city airport needs from 700 to 3,000 acres (280 to 
1,200 hectares). The largest airport in the world in area— 
King Khalid International Airport near Riyadh, Saudi Ara- 
bia—covers 535,510 acres (22,464 hectares). The largest 
airport in the United States, Denver International Air- 
port, has an area of approximately 34,000 acres (14,000 
hectares). 

National governments, state-sponsored bodies, local 
governments, and corporations own most of the world’s 
large airports. Many small airports are privately owned. 

In most countries, one or more federal agencies over- 
see airport certification, air safety. pilot qualifications, 
and the certification and inspection of aircraft. In the 
United States, for example, those agencies are the 
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). In Canada, the 
agency is the Ministry of Transport; in India, the Min- 
istry of Civil Aviation; and in the United Kingdom, the 
Civil Aviation Authority. More than 160 countries, in- 
cluding Australia Canada, India, South Africa, the Unit- 
ed Kingdom, and the United States belong to the Inter- 
national Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) of the United 


Nations. The ICAO establishes standards for its mem- 
bers in such areas as airport safety, operations, and air 
traffic control. 

In addition to licensing U.S. aircraft and pilots and cer- 
tifying airports and airlines, the FAA regulates safety and 
sets design and operations standards for airports. The 
FAA also operates air navigational aids and controls air 
traffic. The TSA, an organization within the U.S. Depart- 
ment of Transportation, is responsible for airport and 
airline security in the United States. 


Kinds of airports 


Airports are classified in different ways in different 
countries. The FAA classifies United States civilian air- 
ports as either commercial service airports or general 
aviation airports. Military airfields make up a third classi- 
fication. 

Commercial service airports, also called air carrier 
airports, serve planes of commercial airlines. They may 
also serve such small aircraft as business, charter, or pri- 
vate planes. Nearly all major civilian airports are com- 
mercial service airports. 

A commercial service airport may serve regional, na- 
tional, or major airlines—or a combination of these 
types. Regional airlines generally fly short routes using 
smaller aircraft and connect small communities with 
one or two large airports. However, some regional jets 
fly routes of up to 1,000 miles (1,600 kilometers). National 
airlines fly from large airports as well as smaller ones, 
and they use both large and small jet aircraft. Major air- 
lines are large air carriers that generate annual revenues 
of more than $1 billion in U.S. dollars. They generally 
provide both national and international flights. 

Most airports that handle international flights have the 
word international in their names. International airports 
serve airlines of both their own country and other coun- 
tries. 

General aviation airports serve all types of aircraft 
except scheduled airliners—planes that operate over 
specified routes on a timetable. They serve business, 
charter, and private aircraft as well as scheduled air 
taxis, which carry passengers between towns and to and 
from commercial service airports. In addition, general 
aviation airports handle small aircraft used for aerial sur- 
veys, crop-dusting, and flight instruction. Airports that 
handle only specialized aircraft, such as helicopters or 
seaplanes, also fall into this category. 

There are thousands of general aviation airports rang- 
ing from small grass or gravel strips to large, busy air- 
ports that handle huge corporate jets. The FAA classifies 
all general aviation airports —except those that serve 
only specialized aircraft—in four groups. The classifica- 
tions are based on the size of the planes the airports can 
handle. Basic utility airports serve single-engine and 
some small twin-engine, propeller-driven planes. Gener- 
al utility airports can handle slightly heavier propeller 
aircraft. Basic transport airports can accommodate small 
jet airplanes. General transport airports handle all types 
of aircraft. 

Special classifications of general aviation airports in 
clude heliports and seaplane bases. Heliports are areas 
where helicopters land and take off. A heliport may be 
on the ground, the roof of a building, or the deck of a 
ship. Seaplane bases are used by seaplanes and amplib- 


Airport 243 





AP/Wide World 
Airline personnel helping travelers at the check-in counter 


© Karen Kent, The Stock Market 


Workers loading food for passengers’ meals 


fans, aircraft that can land and take off on water or land. 
Seaplane bases may be on bays, lakes, or rivers. Most 
seaplane bases have onshore facilities to service the air- 
craft. The world’s busiest seaplane base is in Anchorage, 
Alaska. 

Military airfields are airports operated by the armed 
forces. Some military units, such as the U.S. Air National 
Guard, share facilities at commercial airports. Military 
airfields range in size from small fields for light planes 
to huge airports for heavy jet bombers. 


Airport facilities 


An airport's facilities depend on the size of the com- 
munity it serves, the area of land it covers, and the type 





Chris Sorensen 


Air traffic controllers directing aircraft movements 


————————————Eooa———————O 


244 Airport 


An overview of 
an airport 


Airports provide facilities for aircraft and their crews, passengers, and cargo. The airport dia- 
gramed below is designed on the satellite plan. In this plan, departing passengers enter the main 
terminal, then go to separate terminals called sate/fite terminals to board their planes.The control 
tower is a navigation center from which air traffic controllers direct aircraft movements. The airport 
also has hangars in which aircraft are stored and repaired, runways where the planes take off and 


land, and cargo areas. 


Interstate 
highway >. 


Main ——— 
terminal 


1 714714 
CE 147 14 
HHL 


Satellite terminals 


Runway 





Runway 


of air service it provides. This section deals chiefly with 
the numerous facilities provided by most large commer- 
cial service airports. The subsection Planning and build- 
ing an airport later in this article discusses different 
types of designs for airport passenger terminals. 

The passenger terminal. Passengers begin and end 
their flights at the passenger terminal. Airports may have 
one or more terminal buildings. At airline ticket coun- 
ters, departing passengers purchase tickets, have their 
tickets checked, and receive boarding passes. They also 
can leave their baggage to be loaded into the airplane's 
cargo hold. Loudspeakers, flight monitors, and electron- 
ic message boards announce flight arrivals and depar- 
tures. Boarding lounges provide seats for waiting travel- 
ers and airline crews. 


WORLD BOOK diagram by Russ Coombs, Steven Edsey and Sons 


" 
as | 


. 
Runway 
ol 3 


«oa 


Cargo area : 
te 


7! 


a 








Control 
tower 








Hangars 
=e 





| 

Passengers board and leave aircraft from openings 
called gates. At most large airports, an enclosed walk- 
way called a boarding bridge—or, under a common 
trade name, a /efway—connects the terminal gate with 
the aircraft during boarding. Arriving passengers pick 
up their luggage at a baggage claim area in the passen- 
ger terminal. 

Many of the activities in the passenger terminal take 
place behind the walls or under the floor. These activi- 
ties include the transport of baggage and cargo from 
the ticket counter to the aircraft. In addition, airlines 
maintain offices in these areas. 

Each airline has a briefing room, where pilots receive 


flight information. The briefing room includes a dispatch 
office, which handles communications with the airline's 





WORLD BOOK diagrams by Einbecker-Butler & Associates 











The terminal area of many airports has three main levels that handle a variety of activities. An ad- 
ditional underground level may provide links with mass transportation and intra-airport trains. 








operations center and with its airplanes, both on the 
ground and in flight. The airport manager and the man- 
agement staff, who oversee the operation of the airport, 
also have offices at the airport. 

Hangars are buildings in which aircraft are stored 
and repaired. Most airlines have their own hangars. 
Some hangars can hold several large jets at one time. 
Most airports locate hangars far enough from the termi- 
nal building to avoid interference with aircraft traffic on 
the ground. 

The control tower is the air traffic nerve center. In 
the tower, air traffic controllers use radar, radio, signal 
lights, and other equipment to direct air traffic near the 
airport as well as movements of aircraft on the ground. 
Control towers at the busiest airports may handle more 
than 200 landings and take-offs an hour during peak pe- 
riods. Large, tinted windows enable controllers to see 
all the aircraft in motion at the airport. Some control 
towers are over 200 feet (60 meters) tall. 

Runways must be long enough and wide enough to 
handle the largest planes using the airport. They must 
be as level as possible. However, runways slope slightly 
from the center toward each side to provide good 
drainage. A government body usually sets minimum 
runway lengths for different types of aircraft. Many small 
airports use only strips of mowed grass called /anding 
strips. Some of these strips are only 2,000 to 2,500 feet 
(610 to 760 meters) long. The runways of large airports 
are paved with concrete or asphalt. These runways may 
be as long as 13,000 to 14,000 feet (4,000 to 4,300 meters) 
to handle the biggest planes. Runways must have a c/ear 
zone at each end to give aircraft additional space to take 
off or land without endangering people or property on 
the ground. 

Lines painted down the center and sides and across 
the ends of runways guide pilots in the air and on the 
ground. Numbers painted on each end of a runway tell 
pilots the compass direction in which the runway is laid 
out For example, the numbers 18 and 36 indicate a 
north-south runway. The number 18 (an abbreviation for 
180°) is painted on the north end of the runway, and the 
number 36 (360°) appears on the south end. Most air- 
ports design runways in at least two directions so 
planes can teke off and land as nearly as possible into 
the wind. 

At night and other periods of low visibility, white 
lights outline each runway, and green lights mark the 
beginning of a runway. Red and white approach lights 
shine just in front of the area where a plane should 
touch down. 

Loading aprons and taxiways. The aircraft parking 
area at the gates of the passenger terminal is called a 
loading apron or tarmac. Although the word tarmac 
originally referred to a paving material made of crushed 
rock and tar, the apron is actually made of concrete or 
asphalt because these materials better resist damage 
from heat and fuel leaks. While an airplane is on the 
apron, workers refuel it and load baggage, cargo, and 
meals for the passengers. The crew and passengers 
board airplanes on the loading apron. A small airport 
may service only 1 or 2 aircraft on the apron at one time. 
Large airports may accommodate more than 100 planes 
at once. 

Aircraft use lanes called tax/ways to taxi from the 


Airport 245 


apron to the runways and from the runways to the 
hangars. Many large airports have double taxiways so 
aircraft can move to and from the runways and hangars 
at the same time. At night, the taxiways are marked with 
blue lights. Red lights are used to mark any barriers or 
other dangers. 
Ground transportation and parking. Large airports 
provide roadways alongside the terminal buildings 
where airport buses, hotel vans, private automobiles, 
limousines, and taxis can pick up and drop off passen- 
gers. Some airports are connected to the city center by 
light rail systems or subways. 
All airports maintain parking facilities. Most large air- 
ports have multistory parking garages, which take less 
land than parking lots do to hold the same number of 
cars. Parking provides a major source of revenue for 
many airports. 


Airport operations 


The airport manager and the management staff direct 
the maintenance, operation, and safety of the entire air- 
port In some regions, they may be responsible for sev- 
eral airports. The management staff at a large airport is 
divided into several departments, such as administra- 





World's 25 busiest airports 
Aircraft 
Passenger take-offs 
departures and 
Airport and arrivals" landings 
1. Hartsfield International 
(Atlanta) 80,171,000 916,000 
2. OHare International (Chicago) 72,135,000 908,000 
3. Los Angeles International 68,478,000 561,000 
4. Heathrow (London) 64,607,000 467,000 
5. Dallas/Fort Worth 
International 60,687,000 838,000 
6. Tokyo International 56,402,000 256,000 
7. Frankfurt 49,360,000 459,000 
8. Charles de Gaulle (Paris) 48,240,000 518,000 
9. San Francisco International 41,174,000 429,000 
10. Schiphol (Amsterdam) 39,605,000 432,000 
11. Denver International 38,749,000 509,000 
12. McCarran International 
{Las Vegas) 35,856,000 515,000 
13. Kimpo International (Seoul) 36,727,000 236,000 
14. Minneapolis-St. Paul 
International 36,688,000 523,000 
15. Sky Harbor (Phoenix) 35,890,000 637,000 
16. Detroit Metropolitan 
Wayne County 35,535,000 555,000 
17. Houston Intercontinental 35,246,000 484,000 
18. Newark International 34,195,000 449,000 
19. Miami International 33,570,000 517,000 
20. John F. Kennedy International 
(New York City) 32,779,000 345,000 
21. Barajas (Madrid) 32,766,000 358,000 
22. Hong Kong International 32,747,000 194,000 
23. Gatwick (London) 32,057,000 261,000 
24. Orlando International 30,823,000 368,000 
25. Lambert-St. Louis 
International 30,547,000 481,000 
Winds oak, comiiex ial aichine trath< 
Figures are for 2000) 
Source Airports Council International. Geneva 





246 Airport 





Cargo handling is a major airport activity. Many airlines have special cargo planes 
like the one above. Workers pack small cargo items in containers shaped to fit the 
airplane's interior. They load the cargo through the plane's wide door. 


tion, finance, operations, maintenance, planning, engi- 
neering, safety, security, and public affairs. The airport 
staff works to ensure that the airport operates safely and 
efficiently. Every day, the staff checks the safety of the 
airports terminal, taxiways and runways, parking areas, 
and roadways. 

An airport must operate like a business. Airports rent 
space to the airlines for offices, check-in counters, and 
baggage areas. In addition, airports give leases to 
restaurants, gift shops, hotels, and car rental agencies. 
The leases provide revenue to pay for the operation and 
development of the airport. In addition, the airport re- 
ceives income from parking lots, telephones and adver- 
tisements in the terminal, and landing fees paid by the 
airlines. Most commercial service airports also get in- 
come from a passenger facility charge, a small fee as- 
sessed on each passengers ticket. 

Airline passenger services. Airline workers provide 
many services for passengers at commercial airports. 
Ticket counter employees sell tickets, check in passen- 
gers who already have tickets, and provide information 
about the times and gates for flight arrivals and depar- 
tures. A passenger's ticket may be a printed ticket or an 
e-ticket, a ticket purchased over the telephone or the In- 
ternet and recorded electronically with the airline. Ticket 
counter agents use airline computer systems to quickly 
print boarding passes and baggage tags. Ticket kiosks at 
some airports enable passengers to check themselves in 
without the aid of a ticket agent. 

Ticket counter workers also check in passengers’ bag- 
gage. Baggage handlers and ramp agents (workers that 
service aircraft between flights) see that baggage is 
loaded on the correct flights. After a plane reaches its 
destination, handlers unload bags and transport them to 
the baggage claim area. 

Other airline workers include an airline station man- 
ager, who oversees passenger services, and reserva- 
tions agents, who keep records of flight reservations. 
The dispatch staff maintains contact with planes in the 
air and with other airports that the airline serves. 





Airborne Express 


WORLD BOOK photo 


Refueling is one of the important activities 
carried out while a plane stands outside the 
terminal between flights. 


Cargo handling. Most airports use the term cargo 
for mail and all other freight carried by aircraft except 
baggage. Much air cargo includes items that spoil rapid- 
ly, such as flowers, fruits, vegetables, seafood, and med- 
ical supplies, including organs for transplant. Other typi- 
cal air cargo includes such products as electronic 
products and machinery parts. Both cargo aircraft and 
passenger aircraft carry cargo. 

Large airports have several separate terminals for car- 
go processing. Cargo brought in from the surrounding 
area is often sorted at the airport for various flights. 
Postal workers sort any mail. Carts, towed by small vehi- 
cles called tugs, then carry the cargo to the apron, 
where workers load it into passenger or cargo aircraft. 

Small aircraft services. Commercial service airports 
must provide many services for small planes that are not 
operated by commercial airlines. In the United States, 
these small planes account for about 10 percent of the 
traffic at most large commercial service airports and ap- 
proximately 65 percent of the flights at small commercial 
service airports. A Fixed Base Operator provides these 
small aircraft with such services as fuel, hangars, me- 
chanical maintenance, ground transportation, and food. 

Air traffic control. In the control tower, the air traffic 
controllers guide aircraft as they land, take off, and taxi. 
The controllers see that the traffic keeps moving 
smoothly, rapidly, and safely. They must have good eye- 
sight, speak clearly over the radio, and think quickly. The 
controllers must also remain calm during periods of 
heavy air traffic. Their job becomes especially difficult 
when fog or other weather conditions reduce visibility. 
In such situations, the controllers must rely entirely on 
radar to locate and guide aircraft in flight. 

Planes approach or depart on assigned routes called 
traffic patterns. Instruments in aircraft cockpits electroni- 
cally display an airport's traffic patterns for pilots to fol- 
low. When necessary, a pilot can safely fly without in- 
struments if the weather is clear enough to see other 
aircraft and the airport. 

The control tower has several types of electronic all- 








— oe 


Airport terms 


Air carrier airport is an airport that serves planes ot commer- 
cial airlines. Air carrier airports may also serve other types of air- 
craft, such as business, charter, or private planes. 

Cargo is all freight, except baggage, carried by an airplane. 
Closed in means an airport is closed to air traffic because of 
bad weather. 

Control tower is a glass-enclosed booth equipped with radar, 
radio, lights, and other navigation aids for directing aircraft 
movements on the ground and in the air. Air traffic controllers 
work in the tower or in buildings called air route traffic control 
centers. 

Gate is the airport terminal entryway passengers use when 
boarding or leaving planes. Each airliner is assigned a gate posi- 
tion tor loading or unloading passengers. 

General aviation airport is an airport that does not serve 
scheduled airlines. General aviation airports serve mostly air 
taxis and business, charter, and private planes. 

General aviation traffic is all air traffic except scheduled airline 
flights. 

Loading apron is the paved area around the terminal where 
aircraft are serviced, passengers board and leave planes, and 
baggage and cargo are loaded and unloaded. 

Taxiway is a paved lane aircraft use to move between the 
apron, hangars, and runways. Aircraft follow a taxi route to reach 
a take-off point or parking area. 

Terminal is the main airport building for passenger services. It 
also houses offices of airline employees and the airport man- 
agement staff. 


weather landing equipment to help bring planes down 
safely. Most commercial airports have an electronic aid 
called an Instrument Landing System (ILS). The ILS sends 
radio signals to receivers on an airplane. The airplane 
receivers show the pilot whether the plane is to the left, 
right, above, below, or directly on the correct approach 
path to the airport. 

Other navigation aids include Airport Surveillance 
Radar (ASR), the Microwave Landing System (MLS), and 
the Global Positioning System (GPS). The ASR gives traf- 
fic controllers a view of all aircraft activity within about 
50 miles (80 kilometers) of the airport. This information 


Making instrument 
landings 


Airport 247 


helps controllers prevent midair collisions by choosing 
the safest route for pilots to follow. 

The MLS is a precision landing aid similar to the ILS. 
The MLS provides additional information to help the pi- 
lot select the most appropriate approach path for each 
type of aircraft. Pilots of helicopters and small aircraft 
are thus able to select shorter and steeper approaches 
to the runway than those selected by pilots of larger air- 
craft. 

The GPS uses a network of navigation satellites to en- 
able pilots anywhere on earth to determine their loca- 
tion. These satellites send out radio signals that are 
picked up by receivers on the aircraft. GPS equipment 
can compute an aircraft's position, speed, and time 
every second. The system bases the calculations on the 
distances between the satellites and the receiver. See 
Global Positioning System. 

Airport security. Commercial service airports world- 
wide maintain a high level of security to prevent such 
dangerous activity as terrorist hijackings and bombings. 
TSA personnel search airplanes for hidden weapons 
and explosives. They also inspect passengers’ baggage 
before it goes onto the plane. Passengers must pass 
through electronic scanners that detect guns, knives, 
and other metal objects. 

The federal government has established security reg- 
ulations for all air carrier airports in the United States. 
The regulations include rules on inspection of planes, 
baggage, and passengers. The airports are required to 
have law enforcement personnel on the premises as 
part of their security programs. Federal legislation 
passed after terrorist attacks in the United States in Sep- 
tember 2001 set deadlines for increased security meas- 
ures at airports. These measures include screening all 
checked baggage for explosives. The new law also 
transferred responsibility for passenger and baggage 
screening from personnel employed by private security 
firms to federal employees. 

Other operations. Some airline and privately con- 
tracted employees work in the hangars. There, trained 


The /nstrument Landing System (ILS) sends radio signals to receivers on a plane. A vertical /oca/izer 
beam guides the plane to the runway. A glide-s/ope beam shows the angle on which the plane 


should descend. Marker beacons or special signals indicate the distance to the runway. 





Outer marker beacon 


Localizer beam 






Glide-slope beam 


7 
q 
| 
v 


5 miles (8 kilometers) to runway 





Bes End of runway 


' mile (0.8 kilometer) to runway 


WORLD BOOK diagram by Einbecker-Butler & Associates 


— Middle marker beacon 


Localizer transmitter 


and antenna 
Glide-slope transmitter 


= and antenna 


‘tab? 


% 2 Vo, & 
Saar © » 
. “> oe 





‘ cE _ ee ee ~~ End of runway 
ee Runway 
to ale a) es 2 


ee Touchdown 


Agree, 








Approach lights 





248 Airport 





Security checks at airports help prevent hijacking of planes. Passengers walk 
through a device that detects metal objects. Security personnel may also use a hand- 
held scanner, shown here, to be certain a passenger carries no concealed weapons. 


mechanics repair planes and other employees keep 
records of spare parts needed for urgent repairs. Many 
airline employees work in the apron area. Some direct 
aircraft into parking spaces. Mechanics check the en- 
gines and other equipment. Some employees clean the 
interior of airplanes between flights. After all the work 
has been completed, the captain of an aircraft notifies 
the dispatch office that the flight is ready to leave. 

Airlines contract with commercial flight kitchens to 
prepare food for passengers on some flights. Dietitians 
plan the menus, chefs do the cooking, and food han- 
dlers transport the meals to waiting aircraft. 

At most U.S. airports, FAA employees operate the 
control tower and maintain electronic equipment in the 
tower. The workers who do passenger and baggage in- 
spection in U.S. airports are also federal employees. 
Other federal workers at airports include postal work- 
ers, Customs Service and Immigration Service person- 
nel, and security personnel. 

Many large commercial service airports have a station 
for their national weather service. Airports and airlines 
typically use private weather services to check condi- 
tions in specific areas of interest. Such services provide 
airlines, pilots, and airport operators with world and na- 
tional weather information. 


Airport development 


Planning and building an airport takes a long time 
because of the environmental and economic issues that 
must be considered. When a governmental body wishes 
to build an airport, it may take several years and many 
studies before construction can begin. The first step is 
to hire an airport planning firm to select the best site for 
the new airport. The planners evaluate each potential 
site for many factors, including environmental impact, 
distance to the city, homes and businesses that must be 
moved, and difficulty of building on the terrain. The gov- 
ernmental body then holds public hearings where elect- 
ed officials and the public can express their opinions 


© Tim Boyle, Getty Images 


United Airtines 
An airline mechanic works to keep aircraft 
in safe flying condition. Mechanics perform 
routine checks and make needed repairs. 


about the site that has been chosen. 

Following approval by the community and the federal 
government, funding for the airport must be arranged. 
Voters may be asked to approve a bond issue to help 
pay for the new facility. The governmental body then 
contracts with an architectural firm, an engineering firm, 
contractors and suppliers, and perhaps a project man- 
agement firm to design and build the airport. The actual 
construction of a major airport usually takes three to five 
years. 

Few cities build new airports. Instead, most cities ex- 
pand or renovate their existing airports. Planners pre- 
pare a document called an airport master plan. The plan 
shows the airport's present facilities and describes how 
the airport should be developed to meet future needs. 
These plans generally show the location of new run- 
ways and terminal buildings so these areas can be pro- 
tected for future development. The nation’s government 
often funds such plans. 

As cities allow homes and businesses to be built near 
an airport, they decrease the ability of the airport to 
grow in the future. Airports, airlines, the federal govern- 
ment, and local communities must all work together to 
ensure that airports operate safely and efficiently. 

Terminal designs. Designs for airport passenger ter- 
minals use one of three types of plans. These plans are: 
(1) linear, (2) pier, and (3) satellite. 

In a linear plan, arriving and departing passengers en- 
ter and exit the terminal at various points along the 
building's curb. Aircraft also park along the length of the 
building. This arrangement results in short walking dis- 
tances for passengers. Linear plans work best for pas- 
sengers beginning or ending their trips. Such plans are 
less efficient, however, for passengers or baggage 
transferring between flights. 

A pier plan has a central terminal building with a pier 
or passageway called a concourse that extends onto the 
apron where the airplanes park. Although this type of 
plan may create longer walking distances, it allows 


ee od 


Airport 249 


Common terminal designs include linear, pier, and satellite plans. In a /inear plan, passengers ar- 
rive at points along the length of the building, and the planes park along the other side. A pier plan 


has a central terminal with piers that extend onto the apron where the aircraft park. Ina satellite 
plan, people board and leave planes from separate satellite terminals. 


Types of airport 
passenger terminals 
Passenger 
4—.- terminals 
-Taxiway Passenger 
> terminals 








. * 


a be af = 
& Taxiway p 


Control - 
aad Apron + a 
' Satellite 4 ’ 
mig * terminals < , 
’ ad « 2 ¥ 
a x © 
‘ ‘. x» ¥ 





a® + 

: Parking L . 
“ * 
7 tcer * ee » Taxiway —— ~— 

‘ Mai Control 
erminal Parking c weet tower 
“ —_Apron P Parking 

; Runways 


>. 





Passenger 


terminal Parking 


Linear plan Pier plan 


more aircraft to park near the building. It also centralizes 
such functions as baggage handling, ticketing, and 
check-in. Many modern pier terminals have moving 
sidewalks to help passengers who have to walk long 
distances. 

In a satellite plan, passengers board aircraft from ter- 
minals called sate/lite terminals. Passengers travel from 
the main terminal to a satellite terminal by riding a shut- 
tle or a driverless electric rail car called a people mover. 
Shuttles and people movers run at ground level, over- 
head, or underground from the main terminal. The satel- 
lite plan enables a greater number of aircraft to park at a 
terminal and shortens walking distances. 

Airport noise. When airports were built years ago, 
they lay far from cities and people s homes. However, as 
cities have grown, more people have come to live near 
airports. As a result, aircraft noise has become an in- 
creasing problem. In the United States, federal noise 
laws have resulted in airlines phasing out old, noisy air- 
craft and purchasing quieter new planes, or replacing 
engine parts on existing aircraft. In addition, airports 
sometimes obtain federal funds to buy homes affected 
by noise or to pay for the soundproofing of schools, li- 
braries, and homes. At many airports, pilots must follow 
specific approach and departure patterns to reduce the 
impact of noise on populated areas. 

Paul P. Bollinger, }r- 

Related articles. See the 7ransportation section in the vari- 
ous city, country, state, and province articles. See also: 

Airmail 

Airplane 

Aviation 

Federal Aviation Administration 
Radar 








f 
: 


WORLD BOOK diagrams by Russ Coombs, Steven Edsey and Sons 
Satellite plan 


Outline 


I. Kinds of airports 
A. Commercial service airports 
B. General aviation airports 
C Military airfields 

li. Airport facilities 
A. The passenger terminal 
B. Hangars 
C. The control tower 
D. Runways 
E. Loading aprons and taxiways 
F. Ground transportation and parking 

lll. Airport operations 
A. Airline passenger services 
B. Cargo handling 
C Small aircraft services 
D. Air traffic control 
E. Airport security 
F. Other operations 
IV. Airport development 

A. Planning and building an airport 
B. Terminal designs 
C Airport noise 


Questions 


What security regulations do airports follow to prevent hijack- 
ing attempts? 

What things are shown in an airport master plan? 

What do the numbers on runways mean? 

How do commercial service airports differ from general aviation 
airports? 

What are some functions of federal employees at airports? 

What is the job of the airport management staff? 

What are some of the navigation aids used by air traffic con- 
trollers? 

What are some major sources of revenue at commercial air- 
ports? 

What are some of the responsibilities of the FAA? 

What is the largest airport in the world? In the United States? 


250 Airship 





Culver 
During the 1920's and 1930's, the United States Navy airship 
Los Angeles, shown here, performed such military tasks as es- 
corting ships and patrolling coastal waters. 


Airship is a lighter-than-air aircraft with an engine that 
moves it through the air. Airships also normally have 
equipment for steering. The main body of a typical air- 
ship is a huge, cigar-shaped balloon filled with a lighter- 
than-air gas. The gas raises the craft and keeps it aloft. 

An airship differs from a free-floating balloon, which 
is neither powered nor steered. Airships also differ from 
helicopters and airplanes, which are heavier than air. 
Helicopters and airplanes use their engines and blades 
or wings to lift them and keep them aloft. 

Airships were introduced in the 1800's as the first fly- 
ing machines capable of prolonged flight and of being 
steered. This feature led to the craft being called dirigi- 
bles, which comes from the Latin word dirigere, mean- 
ing to direct. In World War | (1914-1918), airships were 
used as bombers, for protecting ships against subma- 
rine attack, and for other duties. Before and after the 
war, they were used to carry passengers. Airship pas- 
senger services reached their height in the 1930's, but a 
series of disastrous crashes and the increasing populari- 
ty and long-range capability of the airplane brought air- 
ship passenger services to an end. Today, several coun- 
tries have shown a renewed interest in airships for 
advertising, Cargo Operations, passenger transport, 
recreational flying, and surveillance. 


Types of airships 


There are three main types of airships: (1) nonrigid air- 
ships, (2) rigid airships, and (3) semirigid airships. 

Nonrigid airships were the first airships and are the 
most popular type today. They have no major internal 
structures and no outer framework. Gas pressure causes 
the outer skin, called the enve/ope, to keep its shape. 
Modern envelopes are made of synthetic materials. 

The smallest airships have been nonrigid craft. Some 
have measured less than 75 feet (23 meters) long. The 
largest nonrigid airships were the United States Navy's 
ZPG-3W airships. These craft were flown from 1958 to 
1962 and were used for airborne early-warning duties. 
Each ZPG-3W measured about 403 feet (123 meters) 
long. Today's nonrigid airships average about 150 feet 


Goodyear 
Today’ airships are often used for commercial purposes. The 
Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company operates several blimps, 
which serve mainly as advertising or public relations craft. 


46 meters) in length. They cruise at approximately 35 to 
40 miles (56 to 65 kilometers) per hour at heights reach- 
ing about 10,000 feet (3,050 meters). 

The U.S. Navy's B-class nonrigid airships, built in 1917, 
gave rise to the term b/imp for nonrigid craft. The term 
came from B-nonrigid, or B-limp. 

Rigid airships, the largest airships, have a greater 
carrying capacity than nonrigid craft. But few are flown 
today. The main body of a rigid airship is called the Au//. 
Most early rigid craft had a hull consisting of a wooden 
or metal framework that supported the outer skin. To- 
day, composite materials can be used. The most famous 
rigid airships were called zeppelins, after Count Ferdi- 
nand von Zeppelin, a German airship pioneer. 

Zeppelins were cigar-shaped and ranged from about 
400 feet (120 meters) to over 800 feet (240 meters) long. 
Advanced models could reach speeds of about 80 miles 
(130 kilometers) per hour. Inside the hulls were several 
compartments, called gas cells, that held the lifting gas. 
Many hulls contained corridors along which cargo, 
crew quarters, and the fuel tanks were located 

Semirigid airships became fairly common in the ear- 
ly 1900's. They often resembled nonrigid ships, except 
that a support ran along most of the length of the enve- 
lope and helped maintain its shape and distribute loads. 
Semirigid airships were often larger than nonrigid craft 
A few semirigid craft are being developed and flown to- 
day, but they are far less common than nonrigid craft. 


How airships fly 


Lift is the force that raises an airship off the ground 
and keeps it aloft. Airships generate lift because the gas 
they contain has a lower density than the air outside the 
craft. Airships hold enough of this lighter-than-air gas to 
overcome their own weight and rise from the ground. 

Early airships contained hydrogen, the lightest of all 
gases. But hydrogen is highly flammable, which was an 
important factor in a number of airship disasters. As a 
result, helium replaced hydrogen for use in airships. 

Thrust is the force that moves an airship through the 
air. Most airships use engines and propellers to obtain 


Seoll ee 


thrust. On large rigid airships of the earty 1900's, the en- 
gines and propellers were in gondolas (cars) attached to 
the hull. Such craft had separate gondolas for the pas- 
sengers and crew. On most nonrigid and semirigid air- 
ships, engines are mounted on a gondola that also 
holds the crew and passengers. 

Control. Most airships have tail structures that in- 
clude fins, rudders, and elevators. Fins are large, fixed 
surfaces. Typically, four fins are set equally distant from 
one another around the ship's stern (rear). The smaller, 
movable rudders and elevators are surfaces attached to 
the fins. A pilot moves the rudders to steer and the ele- 
vators to raise or lower the ship’s nose. 

For improved control, many early airships carried 
weight called ba//last, usually water. If rain or other 
weather conditions made the craft heavier in flight, the 
pilot could release ballast to lighten the craft and thus 
maintain altitude. Some modern airships carry ballast. 

Ballonets are air-filled bags or compartments inside 
the envelope of nonrigid and semirigid craft. Ballonets 
help maintain the shape of the envelope. If gas pressure 
in the envelope decreases, air is pumped into the bal- 
lonets so that the envelope will not sag. Ballonets can 
also be used to stiffen the envelope of a rigid airship. 

Storage. Early airships were kept in huge hangars or 
sheds, but moving the craft in and out of these shelters 
sometimes proved disastrous. Engineers partly solved 
the problem when they developed the mooring masta 
high, stable tower to which an airship could be an- 
chored without touching the ground. The bow of the 
airship was secured to the tower. Mooring masts al- 


Kinds of airships 


Airship 251 


lowed airships a limited amount of movement to help 
them survive high winds. To enter rigid craft, the crew 
and passengers passed up a Staircase within the mast. 
Low mooring masts were developed to secure non- 
rigid airships close to the ground. The crew and passen- 
gers can board these craft directly into the gondola. 
Some modern airships do not require masts at all. 


History 


The first airships evolved from balloons. Henri Gif- 
fard, a French engineer, built and piloted the first pow- 
ered airship. As with many balloons, ropes covered the 
envelope and hung down to support an open gondola. 
But unlike the ball-shaped balloons, Giffard’s airship was 
cigar-shaped, and the gondola supported a 3-horsepow- 
er (2.2-kilowatt) steam engine. A saillike rudder was car- 
ried in the gondola. 

On Sept. 24, 1852, Giffard flew his craft about 17 miles 
(27 kilometers) from Paris to Trappes, near Versailles, at 
an average speed of 5 miles (8 kilometers) per hour. The 
small rudder and engine enabled him to alter his 
course, but the craft was not properly steerable. 

In 1884, Charles Renard and Arthur Krebs, two French 
inventors, completed La France. This airship had a 
battery-powered electric motor that produced about 9 
horsepower (7 kilowatts). It also had an efficient rudder 
and elevator. Renard and Krebs flew La France around a 
5-mile (8-kilometer) circular course near Paris at speeds 
over 14 miles (23 kilometers) per hour. In 1901, the 
Brazilian-born inventor Alberto Santos-Dumont com- 
pleted a controlled journey around the Eiffel Tower in 


There are three main types of airships. A nonrigid airship has no framework supporting its gas- 


filled envelope (outer skin). In a semirigid airship, supports brace the craft's gas-filled bag. An 
extensive inner framework, usually of wood or metal, supports the gas bags of a rigid airship. 


Bracing 

supports 
Main 
frome 


Gondola 


Semirigid Airship 





— 


Rigid Airship Wire Engine 
supports 


Stares 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Tony Gibbons, Linden Artists Ltd. 


Nonrigid Airship 


Envelope 


e b0 eae Of 


Cotwalk 


Cabins Ladder 


Control 
gondola 














252 Airship 


Paris. His adventures won him great popularity. 

David Schwarz of Austria designed the first truly rigid 
airship. His craft flew on Nov. 3, 1897. But due to windy 
conditions, mechanical problems, and an inexperienced 
pilot, the craft crashed. 

The zeppelins. In 1900, Count Ferdinand von Zeppe- 
lin flew his first airship, the LZ-1. It was 420 feet (128 me- 
ters) long and could reach a top speed of about 17 miles 
(27 kilometers) per hour. It made only three flights be- 
cause it was underpowered and lacked proper control. 
Zeppelin completed the LZ-2 in 1905, and he launched 
the LZ-3 in 1906. The German Army later made the LZ-3 
the first military zeppelin. 

In 1909, Zeppelin helped establish the world’s first 
commercial airline, known as DELAG. The Deutschland, 
DELAGs first airship, was over 485 feet (148 meters) long 
and had three 120-horsepower (90-kilowatt) engines. 
From 1910 to 1913, over 34,000 passengers flew by zep- 
pelin airships on DELAG flights. 

World War I. During World War |, Germany used 
zeppelins and other airships to patrol the North Sea and 
scout enemy craft and positions. Germany was also the 
only country to make major use of rigid airships for 
strategic bombing. But the frequent raids over England 
caused little damage. The largest user of rigid airships 
during the war was the German Naval Airship Division. 
It received about 70 zeppelin and Schutte-Lanz craft. 
Due to accidents, bad weather, and enemy fire, 33 of 
these airships were lost. The capabilities of zeppelins 
improved dramatically. For example, the L-59 once flew 
4,200 miles (6,800 kilometers) nonstop. Its five engines 
could produce speeds of over 60 miles (95 kilometers) 
per hour. 

The United Kingdom built and operated a large num- 
ber of nonrigid airships during the war. British airships 
primarily protected ships from submarine attack. The 
United States used nonrigid airships for some overwa- 
ter patrol duties and antisubmarine warfare. Other coun- 
tries that used airships during the war included France 
and Italy. 

Between world wars. After World War 1, airships 
became bigger, faster, and stronger. For example, in 
1919, the United Kingdom's rigid R-34 made the first 
transatlantic crossing by an airship. In 1926, the Italian- 
built semirigid Norge became the first airship to fly over 
the North Pole. The replacement of hydrogen with heli- 
um to prevent airship disasters began in the 1920's, on 
U.S. craft. 

In the 1920's and 1930's, the U.S. Navy experimented 
with giant rigid airships. The Akron, launched in 1931, 
and the Macon, launched in 1933, carried fighter air- 
planes. While in flight, these airships could launch and 
receive the planes. In April 1933, the Akron went down 
in a storm off the coast of New Jersey, killing 73 people. 
In February 1935, bad weather forced the Macon into 
the sea off the coast of California, killing two people and 
ending U.S. construction of rigid airships. 

The most successful rigid airship ever built was the 
German LZ-127 Grat Zeppelin. Between 1928 and 1937, 
the Graf Zeppelin flew more than 1 million miles (1.6 mil- 
lion kilometers) and carried over 13,000 passengers, 
many of them overseas. In August 1929, it made the first 
airship flight around the world. The Graf Zeppelin ranks 
among the fastest rigid airships ever flown. 





mate t . — 


News Syndicate Co., Inc. 


The Hindenburg explosion marked the end of regular passen- 
ger service on airships. In 1937, this German airship, one of the 
largest ever built, burst into flames while approaching its dock in 
Lakehurst, New Jersey. The ships envelope and hydrogen gas ig- 
nited, causing an explosion. Thirty-six people died in the disaster. 


The Hindenburg. Construction and operation of 
rigid airships in Germany came to a swift end following 
the destruction of the Hindenburg. One of the largest 
airships ever built, the Hindenburg was about 804 feet 
(245 meters) long and 135 feet (41 meters) wide. It had a 
volume of 7,062,100 cubic feet (199,980 cubic meters) 
and cruised at 78 miles (126 kilometers) per hour. On 
May 6, 1937, while approaching its docking in Lakehurst, 
New Jersey, the Hindenburg exploded. Of the 97 people 
on board, 35 were killed. In addition, one member of the 
ground crew was killed. The ships envelope material 
and hydrogen gas had ignited, leading to an explosion. 
The Hindenburg disaster marked the end of the use of 
airships for regular passenger services. In addition, de- 
velopment of rigid airships ended. 

World War Il to the present. The evolution of the 
airplane contributed greatly to the decreased use of the 
military nonrigid airship during World War II (1939- 
1945). The U.S. Navy made the only significant use of 
nonrigid airships during the war, flying mainly its K-class 
airships. Most of these craft patrolled U.S. coastal waters 
and escorted surface ships there. 

In the late 1950's, the Navy introduced its ZPG-3W 
nonrigid airships. One ZPG-3W craft crashed at sea in 
1960, killing nearly everyone on board. This crash con- 
tributed to ending the use of nonrigid airships for mili- 
tary operations. 

Today, there has been a significant revival of airships. 
Most airship companies produce nonrigid craft for 
commercial and recreational purposes. Some manufac- 
turers also design and build large rigid airships for pas- 
senger and heavy cargo operations. Other companies 
have created hybrid craft that rely on modified wings or 
other devices to help produce lift in addition to that pro- 
vided by gas. Michael }. H. Taylor 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Balloon Blimp 





Helium 
Hydrogen 


Santos-Dument, Alberto 
Zeppelin, Ferdinand von 


Additional resources 


Botting, Douglas. Dr. Eckener’s Dream Machine: The Great Zep- 
pelin and the Dawn of Air Travel. Henry Holt, 2001. 

OBrien, Patrick. The Hindenburg. Henry Holt, 2000. Younger 
readers. 


Aisne River, ayr, is a river in northeastern France. It 
rises in the forests of Argonne near Ste. Menehould. It 
flows north and then west before joining the Oise River 
near Compiegne. For location, see France (terrain map). 
The Aisne is about 180 miles (290 kilometers) long. 
Canals join the Aisne to the Seine and Meuse rivers. 
Three bitter battles of World War I (1914-1918) were 
fought in the valley of the Aisne. Hugh D. Clout 
Aitken, William M. See Beaverbrook, Lord. 
Aiun. See El Aaiun. 
Aix-la-Chapelle. See Aachen. 
Aix-la-Chapelle, Ayxs /ah shah PEHL, Congress of, 
met in Aachen (Aix-la-Chapelle), Germany, in 1818. Its 
purpose was to preserve the peace established by the 
Congress of Vienna in 1815. Europe was still struggling 
with problems that grew out of the Napoleonic Wars. 
Even with Napoleon in exile at St. Helena, fear of France 
had not disappeared. Alexander | of Russia, Francis | of 
Austria, and Frederick William III of Prussia attended the 
congress. England was represented by the Duke of Wel- 
lington and Lord Castlereagh, Austria by Prince von 
Metternich, and France by the Duc de Richelieu. Riche- 
lieu convinced the congress that France would keep the 
peace, and all occupation troops were withdrawn. The 
congress also discussed ways of stopping the slave 
trade, ending sea raids by the Barbary States, and per- 
suading Spain’s American colonies to accept Spanish 
rule. Robert G. L Waite 

See also Vienna, Congress of. 
Ajax the Greater, in Greek mythology, was one of the 
bravest Greek heroes who fought in the Trojan War. He 
is called Ajax the Greater to distinguish him from anoth- 
er Greek warrior, called Ajax the Lesser. After the Greek 
hero Achilles was killed in the war, his armor was unfair- 
ly awarded to Odysseus (Ulysses in Latin). Ajax went mad 
with despair at losing the prize and killed flocks of 
sheep and cattle that he believed were his enemies. 
When he regained his sanity, he committed suicide by 
falling on his sword. A flower is said to have sprung 
from his blood. Ajax was the son of King Telamon. Ajax 
is the Latin form of the Greek A/as. 
Ajax the Lesser, in Greek mythology, was a great 
Greek hero during the Trojan War. He is called Ajax the 
Lesser to distinguish him from another Greek hero of 
the Trojan War, called Ajax the Greater. Ajax had a sintul 
character. By raping the Trojan princess Cassandra in 
the temple of the goddess Athena, he brought divine 
wrath on the entire Greek force. Athena and the sea god 
Poseidon destroyed the ships of Ajax and other Greeks 
in a fierce storm in which Ajax died for his defiance of 
the gods. Ajax is the Latin form of the Greek Alas. Ajax 
was the son of King Oileus. F. Carter Philips . 
Akbar, AK bahr (1542-1605), was the greatest ruler of 
the Mughal Empire of India. During his 49-year reign, 
from 1556 until his death on Oct. 27, 1605, he controlled 
most of north and central India and Atghanistan. He set 
up the governmental framework of the empire and or- 


F. Carter Philips 


Akita 253 


ganized new systems of coinage and taxation. 

Akbar had a great interest in all religions and was 
known for his religious tolerance and his justice. Schol- 
ars, priests, and mystics of all religions debated before 
him. Despite resistance from orthodox Muslims, he won 
the support of many Hindus, including the Rajputs, who 
came froma tribal kingdom in northwestern India. 

Akbar was born on Nov. 23, 1542, in Umarkot in what 
is now Pakistan. He was the grandson of Babur, the first 
Mughal emperor. Akbar became emperor at the age of 
13 after the death of his father, Humayun. 

See also Babur; India (The Mughal Empire). 
Akhenaten, 4H kuh NAH tehn, ruled ancient Egypt as 
pharaoh from about 1367 to 1350 B.C. He was married to 
Queen Nefertiti. Akhena- 
ten was a religious re- 
former, devoted solely to 
the worship of Aten, the 
sun god. During the early 
part of his reign, perhaps 
while coregent with his fa- 
ther, Amenhotep III, he 
abandoned the state reli- 
gion of Amon. Akhenaten 
built a new capital at 
Amarna which he called 
Akhetaten, meaning hori- 
zon of Aten. Late in his 
reign, he attacked the old 
religion and removed the 
name of the national god Amon from monuments. Akhe- 
naten was also known as a poet and a patron of the arts. 

Leonard H. Lesko 

See also Egypt, Ancient (The New Kingdom); Nefertiti. 
Akihito, ah kih HEE toh (1933- ), became emperor 
of Japan in 1989 upon the death of his father, Hirohito 
(see Hirohito). Heisei was 
chosen as Akihito’s reign 
name, and he is known as 
the Heisei Emperor. 

Akihito was born on 
Dec. 23, 1933, in Tokyo. 
After World War II (1939- 
1945) ended, the life of 
Japan's imperial family 
changed. Akihito studied 
with an American tutor 
and toured the West. His 
marriage to a Commoner, 
Michiko Shoda, in 1959 
was considered symbolic 
of Japan’s new democracy. 
The couple had two sons and a daughter. Crown Prince 
Naruhito, the oldest child, is heir to the throne. 

Kenneth B. Pyle 
Akita is a breed of dog that originated in northern 
Japan. It was used to hunt bears and other large animals. 
Akitas were once owned by royalty in Japan, and the 
dogs are still revered in that country. Akitas are known 
for their loyalty. They are alert, responsive guard dogs, 
and they are aggressive toward other dogs. 

Akitas are large and powerful, with heavy bones. 
Males stand from 26 to 28 inches (66 to 71 centimeters) 
tall at the shoulder. The short coat of the Akita may be 


Patricia Risso 





Art Resource 


Akhenaten 





Simon Benainous. Gamma-Liatson 


Akihito 


EE 


254 Akiva ben Joseph 





ees 3- Sr 
Joseph L Vogl 


The Akita is a powerful dog that developed in Japan. 


any color, or it may be a mixture of colors. 

Critically reviewed by the Akita Club of America 
Akiva ben Joseph, ah KEE vah behn JOH zuhf(A.D. 
50?-135?), was a rabbi who profoundly influenced the 
development of Jewish law. His name is also spelled Ak- 
iba. He emphasized the importance for every Jew of 
studying the Torah, the first five books of the Bible. Aki- 
va believed that each word and letter of the Bible was 
significant. He sought lessons from the spelling itself as 
well as from the wording of the text. He collected and 
explained legal traditions along with interpretations of 
the Bible. This work became the basis of the Mishnah, 
the fundamental code of Jewish law. Akiva was known 
for his modesty, optimism, concern for the poor, and 
love of Israel. He is the subject of many stories in Jewish 
literature. 

Akiva was born in Judea in central Palestine. After the 
Roman rulers of Judea issued decrees forbidding the 
practice of Judaism, Akiva went to Rome on behalf of 
the Jewish community. However, the Romans did not re- 
lent. In 132, the Jews revolted under the leadership of 
the warrior Bar Kokhba. The Romans crushed the revolt 
in 135. They arrested Akiva and executed him for practic- 
ing his religion. Lawrence H. Schiffman 
Akkad. See Sargon of Akkad. 

Akron (pop. 217,074; met. area pop. 694,960) is a city in 
northeastern Ohio. It lies on the Cuyahoga and Little 
Cuyahoga rivers. For the city’s location, see Ohio (politi- 
cal map). 

Akron was once the world’s largest producer of tires, 
and it was known as the Rubber Capital of the World. 
Today, the city is a center for the research and develop- 
ment of rubber products. The Goodyear Tire & Rubber 
Company—the largest rubber company in the United 
States—has its main office in Akron. 

The city. Downtown Akron includes a federal court- 
house and state government offices. A sports stadium is 
also located in the downtown area. A restaurant and en- 
tertainment district has developed around the stadium. 
A few blocks from the stadium is Inventure Place, the 
home of the National Inventors Hall of Fame. 

The Loral Airdock, the building where Goodyear once 
built blimps, is a well-known feature of the Akron sky- 








line. It stands more than 20 stories tall and covers 
364,000 square feet (33,800 square meters) of floor 
space. It is one of the world’s largest buildings without 
interior supports. 

Akron’s cultural attractions include the Akron Art Mu- 
seum, which specializes in modern art, and the Akron 
Civic Theatre, built in 1929. Stan Hywet Hall, a mansion 
built by Goodyear founder F. A. Seiberling, is now used 
for cultural events. The Akron Symphony Orchestra and 
the Ohio Ballet perform at E. J. Thomas Performing Arts 
Hall. Blossom Music Center, north of the city in Cuya- 
hoga Falls, is the summer home of the Cleveland Or- 
chestra and hosts other musical performances. Akron is 
host each year to the All-American Soap Box Derby (see 
Soap Box Derby). 

The University of Akron is in downtown Akron. Kent 
State University is northeast of Akron in Kent. The North- 
east Ohio Universities College of Medicine is to the east 
of Akron in Rootstown. 

Economy. Akron is a center for the research and de- 
velopment of rubber products. Service industries, such 
as health care and retail trade, are also important in 
Akron. The city has several hospitals and serves as a 
medical center for the region. It is also an important 
trucking center. 

Akron-Canton Regional Airport and Akron-Fulton Mu- 
nicipal Airport serve the city. Passenger trains and 
freight trains also serve Akron. 

Government. Akron has a mayor-council form of 
government. The voters elect the mayor to a four-year 
term. They also elect 13 council members. Ten of the 
members, representing different sections of the city, 
serve for two years. Three of the members represent the 
entire city and serve for four years. Akron is the seat of 
Summit County. 

History. Chippewa, Delaware, Erie, and several other 
groups of Indians lived in what is now the Akron area. In 
1825, General Simon Perkins, a banker, developer, and 
land agent, and settler Paul Williams founded Akron on 
a ridge that rises 950 feet (290 meters) above sea level. 
The settlement was named after the Greek word akros, 
meaning /figh point Akron became a thriving trade cen- 
ter after the completion of the Ohio and Erie Canal in 
1832 and the Pennsylvania and Ohio Canal in 1840. The 
canals opened the way for trade with cities in the east- 
ern United States. Akron was incorporated in 1865. 

In the 1800's, Akron was a center for the production of 
cereal, clay pipe, and farm equipment, but it was rubber 
that made it famous. In 1870, Benjamin F. Goodrich, a 
New York doctor and rubber manufacturer, moved to 
Akron and established a rubber factory. Several other 
rubber companies later built factories in Akron, and the 
city grew rapidly. The development of the automobile 
industry in the early 1900's created a huge demand for 
rubber tires. Akron became the world’s leading tire pro- 
ducer. The city’s population soared, rising from about 
70,000 in 1910 to nearly 210,000 in 1920. Military needs 
during World War II (1939-1945) led to an even greater 
demand for Akron’s tires and other rubber products. 

Rubber remained the city’s main industry until about 
the 1970's. During the 1970’s and 1980's, Akron , like oth- 
er older cities of the North, lost many jobs and people 
to newer factories in the South and Southwest. In the 
late 1900's, the city worked to diversify its manufacturing 





base and to redevelop its downtown. Today, many small 
businesses occupy the buildings once dominated by the 
rubber industry. Kathleen M. Fraze 
Aksum, AHK soom, also spelled Axum, was a powerful 
ancient kingdom in East Africa. It occupied lands that are 
now Eritrea, northern Ethiopia, parts of Sudan and Djji- 
bouti, and at times parts of southwest Arabia. Aksum 
was the ancestor of Ethiopia. Aksum’s capital, also called 
Aksum, stood on the site of what is now Aksum in 
Ethiopia. The kingdom became important about A.D. 50 
and reached its greatest strength between the 300’s and 
600's. 

Aksum grew rich and powerful in part because of 


Adulis, its port on the Red Sea. Adulis was a world trad- . 


ing center near what is now Massawa, Eritrea. Spices, 
ivory, ebony, animal skins, and tortoise shells were ex- 
ported from Adulis in exchange for textiles, precious 
metal objects, wine, and olive oil. These imports came 
principally from Egypt and the Mediterranean area. Ak- 
sums trade network also included Arabia and India and 
may have stretched as far as China. 

At its peak, Aksum conquered other kingdoms along 
the Red Sea and the Blue Nile River. Aksumite kings 
built impressive fortresses, palaces, and granite monu- 
ments. During the 300's, King Ezana conquered the king- 
dom of Kush in what is now Sudan. Ezana also made 
Christianity the state religion of Aksum. 

During the 600's, Muslim conquests in Arabia, Egypt, 
and along the Red Sea and east African coasts ended 
Aksum’s role as a trading power. Islam, the religion of 
the Muslims, spread rapidly in Arabia and North Africa. 
As aresult, the Christians of Aksum found themselves 
surrounded by Muslims and other non-Christians. From 
the 600's to about the 900’s, the Aksumites fought the 


The kingdom of Aksum about A.D. 400 


Aksum, shown in yellow, occupied lands that are now Eritrea, 
northern Ethiopia, and parts of Sudan and Djibouti. By the mid- 
dle of the A.D. 300’s, Aksum had gained control of the land and 
sea routes from Africa to Europe and Asia. Present-day bound- 
aries are shown as gray lines. 

WORLD BOOK map 









—~ Z 
“ To Europe \, PERSIA 





Jerusale 
2 
Alexandria | 








. 2 A ne bian 
. esert 
_Ser enice™ \ (Medinah % 

















——* Trade route \ 


—— \ | t 
Ye \ 4 yw 
Nubian Desert | Mecca 89, 
| ty 
Napata, i \ Bag 
Kueh =“ \ \ r— J yh 
“Meroe Yemeni | 
3 AUR INS nll | 
i |_—/> Aksunt Adane 
Aa $ . NY (Aden) Toindia | 
$ AKSUM \ Xo? — 
[ ni "Zede 
Ethiopian Nae 
ee Plateau i ee 4 


0 200 Miles ; 1 


200 Kilomelers ae a re ay 


— ’ 


Alabama 255 


Muslims. Aksum lost power and territory. However, as- 
pects of Aksum’s culture, particularly its Christian faith, 
survive today in Eritrea and Ethiopia. In addition, the ru- 
ins and monuments of Aksum’s capital can still be seen 
in the present-day town of Aksum. Kevin C. MacDonald 
ALA. See American Library Association. 

Alabama was the most famous of the 20 Confederate 
cruisers that preyed on Union merchant ships and 
whalers during the American Civil War (1861-1865). To- 
gether with the Florida, Shenandoah, and 17 other cruis- 
ers, the A/abama destroyed 257 Union ships. The Con- 
federate cruisers also forced more than 700 other Union 
ships to travel under foreign flags to avoid attack The 
raiders had little effect on the outcome of the Civil War. 
But their actions disrupted trade and nearly destroyed 
the United States Merchant Marine. 

The Alabama was built in England in 1862. Under the 
command of Confederate naval hero Raphael Semmes, 
it sank, burned, or captured 64 ships in the next two 
years. In June 1864, Union warships found the Alabama 
in the harbor of Cherbourg, France, where it had gone 
for repairs. Captain John A. Winslow of the U.S.S. 
Kearsarge stood ready to give battle when the A/abama 
sailed into the English Channel on June 19. Within an 
hour, the Kearsarge sank the Alabama. 

Six years after the Civil War, the British expressed re- 
gret in the Treaty of Washington for the escape of ships 


=— 





Combat of the Kearsarge and the Alabama \about 1865), an oil pamting on canvas by Edouard 
Manet the Philadelphia Museum of Art, the John G. Johnson Collection 


The Confederate cruiser Alabama was sunk by the Union 
warship Kearsarge in a battle in the English Channel in 1864. 


built or fitted out for the Confederacy in British ports. In 
1872, the Geneva Tribunal of Arbitration decided that 
the United Kingdom had failed in its obligations of neu- 
trality by aiding the Confederate Navy. The United King- 
dom was obliged to pay the United States $15 } million 
for damages that had been inflicted on Northern ship- 
ping by the A/abama and other Confederate cruisers. 
Gabor S. Boritt 


See also Washington, Treaty of. 


EEE ,&—E OO eo 


256 Alabama 





Cliff Harden, Shostal 


Forest-covered hills surround a swimming hole in Cheaha Mountain State Park, near Anniston. 
Scenic highlands cover much of northern Alabama. Low coastal plains lie to the south. 


Alabama Zhe Heart of Dixie 


Alabama, one of the Southern States of the United 
States, is known as the Heart of Dixie. Alabama occupies 
a central place in the history of the South. The Constitu- 
tion of the Confederacy was drawn up in Montgomery, 
the state capital, in 1861. The Alabama Capitol served as 
the first Confederate Capitol. There, Jefferson Davis took 
office as president of the Confederacy. 

Today, Alabama has a vital part in the nation’s future. 
Huntsville, called Rocket City, U.S.A, is the site of the 
Redstone Arsenal and the George C. Marshall Space 
Flight Center. Scientists at Huntsville developed many 
important rockets and space vehicles, including the Sat- 
urn 5 rocket system that carried the first astronauts to 
land on the moon. 

Most parts of the South did not become widely in- 
dustrialized until the 1900's. But heavy industry got a rel- 
atively early start in Alabama, mainly because of the 
state's rich mineral resources. Northern Alabama had all 














The contributors of this article are William D. Barnard, Profes- 


sor of History Emeritus at the University of Alabama; and David 
C Weaver, Chairman and Professor of Geography at the Univer- 
sity of Alabama. 





three main raw materials used in making steel—coal, 
iron ore, and limestone. Blast furnaces for making iron 
and steel began operating in Birmingham in the 1880s. 
After that, Birmingham grew rapidly. Today, it is Ala- 
bama’s largest city, and one of the state's important cen- 
ters of service industries. 

For many years, King Cotton’ ruled Alabama's farm 
economy. When the cotton crop was poor, or when it 
sold at low prices, Alabama farmers suffered. But seri- 
ous crop failures during the early 1900's taught the farm- 
ers that they should plant a variety of crops. Then they 
would not lose all their money if the cotton crop failed. 
Alabama is still a leading cotton producer. But much 
livestock and poultry and large crops of corn, peanuts, 
and soybeans are also raised in the state. 

Forest-covered hills and ridges spread over much of 
northern Alabama. In places where the land has been 
cleared, bright red clay soils add splashes of color to 
the landscape. Many dams along rivers and creeks help 
prevent floods. Hydroelectric power stations at some of 
the larger dams produce electricity for use in homes 
and factories. 

In the southern part of Alabama, the hills give way to 
thick pine forests, rolling grasslands, and low croplands. 





Terrence A. Lynch 


Riverchase Galleria is a popular Birmingham shopping mall. 
Birmingham is Alabama's largest city and an industrial center. 


The Mobile Delta area in the southern part of the state 
has many swamps and bayous (shallow channels filled 
with slow-moving water). At the southern tip of Ala- 
bama, sandy beaches border Mobile Bay and the Gulf of 
Mexico. 

Mobile, at the mouth of the Mobile River, is a busy 
seaport. Oceangoing ships unload a wide variety of 
goods at the Alabama State Docks in Mobile Bay. The 
goods include minerals and other raw materials to be 
made into manufactured goods in Alabama factories. 
The ships carry away Alabama coal and a wide variety of 
the state's products, including iron and steel, petroleum 
products, pulp and other wood products, soybeans, and 
wheat. 

The name A/abama comes from the name of an Indian 
tribe that once lived in the region. These Indians called 
themselves the A/ibamu, meaning / open (or / clean the 
thicket One of Alabama's nicknames, the Ye//owhammer 
State, originated during the Civil War (1861-1865). A 
company of Alabama troops paraded in uniforms 
trimmed with bits of bright yellow cloth. The soldiers re- 
minded people of the birds called yellowhammers, 
which have yellow patches under their wings. After that, 
Alabama soldiers were known as Ye/lowhammers. 


Alabama 257 


Interesting facts about Alabama 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Kevin Chadwick 


The first electric troiiey 
streetcars in the United 
States began operating in 
Montgomery ir 1866. 


Littie River, located on Look- 
out Mountain in northeastern 
Alabama, is the only river in 
the United States that runs its 
entire course on the top ofa 
mountain. It forms the Little 
River Canyon. Known as the 
“Grand Canyon of the South,” 
it is the deepest gorge east of 
the Mississippi River. 





First troiiey streetcars 
A monument to the boll 

weevii, erected in 1919, stands in the town of Enterprise. After 
the insect destroyed their cotton crops, Alabama farmers were 
forced to grow new and more diverse crops. As a result, the 
farmers became more prosperous. Enterprise then put up the 
monument ‘in profound appreciation of the boll weevil and 
what it has done as the herald of prosperity. . ..” 


George Washington Carver 
gained a reputation as one of 
the world’s greatest agricul- 
tural scientists from the re- 
search he conducted at Ala- 
bama’s Tuskegee Institute 
(now Tuskegee University). 
Among his discoveries were | 
more than 300 new uses for a 2 . 
peanuts and more than 100 
new uses for sweet potatoes. 


The black civil rights 

movement began at the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in 
Montgomery in 1955. The church's minister, Martin Luther King, 
Jr. organized a nonviolent protest group to help carry out a boy- 
cott against the Montgomery bus system. This action came after 
a black passenger was arrested for refusing to yield her seat toa 
white person. 





George Washington Carver 





of Tounsm 


Mobile Department 
The Port of Mobile, Alabama's only seaport, lies on Mobile 
Bay north of the Gulf of Mexico. Cargo passing through the port 
includes chemicals, textiles, foods, and metal products. 


; , 


Alabama in brief | 


Symbols of Alabama 


The state flag, adopted in 1895, bears a crim- 
son cross ona white field. The flag's cross is 
suggestive of the Confederate battle flag. The 
state seal, first adopted in 1819, has a map of 
Alabama that shows the state's rivers and bor- 
dering states. The rivers served as important 
shipping routes when Alabama had few good 
roads. Today, the rivers remain vital to the 
state as sources of hydroelectric power. oan 





State flag State seal i 





Alabama (brown) ranks 29th in size among all the states 
and 5th in size among the Southern States (yellow). 





General information 


Statehood: Dec. 14, 1819, the 22nd state. 
State abbreviations: Ala (traditional); AL (postal). _ ad _ 
State motto: Audemus Jura Nostra Defendere(We Dare = — 


Defend Our Rights). Montgomery has housed the State Capitol since 1846. Earli- 
State song: “Alabama” Words by Julia S. Tutwiler; music er Capitals were St Stephens (1817-1819), Huntsville (1819- | 


by Edna Goeckel Gussen. 1820), Cahaba (1820-1826), and Tuscaloosa (1826-1846). 





Land and climate 


Area: 51,718 sq. mi. (133,950 km), including 968 sq. mi. 
(2,507 km?) of inland water but excluding 519 sq. mi. 
(1,343 km?) of coastal water. 

Elevation: Highest—Cheaha Mountain, 2,407 ft (734 m) 
above sea level. Lowest—sea level along the Gulf of 
Mexico. 

Coastline: 53 mi. (85 km). 

Record high temperature: 112 °F (44 °C) at Centreville 
on Sept 5, 1925. 

Record low temperature: — 27 °F (— 33 °C) at New Mar- 
ket on Jan. 30, 1966. ~~. 

Average July temperature: 80 °F (27 °C). 

Average January temperature: 46 °F (8 °C). 

Average yearly precipitation: 56 in. (142 cm). 






Lowest 
elevation 


along coast 











important dates French Canadians founded Fort Louis on the Mo- The state's first blast furnace began 


bile River. In 1711, the colony moved to Mobile. operating in Birmingham. 









Alonso Alvarez de Pitieda Alabama became the 22nd 
sailed into Mobile Bay. state on December 14. 







State bird 
Yellowhammer 


t us 

People 
Population: 4,447,100 (2000 census) 
Rank among the states: 23rd 
Density: 86 per mi? (33 per km’), U.S. av- 


erage 78 per mi (30 per km’) 






Distribution’: 60 percent urban, 40 per- 
cent rural 

Largest cities in Alabama 
Birmingham 242,820 
Montgomery 201,568 
Mobile 198,915 
Huntsville 158,216 
Tuscaloosa 77,906 
Hoover 62,742 


Source. 2000 census, except for ® where figures are for 1990. 


Economy 
Chief products 


Agriculture: broilers, beef cattle, cot- 
ton, eggs, hogs, peanuts. 

Manufacturing: chemicals, paper 
products, primary metals, transporta- 
tion equipment, food products, fabri- 
cated metal products, wood prod- 
ucts, clothing. 

Mining: coal, natural gas, petroleum, 
crushed stone, limestone. 


Government 


State government 

Governor. 4-year term 

State senators: 35; 4-year terms 

State representatives: 105; 4-year terms 
Counties: 67 


Federal government 

United States senators: 2 
United States representatives: 7 
Electoral votes: 9 


The federal government created the 
Tennessee Valley Authority. 


The George C. Marshall Space Flight 
Center was established in Huntsville. 


State flower 
Camellia 


Population trend 


Millions 





1800 1820 1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1340 1960 1980 2000 2020 


Source: US. Census Bureau. 


Gross state product 


Value of goods and services pro- 
duced in 1998: $109,833,000,000. 
Services include community, busi- 
ness, and personal services; fi- 
nance; government; trade; and 
transportation, communication, 
and utilities. dustry includes 
construction, manufacturing, and 
mining. Agriculture includes agri- 
culture, fishing, and forestry. 


Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis. 


Alabama _ 259 





State tree 
Southern long- 
leaf pine 






Year Population 
2000 4,447,100 
1990 4,062,608 
1980 3,893,978 
1970 3,444,354 
1960 3,266,740 
1950 3,061,743 
1940 2,832,961 
1930 2,646,248 
1920 2,348,174 
1910 2,138,093 
1900 1,828,697 
1890 1,513,401 
1880 1,262,505 


1870 996,992 
1860 964,201 
1850 771,623 
1840 590,756 
1830 309,527 
1820 127,901 
1810 109,046 
1800 101,250 
Services 73% 





Agriculture 2% 


Sources of information 


For information about tourism, write to: 
Alabama Bureau of Tourism & Travel, 401 Adams Avenue, Suite 
126, Montgomery, AL 36104. The Web site at 
www.touralabama.org also provides information. 

For information on the economy, write to: 
Alabama Development Office, 401 Adams Avenue, Sixth Floor, 
Montgomery, AL 36130-4106. 

The state's official Web site at www-:state.al.us also provides a gate- 
way to much information on Alabama's economy, government, 


and history. 


Martin Luther King, jr., led a march from Selma to 
Montgomery to protest discrimination in voter registration. 


Completion of the Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway linked 
Alabama's port at Mobile with the Tennessee and Ohio rivers. 


260 Alabama 


Population. The 2000 United States census reported 
that Alabama had 4,447,100 people. The state’s popula- 
tion had increased 10 5 percent over the 1990 census 
figure, 4,040,587. According to the 2000 census, Alaba- 
ma ranks 23rd in population among the 50 states. 

About 70 percent of the people of Alabama live in 
metropolitan areas. These areas are Anniston, Auburn- 
Opelika, Birmingham, Decatur, Dothan, Florence, Gads- 
den, Huntsville, Mobile, Montgomery, and Tuscaloosa. 
The Columbus (Georgia) metropolitan area extends into 
Alabama. For the populations of these metropolitan ar- 
eas, see the /ndexto the political map of Alabama. See 
Metropolitan area. 

Alabama has 24 cities with populations of 20,000 or 


more. Birmingham, the largest city, developed as a steel- 


making center. Today, Birmingham is an important cen- 
ter of service industries, particularly medical services. 

Huntsville is the home of the U.S. Army’s Redstone Ar- 
senal and the National Aeronautics and Space Adminis- 
tration’s George C. Marshall Space Flight Center. During 
the 1950's, Huntsville’s population grew by 340 percent. 
Thousands of people moved to the Huntsville area to 
work on missile and space projects of the United States 
government 

Birmingham, Huntsville, Mobile, Montgomery, and 


other cities have kept the attractiveness of small commu- 


nities, in spite of their rapid growth. Huge oak trees arch 
over wide boulevards, even in many downtown areas. 
Stately old homes add to the charm and dignity of these 
cities. 

About a fourth of the people in Alabama are African 
Americans. Other large population groups in the state 
include people of Irish, English, German, and American 
Indian descent. 

Schools. Alabama established its public school sys- 
tem in 1854. Like most Southern States, Alabama had 
separate schools for whites and blacks. In 1954, the 
Supreme Court of the United States ruled that school 
segregation is unconstitutional. In 1963, Alabama began 








lgcorge Smith, 
Alabama’s Gulf Coast attracts many vacationers. This long, 
sandy peninsula extends into the Gulf of Mexico south of Mobile 
Bay. It has warm, sunny weather most of the year. 


illstrom Stock Photo 


People 


Population density 


Most of Alabama's most 
densely populated areas lie in 
the east and north. Much of 
the swampy Mobile River 
Delta area of southwestern 
Alabama is thinly populated. 


Persons per 
sq. mi. 


More than 100 
50 to 100 
25 to 50 


Persons per 
km? 


More than 40 
20 to 40 








WORLD BOOK map; based on U.S. Census Bureau data. 


to desegregate its public schools. By 1973, most of these 
schools had been integrated. 

Today, Alabama operates about 130 local public 
school systems. It also operates a system of secondary- 
level vocational technical training centers. The superin- 
tendent of education heads the state's public school sys- 
tem. The superintendent is appointed by the state board 
of education. The nine-member Board of Education es- 
tablishes policies for the public school system. The gov- 





—s R " "a — 


Photo Options from Hillstrom Stock Photo 
Auburn University has campuses at Auburn and Montgomery. 

Samford Hall, shown here, was one of the first buildings built on 

the Auburn campus. The campus was founded in 1856. 








Alabama _ 261 


ernor serves as president of the board. The other eight public libraries are in Birmingham, Huntsville, Mobile, 
members are elected by the voters to four-year terms. and Montgomery. The public library in Birmingham 
Alabama law requires children from age 7 through 15. ~— owns the Rucker Agee collection of rare maps, the 


to attend school. For the number of students and teach- Tutwiler collection on Southern history and literature, 
ers in Alabama, see Education (table). and a collection of civil rights documents. The University 
Libraries. Alabama's first large library, the Supreme of Alabama's William Stanley Hoole Special Collections 


Court Library in Montgomery, was created in 1828. In Library in Tuscaloosa has materials on the history of the 
1901, the state legislature created the Department of region. 

Archives and History—the first state-supported archives Museums. The Anniston Museum of Natural History 
in the United States. Today, the largest of Alabama's includes exhibits on the history of the earth and displays 
of birds in their natural surroundings. The George 
Washington Carver Museum at the Tuskegee University 
National Historic Site features exhibits that illustrate con- 


This table lists the universities and colleges in Alabama that tributions of blacks to U.S. history. It also displays art- 
grant bachelor's or advanced degrees and are accredited by the work by African and African American artists. The Uni- 


_ Universities and colleges 


Southern Association of Colleges and Schools. 


Name 

Advanced Airpower Studies, 
School of 

Alabama, University of 

Alabama Agricultural and 


Mailing address 


Maxwell Air Force Base 


versity of Alabama State Museum of Natural History 
exhibits a large collection of Indian items. The collection 
includes prehistoric items found at Mound State Monu- 
ment. The Historic Mobile Preservation Society has dis- 
plays on the American Civil War period. 


Filan ohm tavele, vet ot The Birmingham Museum of Art, the Mobile Muse- 

porns aa University mens um of Art, the Huntsville Museum of Art, and the Mont- 
uburn Universi : ce : 

Eahennaveroy Meat sines art. The U.S. Army Aviation Museum at Fort Rucker has 

Huntingdon College Montgomery one of the largest collections of helicopters in the world. 

jacksonville State University Jacksonville 

Judson College Marion 

Miles College Birmingham 

Mobile, University of Mobile 

Montevallo, University of Montevallo 

North Alabama, University of Florence 

Oakwood College Huntsville 

Samford University Birmingham 

South College eel lela 

South Alabama, University of Mobile 

Southern Christian University Montgomery 

Spring Hill College Mobile 

Stillman Solas Tuscaloosa 

Talladega College Talladega 

Lo | State University . 

Tuskegee University Tuskegee 

U.S. Sports Academy Daphne 

West Alabama, University of Livingston 


"For campuses, see Alabama, University of. 
tFor campuses, see Auburn University. 
Campuses at Dothan, Montgomery, and Troy. 





Focus on Sports Alabama Bureau of Tounsm and Travel 
The University of Alabama football team plays some of its The George Washington Carver Museum at Tuskegee Uni- 
home games at Legion Field in Birmingham. College football isa versity has exhibits dealing with Carver and other famous blacks. 
popular spectator sport throughout Alabama. Carver won acclaim for his work in agricultural science. 











Li} nd 
REM IMO, 5 
ue pabicpegre 





“@oUepuedohuy 
*., 
pyeigseLw BLAS f 
. | | 19: ad | ‘ 
oe L f e a " 7 OpPASIPUue)y i veyeW 
BOG Wie mea? Fy one WtAOpiye Paovg ef 





AU Id Puseqman 





souor 





Olin) 


“oj naleas " 
; \ 











F *oue c 


Uj AGO[AR 106,0Q10}4 





J1VH 


jv019 ‘e AVSa0v0701 
vony iNT 1S) 

\ exo AG AU) OUGAL} e uOat unowy® \ 

. ® a UgEUII 


“eAquo *udiopke 
wAqaouy | ydiopkers osoidt whos Povictuoye 


és NN 
ouniApUnoy are : Mw 


U06100q 





















ethinAeipng 
owing |  Ayugse woxoly 
ON3B 30H sions puayiel 


; r 
pnons f Siuiod ranged pays MON, 


Dav Si 
Aroysrp—0 MPa SAH JOH4® 
Ne puounye Auawn ’ 
Lane ' 
HwNje) 60, uinaghivbi 





4 


AUR g ° i. 
onroony, euen 








ouers ® 





Ha NAD; ® i 
B[IASUBHDIG @ 
Worse} \ 





Hosoojoosny 
UOIAO 
n SND id 





yO} Buipuemh® ¢ 






youeoy . 











SW Rye 



































Penge et AIGA 
Ay) in, 
© @s0ujeoAc® *\upwije “ f 
juoue] 1 P4D Orsay F mrepuby Bingusopirya ae’, *poom 70018 
4 *ojjaousy 4, e 10 mut @80)1baS y Farha) at 
BdKops S6ury vignieiuuy “eww 01,0 efoyay® 
e e oso) GS 1epuoyFOuidiy ee ni | YHUSOW 
Pie! fig fea S 10tWji9;7) subiuo7® . 0), bet 
ISPYOAQVNONIYN WOROVTIVL LOUP I, goo ud wre ne ae umoony eyiuvuiys 
“080 — = ofopoljey : DN Wa? ¥ grpied “HAD 0} ; 
— Anabiasw® “ALIN? Aen rh, GAIN eRenig ne anqunjoy 28} 
feapiunwe JOMGOIe 9104 . | *oiauoise od 
ung saan ~ ‘ ‘ | i ‘Wf 7 ye iCueenaely AU 4 et a fi 
OKO wi > sueQusipy - 
7 i aaa eithi0s | Aueg A ! epeNueA ' 
ipuop Poiung *8uudspoo a Ve mit Ty 
JeMuUINg UMNO, adic iid i 
wap *ysyieg *ABLWA wo 211 9AVG a i et litassosy Sv 
RUWAS OAPPIOD ay iys *asiten ‘ 
im IddISSISSIW 





*hosdis ache fodsbpe'" PiemoH 


SUIig OUGAA® jonooth, 
INT oyesyse * 















spd, | ; yng 
i NODH IV epfayiaes Bay ie 
Te oot *aedsoig 
OOANON |! 
Ag DOL © 
| . e 
je . uel 
wie P86, the } We 
Fix NOLSNIM eSpiug BIN ON 








#WOIO 
Agno, © fe 
1 WWOHIHS 






(0 e 
1) ' 
oy asivort “ih 4OISNO}Y 
‘O11QH0 : ©). ‘ 
vinvw aM ; lowjog® \ 


Ub JOH 
io UOSIDDy 4065") 
mornuied” e6puusy® oypadojon ea 


—uesawg® 








NOWYA 





a 


oH! 
OC 








UNS 





bingeyyouy 


~~ 































mae fetor ToAepeg 
° 
JOA'e} 01131 1° - — / 
O20)/N =] LS3HOd IVNOLIVN 
9 = O30: @ eAPsse) OVIHXNVE B WVITHM Jase yuh SOPH 
OPIATE e 
afory uown® wPUOHO Nyt eihiaueg jig wprtidg BUIA 
mah Oe QPOOM 9204 
e008 5,09 “umo} (ye) 





TIVES HVA 





ly JUBSBEIg 






” ofp ajossny Mi 


UAO) dey? 
UUs 


ag 
M[omog MTA eyo ; 
IVMAAG _uonnes an 7 Torsesty— 
- J aj[/AG]17 
wound e _2ta8109 
Suan alls 


eiObsig 
wRSOY 


bam 0} 7 











POOMA OW Y fi ' 
NOSNOVE j \" 
eHongoH  Stuyd] We | Py it) Wiis 27 Oe bee ee), ee eS 


| 
ps ayo . 
j rs NOSIdVW 











OUIPANS 
Ol) AVeIpys0 

INAV OHpy Hezoy 

IVECO 


vOsegnols : 
eos 
sYuds pooo® 


odetpyg \00VAH® 


asag enous 





*eyew 
men 








VNIMOHVO | 
HLYON- a” | ! 
S 14 £ 














$10}0WO)! O87 092 Orz 022 002 O81 OSL Or OZ OOL 06 08 o£ 09 0S Op O€ OF OO OD 


SOW OBL 091 Orl Ozt 001 06 08 0 09 0¢ Op 0€ 02 OL 0 
cl LL OL 6 8 L 9 S v 3 c L 





dew YOOR GTYOM UONdelOJd 91U09 jeLWIOJUOS aque] 
ODIXH#y fO JIHAD 


























| yoyo [8] ACMIBIEAA > 
eweu AuNo} =F Ivd | 
‘sn {& yvodsie soley 
et Oo 
& x Asepunog Ayuno) HON INiOd ane Phe d 
ereisieru| 68) JSOI@I! JOO — + 20104 meow fang ONY1S! NOH 
Aepunog ees ine ueb soy u04° - ‘ 
O peo. JBWIO —— eose jes0pey oO youeg ob ° ad j eT / Puebys) Th Ut ee OT 
JOYIO JO Od Bese BJape} > i ao wiLaneg tte pore O 
JOYJO JO AJEYT! a = 6S] iNOIeS VOR Wd 
AemsseJdx3 === UMO} 20 ANID ° ul IW - — : 008g opip ig ewegeyy, qponented 
: ONYIS!VSOUVINYS ——ee ul Pere “yg s6unds ° uepe . 
e818 UOIRAJOSUOD ie. ——————— il she! (56 eyoubPA — sdiuHyr,eG ° 
‘sAemyBip Teas AfUnd4 @ JOYIO 3O ISBIOF et ee rT % ejojesuag setbee e *esieg e} ndbeg . 
peosjey —— jeuidesaes Bese veg) 





dew jeoniyod veueqeiy 


a 









































































W eBpiquieg 
opnae To YEUIIOT Buin ® 
*enepey hase onwuad ‘ ee 
| ° 1S3404 TWNGILWN ° 
a Bp 2 * pojwon VAINISD eres SLEE, > HN33NO9 sak LPuormorg wee) } f 
& ol JIOAIEW poom|aB exOuuds eejyjor | 162) 7 serena s nesues” f? 
- _ _Apmbda®....| : - . 
: joouwysy — } puo yy pIOYXNH 
i uOIsuay® | ‘ft f—. iG 16 
e ol fe “\ ee! men Bho, 
suveyg jono7 | uA}¥Oo! / ‘ok 
1 x: 2 1d | © = ie : . B ; , | = 196A dS anioll a 
“ pioigeid’ O4y)A0180 ° eaeuSse eo ebuey / pase fl . OW onceoe IddISSISSIW 
é * domme: 1 F ; xOUG] f A@mpood eee Ss = 
She wen HN93N02 or eee weed 
\ _— is 101109 NOL ONIHSYM | ig 46,10, 
: L —_— a P : . ye tee ae doIeyy WKS 
es | 7 / USIP De ° 491 VSeid 2 
“ -Y \ Rm gs e - = fed p ee a 









































































































vViIN¥O49 a Loiinaqay | enone ; 
| yoo) «uoluye ueduieied r 
m é 186g esbuud n 
; s6undg ene e uuds fuun 
vO ONY A301 
3 JO39 4 alive bs impy” : i j JOUNOW iNnqusul4 
& 5 swe ; ul e145, 3A eSNG UIOT HT 
3) )ASEXE rf 
za ! 1 | Yon Uisy 991}e6 pvere/ © Feoueud eUOquiyrig *sBuuds uoreie 
| 1H 10489 Payiasing) x "Den, 4s oats he uoinye ay 
a BUSHING — 1° dens ae 3gHO WA WWNOILWN AWL3QH9) 
: unosuva Poy woo i ecaeee! ae Pe. morAu0g 
@ul * 
Asseuow®? | tH 4e0, 4 yeusen _ umoueds 
u aa guile A@xoy! ‘ 
c A _ yor e818 ye EPOOA,® ‘ UALR ° 
e *yseg eAJON Pies 5 
u wiry” POSP] Mvyi00HO UPUP OE 5 
ee . bine Yel ; ° i 
Wik used s66esg° ey 9 ORIN 
S S30NMO1 * 01904 / 
< Ata Sivasuopso9} ike / 
ore = <, WH 1URSee 
- OABUARH BInid> 
O1OGSUNH» ' RB Vos i at 
= eeaanuod pleH, rf. , rr ; a : | , . | 
| 1 , AB\UINOW ‘. | 
18 HHOLSIH INO \uoawle A we piece SP pros! ES 
move ° bok "Vv : ea ' EP) ise PIONWUAA 


sjspsunes | GundS ogy 


HOUSE gaol GoTl 


264 Alabama 


Alabama map index 


Metropolitan areas 


Anniston 112,249 
Auburn-Opelika 115,092 
Birmingham ... 921,106 
Columbus (Ga.) . . 274,624 
(224,868 in Ga. 
49.756 in Ala) 

Decatur ........ .. 145,867 
Dothan 137,916 
Elorence—....... 142,950 
Gadsden . 103,459 
Huntsville 342,376 
Mobile 540,258 
Montgomery . 333,055 
Tuscaloosa 164,875 
Counties 

Autauga ..43,671 H 6 
Baldwin 140,415 N 4 
Barbour 29,038 | 9 
Bibb .. 20,826 G 5 
Blount . 51,024 D 6 
Bullock rea ay 
Butler .. 21,399 K 6 
Calhoun ..112,249 D 8 
Chambers . 36583 G10 
Cherokee . 23,988 D 9 
Chilton . 39593 H 6 
Choctaw 15,922 ) 2 
Clarke 27,867 K 3 
Cla .14254.F 9 
Clebume .14,123 D 9 
Coftee 43615 L 8 
Colbert 54,984 B 3 
Conecuh 14,089 L 6 
Coosa 12,202 iG 7 
Covington .37631 L 7 
Crenshaw 13,665 K 7 
Cullman 77,483 D 6 
Dale 49.129 K 9 
Dallas . . 46,365 1 5 
De Kalb 64452 B 9 
Elmore 65,874 H 8 
Escambia .38,440 L § 
Etowah 103,459 D 8 
Fayette . 18495 E 4 
Franklin .31)223,_B 8 
Geneva .. 25,764 M 8B 
Greene .. 9,974 .G 3 
Hale ..17,185 H 4 
Henry ...16,310 K 10 
Houston . 88,787 M10 
Jackson .53,926.B 8 
Jefferson 662,047 E 6 
lamar . ..15904 D 3 
Lauderdale .. 87,966.A 4 
Lawrence .. 34,803 B 35 
Lee . ..115,092 H 10 
Limestone 65,676 .A § 
Lnwndes © 13.473 ole 6 
Macon 24108 1° 9g 
Madison 276,700 B 7 
Marengo 422,539'9:5 4 
Manon pee bea Gs! 
Marshall . 4827231 aG 7 
Mobile 399.843 M 2 
Monroe ..24,324.K 5 
Montgomery 223510.1 7 
Morgan ..111,064.C 6 
Perry . 11,861 ..H 4 
Pickens 20,949 F 3 
Pike . 29605 K 8 
Randolph . 22,380 F 9 
Russell . 49.756 | 10 
St Clair 64,742 E 7 
Shelby ..143,293 F 7 
Sumter 14,798 H 2 
Talladega BOS2 ae 
Tallapoosa 41,475 H 8 
Tuscaloosa ..164,875 F 4 
Walker 1. (OSE 3 
Washington ..18,097 L 2 
Wilcox ..13,183...) 35 
Winston 24843 D 4 


Cities and towns 


Abanda . G 9 
Ahbeville® 2,987 K 10 
Ahel F 9 
Aheriail J 9 
Acmar , lie ff 
Adamsville 4965 F 6 
Addison wlsgG 5 
Akron S21TaG 4 
Alabama Port O 3 
Alabaster 22,619 F 6 
Alberta y i o4 
Albertville 17,247 C 8 
Aldrich G 6 
Alexander 

City 15,008 G 8 
Alexandtiat -2.092m5 6& 
Aliceville 2,%7 G 3 
Allen K 4 
Allenton ; 1 6 
Allgood .629 0 7 
Alpine fF 7 
Altoona 944 =D 7 
Andalusia® 8794 L 7 
Anderson . 34 A 5 
Anniston® 24.276 F 8 
Arab 7,174 BG 7 


Ardmore 1,034 . 
Argo 1,780 . 
Ariton 772 
Arley 290 
Arlington Zz. 
Ammstrong . 
Ashby . 5 ae 
Ashford .. 1,853 
Ashland® 1,965 
Ashridge 
Ashville® . 2,260 
Athens? 18,967 
Atmore 7,676 
Attalla 6,592 
Auburn : 42,987 . 
Autaugaville.. 820. 
Avon . BR... 466 
Axis : 3 
Babbie . 627 
Baileyton.. . 684 
Baker Hill ... 
Bangor... . A. 
Banks... .. 224 
Bankston 
Bartteld 
Barlow Bend . 
Barton 
Bashi . 
Battles Whart 5. 
Bay Minette® 7,820. 
Bay View | 
Bayou La 

atre 2,313. 
Bazemore a ee 
Bear Creek 1,053 
Beatrice 412. 
Beaverton 226 
Belgreen & 
Bel 214 
Bellam 2 
Belle Mina 
Bellwood = 
Benton. . a7. 
Berry .... 2580 
Bessemer 29 G72. 
Beulah ed. 
Bexar .. 
Bibbville 
Billingsley .... 116. 


Birmingham® . 242,820 
See 
Bladon Springs 
Blanche id Ms 
Bleecker ‘ 
Blount Springs 
Blountsville 
Blue Mountain . 
Blue Ridge*t .. 
Blue Springs 121 
Boaz : ~ 


1,768 
233 


a4) 


Boligee . 369 
Bolinger 
Bolling o 
Bon Air . 96 
Bon Secour . 
Booth 
Boyd 
Boykin 
Boykin 
Bradley 
Bradleyton 
Braggs = 
Branchville® . 
Brantley 
Brantleyville 
Brent... 
Brewton? 
Briar Hill 
Brickyard 
Bridgeport 
Briertield 
Brighton 
Brilliant 
Brooklyn 
Brooks 
Brookside‘ 
Brookwood 
Browns 
Brownsboro 
Brundidge 
Bucks 
Buena Vista 
Buhl 
Burkville 
Burnsville 
Burnt Com 
Burmwell 
Butler? 
Bynum‘t 
Cadtio 
Caffee Junction 
Cahaba 
Heights*t 5,203 
Calcis 
Calera 
Calhoun 
Calvert 
Camden? 
Camp Hill 
Camphell 
Canne 
Capshaw 
Carbon Hill 2,071 
Cardiff 82 
Canlowville 


202 . 


1,331. 


Qnm mMMomA re mR ERR AMER ONO >—— ZO MAM Ze TTOMARTORIMOOIAREMT MAT R=MAORADO MEZ—HMRemMmMAORAK ee —TOLRaNTARO——oAM> 


ee, 
te 


wg ole 


— 


—_ 


— 


_ 


— 
SI SO I Ds oe Iw OSU UIA RAMS DADS DUAN AYHHAVYVNNHA IHN Ww DH BBWAOOWOGAHAYWORSDIAAWwwwwv & &~w HAPwwerlOPaMOnwiKwPSMLC@BeMBysl DOMNVSYWOUwHA 


VIRMeDSwOUwnAnn 


Carolina’ .. 
Carrollton? 
Carrville 


Castleberry 590 . 


Catherine 
Cecil . 
Cedar Bluff 
Center Hill 
Center Pointt 22,784 
Centre? 
Centreville? 
Chalkvillet 
Chance 
Chancellor 
Chandler 
Springs . 
Chapman ... 
Chase 
Chastang 
Chatom 
Chelseat . 
Cherokee . 
Chickasaw 
Childersburg 
China Grove 
Choccolocco cf 
Choctaw .... .: 
Choctaw Bluff . 
Chrysler ... 
Chunchula 
Citronelle 
Claibome .. 
Clanton® ... 
Clarence 
Clayhatchee 01 
Clayton® 
Cleveland 
Clinton 
Clio . 
Clopton 
Cloverdale 
Coal Fire 
Coal Valley . 
Coaling 
Coalmont .. 
Cobbtown, see 
West End 
{Cohbtown!| 


.. 2,466 
. 3823 


Coftee Springs Je 
Coffeeville .. 360 . 


Colhert Heights 
Cold Spnngs 
Collbran 
Collinsville 
Collirene 


Colony’ 383. 


Columbia... 804 
Columbiana® 
Columbus City 
Comer es 
Cooks Springs 
Cooper 
Coosada 
Cordova 
Corona 
Cortelyou 
Cottage Grove 
Cottondale 
Cottonton .. 
Cottonwood 
Coun 
Courtland 


Crane Hill 
Crawlord 
Creola 
Crews re 
Cromwell .. 
Cropwell 
Crossville 
Crossville 
Cuba se 
Cullman? . . 
Cullomhurg 
Curry .. 
Cusseta 
Cypress... 
Dieville® AS 4 
Daleville 4.653 
Damascus 
Danville 
Daphne 
Darlington ae. 
Dauphin 

island 
Davenport i. 
Daviston 267 
Dawson 
Dayton 60 
De Armanville 
Deatsville 310 
Decatur® 
Deer Park 
Delmar 
Delta 
Demopolis 7,40 
Detroit 247 
Dickert 
Dickinson 


1,467 


ee Or 


AR SSK HM TNZANKSaxn 


mOmn™SZZOO-CS 


Line . Sn. 


2,002 . 


oot So lmlnlalat tnt To belulolubed-F dol belabeintul lof tontesl olmtualubet tele bulatatntatal-l dealetein 


-ed 


_— 


—_ 


ROOT 


DNvyviw &OSOwW NOON D SW & & WD AI TN AI OO ChTUVOANAAODHeHAOwW~i 


—" 


_ 


— 
WwWYWAOOSODNAN WONNWWOUNOSOWURS OCS DwWSYUNINNONGVODRADWOUWS &SOMAWO 


— 


— 


me OWw SS WDM ~IS oe OO ~Iw 


Dixie 
Dixons Mills — 
Dora “ 2413 
Doster... - 
Dothan® . SYS 
Douhle 

Springs? ..1,003. 
Douglas . 530 
Dozier .. 391. 
ae of 
Dudleyville 
Duke 
Duncanville 
Dutton : 310. 
East Brewton 2,4%6 . 
Eastahoga ss. ....... 
Eastem 

Valley 
Echo Hs, 
Echola ve 
Eclectic 1,037 
Eddy _.. ener 
Edwardsville 186. 
Edwin 
Elamville . 
Elba® 4,185. 
Elberta 552 
Eldridge 184 
Elgin a ce 
Elkmnnt . 470. 
Elmore 199 
Elrod a ene 
Emelle . .31 
Empire oe 
Enon 
Enterprise . 21,178 
Eoline .. ee 
dase Ayan e206 
Equali : , ee 
Ecillfork Eee 
Ethelsville al. 
Eufaula 13,908 
Eulaton . a 
Eunola_. ce Pe 
Eutaw” . . 1,878 
Eva ae. 491 
Evergreen® . 3,630 
Exce : 382 
Fabius .. a 
Fackler . 
Fadette .. ee. 
Fairteld _. 12,381. 
Fairhope 12,480 
Fairview ee See 
Falkville ... 1,202 
Farmersville a 
F aunsdale : 87 
F ayette® 4,922 
Fayetteville . sf 
Fernbank , 3 
Fitzpatrick 
Five Points 146 
Flat Creek 
Flat Rock 
Flatwood ; 
Elint City — 
Flomaton . 1,588 . 
Florala 1,964 
Florence® . 36,264 
Foley . 


ForestHome |... . 
Forestdalet 10,509 


Or RAMANA MEBODO—AOO cAmMZ 


OE- SOAR ELON AMS STOOD MAME eS RRER— OE ACOH HIM ORS SO BMO— TOM AAZAE BOE AO ZMH MD TTOO HME TTD> di 


—_ 
_ 


Forkland. 629 
Fort Davis : 
Fort Deposit 1,270 
Fort Morgan : 
Fort Payne® 12,938 
Fort Ruckert 6.052 
Fosters 
Fostona 
Fountain 
Frankfort 
Eranklin 149 
Frankville ; 
Freemanville =. 
Frisco City 1,460 
Fruitdale —_ 
Fruithurst ... 270 
Fulton . . 308 
Fultondale 6595 
Furman a. 
—— 971 
sadsden® 38,978 
Gainesville 220.. 
Gallant 
Gallion 
Ganer - 
Gantt 241 
Gantts Quarry 
Garden City S64 
Gardendale 11.626 
Garland 
Gastonburg 
Gaylesville 140 
Geiger 161 
Geneva® 4 388 
Georgetown 
Georgiana 1,737 
Geraldine 786 
Gilbertown 187 
Glen Allen 442 
Glencoe %, 52 
Glenville ¥ 
Glenwood 191 
Goldville*® 37 


_ 
jnao Go BY) Pop) 


— 


CwRDMwWYBOANWSLWNAVYVSSDYOOWONBDEeON DBuB&e WOO LI 


_ 


— 


CSEODMSNMDAN DANO ESAMNAMAYUNDEWWDHBAH SON VSW Uw ENS DOWN OWAN SS &SHUIRD S HYVIODWUIWEDRABRWHAOBOUARMWOo 


Good Hope 


Good Springs . 


Goodman 
Goodsprings 
Goodwater 
Goodway 
Gordo . 
Gordon . 
Gordonsville 
Gorgas 
Goshen 
Grady 
Graham 
Grand Bayt 
Grant 
Grayson . 
Graysville . 
Green Hill 
Green Pond 
Greenbrier .. 
Greensboro® 
Greenville® . 
Grimes al 
Grove Hill® . 
Groveoak 
Guin 
Gulf Crest. 
Gulf Shores 
Guntersville® 
Gurle 
Gu-Win ae 
Hacklehur 
Hackneyville 
Hacoda 
Halehur: 
Haleywille 
Halltown 
Halsell.... . 
tlamilton® 
Hammondville 
Hamner . 
Hanceville 
Hannon 
Hardaway . . 
Harpersville 
Hartford 
Hartselle . 
Harvestt 
Hatche- 
chubbee 
Hatton... . 
Havana 
Hayden... . 
Hayneville® 
Hazel Greent 
Hazen. 
Headland 
Healing 
Springs 
Heath . te 
Heflin® 
Heiberger 
Helena 
Henagar 
Henderson 
Hickory Elat 
Higdon 
High Point 
Highland 
ome. . 


Highland Lake’ . 


Hillsboro . 
Hobson City 
Hodges 
Hokes Bluff 
Holland Gin 
Hollins 
Holly Pond 


Holy Trinity 
Homewood 
Hnnoraville 
Hoover 
Hnpe Hull 
Horn Hill 
Horton 
Houston 
Howard 
Howton 
Hreytown 
Huguley*t 
Hulaco 
Huntsville® 
Hurricane 
Hurtshoro 
Huxford 
Hybart 
Hytop 

ider 
inverness 
imn City 
imnaton 
imndale* 
irvington 
Ishel 

Jachin 

Jack 
Jackson 
Jacksons Gap 
Jacksnnville 
Jamestnwn 
Jasper® 


15,364 
des 0 


158,216 
592 


315. 


“DO TRO-AAKLONOWNOZONAr TOTS MARZ AMEE TOM SH 


O>ORwnrMER H-S DOR 


SOMARAR=-HZMMM—ABSRKH-=SRNATNOONK—M—Tn—TABBOAOSOAMDO— 


_ 


WOOOwW OW eNWAHDODOOCOUVSOWNNOTRUVS YN YUH WHMH VDI HAOanwowow~~ NOOO OOH VIO sh 


_ 


_— 


—_ 


—_ 


CUNNDS VIS BRAMOHYWODNW OWN WHE OCAM lw WT WEN WWEHNYETHUS HY NN OMAUHROWS @BvVQun 


_ 


— 





Jones .. ; 
Jones Chapel 
Joppa . 
idan 
Jordan. . 
Kansas 

i eperman 
Kellyton 
pal 
Kent. . 
cee 7 
Kilpatric 
inibe 
Kimbrel 
Kimbrough 
Kinsey 
Kinston 
Kirkland ... 
Knoxville 
Laceys Spring 
Lacon 
Ladoniat . 
Lafayette® ... 
Lake Forest? 


Lake Purdy*t . 


Lakeview’ .. 
Lamison ... 
Land. .... 
Lanett 
Langston 
Lapine 


Larkinsville .._ 


Lavaca 
Lawley 
Lebanon . 
Leeds’. 
Leesburg 
Leighton 
Lenox.. 
Leroy ... 
Lester ... 
Letohatchee . 
Level Plains 
Lewiston 
Lexington ... 


Locust Fork 
Logan .. 
Lomax 
Louisville 
Lower 

Peach Tree 
Lowe 


Magnolia 
Magnolia 
Springs 
Magnolia 
erminal 
Malcolm 
Malone 
Malvern 
Manchester 
Maplesville 


Junction 
Marlow 
Martling 
Marvel 
Marvyn 
Maylene 
Maytown’ 
McCalla 
McCullough 
Mcintosh 
McKenzie 
McKinley 
McMullen 
McShan 
Mc Ville 
McWilliams 


gael 
2248—G 
a 
oH 

a 

C 

“ak 
ate 
260 ..D 
~~; 
iG 
541 £ 
-H 
1,119 A 
— 
1,801. E 
a: 
a) 
1,796 
602 
cal 
j 

B 

7 —=—C 
3,229 1 
3,234 G 
om. t... N 
5,799 _ F 
163 .C 
haa | 
| 
7.897 .G 
234. 8B 
oe. J 
B 

J 

tr 
ene 
10,4355 ..E 
799. 
849.B 
i. 

mee 
107A 
: = 
1544, 1 
840A 
106 
[> =_— oO 
.. 4,577 .E 
2,424 1 
2401 .F 
2.458 F 
., 653 I 
= 
978. B 
3,297 ..H 
165.H 
348 M 
1016 D 
D 

rh 

612 .K 
sed 
“ae 140. 
1,348 .N 
SG 
2635 Kk 
397 .D 
29,329. B 
303 M 
rl 

oO 

J 

L 

mm [2 
1,215..M 
0 
672 ...H 
iia 
1,169 £ 
B 

3,511 H 
t 

oO 

Cc 

G 

] 

: 

435 F 
c. 
1)" 
eddies). 
644 _K 
{ 

66 F 

F 

( 

J 


_ 


NAW LS WhyIywOnuweol On ODHnwenDonwhlaenwoocnywhUwmoeuyuRerPeaewoeuwhLonwyuyunle nw 


CIWS UI Ow & pe hOKDLyuVNl oS WAOnNNOWLl © 


—_ 


WOwwhehAWweanner @wyi 


Meadow- 

brook*t 4697 
Megargel 
Mellow Valley 
Melton 
Melvin 
Memphis 33 
Mentone . 451 
Meridianvillet 4,117. 
Mexia ; 
Middleton +. 
Midfield 5,626 . 
Midland City 1,703 
Midway . 457 
Mignont 1,348 
Millbrook ..10,386 
Miller ie & 
Millers Ferry = 
Millerville ....0 0 |... 
Millport 1,160. 
Millry 615 
Milstead 
Minor’ t 1,116 
Minter . 
Mobile®? 198,915 
Monroeville? 6,862 
Montevallo 4,825 
Mont- 

gomery® .. 201,568 
Montrose . 4. : 
Moody” 8,053 
Moores Milf? . 3,178 
Mooresville ..... 59 
Morris . 1,827 
Morvin . “4 A. : 
Mosses’ . 1,101 . 
Moulton? 3,260 
Moundville 1,809 . 
Mount Andrew 
Mount Carmel 
Mount Hope 
Mount Meigs 
Mount Olive . 
Mount Rozell 
Mount Sterling 
MountVernon. . 834 
Mountain 

Brook . 20,604 
Mountain 

Creek te 
Mountainhoro. 338 
Mulga 973 
Muntord.. .... 
Muscle Shoals ..11,924 
Myrtlewood . .....139 
Nanalalia_ 7 
Napier Field’ 404 
Natural Bridge 28 
Nauvoo 264 
Nectar 372 
Needham 97 
Neel / 
New Brockton 1,250. 
New Hope 2,339 
New Markett 1,864 
New Site... 9.46 .6e..8 848 . 
Newbern A'28))| % 
Newell = 
Newton 1,708 
Newtonville 
Newville ...... 553 
Nicholsville 
North 

Courtland’ ...... 799 . 
North Johns.... ..142 
Northport 19,435 
Notasulga 916 
Oak Grove 457 
Oak Hill 37 
Oak Ridge 
Oaklan 
Oakman . 944 
Odenville 1,131 
Ohatchee .. 1,215 
Old Spring Hill .. ... 
Oneonta® 5,576 
Onycha 208 
Opelika® 23,498 
Opp... . 6,607 
Orange Beach. .3,784 
Onon 
Orrville 230 
Owassa 
Owens 

Cross Roads 1,124 
Oxtord 14,592 
Ozark® . 13,119. 
Paint Rock 185 
Palestine . 
Palmerdale 
Panola 
Pans 
Parns 1,268 
Paul 
Pea Ridge 
Peachburg 


"Does nol appear un map: key shows general location. 


tCensus designated place unincorporated, but recognized as a significant sertted community by the US Census Bureau 


County seat 


Source 2000 census Places without population figures are unincorporated areas 


Se lal to 


No 


= oli saliceli=te Neat aa ke ool Pat =] — Las toaVanl> tee tosh ai alin ae.” Alan pale sla te lel@ te (llohelg? — Stestaalnha|Se 


7 


ant Smawme— 


; 


m cde AY ee 


— 
WOfeLVE fons ysOuUn~ nell oewwe efor an ww mele yOhuyunwannwnwr) AYO Nn OnwwewLl ys sSeMeOvwuysownw hobs 


Awe LNynOnuyh Oye Hyyoelvuius 


WBAAGWUONDSOynown 


Pearson 
Pelham 
Pell City 
Pennington 
Perdido - 
Perdido Beach 
Perdue Hill 
Peterman. . 
Peterson .. . 
Petersville see 
Underwood 
(-Petersvillel 
Petrey < pretence 63. 
Phenix City? .. J 
Phil Campbell 
Pickensville ... .... 662 . 
Piedmont 5 
Pike Road 
Pinckard.. . .. 
Pine Ap le... 
Pine Hil 
Pine Level 
Pine Ridge* 
Pinsont 
Pisgah 
Pittsview 
Plantersville _ . 
Pleasant Grove 
Pleasant Hill 
Pleasant Ridge 
Pleasant Site 
Pletcher 
Poarch Creek 
Reservation*® 
Point Cleart 
Pollard 
Pope . 
Portersville 
Potash 
Powell 
Powers 
Prairie 
Praineville 
Prattville® 
Prices .... 
Priceville. .... ..1, 
Prichard 
Princeton... ... 
Prospect 
Providence . 
Pushmataha 
Putnam 
Pyriton . . 
Quinton 
Rabun 
Ragland 
Rainbow City 
Rainsville 
Ralph 
Ramer 
Ranburne 
Randolph 
Range . 
Red Ba 
Red Hi 
Red Level 
Redstone 
Arsenal*t. —_. 2,365. 
Reece City .... 
Reeltown ...... 
Relorm . 
Remla : : 
Rendaiia . Fane, 
Renfroe 
Repton 
Riderville 
Riderwood 
Ridgeville” 
River Falls 
Riverside . 
Riverton ‘ee. 
Riverview* . 99. 
Roanoke .... 
Roha : 
Rohertsdale 
Rohinson 
Springs 
Rock Ci 
Rock Mills 
Rockford? 
Rockledge 
Ruckwood 
Rodentown 
Roeton .. 
Rogersville . 
Roosevelt 


14,369 . 
9,565. 
Ble B) 


428. 


Royal . 
Russellville® 
Rutledge 
Rylan 

Saco 
Salfurd 
Saginaw 


Jd 
M 
, 40) 
K 
K 
E 


ets ee Pe ee 
VODWLSONOLY BOCUWMWONNUDOWNWOD 4 SYOWUNHNOOHAOMOMHLYGDWNSSIWHOUVS SH WDOMSWWS RAweannowmnvwsmsnonsonsL—o 


G 
F 
iE 


Agano= 


~ 
: 


S—One Dow oMm wrx 


S2ubeeawrinu 


~ 


— 


—_ 


AVON sows 


St Clair 
St. Clair 

Springs 
St Elmo 
St Florian 
St. Stephens 
Saks*t 
salem 
Salitpa 
Samantha 
Samson... 
Sand Rock 
Sandy Ridge 
Sanlord 
Saragossa 
Saraland 
SandisSeesoe: 
Satsuma . 
Sawyerville .. 
Sayre me 
Schuster... . . . 
Scottsboro? . . 14, 
Seale 
Be! ; 

rings 

Statight 
Searles 
Section 
Sellers 
Selma? 
Selmont |-West 

Selmontit 
Seman. 
Seminole 
Semmes. 
Shady Grove 
Sheffield . 
Shelby. 
Shellhorn 
Shiloh*® 
Shopton 


Shorter .. "355. 


Shorterville 
Silas . 
Silver Run 


Smithst ... 
Smoke Rise*t .. 1, 
Snead .... 
Snow Hill .. 
Snowdoun 
Society Hill 
Somerville 
South . . 
South 
Vinemont 
Southside 
Spanish Fortt 
Speigner . ‘— 
Spraque . a... 
SpringGarden........ 
Spring Valley ...... 
Springs tlle 
Sprott é 
Spruce Pine 
Standing Rock 
Stanton . 
Stapleton 
Steele... 
Sterrett 
Stevenson 
Stewart 
Stewartville 
Stockton 
Stroud 
Sulligent . 
Sumiton ... 
Summerdale .. 655. 
Summertield 
Summit . 
Sumterville 
Sunny South 
Surginer 
Susan Moore’ 
Suttle 
Sweet Water 
Sycamore Cait... 
Sylacauga .. 12,616 . 
Sylvan 
Springs* 
Sylvania .. 
Talladega® 
Talladega 
Springs 
Tallassee 
Tanner 
Tarentum 
Tarrant 
Taylor 
Tenant 
Tennille 
Tensaw 


mx>o7m 


"oOmT 


fy thong gle la los fey 


Simi coun © SCWOWRDSwWwAWwWunnO we womwenw ~ 


_ 


— 


SOW RP AaNYUNSUWOWNAS DWI De HnAOhLVYUysLwonwwon NAWONVANNYOUWMOULANOCABDANL ON LAH 


—_ 


Alabama 


Texasville 
Tharptown 
Theodoret . 6,811 
Thomaston . 383 
Thomasville 4,649 
Thorsby —. 1,820 
Three Notch —_....... 
Threet 
Tibhie 
Tillmans 

Corner’t 15,685 
Titus 
Le 
Town Creek 1,216 
Townley ._........ 
Toxey 152 
Trafford Syde | 
Trenton ae 
Triana’ eae 
Trini ; . 1,841. 
Tove. 13,935. 
Trussville 12,924 
Tunnel 

Springs . EF 
Tuscaloosa® ....77,906 . 
Tuscumbia? 7,836 
Tuskegee®. ... 11,846 
Twin... 5 Be 
liy|Cii gee eee 
Underwood 

|-Petersvillelt 3,137 
Underwood 

Crossroads. ...... 
Union .. 227 
UnionGrove ...... 94 
Union Springs® 3,670 . 
Uniontown ....... 1,636 
Uriah hee ee 
Valhermoso 

Springs ee 
Valley 9,198 
Valley Head 611 
Vance 500 
Vandiver. i... 
Verbena ; 
Vernon? .. 2,143 
Vestavia Hills 24,476 
Village Springs ....... 
Vina ... 400. 
Vincent 1853 
Vinegar Bend sud 
Vinnette’ EL Rsa 
Vredenhurgh ‘eye 
Wadley .. 640 
Wagarville a 
Waldo* . 28) 
Walker 

Springs 
Wallace Le 
Walnut Grove 710 
Walter ae: 
Ward : 
Warrenton ad 
Warrior 3,169. 
Warsaw sd... 
Waterloo . . 208 
Wattsville ie 
Waverly .. 184 
Weaver 2,619. 
Webb x 1,298 
Wedowee® 818 
Wellington... ..... 
Weogutka . 
West Bend ma ae 
West Blocton . . 1,372 
West End 

|-Cobbtown}t . 3,924. 
West Greene ae 
West Jefferson’ .. 344 
West Point’ .. 295 
Weston” ——__....... 
Westover .. ag 
Wetumpka® . 5,726. 
Whatley ioe 
Wheeler .._—........ 
White Hall 1,014 
White Plains Oe Se. 
Whites Chapel” . 
Whitfield 
Whiton 
Wilmer 
Wilsonville 135] 
Wilton 580 
Winfield 4,540. 
a a 
Winterboro » 
Woodland 192 
Woods Bluff oe. 
Woodstock ne 
Woodville 761 
Wren = 
Yantley 
Yarbo - 
Yellow Bluff 181 
Yellow Pine  —_......... 
York 2,854 


nlaalan Sela Keio) (“ate ¥eles) 


AMADOR MRORMmeERA 


Omaremsm> 


DAMSA~MOH-BATANOAMG 


—z=-AoTn— TTS 


265 


O 
MOUANANSUOAUN NBONSSwed 


Vw NODOOWOYIWNAYUN AYU COWS UCONN AAW OOO D 2h Or~iwe a Aweoebblui 


_— 


_ 


NNHENNHYUIYUIW OMY a OWN OW HOD Ve WAH wo 


266 Alabama 


The beaches and hotels along Alabama's Gulf Coast 
are among the states major attractions. Many vacation- 
ers visit the area each year. Many enjoy saltwater fishing 
in the Gulf of Mexico and freshwater fishing on inland 
lakes. Tourists also come to see Alabama’ historic 
homes and beautiful gardens. 

One of Alabama's outstanding annual events is the 
Mardi Gras celebration in Mobile. The festivities begin 
two weeks before Shrove Tuesday. They include color- 





Places to visit 


Following are brief descriptions of some of Alabama's many 
interesting places to visit. 


Ave Maria Grotto, in Cullman, features more than 125 minia- 
ture replicas of famous buildings and religious shrines con- 
structed on a hillside. Joseph Zoettl, a Benedictine monk, con- 
structed most of the buildings. 

Battleship Alabama was presented to Alabama by the U.S. gov- 
ernment in 1964. Alabamians raised money to restore the 
35,000-long-ton (35,600-metric-ton) ship, which served in 
World War Ii (1939-1945). The battleship is now anchored in 
Mobile Bay. 

Bellingrath Gardens, in Mobile, is world famous for its dis- 
plays of azaleas in the spring and chrysanthemum in the au- 
tumn. Flowers bloom in the gardens the year around. Many 
waterfowl populate the gardens. 

Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, in Mont- 
gomery, was the site at which Martin Luther King, Jr., first 
preached his message of peace and brotherhood. A huge 
mural in the basement of the church depicts important events 
in Kings life. 

First White House of the Confederacy, in Montgomery, was 
the home of President and Mrs. Jefferson Davis during the 
first months of the Confederacy. The white frame house was 
built in 1835. 

McWane Center, in Birmingham, is a science center. It features 
exhibits that allow visitors to interact with energy, motion, 
light, sound, electricity, and magnetism. 

Sequoyah Cavers, at Valley Head, contain beautiful rock for- 


Visitor's guide 


ful parades through the streets both during the day and 
in the evening. 

During late March and early April, blossoms begin to 
appear on shrubs along Mobile's famous Azalea Trail. 
This trail is an automobile route, about 35 miles (56 kilo- 
meters) long, through the city. The trail passes many of 
Mobile's most beautiful homes and gardens. The azaleas 
and other flowering shrubs are usually loveliest during 
late March. 


Bellingrath Gardens 
in Mobile 


Bellingrath Gardens 


mations and clear, shining lakes. Lighting inside the caverns 
creates interesting reflections of the formations in the water. 

U.S. Space and Rocket Center, at Tranquility Base in 
Huntsville, houses a large collection of spacecraft, rockets, 
and hands-on astronaut training exhibits. 

National forests, parks, and monuments. Alabama has four 
national forests: Talladega, William B. Bankhead, Conecuh, 
and Tuskegee. Talladega, the largest, has two divisions—one 
in central Alabama and the other in eastern Alabama. 

Horseshoe Bend National Military Park, near Dadeville, 
marks the site where Andrew Jackson defeated the Creek in- 
dians in 1814. Natchez Trace Parkway between Natchez, Mis- 
sissippi, and Nashville, Tennessee, runs across northwestern 
Alabama. This parkway, which is administered by the National 
Park Service, follows a route that was used by pioneers to re- 
turn north after floating goods down the Mississippi River on 
flatboats (see Natchez Trace). 

At Russell Cave National Monument near Bridgeport, ar- 
chaeologists have found tools and other items used by prehis- 
toric people. These items show that people lived in the cave 
as early as 7000 B.C, and that the cave was used as a shelter 
until about A.D. 1650. 

State parks. Alabama has 24 state parks and 2 state historical 
ironworks parks. The Alabama Historical Commission oper- 
ates Fort Morgan on Mobile Bay. For further information on 
Alabama's state parks and lakes, write to Commissioner, State 
Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, Mont- 
gomery, AL 36130. 


Alabama _ 267 


Sequoyah Caverns 
Rainbow Falls in Sequoyah Caverns at Valley Head 





United States Space and 
Rocket Center in Huntsville 





Debra Schulte Black Star 
Annual events 


January-May 
Mardi Gras in Mobile (February-March); Zoo Weekend in 
Montgomery (March); Selma Pilgrimage Weekend (March); 
Eufaula Pilgrimage (April); Birmingham Festival of Arts (April); 
Panoply, a festival of the visual and performing arts, in Hunts- 
ville (May), Jubilee Cityfest, Montgomery (May). 

June-August 
City Stages in Birmingham (June), America’s Junior Miss in 
Mobile (late June); Chilton County Peach Festival in Clanton 
(June); W. C Handy Music Festival in Florence (early August). 

September-December 
Big Spring Jam in Huntsville (September); South Alabama Na- 
tional Fair in Montgomery (October); National Shrimp Festival 
in Gulf Shores (October); Winston 500 in Talladega (October; 
National Peanut Festival in Dothan (November); Annual 
Thanksgiving Day Pow Wow in Atmore (Novemben; Victorian 
Front Porch Christmas in Opelike (December). 





€d Malles, Hillstrom Stock Photo 


Mardi Gras in Mobile 


268 Alabama Land and climate 


Land regions. Most of southern Alabama lies less meters) above sea level in the northeast. The land slopes 
than 500 feet {150 meters) above sea level. The surface of | to about 500 feet (150 meters) where it meets the East 
the state rises gradually toward the northeast. Alabama Gulf Coastal Plain in the southwest. Farmers could not 
has six main land regions: (1) the East Gulf Coastal Plain, grow large crops in the plateau’s sandy soils until the 
(2) the Black Belt, (3) the Piedmont, (4) the Appalachian 1880's, when commercial fertilizers came into common 
Ridge and Valley Region, (5) the Cumberland Plateau, use. Today, farmers raise hogs and poultry there, and 
and (6) the Interior Low Plateau. grow cotton, hay, potatoes, and vegetables. 

The East Gulf Coastal Plain is Alabama's largest land The Interior Low Plateau lies in the northwestern 
region. It covers the entire southern two-thirds of the part of the state. Much of the land is in the valley of the 
state, except for a narrow strip of land called the Black Tennessee River. Farmers in the region grow corn, cot- 
Belt. In western Alabama, the plain extends north almost __ ton, and hay. The plateau has water transportation and 
to Tennessee. hydroelectric power, which encourage manufacturing 

The plain has several sections. The low, swampy land __ there. Decatur and “The Shoals,” the area of Muscle 
of the Mobile River Delta makes up the southwestern Shoals, Florence, Sheffield, and Tuscumbia, are indus- 
section. The southeastern part is called the Wiregrass trial centers. 
area. It is named for a tough grass that once grew there Coastline. Alabama's general coastline extends for 53 
in pine forests. Today, the Wiregrass area is an impor- miles (85 kilometers) along the Gulf of Mexico. The tidal 
tant farming region. The northern part of the plain is shoreline, which includes small bays and inlets, is 607 
often called the Centra/ Pine Belt because many pine miles (977 kilometers) long. Mobile Bay, at the mouth of 


forests cover its low, rolling hills. In the western part of the Mobile River, is the chief feature of the Alabama 
this section, the soils are gravelly and sandy, and are not __ coastline. It is an important harbor area. Mississippi 
good for growing crops. Sound borders the coast west of Mobile Bay. Perdido 
The Black Belt is a narrow strip of rolling prairie Bay is at the border between Alabama and Florida. The 
wedged between the northern and southern parts ofthe _—_long, sandy peninsula between Mobile and Perdido 
East Gulf Coastal Plain. The Black Belt was named forthe —_ bays is known as the Gu/f Coast Dauphin Island, Ala- 





sticky black clay soils of its rolling uplands. Early in Ala- bama’'s largest coastal island, lies at the entrance to Mo- 
bama’s history, farmers developed large plantations in bile Bay. An overseas highway connects the island with 
this region. Boll weevils came to the Black Belt in 1915, the mainland. 


and damaged the cotton crop. Some farmers then 
changed from growing cotton to raising livestock. 

The Piedmont in east-central Alabama, is an area of 
low hills and ridges separated by sandy valleys. The clay 
soils of these hills and ridges have been badly eroded. 
Most of the land is forested. Cheaha Mountain, the high- 
est point in Alabama, rises 2,407 feet (734 meters) on the 
northwestern edge of the Piedmont. 

Deposits of coal, iron ore, limestone, and marble, to- 
gether with electric power from projects on the Coosa 
and Tallapoosa rivers, make the Piedmont an important 
manufacturing area. Textile production is the main in- 
dustry in many small cities of the region. 

The Appalachian Ridge and Valley Region is an area 
of sandstone ridges and fertile limestone valleys. It lies 
northwest of the Piedmont. The region has coal, iron 
ore, and limestone—the three basic minerals used in 
making iron and steel. For this reason, Birmingham and 
other large cities in the region developed as centers of 
iron and steel production. 

The Cumberland Plateau, also known as the Appala- 
chian Plateau, lies northwest of the Appalachian Ridge 
and Valley Region. The surface varies from flat to gently 
rolling land. It reaches a height of about 1,800 feet (549 





Land regions of Alabama 


Woretp Bown map 


Map index 
prcecrter: > eee D os Mountains aie Ever ec 2 4 Mobic E » 1 he ee 5s . 3 
chian Mts. .. A est point in e Hard se Aw 4 Monte Sano Pp 

Aux Herbes (Isl) . . Eos) Rabe: den... iB « ale ad oe ae, gS (Mountain) -A 3 allailcga Rommel B 3 

Bankhead Lake .......... B 2 ChoctawhatcheeR ....D 4 Lake Lewis Smith ae er 4 N Henry Lake B 3 Tallapoosa R 8B 4, Go 

Bartletts Ferry Ciaibornetake.... ..D 2 Lake Mitchell ic 3 Oak ntain B 3 TennesseeR ....A 2A 4 
Dent f:. . epee Cc 4 Colvin Mountains B 4 Lake Tholocco ..D 4 PeaR : D 4 Tennessee-T: 

Bear Creek ....... A} Conecuh R iD 3 Lake Tuscaloosa 2B 2 Penitentiary bigbee Waterway Cc 1 

Beaver Creek Coosa R. ee Lay Dam —& 3 Mountain A 2 Tom R D 4 
Mountains. . B 3 Cumberland Plateau ....A 3 Litthe Tal saR....B 4 PerdidoR . Em? Walter F. 

Big Creek Lake Ey 1 Dauphin Isl... wee 1 Locust B 3 Pickwick Lake A 2 George Lake D 4 

= Br ny SS, Si lake... C 2 Logan Martin Lake B 3 Piedmont Plateau B 4 Weisner Mountain A 4 

CY cages ,. ie A 3 EscambiaR ...... ....E 2 Lookout Mountain A 4 Pi Creek mo) Weiss Lake. A 4 

Black Beh... og Flagg Mountain Cc 3 Luxapalila Creek ~ Red Hillis... Di West Point Lake B 4 

Black Warrior R. Ga 2 Guntersvilie Lake A 3 in Dam yc 4 Red Mountain B 3 eeler Lake A 2 

Browns Vali A 3 Inland Lake —. B 3 Martin Lake C 4 Rock Mountain B 2 William “Bill” 

ButtahatchieR .. BI Jackson Lake D 2 omarion Sound € 1 Russell Cave Dannelly Res. wei 18) 

CahabaR ....... C 2 jordan Dam Cc 3 MitchellDam ..... Geo Nafl Mon. A 4 Wilson Lake Ae 

Chattahoochee R. D 4 Jordan Lake .. Cm Mobile Bay... .........E 1 Ryan Creek . A 3 Yellow R yD “3 


Alabama physical map 


Distance scale 
0 5 1015 20 25 30 Miles ® State capital 


a 


Pensacola’ 0 10 20 30 40 Kilometers * City or town 
aS 
| ’ ; Ss — SANTA = f —- - ~- - : 
ia 0 Meric : .\ ee 
DAUPHIN 1 a —_ Gulf sr f shales Ene to ga oe. 


7 3 


Specially created lor The Word Book Encovclopedia by Rand MoNatly and World Book editors 





270 Alabama 


Colorful wiidflowers bloom 
on Dauphin Island, off the 
coast of Alabama south of 
Mobile Bay. The island has 
beautiful beaches that attract 
many visitors. 





*, 
aor) 


| eles Kittinger, Hillstrom Stock Photo 
Rivers and lakes. Navigable rivers flow through al- 
most every part of Alabama. The Mobile River and its 
tributaries flow south to the Gulf of Mexico. They form 


the most important river system in the state. The Ala- Average monthly weather 

bama and the Tombigbee, Alabama's longest rivers, 

meet about 45 miles (72 kilometers) north of Mobile and Mobile Birmingham 

form the Mobile River. The Alabama River begins where 

the Coosa and Tallapoosa rivers meet, just north of le lane reac | aan 
Montgomery. The Tombigbee starts in Mississippi and High Low/High Low| snow High Low {HIgh Low! snow 
flows southeast into Alabama. Its main tributary in Ala- 5 L. 

bama is the Black Warrior. Wes 45 118 


The Chattahoochee River forms much of the border 
between Alabama and Georgia. The Tennessee River is 
the most important river in northern Alabama. It flows 
west across almost the entire width of the state. 

Alabama has no large natural lakes, but dams on riv- 
ers have created many artificial lakes. The largest of 
these, Guntersville Lake, covers 110 square miles (285 
square kilometers). It is formed by Guntersville Dam on 
the Tennessee River. Other large artificially created 

















Average January temperatures Average July temperatures Average yearly precipitation 
In winter, winds from the Guif of Mexico Summers in Alabama are long, hot, and Alabama receives much rainfall, espe- 
bring mild air to southern Alabama. Win- humid. Higher elevations make the north- _ cially near the Gulf coast. Snowfail is light 
ters are a little coider in the north. east slightly cooler. in the north and rare in the south. 
Degrees Degrees Degrees Degrees 
Fahrenher BE Celsius Fohrenher : Celsius Inches Centimeters 
Above 48 Above 9 Above 82 Above 28 More thon 60 More than 152 
44 to 48 7109 81 to 82 27 to 28 $6 to 60 g 142 10 152 
42 to 44 6 to 7 80 to 8! 26 '0 27 52 to 56 al 132 to 142 
Below 42 | Below 6 Below 80 | 





Below 26 Less thon 52 _| Less thon 132 























lakes, in order of size, include Wheeler on the Ten- 
nessee River, Martin on the Tallapoosa River, and Weiss 
on the Coosa River. 

Plant and animal life. Forests cover about two-thirds 
of Alabama. Pine forests are the most common type of 
forest. Besides pines, other trees in the state include 
cedars, cypresses, hemlocks, and oaks. 

In the spring, blooming shrubs and trees cover the Al- 
abama countryside. The state is famous for its azaleas. It 
also has flowering dogwood, mountain laurel, and 
rhododendrons. Alabamas wildflowers include asters, 
Dutchman’'s-breeches, goldenrods, orchids, pinks, and 
southern camasses. 

Bobcats, deer, red and gray foxes, minks, opossums, 
rabbits, raccoons, skunks, squirrels, and wild turkeys 
live in many parts of Alabama. Beaver colonies thrive in 
the swamps and lowlands. Some alligators can be found 
in the state’s southern swamps and bayous (see Bayou). 
These areas also provide winter shelter for ducks, 


Alabama 271 


geese, and other water birds that fly north in the spring. 
Freshwater fish in Alabama streams include bass, 
bream, buffalo fish, catfish, crappies, garfish, and shad. 
Drumfish, flounder, mackerel, mullet, red snapper, and 
tarpon are common in the Gulf of Mexico along Alaba- 
ma’s coast. Shellfish found in the Gulf include crabs, oys- 
ters, and shrimps. 

Climate. Alabama has a mild climate. January temper- 
atures average about 52 °F (11 °C) in the southern part of 
the state, and about 46 °F (8 °C) in the north. July temper- 
atures average about 80 °F (27 °C) throughout the state. 
Alabama's lowest temperature, — 27 °F (—33 °C), oc- 
curred at New Market on Jan. 30, 1966. The highest tem- 
perature, 112 °F (44 °C), was at Centreville on Sept 5, 
1925. Alabama's annual precipitation (rain, melted snow, 
and other moisture) averages from about 65 inches (165 
centimeters) on the coast to 53 inches (135 centimeters) 
in the north. Snow falls in the north, but is rare on the 
coast. 


Economy 


As in many states, Alabama's economy is changing. Al- 
abama has long been known for its manufacturing in- 
dustries. Manufacturing remains the state's single most 
important economic activity in terms of the gross state 
product—the total value of all goods and services pro- 
duced in a state in a year. However, the number of man- 
ufacturing jobs in the state declined during the 1990s. 
Service industries, taken together, make up the largest 
portion of Alabama's gross state product. In the 1990's, 
these industries had significant job growth. 

Mining and farming also contribute to Alabama’s eco- 
nomic output. The state is an important producer of coal 
and natural gas. Much of its agricultural income is pro- 
duced by farms that raise livestock. 

Natural resources of Alabama include thick pine 
forests, areas of fertile soil, valuable mineral deposits, 
and deep rivers. 

Soil. Alabama's Black Belt is known for its black clay 
soils. Parts of the East Gulf Coastal Plain have sandy soils. 
Red soils cover most other parts of the state. In many ar- 
eas, these red soils were once covered by gray or yel- 
low topsoil. Much of the fertile topsoil was carried away 
by erosion after farmers cut down trees and plowed the 
land. Today, many Alabama farmers help save fertile 
soils by contour plowing, terracing, and other conserva- 
tion methods. 

Minerals. Valuable deposits of coal and limestone lie 
fairly close together in the Birmingham area of Alabama. 
These materials are used in the production of iron and 
steel. Alabama's most important coal beds are located in 
the north-central part of the state. Major deposits of 
limestone are also found in northern Alabama. 

Alabama has important oil and natural gas fields in 
Choctaw, Escambia, Mobile, and other southwestern 
counties. Other mined products found in the state in- 
clude asphalt, bauxite, clay, dolomite, marble, mica, salt, 
sand and gravel, sandstone, and talc. 

Service industries, as a group, contribute the great- 
est part of the gross state product in Alabama. Most of 
the service industries are concentrated in the state's 
metropolitan areas. 





Ranking first among Alabama’s service industries are 
(1) community, business, and personal services and (2) 
wholesale and retail trade. Each contributes an equal 
amount toward the gross state product. 

Community, business, and personal services consist 
ofa variety of establishments, including private health 
care, law firms, software developers, and engineering 
companies. Blount, an important construction engineer- 
ing company, is based in Montgomery. Birmingham is a 
center for high-tech and telecommunications services. 

The wholesale trade of groceries, machinery, and 
mined products is important in Alabama. Mobile serves 
as the state's major center of wholesale trade. Major 
types of retail businesses include automobile dealer- 
ships, discount stores, and food stores. Bruno’s, one of 
the South's largest grocery store chains, is headquar- 
tered in Birmingham. 


272 Alabama 


Government ranks next among the service industries 
of Alabama. Government services include the operation 
of public schools, public hospitals, and military estab- 
lishments. The public school system is a leading em- 
ployer in Alabama. Major military bases located in the 
State include Fort Rucker, near Dothan, and Maxwell Air 
Force base and Gunter Annex, near Montgomery. The 
Huntsville area is home to the George C. Marshall Space 
Flight Center and the Redstone Arsenal. State govern- 
ment offices are based in Montgomery. 

Finance, insurance, and real estate forms Alabamas 
fourth-ranking service industry. Birmingham is Alaba- 
ma’'s leading financial center. Two of the South's largest 
banking companies, Amsouth and SouthTrust, have 
their headquarters there. Large financial companies are 
also based in Montgomery. Real estate is a major part of 
the economy of Alabama because of the large sums of 
money involved in the buying and selling of homes. The 
leasing of buildings is also part of the real estate sector. 

Transportation, communication, and utilities ranks 
fifth among service industries in Alabama. Many ship- 
ping companies are based in Mobile, which has one of 
the busiest ports in the United States. Ships transport 
the state's mined products and many other types of 
freight Trucking and shipping companies also transport 
much of Alabama's freight Pipeline companies transport 
petroleum and natural gas. Telephone companies are 
the most important part of the communications sector. 
The Alabama headquarters of BellSouth are in Birming- 
ham. Utility companies provide electric, gas, and water 
service. More information about transportation and 
communication appears later in this section. 

Manufacturing. Goods manufactured in Alabama 
have a value added by manufacture of about $30 billion 








Fd Males, Hillstrom Stoc k Photo 
Paper mills operate in many parts of Alabama. Paper products 
rank among Alabamass leading manufactured goods. The state ts 
a major U.S. producer of forest products. 


yearly. This figure represents the increase in value of 
raw materials after they become finished products. 

Chemicals are Alabama's leading manufactured 
goods in terms of value added by manufacture. The 
States most important chemical products are used by in- 
dustry. Alabama factories also produce chemical fibers, 
fertilizers, and insecticides. Chief chemical production 
centers in the state include Decatur and Mobile. 

Paper products rank second in value added among 
Alabama's manufactured products. Pulp and paper are 
produced at mills in many parts of the state, including 
the Mobile, Montgomery, and Childersburg areas. Oth- 
er paper products manufactured in Alabama include 
cardboard, paper bags, and paper tissue. 

Primary metals are Alabamass third-ranking manufac- 
tured product Primary metals manufacturing is based 
mainly on the steel industry, which is centered in Birm- 
ingham, Decatur, and Gadsden. 

Transportation equipment is Alabama's fourth-ranking 
manufactured product. Motor vehicles, aircraft engines, 
and military and space equipment are produced here. 

Food products rank fifth in terms of value added by 
manufacture. The states major food processing activities 
include bread baking and meat packing. 

Other goods made in Alabama include clothing, com- 
puter and electronic equipment, fabricated metal prod- 
ucts, machinery, rubber and plastic products, textiles, 
and wood products. Much of the clothing made in Al- 
abama is manufactured in small towns, including An- 
dalusia, Bay Minette, Elba, Haleyville, Jasper, and Scotts- 
boro. Computer components and communications 
equipment are the leading types of electronic equip- 
ment made in Alabama. The state's fabricated metal 
products include hardware, containers, and architectur- 
al metals. Factories in Birmingham and Montgomery 
manufacture heating and air conditioning units. Flo- 
rence is a center for the manufacture of metalworking 
machinery. Huntsville, Opelika, and Tuscaloosa have 
large tire factories. Plants near Birmingham and 
Huntsville make a variety of plastic products. Fabric, 
thread, yarn, and other textile products are made in 
many parts of Alabama. Lumber, plywood, and veneers 
are among the state's chief wood products. 

Agriculture. Farms cover about 30 percent of Alaba- 
ma's land area. The state has approximately 49,000 farms. 

Livestock products account for about three-fourths of 
Alabama's farm income. Alabama ranks among the lead- 
ing states in the production of broilers (chickens 5 to 12 
weeks old). Broilers are the most valuable farm product 
in the state. They provide more than 40 percent of the 
farm income. Counties in the northern part of the state 
produce the most broilers. 

Beef cattle are Alabama's second most valuable farm 
product. Cattle graze on grasslands throughout the 
State, but especially in the Black Belt in central Alabama. 
Eggs and milk are also leading livestock products in the 
State. Hogs are raised in all parts of the state, but espe- 
cially in the Wiregrass area. Catfish farming and bee- 
keeping are also important in Alabama. 

Until the early 1900's, cotton production employed 
many farmworkers and provided almost all of Alabama's 
agricultural wealth. Today, cotton is still Alabama's lead- 
ing crop, and the state is a leading cotton producer. Me- 
chanical pickers harvest much of the cotton crop. 


Economy of Alabama 


This map shows the economic uses of land in Alabama and 
where the state's leading farm, mineral, and forest products are 
produced. Major manufacturing centers are shown in red. 


Mostly cropland ncaa Urban area 


| Woodland mixed with e 
| _s}scropland and grazing 


e 
cel Mostly forest land 
WORLD BOOK map 


Manufacturing center 


Mineral deposit 





=—— Natura gas 


Greenhouse and nursery products are an important 
source of farm income. Peanuts, which are grown in the 
Wiregrass region, are another important crop. Other 
valuable field crops include corn, soybeans, and wheat. 

Peaches are produced mainly in Chilton county. Al- 
abama farmers also grow apples, nectarines, plums, 
grapes, strawberries, and blueberries. The state's lead- 
ing vegetable crops include potatoes, sweet potatoes, 
sweet corn, tomatoes, and watermelons. Most of the 
potatoes and sweet potatoes are produced in Baldwin, 
Chilton, Cullman, DeKalb, and Jackson counties. Pecans 
are another valuable farm product, produced mainly in 
the southern part of the state. 

Mining. Alabama’‘s most valuable mined products are 
coal, natural gas, petroleum, crushed stone, and lime- 
stone. Jefferson, Tuscaloosa, and Walker counties in 
north-central Alabama produce most of the state's coal. 
The coal is a bituminous (soft) variety that is taken from 
both underground and surface mines. Natural gas and 
petroleum are obtained mainly from wells in the south- 
western part of the state. The production of methane 


Alabama 273 


gas from coal is a major activity in west-central Alabama. 
Large limestone quarries lie near Birmingham and 
Huntsville. Limestone is used primarily to make cement 
and roadbeds. 

Alabama is among the leading states in mining baux- 
ite and marble. The state’s other mined products include 
clays, salt, and sand and gravel. 

Fishing industry. Alabama has an annual fish catch 
valued at about $50 million. The Gulf of Mexico provides 
most of the catch. Shrimp are the most valuable product 
of Alabama's saltwater fishing industry. Blue crabs rank 
second in value, followed by oysters. Buffalo fish, cat- 
fish, and mussels are caught commercially in freshwater 
streams in Alabama. Grain-fed catfish, raised in artificial 
ponds on farms, are an important new food crop. 

Electric power. Plants that burn coal provide about 
two-thirds of Alabamass electric power. Nuclear plants 
provide about 25 percent of the state's electric power. 
Hydroelectric plants supply almost all of the remaining 
power. The Tennessee Valley Authority, a government 
corporation, operates hydroelectric and nuclear plants 
in northern Alabama. 

Transportation. Alabama has about 94,000 miles 
(151,000 kilometers) of roads and highways. Four major 
rail lines provide freight service in Alabama. Passenger 
trains serve Birmingham and two other cities in the 
state. Most of Alabama's air traffic goes in and out of air- 
ports at Birmingham, Huntsville, and Mobile. 

About 1,350 miles (2,170 kilometers) of navigable wa- 


_ terways cross the state. They include a section of the 


Gulf Intracoastal Waterway between Brownsville, Texas, 
and Carrabelle, Florida. This section is about 60 miles (97 
kilometers) long. The Black Warrior-Tombigbee-Mobile 
river system, 453 miles (729 kilometers) long, is the 
longest navigable waterway in Alabama. The Tennessee 
River connects northern Alabama with the Mississippi 
River system. The 234-mile- {377-kilometer-) long Ten- 
nessee-Tombigbee Waterway was completed in 1985. 
This waterway helps link the port at Mobile with inland 
ports on the Tennessee and Ohio rivers. Alabama has 
built dock facilities at Decatur, Eufaula, Huntsville, 
Phenix City, and other towns along waterways. 

Mobile, on Mobile Bay, is Alabama's only seaport. The 
Alabama State Docks at Mobile are among the finest 
port facilities in the United States. They can handle 
about 35 oceangoing vessels at a time. 

Communication. The Mobile Register, founded in 
1813, is Alabama's oldest newspaper. Today, about 130 
newspapers, including about 25 dailies, are published in 
Alabama. The Birmingham News has the largest circula- 
tion. Other leading papers include the Birmingham Post- 
Herald, The Huntsville Times, the Mobile Register, and 
The Montgomery Advertiser. About 90 periodicals are 
also published in Alabama. 

WAPI of Birmingham is Alabama's oldest commercial 
radio station. It began in 1922 in Auburn as WMAV. 
WVTM-TV, the state's first television station, was estab- 
lished in Birmingham in 1949 as WABT-TV. The Alabama 
Public Television Network began operating in 1955. It 
was the first state-owned educational television system 
in the nation. This system has stations in several cities 
and reaches every county in the state. Alabama has 
about 225 radio stations and 35 television stations. Cable 
TV systems and Internet providers serve most areas. 


274 Alabama Government 

Constitution of Alabama was adopted in 1901. The 
state had five earlier constitutions, adopted in 1819, 
1861, 1865, 1868, and 1875. An amendment may be pro- 
posed either by the Alabama Legislature or by a consti- 
tutional convention. An amendment proposed by the 
Legislature must be approved by three-fifths of the 
members in each house. Then it must get the approval 
of a majority of the electors voting on the issue. Alaba- 
ma’s Constitution has been amended over 600 times, the 
most of any state constitution. 

A majority of the members of each house of the legis- 
lature and a majority of the voters must approve calling 
a constitutional convention. An amendment proposed 
by the convention must be approved by a majority of 
the people voting on the issue in an election. 

Executive. The governor of Alabama is elected to a 
four-year term. This official can serve more than one 
term. However, the governor is not allowed to serve 
three terms in a row. Alabama's other top executive offi- 
cials include the lieutenant governor, secretary of state, 
attorney general, auditor, treasurer, and commissioner 
of agriculture and industries. Each of these officials is 
elected to a four-year term. 

Legislature consists of a Senate of 35 members and a 
105-member House of Representatives. Each of Alaba- 
ma’s 35 senatorial districts elects one senator. Each of 
the states 105 representative districts elects one mem- 
ber to the House of Representatives. Senators and rep- 
resentatives serve four-year terms. 

The Legislature holds regular sessions each year. Ses- 
sions may not last longer than 105 days, and the Legisla- 
ture may not meet as a whole on more than 30 of these 
days. Sessions begin in January during the first year of 
the legislative term, in February during the second and 


third years, and in April during the fourth year. 

Courts. The highest court in Alabama is the state 
Supreme Court. It has a chief justice and eight associate 
justices, and they are all elected to six-year terms. The 
Court of Criminal Appeals has five judges, and the Court 
of Civil Appeals has five judges. These judges also are 
all elected to six-year terms. Lower courts in Alabama in- 
clude a circuit court, district court, probate court, and 
municipal courts. 

Local government. Alabama has 67 counties. Each is 
governed by a board of commissioners. The boards are 








State Legislature 
The Alabama Senate meets in the State Capitol in Montgom- 
ery. Each of Alabama's 35 state senators serves a four-year term. 


The governors of Alabama 


Party Term Party Term 

William Wyatt Bibb *Dem.-Rep. 1819-1820 William Calvin Oates Democratic 1894-1896 
Thomas Bibb Dem.-Rep. 1820-1821 Joseph Forney Johnston Democratic 1896-1900 
Israel Pickens Dem.-Rep. 1821-1825 William James Samford Democratic 1900-1901 
John Murphy Dem.-Rep. 1825-1829 William Dorsey Jelks Democratic 1901-1907 
Gabriel Moore Democratic 1829-1831 Braxton Bragg Comer Democratic 1907-1911 
Samuel B. Moore Democratic 1831 Emmett O'Neal Democratic 1911-1915 
John Gayle Democratic 1831-1835 Charles Henderson Democratic 1915-1353 
Clement Comer Clay Democratic 1835-1837 Thomas Erby Kilby Democratic 1919-1923 
Hugh McVay Democratic 1837 William W. Brandon Democratic 1923-1927 
Arthur P. Bagby Democratic 1837-1841 Bibb Graves Democratic 1927-193) 
Benjamin Fitzpatrick Democratic 1841-1845 Benjamin Meek Miller Democratic 1931-1935 
Joshua Lanier Martin Democratic 1845-1847 Bibb Graves Democratic 1935-1939 
Reuben Chapman Democratic 1847-1849 Frank M. Dixon Democratic 1939-1943 
Henry Watkins Collier Democratic 1849-1853 Chauncey Sparks Democratic 1943-1947 
John Anthony Winston Democratic 1853-1857 James E. Folsom Democratic 1947-1951 
Andrew Barry Moore Democratic 1857-1861 Gordon Persons Democratic 1951-1953 
John Gill Shorter Democratic 1861-1863 James E. Folsom Democratic 1955-1959 
Thomas Hill Watts Democratic 1863-1865 John M. Patterson Democratic 1959-1963 
Lewis E. Parsons Democratic 1865 George C. Wallace Democratic 1963-1967 
Robert Miller Patton Republican 1865-1867 Lurleen Wallace Democratic 1967-1968 
Military rule 1867-1868 Albert P. Brewer Democratic 1968-1971 
William Hugh Smith Republican 1868-1870 George C. Wallace Democratic 1971-1979 
Robert Burns Lindsay Democratic 1870-1872 Forrest H. James, Jr. Democratic 1979-1983 
David Peter Lewis Republican 1872-1874 George C. Wallace Democratic 1983-1987 
George Smith Houston Democratic 1874-1878 Guy Hunt Republican 1987-1993 
Rufus W. Cobb Democratic 1878-1882 Jim Folsom Democratic 1993-1995 
Edward Asbury O'Neal Democratic 1882-1886 Fob James, Jr. Republican 1995-1999 
Thomas Seay Democratic 1886-1890 Donald Siegelman Democratic 1993- 
Thomas Goode Jones Democratic 1890-1894 


*Democratic-Republican 


known officially as county commissions. In most coun- 
ties, the chief official is the probate judge. The probate 
judge is elected to a six-year term. Other county officials 
include the sheriff, district attorney, superintendent of 
education, engineer, tax assessor, and tax collector. 

Most Alabama municipalities have a mayor-council 
form of government. A few cities operate under a city- 
manager plan. Birmingham, Huntsville, Montgomery, 
and Tuscaloosa have mayor-council governments. Most 
small cities and towns also operate under the mayor- 
council plan. 

Revenue. Taxation provides about half of Alabama's 
general revenue (income). Most of the rest comes from 
federal grants and interest earned on public accounts. 
The main sources of tax revenue are personal and cor- 
porate income taxes, and general sales and use taxes. 
Other major sources of tax revenue include taxes on al- 
coholic beverages, insurance premiums, motor fuels, 
and public utilities. Taxes are also assessed for motor 
vehicle licenses and business licenses. 


Alabama 275 


Politics. As in other Southern states, most candidates 
elected to national, state, and local offices in Alabama 
have been Democrats. Most of Alabama's major state 
and local political battles have traditionally been waged 
in primary elections for the Democratic nomination. But 
since the mid-1900's, Alabamians have elected a number 
of Republican candidates to local offices and to the Con- 
gress of the United States. In 1986, Guy Hunt became the 
first Republican to be elected governor of Alabama 
since the early 1870's. 

Until the 1960's, Alabama voters usually supported 
Democratic presidential candidates. But in 1964, the 
state voted for Senator Barry M. Goldwater of Arizona, 
the Republican candidate. It was the first time since 1872 
that the state of Alabama supported a Republican presi- 
dential candidate. Since 1980, the Republican candidate 
has won Alabamas electoral votes in each presidential 
election. For Alabamass electoral votes and voting 
record in presidential elections since 1820, see Electoral 
College (table). 


History 


indian days. Cliff-dwelling Indians lived in the Alaba- 
ma region 8,000 years ago. Excavations in Russell Cave, 
in northeastern Jackson County, have revealed details of 
their lives. Later the Cherokee, Creek, Choctaw, and 
Chickasaw Indians lived in the region. Whites called 
these groups the Civilized Tribes because they adopted 
many European customs. See Five Civilized Tribes. 

Exploration and settlement. Alonso Alvarez de 
Pineda, a Spanish explorer, sailed into Mobile Bay in 
1519. In 1528, an expedition led by Panfilo de Narvaez 
passed through Alabama coastal waters. Alvar Nunez 
Cabeza de Vaca, the first European to cross North Amer- 
ica, was a member of this expedition. Hernando de Soto, 
another Spaniard, led an expedition into the Alabama re- 
gion from the northeast in 1540. He became the first 
white person to explore the interior. De Soto (also called 
Soto) and the Indians fought a bloody battle at Mabila, 
north of present-day Mobile. De Soto's forces defeated 
Chief Tuscaloosa and his warriors. 

In 1559, Tristan de Luna, a Spanish adventurer from 
Mexico, searched for gold in the Alabama region. He or- 
ganized small settlements on Mobile Bay and at the pre- 
sent site of Claiborne. In 1561, he was removed from his 
command and was forced to return to Mexico. 

The first permanent group of white settlers in the Al- 
abama region were French. In 1699, two French-Canadi- 
an brothers, Pierre Le Moyne, Sieur dlberville, and Jean 
Baptiste Le Moyne, Sieur de Bienville, sailed to Dauphin 
Island in Mobile Bay. In 1702, they founded Fort Louis 
nearby along the Mobile River. Fort Louis became the 
capital of the French colony known as Louisiana. In 1711, 
river floods forced the French to move 27 miles (43 kilo- 
meters) south to the present site of Mobile. This settle- 
ment, also called Fort Louis, became the first permanent 
white settlement in Alabama. It was renamed Fort 
Condé in 1720. The settlement was the capital of French 
Louisiana until 1722, when New Orleans became the 
Capital. 

In 1763, the French gave most of their colony of 
Louisiana to Britain in the Treaty of Paris. This treaty end- 


ed the French and Indian War. The Mobile area became 
part of West Florida, under British control. Northern Al- 
abama was included in the Illinois country, a region in 
what is now the central United States. 

In 1779, Spain declared war on Britain. In 1780, 
Bernardo de Galvez captured Mobile from the British. In 
the Treaty of Paris signed in 1783, Britain gave the Mo- 
bile region to Spain. 

Territorial days. In 1795, Thomas Pinckney, a U.S. 
statesman, negotiated the Treaty of San Lorenzo. This 
treaty, also called the Pinckney Treaty, fixed the southern 
boundary of the United States along the 31st parallel of 
north latitude. All of present-day Alabama except the 
Mobile area lay north of the line and became part of the 
United States. In 1798, the Alabama region, except the 
Mobile area, became part of the Mississippi Territory 
organized by the U.S. Congress. 

During the War of 1812 against Britain, the United 
States seized the Mobile area from Spain. On April 15, 
1813, the Stars and Stripes flew over the entire Alabama 
region for the first time. Also in 1813, the Creek Indians 
massacred several hundred pioneers at Fort Mims near 
Tensaw. In 1814, U.S. forces under General Andrew Jack- 
son defeated the Creek in the Battle of Horseshoe Bend. 
The Creek then surrendered their land to the United 
States. William Weatherford, a Creek chief also known 
as Red Eagle, led the tribe in its bitter fight against Jack- 
sons troops. 

In 1817, the Alabama Territory was organized. St. 
Stephens, on the Tombigbee River, was the capital. 

Early statehood. A constitutional convention met in 
Huntsville in 1819 and drew up the territory's first Con- 
stitution. On Dec. 14, 1819, Alabama entered the Union 
as the 22nd state. Huntsville served as the capital of Al- 
abama for a little more than a year. William Wyatt Bibb, 
who had been governor of the Alabama Territory, be- 
came the new state’s first governor. Cahaba became the 
capital in 1820. In 1825, floods from the Alabama River 
caused great damage to Cahaba. Because of the floods, 
the capital was moved to Tuscaloosa in 1826. 


276 Alabama 





Frau panting by Alagza Chappel bont the Paqeant at 
Amenca serus Yale Uinawersity Press Claded Stotes 
Publishers Assac tne sade dastobidar 


Fort Mims, near Tensaw, was the site of a bloody battle. On 
Aug. 30, 1813, the Creek Indians led by Chief Red Eagle attacked 
the fort and killed several hundred pioneers. 


In 1838, federal troops marched into the remaining 
Indian territory of Alabama, in the northeast section of 
the state. They demanded that all the Indians move to 
the west. By 1840, all but a few scattered tribes had 
moved west beyond the Mississippi River. 

Alabama suffered severe financial troubles during the 
1840's and 1850's. The state bank, created during the 
1820's, was poorly managed. The bank issued too much 
money and, as a result, the money decreased in value. 
The bank also loaned large amounts of money for politi- 
cal reasons. In 1837, a financial panic and depression 
swept across the United States. The Alabama state bank 
could not afford to pay back the money it owed to its 
depositors. For this reason, Governor Benjamin Fitzpat- 
rick began to /iquidate (close) the bank during the early 
1840's. Many Alabamians lost all their savings. The state 
also suffered from a drought that ruined crops, and 
from several epidemics of yellow fever. 

During the 1840's, many people in the North wanted 
the federal government to outlaw slavery in the nation’s 
western territories. In 1848, a Democratic state conven- 
tion in Alabama adopted the “Alabama Platform’ sup- 
ported by William L. Yancey, a prominent statesman. 
This platform declared that the federal government did 
not have the right to bar slaves from the territories. 

The Civil War and Reconstruction. Disagreements 
over slavery continued during the 1850's. Economic ri- 
valries between the agricultural South and the industrial 
North and disagreements about the rights of states also 
created conflicts (see States rights). These conflicts 
deepened after Abraham Lincoln was elected President 
in 1860. Alabama seceded (withdrew) from the Union on 
Jan. 11, 1861, and declared itself the Republic of Ala- 
bama. The Alabama secession convention invited other 
Southern States to send delegates to Montgomery. On 
February 8, the convention established the Confederate 
States of America, with Montgomery as its capital. For 
this reason, Montgomery is known as the Cradle of the 
Confederacy. The capital of the Confederate States was 
moved to Richmond, Va., in May 1861. 


The most important Civil War action in the state was 
the Battle of Mobile Bay in 1864, won by Union forces 
under Rear Admiral David G. Farragut (see Farragut, 
David G.). Union forces also made several raids into Ala- 
bama during the war. In 1863, Confederate forces led by 
General Nathan Bedford Forrest captured a much larger 
group of Union raiders at Cedar Bluffs. In 1865, Union 
General James H. Wilson led the largest raid into Ala- 
bama and won victories at Selma and Montgomery. 

Most of Alabama escaped the ruin that spread across 
the South during the Civil War. However, Florence, 
Huntsville, Montgomery, Selma, and other cities in the 
northern and central parts of the state suffered destruc- 
tion and looting. 

Alabama faced mounting financial problems during 
the Reconstruction period that followed the war. The 
state debt increased from $8 million to more than $32 
million from 1866 to 1873. The state government came 
under the control of former Northerners called carpet- 
baggers and Southerners called sca/awags. On June 25, 
1868, Alabama was readmitted to the Union. In 1874, 
conservative Democrats succeeded in electing most 
state officials. The state government was reformed, and 
a new constitution was adopted in 1875. 

State prosperity followed the Reconstruction pe- 
riod. During the 1870's, several railroads were com- 
pleted. Also during the 1870's, Alabamians proved they 
could make iron by burning iron ore with coke, rather 
than with charcoal. This was important because north- 
central Alabama had large deposits of coal, from which 
coke is made. The same region also had vast supplies of 
iron ore and limestone, the two other minerals needed 
to make iron and steel. In 1880, Alabama's first blast fur- 
nace, Alice No. 1, began operating in Birmingham. 
Within a few years, Birmingham became a great iron 
and steel center. Important iron and steel works were 
also built in Anniston, Bessemer, Decatur, Russellville, 
and Talladega. By 1890, iron and steel making had be- 
come Alabama's most important manufacturing industry. 
The lumber industry and the textile industry also grew 
rapidly in the late 1800's. 

World War I and the Great Depression. Alabamas 
industry and commerce grew after the United States en- 
tered World War | in 1917. Shipbuilding became an im- 
portant industry in Mobile. Alabama farmers increased 
production of cotton and food to meet the demands of 
the war effort. In the mid-1920's, the Alabama State 
Docks agency built new port facilities at Mobile. Ala- 
bama’s trade with other countries increased greatly as a 
result. In 1929, the Alabama-Tombigbee river system 
flooded large areas in southern Alabama, causing about 
$6 million damage. 

Many Alabamians suffered financial setbacks during 
the Great Depression of the 1930's. Between 1929 and 
1931, more than 60 Alabama banks failed, with a loss of 
more than $16 million. During the early 1930's, Alabama 
passed a state income tax law and the Budget Control 
Act to help save the state from bankruptcy. 

In 1933, the federal government created the Tennes- 
see Valley Authority (TVA). The TVA was given the re- 
sponsibility of building flood-control and electric-power 
projects on the Tennessee River. The TVA took over 
Wilson Dam and two nitrate plants at Muscle Shoals. 
The dam and plants had been built by the government 










Redstone Arsenal, near Huntsville, was es- 
tablished in 1941. It is the headquarters of the 
U.S. Army Aviation and Missile Command and 


the George C Marshall Space Flight Center. La - 


son Davis was inaugurated there. 


important dates in Alabama 


1519 
1540 


1559 
1702 
1763 
1783 
1795 
1813 
1814 
1817 


1819 
1861 


Alonso Alvarez de Pineda sailed into Mobile Bay. 
Hernando de Soto explored much of what is now Ala- 
bama. 

Tristan de Luna established several temporary settle- 
ments in what is now Alabama. 

French Canadians founded Fort Louis on the Mobile 
River. In 1711, the colony moved to what is now Mo- 
bile. 

France gave the Alabama region to Britain. 

Britain gave the United States much of what is now Al- 
abamaa. It gave the Mobile region to Spain. 

The United States and Spain signed the Treaty of San 
Lorenzo, setting the southern boundary of the United 
States at the 31st parallel, across Alabama. 

The United States captured Mobile Bay from Spain. 
The Creek Indians surrendered nearly half the present 
state of Alabama to the United States. 

The Alabama Territory was created. 

Alabama became the 22nd state on Dec. 14. 

Alabama seceded from the Union on Jan. 11 and be- 
came the Republic of Alabama until Feb. 8, when it 
joined the Contederacy. 


Russell Cave, in northeastern Jackson 
County, was the home of cliff-dwelling Indi- 
ans 8,000 years ago. Excavations at the cave, 
now part of Russell Cave National Monu- 
ment, have revealed details of their lives. 


The first Confederate Capital was Mont- 
gomery, from Feb. 8 to May 21, 1861. Jeffer- 


ait 


Alabama 








The Union won an important Civil War bat- 
tle at Mobile Bay on Aug. 5, 1864. During the 
battle, Union Commander David G. Farragut 
reportedly cried, “Damn the torpedoes! Full 
speed ahead!" 


The Creek Indians were defeated by U.S. troops led by 
General Andrew Jackson in the Battle of Horseshoe Bend in 
1814. The Creek then surrendered their Alabama land. 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Kevin Chadwick 


1868 
1880 


Alabama was readmitted to the Union on June 25. 
The state's first blast furnace began operating in Bir- 
mingham. 

The present state constitution was adopted. 

The federal government created the Tennessee Valley 
Authority. 

1940's The Redstone Arsenal at Huntsville became a center 
of rocket and spacecraft research. 

A tederal court ordered Montgomery to desegregate 
its public bus system. 

The George C Marshall Space Flight Center was es- 
tablished in Huntsville. 

Civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr., led a march 
from Selma to Montgomery to demonstrate the de- 
mands of blacks for an end to discrimination in voter 
registration. 

George C Wallace became the first Alabama gover- 
nor to be elected to a third term. He won a fourth term 
in 1982. 

Completion of the Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway 
linked the Alabama port of Mobile with ports on the 
Tennessee and Ohio rivers. 


1901 
1933 


1956 
1960 


1965 


278 Alabama 


during World War | and the 1920's. The TVA later built 
Wheeler and Guntersville dams on the Tennessee River. 
The Alabama Power Company, a private firm, also built 
dams and hydroelectric plants during the 1930's. These 
plants provided inexpensive power for Alabama facto- 
ries, and so boosted the state's industrial growth. 

The mid-1900's. During World War II (1939-1945), Al- 
abama’s agricultural and industrial production expanded 
greatly. The government established the Redstone Arse- 
nal in Huntsville in 1941. The arsenal developed the 
rockets, satellites, and spacecraft that launched the Unit- 
ed States into the space age. 

After the war, Alabama became an important produc- 
er of chemicals, minerals, rubber products, and textiles. 
Alabama's industrial growth slowed down during the 
1950's, and many Alabamians left the state to find jobs in 
the North and West. Iron ore production in Alabama 
dropped sharply during the 1950s. By the early 1960's, 
most of Alabama's iron ore mines had closed. 

During the 1950's and 1960's, Alabama farmers be- 
came less dependent on cotton. Farm income came in- 
creasingly from broiler chickens, cattle, hogs, peanuts, 
and soybeans. As agricultural methods and products 
changed, fewer farmworkers were needed. Many 
moved to the cities, and Alabama became mainly an ur- 
ban state. 

Like many other states, Alabama faced serious racial 
problems in the 1950's and 1960's. In 1955 and 1956, civil 
rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr., directed the Mont- 
gomery bus boycott Many blacks refused to ride in 
public buses in Montgomery because the law required 
them to sit in the rear. In 1956, a federal court ordered 
Montgomery to desegregate its buses. 

In 1954, the Supreme Court of the United States had 
ruled that compulsory segregation in public schools 
was unconstitutional. But in 1963, Governor George C 
Wallace personally tried to halt the integration of Alaba- 
ma‘s public schools. In June, he stood in the doorway of 
Foster Auditorium at the University of Alabama in 
Tuscaloosa and refused to admit two blacks. President 
John F. Kennedy called the National Guard to active duty, 





and the troops enforced the law. In September, Wallace 
tried to prevent the integration of public elementary and 
secondary schools in several cities. President Kennedy 
again called in the National Guard, and the black stu- 
dents were admitted. Since 1963, Alabama has gradually 
integrated most of its public schools. In March 1965, 
King led a five-day march from Selma to Montgomery to 
protest discrimination in voter registration. In August, 
Congress passed the Voting Rights Act, which made 
thousands of Alabama blacks eligible to vote. 

Republicans gained increasing success in Alabama, a 
traditionally Democratic state. In 1964, Barry M. Goldwa- 
ter became the first Republican presidential candidate 
to carry Alabama since 1872. 

In 1960, the government established the George C 
Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville. The Saturn 5 
rocket system, which powered the first missions that 
landed astronauts on the moon, was developed at 
Huntsville during the 1960's. 

Recent developments. Alabama, like other states, 
faced financial problems in the 1980's and early 1990's. 
The state government sought ways to provide sufficient 
funds for such services as state-supported nursing 
homes and public education. In 1980, the state legisla- 
ture increased taxes on cigarettes and alcohol to in- 
crease funds for government services. 

The rising costs of petroleum and natural gas have led 
to increased use of coal. This action has spurred further 
development of Alabama's coal deposits. 

Industry continues to grow in the state, and the popu- 
lation has been rising steadily. African Americans are 
playing an increasingly important role in local and state 
politics. Republicans have also been gaining strength in 
local and state governments. In 1986, Guy Hunt became 
the first Republican to be elected governor of Alabama 
since Reconstruction. But he was removed from office in 
1993, following his conviction for felony ethics viola- 
tions. He was sentenced to pay fines and to perform 
1,000 hours of community service. In 1998, Hunt was 
pardoned by a state parole board. 

William D. Barnard and David C Weaver 


AP Wide World 


Martin Luther King, Jr., or- 
ganized a boycott of the 
Montgomery bus system in 
1955. Many blacks stopped 
riding buses because the law 
required them to sit in the 
rear. In 1956, a federal court 
ordered Montgomery to de- 
segregate its buses. 


Study aids 


Related articles in World Book include: 


Biographies 


Barkley, Charles 

Bienville, Sieur de 

Black, Hugo L 

Carver, George Washington 
Curry, Jabez L M. 

De Soto, Hernando 

Forrest, Nathan B. 

Gorgas, William C 

Iberville, Sieur d’ 

Keller, Helen A. 


Lee, Harper 
Owens, Jesse 
Parks, Rosa Louise 
Sparkman, John J. 
Walker, Leroy P. 
Wallace, George C 


Washington, Booker T. 


Wheeler, Joseph 
Yancey, William L 


Cities 
Birmingham Mobile 
Huntsville Montgomery 
History 
Civil War Indian, American 


Confederate States Reconstruction 
States rights 


of America 


Physical features 


Appalachian Mountains 
Gulf of Mexico 

Gulf Stream 

Mobile River 


Muscle Shoals 
Piedmont Region 
Tennessee River 
Tombigbee River 


Other related articles 


Fort McClellan 
Fort Rucker 
Redstone Arsenal 


1. People 
A. Population 
B. Schools 
C. Libraries 
D. Museums 
il. Visitor’s guide 
A. Places to visit 
B. Annual events 
itl. Land and climate 
A. Land regions 
B. Coastline 
C. Rivers and lakes 


D. Plant and animal life 


E. Climate 
IV. Economy 
A. Natural resources 
B. Service industries 
C Manufacturing 
D. Mining 
E. Agriculture 
F. Fishing industry 
G. Electric power 
H. Transportation 
1. Communication 
V. Government 
A. Constitution 
B. Executive 
C. Legislature 
D. Courts 
E. Local government 
F. Revenue 
G. Politics 
Vi. History 


Questions 


Who led the U.S. forces that defeated the Creek Indians in the 


Battle of Horseshoe Bend? 


Why did the production of iron ore decline sharply in Alabama 


during the 1950's? 
What is the Azalea Trail? 


Tennessee Valley 
Authority 


Alabama River 279 


Why is Huntsville called Rocket City, USA? 

What are Alabama's chief manufacturing industries? 

Why did Alabama suffer more during Reconstruction than it did 
during the Civil War? 

What is the Black Belt? 

Why did the Birmingham area become a major center of iron 
and steel production? 

Why is Montgomery called the Cradle of the Confederacy? 

What is Alabama’s only seaport? 


Additional resources 


Level! 

Brown, Dottie. Alabama. 2nd ed. Lerner, 2001. 

Davis, Lucile. Alabama. Children’s Pr., 1999. 

Shirley, David. Alabama. Benchmark Bks., 2000. 

Thompson, Kathleen. A/abama. 2nd ed. Raintree Steck-Vaughn, 
1996. 

Wills, Charles A. A Historical Album of Alabama. Millbrook, 1995. 

Level if 

Barnard, William D. Dixiecrats and Democrats: Alabama Politics, 
1942-1950. 1974. Reprint. Univ. of Ala. Pr., 1985. 

Cronenberg, Allen. Forth to the Mighty Conflict Alabama and 
World War II. Univ. of Ala. Pr., 1995. 

Jakeman, Robert J. The Divided Skies: Establishing Segregated 
Flight Training at Tuskegee, Alabama, 1934-1942. \992. Reprint 
Univ. of Ala Pr., 1996. 

Newton, Wesley P. Montgomery in the Good War: Portrait of a 
Southern City, 1939-1946. Univ. of Ala. Pr., 2000. 

Rogers, William W., and others. A/abama. Univ. of Ala. Pr., 1994. 

Thomas, Mary M., ed. Stepping Out of the Shadows: Alabama 
Women, 1819-1990. Univ. of Ala. Pr., 1995. 

Walthall, John A. Prehistoric Indians of the Southeast Archaeolo- 
gy of Alabama and the Middle South. 1980. Reprint Univ. of 
Ala. Pr., 1990. 

Wiggins, Sarah W., comp. From Civil War to Civil Rights, Alaba- 
ma, 1860-1960. Univ. of Ala. Pr., 1987. 

Willoughby, Lynn. Flowing Through Time: A History of the Lower 
Chattahoochee River. Univ. of Ala Pr., 1999. 


Alabama, University of, is a coeducational state- 
supported educational system. Its official name is the 
University of Alaba:na System. It consists of three uni- 
versities. The original campus is the University of Ala- 
bama in Tuscaloosa. The system includes the University 
of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) and the University of 
Alabama in Huntsville (UAH). Each school offers bache- 
lor's, master's, and doctor's degrees. The schools at Tus- 
caloosa and Birmingham have professional programs. 
The University of Alabama was founded in 1831. UAB 
and UAH were established as branches in the mid-1960's 
and began operating independently in 1969. In 1975, the 
system was established. 

Critically reviewed by the University of Alabama 
Alabama River flows through the East Gulf Coastal 
Plain of Alabama. It is formed where the Coosa and Tal- 
lapoosa rivers join north of Montgomery in the central 
part of the state (see Alabama [physical map)). The Al- 
abama follows a winding course southwest for 315 
miles (507 kilometers). At a point about 45 miles (72 kilo- 
meters) north of Mobile, it unites with the Tombigbee 
River to form the Mobile River. 

The Alabama River is navigable for its entire length. 
Three dams lie along the river. They create three bodies 
of water—R. E. "Bob" Woodruff Lake, William Dannelly 
Reservoir, and Claiborne Lake. Power stations generated 
by the dams provide electric power. The lakes and res- 
ervoir are used for recreation. They also release water, 
as needed, to maintain a 9-foot (2.7-meter) navigation 
channel. Howard A. Clonts, Jr. 

See also Mobile River. 


280 Alabaster 


SCALA Ant Resource 


An alabaster bust of King Tutankhamen dates back to the 
1300's B.C Many ancient Egyptian sculptors used alabaster. 


Alabaster, Al uh Bas 
tuhr, is the name of two 
types of fine-grained 
white rocks that look simi- 
lar but have different 
chemical compositions. 
Both types are used for or- 
namental purposes. 

Today, the word a/- 
abaster commonly refers 
to a type of rock com- 
posed of the mineral gyp- 
sum. Gypsum Is an ex- 
tremely soft mineral made 
of calcium sulfate and wa- 
ter. Its chemical formula is 
CaSO,:2H,0 and its crys- 
tals are monoclinic (see Crystal [Classifying crystals]). 
Craftworkers make vases, statues, and building stone 
from gypsum alabaster. It is soft, and workers can carve 
it without special tools. Deposits of this type of alabaster 
occur in many parts of the world. 

In ancient times, the word a/abaster referred to a type 
of rock from which carvers made vases called a/abas- 
ters. People kept ointments and perfumes in these vases. 
Carvers shaped alabasters from cave formations called 
stalactites and stalagmites. These formations are com- 
posed of calcite (CaCO,), which is harder than gypsum. 
Calcite crystals are hexagonal. One kind of calcite al- 
abaster, called oriental alabaster, is mined mainly near 
Florence, Italy. Another kind, Egyptian alabaster, was 
mined in ancient times near Thebes, Egypt. 

Kenneth J. De Nault 

See also Calcite; Gypsum. 

Aladdin, uh LAD uhn, is the hero of one of the most fa- 
mous tales of the Thousand and One Nights, also known 


The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New 
York Gity, Rogers Fund, 1926 


An alabaster headrest was 
part of the rich turnishings of 
an ancient Egyptian tomb. 








as the Arabian Nights. His story is told by the Princess 
Scheherazade to her husband. 

According to the tale, Aladdin is a poor Chinese boy 
who comes into the possession of a magic lamp. By rub- 
bing the lamp, he can make a genie (spirit) appear who 
obeys Aladdin’s every command. The boy becomes 
enormously rich and marries the sultans daughter. But a 
magician plots against their happiness and tricks Alad- 
din’s wife into giving up the lamp. Eventually, Aladdin re- 
gains the lamp, his prosperity, and his bride. When the 
sultan dies, Aladdin succeeds him. The charm of the sto- 
ry lies as much in Aladdin’s humor and good will as in 
the description of fabulous events. Dick Davis 

See also Arabian Nights; Genie. 

Alamein, El. See El Alamein. 

Alamo, Al uh mof, is a historic structure in the center 
of San Antonio. A famous battle was fought there from 
Feb. 23 to March 6, 1836, during the war for Texan inde- 
pendence. The Alamo is sometimes called the Ther- 
mopylae of America, after the famous battle in which the 
ancient Greeks held off a large Persian force. No Texans 
escaped from the Alamo after the night of March 5. The 
Alamo is now a restored historic site. 

Early days. The Alamo was built as a Roman Catholic 
mission. Padre Antonio Olivares, a Spanish missionary, 
established it at San Antonio in 1718. The mission con- 
sisted of a monastery and church enclosed by high 
walls. The mission was originally called San Antonio de 
Valero. \t was later called A/amo, the Spanish name for 
the cottonwood trees surrounding the mission. The Tex- 
ans occasionally used the mission as a fort. 

During the winter of 1835-1836, the people of Texas 
decided to sever their relations with Mexico because of 
dissatisfaction with the Mexican government. To prevent 
the success of this independence movement, General 
Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna, in command of the Mexi- 
can Army, approached San Antonio with his troops. 
Lieutenant Colonel William Barret Travis and a force of 
about 150 Texans sought to defend the city. The compa- 
ny included the famous frontiersmen James Bowie and 
Davy Crockett. The quick arrival of the Mexicans took 
the Texans by surprise. They retreated to the Alamo to 
hold off the Mexican force of approximately 4,000 
troops. Travis sent out a plea for help, declaring, ‘I shall 
never surrender or retreat. A relief party from Gonzales, 
Texas, passed through the Mexican lines and entered 
the Alamo, increasing the Alamo forces to 189 men. 
Colonel J. W. Fannin left Goliad, Texas, with most of his 
400 men to relieve the Alamo, but he had equipment 
trouble on the way and returned to Goliad. 

The siege of the Alamo lasted 13 days. By March 5, 
the garrison could not return Mexican fire because am- 
munition was low. This convinced Santa Anna that the 
fort could be assaulted. Early the next morning, the Mex- 
icans succeeded in scaling the walls. At the end, the Tex- 
ans fought using their rifles as clubs. Some historians 
believe that a few defenders, perhaps including Crock- 
ett, survived the battle only to be executed at Santa 
Anna’‘s orders. Other historians accept the more familiar 
story that all the Texans who fought died in the battle. At 
8 a.m., the Mexican general reported his victory to his 
government. Survivors of the battle included Susanna 
Dickinson, the wife of an officer; her baby; her Mexican 
nurse; and Colonel Travis’s black slave Joe. 


The Battle of the Alamo 
took place in a mission in San 
Antonio. On the morning of 
March 6, 1836, Mexican 
troops under General Santa 
Anna successfully stormed 
the mission and killed all the 
defenders. 


Alaric 281 





Dawn at the Alama by H. A McArdle, Texas State Library, Austin, Texas. WORLD BOOK photo by William Malone 


“Remember the Alamo” became a battle cry. The de- 
termined defense of the Alamo gave General Sam Hous- 
ton time to gather the forces he needed to save the in- 
dependence movement of Texas. He retreated eastward, 
pursued by Santa Anna. At San Jacinto, Texas, he turned 
on the Mexicans, surprised them during an afternoon 
siesta, and on April 21, in just 18 minutes, captured or 
killed most of the Mexican army of over 1,200 men. 
Houston's army captured Santa Anna the following day 
and forced him to sign a treaty granting Texas its inde- 
pendence. Joseph A Stout, jr. 

Related articles in World Book include: 

Bowie, James Mexico (War with Texas and 
Crockett, Davy the United States) 


Houston, Sam Santa Anna, Antonio Lopez de 
Travis, William B. 


Additional resources 


Bredeson, Carmen. Jhe Battle of the Alamo. Millbrook, 1996. 
Younger readers. 

Nelson, George. The Alamo: An Illustrated History. Aldine, 1998. 

Sorrels, Roy. The Alamo in American History. Enslow, 1996. 
Younger readers. 


Alanbrooke, Lord (1883-1963), was one of Britain's 
military leaders during World War II (1939-1945). He 
won special distinction for his leadership during the re- 
treat to—and, later, from—Dunkerque, France, after Bel- 
gium fell to Germany in May 1940. Alanbrooke served as 
chief of the Imperial General Staff from 1941 to 1946. He 
also fought in World War | (1914-1918). 

Alanbrooke was born near Lourdes, France, of British 
parents. His given and family name was Alan Francis 
Brooke. In 1945, he became a nobleman and changed 
his name to Alanbrooke. lan F W Beckett 
A-Anon, AL uh nahn, is a worldwide fellowship of the 
families and friends of alcoholics. Members learn that al- 
coholism is a disease and how it affects family life. They 
use this information to solve their own problems and to 
understand problem drinkers. Al-Anon has a teen-age 
division called Alateen. 

Al-Anon cooperates with Alcoholics Anonymous 
(A.A.}, an organization for alcoholics, but is nota branch 
of A.A. Al-Anon was incorporated in 1954. Its members, 
like AA. members, use only their first names to ensure 


anonymity. Al-Anon groups work to follow AA's 12 sug- 
gestions for better living, the Twelve Steps. 

Al-Anon has about 500,000 members in more than 
30,000 local groups. It collects no dues but accepts con- 
tributions from members to cover expenses. It is not 
connected with any religious or other group. Al-Anon’s 
world service office, the Al-Anon Family Group Head- 
quarters, Inc., is located in New York City. 

Critically reviewed by Al-Anon 

See also Alcoholics Anonymous; Alcoholism. 
Alarcon, 4H /ahr KOHN, Pedro Antonio de (1833- 
1891), was a Spanish author. He is best known today for 
his short novel The Three-Cornered Hat (1874), one of 
the most popular works in Spanish literature. In 1919, 
the Spanish composer Manuel de Falla adapted Alar- 
con's tale into a famous ballet of the same name. 

Alarcon based The Three-Cornered Hat on a tradition- 
al Spanish ballad. His humorous story describes the 
confusion that occurs when a miller believes his wife 
has been having an affair with the mayor of the village. 
The story provides a lively picture of village iife in Alar- 
con's native region of Andalusia. Alarcon wrote another 
popular short novel, Captain Venom (1881). One of his 
four novels, The Scandal (1875), became noted for its 
keen psychological insights. Alarcon also wrote travel 
books and short stories and essays. 

Alarcon was born in Guadix, near Granada. In 1859, he 
served in a Spanish military operation in Morocco. He 
gained his first literary recognition with A Witness‘ Diary 
of the African War (1859-1860), a patriotic account of the 
campaign. Oavid Thatcher Gies 
Alaric, Al uhr ihk (A.D. 370?-410), was a king of the Visi- 
goths. He invaded Italy and captured Rome in the early 
A.D. 400's. In 395, the declining Roman Empire split per- 
manently into Eastern and Western empires. Alaric then 
led the Visigoths in a revolt against the Eastern Empire. 
He invaded Italy in 401, and began a series of attacks on 
the Western Empire. He attacked Rome in 408 and in 
409, but accepted huge ransoms to end both sieges. In 
410, he captured and looted Rome, but spared its 
churches. Alaric planned to settle in Africa, but a storm 
forced him to stop at Cosenza in southern Italy. He died 


there, late in 410. See also Goths. William G. Sinnigen 


282 Alaska 





NAark Newman, Tom Stack & Assoc 


Mount McKinley, in central Alaska, has the highest summit in North America. Its South Peak rises 
20,320 feet (6,194 meters) above sea level. Alaska’s majestic mountains and vast areas of unspoiled 


wilderness attract many people who love the outdoors. 


Alas ka The Last Frontier 


Alaska is the largest state of the United States in area. It 
is almost a fifth as large as all the rest of the United 
States, and more than twice the size of Texas, the sec- 
ond largest state. But Alaska has a relatively small popu- 
lation. According to the 2000 census, Alaska ranks 48th 
among all the states in population. Only Wyoming and 
Vermont have fewer people than Alaska. Alaska is often 
called the Last Frontier because much of the state is not 
fully settled. Juneau is Alaska’s capital. Anchorage is the 
state's largest city in terms of population. 

When Alaska entered the Union in 1959, it was the 
first new state in 47 years. About 500 miles (800 kilome- 
ters) of Canadian territory separate Alaska from Wash- 
ington. Alaskans often refer to the rest of the continental 
United States as the ‘lower 48." The Alaska Highway, 
which runs between Delta Junction, Alaska, and Dawson 





The contributors of this article are F. Patrick Fitzgerald. Profes- 
sor of Geography and History at the University of Alaska South- 
east at Juneau, and Claus-M. Naske, Executive Director, Universi 
ty of Alaska Press, and coauthor of Alaska: A History of the 49th 
State 


Creek, British Columbia, Canada, connects Alaska with 
the road systems of the other states as well as with 
Canada. 

The Alaskan mainland’s most western point is only 51 
miles (82 kilometers) from Russia. Alaska's Little Dio- 
mede Island, in the Bering Strait, is about 2 5 miles (4 
kilometers) from Russia’s Big Diomede Island. No other 
part of North America is closer to Asia. 

Almost a third of Alaska lies north of the Arctic Circle. 
However, Point Barrow, the northernmost point, is al- 
most 1,300 miles (2,090 kilometers) south of the North 
Pole. The state has a wide range of temperatures—as 
low as —80 F(-62° ©), and as high as 100° F (38° ©). The 
climate and soil as far north as the Arctic Circle permit 
farmers to raise livestock and grow barley, potatoes, 
and other crops. The summer sun shines about 20 hours 
a day in Alaska, and crops grow rapidly there. At Point 
Barrow, from May 10 to August 2, the sun never sets. 

Alaska is famous for its towering mountains and beau- 
tiful scenery. Mount McKinley, which rises 20,320 feet 
(6,194 meters) above sea level, is the nation’s highest 
peak. Alaska also has the 15 next highest peaks and al- 
most all of the active volcanoes in the United States. 


Interesting facts about Alaska 


Alaska has more inland water than any other state—20,171 
square miles (52,243 square kilometers). Inland water covers an 
area in Alaska larger than the area of Vermont and New Hamp- 
shire combined. 


The Aleutian islands of Attu and Kiska were the only parts of 
North America occupied by Japanese troops during World War 
li. The islands were captured in 1942 and recovered by the 
United States in 1943. 





—— 
eH HOC AITUN 
VN MRA 
sat atta! 
TTR 
Pind ts Pep UN LEONA 
¢ Piseooieee 


ean ha 
Ueohiete epi eadt 


Denali National Park, the site of Mount McKinley, is 
one of anumber of national parks in the state. Wrangell- 
St. Elias National Park in Alaska is the nation’s largest na- 
tional park. It covers more than 8 million acres (3 million 
hectares). Alaska also has the nation’s largest wildlife 
refuge. The Yukon Delta National Wildlife Refuge covers 
nearly 20 million acres (8 million hectares). 

Inuits, Aleuts, and Indians were living in Alaska when 
Russian explorers arrived. A Russian trader established 
the first white settlement, on Kodiak Island, in 1784. 

United States Secretary of State William H. Seward 
bought Alaska from Russia in 1867 for $7,200,000— only 
about 2 cents per acre (5 cents per hectare). Some Amer- 
icans thought the region was a wasteland of ice and 
snow. They called it Seward's Folly, Seward Icebox, and 
Icebergia. However, Alaska proved to be rich in fish, 
minerals, timber, and potential water power. The value 
of resources taken from the region has paid back the 
purchase price hundreds of times. Huge oil reserves at 
Prudhoe Bay along the Arctic coast rank as Alaska’s chief 
source of wealth. 





Alaska 283 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Kevin Chadwick 


Alaska has the longest general coastline of any state. It meas- 
ures 6,640 miles (10,686 kilometers), a distance greater than that 
of all the other states coastlines combined. The coastline of the 
Alaskan mainland and all the major islands washed by tidewater 
measures 33,904 miles (54,563 

kilometers). 


Bald eagles gather in greater 
numbers along the Chilkat River 
just north of Haines than at any 
other place in the world. Each 
year, more than 3,500 of the 
birds come to this site to feed 
on late runs of salmon. The 
salmon are accessible because 
an unusual upwelling of warm 
water keeps the river free of ice. 





Bald eagles 


Juneau, the capital of Alaska, 
is situated between steep 
mountains and a fine, deep 
harbor. In addition to govern- 
ment operations, the city's 
main industries are fishing, 
mining, and tourism. 


Kerth Gunnar, West Stock 





© Jane Gnass, West Stock 
Downtown Anchorage includes a log cabin visitor information 
center, shown here- Anchorage is Alaska’s largest city and the 
state's chief center of commerce and transportation. 


Alaska in brief 


Symbols of Alaska 


The state flag, adopted in 1927, was designed 
by a 13-year-old schoolboy. Seven gold stars, 
representing Alaskas gold resources, form 
the Big Dipper. An eighth star in the corner is 
the North Star, symholizing Alaska’s location 
in the Far North. The state seal was adopted in 
1913. It has symbols, relating to Alaska’s econ- 
omy, for agriculture, fishing, forestry, mining, 
and transportation. The rays above the moun- 
tains represent the northern lights. 








Alaska (brown) is the largest 
state in the United States. 


General information 


Statehood: Jan. 3, 1959, the 49th state. 

State abbreviation: AK (postal). 

State motto: North to the Future. 

State song: “Alaska’s Flag.” Words by Marie Drake; mu- 
sic by Elinor Dusenbury. 


Land and climate 


Area: 587,878 mi? (1,522,596 km’), including 17,502 mi? 
(45,329 km’) of inland water but excluding 27,355 mi’ 
(70,848 km?) of coastal water. 

Elevation: Highest—Mount Mckinley, 20,320 ft (6,194 m) 
above sea level. Lowest—sea level. 

Coastline: 6,640 mi (10,686 km). 

Record high temperature: 100 °F (38 °C) at Fort Yukon 
on June 27, 1915. 

Record low temperature: — 80 °F (~ 62 °C) at Prospect 
Creek, near Stevens Village, on Jan. 23, 1971. 








State flag State seal 





The State Capitol is in Juneau, the capital of Alaska since 
1900. Sitka served as capital from 1884 to 1900. 









Lowest 
elevation Grealesl 
along coast north-south 
distance 
8 1,350 mi 


{2,150 km) 





e he Grealest easl- 
* Ko’ eat. © west distance 
2,350 mi (3800 kim} 








Average July temperature: 55 °F (13 °C), 5 
Average January temperature: 5 'F {—13 °C). ie 
Average yearly precipitation: 55 in (140 cm). 

<< 
Important dates Russians established the first white 


settlement in Alaska on Kodiak Island. 






Captain Vitus Bering, a Danish navigator, 
landed on what is now Kayak Island. 


The Klondike and Alaska 


gold rush started. 


The United States purchased 
Alaska from Russia. 


| 
es | 


jas 

















State bird 
Willow ptarmigan 





People 

Population: 626,932 (2000 census) 

Rank among the states: 48th 

Density: 107 per 100 mi? (41 per 100 km’), 
U.S. average 78 per mi? (30 per km’) 

Distribution’: 67 percent urban, 33 per- 


cent rural 
Largest cities in Alaska 
Anchorage 260,283 
/ Juneau 30,711 
Fairbanks 30,224 
Colleget 11,402 
Sitka 8,835 
~ Ketchikan 7,922 


tUnincorporated place. 


Source: 2000 census, except for *, where figures are for 1990. 


Economy 
Chief products 


Fishing industry: cod, crab, flounder, 


salmon. 


Manufacturing: food products, petro- 


leum products. 


Mining: petroleum, natural gas, gold, 


zinc, silver. 


Government 
State government 


Governor. 4-year term 
State senators: 20; 4-year terms 


State representatives: 40; 2-year terms 


Organized boroughs: 16 


Federal government 


United States senators: 2 
United States representatives: 1 
Electoral votes: 3 


Congress established 
Alaska as a U.S. territory. 


state on January 3. 


Large oil reserves were dis: 
covered near Prudhoe Bay. 


Settlement Act passed. 


State flower 
Forget-me-not 


Population trend 


Thousands 


600 


0 









1800 1820 1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 2020 


Source: US. Census Bureau 


Gross state product 


Value of goods and services pro- 
duced in 1998: $24,235,000,000. Serv- 
ices include community, business, 
and personal services; finance; gov- 
ernment; trade; and transportation, 
communication, and utilities. Industry 
includes construction, manufacturing, 
and mining. Agriculture includes agri- 
culture, fishing, and forestry. 


Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysts. 





Agriculture 2% es 


Sources of information 


For information about tourism, write to: Alaska Division of 
Tourism, P.O. Box 110801, Juneau, AK 99811-0801. The Web site at 
www.dced.state.ak.us/tourism also provides information. 

For information on the economy, write to: Legislative Affairs 
Agency, State Capitol, Juneau, AK 99801-1182. 

The state's official Web site at wwwsstate.ak.us also provides a 
gateway to much information on Alaska’s economy, government, 


and history. 


The Trans-Alaska Pipeline 
was completed. 






Alaska 285 





State tree 
Sitka spruce 





Year Population 
2000 626,932 
1990 551,947 
1980 401,851 
1970 302,583 
1960 226,167 
1950 128,643 


1940 72,524 
1930 59,278 
1920 55,036 
1910 64,356 
1900 63,592 
1890 32,052 
1880 33,426 
Services 74% 


— 
Industry 24% 


Tanker in Prince William Sound 
caused largest oil spill in U.S. history. 


Alaska became the 49th — The Alaska Native Claims Congress passed the Alaska Nation- Most oil-spill cleanup completed 
al Interest Lands Conservation Act. 


at cost of more than $2 billion. 


286 Alaska 


Population. The 2000 United States census reported 
that Alaska had 626,932 people. The population had in- 
creased 14 percent over the 1990 figure of 550,043. Ac- 
cording to the 2000 census, Alaska ranks 48th in popula- 
tion among the 50 states. Only Wyoming and Vermont 
have fewer people than Alaska. 

About a third of Alaska’s people were born in Alaska. 
Many of those who were born in other states are mem- 
bers of the United States armed forces that are assigned 
to Alaska. Alaska has about 98,000 natives. Of this figure, 
about two-thirds are Inuit and one-third are Indians. 
Most Inuit live in the north and west. About 10,000 of the 
Inuit are Aleuts. Aleuts live on the Alaska Peninsula and 
the Aleutian Islands. Haida, Tlingit, and Tsimshian Indi- 
ans live in the southeast. Athabaskan Indians live mainly 
in Alaska's interior. 

Most of the white population lives in or near Anchor- 
age, Alaska’s largest city; in Fairbanks; and in the south- 
eastern Coastal cities. Anchorage is Alaska’s only metro- 
politan area (see Metropolitan area). 

Schools. The commissioner of education heads Alas- 
kas education department. The commissioner is ap- 
pointed by the State Board of Education and Early Devel- 
opment subject to the governor's approval. Seven voting 
members of the board are appointed by the state's gov- 
ernor. Two nonvoting members, representing students 
and the military, also sit on the board. The board estab- 
lishes policies for Alaska’s public school system. 

Children in Alaska must attend school from the ages 
of 7 through 15. Each organized borough is a school dis- 
trict and has a school board. Cities that lie outside the 
organized boroughs have city school boards. Regional 
school boards operate schools in rural areas outside the 
organized boroughs. 

Alaska has three schools that grant bachelor’s or ad- 
vanced degrees and are accredited by the Northwest 
Association of Schools and Colleges. The University of 
Alaska has several campuses throughout the state (see 
Alaska, University of). The state’s two other colleges are 
Sheldon Jackson College in Sitka and Alaska Pacific Uni- 
versity in Anchorage. 

Libraries and museums. Alaska's State Library, in 





People 


Population density 


Alaska is the most thinly populated state. Most Alaskans live in 
Anchorage or along the southeastern coast. Anchorage is the 
state's largest city in terms of population. 


Arctic Ocean 


er ct 
Vo 


e . J 
4 \ 
M., 


stay) ee 
Persons per 5 Cee 
km?  S ] 


Kercnan | A 


7 


i ie” 
 gskoss 
| Persons per 
sq. mi. 
More than 5 More than 2 


2to5 1to2 
| 
Less than 2 | “dl Less than 1 





WORLD BOOK map. based on US Census Bureau data 


Juneau, includes a historical section and state archives 
and records management services section. Academic li- 
braries are located at the University of Alaska Fairbanks, 
the University of Alaska Anchorage, and the University 
of Alaska Southeast in Juneau. 

The Alaska State Museum in Juneau features exhibits 
of Inuit and Indian objects. It also has displays dealing 
with animals and minerals in the state. A branch of the 
state museum, the Sheldon Jackson Museum in Sitka, 
has Inuit and Indian collections. The University of Alaska 
Museum in Fairbanks focuses on the state's cultural and 
natural history. Other cities that have museums include 
Anchorage, Bethel, Haines, Homer, Kenai, Ketchikan, Ko- 
diak, Nome, Palmer, Petersburg, Skagway, and Wasilla. 


Umversity of Alaska, Fairbanks 


The University of Alaska 
has several campuses. The 
Gruening Building on the 
Fairbanks campus, shown 
here, was named for Ernest 
Gruening, known as ‘the fa- 
ther of Alaskan statehood.” He 
was governor of the Alaska 
Territory from 1939 to 1953 
and a U.S senator from the 
state from 1959 to 1969. 








Alaska map index 


Metropolitan area 


Anchorage .. . 


Boroughs’ 


Aleutians East 
Anchorage 2 
Bristol Bay 
Denali. 
Fairbanks 

North Star .... 
Haines ... 
Juneau 
Kenai 

Peninsula .... 
Ketchikan 


Cities and towns 


Adak Station’ . 


Akhiok ....... .... 


Bodenburg 
Butte’. 


Cape Lisburmne 
Cape 


Chitinat 
Chuathbaluk’ 
Circlet .. 
Circle 

Hot Springs 
Clam Gulch* 
Clarks Pointt 
Clover Pass*. . 


Coffman Cove’. . 


Cohoet 


Cold = 


College 
Cooper 
cons" 
per 
aes 
Cordova 
Crooked 
Creekt 
Cu 
Deadhorse 
Deering 
Delta Junction 
Dillingham 
Diomede* 
Donnelly 
Dot Laket 
Dunbar’ 
Dutch Harbor 


fatals lube en 


OMA" HYPO ™> “OMT 


onmnmmyy ZFMBMMMAO NTO SBmMOO "M7 


SiS albebe (eats) 


baa] 


a 6 a Fi 


e omn 


7MAOQmMs 


=—— 
_ 


. .. 260,283 
ZE97— 1" & 
60,283 F 11 
1258 G 9 
1,893 .D 11 
82,840 ._.D 12 
. 2,392 G15 

.30711..G 15 
49.691 ..F 11 
14070 ..H 16 
13,913 H10 

1823..H 8 
539,322 ..E£ 11 
7,385 ..B 10 
7208 € 9 
8835 ..H 15 

808 ..G 13 


_ 


WOwUaywowmow 


— 
_ 


11 


— — 


— 


— 
O—nm MmON Nm WO Owes 


—— 


Alaska 


Eagle 129 8.3. Kenai 6,942 F 11 Nikolskit 395ml 6 Station’ 
Eagle Villaget 68 D i3 Ketchikan 7922 H 16 Ninilchikt J72 GN Shishmaref 562 
Edna Bayt 49.H 15 Ketchikan Noatakt 428 C 9 Shungnak 256 
Eek 280 F 8 East H 16 Nome 3505 D 8 Sitka 8,835 
Egegikt 16.G 9 Kiana 388 C 9 Nondalton 221 .G 10 Skagway . 862 
Erelson AFBt 5,400 .D 12 King Cove 792_ 18 Noorvik 644 C 9 Slana*t 124 
Ekuk G 9 King Salmont 442 G 9 North Pole 1570 .D 12 Sleetmutet 100 
Ekwok 130..G 9 Kipnukt 644 F 8 North Tongass Soldotna 3,759 
Elfin Cove*t 32_G 14 Kivalina 377..€ 8 Highway* .H 16 South Naknekt 137 
Elim . 313 D 8 Klawock 854 H 16 North le Sparrevohn 
Emmonak 767, £ 8 Klukwant .. 139 F 14 Pass° .H 16 Station’ aria 
Eyopst Bay G 10 Kobuk 109 C 10 Northwayt 95.613 Stebbins me A? 
Eska .. Foil Kodiak 6,334 .H 10 Northway Sterlingt 4.705 
Estert 1.680..D11 Kodiak Village*t Aly 13 {5 Stevens 
Evansville*t 28 Dl Station*t 1840 H10 Nuiqsut . 433 Bl Villaget —. 87 . 
ak’ F 12 Kokhonak’ 174 G10 Nulato 336 D 9 Stony Rivert 61 
Fairbanks 30,224 D111 Koknines ... .D 10 Old Harbor 237..H 10 Suntrana 
False Pass 641 7 Koliganekt 1825.G 9 Oscarville*t 61 F 8 Susitnat 37 
Flatt 4uE 9 Kongiganak’*t 359..F 8 Ouzinkie 225 .H 10 Sutton 
Fort Greelyt 461 E 12 Kotlik 591 E 8 Palmer AtS33erEmii Takotnat 50 
Fort Kotzebue 30824 CS Paxsont 43 E 12 Talkeetnat 772 
Wainwright. D 12 Koyuk 2974 D3 Pedro Ba 50 G10 Tanacrosst 140 
Fort Yukon 395..C 12 Koyukuk 101 .D 9 Pelican 163 .G 14 Tanana 308 
Fox"t 300 D1 Kupreanol 523 lS Pennock Tatalina 
Fritz Creek*t 1603 ..G 11 Kwethluk 713..F 8 Island° ot ik Station® 
Gakonat  eotlagt 12 Kwigillingokt 338 F 8 Perkinsville* D 8 Tatitlekt 107 
Galena 675 D 10 Larsen Bay 115 H 10 Perryvillet 107 H 8 Tazlina*t 149 
Gambell 649 D 6 Levelockt 322 .G9 Petersbu 3,224 H15 Telida’® 
Glennallent S54 F 12 Lime Villaget 6 F 10 Pilot Poin 100 H 9 Teller 268 
Golovin 144.D 8 Livengoodt 23 DM Pilot Station BS0eE 8 Teller Mission 
Goodnews Bay 230.G 8 Lower Pitkas Pointt T25aE 8 [Brevig 
Grayling 194.£ 9 Kalskag 2678 ES Platinum . 41 G 8 Mission! 
Gulkanat iyde Wz Lower Tonsina*® ppAe 4 Point Baker*t 35 .H 16 Tenakee 
Gustavust 429.G 15 Manley Point Hope . 757 B 8 Springs 104 
Haines eel collec Gals Hot Springst 72 DM Point Layt 247.B 9 Tetlint AN7 
Halibut Covet PSsoeGelll Manokotak . 3399 G 9 Port Alexander 81 H15 Thorne Bay* 557 
Harding Lake* D1 Marshall - 49 «E 8 Port Clarence*t 21 D 8 Togiak 809 
Healyt . 1,000 .E 11 McGrath 401 ..E 10 Port Grahamt 71 6G11 Tokt WEEE 
Healy Lake*t ,ay/—te yp McKinley Parkt 142 € 11 Port Heident 19 H 9 Toksook Bay* 532 
HermingCove . H 16 Medira E 10 Port Lions 256 H 10 Tonsina*t 32 
Hollist De ett 16 Mekoryuk . ZIOGE 7 Portage Creek*t 5646 9 Tuluksakt 428 
Holy Cross e227, ES 9 MentastaLaket 142 E 12 Portlock’ . Gil Tuntutuliakt 370 
Homer 3,946 Gl Metlakatlat 1,375 .H 16 Prudhoe 5 Bll Tununakt 25 
Hoonah .. 860 G15 Mintot 258 D1 Quinhagak che) a Re Twin Hillst 69 
Hooper Bay 1014 £— 7 Montana F Wl Rampartt 45 Dll Two Rivers*t 482 
Hopet ag l37 ak 11 Moose Creek*t 542 D111 Red Devilt BSEE 9 Tyonekt 193 
Houston’ 1202 FE Moose Passt . 206.F 11 Ru 188 D 10 Ugashikt 1 
Hughes ..78 .D 10 Mountain Russian Umiat . ; 
Huslia . .«293 ..D 10 Point . H 16 Mission ZIG Unalakleet 747 
Hydaburg. .... 382..H 16 Mountain St George —.....152 G 6 Unalaska 4,283 
Hydert 97 H 16 Village 755 E 8 St Marys 500 E 8 Unga . 
Igiugig’t 53. G 10 Murphy Dome* 6) 1 St Michael 368 E 8 Usibelli 
Miamnat 102 .G 10 Myers Chuck H 16 St Paul 532 G 6 Usibelli Mine® 
Indian Naknekt 678 G 9 Salamatoft S54 F 11 Valdez 4036 
Mountain* .D 10 Napakiak 353 — 8 Salcha*t 854 D111 Venetiet 202 
Ivanof Bayt ioe, HS Napaskiak 390 F 8 Sand Point 952 I 8 Wainwright 546 
Jakolol Bay* Gi Nelson Savoonga 643 D 7 Wales 152 
Juneau . 30,711 G15 Lagoon*t 83 | 8 Saxman’ . 431 H 16 Wasilla 5,469 
Kachemak’ 431 Gil Nenana —=402.D 11 Saxman East” H 16 White 
Kake 710. .H15 Nenana Native Scammon Bay 465 E 7 Mountain 203 
Kaktovik . 293 SB 12 Village Dil Selawik 772..C 9 Whittier 182 
Kalifonsky*t .5,846 F 11 New Stuyahok 471 G 9 Seldovia . 286 Gl Willowt 1.658 
Kalskag ie 2 eS Newhalen 160 G 10 Seward 2830 G11 Wisemant  ageel 
Kaltag ... 2305.0, 9 Newtokt 32). .F™ 8 Shageluk A2Z9._E . 9 Wrangell 2,308 
Karlukt 27 HD Nightmute . 208 E 8 Shaktoolik 230 D 9 Yakutatt .. 680. 
Kasaan 39 .H 16 Nikiski*t 4,327 FW Sheldon Point 164 E 8 
Kasiloft 471 ..F 11 Nikolai 100 .E 10 Shemya 


*8orough names and names of cities marked with an astensk do not appear on the map; key shows general location 
tCensus designated place— unincorporated, but recognized as a significant settled community by the US Census 8ureau 
+City and metropolitan area have same boundary and population. 

Places wrthout population figures are unincorporated areas. 

Source: 2000 census 


287 


Sa) ae 
3 


“man Amana 
oO 


ommm=aamayo 
— 
= 


Oo omaam 
oo Nh 


MAOH OSH SH wOUMAONIKOAWU 


— 


— = 


NADA TMOM=—TOePTVNOOVMAAAMOAIMO 


aQxrInTToS 





Harold E Wilson, Warden & Associates 
Atka is a remote Alaskan village in the Andreanof Islands. The Andreanof Islands are part of the Aleutian 
chain, which extends westward from the tip of the Alaska Peninsula. 

































1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
| 
| 
ls 
] \—4 
RUSSIA aa 
\2 1 
hy 
Z\o 
miZ 
2 
CAPE UISBURKE 
S 1B E RIA \Cape Lisburn — 
Pomnt Hope*., 
| q 
~Anadyr } Kivalina, 
CAPE KRUSENSTE 
' NATIONAL MONUMES 
na i 
CHUKCHI PENINSULA “a 
eeeringovskty ¥ 
Provideniya, 
CAPE OLYUTORSKIY ie ‘ KING ISLAND 
Se CAPE RODNEY 
~ Gambelit White 
e f Nome? a 
avoonga ~~ 
ey SEWARD PENINSULA Goiovu? 
SIKNIK CAPE or. NORTHEAST CAPE 
ST LAWRENCE ISLAND Stebbils 
= M hae ry 
: Canon a Icha 
F Sheldon Point rae 
OP Fa 4 
OS Mountain Village 
-“6) HALL ISLANO Scammon Bay ®, 
ALASKA MARITIME ST MATTHEW ISLAND ie cha a 
— YUKON DELTA 
WILDUIFE F ; 
Newto! t 
_— shot . 
mee NUNIVAK ISLANO Tununake “Aleut i te 
ROS cl Mekoryuk - e o Nai ; o 
wee YUKON DELTA | as kal 
oe nwa Cheforne 
ATTU ISLAND St Pau! 
ALASKA MARITIME NWR e 
 SHEMAYA ISLAND PRIBILOF ISLANDS 
NEAR ISLANDS St George. 
KISKA ISLAND ALASKA PENINSULA - 
ALASKA PENINSULA NATIONAL WILDUFE REFUGE tvanhot 
Ne : d 
RAT ISLANDS Nay, WZEMBEK NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE 
C 
UNIMAKISLAND oY Mu 
Nano abelian a. 
Mug, Dutch H olan a ' , - 
ut¢ ar Awe e 
TANAGA 2 SANAK 
RE UMNAK ISLAND > Oe lask er 
ISLAND - FUGE = alaska 
ADAK AK. area ISLAND it ee SUND cust 
ISLAND ~=ANDREANDF ISLANDS oe ’ FOX ISLANDS RATIONS 
AMLIA ISLANDS OF THE Nikolsh: ) 
ISLAND FOUR MOUNTAINS ALEUTIAN 
| 
q 






































































































































9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
1a Ya = 129" amundsen Gull 
in 
wk 
POINT BARROW - A 
*Ba ew CAPE DALHOUSIE 
= 
Wainwright, Prudhoe B ATKINSON POINT - 
ICY CAPE athe. : -gMeade River _ - a oe evliext.Se : J 22 Zs 
i, a0 ee. ‘ sKaktovik 7 aN 
~~ | ! BEMARCATION POINT 
“Point” — Nujqgsut ~~ ¢Deadhorse ! J 
lay “ , - 
r # Ls sS ¥ 
an : a | = al 1 x 
a - ‘ Umuiat e a awe sN B 
{ i S > Inuvik 
4 2 2B 
g ARCTICNANONAL ry 
NATIONAL PRESERVE & WILDUFE REFUGE 6. 
am | 
eee POL Arctic Village ¢ . 
pata 7 NORTHWEST 
Kotz 2 (Chandar : TERRITORIES Cc 
sens 
Se Shungnak® eX Bettles ie Arak a 
“ +p 7 SELAWIK NATIONAL M4 vepe |e ' eChalkyitsik — 
WILDUFE REFUGE Allakaket 8 Fort oe elas " 
ie dland un As = © eye 'e RATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE 
ucklan Hughes REFUGE j e 
ih Stevens Wages’. ch creek Circle 
4 Huslia x 
A, pills Central $\_ 
<P KOYUKUK NATIONAL Rampart vengood _fet%Circle Hot Spring YUKON 
m,' a Tanana ss YUKON CHARLEY RIERS D 
Koyuk Koyukuk Kokrines ie rif, nx ES NATIONAL PRI TERRITORY 
Nul 10, Do e Manley rs) f , rth Pole eset! ¢ Eag!e Village 
pohektoolk yealena™ Ky Hot Springs Fairbanks” Sg087 WaINwRIGHT 
Kaltage cottons Nenana Native Village Pionana ON AIR FORCE BASE ‘ Dawson 
eUnalakleet WILDUFE NOWITNA NATIONAL Anderson Chicken, - 
** REFUGE WILDUFE REFUGE Suntrg Big Delta A 
Sy F Lakes anite A FORT GREELY 
ws r. Minchumina ® sant, eUsibellt q 
oGrayling Medfra | E 
_Anvik Takotna® , Nikolai 
i - McGrath 
4 @Shageluk cGra Pyrat 
/ *Flat «ppl 
_SHoly Cross TRANS. ALASKA PIPELINE ~ 
a9 Crooked Creek 
ane i= Red Devil 
a *Stony River \GHWA' wa 
an Mapai: Sleétmute 
rata ie? Bute cacy Valse, F 
' NATIONAL FORE 
Portage TaYitlek : 
a "Whittier -cordova BLONDIKE GOLD RUSH 
. Niiobse Pass © Point Whitshed © agli yr ‘dye . 
iS, edhoe Kastchco bper Landing B Ht gway_ B R | T | S H 
Keuoanek Nondaltone - Ichik Bay _ COLUMBIA 
‘ uae ons t Pee CAPE ST ELIAS Yakutat® 
“Ehwok pow Stuyahot, gee adi KENAl MONTAGUE ISLAND NATIONAL FOREST 
PENINSULA GLACIER 6 
NANONAL PA RALTY (SLAND NATIONAL MONUMENT] G 
bf TONGASS NATIONAL FOREST) 
















SP te 


s seldovia 
English Bay® Port KENAJ FJORDS . 
PP ANO PRESERVE 


ay ‘Yeinaais 
f Alaski 












sels ahe Tensal ; 













MISTY FJORDS 














Edna Baye 


Z a ling soo"°° Graham NATIONAL PARK iti 
1g PARK cree tan as eet i; 
PE soaoe"s 
INSTANTINE , it Lop 5 *Baranof - kuoN agi NATIONAL FOREST) 
lot Point, @,° bu 
Ugashik rade “Karla, 0 ountes 3 . BIE onc Bacchi seinen eon oh “te peer yde 
Port alexandaye? "Ole. Be 
vA 


ort Helden ia  -  xppiaxbarsen Bx 








Klawock_% 
ALEXANDER Crai 





oa,%° 
Gee 





Brince Rupert . 
GRAHAM ISLAND = 





Qa Miliary or other federal area 
+ Point of interest 
—— Oil pipeline 


Railroad 


Highways: 
Road 


{1} State or territorial 





1s 16 


ie ISLAND. °Old Harbor 
MONU Aktiio 9 KODIAK NATIONAL WILDUFE REFUGE 
° nik Lagoon ra 
Chignik F 
ignik Lake “gga ON as 
ALE! : F 
CHIRIKOF ISLAND Nort Pacific Ocean 
Alaska political map 
Park or other recreation atea 
Forest or other conservation area 
Military or other federal area 
International boundary 
North Provincial boundary 
State or territorial capital 
City or town 
Polyconic projection 
WORLD BOOK map 
9 10 11 12 13 14 
1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 Miles 
1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2000 2100 2200 2300 2400 2500 2600 2700 Kilometers 


290 Alaska Visitor's guide 

Alaska’s vast wilderness attracts many people who 
love the outdoors. Expert mountain climbers tackle 
Alaskan peaks that rank as the highest in North America. 
People fish for record-sized salmon, trout, and halibut. 

Thousands of tourists come to see Alaskas magnifi- 
cent mountain scenery and historic coastal towns. Many 
vacationers from the ‘lower 48° drive to the state on the 
Alaska Highway or take a scenic cruise along the Inside 
Passage of Alaska’s southeastern coast. 


Alaska offers interesting activities for everyone. These 
activities include white water kayaking, bird watching, 
and photographic tours of the famous “northern lights.” 

Perhaps the most popular winter event in Alaska is the 
Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race. Sled drivers called mush- 
ers and their teams of dogs race over a rugged course 
from Anchorage to Nome. Held each March, the course 
is about 1,200 miles (1,930 kilometers) long and usually 
takes about 12 days to complete. 





Ld 
t 
? 
1 
’ 
’ 
f 
re 
1) 


© |eft Schultz, Alaska Stock 


Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race between Anchorage and Nome 


Places to visit 


Following are brief descriptions of some of Alaska’s many in- close-up views of the Mendenhall Glacier. Visitors to the gla- 
teresting places to visit. cier can hike nearby trails or raft down the Mendenhall River. 
Alaska Highway extends 1,397 miles (2,248 kilometers) be- The Haines Highway connects the northern end of the ferry- 

tween Dawson Creek, B.C, and Delta Junction. Linking high- liner route with the Alaska Highway. In south-central Alaska, 

ways go north to Fairbanks, in gold rush country, and south to ferryliners operate between Cordova and Kodiak, with stops 

Anchorage and other cities. See Alaska Highway. at Valdez, Whittier, Seward, Homer, and Seldovia. 


“Marine Highway’ is Alaska’s state ferryliner system. Oceango- National parklands in Alaska include Denali National Park, 


ing ferryliners carry cars and passengers along this route 
from Prince Rupert, B.C, and Bellingham, Wash., to southeast 
ern coastal cities. The ferryliners follow the Inside Passage 
running between forested islands and the steep, inlet-cut 
mainland coast. Each town located along this scenic route of- 
fers special attractions to visitors. Saxman, near Ketchikan, for 
example, has the world’s largest collection of authentic Indian 
totem poles. Ketchikan also has a large collection of authentic 
totem poles. Sitka, which was the capital when Alaska be- 
longed to Russia, includes historic St. Michael's Cathedral, a 
Russian Orthodox church. Juneau, the state capital, offers 


which features the highest peak in North America, majestic 
Mount Mckinley (20,320 feet. or 6,194 meters, above sea 
level). Alaska is also the site of Gates of the Arctic National 
Park, Glacier Bay National Park, Katmai National Park, Klondike 
Gold Rush National Historical Park, Sitka National Historical 
Park. and Wrangell-St. Elias National Park. For more informa- 
tion, see the map and tables in the World Book article on Na- 
tional Park System. 


National forests. Alaska has two national forests. They are Chu- 


gach, along the southern central coast, and Tongass, along 
the southeastern coast 


Alaska 291 


Annual events 


January-June 
Russian Christmas, in cities across the state (early January); 
Winter Sunrise in Barrow (late January); Fur Rendezvous in 
Anchorage (February); Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race (March); 
Pillar Mountain Golf Classic in Kodiak (March); Alaska Folk 
Festival in Juneau (April); Jazz and Classics Festival in Juneau 
(May); Little Norway Festival in Petersburg (May); Kodiak Crab 
Festival (May); The Midnight Sun in Barrow (mid-May); Sitka 
Summer Music Festival (June). 


July-December 
World Eskimo-Indian Olympics in Fairbanks (July); State Fair in 
Palmer (August-September); Equinox Marathon Run in Fair- 
banks (September), Alaska Day Celebration in Sitka, commem- 
orating the transfer of Alaska from Russia to the United States 
in 1867 (October); Athabascan Fiddling Festival in Fairbanks 
(November); Great Alaska Shootout in Anchorage, featuring 

a college basketball teams from throughout the United States 

Warden & Re ousies (November). 





Totem pole and tribal house near Ketchikan 





© Woligang Kaehler, Corbis Alaska State Fair 


St. Michael's Cathedral in downtown Sitka Alaska State Fair in Palmer 


ere was F 


: . = + 
opera ats rerama gist te a 





Chambers, Miller Services 
Ferry line in Ketchikan Harbor 


292 Alaska 


Land regions. Alaska has four main land regions: (1) 
the Pacific Mountain System, (2) the Central Uplands and 
Lowlands, (3) the Rocky Mountain System, and (4) the 
Arctic Coastal Plain. 

The Pacific Mountain System of Alaska is part of a 
group of ranges that extends down the Pacific Coast to 
southern California. In Alaska, the ranges curve from the 
Aleutian Islands in the west through south-central Alas- 
ka and along the coast in the southeast. 

The region has many subdivisions. The strip of coastal 
land 400 miles (640 kilometers) long in the southeast is 
called the Alaska Panhandle. It is 10 to 150 miles (16 to 
241 kilometers) wide, and includes tall mountains and 
ice fields. The Saint Elias Range extends northwestward 
from the Panhandle. Mount Saint Elias rises 18,008 feet 
(5,489 meters) in this range. The Wrangell Mountains, 
northwest of the Saint Elias Range, include Mount Bona 
(16,421 feet, or 5,005 meters) and three tall peaks— 
Mount Blackburn (16,390 feet, or 4,996 meters), Mount 
Sanford (16,208 feet, or 4,940 meters), and Mount 
Wrangell (14,005 feet, or 4,269 meters). Mount Wrangell 
is an active volcano. The Chugach and Kenai mountains 
border the coast from the Saint Elias Range west to the 
Kenai Peninsula and Kodiak Island. Mount Fairweather, 
in the Chugach Mountains, is 15,300 feet (4,663 meters) 
high. The Talkeetna Mountains, north of Anchorage, are 
a low range of rugged, glacier-cut peaks. The Alaska 
Range is the most inland section of the Pacific Mountain 
System. From the Canadian border, it curves west and 
southwest to the Alaska Peninsula. The Alaska Range in- 
cludes Mount Mckinley (20,320 feet, or 6,194 meters), 
the highest peak in North America, and Mount Foraker 
(17,400 feet, or 5,304 meters). 

The Alaska Peninsula and the Aleutian Islands extend 
southwest in a long chain from the Alaska Range. The 
Aleutians include 14 large islands, about 55 small is- 
lands, and many islets. The largest islands are Unimak, 


Land and climate 





© Jane Gnass, West Stock 
The Matanuska Valley produces m@st of Alaska’s farm prod- 
ucts. On the farm shown above, caps protect squash plants from 
frost. The Chugach Mountains tower in the background. 


Land regions of Alaska 















. a NN 
Unalaska, and Umnak. The Aleutian Range forms the ~ >> 
it “t ° ° j - 
backbone’ of the peninsula and islands. It extends 1,600 bs : yoko Pa : 
miles (2,570 kilometers), from Mount Spurr, across Cook _ CENTRAL UPLANDS 
Inlet from Anchorage, to Attu Island near the Asian con- L 0 
. me LOWLANDS PACIFIC 
MOUNTAIN 
S __SYSTEM 
A > « 
% f 
A 
~ 
\* a 
bu, TZ fo e 
Se p> fh : rt t 
WORLD BOOK map ~ 
Map index 
Adak Island _ . G 2 Cape Newenham... E  5 Kanaga Island . Ge2 Mt. Katmai E 6 St George Island F 4 
Agattu Island .. Fol Cape Prince of Wales © 4 Katmai Nat!. Park Mt McKinley St. Lawrence Island . C 4 
Alaska Peninsula .F 6 Cape Romanzot D5 and Preserve E 6 {highest point in St. Matthew Island . D 4 
Alaska Range D7 Cape St Elias E 8 Kiska Island . teu North America) D7 St. Paul Island E 4 
Aleutian islornds G 3 Chandalar R. B 7 KobukR. . B 6 Mt Michelson . B 7 Sanak Island - ae FSS 
Aleutian Range E 6 Chichigof Island E19 Kodiak Island . i. 6 Mt St Elias. ..... D 8 Selawik Lake. ........C 6 
Alexander Chirikof Island . F 6 Korovin Volcano Gres Mt Veniaminot .. F. ps Seward Peninsula .......C 5 
Archipelago ta 9 Chukchi Sea B 4 Kotzebue Sound Ges Mt Vsevidot G 4 Sheenjek R....... ee B 7 
Amchitka Island G 1 Coast Mts. . E 10 Koyukuk R. C 6 Near Islands Fo Shelikof Strait... F 6 
Amchitka Pass . .G 2 Colville R. B 6 Kuskokwim Bay fe Noatak RR. ... BOS Shishaldin Volcano... F 5 
Amlia Island . G 3 Cook Inlet . E 7 Kuskokwim Mts. D 6 North Pacific Dcean G 8 Shumagin Islands ......F 5 
AmuktaPass ...... .G 3 Copper R. . wD & Kuskokwim R. D5 Norton Sound Ces Tanagalsland........ G2 
Andreanottslands G2 Denali Natl. Park Lake Clark E 6 Nunivak Island —E 4 Tanana’R! ..) seam. .-6. Cc 7 
Arctic Ocean A 6 and Preserve C 7 Little Diomede Island C4 Pavlof Volcano F 5 Teshekpuk lake... A 6 
Atka Island & 3 Dixon Entrance F 10 Makushin Volcano G4 Pt Barrow A 6 Tikchik Lakes .... .....C 7 
Attu Island Fol Etolin Strait . boS Montague Island t7 Pt Hope BS nape pe 
Baird Inlet Des Four Mountains, Mt Bendeleben cs Porcupine R. . B 8 ountain .. . o 8 5 
Baird Mts... BS Islands of the (6&3 Mit. Blackburn . D 8 Pribilof Islands bE 4 Trinity Islands... F 6 
Baranof Island Fs 9 Fox Islands G 4 Mt. Chamberlin Ew Prince of Wales Unalaska Island... ... G 4 
Becharot Lake E 6 Glacier Bay Natl. Nit. Doonerak B 7? Island A? Unimak Island FOS 
Bering Sea ez Park and Preserve 9 Mt. Fairweather te’, Prince William Unimak Pass .... ...F 4 
Bering Strait C 4 Gulf of Alaska | 8 Mt. Foraker De? Sound . #\ i) West Point (mountain). .C 8 
Bristol Bay Be 5 Hagenieister Island i. Mt. Hamilton D5 Prudhoe Bay PAS? Wrangell Mts. Os 
Brooks Range B 6 Icy Cape AS Mt. Hayes © wv Rat Islands Fo Yakutat Bay me (i 
Cape Lisbume B 5 lliamna Lake E iG Mt. Hubbard D 8 St. Elias Mts. D 8 YukonR....... Ae US 





SI@\OWOIIY OOO'E 008'z 009'7 00r'z 




























5 
_ovet 4s ue ai Pugs; 
9829) 50100" s\ spuejs; eS. Sse ea® 
ma! gpvel fe) uiBewinys 1} 4euy Ly, 
“eg Shp 139080 OS Py cadens 
y 2. r "hI8YS; 
4 1A 008g 
Pues YD, L 
/ Pa °a Mes, Sp mule 
ue 
IStig Jongil e 5 
d Pues; ney 18)" 6b Ss 
, /12)8!2W96 04 Is / u 
o 41n9 (w ivo'2) 4 SLL ; ce 
| es e| Vv } 1euUe yO Ns edettomany Won, § ~ 
4 gud TWNOUNN oo ae — ° / - 
SOWOrs VN ge lnow 4 Ji 
48 pueist fa i i's 
sea or anbeuow youd “Saye | 4 Pues, 
wat 4 AO! ) , 4 eye Fe .. | hell 3S *atung, 
NR cadiatouy. 36 : a - ; Pp 
2 bi A ney St dew YOO GTIOM 
a a 
weg 
jaa] eas 
9AOgE UON}EARIA 
UMO] JO ALD 
Oo jended jeisuiAosd 10 8]81S 
Asepunog om 
rg ae dj! Pau ‘ay Asepunog yed jeuonen al 
9 dew uleiia} 
eyse|V 
Aeg e0uPpN4d oyt « 
yndyayse| , 
Vv @ yo moueg wiod MOdJeg se 
" | 
4: : | u@9IQ INIIpy 
7’ ah bi vii ri ~ a 
OL 6 8 L 9 Z L 
=i wien a _ 


294 Alaska 


tinent. The range has many active volcanoes. The great- 
est eruptions occurred in 1912, at what is now Katmai 
National Park. A new volcano, Novarupta, hurled tons of 
rocks and ashes into the air. The top of Mount Katmai 
collapsed and formed a ca/dera (basin) 3 miles (5 kilome: 
ters) wide and 3,700 feet (1,130 meters) deep. The lava 
and ash from the volcano formed the Valley of Ten 
Thousand Smokes, an area of fumaroles (holes from 
which hot gas steams up). 

Two important lowlands lie within the Pacific Moun- 
tain System. These are the Copper River Basin and the 
Susitna-Cook Inlet lowland. The Copper River Basin, a 
forested lowland with river canyons, extends between 
the Chugach and Wrangell mountains. During the Pleis 
tocene Epoch, atime marked by a succession of ice 
ages, it was the site of a large lake. The most recent ice 
age ended about 11,500 years ago. The Susitna-Cook In- 
let lowland extends north and east from Anchorage. 
Most of the area is forested. But it has a few towns and 
includes the fertile farmland of the Matanuska Valley. 

The Central Uplands and Lowlands make up the 
largest Alaskan land region. This region lies between 
the Alaska Range on the south and the Brooks Range on 
the north. It extends westward from the Canadian bor- 
der and includes the Seward Peninsula and the Kuskok- 
wim River area of southwestern Alaska. The region has 
low, rolling hills. It also has broad, swampy river valleys, 
including the valleys of the Koyukuk, Kuskokwim, 
Tanana, and Yukon rivers. 

The Rocky Mountain System of Alaska consists of the 
Brooks Range and its foothills. The Brooks Range has 
steep, glacier-cut peaks that rise to 9,000 feet (2,700 me- 
ters) in the east, but are lower in the west. It includes the 
Baird, De Long, and Endicott mountains. | 

The Arctic Coastal Plain is the most northern region. 
It rises gradually from the Arctic Ocean to a height of 
about 600 feet {180 meters) in the south. Permafrost (per- 
manently frozen ground) 1,000 feet (300 meters) thick lies 
under the plain. No trees can grow there. But the surface 
of the ground thaws during summer and becomes 
thickly carpeted with low grasses and wild flowers. This 
grassy, treeless area is called the tundra. 

Federally protected lands. Alaska includes 16 na- 
tional wildlife refuges. These lands are part of the Na- 





tional Wildlife Refuge System, established by the U.S. 
government to protect and increase wildlife and their 
habitat. The system is managed by the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service. Alaska’s refuges make up more than 80 
percent of the land in the system. The Yukon Delta Na- 
tional Wildlife Refuge, in western Alaska, ranks as the 
nation’s largest refuge. It covers nearly 20 million acres 
(8 million hectares). = + 

The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, in northeastern 
Alaska, has become a topic of debate between environ- 
mentalists and the oil and gas industry. Oil companies 
have sought the right to drill for oil on the coastal plain 
in the northern part of the refuge. Environmentalists 
have protested that the drilling would damage the 
refuge. The federal government has not allowed drilling 
to take place. See National Wildlife Refuge System. 

Coastline. Alaska’s general coastline is 6,640 miles 
(10,686 kilometers) long. About 5,580 miles (8,980 kilome- 
ters) are along the Pacific Ocean, and about 1,060 miles 
(1,706 kilometers) are along the Arctic Ocean. All the 
coastline of the mainland and major islands washed by 
tidewater measures 33,904 miles (54,563 kilometers). The 
main features of the coast in the south are the Gulf of 
Alaska, Prince William Sound, and Cook Inlet. Bristol 
Bay and Norton Sound open into the Bering Sea in the 
southwest. Kotzebue Sound faces the Chukchi Sea in the 
northwest. The Arctic Ocean and the Beaufort Sea bor- 
der the northern coast. 

The southern coast is cut by hundreds of small bays, 
channels, and narrow, steep-sided inlets called fords. 
The islands of the Alexander Archipelago rise from the 
Pacific off the shore of the Alaska Panhandle. Prince of 
Wales Island, the largest of the group, is the home of 
most of Alaska’s Haida Indians. Ketchikan is on Revil- 
lagigedo Island, and Sitka is on Baranof Island. Other 
large islands in the group include Admiralty, Chichagof, 
and Kupreanof. Kodiak, Afognak, and several smaller is- 
lands lie southwest of the Kenai Peninsula in the Gulf of 
Alaska. The Pribilot Islands in the Bering Sea are the 
summer home of the world’s largest fur seal herd. Nuni- 
vak Island, northeast of the Pribilofs, is the home of 
many musk oxen. Saint Lawrence Island is located at the 
southern end of the Bering Strait. Little Diomede Island 
and Big Diomede Island are located in the Bering Strait. 


Artstreet 


Mendenhall Glacier near Ju- 
neau fills a valley with ice and 
rock. This glacier is one of 
several in Alaska that can be 
reached by highway. 





Alaska 295 


Little Diomede is part of Alaska. Big Diomede belongs to 
Russia. 

Rivers and lakes. The Yukon River, Alaska’s chief wa- 
terway, is the fifth-longest river in North America. It 
flows 1,979 miles (3,185 kilometers) through Alaska and 
parts of Canada. From June to October, the river is free 
of ice. Small boats and barges can travel from its mouth 
on the Bering Sea across Alaska and into Canada. The 
Yukon’s main tributaries are the Koyukuk and the Tanana 
rivers. See Yukon River. 

Alaska’s second-longest river, the Kuskekwim, emp- 
ties into the Bering Sea at Kuskokwim Bay. The Colville 
River flows into the Arctic Ocean, and the Noatak and 
Kobuk rivers flow into the Chukchi Sea at Kotzebue 
Sound. The Susitna and Matanuska rivers flow into Cook 
Inlet, and the Copper River empties into the Gulf of Alas- Northern fur seals spend the summer on islands off Alaska’s 
ka. Several rivers, including the Alsek, Stikine, and Taku, coast. The world’s largest herd lives on the Pribilof Islands. 
begin in Canada and flow south or west across the Alas- 
ka Panhandle to the Pacific. 





Alaska has thousands of lakes. The largest, lliamna 
Lake on the Alaska Peninsula, is 80 miles (130 kilometers) 


Average monthly weather long and 20 miles (32 kilometers) wide. Other lakes in- 
clude Aleknagik, Becharof, Clark, Minchumina, Naknek, 
Anchorage Barrow Selawik, Skilak, Teshekpuk, and Tustumena. 
Temperatures | D250 en rt Glaciers. Thousands of glaciers from 1 to 30 miles (1.6 
Sen cy | falno Sarid mc Lic) tol 48 kilometers) long fill Alaska’s mountain valleys and 
High Low High Low canyons. The greatest number of glaciers are along the 
2005 Gl 5 ia Nes coast in the south and southeast. Malaspina, in the Saint 
See | 3, 12 | [| a 4 Elias Range, is North America’s largest glacier. It is an 
oes 4 a, ice sheet almost 50 miles (80 kilometers) wide. Many 
an 11 ley ee Alaska glaciers are easy to reach, and scientists from all 
45 392 parts of North America come to study them. Columbia 
49 : . Glacier can be reached by boat from Cordova. This huge 


ice sheet ends in an ice cliff in the sea. Glaciers that can 
be reached by highway include Black Rapids, Canwell, 
Castner, Gulkana, Matanuska, Mendenhall, Portage, and 
Worthington. 

Plant and animal life. Forests cover about a third of 











Average January temperatures Average July temperatures Average yearly precipitation 
The southern coastal areas generally re- Alaska has short, cool summers with big The southern coastal areas receive heavy 
main above freezing in winter. The rest of variations in temperature between the precipitation. The rest of the state gener- 
the state carn be extremely cold. cold north and milder southern areas. ally is extremely dry. 
7 WORLD 8OOK maps 
Degrees Degrees Degrees Degrees 
Eahrenhot Celsius Fahrenheit Celsius Inches Centimeters 






Above 32 Above 0 Above 60 Above 16 More thon 64 More thon 163 






















55 to 60 13 t0 16 32 to 64 J 81 t0 163 
i= 
50 to 55 10 to 13 16 to 32 41 to 81 
45 to 50 7 to 10 | 8 to 16 20 to 41 
Below 45 | | Below 7 Less thon 8 } Less thon 20 
Barrow z : ‘ . =? Barrow 
—e 
Nome 
. 








Fairbanks 









s 
Juneau 






Piodiak 


al 


Kodiak Kodiak 





296 Alaska 


Alaska. The most important trees are birches, Sitka 
spruces, western hemlocks, and white spruces. Other 


trees include aspens, black spruces, cottonwoods, tama- 


racks, and willows. 

Grasses, mosses sedges, and plantlike organisms 
called lichens are found in many parts of Alaska. In the 
far north, they provide food for caribou and other ani- 
mals. Wild flowers also grow throughout the state. Wild 
flowers on the tundra include asters, cinquefoils, fire- 
weeds, forget-me-nots, larkspurs, and mountain laurels. 
Arctic daisies, bog laurels, cowslips, violets, wild hy- 
acinths, and wood nymphs bloom in the mountains. 

The waters off Alaska’s shores are rich in salmon and 
halibut. They also contain great quantities of clams, cod, 
crabs, herring, and shrimp. The world’s largest herd of 
fur seals is found on the Pribilof Islands in summer. A 
herd of musk oxen lives on Nunivak Island. Brown bears 
live on Kodiak Island and in other parts of south-central 
and southeast Alaska. Polar bears live along the Arctic 
Coast. Other animals include caribou, deer, elk, grizzly 
bears, moose, Mountain goats, and mountain sheep. 
Game birds include ducks, geese, and grouse. 


Climate. Alaska has a great variety of climates. Winds 
that blow eastward over the warm Kuroshio (japan Cur- 
rent) give southern Alaska a fairly mild climate. Near the 
southern coast, temperatures average 28 °F (—2 °C) in 
January and 55 °F (13 C) in July. Precipitation (rain, melt- 
ed snow, and other moisture) averages 20 inches (51 
centimeters) at Cook Inlet and 92 inches (234 centime- 
ters) in the Panhandle. Parts of the southeast coast get 
heavy precipitation. Port Walter, on Baranof Island, has 
the highest average yearly precipitation in the continen- 
tal United States—221 inches (561 centimeters). 

In the inland parts of Alaska, temperatures average 
about — 9 °F (—23 °C) in January, and about 59 °F (15 °C) in 
July. The annual precipitation averages about 13 inches 
(33 centimeters). Fort Yukon recorded Alaska’s highest 
temperature, 100 “F (38 °C), on June 27, 1915. The record 
low, —80 'F (—62 'C), was set at Prospect Creek, near 
Stevens Village, on Jan. 23, 1971. This ranks as the lowest 
temperature ever recorded in the United States. 

The Alaskan Arctic has an average January tempera- 
ture of —11 °F (—24 °C). Its average July temperature is 
47 °F (8 °C). Annual precipitation is very low. 


Economy 


Alaskas economy relies heavily on government activi- 
ties and petroleum production. The huge amounts of 
petroleum produced by Alaska‘s oil industry are 
shipped to other states in oil tankers and through the 
Trans-Alaska Pipeline. While mining remains one of 
Alaska’s most important economic activities, other in- 
dustries have helped diversify the state's economy. 

Service industries, which include such activities as 
government operations, transportation, and real estate, 
are also important to the state. Tourism benefits many 
businesses in Alaska, including hotels, shops, restau- 
rants, and tour organizers. More than 1 million tourists 
visit the state annually, spending about $1 billion. 

Fishing is the dominant industry in many parts of the 
state. Alaska catches more fish than any other state. 


Production and workers by economic activities 


alilont Employed workers 

of GSP’ Number Percent 
Economic activities produced ofpeople of total 
Government 21 92,900 24 
Transportation, communi- 

cation, & utilities 18 29,900 
Mining 15 11,900 3 
Community, business, 

& personal services i 104,400 27 
Finance, insurance, 

& real estate 12 22,600 6 
Wholesale & retail trade 10 70,900 19 
Manufacturing 5 17,000 4 
Construction 4 20,800 
Agriculture, forestry, 

& fishing z 14,500 4 
Total 100 384,900 100 


“GSP © gross state product, the total value of goods and services produced ia year. 
Figures are for 1998 

Sources bVorld Book estinates based on data from US Bureau of Econonuc Analysis 
and US Bureau of Labor Statistics 





© Mark Kelley, Juneau Comvention & Visitors Bureau 


Mount Roberts Tramway is a popular tourist attraction in 
Juneau. It carries passengers to the top of Mount Roberts. 
Tourism contributes greatly to Alaska’s economy. 


Land use is a difficult problem in Alaska, as economic 
development and environmental protection interests 
often clash. The federal government owns and controls 
most of the state’s land, and it has set aside large areas 
for wildlife conservation and national parklands. 

Natural resources of Alaska include rich soils, valu- 
able minerals, and plentiful water, fish, and forests. 





Soil. Most interior valley soils in Alaska are composed 
of /oess (coarse particles of dust deposited by the wind). 
These soils resemble the soils found in the western 
United States, China, and other highly productive farm 
areas. Although Alaska’s soils are naturally productive, 
they need much fertilizer. 

Minerals. Oil and natural gas have been found on the 
Kenai Peninsula and in Cook Inlet in south-central Alas- 
ka. Large reserves of oil and natural gas lie near Prudhoe 
Bay on the state's Arctic coast. Whether to tap these re- 
serves has become a major source of debate. Some of 
these reserves lie beneath the Arctic National Wildlife 
Range, a key breeding ground for many of Alaska's wild 
creatures. Natural gas also has been found near Point 
Barrow in the Arctic Coastal Plain. Coal is found in the 
Kenai Peninsula, the Matanuska Valley, the Arctic 
Coastal Plain, and along the Healy and Yukon rivers. 

Much of Alaska’s gold is found in streambeds in the 
Yukon River Basin near Fairbanks and the Seward Penin- 
sula near Nome. Gold also is found in combination with 
other precious metals in underground deposits on 
many islands in southeastern Alaska. 

A major zinc deposit lies northwest of Kotzebue. One 
of the largest molybdenum deposits in the world is near 
Ketchikan. Widespread deposits of sand and gravel are 
a valuable resource for the construction industry. In ad- 
dition, Alaska has deposits of antimony, chromite, cop- 
per, gemstones, granite, limestone, nickel, platinum, sil- 
ver, and tungsten. 

Service industries, taken together, account for the 
largest portion of Alaska’s gross state product—the total 
value of goods and services produced ina state ina 
year. Most of the service industries are concentrated in 
the urban areas of the state. 

Government services contribute more to the gross 
state product than any other service industry. Govern- 
ment services include the operation of public schools, 
public hospitals, and military bases. An extensive net- 
work of government services is necessary because the 
state's people are spread over a large area. The federal 
government controls much of the state's land. Military 
bases are located near Anchorage and Fairbanks. 

Transportation, communication, and utilities form 
Alaska’s second-ranked service industry in terms of the 
gross state product. Transportation is essential to Alas- 
ka’s economy because the state lies far from major mar- 
kets. Pipeline and shipping companies transport petrole- 
um to processors. Ships also bring such essential goods 
as automobiles and groceries to Alaska from other 
states. Alaska’s location between Asia and the continen- 
tal United States has also helped make it an air freight 
transfer hub for such companies as FedEx and United 
Parcel Service. At Kodiak Island, the Alaska Aerospace 
Development Corporation created the nation’s first pri- 
vately operated rocket launch complex. Telephone com- 
panies are the biggest part of the communications sec- 
tor. Utilities provide gas, electric, and water service. 
More information about transportation and communica- 
tion appears later in this section. 

Next among service industries in Alaska is communi- 
ty, business, and personal services. This industry con- 
sists of a wide variety of establishments, including pri- 
vate health care, hotels, law firms, engineering compa- 
nies, and repair shops. Engineering companies involved 


Alaska 297 


in mining, construction, and aerospace technology are 
especially important 

Ranking fourth among Alaska’s service industries is fi- 
nance, insurance, and real estate. Anchorage is Alaska’s 
chief financial center. The buying and selling of build- 
ings and other property is the major real estate activity. 

Wholesale and retail trade rank fifth among Alaska’s 
service industries in terms of the gross state product. 
The wholesale trade of petroleum products, groceries, 
and motor vehicles is important in Alaska. Major types 
of retail businesses include automobile dealerships, 
food stores, and hardware stores. 

Mining. Petroleum provides about 95 percent of Alas- 
ka’s mining income. The Prudhoe Bay area is one of the 
world’s major petroleum-producing regions. Prudhoe 
Bay also contains vast natural gas reserves. Petroleum is 
transported south from Prudhoe Bay by the Trans-Alaska 
Pipeline. Petroleum is also pumped from oil fields in the 
Kenai Peninsula-Cook Inlet area. 

For many years, gold was Alaska’s major mined prod- 
uct Alaska is still an important gold-mining state. Most 
of the gold is obtained from p/acer deposits—particles 
of gold in streambeds —near Fairbanks and Nome. 

Alaska’s mines also produce major amounts of zinc 
and silver. The Red Dog Mine, near Kotzebue, is the 
largest zinc mine in the United States. Greens Creek 
Mine, near Juneau, is a leading producer of both zinc 
and silver. Alaska’s other mined products include coal, 
crushed stone, lead, molybdenum, and sand and gravel. 

Manufacturing. Goods manufactured in Alaska have 
a value added by manufacture of about $15 million a 
year. This figure represents the increase in value of raw 
materials after they become finished products. 

Food processing is Alaska’s leading manufacturing ac- 
tivity in terms of value added by manufacture. Fish prod- 
ucts are the main source of food-processing income. 
Many coastal cities process salmon. The processing of 
crab, halibut, herring, pollock, sablefish, and other 
groundfish is also important to the economy of Alaska. 





©fett Schultz Alaska Stock Images 
The Red Dog Mine, the largest zinc mine in the United States, is 
in northwestern Alaska, near Kotzebue. A truck hauls zinc from 
the mine. above. Zinc is an important mineral product of Alaska. 


298 Alaska 


Petroleum products rank second in terms of value 
added. The Fairbanks and Kenai areas have large oil re- 
fineries. Refineries also operate at Prudhoe Bay. 

Fishing industry. Alaska leads the states in the annu- 
al value of fish caught by the commercial fishing indus- 
try. The state has a yearly fish catch valued at about $1 ; 
billion. Workers in the industry catch cod, flounder, 
groundfish, halibut, pollock, rockfish, sablefish, salmon, 
and smelt. Dungeness crab, king crab, scallops, sea 
urchins, shrimp, and tanner crab (also known as snow 
crab) are also harvested, as are herring eggs. Kodiak and 
Unalaska/Dutch Harbor are the chief fishing ports. 

Forestry is an important component of Alaskas econ- 
omy. Forest products exports top $200 million each year. 
Alaska has over 25 million acres (10 million hectares) of 
commercial forestland. The southern Panhandle has 
many log-processing camps and sawmills. 

Agriculture. Farms cover well under 1 percent of 
Alaska’s land area—only 880,000 acres (356,000 hectares). 
The fertile Matanuska Valley northeast of Anchorage 
produces about three-fourths of Alaska’s farm products. 
Alaska has about 550 farms. 

Milk is Alaska’s most valuable livestock product, fol- 
lowed by eggs and beef cattle. Alaskan farmers also 
raise chickens, hogs, sheep, and lambs. Inuit keep herds 
of reindeer as a source of meat and hides. 

The growing season in Alaska ts very short However, 
the summer sun shines about 20 hours a day in the cen- 
tral part of the state, and crops ripen quickly there. All 
fruits and vegetables that grow in a cool climate can be 
raised in Alaska as far north as the Arctic Circle. Green- 
house and nursery products are the leading source of 
agricultural income in Alaska. In addition, Alaskan farm- 
ers grow such crops as barley, hay, oats, and potatoes. 
Timber is also important in the state. 

Fur industry. Alaska trappers catch many kinds of 
fur-bearing animals, including beavers, lynxes, martens, 


Economy of Alaska 


This map shows the econom- 
ic uses of land in Alaska and 
where the state's leading 
farm, mineral, and forest 
products are produced. Ma- 
jor manufacturing centers are 
shown in red. 








Farmland mixed with 
___} grazing 


) Sparse vegetation mixed 
: with grazing 


—— Trans-Alaska pipeline 
e Manufacturing center 


° Minerai deposit 


WORLD BOOK map 


coal . 
Reindeer 






aes” na, Gravel 


minks, wolves, and wolverines. The yearly value of the 
animals pelts ranges from $5 million to $10 million. 

Many Alaskans, most of them natives, hunt and fish 
for food. They also use animal skins in making clothing 
and other items for datly living. 

Electric power. Power plants that burn natural gas 
provide about 55 percent of the electric power generat- 
ed in Alaska. Hydroelectric plants generate about 25 
percent of the state's power. Only a small fraction of the 
State's potential hydroelectric power has been devel- 
oped. The rest of the state's power comes from coal- 
burning and petroleum-burning plants. 

Transportation. It is difficult and expensive to build 
roads and railroads in Alaska. The land is rugged, and 
the construction season is short. 

During World War II (1939-1945), the federal govern- 
ment built the Alaska Highway—the only major land 
route between Alaska, Canada, and the ‘lower 48." The 
highway extends between Dawson Creek, British Co- 
lumbia, and Delta Junction, where it joins the Richard- 
son Highway to Fairbanks. The Alaska Highway, together 
with the Richardson Highway, extends 1,495 miles (2,405 
kilometers). Alaska has about 13,000 miles (20,900 kilo- 
meters) of roads and highways. Most of the state's roads 
link the Alaska Highway with the Kenai Peninsula, An- 
chorage, Valdez, and Fairbanks. 

The state-owned Alaska Railroad provides freight 
service from Seward and Whittier to Anchorage and 
Fairbanks. This railroad also operates passenger trains. 

Small planes flown by “bush pilots” provide the prima- 
ry link between about 200 remote villages and the out- 
side world. These pilots carry passengers, supplies, and 
mail across thousands of miles of rugged, remote coun- 
try. Anchorage is a major air terminal. It serves as one of 
the world’s busiest cargo hubs. Other major airports are 
at Juneau and Fairbanks. 

Alaska depends on container ship service for most of 





gNatural gas 


Coal, 
Petroleum 





Natural gas® 






Natural gase - 


eat = = { 


Sr ee 








its trade with the “lower 48. The state's chief ports in- 
clude Anchorage, Seward, Unalaska/Dutch Harbor, 
Valdez, and ports near Ketchikan and Kodiak. Nome, the 
main port on the Bering Sea, is blocked by ice in winter. 

Alaska has an outstanding ferryliner system owned by 
the state. Three main routes serve coastal areas. In the 
southeast, huge ferryliners, each carrying as many as 
108 cars, stop at several cities between Haines and Skag- 
way in the north and Bellingham, Washington, and 
Prince Rupert, British Columbia, in the south. The Kodiak 
Island Ferry connects Seward, Kodiak, Homer, Valdez, 
and Cordova. The Prince William Sound ferryliner serv- 
ice links Valdez, Cordova, and Whittier. 


Alaska 299 


A salmon catch is unloaded 
at Annette Island. Fish prod- 
ucts rank among Alaska’s 
leading manufactured goods. 
Alaska leads the states in the 
value of fish caught by the 
commercial fishing industry. 


Terry Domico, Earth Images 


Communication. The first public newspaper in Alas- 
ka, the Sitka Times, began publication in Sitka in 1868. 
Today, Alaska has about 35 newspapers, of which 6 are 
dailies. The leading daily newspapers published in Alas- 
ka include the Anchorage Daily News, Fairbanks Daily 
News-Miner, and Juneau Empire. 

The first radio station in Alaska, KFQD, started broad- 
casting from Anchorage in 1924. The state’s first televi- 
sion stations, KTVA-TV and KFIA-TV (now KENI-TV), be- 
gan operating in 1953, also in Anchorage. Today, the 
state has about 75 radio stations and 15 television sta- 
tions. Cable television systems and Internet providers 
serve most of Alaska’s communities. 


Government 


Constitution. Alaska’s present Constitution was 
adopted in 1956, three years before the territory became 
a state. A constitutional amendment must be approved 
by two-thirds of the members of each house of the state 
legislature. Then it must be approved by a majority of 
voters in a statewide election. 

Amendments may also be proposed by a constitution- 
al convention. The convention must be approved by a 
majority of each house of the legislature. It must then be 
approved by a majority of the people who vote on the 
issue in an election. All amendments proposed by the 
convention must be approved by the voters. If no con- 
vention has been held in a 10-year period, the question 
of calling a convention must be put to the voters. 

Executive. The governor of Alaska is elected to a 
four-year term and cannot serve more than two terms in 
a row. Alaska’s lieutenant governor is the only other 
elected state official. He or she is elected to a four-year 
term and can be reelected any number of times. 

The state's other top executive officials include 13 
commissioners, each of whom heads one of Alaska’s 15 
executive departments. Alaska also has an attorney gen- 


eral, who heads the Department of Law, and an adjutant 
general, who heads the Department of Military and Vet- 
erans Affairs. The governor appoints these two officials 
and the 13 commissioners with the approval of a majori- 
ty of the legislators voting in a joint session. 

Legislature consists of a 20-member Senate and a 40- 
member House of Representatives. One senator is elect- 
ed from each senatorial district. Each representative dis- 
trict elects one representative. Each senator serves a 
four-year term. Each representative serves a two-year 
term. 

The legislature holds a regular session every year. The 
sessions begin on the second Monday in January, ex- 
cept in years following gubernatorial elections—when 
they begin on the third Monday in January. The length 
of the sessions is limited to 120 days. The legislature or 
governor may call a 30-day special session. 

Courts. The highest court in Alaska is the state 
Supreme Court. It nas five justices, one of whom is cho- 
sen by the other justices to serve a three-year term as 
chiet justice. The Supreme Court concentrates on civil 
matters but has ultimate authority in all cases. 


300 Alaska 


The Court of Appeals, which has three judges, is the 
second-highest court for criminal matters. The Superior 
Court, Alaska’s second-highest court for civil cases, has 
32 judges. It is divided into four districts. District courts 
handle some civil and criminal cases. Seventeen district 
court judges serve in Alaska's four judicial districts. The 
Court of Appeals has jurisdiction to review district court 
decisions. 

The governor appoints the Supreme Court justices 
and the Superior Court and Court of Appeals judges 
from people nominated by the Alaska Judicial Council. 
This council consists of the chief justice and six private 
citizens. After serving three years, a Supreme Court jus- 
tice or Superior Court or Court of Appeals judge must 
be approved by the voters in the next general election. 
Each Supreme Court justice must be reapproved every 
10 years. Superior Court judges must be reapproved 
every 6 years, and Court of Appeals judges every 8 
years. 

The governor appoints district court judges from can- 
didates recommended by the Alaska Judicial Council. 
Voters must approve such judges in the first general 
election held more than two years after their appoint- 
ment, and every four years thereafter. 

Local government. Alaska is divided into 16 local 
government units called organized boroughs. Organ- 
ized boroughs are incorporated areas that may include 
cities, suburbs, and rural areas. They are equivalent to 
counties in other states. Each borough is governed by 
an assembly of from 5 to 11 members. Jn most bor- 
oughs, the top administrative officer is a mayor elected 
by the people. A borough may instead have a manager 
appointed by the assembly. Other borough officials are 
appointed by the mayor or the manager. Organized bor- 
oughs cover only about 44 percent of Alaska. However, 
they have about 85 percent of the population. The rest of 





the state is called the unorganized borough. \t is gov- 
erned by the Legislature. 

Alaska's cities use a mayor-council or city-manager 
form of government All of the cities have elected city 
councils. 

Revenue. Much of the income of Alaska’s govern- 
ment comes directly from oil and gas production. Petro- 
leum companies pay the state production taxes and roy- 
alties, a share of their profits. In addition, the state 
receives revenue from taxes on corporate income, mo- 
tor fuels, and property. Alaska also gets money from 
federal grants and other U.S. government programs. The 
state has no personal income tax or sales tax. 

Politics. Fewer contests take place between political 
parties in Alaska than in most other states. Almost all of 
Alaska's state and local government officials are appoint- 
ed or are elected on a nonpartisan (no-party) basis. The 
state's elections for governor have resulted in several 
victories for both Democrats and Republicans. Jn elec- 
tions for president, Alaska’s voters have favored the Re- 
publican candidate almost every time. For Alaska's elec- 
toral votes and voting record in presidential elections, 
see Electoral College (table). 


History 


Early days. No one knows exactly how long human 
beings have lived in America. But most scientists believe 
that the first Americans walked across a land bridge 
from Asia into what is now Alaska about 15,000 years 
ago. In the 1700's, when whites first arrived in the Alas- 
kan region, three groups of people—Inuit, Aleuts, and 
Indians—were living there. 

The Inuit lived in the Far North and West. From Alas- 
kas north coast to Greenland, Inuit hunted such large 
sea mammals as whales, seals, and polar bears. Some 
small groups of Inuit inhabited inland areas and hunted 
caribou. 

The Aleuts, closely related to the Inuit, lived on the 
Aleutian Islands and the Alaska Peninsula. The Aleuts 
were skillful sea hunters. 

The largest Indian groups, the Tlingit and Haida, lived 
along the coast, where fish and game were plentiful. 
Some Tsimshian Indians also lived there. The Athabas- 
kan Indians lived in the interior, a rugged region with- 
out the rich natural resources of the coast. The Athabas- 
kans fished and hunted caribou. 

European exploration. The Russians were the first 
Europeans to become interested in the Alaskan region. 
In 1648, a group of Russians, led by Semen I. Dezhnev, 





Anchorage Museum of History and Art 


Totem poles carved by the Haida Indians stand at Kasaan, on 
Prince of Wales Island. Totem poles are a traditional Indian art 
form in the Pacific Northwest. They symbolize tribes or families. 





sailed through the strait separating northeastern Asia 
and northwestern North America. In 1725, Czar Peter the 
Great of Russia commissioned Vitus Bering, a Danish 
navigator, to explore the North Pacific region. Bering 
and his crew traveled more than 6,000 miles (9,700 kilo- 
meters) across Russia and Asia. Then they built a ship 
and in 1728 sailed through the strait navigated earlier by 
Dezhnev. This body of water later became known as the 
Bering Strait. But Bering did not sight the North Ameri- 
can mainland because of fog. 

In 1741, Bering and Aleksei Chirikov, a Russian ex- 
plorer, led a second expedition to the region. Bering’s 
party sighted Mount St. Elias in southeastern Alaska and 
landed on what is now Kayak Island. 

Expeditions from England, France, and Spain soon 
reached Alaskan waters. Most of these explorers sought 
a sea route between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. 

The Russian era. Members of the second Bering ex- 
pedition returned to Russia with sea otter furs. Russian 
traders and hunters then developed a brisk fur trade on 
the Aleutian Islands and later on the mainland. Fur trad- 
ers enslaved the Aleuts and, by overhunting, nearly de- 
stroyed populations of fur-bearing animals in the Aleu- 
tians. In 1784, Gregory Shelikof, a trader, established the 
first white settlement in Alaska, then called Russian 
America, on Kodiak Island. 

In 1799, Russia chartered the Russian-American Com- 
pany, a trading firm. Alexander Baranof became the 
firm's chief manager. Baranof moved the company’s 
headquarters to Novo Arkhangelsk (New Archangel, 
now Sitka), which he captured from the Tlingit Indians. 
Novo Arkhangelsk became the largest town in Russian 
America. Baranof managed company affairs profitably 
for the stockholders, and he established good relations 
with many native groups. The Russian-American Com- 
pany sent Russian Orthodox priests to convert the native 
Alaskans to Christianity. 

In 1818, Baranof retired, and the company began to 
lose money. Russian naval commanders then ruled the 
colony. 

In 1824 and 1825, Russia signed separate treaties with 
the United States and Great Britain. These pacts recog- 
nized latitude 54°40’ as the southern boundary of Rus- 
sian territory in America. As part of the agreements, 
Russia gave the United States and Britain trading rights 
along Alaska’s Pacific Coast. 

American purchase. The Russians tried to develop 
several industries, including coal mining, shipbuilding, 
and whale hunting. But by the 1850's the fur trade had 
declined and the company’s other enterprises had 
begun to fail. After the Crimean War (1853-1856) weak- 
ened Russia, the country became eager to sell Alaska. 
United States Secretary of State William H. Seward 
agreed to buy the region for $7,200,000, about 2 cents 
per acre (5 cents per hectare). On March 30, 1867, he 
signed the Treaty of Cession of Russian America to the 
United States. Some Americans opposed the purchase. 
They called Alaska such names as Seward's Folly, Sew- 
ard'’s Icebox, and Icebergia. But many Americans fa- 
vored the acquisition. Congress approved the purchase, 
and American troops raised the U.S. flag at Sitka on Oct. 
18, 1867. 

Congress did not provide for an Alaskan government 
during the next 17 years. Alaska was administered first 


Alaska 301 


by the War Department, next by the Treasury Depart- 
ment, and then by the Navy Department. These three 
agencies had little interest in the local problems of the 
region. 

A few American companies became interested in 
Alaska’s rich salmon fisheries. In 1878, they built the first 
canneries in Alaska. 

In 1884, Congress passed the first Organic Act. This 
act established Alaska as a “civil and judicial district.” It 
provided for a governor, a code of laws, and a federal 
court. But the laws were the laws of Oregon, and they 
were not adapted to Alaskan conditions. Congress kept 
the power to make laws for Alaska. 

The gold rush. In 1880, Joseph Juneau and Richard T. 
Harris discovered gold deposits along Gastineau Chan- 
nel in southeastern Alaska. This discovery led to the 
founding of the city of Juneau. In 1896, prospectors 
found rich gold deposits in the Klondike district of Cana- 
das Yukon region, just across the border from Alaska. 
The discovery led to the Klondike and Alaska gold rush 
of 1897-1898. Miners discovered gold at what is now 
Nome in 1898 and in the Fairbanks area in 1902. The 
three gold discoveries attracted thousands of people 
hoping to strike it rich and aroused nationwide interest 
in Alaska. Alaska’s population nearly doubled in 10 
years, reaching 63,592 by 1900. 

The early 1900's. The gold discoveries focused con- 
gressional attention on Alaska. In 1903, a group of U.S. 
senators toured the territory to learn of Alaska’s needs. 
They recommended that the government construct a 
system of transportation routes there. Congress then 
created a Board of Road Commissioners for Alaska, 
which built and maintained wagon roads, trails, bridges, 
and ferries throughout the territory. 

In 1906, Congress allowed Alaskans to elect their own 
delegate to Congress. They chose Frank H. Waskey, a 
Democrat. He could speak in the House of Representa- 
tives but was not allowed to vote. During this period, 
James W. Wickersham, a federal judge, rallied Alaskans 
to the cause of more self-government for Alaska. In 
1908, Wickersham was elected Alaska’s delegate to Con- 
gress. In 1912, Congress passed the second Organic Act, 
which gave Alaska a territorial legislature with limited 
powers. 

The Alaska Native Brotherhood (ANB) was formed in 
1913. It was joined by the Alaska Native Sisterhood two 
years later. These organizations sought to unite the na- 
tive communities of the region and fought for the politi- 
cal interests of its members. The groups helped achieve 
voting rights, integrated classrooms, and other civil 
rights for Alaska’s native peoples. 

In 1929, the ANB enlisted Wickersham to pursue a 
settlement for native lands seized by the federal govern- 
ment. Wickersham failed to persuade Congress to rec- 
ognize native land claims. But the work of his succes- 
sors and native groups eventually led to the Alaska 
Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971. 

World War 1 (1939-1945) caused great changes in 
Alaska. The United States recognized the military impor- 
tance of the territory, which lay close to Asia, and sent 
thousands of workers there to build and maintain mili- 
tary installations. In 1942, the Japanese bombed Dutch 
Harbor in the Aleutian Islands and occupied Kiska and 
Attu, two islands in the chain. These islands were the 


302 


°Historic “Alaska 


Alaska 





The Bering Strait, which separates Alaska 
from Russia, was named after Danish naviga- 
tor Captain Vitus Bering, who explored the 
waters around Alaska in the early 1700's. 


The Gold Rush of 1897 and 1898 
began after the discovery of gold 
in the Yukon, just across the bor- 
der from Alaska. Gold was later 
found near what are now Nome 









and Fairbanks. 





The Russian-American Company, chartered in 1799, pros- 
pered in the fur trade under Alexander Baranof, its first man- 
ager. The company was based in what is today Sitka. 


Important dates in Alaska 


1741 The second Vitus Bering expedition landed on what is 
now Kayak Island. 

1784 Russians established the first white settlement in Alas- 
ka, on Kodiak Island. 

1824-1825 Russia agreed to recognize latitude 54°40’ as the 
southern boundary of Alaska. 

1867 The United States purchased Alaska from Russia. 

1884 Congress gave Alaska laws and a federal court. 

1897-1898 The Klondike and Alaska gold rush started. 

1906 Alaskans elected their first delegate to the U.S. Con- 
gress. 

1912 Congress established Alaska as a US. territory. 

1942 The Japanese bombed Dutch Harbor and invaded the 
Aleutians. The Alaska Highway was completed. 

1958 Congress approved Alaskan statehood on June 30. 





The U.S. bought Alaska 
from Russia in 1867. Secretary 
of State William H. Seward 
paid $7,200,000 for the region. 












The Alaska National Interest Lands Conser- 
vation Act of 1980 set aside about 104 million 
acres (42 million hectares) as national parks, 
wildlife refuges, and other conservation areas. 


WORLD BOOK tllustrations by Kevin Chadwick 


1959 Alaska became the 49th state on January 3. 

1968 Large oil reserves were discovered near Prudhoe Bay. 

1971 Congress passed the Alaska Native Claims Settlement 
Act, giving 44 million acres (18 million hectares) of land 
to native Alaskans. 

1977 Workers completed construction of a pipeline to carry 
oil from Prudhoe Bay to Valdez. 

1980 Congress passed the Alaska National Interest Lands 
Conservation Act, which placed about a fourth of the 
state's land in the National Park System. 

1989 The Exxon Valdez dumped nearly 11 million gallons (42 
million liters) of oil into Prince William Sound in the 
largest oil spill in United States history. 

1992 Most of the Exxon Valdez oil-spill cleanup was com- 
pleted at a cost of more than $2 billion. 





I - pai) “essa Wii Pog 









| 


‘" 


only part of North America invaded during World War 
ll. The government built the Alaska Highway in 1942, 
mainly as a military supply road. In 1943, about 152,000 
military personnel were stationed in Alaska. United 
States troops recovered Kiska and Attu later that year, 
and the war in Alaska ended. But the military impact al- 
tered the territory forever. 

Statehood. The war led to demands that Congress 
admit the territory to statehood. The first Alaskan state- 
hood bill was introduced in Congress in 1916, but it did 
not receive a hearing. Other statehood bills were intro- 
duced from the mid-1940s until 1958. In 1958, Congress 
voted to admit Alaska to the Union. On Jan. 3, 1959, Pres- 
ident Dwight D. Eisenhower signed the proclamation 
declaring Alaska the 49th state. Alaska became the first 
new state since 1912. William A. Egan, a Democrat, be- 
came the first elected governor of Alaska. 





wert 
{tae 33 s 4 


a 


{¥ 


mi Cited State S) owt ts 


Non 
pasting! Gy fa Jf fed 
| tt SHIA: Yay % QR nh 0 Boma 
phd rt A F x / ffs 4 
TIS athens 





Alaska 303 





G A U.S. Treasury warrant for 

“4 | $7,200,000 was used to pur- 
' 
) 
' 


= ere chase Alaska from Russia in 
fa, yp es 1867. The price came to about 
. 2 cents per acre (5 cents per 
) ye Ci APOWMANS hectarel. 





‘ fhe Mon “ fA 
4, 4 -— 


AZ, 
‘ i = 


{ 
Li ipisfes Sf Met A ttidtt VA | 
National Archives 


Alaska found its first years of statehood difficult and 
costly. It had to take over the expenses of public serv- 
ices that the federal government had provided. Con- 
gress helped by giving Alaska some buildings, transition 
grants, and other funding. Alaska also received funds 
from the lease of public lands and the right to claim 
103.5 million acres (41.9 million hectares) of federal land 
over a 25-year period. State selection of lands began 
soon afterward. Alaska’s Inuit and Indians, however, pro- 
tested the selection process. They charged that the 
process did not recognize their claims of ownership or 
their traditional way of life, in which small bands moved 
over large areas hunting, fishing, and gathering food. 
These and other issues spurred the formation of the 
Alaska Federation of Natives (AFN) in 1966. The organiza- 
tion included representatives from nearly every group 
of native people and helped lead the fight for a full set- 


Marshal Lockman, Black Star 





A massive earthquake 
rocked Alaska on March 27, 
1964. In Anchorage, the city 
hit hardest by the quake, 
buildings crumbled and pave- 
ment fell 30 feet (9 meters} in 
a few seconds. The earth- 
quake was one of the most 
powerful ever recorded on 
the North American continent. 


304 Alaska 





Terry Domico, Earth Images 


Construction of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline began in 1974 and 
was completed in 1977. The pipeline carries oil from Prudhoe 
Bay to the port of Valdez, a distance of about 800 miles (1,300 
kilometers). It cost about $8 billion to build. 


tlement of Alaska native land claims. 

During the 1960's, the state improved its transporta- 
tion facilities. It developed a state ferry system, the “Ma- 
rine Highway,’ to serve coastal cities. 

In 1964, one of the biggest earthquakes ever known to 
hit North America shook the area around Anchorage 
and Valdez. It measured 8.3 on the Richter scale. The 
quake and tsunamis (huge, destructive waves) that it 
caused killed 131 people and resulted in more than 
$400 million in property damage. 

The discovery of oil. In 1968, the Atlantic Richfield 
Company announced the discovery of a giant oil field at 
Prudhoe Bay on the Arctic Coastal Plain. It was one of 
the greatest oil discoveries in history. This oil field has 
the largest reserves of oil in North America. In 1969, 
Alaska auctioned oil and gas leases on the field's 450,000 
acres (182,000 hectares) and earned over $900 million. 
Construction of a pipeline to carry oil about 800 miles 
(1,300 kilometers) across the state, from Prudhoe Bay to 
the port of Valdez, began in 1974. The pipeline was com- 
pleted in 1977 at a total cost of about $8 billion, and oil 
production began. 

The development of the Prudhoe Bay oil field provid- 
ed new jobs and greatly increased state revenues dur- 
ing the late 1970's and early 1980's. In 1976, Alaska’s vot- 
ers had approved an amendment to the state Constitu- 
tion that created the Alaska Permanent Fund, a savings 
account that belongs to all the people of Alaska. The 
amendment calls for at least 25 percent of all money 
earned by mineral development to be deposited into 
this fund. In 1980, the high revenues created by the oil 
boom enabled the state government to abolish individ- 
ual state income taxes. In 1982, every Alaskan resident of 


six months or more began receiving dividend payments 
from the Alaska Permanent Fund. Each year, 50 percent 
of the fund's earnings, averaged over a 5-year period, 
are distributed equally to eligible Alaskans. 

Land-use issues. From 1971 to 1980, the federal gov- 
ernment set aside large amounts of land for native Alas- 
kans and for conservation purposes. In 1971, President 
Richard M. Nixon signed the Alaska Native Claims Settle- 
ment Act. This revolutionary measure gave $962.5 mil- 
lion and about 44 million acres (18 million hectares) of 
land to the state's Inuit and Indians. The act created 12 
regional corporations to administer the money and the 
land. A 13th corporation was added later. Every Alaskan 
Inuit and Indian received shares in the corporations. 

In 1978, 56 million acres (23 million hectares) of Alas- 
kan land were set aside as national monuments. In 1980, 
Congress passed the Alaska National Interest Lands 
Conservation Act. This act added more than 104 million 
acres (42 million hectares) to the conservation system in 
Alaska. The measure established the boundaries for a 
widespread network of federal, state, native, and private 
lands. 

The 1980 conservation act gave rural Alaskans priority 
in hunting and fishing for food on federal lands. Many 
urban Alaskans who hunt and fish for sport complained 
that these provisions discriminated against them. Dis- 
putes over hunting and fishing rights led to increasing 
racial tensions between urban whites and rural native 
people. During the 1990's, when Alaskans still failed to 
comply with the provisions of the act, the federal gov- 
ernment took over fish and game management on these 
lands. 

Recent developments. In 1989, an oil tanker, the 
Exxon Valdez, struck a reef in Prince William Sound in 
southeastern Alaska, causing the largest oil spill in 
United States history. Nearly 11 million gallons (42 mil- 
lion liters) of crude oil spilled into the sound. The oil 
polluted beaches and fishing waters and destroyed 
wildlife. Most of the cleanup work at the sound was 
completed in 1992 at a cost of more than $2 billion. But 
scientists continue to work toward restoring the ecolog- 
ical balance of the area. In 1998, the Alaska SeaLife Cen- 
ter opened in Seward, Alaska. Much of the center's con- 
struction was funded by money from a settlement in the 
Exxon Valdez case. F. Patrick Fitzgerald and Claus-M. Naske 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Biographies 
Bartlett, Edward L Gruening, Ernest Seward, 
Bering, Vitus Muir, John William H. 
Cities and towns 
Anchorage Juneau Nome 
Fairbanks Ketchikan Sitka 
History 
Gold rush State, Department of (picture: 
Haida Indians Secretary of State William 
Klondike H. Seward) 


Tlingit Indians 


Physical features 


Mount McKinley 
Pacific Ocean 

Pribilof Islands 

Saint Elias Mountains 
Yukon River 


Aleutian Islands 
Arctic Ocean 
Bering Sea 
Coast Ranges 
Inside Passage 





nt ee 


Other related articles 


Alaska Highway Iditarod 
Aleuts Inuit 
Arctic Kenai Fjords National Park 


Denali National Park 
Gates of the Arctic National 
Park 


Kobuk Valley National Park 
Lake Clark National Park 
Wrangell-St Elias National 


Glacier (picture) Park 
Outline 
I. People 
A. Population C. Libraries and museums 
B. Schools 


Il. Visitor’s guide 
A. Places to visit 
iil. Land and climate 
A. Land regions 


B. Annual events 


D. Rivers and lakes 


B. Federally protected E. Glaciers 
lands F. Plant and animal life 
C Coastline G. Climate 
IV. Economy 
A. Natural resources G. Agriculture 
B. Service industries H. Fur industry 


C Mining I. Electric power 
D. Manufacturing J. Transportation 
E. Fishing industry K. Communication 


F. Forestry 
V. Government 
A. Constitution E. Local government 
B. Executive F. Revenue 
C Legislature G. Politics 
D. Courts 
Vi. History 
Questions 


What is Alaska’s “Marine Highway”? 

What are the basic units of local government? 

Why do summer crops ripen quickly in central Alaska? 

What is Alaska’s most valuable mineral? What had been the 
state's most valuable mineral for many years? 

What three groups of people lived in Alaska before Europeans 
arrived? 

What part in Alaskan history was played by Vitus Bering? By 
William H. Seward? 

What is the highest peak in North America? How high above sea 
level does it reach? 

What part of Alaska was the only part of North America invaded 
during World War Il? 

Why did Alaska abolish its state income tax in 1980? 


Additional resources 


Level I 

Brown, Tricia. /ditarod Country- Exploring the Route of the Last 
Great Race. Epicenter Pr., 1998. 

Cohen, Daniel. The Alaska Purchase. Millbrook, 1996. 

Jones, Charlotte F. Yukon Gold: The Story of the Klondike Gold 
Rush. Holiday Hse., 1999. 

Miiler, Debbie S. River of Life. Clarion, 2000. Describes life in and 
around an Alaskan river. 

Staub, Frank J. Children of the Tlingit Carolrhoda, 1998. 

Walsh Shepherd, Donna. A/aska. Children’s Pr., 1999. 


Level Il 

Alaska Atlas & Gazetteer. 2nd ed. DeLorme Mapping, 1998. 

Andrews, Susan B., and Creed, John, eds. Authentic Alaska: Voic- 
es of Its Native Writers. Univ. of Neb. Pr., 1998. 

Haycox, Stephen W., and Mangusso, M. C, eds. Alaska Antholo- 
gy: Interpreting the Past Univ. of Wash. Pr., 1996. 

Naske, Claus-M., and Slotnick, H. E. A/aska. 2nd ed. 1987. Reprint 
Univ. of Okla. Pr., 1994. 

Wolfe, Art, and Jans, Nick. A/aska. Sasquatch Bks., 2000. 


Alaska, University of, is a state-supported system of 
higher education. The system includes three multicam- 
pus universities, one community college, and a network 
of services for rural Alaska. The multicampus universt- 


Albacore 305 


ties offer developmental, vocational, certificate, associ- 
ate, undergraduate, and graduate degree programs. 
These schools are the University of Alaska Anchorage, 
which includes Kenai Peninsula College, Kodiak College, 
Matanuska-Susitna College, and Prince William Sound 
Community College; the University of Alaska Fairbanks, 
with campuses in Bethel, Dillingham, Fairbanks, Kotze- 
bue, and Nome; and the University of Alaska Southeast, 
with campuses in Juneau, Ketchikan, and Sitka. The uni- 
versity was founded in 1917 in Fairbanks. 

Critically reviewed by the University of Alaska 
Alaska Highway is a 1,397-mile (2,248-kilometer) road 
that runs between Dawson Creek, British Columbia, and 
Delta Junction, Alaska. The Richardson Highway links 
Delta Junction and nearby Fairbanks. The Alaska High- 
way is the only highway that connects Alaska with the 
road systems of the other states and Canada. 

United States Army engineers and civilian contractors 
built the Alaska Highway as a military supply route in 
1942 and 1943, when the United States was fighting in 
World War II. The highway was originally known as the 
Alcan Highway. The highway’s original length was 1,422 
miles (2,288 kilometers). The southern 1,221 miles (1,965 
kilometers) of the road that crosses Canada became the 
property of Canada on April 1, 1946. Reconstruction has 
shortened the length in Canada to 1,196 miles (1,925 kilo- 
meters). Some of the highway has a gravel surface, but 
most of it now has a higher grade of pavement. 

John C Hudson 
Alaskan malamute is a strong, rugged sled dog that 
came originally from Alaska. The dog is large and com- 
pactly built, and its thick coat usually is wolf-gray or 
black and white, with darker markings on the head. The 
malamute carries its bushy tail over its back. When it 
sleeps, the Alaskan malamute curls up so that its tail cov- 
ers its nose. Most malamutes weigh from 75 to 85 
pounds (34 to 39 kilograms). A group of Inuit people 
called Malemiuts developed the breed. The Inuit are 
also known as Eskimos. See also Dog (picture: Working 
dogs); Sled dog. Critically reviewed by the American Kennel Club 
Alateen. See Al-Anon. 

AkAzhar University is one of the oldest universities 
in the world. The university was founded about A.D. 970 
in Cairo, Egypt, and is a center of Islamic learning. Al- 
Azhar University offers courses in Islamic theology, Is- 
lamic law, Arabic studies, medicine, engineering, and 
agriculture. About 90,000 students attend the university, 
which has two major campuses in the Cairo area and 
four campuses in other cities of Egypt. P. A. McGinley 
Alba, AL buh or AHL bah, Duke of (1508?-15822), also 
called the Duke of Alva, was a Spanish general and dip- 
lomat who served Kings Charles | and Philip II of Spain. 
In 1567, Philip made Alba governor of the Netherlands 
and ordered him to crush a revolt that had broken out 
there against Spain. Alba’s court sentenced about 1,200 
rebels to death and was called the Council of Blood. His 
brutality and harsh taxes only made Netherlanders more 
determined to be free. Patriots seized the major coast 
towns and attacked Spanish shipping. They cut the 
dikes, and the floodwaters stopped Alba's army. Alba re- 
turned to Spain in disgrace. But in 1580, he helped Philip 
conquer Portugal. The duke’s full name was Fernando 
Alvarez de Toledo. Carla Rahn Phillips and William D. Phillips, Jr. 
Albacore. See Tuna. 


306 Albania 


Albania is a small, mountainous nation in the Balkan 
Peninsula of southeastern Europe. It is one of the least 
developed countries in Europe. Most of the people 
make their living through agriculture. 

Albania’s name in Albanian, the official language, is 
Shqipéria, which means The Land of the Eagle. The 
country’s full, official name is Republika e Shqipérisé 
(Republic of Albania). Tirané is its capital and largest city. 

Albania was part of the Ottoman Empire for over 400 
years. It gained its independence in 1912. From 1944 un- 
til the early 1990's, Albania was a Communist Country. 

Government. A president serves as the head of state 
in Albania and is the nation’s most powerful official. A 
prime minister serves as head of government and pre- 
sides over a cabinet, which helps carry out the functions 
of the government. 


Albania 















International boundary 
Road 

Railroad 

National! capital 

Other city or town 


Elevation above sea level 





Kuravastas Lug 


AUINS OF — y, 
APOLLONIA.. §F . 


| \ 
ana 


-- G4 
Viore | 
ae f i 















Nartes Lage 
Sazan~ 
Cape Gjuhezes 


— A a 
Gulf of \Gures “a 





40° North Latitude 
Erikousa 


Othonoi 






Karousadhes 






Corfu . 
Kerkira 


WORLD BOOK maps 


Albania’s parliament, which is called the National As- 
sembly, has one house of 140 members. The National 
Assembly elects the president, who then appoints the 
prime minister and the cabinet. Members of the Nation- 
al Assembly are elected by the people to four-year 
terms. 

The country is divided into 27 rrethe (districts). These 
districts are further divided into gytete (towns) and, in 
the rural areas, fshatra té bashkuara (united villages). A 
people's council governs each of Albania’s districts, 
towns, and united villages. 

People. Albanians are divided into two major 
groups—the Ghegs and the Tosks—according to which 
Albanian dialect they speak. Most of the Ghegs live 
north of the Shkumbin (also spelled Shkumbi) River, and 
most of the Tosks live south of the river. A few Greeks 
live in the regions that adjoin Greece. 

Most of the people live on farms or in rural villages. A 
few Albanians along the Adriatic coast earn their living 
by fishing. There are only 12 cities in Albania that have 
populations of more than 20,000. 

Living standards in Albania are extremely low com- 
pared with those of other European countries. The in- 
comes of most Albanians are small, but health care, so- 
cial services, and education are free. Bread, vegetables, 
and such dairy products as cheese and milk make up 
the daily diet of most of the people. 

Many Albanians are Muslims. Others belong to East- 
ern Orthodox Churches, and some are Roman Catholics. 

All of Albania’s children must complete eight years of 
school. The University of Tirané is the country’s largest 
university. For Albania’s literacy rate, see Literacy (Litera- 
cy rates for selected countries). 

Land. Mountains cover most of Albania. The North 
Albanian Alps tower about 8,500 feet (2,590 meters) 
above sea level. Mount Korabit (9,026 feet, or 2,751 me- 
ters), in the northeastern part of the country, is Albania‘s 
highest point. A coastal plain lies along the Adriatic Sea. 
Scrub forests cover about 30 percent of the country. 

Albania’s major rivers, the Buné, Drin, Shkumbin, and 
Vjosé, all empty into the Adriatic Sea However, the 
Buné is the only river that can be used for shipping. Al- 
bania shares Lake Scutari (also called Lake Skhodra) with 
Yugoslavia, Lake Ohrid with Macedonia, and Lake Pres- 
pa with Macedonia and Greece. 

Along the Adriatic, the climate is mild, with hot, dry 
summers and rainy winters. The mountains have a mod- 


Facts in brief 


Capital: Tirané. 

Official language: Albanian. 

Area: 11,100 mi? (28,748 km’). Greatest distances—north-south, 
215 mi (346 km); east-west, 90 mi (145 km). Coast/ine—175 mi 
(282 km). 

Population: Estimated 2002 population—3,152,000; density, 284 
per mi’ (110 per km); distribution, 54 percent rural, 46 percent 
urban. 1989 census—3,182,400. 

Chief products: Agnculture—corn, potatoes, sugar beets, 
wheat. Mining—chromite, copper, petroleum. 
Manutacturing—cement, fertilizers, food products, textiles. 

Flag: A two-headed black eagle appears on a red field. See Flag 
(picture: Flags of Europe). 

Money: Basic unit—lek. One hundred qindarka equal one lek 


a 





erate climate. The country’s average annual rainfall 
varies from 40 to 60 inches (100 to 150 centimeters). 

Economy. The government owns many businesses in 
Albania, especially mines and large factories. But most 
farms and small businesses are privately owned. 

Agriculture employs more Albanians than any other 
economic activity. The country's chief crops include 
corn, grapes, olives, potatoes, sugar beets, and wheat. 
Farmers also raise such livestock as cattle, goats, poultry, 
and sheep. 

Albania is rich in mineral resources, and mining ranks 
as the country's leading industrial activity. Albania‘'s 
mines produce chromite, copper, lignite, nickel, and 
other minerals. The country also produces natural gas 
and petroleum. Albania has relatively few factories. Its 
factory products include cement, fertilizers, food prod- 
ucts, and textiles. 

Albania's exports include chromite, copper ore, fruits 
and vegetables, nickel, and petroleum. Farm and indus- 
trial machinery and mining equipment are among its 
chief imports. 

Buses, bicycles, and trains are common means of 
transportation in Albania. Private ownership of automo- 
biles was illegal until 1991. Albania’s railroad network 
connects Tirané and Durrés—the country’s chief port— 
with such important industrial centers as Elbasan, Fier, 
Shkodér, and Vloré. A small airport outside Tirané links 
Albania with several European countries. 

History. About 300 B.C, the Illyrian kingdom covered 
much of what is now Albania. Greece also had colonies 
in Albania then, and Greek civilization influenced the Il- 
lyrians. In 167 B.C, Roman forces conquered the Illyrians 
and spread Roman civilization into Albania. When the 
Roman Empire split in A.D. 395, much of Albania became 
part of the Eastern Roman, or Byzantine, Empire. Be- 





Albania 307 


tween the 300's and 1000's, Goths, Bulgarians, Slavs, and 
Normans invaded Albania. Southern Albania was part of 
the Byzantine Empire until 1204. During the 1300's, much 
of Albania became part of the Serbian Empire. 

Ottoman rule. The Albanians long resisted attempts 
by the Ottoman Empire to take over the country. The 
most distinguished leader against the Ottomans was 
Scanderbeg {also spelled Skanderbeg or Skénderbeg), 
who became Albania's national hero. After Scanderbeg’s 
death in 1468, the Ottomans conquered Albania, and it 
became part of the Ottoman Empire. However, during 
more than 400 years of Ottoman rule, Albanian chiefs 
controlled most local matters. Many Albanians became 
Muslims during this period. 

Independence. A number of local uprisings took 
place in Albania during the Ottoman rule, but a national- 
ist movement did not develop in the country until the 
1800's. In 1878, a group of Albanian leaders organized 
the League of Prizren, which called for Albanian self- 
government within the Ottoman Empire. But Albania re- 
mained under Ottoman rule until 1912, when it gained 
independence during the First Balkan War. In 1913, the 
great European powers established Albania’s borders, 
and the country became a self-governing principality. 
The European powers selected William of Wied, a Ger- 
man prince, as ruler. But he ruled for only a few months. 

Austro-Hungarians, Italians, Serbs, and French occu- 
pied Albania during World War | (1914-1918). The Italians 
remained until 1920, when Albania insisted on its inde- 
pendence. Ahmed Beg Zogu seized power in 1925, pro- 
claimed Albania a republic, and became the country’s 
first president. In 1928, Zogu made himself King Zog I. 
He ruled until 1939. 

World War Il. \taly invaded Albania in April 1939 and 
made the nation part of the Italian Empire. World War II 


Ferdinando Scianna, Magnum 


Tirané is Albania's largest city. 
It has been the country’s capi- 
tal since 1920. Tirané’s central 
district, /eft, has many modern 
stone buildings. 


308 Albania 


began later that year. When Italy surrendered to the Al- 
lies in 1943, during the war, German troops occupied 
Albania. 

During World War Il, there were three main resist- 
ance movements in Albania: (1) a nationalist movement 
called Balli Kombetar, led by Midhat Frashéri; (2) a royal- 
ist group called the Legality Movement, headed by Abas 
Kupi; and (3) a Communist organization called the Na- 
tional Liberation Front (NLF), led by Enver Hoxha. These 
groups fought against one another as well as against the 
German occupation forces. 

Communist control. \n 1944, the Germans were driven 
out of Albania, and the Communists gained control of 
the country. Hoxha established a Communist govern- 
ment at Tirané during that year, and he began ruling the 
country as first secretary of the Communist Party. The 
Communists greatly restricted the freedom of the peo- 
ple. 

The Communist Party in Yugoslavia had helped the 
Communists of Albania organize the NLF, and relations 
with Albania remained close until 1948. But in that year, 
a split developed between the Soviet Union and Yugo- 
Slavia. The split resulted in the expulsion of Yugoslavia 
from the Cominform, a Soviet-dominated organization 
of European Communist parties. The people of Albania 
supported the Soviet Union to free themselves from 
Yugoslav influence. They also hoped to obtain Soviet aid 
in gaining control of a part of Yugoslavia where Albani- 
ans lived. 

Albania’s close relations with the Soviet Union ended 
in the early 1960's. At that time, a break occurred be- 
tween the Soviet Union and China over the interpreta- 
tions of certain Communist teachings. In particular, Chi- 
na rejected the Soviet Union’s policy of coexistence with 
non-Communist countries. Albania supported China in 
the dispute. In 1961, Albania and the Soviet Union broke 
off relations. At about the same time, Albania limited its 
contact with most other nations. 





China provided Albania with technical assistance and 
other aid from the 1960's to the late 1970's. Albania then 
became China's only ally in Europe. Albanian delegates 
at the United Nations (UN) played a leading role in the 
efforts that led to China's admission to the UN in 1971. 

Relations between Albania and China became 
strained during the late 1970's. Albania’s leaders ac- 
cused China of abandoning Communist principles. They 
criticized China for improving relations with Yugoslavia 
and the United States. In 1978, China responded to these 
attacks by cutting off all aid to Albania. In the early 
1990's, Albania restored relations with the United States, 
improved relations with China, and increased its contact 
with other nations. In addition, Albania restored rela- 
tions with the Soviet Union prior to that country’s 
breakup in 1991. 

Hoxha died in 1985, after ruling Albania for more than 
40 years. Ramiz Alia succeeded Hoxha as first secretary 
of the Communist Party. Alia had been elected president 
of Albania in 1982, and he continued to serve as presi- 
dent Alias government introduced some social and 
economic reforms in an attempt to avoid the downfall 
suffered by other Communist governments in Eastern 
Europe in 1989. The government again allowed the pub- 
lic practice of religion. In 1967, the government had out- 
lawed all religious groups and seized their property. In 
1990, however, places of worship began to reopen. An- 
other reform called for paying workers bonuses to work 
harder and produce more goods as a way to ease short- 
ages. 

But the people felt that the reforms did not go far 
enough. In December 1990, Albanians staged protests to 
try to force the Communists from power. As a result, the 
Communists allowed the formation of new political par- 
ties. 

End of Communist rule. \n March 1991, multiparty na- 
tional elections were held. The Communists won a ma- 
jority of seats in the National Assembly and remained in 


Bruce Coleman Ltd 


ard 


Albanian peasants meet at a 
livestock market in a rural 
area. Farmers raise such live- 
stock as goats, shown here, 
cattle, poultry, and sheep. Al- 
bania’s farm crops include 
corn, grapes, olives, potatoes, 
sugar beets, and wheat. 










_ 4 
aly 


wo > *“ Pool r 
awn wr PRs 
& ru 
|) oe , 
WS 


— _ 


=" 
—— 
Sy 


=e eee SS 


Hutchison Library 


A statue of Scanderbeg, Albanias national hero, stands in 
Tirané. Scanderbeg led a resistance movement against the Ot- 
toman Empire during the 1400's. 


power. But protests against Communist rule continued, 
and the Communist prime minister and his cabinet were 
forced to resign in June. A temporary government made 
up of Communists and non-Communists, who had given 
up their party affiliations, was formed. Thousands of Al- 
banians fled the country to gain more freedom and es- 
Cape severe economic hardships. 

Parliamentary elections in March 1992 gave the Dem- 
ocratic Party a majority of seats. In April, Alia resigned as 
president The Assembly then elected Sali Berisha of the 
Democratic Party as president. Berisha supported the 
creation of a free-enterprise economy, and his govern- 
ment introduced a program for economic reform. 

In parliamentary elections held in 1996, the Democrat- 
ic Party again won a majority of seats in the National As- 
sembly. However, international observers criticized the 
elections for ballot fraud and other irregularities. 

ln January 1997, tens of thousands of Albanians staged 
violent protests across the country against Berisha’s 
government. The protests began after the collapse of in- 
vestment schemes in which hundreds of thousands of 
people lost their savings. Most investors blamed the 
government for not warning them against the risky in- 
vestments, and they claimed that the government profit- 
ed from the funds. Many people demanded Berisha s 
resignation. He remained in office but formed a coali- 
tion government and announced that elections would 
be held in June. But unrest continued to spread, and Al- 
bania fell into disorder. Thousands left the country. 

In April, the UN sent an international torce to oversee 
relief efforts and help restore order. In parliamentary 
elections held in June and July, the Socialist Party defeat- 
ed Berisha’s Democratic Party by a landslide. Socialist 


a gil 


Albany 309 


leader Rexhep Meidani became president. Some meas- 
ure of calm returned, and the UN force left in August 

Recent developments. |n 1998 and 1999, almost half a 
million ethnic Albanian refugees streamed into Albania 
from the Yugoslav province of Kosovo. They were flee- 
ing attacks by Serbian forces. With help from interna- 
tional organizations, Albania housed the refugees for 
several months until it was safe for them to return. 

In 1998, Albania adopted a new constitution. Meidani 
signed the constitution into law in November of that 
year. The Socialist Party retained control of parliament in 
elections in 2001. Sharon L Wolchik 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Adriatic Sea Hoxha, Enver 
Balkans lonian Sea 


Albany (pop. 95,658) is the capital of New York and one 
of the oldest cities in the United States. It was first set- 
tled in 1624 and became a city in 1686. Albany lies on the 
Hudson River in eastern New York and has an active 
port, though it is 150 miles (241 kilometers) from the At- 
lantic Ocean. The Hudson River has been cleaned out 
and deepened so that ocean ships can reach the city. 
For the location of Albany, see New York (political map). 

Description. Albany, the seat of Albany County, cov- 
ers 22 square miles (57 square kilometers) on the west 
bank of the Hudson River. The business district lies on a 
slope leading down to the river. The historic and inner- 
city neighborhoods cluster around the downtown area. 
In the 1900's, the city expanded westward, and newer, 
more prosperous neighborhoods lie mainly to the west 
and southwest Albany and two other cities—Schenec- 
tady and Troy—form a metropolitan area of 875,583 peo- 
ple. The area is often called the Capital Region. 

The State University of New York (SUNY) has its sys- 
tem headquarters downtown at SUNY Plaza. The Univer- 
sity at Albany, SUNY, has two campuses in the city. 
Other colleges inciude Albany College of Pharmacy, Al- 
bany Law School, Albany Medical College, the College 
of St Rose, and Russell Sage College. 

Points of interest in the city include the Albany Insti- 
tute of History and Art; the Ten Broeck, Schuyler, and 
Cherry Hill mansions, all built in the 1700's; the State 
Capitol; and the Empire State Plaza, a large complex of 
government office towers and other buildings. The 
plaza includes the New York State Museum; the New 
York State Library; the Egg, an oval-shaped building with 
two theaters; and the 44-story Corning Tower, the tallest 
building in the state outside of New York City. 

Economy. Albany is a center of government, educa- 
tion, health care, banking, insurance, and other service 
industries. The city is also an important transportation 
center. Many of Albany's workers commute, mainly by 
automobile, from other cities and towns in the Capital 
Region. The region is sometimes called Tech Valley be- 
cause of the research universities and high-technology 
companies located there. Albany International Airport, 
northwest of the city, serves the region. 

Government and history. Albany has a mayor- 
council form of government. The voters elect the mayor 
and 16 council members to four-year terms. 

lroquois Indians lived in what is now the Albany area 
before European settlers arrived. In 1609, the English ex- 
plorer Henry Hudson and his crew became the first Eu- 
ropeans to reach the site, during a voyage for the Dutch 


Tirane 
Warsaw Pact 


310 Albany Congress 


East India Company, a trading firm. In 1624, Dutch set- 
tlers established Fort Orange on the west bank of the 
Hudson River in what is now downtown Albany. The set- 
tlement around the fort became the Village of Bever- 
wyck in 1652. In 1664, the English claimed the region, 
and the settlement was renamed Albany for the Duke of 
York and Albany, the English king's brother. On July 27, 
1686, Albany received a charter incorporating it as a city. 

Albany played a significant role in the American Colo- 
nies as an important river port, a fur-trading center, and 
a military post. The city has the nickname Cradle of the 
Union because American statesman Benjamin Franklin 
presented his Plan of Union there at the Albany Con- 
gress in 1754. His plan was the first formal proposal to 
unite the American Colonies. In 1797, Albany was cho- 
sen as the state capital. 

Albany's most rapid period of growth followed the 
completion of the Erie Canal in 1825. The canal opened 
the way for barge traffic between Albany and Buffalo 
and connected the Hudson River to the Great Lakes. Al- 
bany’s population increased from 12,630 in 1820 to 
24,209 in 1830. New York’s first railroad, the Mohawk 
and Hudson, began to operate between Albany and 
Schenectady in 1831. The city was a major railroad cen- 
ter during the last half of the 1800's. Transportation, 
commerce, and industry flourished during the late 
1800's and early 1900's. Albany had 94,151 people in 
1900, and 134,995 by 1950. 

During the last half of the 1900's, Albany, like many 
U.S. cities, lost population to the suburbs, and many re- 
tail stores moved to suburban shopping malls. Manufac- 
turing declined, and service industries became increas- 
ingly important to the economy. The Empire State Plaza 
was completed during this period, as part of a down- 
town renewal program. Ray Bromley 

See also Albany Congress; New York. 

Albany Congress was a meeting that adopted the 
first formal proposal for a political union of the Ameri- 
can Colonies. It was held in Albany, New York, in June 
1754. Representatives from Massachusetts, New Hamp- 
shire, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York, Pennsylva- 
nia, and Maryland met with representatives of the Iro- 
quois tribes at the request of the British government. 
The purpose of the meeting was to win the loyalty of the 
Iroquois in view of a threatening war with France, and to 
work out some form of agreement with them. Colonial 
representatives included James DeLancey (New York), 
Thomas Hutchinson (Massachusetts), Stephen Hopkins 
(Rhode Island), William Pitkin (Connecticut), John Penn 
(Pennsylvania), and Benjamin Franklin (Pennsylvania). 

The delegates realized the real problem was to unify 
the colonies, and several plans were proposed. The con- 
gress adopted Franklin's proposal, often called the A/- 
bany Plan of Union. Under this plan, each colony would 
send from two to seven representatives to a Grand 
Council. This council would levy taxes, raise troops, and 
regulate trade with the Indians. Neither Britain nor the 
colonies seriously considered the plan. Eleven years lat- 
er, the Stamp Act Congress of 1765 marked the colonies 
next major step toward an American union (see Revolu- 
tionary War in America [The Quartering and Stamp 
acts). Jack N Rakove 
Al Basrah, a/ BAHS ruh or al BUHS ruh|pop. 678,000), 
also called Basra, is one of the largest cities in Iraq. It is 


also a chief Iraqi port. Al Basrah stands along the Shatt al 
Arab, a waterway that connects the Tigris and Euphrates 
rivers and links Al Basrah with the Persian Gulf. The city 

lies about 55 miles (90 kilometers) from the Persian Gulf. 

For location, see Iraq (map). 

Al Basrah was founded by Arabs in A.D. 636 as a mili- 
tary outpost. It became an important trading center. The 
city was ruled by the Ottoman Empire from 1534 to 1918. 
It declined in importance under Ottoman rule. The Unit- 
ed Kingdom gained control of the city in 1918, at the end 
of World War I. The city served as a military center un- 
der British rule until lraq gained independence in 1932. 
Al Basrah became the main port for exporting Iraqi oil 
and other products. A war took place between Iraq and 
Iran from 1980 until 1988, when the two countries 
agreed to a cease-fire. During that time, much of Al Bas- 
rah was destroyed. The city was quickly built up after 
the war. But in 1991, the city was again heavily damaged 
by bombing in the Persian Gulf War. Later in the year, Al 
Basrah suffered more damage during fighting between 
Shiite rebels and the government of Iraq. Michel Le Gall 
Albatross, Al buh traws, is the name for any one of 
several kinds of large sea birds. Albatrosses are found 
over nearly all oceans, except the North Atlantic. The 
best-known albatross is the wandering albatross of 
southern seas. It has a white body and darker wings and 
tail. The spread wings may be up to 11 3 feet (3.5 meters) 
from tip to tip. Its bill is long, heavy, and powerful. 

The albatross sometimes follows a ship for days, but 
is seldom seen resting. It feeds on scraps of food 
thrown from the ship, or on fish and squid. On such 
food-gathering flights, the wandering albatross has 
been known to cover more than 9,300 miles (15,000 kilo- 
meters) and to maintain an average speed of 35 miles (56 
kilometers) per hour for 500 miles (800 kilometers). 

Albatrosses come to land only to breed. Thousands of 
these birds gather on remote islands. The female alba- 
trosss single egg is white with brown spots. It is laid on 
bare ground or in a shallow nest and hatches after about 
81 days. The young bird has dark, fluffy down. Two spe- 





Bruce Coleman Inc. 


Wandering albatrosses have a white body with darker wings 
and tail. Like other kinds of albatrosses, they breed on remote is- 
lands, where the female lays a single egg on bare ground. 


cies of albatrosses are commonly found along the Pacif- 
ic Coast of North America. George L Hunt, Jr. 


Scientific classification. Albatrosses are in the albatross 
family, Diomedeidae. The scientific name for the wandering al- 
batross is Diomedea exulans. 


See also Animal (picture: The courtship ritual). 
Albee, Edward (1928- ), is a major American play- 
wright who uses a wide variety of styles ranging from 
realism to fantasy. He writes about the need for human 
contact and the illusions his characters embrace to face 
the meaninglessness of existence. Albee gained interna- 
tional fame with Whos Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (1962), a 
moving examination of power struggles and the combi- 
nation of cruelty and love in marriage. 

Albee won the 1967 Pulitzer Prize for A Delicate Bal- 
ance (1966), a study of family relationships and friend- 
ships set in an emotionally sterile suburban atmosphere. 
He won the 1975 Pulitzer Prize for Seascape (1975), a fan- 
tasy about a middle-aged couple's ability to move be- 
yond a fear of change and the unknown. He received a 
third Pulitzer Prize in 1994 for Three Tall Women (world 
premiere in Vienna in 1991), about an aged woman's en- 
counter with mortality. 

Albee’s first plays were short, probing dramas about 
the materialism, complacency, and alienation he saw in 
American society. They were influenced by the 7heater 
of the Absurd, a 1950's European drama movement. 
These plays include The Zoo Story(1959), The Death of 
Bessie Smith (1960), The Sandbox (1960), and The Ameri- 
can Dream (1961). Among his other plays were Jiny Alice 
(1964), a symbolic religious drama, and The Play About 
the Baby (1998), in which an older couple strips away the 
illusions of a younger couple. The Goat, or Who Is Syl- 
via? (2002) is a dark comedy about a man who falls in 
love with a goat. Edward Franklin Albee was born on 
March 12, 1928, in Washington, D.C. Thomas P. Adler 
Albéniz, ah/ BAY nees or ahi VAY neeth, isaac (1860- 
1909), a Spanish composer and pianist, was one of the 
creators of a national style for Spanish music. His most 
famous composition, /beria (1908), consists of four 
books of solo piano music. His orchestral works include 
Spanish Rhapsody (1887) and Catalonia (1899). From 1893 
to 1900, he lived in Paris, where his music influenced the 
French composers Claude Debussy and Maurice Ravel. 

Isaac Manuel Frescesco Albéniz was born on May 29, 
1860, in Camprodon in Catalonia. He gave his first piano 
recital at the age of 4. He was a respected concert pi- 
anist throughout his life. 
Albers, Josef (1888-1976), was a German-born painter 
and teacher. Albers focused on the way colors are made 
to perform by their relationship within a picture. He lim- 
ited himself for years to one form: the square. By paint- 
ing squares within squares, he explored color relation- 
ships with more freedom since he was relieved of ihe 
problem of form. He called his series of square paint- 
ings Homage to the Square. 

Albers was born on March 19, 1888, in Bottrop. He 
taught color theory and abstract art at the Bauhaus 
school of design from 1923 to 1933, then moved to the 
United States. Albers taught at Black Mountain College 
from 1933 to 1939 and at Yale from 1950 to 1960. Albers 
became partly responsible for the Bauhaus influence on 
American design. He became a U.S. citizen in 1939. See 
also Corcoran Gallery of Art (picture). Dore Ashtnn 


Vincent McDermott 


Albert, Prince 311 


Albert I (1875-1934), king of the Belgians from 1909 to 
1934, was a heroic military leader during World War | 
(1914-1918). As commander in chief of the Belgian army, 
he helped stop the German advance in September 1914. 
Albert remained in active command of the army until the 
end of the war. After the war, he helped his country with 
the problems of reconstruction. In a few years, Belgium 
had largely recovered from the effects of the war. 

A!bert was born on April 8, 1875, in Brussels. He was 
the grandson of King Leopold I, the German prince 
elected king of the Belgians in 1831. Albert succeeded 
his uncle, Leopold II, in 1909. He married Elizabeth, 
Duchess of Bavaria, in 1900. As king, Albert was known 
for his liberal views and democratic sympathies. A noted 
sportsman, he died while mountain climbing near Na- 
mur, Belgium. His eldest son succeeded him as Leopold 
iI). Jane K. Miller 
Albert, Carl Bert (1908-2000), an Oklahoma Democrat, 
was speaker of the United States House of Representa- 
tives from 1971 until he retired in 1977. He had been ma- 
jority leader of the House since 1962. Albert played an 
important role in the passage of President Lyndon B. 
Johnson's domestic program in the mid-1960's. He 
backed Johnson's civil rights proposals even though his 
district generally opposed such legislation. 

Albert was born on May 10, 1908, in McAlester, Okla- 
homa. He graduated from the University of Oklahoma 
and studied at Oxford University in England on a Rhodes 
scholarship. He began his first House term in 1947 and 
was majority whip from 1955 to 1962. Albert was chair- 
man of the platform committee of the 1964 Democratic 
National Convention and was permanent chairman of 
the party's 1968 national convention. 
Albert, Lake. See Lake Albert. 
Albert, Prince (1819-1861), married his first cousin, 
Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom, in 1840. As 
prince consort, he was respected for his industry and 
business sense. Some distrusted him as the queen’s ad- 
viser, because he was not born in England. See Victoria. 

Albert was born on Aug. 26, 1819, near Coburg, Ger- 
many. His father, Ernest, was the Duke of Saxe-Coburg 
and Saalfeld (from 1826, of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha). Al- 
bert's full given name was Francis Charles Augustus Al- 
bert Emmanuel. He was educated as a possible consort 
(husband) to Victoria. Victoria ascended to the throne in 
1837 and was crowned in 1838. In 1839, Albert visited 
her. They were married in 1840. 

Albert became the adviser and private secretary to the 
queen. He reorganized the royal household and started 
a study of politics. In 1841, he was appointed head of a 
commission to encourage the fine arts in the United 
Kingdom. He spent his leisure time in museums and art 
studios, and in parts of London where conditions were 
either being improved or in need of it. His speeches to 
the working people showed his ability and tact. 

In 1847, Cambridge University elected Albert chancel- 
lor. His ideas on education helped alter the academic 
program, which was soon imitated by Oxford University. 
At the request of the Duke of Wellington, he helped re- 
organize the army training plan during the Crimean 
War. He was interested in agricultural improvements, 
and he planned and landscaped Victoria's winter home 
on the Isle of Wight. Late in 1861, Albert's health failed. 
He died of typhoid fever. Richard W. Davis 


Charles Bartlett 


312 Alberta 





Cameramann International, Ltd. 


The majestic Canadian Rocky Mountains rise along Alberta’s southwesterm border. 


Alberta 


Alberta, the westernmost Prairie Province of Canada, 
is one of the greatest oil-producing regions in North 
America. About 70 percent of Canada’s petroleum 
comes from oil wells on Albertas rolling plains. About 
80 percent of Canada’s natural gas comes from huge de- 
posits that lie near the oil fields. Pipelines carry Alberta's 
oil and natural gas throughout Canada and into the Unit- 
ed States. Alberta's major oil fields lie in the central and 
northern parts of the province. 

Petroleum has helped make Alberta prosperous. Oil 
and natural gas production fees and leases make up the 
provincial governments greatest source of income. 
They have paid much of the cost of Alberta's hospitals, 
roads, schools, and other public works. Petroleum and 
natural gas production and related industries provide a 
large share of the personal income of Alberta people. 
Service industries, however, provide the greatest 
sources of income to the province's people. The prov- 
ince’s standard of living is among the highest in Canada. 








The contributors of this article are G. Peter Kershaw, Professor 
of Geography at the University of Alberta; and Roderick C 
Macleod, Professor of History at the University of Alberta. 








Alberta also has other resources, including more than 
half of the known coal deposits of Canada. Other miner- 
als found in the province include natural gas liquids, 
sand and gravel, and sulfur. Albertas mining production 
accounts for about three-fifths of the national total. 

Alberta is a leading province in agriculture. In many 
areas of the province, vast fields of golden wheat can be 
seen extending to the horizon. Among the provinces, Al- 
berta ranks behind only Saskatchewan in its production 
of wheat, barley, and canola. Alberta also produces 
more beef cattle than all the other provinces combined. 

The production of chemicals is the leading manufac- 
turing activity in Alberta. Petrochemicals (chemicals 
made from petroleum) and fertilizer are the province's 
chief chemicals. Edmonton is Alberta's capital and sec- 
ond largest city. Calgary is the largest city. 

Millions of tourists visit the province yearly. The most 
popular attractions are the majestic, snow-capped Cana- 
dian Rockies along the province's southwestern border. 
There lie three of Alberta's five national parks—Banff, 
Jasper, and Waterton Lakes. Lake Louise, which is sur- 
rounded by the Canadian Rockies in Banff National Park, 
is one of the most popular attractions in Canada. Many 
vacationers go to the provinces northern forests to hunt 


Alberta 313 


Interesting facts about Alberta 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Kevin Chadwick 


The world's largest Easter Ue ei Head-SmashecHn Buffalo Jump, near Fort Macleod, is a cliff 
egg is located in Vegreville. It ry a “Se that Indians used to kill large numbers of buffalo. Archaeological 
is 26 feet (7.9 meters) long, 18 ES evidence shows that the cliff was used for this purpose during 
feet (5.5 meters) wide, stands different periods between about 3,600 B.C. and the mid-1800's. 

31 feet (9.4 meters) high on its Indians stampeded buffaloes over the 33-foot (10-meter) cliff 
base, and weighs about 5,000 while hunters waited below to butcher the animals for meat, 
pounds (2,300 kilograms). It is hide, and bone. Blackfoot Indians gave the site its present name 
known as the Pysanka, the after a young brave's skull was crushed while he watched from 
Ukrainian term for Easter egg. | below as buffaloes were being driven over the cliff. They called 
The computer-designed egg f i F the place Estipah-Sikikini-kots, meaning “where he got his head 
has a shell composed of multi- " , 


smashed in.” 
colored aluminum pieces 
joined together to form a col- : 
orful pattern. World's largest Easter egg 





The world’s largest shopping center is the West Edmonton 
Mall. It has more than 800 shops, the world’s largest indoor 
amusement park, 20 movie theaters, and an ice arena. 


The world’s foremost dinosaur museum is the Royal Tyrrell 
Museum of Palaeontology in Drumheller. Opened in 1985, it has 
dinosaur fossils from throughout the provinces. The museum is 
named after Joseph Burr Tyrrell, a Canadian geologist who dis- 4 
covered rich beds of dinosaur fossils in Alberta in 1844. 





Pedestrian mall in dowr- 
town Calgary 





bears, caribou, deer, elk, and moose, or to fish in the 
sparkling lakes and streams. Others stay at dude ranches 
in Alberta’s cattle country. Hikers visit the forts, mis- 
sions, and trading posts that were built during Alberta's 
fur-trading days. Winter skiing in the Canadian Rockies 
is also an attraction. Unusually clear skies give Alberta 
more hours of sunshine throughout the year than any 
other Canadian province, and earned it the nickname 
Sunny Alberta. 

The name of the province dates from 1882. During 
that time, the Canadian government decided to divide 
the region of land lying between Manitoba and British 
Columbia into four territorial districts—Alberta, Assini- 
boia, Athabaska, and Saskatchewan. The Alberta district 
was named after Princess Louise Caroline Alberta, a 
daughter of Queen Victoria. The princess was married 
to the Marquess of Lorne, the Canadian governor gener- 
al. The princess’ first name was given to what is now Al- 
berta’s most famous lake, Lake Louise in Banff National 
Park. 

For Alberta’‘s relationship to the other provinces of 
Canada, see the World Book articles on Canada; Cana- 
da, Government of; Canada, History of. Oil refinery near Edmonton 





‘Cameramann Intemational, Lid 










Alberta in brief 









Symbols of Alberta 


The provincial flag, adopted in 1968, bears 
the shield from the coat of arms. The shield 
has a cross of St George, which represents 
Alberta's link with the United Kingdom, and a 
landscape with mountains, hills, a prairie, 
and a field of wheat. The shield was adopted 
as the provincial coat of arms in 1907. A lion 
and a pronghorn supporting the shield and a 
crest including a helmet, a beaver, and a 
crown were added in 1980. 











Provincial flag 








Alberta (brown) is the fourth largest province and the 
largest of the Prairie Provinces (yellow). 


General information 


Entered the Dominion: Sept. 1, 1905, with 
Saskatchewan, as the 8th and 9th provinces. 
Provincial abbreviation: AB (postal). 
Provincial motto: Fortis et Liber (Strong and Free). The Legislature Building is in Edmonton, the capital of 
Alberta since it entered the Dominion in 1905. 





Areas 255,287 mi? (661,190 km/’), including 6,490 mi? 

(16,800 km?) of inland water. 

Elevation: Highest—Mount Columbia, 12,294 ft (3,747 m) 
above sea level. Lowest—557 ft (170 m) above sea level 
along the Slave River in northern Alberta 

Re high temperature: 110 ‘F (43 °C) at Bassano 

Dam on july 21, 1931, and at Fort Macleod on July 18, 

1941. 

milion on Jan. 11, 1911. 
Average July temperature: 63 ‘F (17 °C). 
Average January temperature: 9 F (-13 C). 












: — 78 °F (—61 Cat Fort Ver- 

























Average yearly precipitation: 16 in (41 cm). - 
a | Greatest \ 
al aa ; spe south \ 
760 mi 
{1,225 km) 
Important dates Peter Pond of the United States established | The North-West Mounted The Canadian Pacific 
a trading ST near Lake Athabasca. Police established Fort Macleod. Railway reached Calgary. 
1754-1755 pis74 18761877 | 
et 4 
Anthony Henday of England explored the Indians surrender central and southern 


Alberta region. Alberta to the government through two treaties. 


Provincial 
coat of arms 





People 


Population: 2,974,807 (2001 census) 

Rank among the provinces: 4th 

Density: 12 persons per mi? (4 per km’), 
provinces average 13 per mi? (5 per 
km+*) 

Distribution: 81 percent urban, 19 per- 
cent rural 

Largest cities and towns® 


Calgary 878,866 
Edmonton 666,104 
Red Deer 67,707 
Lethbridge 67,374 
St. Albert 53,081 
Medicine Hat 51,249 


*2001 census. 
Source: Statistics Canada. 


Economy 
Chief products 


Agriculture: beef cattle, wheat, canola, 
barley, hogs, milk. 

Manufacturing: chemicals, food and 
beverage products, printed materi- 
als, fabricated metal products, wood 
products. 

Mining; Petroleum, natural gas. 


Government 
Provincial government 


Premier: term of up to 5 years 
Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
83; terms of up to 5 years 


Federal government 


Members of the House of Commons: 26 
Members of the Senate: 6 


Population trend 


Millions 





1860 


Alberta 315 


Provincial Floral emblem 
seal Wild rose 





Year Population 


2001 2,974,807 
1996 2,696,826 
199] 2,545,553 
1986 2579,2/6 
1981 2,237,724 
1976 1,838,037 
1971 1,627,874 
1966 1,463,203 
1961 1,331,944 


1951 939,501 
1941 796,169 
1931 731,605 
1921 588,454 
1911 374,295 


1885 1910 1935 1960 1985 2010 


Source: Statistics Canada. 


Gross domestic product 


Value of goods and services pro- 
duced in 2000: $114,512,000,000.* 
Services include community, busi- 
ness, and personal services; fi- 
nance; government; trade; and 
transportation and communica- 
tion. /ndustry includes construc- 
tion, manufacturing, mining, and 
utilities.. Agricu/ture includes agri- 
culture, fishing, and forestry. 


*Canadian dollars. 






Industry 39% 


Services 58% Agriculture 3% 


Source: Statistics Canada. 


Sources of information 


For information on tourism and vacation planning in Alber- 
ta, write to: Travel Alberta, Box 2500, Edmonton, AB T5} 
224. Travel Alberta's Web site at www.travelalberta.com 
also provides tourist information. The Provincial Archives 
of Alberta handles requests for information about the prov- 
ince’s economy, government, and history. Write to: Provin- 
cial Archives of Alberta, 12845 102nd Avenue, Edmonton, 
AB T5N OM6. The Alberta government's Web site at 
www.gov.ab.ca also serves as a useful gateway to informa- 
tion on the province s economy, government, and history. 


The province s first major oil discovery 
was made in Turner Valley. 





Alberta became a province on September | 


1967 


Alberta first plant to remove oil from 
bituminous sands began operation. 


316 Alberta 


People 


Population. The 2001 Canadian census reported that 
Alberta had 2,974,807 people. The population had in- 
creased about 10 percent over the 1996 census figure of 
2,696,826 people. 

About 80 percent of Alberta's people live in cities, 
towns, and villages. About two-thirds of them live in the 
metropolitan areas of Calgary and Edmonton. These 
two cities have Alberta's only Census Metropolitan Ar- 
eas as defined by Statistics Canada. For the populations 
of the province's cities, towns, and other populated 
places, see the /ndex to the political map of Alberta. 

Most of Alberta's people live in the southern part of 
the province. Cold Lake and Grande Prairie are the only 
cities in the northern half of the province with popula- 
tions of over 10,000. Calgary is Alberta's largest city, fol- 
lowed by the province's capital, Edmonton. For further 
information, see the separate articles on the cities and 
towns of Alberta listed in the Re/ated articles at the end 
of this article. 

About 84 of every 100 Albertans were born in Cana- 
da. About a third of the rest of Alberta's people came to 
the province from the United Kingdom or the United 
States. About 45 percent of the people have English an- 
cestors. Other large ethnic groups in the province, in 
order of size, are those of Scottish, German, Irish, 


French, Ukrainian, Dutch, or Polish descent. 


Alberta map index 


Metropolitan areas 


Calgary . 
Fareracn 


951,395 
937 BAS 


Cities, towns, and 


other populated 
places 
Acadia*t 512 
Acadia Valley 
Acme 648 
Airdrie . 20,382 
Alberta 

Beach 762 . 
Alder Flats . 
Aldersyde 
Alix 825 
Alliance 171 
Amisk 181 
Andrew . . 485. 
Antler Lake* 
Anzac 
Ardmore . 
Ardrossan’ 
Arrowwood 196 
Ashmont 
Athahasca 2,415 
Banff 7,135 
Barnwell . 48 
Barons 284 
Barrhead 2.415. 
Bashaw 825 
Bassano 1 320 
Bavwill 362 
Beaumont 7,006 
Beaver Lake 

Indian 

Reserve 390 
Beaverlodge 2.110 
Beiseker 838 
Benalto 
Bentley 1,035 
Benvyn 46. 
Big Lakes*t 5,B45 
Big Valley $40 
Bighurn*t 1 298 
Birch Hills 

County‘t 1644 
Bittern Lake 221 
Black 

Diamond 1.866 
Blackfalds 3,042 


Blackfoot 


lm inal uml a Ye 


_ 


= 
™1 Oo 


< 
—- 
MOM I DMOMMOBDMOwDMDOOCwWM~I Ns 


MOM dS ssw 


CO se 


Blackie 
Blood Indian 
Reserve 

Blue Ridge 
Bluesky 
Bluffton . . 
Bon Accord . 
Bone town’ 
Bonnyville 
Bonnyville*t 
Botha . 
Bow Island 
Bowden 
Boyle 


Bragg Creek 


Brazeau*t 
Breton 
Brouks 
Brownvale 
Bruce . 


Bruderheim _ 


Buck Lake 
Burdett 
Burmis 
Cadomin 
Cadotte Lake 
Calahoo . 
Calgary 
Calmar 
Campbell- 
town 
Heights* 
Camrose . 
Canmore 
Canyon 
Creek 
Carhun 
Carbundale*® 
Cardston 
Cardston 
County*t 
Carmangay 
Caroline 
Carseland 
Carstairs 
Castor 
Caswellem’ 
Cayley 
Central Park’ 
Centre 
Calling 
Lake* 
Cereal 
Champion 
Chauvin 
Chestermere 
Chipewyan 
Lake® 


3.852 


.878.866 
1,902 


187 
$55 
Sob 
3,414 


cigar it 


i 


zoe 


= 


~ 
od 
NMS SUIUISI ONO SONA NOW SCCOD NSH & oo 


oo 
‘aw 


~ =~ _ — 
— ed 


Pe ee, 


ie, aca 


imal 


— = 


— 


“DmMwWnO~i woe anon DH oo 


Chi pman* 
Clairmont 
Clandeonald 
Claresholm 
Clear Hills*+ 
Clearwater 


Heights 
Collingwood 

Cove® 
Conklin 
Consort 
Coronatiun 
Coutts 
Cowley 
Cremona 


Daysland 
Debdolt 
Delbume 
Delia 
Derwent 
Desmarais 
Devun 
Devonshire 
Meadows’ 
Dewberry 
Diamond 
City 
Didsbury 
Donalda 
Donnelly 
Coun 
Valle 
Dnit Pile River 
India 
Reserve 
Drumheller 
Duchess 


Population density 


Most of Alberta's people live in the southern part of the 
province—especially in and around Calgary and Edmonton, the 
province's largest cities. The northern areas are thinly settled. 


Persons per 
mi? 

More than 25 } 
12 to 25 


More than 10 
5 to 10 

1to5 
Lessthan2) | Less than 1 





WORLD 8OOk map, based on the Natrona/ Alas of Canada. 





—_ 


Dunmore Grande 


I 8 N10 
G 4 Eaglesham F 4 Praine 36,983 G 4 
— ae 1 10 East Coulee . Lol 29 Grandview’ 8 J 7 | 
3,622 N 8 East Peace’t PA23"_E *6 Granum 392g 8 
2772TE 4 Eckville 1019K 7 Grassy Lake N 9 | 
Edberg ; 150 K 8 Green Court nai 6 : 
11505 kK 6 Edgerton 403 .j 10 Greenview t 5.439 H 5 
Edmonton 666,104 | 8 Grimshaw 2435 F 5 
m7 Edson 7385 | 5 Grouard . G 6 | 
391 kB Eik Point 1440 1 10 Gull Lake | aS ete 
ating 8 Elnora 250 K 8 Gunn : I 7 
eels lees pee” 171. M11 Hairy Hill aT Ue 
6,008 .O 9 Enilda ..G 6 Half Moon Bay* .. 37 kK 7 
1476.0 8 Entwistle ee er, Halkirk ap ll ee 
11,798 M 7 Erskine K 8 Hanna 2986 L 9 
11,520 H 10 Evansburg | 6 Hardisty 743 4 9 
Exshaw M 6 Hey Lake 
Fabyan* J 10 ndian 
439 H 10 Fairview 3,150.F 4 Reserve 315 B 4 
= een Fairview’ t 1806 F 4 Hay Lakes 346 8 
Falher 1,109. G 5 Heisler Taal 63 nek 9 
k Faust G 6 High Level 3444 C 5 
Fawcett H 7 High Prairie 2 ist Guess 
) 8 Ferintosh 150 _K 8 High River 9335 N 8B 
G 9 Fleming Hiillsdale* .f 8 
..634 K 10 Park as ae: Hillspring 193 D 8 
902 k 10 Foothills*t 16,7644 N 7 Hines Creek or Yee | 
34 O 9 Foremost 53t..0 10 Hinton 9405 J 4 
2255 ON 7 Furesthurg 870 K 9 Holden 374 J 9 
415 L 7 Fort Hubble s 
2.389 L 7 Assiniboine H 7 Lake* sodin | 7 
Fort Hughenden 235 aK 10 
6,262 O 7 Chipewyan . B 9 Hunter Hill 
Fort Kent H 10 Estates° ; | 83) 
6,114 N 10 Fort MacKay oA, Hussar 181 M 9 
205 K 10 Fort Macleod 2930-0 8 e 382 .G 3 
779) 2 Fort Mc: Innisfail 6928 L 8 
G 4 Murray E93 Innisfree 219° = 9 
Fale St! Fort Saskat- irma 435 J 10 
215 9 chewan 13, UZ) elles irricana 1,038 M 8 
11) 4 10 Furt Irvine N11 
F 7 Verniliun 6 Island Lake 199 H 8 
4969 J 8 Fox Creek 2,337..H 5 Islay J 10 
Fox Lake Janvier 
kK 8 Indian Indian 
200 1 10 Reserve LZ eee 7 Reserne 252 F 10 
Gadsby 40 ok 9 Jarvie H 7 
O 8 Gainlord days Jasper 4,180 4 
3,932 L 7 Galahad 161K 9 john dOr 
230k) 9 Gibbons 26> 1 8 Prairie 
377 G 5 Gift Lake f 6 Indian 
Girouxville 36 F 5 Reserve - 851 G@ 7 
5801 ) 7 Gleichen M 8 Johnson 
Glendou 459 H 10 Addition’ N 9 
Glenwood 2358 D 8 josephburg’ 8 
655 G 6 Grand Centre 14 10 Joussard G 6 
71783, .L 99 Grande Kananaskis 462 M 6 
83h MOO Cache 3828 | 3 Kikino H 9 


Alberta has approximately 70,000 peop!e of Indian an- 
cestry, about 25,000 of whom live on reservaticns. The 
tribes include the Blood, Cree, Piegan, and Siksika 
(North Blackfoot). About 40,000 métis (people of mixed 
Indian and white descent) also live in the province. 
About 7,000 Hutterites live in Alberta, more than in any 
other province. The members of this religious group are 
successful farmers who lead simple lives. They live in 
about 80 communities, most in southwestern Alberta or 
northeast of Calgary. Many families include nine or 
more children. The Hutterites came to Alberta from 
South Dakota in 1918. They had been persecuted in 
South Dakota during World War | (1914-1918) for refus- 
ing to bear arms for religious reasons. See Hutterites. 

Schools. Missionaries established the first schools in 
the Alberta area during the mid-1800's. A public school 
system was set up in the province in 1884. Today, Alber- 
ta has public, separate, and private schools. Elected 
boards of trustees administer the public and separate 
school systems. Private schools are organized by private 
groups and offer a variety of academic, religious, or lan- 
guage instruction. Public and separate schools are sup- 
ported by taxes. Public education also offers fully funded 
charter schools. These schools operate under local con- 
trol according to the terms of special contracts called 
charters. Private schools receive funding from private 
sources. Accredited private schools may qualify for par- 
tial provincial funding. Parents may also choose home 
education programs supervised by a school board or an 
accredited private school. 

All Alberta schools are governed by the provincial 
Department of Learning, which is headed by the minis- 
ter of learning. Alberta law requires all children from the 
ages of 6 to16 to attend school. For the number of stu- 
dents and teachers, see Education (table). 


Killam 1,004.) 9 Millet 2,037 J 8 Provost 
Kinuso 2.231266 Milo Pilsen 8 Provost‘t 
Kitsco ....671 J 10 Minburn .... 88.) 9 Radway ...._.... 
Kneehill Mirror .. 492 K 8 Rainbow Lake ..... 
County*t 5,319 L 8 Monarch oO 8 Ralston 
Lac La Biche 2,77 H 9 Morinville 6340.1 8 Ranchland*t 
Lac Ste. Anne Morrin 252 Sie S Ranfurly 
County*t .. 8948 | 7 Mulhurst mj Raymond 
Lacombe ... ..9384 K 8 Mundare® 653.1 9 Red Deer 
LaCrete _ . cee C5 Munson . . 222 § Redclift 
La Glace G 3 Myrnam 322.1 10 Redwater 
Lakeview | iy Nacmine me 8 Rimbey 
Lake Louise ges Nampa eSove F 15 Robb 
Lakeland Nanton 1e41.N 8 Rochester 
County*t $959.G 9 Neerlandia RH 7 Rochlort 
Lamont 1692 | 8 New Norway e292 GS Bridge 
Langdon . M8 New Sarepta 362 J 8 Rock 
Lavoy ercgoasy thd ene) Noblelo 615 N 8 ountain 
Leduc .. 15032 J 8 Northem House _ 
Legal . ...1058 1 8 Lights*t 4217 _D 3 Rocky Rapids 
Leslieville 2 ..... K 7 Ohaton | 8 Rocky View’t 
Lesser Siave Okotoks 11,664 _M 7 Rockyford 
River*+ DB Sati 7 Olds .6607 L 7 Rolling Hills 
Lethbridge 67,374 O 9 Onoway 847 1 7 Rolly View” 
Linden a Gye Opportunity” 3,436 £ 7 Rosalind 
Linn Valley* — 7 en 1020 L 10 Rosedale 
Little Buffalo .... .. F 6 Paddle Rosema 
Lloydminster? 13.148 J} 11 Prairie C5 Round Hill 
Lodgepole = oa 6 Paradise Rumsey 
Lomond tiga 9 Valley 152 pleat Rycroft 
Longview oy JOON. 7 Peace’t 1496 F 4 Ryiey 
Loon Lake E 6 Peace River 6.240 F 5 Saddle Hills 
Lougheed .228 K 10 Peerless Lake E 7 County*t 
Lundbreck Om? Peers 1 6 St Albert 
Magrath “19938,0° 8 Peigan Indian St. Isadore*® 
Mailaig H 9 Reserve 1537 O 8 St Paul 
Ma-Me-O Penhold 1729 K 7? Samson 137 
Beach Sig) 7 Pibroch | 7 Indian : 
aad 1293 E 4 Pickardville ‘om Reserve 
Mannville 722 Men lO Picture Butte 1701 N 9 Sangudo 
Manyberries ae 10 Pincher Schuler 
Marlboro i eS Creek 3,666 O 7 Scot Haven® 
Marwayne 4895S ccl 10 Pincher Seba Beach 
Mayerthorpe 1570 | 6 Creek*t 3197 O 8 Sedgewick 
McLennan 804 G 5 Plamondon 4h oH 9 See 
Medicine Hat) = 51,249 N 10 Ponoka 6340 K 8 Seven : 
Metiskow K 10 Poplar _ Persons 
Milk River 879 O 9 Ridge” } 7 Sexsmith 


“Does nol appear on map: key shuws general location 
tMunteipal District 


tUity on Alberta Saskatchewan border total population 20,988 
Source 2001 census Places without pupulatiuns are unincorporated. 


ali 7 





Libraries and museums. Alberta has many public li- 
braries throughout the province. The University of Al- 
berta in Edmonton, the University of Calgary, and the 
University of Lethbridge have large academic libraries. 

The Glenbow Museum in Calgary features exhibits on 
the history of Alberta and western Canada. The Provin- 
cial Museum of Alberta in Edmonton also has exhibits 
on Alberta's history. The Royal Tyrrell Museum of 
Palaeontology, in Drumheller, has a large collection of 
dinosaur fossils. The Odyssium, in Edmonton, has ex- 
hibits on science, as well as a planetarium, an observato- 
ry, and an IMAX theater. Fort Edmonton Park, in Edmon- 
ton, features re-creations of Edmonton streets from 
different periods in the city’s history. Heritage Park in 
Calgary and Ukrainian Cultural Heritage Village near Ed- 
monton are also pioneer villages. The Remington-Alber- 
ta Carriage Centre in Cardston has horse-drawn vehicles 
from the 1800's and early 1900's. The Reynolds-Alberta 
Museum in Wetaskiwin exhibits old-time automobiles, 
farm equipment, and aircraft. Calgary, Edmonton, Leth- 
bridge, Medicine Hat, and Red Deer have art galleries. 


1,980 .K 10 Shaughnessy —_...... O 8 Vauxhall 1125iN 9 
2635 .K 10 Slave Lake 6600 G 7 Vegreville 5,376.1 9 
spat 8 Smith ee. .G 7 Vermilion . 3,948 ..J 10 
976 G 3 Smoky Lake W0i)..1 9 Veteran 2927 ao 
eer: N 10 Smoky River*t 2.379 G 5 Viking 7 U052 54): 9 
.. 96 IN 7 South Bailey’ et Vilna 2485) |) 
ee a ae, Spirit River .. 1,100 F 4 Vimy’ » Beale 
3,200 .O 9 Spirit River’t ...824 F 3 Vulcan .1,762..N 8 
67,707 .K 8 Spruce Wabamun 601.) 7 
4,372 ..N 10 Grove 15,983 .J 7 Wabasca eee Fie 
2,7 2er leo Spruce Wainwright SZ le 
2,118. K 7 MICW!> 2 ates «aE Koes Wainwright’ t 4,231.J 10 
ine ee If Si Standard 389. M 8 Walsh : san anelsl Ul 
ee...) H 8 Starland Wandering 
County*t 2210.1 9 River . Garo 
1 ae 1 7? Stavely . 442. .N 8 Wanham aif 4 
Stettler . .3.215.K 8 Warburg 500. J 7 
Soria ...877..0 9 Warner... 379.0 9 
6208 K 7 et jain 9589.) 7 Waskatenau . E2520 lee 
ic leet Strathmore .7,621.M 8 Water Valley . ere Lee 
30,688 M 7 Strome . . OR MM) OR Waterton 
3/3 .M_8 Sturgeon Park Ses. ees 
ie. NES County*t 18067 I 8 Wayne mec 18 
Penis Suffield... Bae “Fil O Wembley 1497 G 3 
199 }) 9 Sundre 27267 = 7 West Cove* 105.1 7 
L 9 Swan Hills 1807..H 6 Westlock 4819 1 7 
366 M 9 Sylvan Lake J93 Kk 7 Westlock 
Jee Taber 7671,0 9 County*t 6859 1 7 
sek & Taber’t 6012 0 9 WestwardHo .......... Lt 7 
609 F 4 Tangent pF 4 Wetaskiwin. 11,154.) 8 
a7 ees Tees =. S Whitecourt 8334.1 6 
wk Thorhild 462.1 8 Whitelaw gr 4 
2.566 F 3 Thorsby 199.) 7 Widewater* Ts mG 7 
53,081 1 8 Three Hills 29027 8 Willingdon 287.1 9 
- 3 Tilley ele o Willow 
30el I 9g Tofield 1818 } 8 Creek*+ 5412.N 8 
Tomahawk yz Winfield —........ } 7? 
Torrington fac 6 Woking G4 
3,069 K 8 Trochu 1033 L 8 Wood 
377 te 7 Tsuu Tina Buttalo’§ 41,466 D 10 
N11 Nation Woodlands 
1 8 Indian County*t 3,818 | 6 
a9 J 7 Reserve’ 1.982 M 7 Wrentham oO 9 
865 | 9 Turin N 9 Wreclif 1 8 
M 6 Furner Yellowhead 
Valley 1608 M ? County‘*t S881 eS 
_ N10 Two Hills Losi 9g Youngstuwn . 183. L 10 
1635 G 4 Valleyview 1856 G 5 Zaina City B 4 


§Reqiunal Municipality 

















OME) ote 











Pe WIINIAOYd 2¥¥1 G10 


i144 











ayP if 






































»: 


ud WIONIAON 





Av 380 | 





wlan * 


THHIYNHD NOLSNIM AIS 


: A 


PUBLIOIId 


Ne veyed 


Pi 
SHI teledus) 





JA¥3S3y¥ NvIGNIO 


aye 
Syn 





34V7 JYV3H 
ahiewy 





AUNnqsausy 


BAY 
Buvepuer, 














wud 


Bh, Wee te 


Ma 


o 
AAWAS IY NVIGNI 


3Iyw1 ONNIWIO 
aye] Guiyjed 





YITGNVD 31Siidvd Nvor 





i 











\ ener p 
aeve @ MOUs 




















Apel Bea fopree 
9AW3S 34 NVIONI D ¥ 
: IOGIYMYS 
2 49959) U 


7 WHvd WISNIAOHdO 
3W1 3AV1S H3SS31 


y 


















































JAW3S 3Y 
NVIONI W3AIY 
3d 1dINO 








meal) 10d ig 





JAAS 3Y sth 





34V1NOID 


3AY3S3Y NVIGN! 
» Slat Y3NONS 














NIAO 
NoswwitliM 








49019 pega” 


yeaH Pea” 
doa, © 














Wud 
WIONIAOWd 
3148.0 





































_— 
@tvomu j 


 eunonjey4 
4 WISNIACHAEIN VIS! NOOLYASVS 


o FED 


















A 


9 
44 NVIONI S3WV1 3SHOH 





















ne e9) 
aN QUILEAA 
ee 4 A 
e abeyfg ueaiag® , 7 vow tuogler ar wes a ALIN 
‘| f SCUGLUS ae aAUaSSANVION! /? ee. “99 Meal a, ‘eal | 
! By 953y.NwiONi te : ve @asaqeny, INT WADE Ds COWPALY ose . * ueiunoyy Auage 
a J Balke ' a = oe 9 td PuElyoH ss 
) Aajhing ‘2QdaSau NVIONT * 
: 917) $8U) 
4 (ueysaey) Tenia ov) diniieed oe ‘wage 
axe f yon WYd IWIONIAOKd va QaHeS 19 uyor 1S W04 
My JANISAY NVIONI 6 H138VZ173 N33N0 
swruy QINVA 3WIODIND : e Ohl O4BING 
a Ren * = = a OO 
rf GAYVd TWIINIADUd JAY TVIONIND —_ M i Riel aqiAUaxIg oe Aaysiom 1G 
We 949016] dye "if INYURUAT pp 4) 3nuas3u Nvigni : | 
i Nee - | aye) ssajiaag® - ae ~~’ VIGANNTBO HSILIYG 
= 3AH3S34 NVIGNI , ‘ ‘ 
| PEyC UNCER) ) Aeunywow yOo{ Lh » 3 
4 alt on 
j 1 ? } 
PA 1 ® e % 
* pers) 12 
JANISIY NVIGNI \ 
APAOW LHOd QO) axe? uosig® SNe 
NYMAHOLV SVS Kee 104 WIONIAO! 
JAY 3S3Y NVIGNI 341 HNWYN 
ANSaS 34 NvIONIF | 
HIAM HNWYN 4 
x 
JAN3S3H NVIGNI & 
norvoewI a 2 
: nolea.e) 
3AW3S 34 NVIONI ‘ 
JANIS 34 NVIGNI O ‘ 
ONVAM3dIHO 338) OVI 
i | 
9 BAHASA NVIGNI . \ BAI PAY ait) — 
+ lia “ 4 TS Ale Yor Qe, Mog r | 
Ty) es anuasiam  2A¥3Su pha | 
< JAWISAY NVI Pr HONGH  24VTOWHD ee 
NVAM3ul YO,GNHOF =—-43AW38 Mi Py weiss NvidNi 
| wT vz 
| aye } f 
heOJepy 
£6) 
=e jy t= 
° JAY3S 34 NVIONI 
P 4¥¥1 OHDLSIE 
JOAlY UBAIS o , 
(3AN3S34 NVIONI 
Vv Au) wine — lf LNIOd HSISXOVE 
ray 0 suige’) ueIpU} od 
MeN 
rae? e) 
ys yoy NM H it Y O N fo 
, ¥ if 





S4AlBWOHy OgE 


008 OSZ 





00s 
cl LL 





St 001 0S 
00z 
£ 


* 






















0 0S Sé OL 9g 
9 S S c L 
i] Sere: V3 —ae ——. Re a ee 
} 1GVec 39V3d 4 PSM iy 
| m VNVINOW ieuahyn l Merk oe Fy 
SON a " = i Sa YORIAOId NUODATY 
SiLVLS G3LINN —— =< ee suno>* ly LT ‘S/n (6a) 19d 
; Ys : P XUV IVIONIA 
me TOUNYD a a a WIONtAOHg > NAY a ’ GUOTOOA e 
Aepssoiy  “NOAS'NODNILIUM ~3AkGs3u NwIaNi Goo 
&? pts JOWIEAA 
ae 








MHeSs\u; G) 


Spineqhuew. UOyizay 

















J 
Peomey — { 
Aiepunog et9UIAOIg — | 
leounog fz] YOdiie soley dM 
Asepunog fUOllvU2eiU; emmame { 
©peue)-sueiy @) IS@19}U1 jo wWiog 4 O 
a 449881 Uerpu is =i | 
epOUas 4 : F818 10U}0 10 i) ipuj 
JOA Ub PEO. 101 —_ 9019801 Ueipy, — 9 
9818 UONeaiD9; 
Aemssaidx 3 a 4YMO) 10 AY e 4940 40 yey (as) 
1@lides 1819UIA01g ) 
© uorth 
L etpueds 510A 4) 
= a Jain 








ifamony 


oye] 
a ‘a 


Mequeg Syoolg 
Jauuer | 


628 veqin Hs) 
dew jeonyod Plaqgiy 


puowo>® 
Zz 


tA 
(eo) 
is) 
















o Aaya wn 


















ee ee J 
y se ) \? ; _ “J ly = yr 
. och 4 A 
yous ye Q  - Sf juey 
< TEAST aT % P j “> ' ' 
Yd TWIONIAOMG YNYSONIG & Ze ' 
4 o f 4 
WA | s > IRE ef ' 5 
SSeidh Th 
ae sr 
an CaN { 
on UOKS big. 
Aayen bIpPoy 





7 














Pda WNolwn |) 4 
WQWY orise5 IXOUS 13034 LNNOW » 
-— > ‘One \ «a ya yo 
ig ft 
a. PRN Nore 
uoweiy) @ 
ts a AGHRA saje, 
7 ee A ‘eYepuiy HEA seen 
7 : *edoysAuy H 
2 eonyy 
if 
hs 
x x wadWIOD 
| 











WH WIONIAOUd PI 







+yH } ‘ 
‘ - 1ONSVQUTY 
2is 
PNIAOHE 39007 aay 313391 —* a \ 
2u101R> 





." 


ie ny 
mye X\ —_ 


ueYdENS weyeiay )| 















e ® 
MOHIM Pay ¢ 





ay 











y 
\ YYAWMIOD Hsiting 
Way, : 
Spurs Coney en's yeep 
mit *ePaE 

YVd IWIINIAOW. p04? PRPYOg Mj r15 Aequens 184 Nideg® apy 

7 AUH38 TCI Bhisie idegs 

Sa utan Puyesoy OID» 

bie y & 
Ml aR 


OWHINNS 
53N3534 NVIONI 4S H1H9.0 








2 " » 




















\ ssvy © taser 
Sonne. i Q¥3HMO7794 f | 
i me mye = } 
re earn ig ! 
+ Wya AWIZvHE : Cured é } 
ete aon yo : 
r ‘Aonen\estpebag AUoeig oan pees meus * | iP 
i 4 
Bh 5 aed oe) Hy ms Yuony 
PION & “s | 
Qn it~, MEALS \ 
“~~ ~  JUBAATO) J 
AAAS NVIGNI COWEN Z ee * pidjuoney, 
? y ~ s URS 
| [¢] OH T aptatys 848) Aqu Nt » Gings Use & SHpig UOjYyIoy 
) IAWISIY NVIANI Sog nos aoe totueaEY \QliN03 va99; 
JAWIS IY NVIGNI Nina) vin L Senay onigg LEP) 
Ww IAWIS 4 NV 








peaysseg 





nee ha we 


—~ wees 
S84 thw . 





Aan geese PNG ot 





320 Alberta 


Every year, millions of visitors come to Alberta from 
all over the world. Vacationers are especially attracted 
by the province's world-famous national parks in the 
majestic Canadian Rockies. Tourists may ride horseback 
and may enjoy boating, golfing, swimming, and white 
water rafting amid spectacular scenery. Mountain climb- 
ers face the challenge of Alberta's jagged slopes. In win- 
ter, skiers skim down mountain slopes in areas such as 





Visitor's guide 


Banff, Jasper, and Kananaskis. 

Trails for hikers lie throughout the province. Each 
year, many vacationers travel to northern Alberta to fish 
in the province's sparkling lakes and streams for gray- 
ling, trout, pike, and walleye. Many other tourists stay at 
guest ranches and farms. The Calgary Stampede is one 
of Alberta’s most popular annual events. This 10-day 
rodeo is held in Calgary each July. 


T Klassen, Hot Shots 


Lake Louise, amid the snow-covered Canadian Rocky Mountains in Banff National Park 


Places to visit 





Following are brief descriptions of some of Alberta s many in- 
teresting places to visit See also entries about other attractions 
in the /nteresting facts about Alberta section in the introduction 
of this article. 

Badlands, in the Red Deer River Valley, have weird and beauti- 
ful rock shapes—called hoodoos—created by wind and water 
erosion. The rock layers contain fossils of dinosaurs and other 
forms of life. 

Calgary Zoo features natural habitat enclosures, a tropical avi- 
ary and conservatory, and life-sized dinosaur models. 

Columbia Icefield, between Banff and Jasper, consists of about 
150 square miles (390 square kilometers) of glacial ice. Tour- 
ists ride in a snowcoach over Athabasca Glacier. 

Dinosaur Provincial Park, northeast of Brooks, was estab- 
lished in 1955 to protect one of the most extensive dinosaur 
fields in the world. Visitors can tour the park. 

Fort Museum, in Fort Macleod, has a full-size replica of the Al- 
berta region s first North-West Mounted Police outpost, built 


in 1874. The museum explores the history of American Indi- 
ans, pioneers, and police in the region. 

Frank Slide Interpretive Centre, located near the southwest- 
ern bor-der of Alberta, is the site of a 1903 landslide. Visitors 
can explore the slide area and learn about the early coal min- 
ers. 

National! parks. Alberta has about 21,000 square miles (54,000 
square kilometers) of national parks, more than in any other 
province. The first Canadian national park was established in 
Alberta in 1885. This park is now known as Banff National 
Park Alberta has four other national parks—Elk Island, Jasper, 
Waterton Lakes, and Wood Buffalo. See Canada (National 
park system). 

Provincial parks. Alberta has 65 provincial parks and over 200 
provincial recreation areas. For information, write to: Alberta 
Environment, 9915 108th Street, Edmonton, AB T5K 2G8. Al- 
berta Environment's Web site at wwww.gov.ab.ca env. parks 
also provides information on Alberta s provincial parks. 


Alberta 321 


January-June 
Banff/Lake Louise Winter Festival (January); Calgary Winter 
Festival (February); Northern Alberta International Children’s 
Festival in St Albert (late May); Banff Arts Festival (May-Au- 
gust); Wainwright Stampede (June); Jazz City International Mu- 
sic Festival in Edmonton (June-July). 
July-December 
Calgary Stampede (July); Ukrainian Pysanka Festival in Vegre- 
ville (July); Calgary Folk Music Festival (July); Klondike Days in 
Edmonton (July); Westerner Days in Red Deer (July); Fringe 
Theatre Festival in Edmonton (August); Edmonton Heritage 
Festival (August); Edmonton Folk Music Festival (August); Cal- 
es . gary Highland Games (September); First Night festivals in 
Athabasca Glacier in the Columbia Icefield Banff, Drayton Valley, Edmonton, and Red Deer (December). 


“,. 
t a 
~~ 





Keith Gunnar, West Stock 





Calgary Exhibition & Stampede ; Alberta Government Travel Bureau 


Chuck wagon race at the Calgary Stampede Frank Slide near Alberta's southwestern border 


es — a= 


Kimberly Cleary Hot Shots 


Striking rock formations in the Badlands in Red Deer River Valley near Drumheller 





322 Alberta 


Land regions. Alberta has four main land regions. 
They are (1) the Canadian Shield, (2) the Saskatchewan 
Plain, (3) the Alberta Plain, and (4) the Rocky Mountains 
and Foothills. These regions increase in altitude toward 
the Canadian Rockies in the southwest. 

The Canadian Shield is a vast, horseshoe-shaped re- 
gion that covers almost half of Canada and extends into 
the United States. This hilly section, made up of ancient 
granites and other rocks, covers a small part of the 
northeastern corner of Alberta. Most of the region lies 
less than 1,000 feet (300 meters) above sea level. The 
lowest point in Alberta, 557 feet (170 meters) above sea 
level, is along the Slave River. The region has forests of 
coniferous (cone-bearing) trees and many lakes. It is 
thinly populated. See Canadian Shield. 

The Saskatchewan Plain is part of the Western Interi- 
or Plains, the Canadian section of the North American 
Great Plains. Pine and spruce forests cover much of this 
gently rolling region. Alberta's bituminous sands (sands 


that contain a substance from which oil can be obtained) 


are found along the lower Athabasca River. The 
Saskatchewan Plain lies less than 2,000 feet (610 meters) 
above sea level. 

The Alberta Plain, another part of the Western Interi- 
or Plains, is the province's largest land region. It covers 
about two-thirds of Alberta. Most of this region has an 
altitude of more than 2,000 feet (610 meters). Pine and 
Spruce forests cover the northern part of the Alberta 
Plain. Grasslands with some aspen groves lie near 
Grande Prairie and north of the Peace River between the 
North Saskatchewan River and Grimshaw. The area be- 
tween the North Saskatchewan River and the Red Deer 
River is called the Parklands. This area has groves of as- 
pen trees within grasslands. It is Alberta's chief farming 
region and one of the richest in Canada. It has rich soils 
and regular rainfall. Parklands farms produce crops and 
livestock. To the south, the Alberta Plain ranges from 
gently rolling to flat grassland. There, wheat and other 
grains grow well, and ranchers raise cattle and sheep. 

The Rocky Mountains and Foothills extend through 
western North America between Northern Alaska and 
New Mexico in the United States. They are part of the 
great Cordilleran mountain chain that reaches to the 
southern tip of South America. In Alberta, the Canadian 
Rockies rise along the Great Divide, which forms the 
provinces southwestern border with British Columbia 
(see Great Divide). Mount Columbia, the highest point 
in Alberta, rises 12,294 feet (3,747 meters). The Twins 
(north peak 12,085 feet or 3,684 meters, and south peak 
11,675 feet, or 3,559 meters) tower over Jasper National 
Park. Thirty other mountains in the region are higher 
than 10,000 feet (3,000 meters). 


Land and climate 


The Canadian Rockies have some of the most spectac- 
ular scenery in the world. The snow-capped peaks con- 
sist of bare, jagged rock. Thick growths of aspens, bal- 
sam firs, pines, poplars, and spruces cover the northern 
foothills. They provide much lumber and pulpwood for 
Alberta's forest industries. The rugged Rockies attract 
many mountain climbers. The Rockies also appeal to 
people who enjoy sport fishing in the high lakes and 
streams or hunting mountain goats and sheep in desig- 
nated areas. Banff, Jasper, and Waterton Lakes national 
parks are in this beautiful region. 

Rivers and lakes. Northern and north-central Alberta 
are drained by the Athabasca, Hay, and Peace rivers and 
their tributaries. In warm weather, barges and tugboats 
operate on the Athabasca River. They can travel as far as 


the Arctic. The North Saskatchewan River and its 


branches, including the Battle and Vermilion rivers, 
drain the Parklands in south-central Alberta. The North 
Saskatchewan River rises in the Columbia Icefield, 
which lies in Banff and Jasper national parks and in 
British Columbia. This 100-square-mile (260-square-kilo- 
meter) sheet of ice consists of glaciers made of ice that 
may be hundreds of years old. Most of Alberta's major 
rivers originate in the mountains. Their water comes 
mostly from melting snow and glaciers. 


SASKATCHEWAN 
PLA 





| CANADIAN 
SHIELD 


Land regions of Alberta 


WORLD BOOK map 
Map index 
Athabasca R. E 4 Christina R. D 6 Lesser Slave Lake D 4 North Saskatche- Sounding Creek aaa = 7) 
Banff Natl. Park G&S Clear Hills AC Little Bow R. H 5 wanR . E 6 South Wabasca 
Battle R F 6 Clearwater R. {e o7 Little Smoky R. E 3 North Wabasca Lake D 5 lake. D 5 
Beaver R E 6 Clearwater R. rG 4 Lodge Creek LF Old Fort R B 6 Sullivan Lake G 6 
Birch Mts. {GF Cold Lake . 42 7) McLeod R. F 4 Owl R. D 6 Swan Hills — 4 
Birch R B 5 Crowsnest Pass el 4 Middle Sand Hills, Peace R. ic 3 Twins, The (mts! G 3 
Bistcho Lake A 3 Cypress Hills BIB 7! The .H 7 Peerless Lake Cc 4 Utikuma Lake D4 
Blackfoot Hills F 7 Efk Island Natl. Park F 6 Milk R. Nie? Pelican Mountain D 5 Vermilion R. F 6 
Bow R. H 6 Etzikom Coulée I 6 Mt Alberta G3 Pembina R. F 4 Wabasca R. Cc 4 
Brazeau R F 4 Firebag R B 6 Mt Allan H 4 PetitotR. . A 2 Waterton Lakes 
Buffalo Head Hills B 4 Graham Lake fe 5 Mt Assiniboine H 4 Primrose Lake Ee Natt. => 5 
Buffalo Lake G 6 Hay R. A 3 Mt Chown Tf Red Deer R. G 5 Willmore 
Buffalo R. A 5 Jasper Natl. Park i ae! Mt Columbia (highest Richardson R. B 6 Wildemess 
Cameron Hills #0 Kicking Horse Pass G 4 point in Alberta) G 3 Rocky Mts. Ee Park EZ 
Caribou Mts. A 4 Lake Athabasca YN Fi Mt Joftre .H 4 Simonette R. E 3 Wood Buffalo 
Charles Lake A 6 Lake Claire B 6 Mit Robson ngs Slave R. A 6 Natl. Park A 5 
Chinchaga R. B 3 Leland Lakes A 6 Neutral Hills Gees Smoky R. D 3 Yellowhead Pass F 























B | € B 
& 
° 
= 
o 
> 
c 665 C 
V7 mp 
# my rv 
lear Hills % . 
a 9 ey 
ak . | ee ‘Utkuma 
| . . Se $ Wabascal. — 
D e : ‘ a | D 
ha | Rivet ~ i Pelican Mountain 
ee ah 
c : E 
Se 
Bonnyville 
mth 
No La 


Chewan Rive, 


Mi Rocky Mo 
Faves cm 





: 4 . ylvanb.- Car 1 3000+ uis soto 
4 wil hall Gough igh (gi m) Lake % L7 
Go = Mit y 7 coe “A Ss i | G 
Snie. — i r LS Mh. 


physical map 


rigs National park boundary 





H gums Boundary H 
@ Provincial capital 
| ° City or town 
+ Elevation above sea level 
| _ Dam 
I , | 
= Mountain pass “ oe 
4 i ‘s eee ss Pekowki Ko as ‘ 
, : + ‘Sr Mery Res. Lake 
| f t 
Icefield or glacie IATERTON LAKES pik River 
JONALPARK “CRNADA ee 
WORLD BOOK m NT TES 
ap "UNITED STA eS 
_ é | i po ng= < . 
0 100 500 Miles 
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 Kilometers 





324 Alberta 





Alberta Agriculture 


Vast wheat fields cover much of the southern Alberta Plain. Fertile soil and regular rainfall help 
make the Alberta Plain the major farming region of the province. Wheat is Albertas chief crop. The 


province is also an important producer of barley, oats, and rye. 


Lake Athabasca is the largest lake in Alberta. A third 
of this 3,064-square-mile (7,935-square-kilometer) lake 
lies in northeastern Alberta, and the rest is in Saskatche- 
wan. Other large lakes in Alberta include Lake Claire in 
the northeast and Lesser Slave Lake in the central re- 
gion. Beautiful Lake Louise in Banff National Park is Al- 
bertas most famous lake. 

Plant and animal life. Forests cover about half the 
province. Important trees include balsam poplar, balsam 
fir, Douglas-fir, jack pine, lodgepole pine, tamarack, 
trembling aspen, and black, white, and Engelmann 
spruce. Flowers in Alberta bloom from early spring, 
when crocuses appear, to autumn, when frost withers 
the goldenrods and asters. The provincial flower, the 
wild rose, grows throughout the province. Purple fire- 
weeds, which thrive on scorched forest lands, quickly 
cover the woodlands after a fire. Blueberries, chokeber- 
ries, highbush cranberries, raspberries, saskatoons, and 
strawberries grow over much of the countryside. 

Alberta lies along three of the major North American 
flyways used by birds migrating between their winter 
and summer homes (see Bird {How birds migratel). 
Many kinds of songbirds live in the river valleys. Game 
birds, especially ducks and geese, nest on lakes and 
sloughs throughout the province. Many wetlands are 
managed to improve nesting success. 

Alberta has many native mammals. Several species of 
ground squirrels live in the province. Snowshoe hares 
are found throughout Alberta. Pronghorns and mule 
and white-tailed deer are common in the grasslands. 
Black bears, caribou, chipmunks, elk, moose, mule deer, 
tree squirrels, and white-tailed deer can be found in the 
forests. Bighorn sheep, elk, grizzly bears, mountain 
goats, mountain lions, and mule deer inhabit the moun- 
tains of Alberta. 

Bears, beavers, coyotes, ermines, fishers, foxes, 
lynxes, martens, minks, muskrats, squirrels, wolves, and 
wolverines are common in the northern half of the prov- 


ince. Some native people in this area make a living by 
trapping these animals for fur. 

Important species of fish in the lakes and rivers of Al- 
berta include grayling, pickerel, pike, trout, and white- 
fish. Several species of reptiles are found in the south- 
ern parts of the province. But these animals are less 
common in the cooler northern areas. 

Climate. Alberta has long, cold winters and short, 
warm summers. Temperatures in both summer and win- 
ter are generally much lower in the north than in the 
south. January temperatures in the province average 5 °F 
(—15 °C), and July temperatures average 59 °F (15 °C). Fort 
Vermilion had the lowest recorded temperature, — 78 °F 
(—61 °C), on Jan. 11, 1911. Medicine Hat had the highest, 
108 °F (42 °C), on July 12, 1886. Precipitation (rain, melted 
snow, and other forms of moisture) averages 12 to 21 
inches (30 to 53 centimeters) yearly. Annual snowfall 
ranges from about 70 inches (180 centimeters) in the 
north to 30 inches (76 centimeters) in the south. 


Average monthly weather 


Tin a. cele “Rie Me ee 


Edmonton Calgary 


Temperatures = Days of Temperatures = Days of 
F € rain or F iC rain or 


High Low Hightow snow High Low High Low) snow 





Jan. 17 1 |-8 =18 Jan. 2¢ 5 -3 -15 ; 
Feb. 2 Zi-6 —17 Feb. 28 6 |-2 -14 | 8 
Mar. | 33 14 1 —10 Mar. 37 if 3 -9) ? 
Apr. | 51 29) 11 -2 Apr. | 52. 27 | 11-3 
May | 64 » | 18 4 May 63 37 17 3 

June | 7 16) 21 8 june | 68 44 20 7 2 
July Fe es 244 0O July 76 49 | 24 9 

Aug. | 72 47 |22 & Aug | 74 46/23 8& 

Sept | V7 4 ) Sept | 6) 39 | 18 4 8 
Oct. 52 WW —1 Oct Ss 3 2 —1 | ic 
Nov. ¢ 1 9 Nov. | 38 18 3 -8 | : 
Dec. 2 7 —16 Dec. |! 29 9 2 -13 








Alberta 325 


Average January temperatures 


Alberta has long, cold winters. The prov- 
ince’s temperatures decrease steadily 
from the south to the far northern region. 


Average July temperatures 


The province has short, mild summers. 
The southeastern part of Alberta has the 
warmest summertime temperatures. 


Average yearly precipitation 


Precipitation varies widely throughout the 
province. The north and southeast are 
much drier than the southwestern area. 


Degrees 
Celsius 


Degrees 
Fahrenheit 


Above 10 
Oto 10 
-8 100 
Below -8 


Degrees 
Fahrenheit 


Above -12 
-18 to -12 
-22 to - 18 
Below -22 


Above 64 
59 to 64 
50 to 59 





Grande Praine, 





WORLD BOOK maps; based on the National Atlas of Canada. 


1151018 





Degrees 
Celsius 


Above 18 


Inches Centimeters 
More thon 32 More thon 81 


20 to 32 i 51 to 81 


161020} | 41 10 51 
Less thon 16 || Less thon 41 





Fort MeMurray 


Grand Praine, 
— ce 


Edmonton 
e 


. Red Deer 


Economy 


In the early days, the economy of the Alberta region 
was based chiefly on the fur trade. Agriculture became 
important during the late 1800's. Petroleum and natural 
gas became important sources of income during the 
1950's. Today, Alberta has a diversified economy built on 
agriculture and resource-based industries. Service in- 
dustries, taken together, account for the largest portion 
of Alberta's gross domestic product (GDP)—the total val- 
ue of all goods and services produced in the province in 
a year. Mining is Alberta’s second most important eco- 
nomic activity. It accounts for about a fifth of the prov- 
ince’s gross domestic product. 

Natural resources. Alberta's fertile soil helps pro- 
duce plentiful crops. Its vast mineral deposits supply im- 
portant industries. The provincial government owns 
most of the mineral and forest resources, and enforces 
strict regulations to protect them and the land. 

Soil. The brown soil of the southeastern prairies, 
which gets little rain, is the only soil in Alberta that re- 
quires irrigation. The rich, dark-brown or black soil of 
the other prairies receives more rain and produces 
much of Alberta's grain. The Parklands have the richest 
topsoil, much of it 1 foot (30 centimeters) thick. The up- 
lands and northern forests have gray soil. 

Minerals. Alberta has about 5 billion barrels of oil de- 
posits in underground pools. After an oil well has been 
drilled, provincial laws require the oil companies to re- 
move the drilling rig and restore the land to its former 
state. In the Athabasca River Valley, bituminous sands 
are so soaked with oil that a person gets oily handling 
them. Indians and fur traders once used these sands to 
make their canoes watertight. Experts estimate that the 


oil-sands deposits extend 54,000 square miles (140,000 
square kilometers) and contain as much as 1 + trillion 
barrels of oil. These are among the world’s largest 
known reserves. About 95 trillion cubic feet (2.7 trillion 
cubic meters) of natural gas lie underground, most of it 
near oil fields. 

Most of Canada’s known coal reserves lie in Alberta. 
Coal beds cover 117,000 square miles (303,000 square 
kilometers) from the foothills of the Rockies through 
much of the central and southern plains. Most of Alber- 
tas deposits consist of soft forms of coal called bitumi- 
nous coaland subbituminous coal. 

Sand and gravel are found throughout the province. 
Fine limestone occurs on the eastern slopes of the 
Rocky Mountains, and clay and shale are plentiful in the 
Medicine Hat area. Thick salt beds are found in the 
northeast and near Edmonton. Other mined products in- 
clude potash, quartz, sodium sulfate, and sulfur. 

Service industries, taken together, account for the 
largest portion of Alberta's gross domestic product. The 
province s service industries are concentrated in the 
Calgary and Edmonton metropolitan areas. 

Community, business, and personal services is Alber- 
tas most important economic activity in terms of gross 
domestic product. This industry group is also the lead- 
ing employer in the province. These services include 
such activities as education, health care, legal services, 
engineering services, and the operation of hotels, res- 
taurants, and recreational facilities. This service group 
benefits heavily from the thousands of tourists that visit 
the province each year. Banff National Park in the Rocky 
Mountains and the cities of Calgary and Edmonton rank 


326 Alberta 


Production and workers by economic activities 


Patant Employed workers 

of GDP” Number Percent 
Economic activities produced _ of people of total 
Community, business, 

& personal services 20 601,900 38 
Miningt is 83,300 5 
Finance, insurance, 

& real estate 16 79,000 5 
Manufacturing 10 140,100 2 
Wholesale & retail trade 9 252,600 16 
Transportation & 

communication 9 159,300 10 
Construction 7 128,300 8 
Government 4 61,900 4 
Agriculture 3 69,300 4 
Utilities 3 12,500 1 
Total 100 1,588,200 100 


*GDP - gross domestic product. the total value of goods and services produced in a year. 
tEmployment figures include forestry and fishing. 

Figures are for 2000 

Source Statistics Canada, 


among Alberta's leading tourist destinations. 

Finance, insurance, and real estate form the second 
most important service industry group in terms of gross 
domestic product. This group benefits greatly from in- 
come brought in by the province's petroleum and gas 
industries. For example, each year the provincial govern- 
ment collects millions of dollars in royalties from petro- 
leum companies, which it invests in the province's finan- 
cial institutions. The government sets aside money for 
investments so it will have money to draw on at times 
that oil and gas revenues decline. 

Ranking next among Albertas service industries are (1) 
wholesale and retail trade and {2) transportation and 
communication. Each of these groups accounts for an 
equal share of the province's gross domestic product. 

The province's wholesale trade is based mainly on the 
distribution of food and mined products. Alberta ex- 
ports large amounts of petroleum and natural gas to the 
United States. Retail trade establishments include de- 
partment stores, grocery stores, and specialty shops. 
These businesses also benefit from tourist spending. 

Telecommunications is a major part of the transporta- 
tion and communication sector. More information on 
this industry group appears later in this section. 

Government ranks fifth. Many government activities 
are centered in Edmonton, Alberta’ capital. 

Mining. Petroleum is Alberta's leading mineral prod- 
uct, and the province produces about 70 percent of 
Canada’s oil. About 55,000 wells in Alberta yield about 
600 million barrels of petroleum each year. Alberta's ma- 
jor oil fields are at Judy Creek, Pembina, Rainbow Lake, 
Redwater, and Swan Hills. The province has two large 
plants that produce petroleum from oil sands. These 
plants lie near Fort McMurray in the Athabasca River 
Valley. Smaller plants operate at Cold Lake and Peace 
River. Petroleum produced from oil sands accounts for 
about 40 percent of the province s total oil production. 

Alberta produces about 80 percent of Canada’s natur- 


al gas. Pipelines carry petroleum and natural gas 
throughout Alberta and to the east, south, and west. 
Gathering lines transport the fuels within the province 
and feed them into cross-country lines. The Interprovin- 
cial Pipeline starts in Redwater, near Edmonton. It car- 
ries Alberta oil about 2,600 miles (4,100 kilometers) east 
to Quebec City. The Trans Mountain Pipeline carries oil 
718 miles (1,156 kilometers) west, from Edmonton to re- 
fineries in Vancouver, British Columbia. Alberta pipe- 
lines feed natural gas into the Trans-Canada Pipeline, 
which extends over 2,300 miles (3,700 kilometers) from 
the Alberta-Saskatchewan border to Quebec City. All 
these pipelines have branches into the United States. In 
addition, a network of pipelines 1,370 miles (2,200 kilo- 
meters) long carries natural gas from Alberta to Califor- 
nia. The Trans-Canada Pipeline, with all its branches, is 
the longest pipeline in Canada. 

Petroleum and natural gas account for more than 90 
percent of Alberta’s mining income. Of the province's 
other mined products, coal, sand and gravel, and sulfur 
are most important. Vast deposits of coal lie in southern 
Alberta. Most of the coal is obtainable by surface min- 
ing. Major surface mining operations take place to the 
west of Edmonton and to the east of Red Deer. Much of 
Alberta's sand and gravel production occurs in the 
south-central part of the province. Sand and gravel are 
used mainly for building roadbeds. Almost all of Alber- 
tas sulfur comes from processing natural gas. Sulfur is 
used in the manufacture of paper and fertilizer. 

Manufacturing. Goods produced in Alberta have a 
value added by manufacture of about 14 billion Canadi- 
an dollars yearly. This figure represents the difference 
between the value of raw materials and the value of fin- 
ished products manufactured from the raw materials. 

The production of chemicals is the leading manufac- 
turing activity in Alberta. The province's main chemical 
products are petrochemicals and fertilizers. Petrochemi- 
cals are produced from petroleum and include such 
compounds as ethylene and methanol. 

Food and beverage processing is Alberta's second 
most important manufacturing activity in terms of annual 
value added by manufacture. Meat packing is the lead- 
ing type of food processing in Alberta. The Calgary area 
is a major center of Canada’s meat-packing industry. 
Other important products include animal feed, beer, 
dairy products, and flour. 

Other leading products manufactured in Alberta tn- 
clude fabricated metal products, paper and allied prod- 
ucts, and wood products. Machine tools, metal contain- 
ers, and structural metal are the main fabricated metal 
products. Newsprint is the primary type of paper pro- 
duced in the province. Leading wood products include 
lumber, cabinets, doors, and window frames. 

Agriculture. Alberta has approximately 55,000 farms. 
Farmland covers about a third of the land area. Alberta 
has about two-thirds of Canada’s irrigated farmland. 

Beef cattle are the leading farm product in Alberta, 
providing nearly half of the annual farm income. The 
heaviest concentration of cattle ranches lies in a wide 
belt that begins north of Calgary and extends to the U.S. 
border. Alberta has more beef cattle than any other 
province. Farmers in Alberta also raise large numbers of 
dairy cattle, hogs, and sheep. 

Wheat, the leading crop in Alberta, is grown through- 


Economy of Alberta 


This map shows the economic uses of Jand in Alberta and where 
the province's leading farm, mineral, and forest products are 
produced. Major manufacturing centers are shown in red. 


Mostly cropland 
‘ial Mostly grazing land ° 
ae Forest land ° 





Mostly unproductive land 
with alpine vegetation 


Manufacturing and 
service industry center 


Mineral deposit 





WORLD BOOK map 


out much of the province. Only Saskatchewan produces 
more wheat. Other leading crops include canola, barley, 
and ornamental plants. Canola is used to make cooking 
oil, and barley is used mainly as livestock feed. 
Forestry. Alberta has vast timber resources. Forests 
cover about half of Alberta's land area. Forests grow pri- 
marily in the northern and western parts of the province. 


Alberta 327 


Softwoods, such as spruce and pine, are the most valu- 
able species. Aspen hardwoods are also important. 
Most timber is used for lumber and for pulp and paper. 
The provincial government regulates timber harvesting. 

Electric power and utilities. Coal is the chief fuel for 
power plants in the province. Three major stations have 
been built near deposits of easily mined coal. Natural 
gas is also used to fuel power plants. Several hydroelec- 
tric stations are on the Bow River and its branches, and 
on the Brazeau River. Utilities in the province also pro- 
vide gas and water service. 

Transportation. Alberta has a fine highway system. 
Two transcontinental highways, the Yellowhead and the 
Trans-Canada, cross Alberta from east to west. The 
North/South Trade Corridor provides an important con- 
nection between northern Alberta and markets in the 
southern part of the province. 

Major airports at Calgary and Edmonton offer both 
domestic and international service. Alberta also has 
eight regional airports with scheduled service. Many 
small airports handle important cargo traffic for north- 
ern Alberta, the Northwest Territories, and Yukon Terri- 
tory. Alberta is the headquarters for WestJet, an airline 
that serves mainly western Canada. 

Alberta has an excellent system of railroads. Two 
transcontinental rail lines, the Canadian National Railway 
and the Canadian Pacific Railway, cross the province 
from east to west. They connect Alberta's exporters of 
grain, coal, and forest and petroleum products with 
western ports. The head office of the Canadian Pacific is 
in Calgary. Alberta is also home to the Central Western 
Railways, another important railroad system. 

Water transportation declined after the province's fur- 
trading days. However, the discovery of petroleum in 
Alaska and the Northwest Territories renewed interest 
in water transportation. In warm weather, barges carry 
freight on the Athabasca River and the Slave River, 
which link northern regions of Alberta with the northern 
part of the Northwest Territories. In winter, airplanes 
equipped with landing skis and other special equipment 
are used to haul freight on frozen lakes and rivers. 

Communication. The first newspaper in the Alberta 
region was the Edmonton Bulletin, published from 1880 
to 1951. Alberta has 9 daily newspapers and about 110 
weeklies. The Edmonton Journal is the largest daily 
newspaper. Alberta’s first radio station, CFAC in Calgary, 
began broadcasting in 1922. The province’s first televi- 
sion station, CHCT-TV, also in Calgary, started in 1954. 
Today, Alberta has about 60 radio stations and 11 televi- 
sion stations. Cable television systems and Internet 
providers serve many Alberta communities. 


Government 


Lieutenant governor of Alberta represents the 
British monarch, Queen Elizabeth !I, in her role as the 
queen of Canada. The lieutenant governor is appointed 
by the governor general in council of Canada for a peri- 
od of at least five years. The position of lieutenant gover- 
nor is largely honorary. 

Premier of Alberta is the actual head of the provincial 
government. Alberta, like Canada itself, has a parliamen- 
tary form of government. The premier of the province is 


an elected member of the Legislative Assembly. The 
person who serves as Alberta's premier is usually the 
leader of the party holding the most seats in the Legisla- 
tive Assembly. 

The Executive Council includes ministers who are 
chosen by the premier from among members of the 
premier s party in the Legislative Assembly. Each minis- 
ter directs one or more departments of the provincial 
government. The Executive Council, like the premier, 





328 Alberta 





Alberta Legis!ature 


Alberta’s legislature, called the Legislative Assembly, has one 
house. Its members serve terms of up to five years. 


resigns if it loses the support of a majority of the Legisla- 
tive Assembly. 

Legislative Assembly of Alberta is a one-house leg- 
islature that makes the provincial laws. It has 83 mem- 
bers, each of whom is elected from a separate electoral 
district called a constituency. The members terms may 
last up to five years. However, the lieutenant governor, 
on the advice of the premier, may call for an election be- 
fore the end of the five-year period. If this is done, all 
members of the Assembly must run again for office. 

Courts. The highest court in Alberta is the Court of 
Appeal. It hears only appeals in civil and criminal cases. 
The Court of Appeal has the chief justice of Alberta and 
12 justices of appeal. The Court of Queen's Bench hears 
all cases involving murder, treason, and other major 
crimes. This court has a chief justice, an associate chief 
justice, and 61 judges. 

Judges of Alberta's Court of Appeal and the Court of 
Queen's Bench are appointed by the governor general 
in council. They can serve until the age of 75. Provincial 
court judges hear provincial, civil, family, and youth cas- 
es and are appointed by the lieutenant governor in 


to three-year terms. Every year, the councilors choose 
one of their number as mayor. Voters in Alberta’s coun- 
ties and municipal districts also elect councilors to 
three-year terms. Every year, these councilors choose 
one of their number to serve as reeve (chief official). In 
some cases, the council passes a bylaw that requires the 
reeve to be elected by the people of the municipality. 

Alberta also has eight unincorporated improvement 
districts, three special areas, and two specialized munic- 
ipalities. The provincial Department of Municipal Affairs 
manages these units of local government Elected coun- 
cilors serve in advisory roles. 

Revenue. Taxation accounts for the largest portion of 
the provincial government's general revenue (income). 
The next largest source of general revenue comes from 
the government's charges for rights to petroleum de- 
posits. In the past, some of this money was invested in a 
special fund. Investments made with the fund’s money 
continue to provide revenue. Like other provinces, Al- 
berta receives financial aid from the federal govern- 
ment. Alberta is the only province with no sales tax. 

Politics. Since Alberta became a province in 1905, 
four parties have controlled its political life. The Liberal 
Party was the first to control the provincial government. 
It held power from 1905 until 1921. In 1921, the United 
Farmers of Alberta came into office. It was formed dur- 
ing a period of low farm prices. During the Great De- 
pression of the 1930's, the people of Alberta became 
dissatisfied with the government's failure to solve the 
province's economic problems. A new party, the Social 
Credit Party, won control of the provincial government 
in 1935. The Progressive Conservative Party has con- 
trolled Alberta's Legislative Assembly since 1971. 


The premiers of Alberta 


Party Term 
Alexander C. Rutherford Liberal 1905-1910 
Arthur L. Sifton Liberal 1910-1917 
Charles Stewart Liberal 1917-1921 


Herbert Greenfield United Farmers 


council. The Provincial Court of Alberta consists of a of Alberta 1921-1925 
chief judge, 9 assistant chief judges, and 99 judges. jot. E. Breagtae ea ih 1925-1934 
Local government Alberta has 64 rural municipali- Richard G. Reid Gained Panners 
ties, 15 cities, 110 towns, 105 villages, and 52 summer of Alberta 1934-1935 
villages. Each of these incorporated units of local gov- William Aberhart Social Credit 1935-1943 
ernment is self-regulated. A summer village is a commu- iat iio re an oat 
; ‘einality ; ; ‘ai m ocial Credi E 
nity or municipality in a resort area that provides munici- Pa pales pease 
pal services throughout the year. Conservative 197 1a 
The voters of each city and town in Alberta elect a Donald R. Getty Progressive 
mayor and council to three-year terms. The council con- Conservative 1985-1992 
sists of seven councilors unless the council passes a by- Ralph Klein Progressive 
law that specifies a higher or lower odd number. Village Conservative — 1992: 
and summer village voters elect three or five councilors 
History 


Indian days. When Europeans first arrived in the Al- 
berta region, the Blackfoot Indian nation lived in the 
southern prairies and foothills. It consisted of the Blood, 
Piegan, and Siksika (North Blackfoot) tribes. The Sarcee, 
their allies, also lived in the south. The Cree lived in the 


northern forests. Other Indians of the Alberta region in- 
cluded the Beaver and Gros Ventre tribes, and the 
Stonies, a branch of the Assiniboine tribe. 

The fur trade. In 1670, King Charles II of England 
granted fur-trading rights in the Alberta region to the 





Hudson's Bay Company. The region was part of a vast 
territory called Rupert's Land. The first white person 
known to visit the Alberta region was Anthony Henday. 
In 1754, the Hudson's Bay Company sent Henday to pro- 
mote trade with the Blackfoot Indians. He stayed with 
the Blackfoot that winter and returned to York Factory, 
on Hudson Bay, in 1755. See Henday, Anthony; Hud- 
sons Bay Company. 

In 1778, Peter Pond, an American, built a fur-trading 
post near Lake Athabasca. During the 1780's, the North 
West Company, formed by fur traders in Montreal, 
began to compete with the Hudson's Bay Company. The 
firms competed in the Alberta region until they com- 
bined in 1821. See North West Company. 

In 1788, Roderick Mackenzie, a fur trader, established 
Fort Chipewyan. His cousin, Sir Alexander Mackenzie, 
traveled from this post to the Arctic Ocean in 1789 and 
to the Pacific Ocean in 1792-1793 (see Mackenzie, Sir 
Alexander). Between 1789 and 1812, the geographer 
David Thompson made surveys that provided the first 
good map of the Canadian Northwest. 

The missionaries. During the mid-1800's, most of 
the settlers in the Alberta region were traders and metis 
(people of mixed Indian and white descent). Missionar- 
ies converted many Indians. They introduced schools 
and attempted to persuade Indians and metis to settle 
permanently and begin farming. 

Robert T. Rundle, a Methodist, was the first mission- 
ary in the region. He arrived in 1840 and stayed until 
1848. Two other Methodist leaders, George McDougall 
and his son, John McDougall, arrived in the Alberta re- 
gion in 1863. A priest named Jean Thibault established 
Alberta's first Roman Catholic mission in 1843 in Lac Ste. 
Anne. In 1852, Albert Lacombe, another Catholic priest, 
began working among the Indians and métis. Lacombe 
founded the town of St. Albert in 1861. 

Early settlement. In 1870, the Hudson's Bay Com- 
pany gave up Rupert's Land to the British government, 
which then transferred it to the newly formed Dominion 
of Canada. The dominion paid the company $14 million 
and permitted it to keep large areas of the plains. Later 
in 1870, Canada established the North West Territories, 
which included the Alberta region and the rest of the 
former Rupert's Land. 

At this time, traders from Montana were Carrying on 
an illegal liquor trade with the Indians in the North West 
Territories. To stop this trade and to prepare the way for 
peaceful settlement of the region, the Canadian govern- 
ment organized the North-West Mounted Police (see 
Royal Canadian Mounted Police [History]). The Mount- 
ies established their first post in the Alberta region in 
1874 at Fort Macleod, and stopped the illegal trading. 
The Mounties won the confidence and respect of the In- 
dians. Within a few years, the Indians and the Canadian 
government signed three treaties. Treaty No. 6, signed 
in 1876 and Treaty No. 7, signed in 1877, gave the Cana- 
dian government the central and southern parts of Al- 
berta in return for reservations, annual payments, and 
promises of future assistance for the Indians. Treaty No. 
8, signed in 1899, gave the northern half of Alberta to 
Canada on similar terms. 

By 1883, about 500 settlers, most of them cattle ranch- 
ers, were living in the Alberta region. That year, the Ca- 
nadian Pacific Railway (now called CP Rail System) linked 


Alberta 329 


Calgary with cities in eastern Canada. The North West 
Rebellion of 1885, an uprising of Indians and metis led 
by Louis Riel, caused great alarm in the Alberta region. 
However, the only violence in the area was the killing of 
nine whites by Indians at Frog Lake. See North West Re- 
bellion. 

A new province. Opportunities for settlement in the 
Alberta region drew thousands of farmers from eastern 
Canada, the United States, and northern and central Eu- 
rope. In 1905, the Canadian government established the 
province of Alberta. Alexander C. Rutherford, a Liberal, 
became the first premier. Alberta's first major oil discov- 
ery was made in 1914, in Turner Valley. 

After World War | (1914-1918), many farmers lost their 
land because of drought and low prices on farm prod- 
ucts. The United Farmers of Alberta, a new political 
party, won control of the provincial government from 
the Liberal Party in 1921. The new party received sup- 
port from the farmers, who felt it could best protect 
their interests. Prosperity returned soon. The provincial 
government improved and expanded education, high- 
ways, and public health programs. 

Low farm prices during the Great Depression of the 
1930's helped bring another new party to power in Al- 
berta. The Social Credit Party, led by William Aberhart, 
was elected in 1935. It had promised to solve the prob- 
lems of the depression. The new government did pass 
laws to control banking and credit, but the federal gov- 
ernment declared these laws unconstitutional. 

The mid-1900’s. Alberta prospered during World 
War II (1939-1945). Farmers raised grain and livestock to 
help meet the food needs of the Allies. Mining and man- 
ufacturing increased with the production of war goods. 

In 1947, petroleum and natural gas were discovered 
at Leduc, near Edmonton. The discoveries led to wide- 
spread industrialization that changed Alberta's econ- 
omy. The province owned most of the mineral rights in 
the land and received income from leases, rentals, and 
royalties (shares of the profits). Alberta used the money 
to expand its hospitals, roads, schools, and other public 
works. In 1957, the province paid its citizens a dividend 
from its oil income. Every adult who had lived in Alberta 
for at least five years received $20. In 1958, ihe provin- 
cial government paid a dividend of $17.50. 

In 1954, for the first time, the combined value of Al- 
berta mining and manufacturing became greater than 
that of agriculture. As industrialization increased, thou- 
sands of workers came to Alberta from other provinces, 
Europe, and the United States. Alberta's population in- 
creased greatly in the late 1950's and became mostly 
urban instead of rural. In 1945, less than a fourth of the 
people lived in Calgary or Edmonton. By 1966, about half 
the people lived in those two cities. 

In 1958, James Gladstone of Alberta became the first 
Indian in the Canadian Senate. His appointment had 
been recommended by Prime Minister John G. Diefen- 
baker. 

In 1962, coal production in Alberta dropped to a rec- 
ord low. The coal industry had begun to decline in the 
1950's. For example, railroads switched from coal to die- 
sel fuel as diesel locomotives replaced steam engines. 
Also, natural gas and fuel oil replaced coal in many heat- 
ing systems. But in 1967, Japan became a new market for 
coal, and coal production started to increase. 


330 Alberta 


°Historic —Alberta 


Sir Alexander Mackenzie left 
Fort Chipewyan in 1789 on an ex- 
pedition in which he discovered 
the Mackenzie River, the longest 
river in Canada. 





Missionaries in Alberta during the 
mid-1800's converted many Indians and 
meétis (people of mixed white and indian 
descent) to settled ways of life on farms 
and in permanent homes. 





Ranching began in the 1880's when 
Montana ranchers drove their cattle 
across the Canadian border to the pas- 
turelands of southern Alberta. 


Important dates in Alberta 


1670 King Charles II of England granted trading rights in 
the Alberta region to the Hudson's Bay Company. 

1754-1755 Anthony Henday of the Hudson's Bay Company 
explored the Alberta region. 

1778 Peter Pond of the United States established a trading 
post near Lake Athabasca. 

1840 Robert T. Rundle became the first missionary in the 

Alberta region. 

The North-West Mounted Police established Fort 

Macleod. 

1876-1877 Indians signed two treaties surrendering central 
and southern Alberta to the Canadian government. 


1883. The Canadian Pacific Railway (now CP Rail System) 
reached Calgary. 


1874 





The North-West 
Mounted Police came 
to Alberta in 1874. The 
Mounties drove liquor 
traders and outlaws 
from the region. 






Oil and natural gas discoveries in 
Turner Valley in 1914 led to the devel- 
opment of a petroleum and natural gas 
field that is still productive. 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Kevin Chadwick 


Alberta became a province on September 1. 
A major oi] discovery was made in Turner Valley. 


The United Farmers of Alberta, a new political party, 
came to power. 


The Social Credit Party, another new organization, 
took over the Alberta government. 


The discovery of oi! at Leduc started widespread in- 
dustrialization in Alberta. 


The combined value of Alberta's mining and manufac- 
turing exceeded that of agriculture for the first time. 


Alberta's first plant to remove oil from bituminous 
sands began operation. 


The Progressive Conservative Party came to power, 
ending 36 years of rule by the Social Credit Party. 


The Winter Olympic Games were held in Calgary. 





In 1967, Alberta's first plant to remove oil from the bi- 
tuminous sands of the Athabasca River Valiey was com- 
pleted. The Alberta ‘resources railway’ went into opera- 
tion in 1969. This 235-mile (378-kilometer) line extends 
from Grande Prairie to Brule. It opened undeveloped 
land in northern Alberta so that industry could reach 
mineral deposits and timber. The Alberta portions of the 
Trans-Canada Highway and the Yellowhead Highway 
also were completed during the 1960's. 

In 1971, voters gave control of Alberta's government 
to the Progressive Conservative Party, ending 36 years of 
Social Credit Party rule. Peter Lougheed became pre- 
mier. He resigned in 1985. Donald R. Getty, a Progressive 
Conservative, succeeded Lougheed as premier. Getty re- 
signed in 1992, and the Progressive Conservatives chose 
Ralph Klein as the new party leader and premier. 

In the 1970's and early 1980's, Alberta experienced 
great industrial expansion. The province's vast oil de- 
posits have attracted many new industries, and thou- 
sands of people from other parts of Canada have come 
to Alberta to find jobs in the new industries. A second 
plant to remove oil from Alberta's bituminous sands 
opened in 1978. This plant is the largest industrial com- 
plex ever built in Alberta. 

Recent developments. Calgary and Edmonton grew 
rapidly due to the expansion of retail trade, tourism, and 
other service industries. The 1988 Winter Olympic 
Games were held in Calgary. Calgary also became the 
headquarters of the Reform Party of Canada, founded in 
1987. The Reform Party called for more attention to the 
western provinces and reform of Canada’s constitution 
to create an elected Senate. The party grew rapidly. In 
the 1993 national election, it won 52 seats in the Canadi- 
an House of Commons. In the 1997 election, it won the 
second largest number of seats and as a result became 
the official opposition. In 2000, Reform members voted 
to dissolve the party and join a new conservative party 
called the Canadian Reform Conservative Alliance. The 
new party, commonly known as the Canadian Alliance, 
then became the official opposition in the House of 
Commons. G. Peter Kershaw and Roderick C Macleod 


Study aids 
Related articles in World Book include: 
Biographies 
McLuhan, Mar- 
Shall 


Michener, Roland 
Murphy, Emily G. 


Bennett, Richard B. | Henday, Anthony 
Clark, Joe Mackenzie, Roder- 
Crowfoot ick 

Day, Stockwell Manning, Preston 


Cities and towns 


Banff 
Calgary 


Edmonton Lethbridge 


Physical features 


Lake Louise 
Peace River 


Athabasca River 
Lake Athabasca 


Rocky Mountains 
Saskatchewan River 
Other related articles 


Banft National Park Jasper National Park 


Hudson's Bay Company North West Company 
Outline 
I. People 
A. Population B. Schools 


Alberti, Leon Battista 331 


C. Libraries and museums 
ll. Visitor's guide 

A. Places to visit 
Ill. Land and climate 

A. Land regions 


B. Annual events 


C. Plant and animal life 


B. Rivers and lakes D. Climate 
IV. Economy 
A. Natural resources F. Forestry 


B. Service industries G. Electric power 
C. Mining H. Transportation 
D. Agriculture |. Communication 
E. Manufacturing 

V. Government 


A. Lieutenant governor E. Local government 


B. Premier F. Revenue 
C.Legislative Assembly __ G. Politics 
D.Courts 
VI. History 
Questions 


What is Alberta's chief mineral product? 

What are Alberta's two metropolitan areas? 

Which three national parks are located in Alberta's Rocky 
Mountains? 

Why are Alberta's bituminous sands important? 

What is Alberta’s chief farming region? 

Which political party developed in Alberta during the Great De- 
pression of the 1930's? 

What changes took place in Alberta in the 1950's? 

How do Alberta's juries differ from those of the other provinces? 
Why? 

What illegal activity first brought the North-West Mounted Po- 
lice to the Alberta region? When? 

What is the “resources railway”? 


Additional resources 


Level! 

Bakken, Edna. A/berta Grolier, 1991. 

Beckett, Harry. A/berta. Rourke, 1997. 

LeVert, Suzanne. A/berta. Chelsea Hse., 1991. 

Yates, Sarah. A/berta. Lerner, 1995. 

Level Il 

Hempstead, Andrew, and Purdon, Nadina. A/berta and the 
Northwest Territories Handbook. 3rd ed. Moon Pubns., 1999. 
A travel guidebook. 

Palmer, Howard and Tamara. A/berta. Hurtig, 1990. 

Silverman, Eliane L The Last Best West Women on the Alberta 
Frontier, 1880-1930. Rev. ed. Fifth Hse. Pubs., 1998. 

Voisey, Paul. Vulcan: The Making of a Prairie Community. Univ. of 
Toronto Pr., 1988. Describes life in southern Alberta in the 
early 1900's. 


Alberta, University of, is a government-supported, 
coeducational university in Edmonton, Canada. The uni- 
versity has undergraduate and graduate programs in 
agriculture and forestry, arts, business, dentistry, educa- 
tion, engineering, home economics, law, library sci- 
ence, medicine, nursing, pharmacy, physical education, 
rehabilitation medicine, and science. Its School of Native 
Studies offers programs that focus on issues affecting 
Canadian Inuit (formerly called Eskimos) and Indians. 
The university has a French-language faculty (Faculté 
Saint-Jean), which offers degree programs in arts, sci- 
ence, and education. 

The provincial legislature of Alberta established the 
university in 1906. The school opened in 1908. 

Critically reviewed by the University of Albena 
Alberti, ah/ BEHR tee, Leon Battista, /ay OHN baht 
TEES tah (1404-1472), was an Italian Renaissance archi- 
tect, painter, and scholar. He spent his early years study- 
ing ancient Greek and Roman civilizations. During this 
time, he gained a reputation as a humanist and learned 


332 Albertus Magnus, Saint 


Latin scholar as he wrote two influential books, On 
Painting (1435) and On Architecture (begun in the 1440's). 
The work on painting was the first scientific study of 
perspective (representing objects on a flat surface to 
give the illusion of receding distance). 

From 1450 until his death, Alberti concentrated on ar- 
chitecture. His best-known buildings include the church 
of San Francesco (1450) in Rimini and the Rucellai Palace 
(1452) in Florence, as well as the facade (front) of the 
church of Santa Maria Novella (about 1456-1470) in Flo- 
rence. Another of his masterpieces, the church of Sant 
Andrea in Mantua, was completed in 1494, after his 
death. Alberti was born in Genoa. J. William Rudd 

See also Architecture (Early Renaissance architecture; 
picture); Florence (picture: Santa Maria Novella). 
Albertus Magnus, Saint (1206?-1280), was a Ger- 
man-born Christian theologian, philosopher, and scien- 
tist. His importance lies in his awareness of the differ- 
ence between theology and philosophy and between 
revealed truth and experimental science. He believed 
that different areas of knowledge follow different sets of 
laws and require different methods of investigation. 

Albertus was advanced for his time in his knowledge 
of the sciences. He wrote about many scientific subjects, 
including astronomy, chemistry, geography, and physi- 
ology, using his own scientific observations. He devoted 
much of his time to popularizing the writings of the an- 
cient Greek philosopher Aristotle. Albertus wrote a 
large number of commentaries on Aristotle's philoso- 
phy. These writings influenced Saint Thomas Aquinas, 
Albertus's most famous pupil, and other theologians 
known as scholastics (see Scholasticism). 

Albertus Magnus was born into a noble family in 
Lauingen, near Ulm. He attended the University of Padua 
in Italy, where he joined the Dominican religious order 
in 1223. He studied and taught at a number of European 
universities but spent most of his time in Cologne, Ger- 
many. Albertus served as a high-ranking Dominican offi- 
cial in Germany, as a bishop, and as a representative of 
the pope. His feast day is November 15. Albertus is the 
patron saint of students of the natural sciences. 

Marilyn J. Harran 
Albigenses, 41 buh JEHN seez, were a group named 
for Albi, a city in southern France. They were part of a 
sect called the Cathari, which flourished in parts of 
France, Germany, and Italy during the 1100's and 1200's. 
The Albigenses believed that the principles of good and 
evil continually opposed each other in the world. They 
believed that worldly things represented the evil force 
and that the human spirit was the only good. They 
taught that the spirit had been imprisoned in the body 
as punishment for sinning, and that the highest good 
was to free the spirit from the body. The Albigenses op- 
posed marriage, bearing children, and eating meat and 
other animal products. They advocated suicide, espe- 
cially by starvation. 

The Albigenses grew in popularity until the church 
pronounced them heretics in the mid-1100's. But the no- 
bility and the townsfolk supported them. The church 
conducted a crusade against the Albigenses in the early 
1200's. Crusaders and the Inquisition gradually de- 
stroyed the Albigenses power, though there were brief 
rebellions from time to time. By about 1350, the Albi- 
genses had disappeared in Western Europe. See also 


Dominic, Saint; Heresy. Eugene TeSelle 

Albino, a/8Y nob, is an animal or plant that is unable to 
produce pigment (coloring substance) in some or all of 
its organs. As a result, the animal or plant has abnormal- 
ly light coloration. Albinism is caused by a change in the 
genes (units of heredity) and can be inherited. A person 
who is a true (complete) albino has milky-white skin, 
white hair, and pink eyes. The eyes are pink because the 
blood in the tiny vessels of the /ris (colored part of the 
eye) shows through the transparent parts. In normal 
eyes, the iris hides the pinkness. Albinism occurs about 
once in every 20,000 births. 

Albinism may vary from the complete absence of col- 
or to the presence of nearly normal amounts of pigment 
in some organs. Most white horses, chickens, ducks, 
and geese are only partia/ albinos because these ani- 
mals have pigment in their eyes, beaks, or legs. Albino 
animals are rarely seen in the wild because their unusu- 
al coloration makes them inviting prey. 

In many partial albino plants, only the flowers have no 
pigment. But some albino plants also lack chlorophyll 
and the leaves are also white. Such plants die unless 
they can get food from their surroundings, because 
plants need chlorophyll to make food. Lawrence C. Wit 

See also Heredity (diagram: The transmission of al- 
binism); Horse (Color types; picture). 

Albright, Madeleine Korbel (1937- ), served as 
secretary of state of the United States from 1997 to 2001. 
She was the first woman to hold the post. President Bill 
Clinton appointed her to the office. Albright had served 
as U.S. ambassador to the United Nations (UN) from 1993 
to 1997. At the UN, she became known as an outspoken 
supporter of human rights and the use of UN peace- 
keeping forces in troubled areas. 

Albright was born in Prague, Czechoslovakia (now 
Czech Republic). Her maiden name was Madeleine Kor- 
bel. Her father was a Czech diplomat. When Nazi Ger- 
man forces occupied Czechoslovakia in 1939, her father 
fled with his family to Yugoslavia and, eventually, to the 
United Kingdom. The fami- 
ly returned to Czechoslo- 
vakia in 1945 but fled again 
in 1948 when Communists 
took over the country. 
They settled in the United 
States. 

Albright received a 
bachelor’s degree from 
Wellesley College in 1959 
and a doctorate in govern- 
ment from Columbia Uni- 
versity in 1976. She was 
married to Joseph Al- 
bright, a journalist, from 
1959 to 1983. 

Albright served as a member of President Jimmy Car- 
ters National Security Council staff from 1978 to 1981. 
She was a professor of international affairs at George- 
town University from 1982 to 1993. 
Albumin, a/8YOO muhn, also spelled a/bumen, is a 
sticky, gelatinlike substance. Its best-known form is the 
white of an egg. Albumin belongs to the class of foods 
called proteins (see Protein). The word is spelled a/bu- 
men when it refers to egg whites, but a/bumin when re- 


US. Department of State 


Madeleine Korbel Albright 


Andrew Bennett 





ferring to the general substance. The albumin of egg 
white is called ova/bumin. The albumin in miilk is called 
lactalbumin. Serum albumin is the albumin in blood 
serum. It makes up over half of the protein in blood 
serum and helps stabilize other serum proteins. Some 
albumin is found in vegetable matter. All albumins con- 
tain carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur. 

Albumin becomes a solid mass when heated. If albu- 
min is heated with a liquid, it either settles to the bottom 
as sediment or forms a scum at the top. The sediment or 
the scum collects foreign substances as it forms. Albu- 
mins are used to collect impurities from liquids in sugar 
refining, industrial dyeing, and making photographic 
chemicals. Kermit L. Carraway 

See also Blood (Regulating the volume of blood com- 
ponents); Egg (The parts of an egg). 

Albuquerque, AL buh kur kee (pop. 448,607; met. area 
pop. 712,738), is the largest city in New Mexico. It serves 
as a financial, industrial, trade, and transportation center 
of the Southwest. The city is also a leading center for en- 
ergy, Space, and defense research. For location, see 
New Mexico (political map). Albuquerque's heritage of 
both Pueblo Indian and Spanish culture gives the city a 
special atmosphere. 

Description. Albuquerque, the county seat of 
Bernalillo County, covers about 168 square miles (435 
square kilometers). The Albuquerque skyline includes a 
number of skyscrapers, but many low, flat-roofed, 
adobe houses help the city keep its Indian character. 
One of the city's landmarks, the Roman Catholic Church 
of San Felipe de Neri, served as a fortress that protected 
the early settlers during Indian raids. East of the city, the 
Sandia Mountains provide ski slopes, an aerial tram, and 
other recreational facilities. Albuquerque ts the home of 
the Albuquerque Technical-Vocational Institute, the Uni- 
versity of New Mexico, and Southwestern Indian Poly- 
technic Institute. 

Federal nuclear weapon research and defense-related 
research rank as the chief industries in Albuquerque. 
Nearby Kirtland Air Force Base is a defense and energy 
research center. Sandia National Laboratories, on the 
Kirtland base, conducts energy research and develop- 
ment programs and is the largest employer in the state. 
Phillips Laboratory is also at the base and is one of the 
Air Force's largest weapons laboratories. Tourism is the 
city’s most profitable nongovernment industry. Clothing 
and electronics factories, food-processing plants, and 
health care facilities employ many Albuquerqueans. 

Government and history. Albuquerque has a may- 
or-council form of government. The voters elect a mayor 
and nine councilors to four-year terms. 

Francisco Cuervo y Valdés, the governor of the Span- 
ish province of New Mexico, founded Albuquerque in 
1706. The community was named for the Duke of Albur- 
querque, a Spanish nobleman. The town became part of 
the United States as a result of the Mexican War (1846- 
1848). Albuquerque was incorporated as a City in 1891. It 
had about 3,785 people and served as a trading center 
for sheep ranchers. 

After World War Il ended in 1945, an increase in mili- 
tary spending created thousands of jobs in the nuclear 
research centers in and near Albuquerque. The citys 
population more than doubled from 1950 to 1960, rising 
from 96,815 to 201,189. An urban renewal program in 


Alchemy 333 


the mid-1970's included a new convention center and a 
public library. In the late 1900's, the city completed ex- 
pansions of the convention center and the Albuquerque 
International Airport. 

For the monthly weather in Albuquerque, see New 
Mexico (Climate). 

Alcan Aluminium Limited is one of the world’s 
largest producers of aluminum and a manufacturer of 
aluminum products. Its headquarters are in Montreal, 
Canada. Alcan owns and operates companies in over 20 
countries and maintains sales offices worldwide. These 
companies together are involved in all aspects of the 
aluminum business: bauxite mining, alumina refining, 
aluminum smelting, manufacturing, sales, and recycling. 
In addition, Alcan owns hydroelectric power plants that 
produce the energy required for aluminum smelting. 

Industries served by Alcan include the four major 
markets for aluminum products: containers and packag- 
ing, transportation, building and construction, and the 
electrical industry. Its products include automotive 
parts, electric cables, chemicals, foil goods, and siding 
for buildings. 

Alcan was formed in 1902 as a Canadian firm owned 
by the Aluminum Company of America (now Alcoa Inc.), 
a business based in the United States. In 1928, Alcan be- 
came an independent company and took control of 
most of Alcoa's business outside the United States. 

Critically reviewed by Alcan Aluminium Limited 

See also Aluminum. 

Alcatraz, AL kuh TRAz, was a famous federal prison on 
Alcatraz Island in San Francisco Bay. The name Alcatraz 
comes from a Spanish word meaning pelican. The island 
stands on 12 acres (5 hectares) of solid rock, and Alca- 
traz was often called The Rock. More than 1 mile (1.6 
kilometers) of water separates it from the mainland. For 
the location of Alcatraz, see San Francisco (map). 

Alcatraz Island became the site of the first permanent 
military fort on the West Coast in 1854. A military prison 
was added in 1861. In 1909, the wooden prison was re- 
placed by a more modern concrete cell block. Alcatraz 
became a federal prison in 1934, built to confine some 
of the most dangerous criminals in the United States. In 
1963, the federal government decided Alcatraz was too 
expensive to maintain and supply, and closed it. In 1972, 
Alcatraz became part of the Golden Gate National Recre- 
ation Area. Visitors may tour the prison. 

James O. Finckenauer 
Alcazar, AL kuh zahr, is the name usually given to 
palaces built by the Moorish rulers in Spanish cities. 
They sometimes had walls around them for defense, 
and were like fortresses. The one in Toledo, Spain, was 
destroyed during the Spanish Civil War (1936-1939). The 
Alhambra is perhaps the best-known alcazar (see Al- 
hambra). William J. Hennessey 
Alchemy, AL kuh mee, is a blend of pseudoscience, 
magic, and mystical philosophy. It was popular from the 
time of early Christianity until about 1700. Alchemists 
tried to change less costly metals into silver and gold. 
They also tried to find the e/ixir of life (a substance that 
would cure disease and lengthen life). They failed to find 
it, but their work in preparing and studying chemical 
substances helped the science of chemistry develop. 

Some alchemists were only fakes. But others were 
learned people who had more philosophical goals. They 


Kelly Brewer 


334 Alcibiades 


felt that if they learned how to make gold from lesser 
metals, they could also perfect other things. They con- 
sidered gold the perfect metal because of its beautiful 
luster and its resistance to rusting. 

Some alchemy was practiced in China and India be- 
fore the birth of Christ. But it developed into a major sys- 
tem in Egypt during the next 300 years. The Greek- 
speaking scholars of Alexandria used it to try to explain 
how Egyptian artisans made things. Greek-Egyptian 
alchemy spread through Syria and Persia to the Arabs. It 
spread to Western Europe in the 1100s and 1200's. 

Alchemists drew their theories of matter from the an- 
cient Greeks. They believed that all matter was made up 
of a single, formless substance. Alchemists thought this 
substance became the four elements—eanth, air, fire, 
and water—when combined with hot or cold and wet or 
dry. They thought they could change one substance into 
another merely by changing the balance of these ele- 
ments, a process called transmutation. This theory led 
them to try producing gold from other metals. In the 
early 1500's, Swiss scientist Paracelsus tried to substitute 
sulfur, mercury, and salt for earth, air, fire, and water. Al- 
chemists also searched for the philosopher's stone \a 
magical substance that was supposedly able to make the 
transmutation process easier). 

Gold's lasting quality led many persons to believe that 
they would find the secret of long life or even immortali- 
ty if they could discover how to make gold from lesser 
substances. The Chinese once believed that eating from 
golden dishes prolonged life. 

Alchemy was associated with many religious beliefs. It 
was believed that the techniques used to make gold 
were symbolically related to death, corruption, regener- 
ation, and resurrection. Alchemy and astrology became 
closely related because of the belief that each heavenly 
body represented and controlled a certain metal. Some 
thought the sun represented gold; the moon, silver; 
Mars, iron; Venus, copper; Jupiter, tin; Saturn, lead; and 
Mercury, the metal mercury, also called quicksilver. Al- 
chemists believed that the positions of these bodies in- 
fluenced the success or failure of their work. 

Alan Dundes 

See also Astrology; Chemistry (History); Gold; Metal- 
lurgy (History). 

Alcibiades, 4: su/h BY uh veez (4502-404 B.C), was an 
Athenian general. He became a central figure in the 
Peloponnesian War, which was fought between Athens 
and Sparta from 431 to 404 B.C 

Alcibiades was the ward of the Athenian leader Peri- 
cles and a favorite pupil of Socrates, a famous Greek 
philosopher. He entered politics in 420 B.C and soon 
became popular for his aggressive foreign policy. 

Alcibiades's policy led Athens to a battle with Sparta 
in 418 B.C, which Athens lost. Later, he persuaded the 
Athenians to invade Sicily. In 415 B.C, just before the in- 
vasion began, citizens accused Alcibiades of defacing 
statues of the god Hermes and of mocking the religious 
rituals known as the Eleusinian Mysteries. The Athenians 
refused his request for an immediate trial, so he sailed 
on to Sicily. Shortly after arriving in Sicily, Alcibiades 
was called back to Athens for trial. But he escaped to 
Sparta. He advised the Spartans to aid the Sicilians, and 
the Athenians were defeated in Sicily. 

Later, the Spartans grew suspicious of Alcibiades. Al- 


cibiades then became an adviser to the Persian leader 
Tissaphernes. In 411 B.C, the Athenians asked Alcibi- 
ades to lead their fleet at Samos. \With this navy, he de- 
feated the Spartans in several battles and became a 
hero. In 406 B.C, however, the Spartan general Lysander 
defeated Alcibiades's fleet. After Athens ss final defeat in 
the war, Alcibiades fled to Asia Minor (now Turkey). 
There, his enemies set fire to his house, and he died try- 
ing to escape. 
Alcid. See Auk. 
Alcindor, Lew. See Abdul-Jabbar, Kareem. 

Alcoa Inc. is the world's leading producer of alu- 
minum products. It maintains operating facilities in 
more than 100 locations worldwide. Alcoa is engaged in 
all steps of aluminum production, from the mining of 
the aluminum ore bauxite to the fabrication of aluminum 
into finished products. Alcoa also has plants for recy- 
cling used aluminum. The company s wide range of 
products includes bars, building products, castings, 
electrical conductors, fasteners, foil, forgings, plates, 
rods, sheets, tubing, and wire. 

Alcoa is also involved in the shipping industry and in 
the manufacture of chemicals and nonaluminum prod- 
ucts. It licenses technology to other firms and sells engi- 
neering and construction services. 

The company was organized in 1888 as the Pittsburgh 
Reduction Company. It was formed to produce alu- 
minum by a process discovered by the American scien- 
tist Charles M. Hall in 1886. The company's name was 
changed to the Aluminum Company of America (Alcoa) 
in 1907. It adopted its present name in 1999. The compa- 
ny's headquarters are in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 

Critically reviewed by Alcoa Inc. 

See also Alcan Aluminum Limited; Aluminum (The 
growth of the aluminum industry). 

Alcock and Brown, AI kahk, were pioneer British 
aviators who made the first nonstop flight across the At- 
lantic Ocean. Sir John William Alcock (1892-1919) was 
the pilot, and Sir Arthur Whitten Brown (1886-1948) was 
the navigator. On June 14, 1919, the two men took off 
from Lesters Field near St. John's, Newfoundland (now 
Newfoundland and Labrador), in a twin-engine Vickers 
Vimy, a converted bomber. They landed the plane ina 
bog near Clifden, Ireland, the next day. They traveled 
1,950 miles (3,138 kilometers) in 16 hours 27 minutes at 
an average speed of 118 miles (190 kilometers) per hour. 

Alcock and Brown were knighted for their effort by 
King George V. They also received a prize of 10,000 
pounds ($46,200) that the London Daily Mail newspaper 
had offered to the crew of the first airplane to make a 
nonstop transatlantic crossing. 

Alcock was born on Nov. 6, 1892, in Manchester, Eng- 
land. During World War | (1914-1918), he was consid- 
ered one of the best pilots in the United Kingdom's Roy- 
al Naval Air Service. He died in an air crash on Dec. 18, 
1919, six months after his transatlantic flight. 

Brown was born of American parents in Glasgow, 
Scotland on July 23, 1886. He became a British citizen 
and served in the Royal Flying Corps. He died on Oct. 4, 
1948. Paul R. Matt 
Alcohol refers to a class of chemical compounds, all of 
which consist of chemically bonded atoms of carbon, 
hydrogen, and oxygen. All alcohol molecules contain at 
least one Aydroxy/l group. A hydroxyl group is a specific 


Peter Krentz 





arrangement of atoms in which a liydrogen atom is 
bonded to an oxygen atom. In alcohol moiecules, the 
oxygen atom in the hydroxyl group is, in turn, bonded to 
a carbon atom. 

People commonly use the word a/coho/ to refer to 
such beverages as beer, wine, and liquors. But there are 
many types of alcohols, and they have a variety of uses. 
This article discusses the chemical properties and com- 
mercial uses of several alcohols. For information on al- 
coholic beverages, see Alcoholic beverage. 

Methanol, also called methy/ alcohol or wood alco- 
hol is the simplest of the alcohols. It has one hydroxyl 
group, and its chemical formula is CH,OH. Methanot is a 
highly toxic, colorless liquid. It boils at 149 °F (65 “C) and 
freezes at — 137 *F (—94 °C). 

Methanol originally was produced from wood, but it 
is now commercially produced primarily from methane, 
the chief component of natural gas. The majority of 
commercially produced methanol is converted to form- 
aldehyde, a chemical used to make plastics. As an indus- 
trial so/vent (substance that dissolves other substances), 
methanol is important in the manufacture of paints and 
varnishes. Methanol also functions as a fuel-line an- 
tifreeze for automobiles, and it serves as an ingredient 
in the production of other chemicals. Methanol can be 
used as a motor fuel, but it is more expensive than other 
fuels. See Methanol. 

Ethanol, also called ethy/ alcohol is the alcohol found 
in alcoholic beverages. Ethanol is also used for a variety 
of other purposes. It serves as a solvent for chemical re- 
actions and for lacquers, varnishes, and stains. It is also 
important in the preparation of chemicals used as deter- 
gents, flavorings, and fragrances. When ethanol is 
added to gasoline, it improves the octane rating of the 
gasoline. 

Ethanol is produced by several methods. For example, 
ethanol used in beverages is produced by fermenting 
fruits, grains, or vegetables. However, most ethanol 
used for commercial purposes is made by heating ethyl- 
ene and water under pressure in the presence of a 
phosphoric acid catalyst (see Catalysis). Ethylene is a gas 
that is a component of crude oil. 

The United States government controls and taxes the 
production and distribution of ethanol in the United 
States and taxes ethyl alcohol used in alcoholic bever- 
ages. For this reason, ethanol manufacturers in the Unit- 
ed States denature (make unfit to drink) most of the 
ethanol that will be used for purposes other than alco- 
holic drinks. Manufacturers denature ethanol by mixing 
it with methanol or other poisonous chemicals. 

Ethanol boils at 172 F (78 C) and freezes at —173 F 
(—114 °C). Its chemical formula is CH,CH,OH. It has one 
hydroxyl group. 

Propanol, or propy/ alcohol, has one hydroxyl group, 
and its chemical formula is CH,CH.CH,OH. There are 
two forms of propanol, called isomers. Isomers have the 
same kind and number of atoms. However, they have 
different molecular structures and therefore different 
chemical and physical properties. For example, one of 
ithe isomers of propanol, called normal! propanol, 1- 
propanol, or n-propy! alcohol, boils at 208 F (98 C) and 
freezes at ~195 F (—126 ‘C). But the other isomer, 
known as isopropanol, 2-propanol, or isopropyl alcohol, 
boils at 181 “F (83 °C) and freezes at —126 F (—88 °C). 


Alcoholic beverage 335 


Normal propanol is made commercially from ethyl- 
ene and synthesis gas, a mixture of hydrogen and car- 
bon monoxide, in the presence of a rhodium or cobalt 
catalyst. Propyl alcohol is used to prepare other chemi- 
cals, and it is used as a solvent for sticky substances 
called resins. 

lsopropanol is produced by reaction of the gas propy- 
lene, a component of crude oil, with water in the pres- 
ence of an acid or metal catalyst. lsopropanol is mainly 
used to produce acetone, a common industrial solvent 
It is also used as a rubbing alcohol, and in cosmetics 
and lotions. 

Ethanediol, or ethylene givcol, is a highly toxic alco- 
hol that is used mainly as an antifreeze in automobile ra- 
diators. It is produced by the reaction of ethylene with 
water and oxygen in the presence of a silver oxide 
catalyst. Ethanediol has a boiling point of 388 °F 
(198 *C) and a freezing point of —9 °F (—13 ‘C). It 
has two hydroxyl groups and a chemical formula of 
HOCH,CH,OH. 

Other alcohols include p/asticizer alcohols, which 
have 6 to 11 carbon atoms. Plasticizers are used in the 
manufacture of plastics, and they give these substances 
flexibility. 

Alcohols that have more than 11 carbon atoms are 
called detergent alcohols. Manufacturers use these alco- 
hols to make detergents, soaps, and shampoos. In com- 
bination with other chemicals, these alcohols have the 
ability to dissolve dirt and grease in water in a process 
called emulsification. Robert C. Gadwood 

See also Antifreeze; Glycerol; Solvent 
Alcohol Problems, American Council on. See 
American Council on Alcohol Problems. 

Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, Bureau of, is 
an agency in the United States Department of the Treas- 
ury. The bureau, which is often called the ATF, has re- 
sponsibilities for regulation, law enforcement, and tax 
collection. 

The ATFs regulatory mission is to administer federal 
regulations for the production and distribution of alco- 
hol, explosives, and firearms. ATF regulators inspect fac- 
tories and businesses and test products. The bureau is- 
sues licenses and permits to regulated businesses in the 
firearms, explosives, liquor, and tobacco industries. 
Each year, the ATF collects billions of dollars in taxes 
from manufacturers of alcohol and tobacco. 

Most ATF criminal cases involve people suspected of 
the illegal possession and use of firearms and explo- 
sives. Targets of investigation include killers for hire, 
gun smugglers, bombers, and arsonists. ATF special 
agents go undercover to break up illegal commerce in 
firearms, drug smuggling rings, outlaw motorcycle 
gangs, and other criminal groups. The ATF works close- 
ly with other law enforcement agencies. 

The ATF was chartered in 1972. Its headquarters are in 
Washington, De Franklin E. Zimring 
Alcoholic beverage is a drink that contains ethyl al- 
cohol. Alcoholic beverages are made chiefly from such 
grains as barley, corn, and rye, or from grapes or other 
fruits. 

There are two main groups of alcoholic beverages, 
fermented drinks and distilled drinks. Fermented drinks 
contain from 5 percent or less to 20 percent ethyl alco- 
hol. The principal fermented beverages are beer and 





336 Alcoholic beverage 


wine. Distilled beverages, also called spirits or /iquor, 
contain from 12 to 55 per cent or more ethyl alcohol. 
They include brandy, gin, rum, vodka, and whiskey. 
Americans drink about 53 billion gallons (21.8 billion li- 
ters) of beer, 570 million gallons (2.2 billion liters) of 
wine, and 416 million gallons (1.6 billion liters) of spirits 
annually. The United States ranks about 20th among na- 
tions in the per capita (per person) consumption of alco- 
holic beverages. 

Taxes on alcoholic beverages provide a major source 
of revenue for the United States government and state 
and local governments. About 56 per cent of this reve- 
nue comes from the sale of spirits, which carry much 
higher taxes than do fermented beverages. Taxes and 
other fees make up approximately half the price of a 
bottle of spirits. 

Ethyl alcohol slows the activity of the nervous system. 
Alcoholic beverages have a relaxing effect that many 
people find pleasurable. However, an excessive amount 
of alcohol can cause intoxication. Prolonged, excessive 
drinking of alcoholic beverages may lead to alcoholism 
and various other disorders. 


Fermented beverages 


Beer, wine, and other fermented alcoholic beverages 
are made by adding yeast to certain substances that 
contain sugar. The yeast begins the fermentation proc- 
ess, which converts the sugar into ethyl alcohol and car- 
bon dioxide gas. 

Beer is made chiefly from barley ma/t To obtain the 
malt, brewers soak barley in water and make it sprout. 
Then they dry the barley and remove the sprouts, leav- 
ing only starch, or malt. The malt is ground and mixed 
with water to form a mash. It is then added to another 
mash, a preparation of cereal grain such as corn or rice 
that has been crushed and heated. This process con- 
verts the starch into sugar. Dried flowers from the hops 
plant are added for flavor, and then the mash is fer- 
mented. Finally, brewers age beer for several weeks to 
develop its taste. 

Most beer contains from 2 to 6 per cent alcohol. 
Lager beer, the most popular type in the United States, 
has a golden color, but some beers are dark brown. 
Beer is a foaming, carbonated beverage and is generally 
served chilled. 

Wine. Almost all wine is made from grapes, which 
consist largely of sugar. Wine can also be made from 
apples, cherries, or other fruits. Winemakers crush the 
fruit and then ferment the juice. Wine may be aged for 
four years or longer. Most wine has an alcohol content 
of 7 to 24 per cent. Wine may be red, white, or rosé 
(pink), and either sweet or dry (unsweet). Wine is served 
chilled or at room temperature. 

Other fermented beverages include a/e, hard 
cider, and sake. Ale is brewed in much the same way as 
beer. Hard cider is made from apples. Sake is a Japanese 
drink made from rice. 


Distilled beverages 


Distilled alcoholic beverages are made chiefly from 
fermented grain mash or fermented fruit juice. In the 
distillation process, the mash or juice is heated, giving 
off vapors of alcohol. Distillers collect the vapors and 
cool them to form a liquid. The flavor of spirits depends 


largely on the kind and amount of grain, fruit, and yeast 
used, plus variations in the fermentation, distillation, 
and aging processes. 

The percentage of alcohol in distilled beverages is ex- 
pressed as proof. !n the United States, proof equals 
twice the amount of alcohol in the beverage. For exain- 
ple, a beverage that is 80 proof contains 40 per cent al- 
cohol. In Canada and Great Britain, the amount of alco- 
hol is about 57 per cent at 100 proof. 

The leading distilled beverages in the United States 
include, in order of popularity: (1) whiskey, (2) vodka, (3) 
liqueurs, (4) gin, (5) rum, and (6) brandy. 

Whiskey is made chiefly from barley, corn, or rye. 
Most whiskey is a blend of as many as 40 kinds of whis- 
keys made from different grains. Whiskey may be aged 
six years or more. Aging develops the flavor and gives 
the beverage an amber color. Whiskey from Scotland, 
called Scotch whisky or just Scotch, is known for its 
smoky flavor. It is made from a mash that consists prima- 
rily of barley. Whiskeys made in the United States in- 
clude bourbon and blended whiskey. Bourbon is pro- 
duced from a mash consisting chiefly of corn. American 
blended whiskey may contain many different types of 
whiskeys. 

Most whiskey ranges from 80 to 100 proof. Whiskey 
served straight or neat is served unchilled. Whiskey may 
also be served on the rocks (with ice) or mixed with 
water, carbonated water, or other beverages. In addi- 
tion, it is used in many kinds of cocktails. 

Vodka is made from barley, corn, or rye, or some- 
times from potatoes. It varies from 80 to 100 proof, is not 
aged, and has no color. Vodka also has no taste or odor, 
and so it is usually mixed with orange juice, tomato 
juice, tonic water, or some other beverage. 

Liqueurs, also called cordia/s, are made by flavoring 
brandy, gin, or other spirits with various parts of plants, 
such as flowers, fruits, and leaves. Liqueurs contain at 
least 21 per cent sugar. The most popular flavors in- 
clude apricot, blackberry, cherry, chocolate, peach, and 
peppermint. Liqueurs range from 25 to 110 proof and 
have a variety of colors. They may be served neat, on the 
rocks, or as part of various cocktails. 

Gin is a mixture of alcohol and water, flavored with 
juniper berries and other ingredients. Gin varies from 80 
to 94 proof. It can be mixed with a wine called vermouth 
to make a martini, one of the most popular cocktails. Gin 
also may be mixed with lime juice, tonic water, or other 
beverages. 

Rum is made from the juice or syrup of sugar cane, 
or from molasses. Rum is at least 80 proof and may be 
white or amber, depending largely on the aging proc- 
ess. It is usually mixed with coconut juice, lime juice, 
pineapple juice, cola, or some other beverage. 

Brandy is distilled from grape wine or other fer- 
mented fruit juices. Brandy made from grape wine is at 
least 80 proof. A grape brandy called cognac is distilled 
in the area of Cognac, a town in France. Brandy is aged 
for two to eight years. Flavored brandies, made from 
such fruits as blackberries, cherries, or plums, are at 
least 70 proof. They are named for the fruit whose juice 
is used in making them. Brandy is usually served neat or 
mixed with another spirit, such as a liqueur. 

Other distiJled beverages include aquavit and fe- 
quila. Aquavit, also spelled akvavit, is a Scandinavian 


———— EE 


———<—— 


beverage made from grains or potatoes and flavored 
with caraway seeds. Tequila, a Mexican drink, is distilled 
from the fermented juice of the maguey plant 


History 


The first alcoholic beverages were fermented. Scenes 
showing fermentation appear on pottery made in Meso- 
potamia as early as 4200 B.C. Brandy is probably the old- 
est distilled beverage. It may have been made as early as 
A.D. 100. By the 1400's, whiskey had been distilled in Ire- 
land and Scotland. Gin was first made by a Flemish phy- 
sician in the 1600's. The first distillery in what is now the 
United States was established in 1640 in the area of pre- 
sent-day New York City. Rum was first distilled in Barba- 
dos about 1650. The first Canadian distillery was estab- 
lished in Quebec City in 1769 for the production of rum. 
In 1789, the first bourbon was made near Georgetown, 
Kentucky. 

During the 1800's, a movement began in the United 
States to prohibit the manufacture and sale of alcoholic 
beverages. A constitutional amendment banning the 
beverages went into effect in 1920, but thousands of 
Americans defied the prohibition law. In 1930, the feder- 
al government estimated that about 800 million gallons 
(3 billion liters) of alcoholic beverages were being pro- 
duced in the country annually. The prohibition amend- 
ment was repealed in 1933. 

Throughout history, there have been attempts to pro- 
hibit or limit the drinking of alcoholic beverages. Coun- 
tries have imposed various measures to limit alcohol 
use. These measures include rationing alcoholic bever- 
ages, imposing legal bans against drinking, and taxing 
alcoholic beverages heavily. Some religions prohibit the 
consumption of alcohol. Lisa M. Tate 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Alcohol Beer Fermentation Prohibition 
Alcoholics Brewing Nutrition Whiskey 

Anonymous Champagne (Beware of Wine 
Alcoholism Distilling alcohol) 


Alcoholics Anonymous (A.A.) is a worldwide or- 
ganization of men and women who help each other 
solve their common problem of alcoholism. They also 
offer to share their recovery experiences with others 
who have a drinking problem and want to do something 
about it. The fellowship of Alcoholics Anonymous was 
founded in 1935. It has about 85,000 local groups in the 
United States, Canada, and about 130 other countries. 
The people in each group meet to share their problems 
and experiences. A.A. is not a medical or religious or- 
ganization. It is concerned only with the personal recov- 
ery and continued sobriety of individual alcoholics who 
turn to A.A. for help. The General Service Office is the 
center of A.A. activities. The organizations headquarters 
are in New York City. See also Al-Anon. Critically 
reviewed by Alcoholics Anonymous 

Alcoholism is a serious disease in which people have 
an overwhelming desire for the mental and physical ef- 
fects of drinking alcoholic beverages. The formal term 
for alcoholism is alcohol dependence. Alcohol is one of 
the most widely used drugs in the history of the world. 
Many adults drink alcoholic beverages on social or cer- 
emonial occasions but have no wish to consume large 
amounts regularly. People with alcoholism, who are 
called alcoholics, feel a strong, continuing urge to drink. 


Alcoholism 337 


Alcoholism has four main symptoms: (1) craving, (2) 
lack of control, (3) physical tolerance, and (4) physical de- 
pendence. Craving is a strong need to drink in spite of 
serious harmful consequences, such as drinking-related 
illnesses or job problems. Lack of control is the inability 
to stop drinking once a drinking episode starts. Physical 
tolerance is the need to consume increasing amounts of 
alcohol to feel its effects. Physical dependence occurs 
when people's bodies become so accustomed to alco- 
hol that they have withdrawal symptoms after they stop 
drinking. Symptoms of withdrawal include shakiness, 
rapid heartbeat, nausea, sweating, and anxiety. Physical 
dependence does not occur in all alcoholics. 

People who are not alcoholics may also have serious 
problems caused by excessive drinking. These prob- 
lems include difficulties at work or school, neglect of 
family responsibilities, and strains in personal relation- 
ships. Drinking that causes problems but does not meet 
the formal definition for alcoholism is called a/coho/ 
abuse. 

Causes of alcoholism. Scientists do not yet fully un- 
derstand what causes alcoholism. Although many peo- 
ple use alcohol at times, only a small percentage devel- 
op drinking problems. Researchers are beginning to 
identify ways that the brains of alcoholics differ from the 
brains of nonalcoholics. For example, tests show that al- 
coholics and nonalcoholics have different patterns of 
brain electrical activity. Such differences may provide 
evidence that alcohol does not affect the brains of alco- 
holics in the same way it affects nonalcoholics. Because 
of the way their brains respond, problem drinkers may 
develop an unusually strong desire for alcohol’s effects. 

Research shows that heredity plays an important role 
in alcoholism. For example, the pattern of brain electri- 
cal activity associated with alcoholism appears to be in- 
herited. Other studies show that people with an alco- 
holic parent have a greater risk of developing the dis- 
ease than do children of nonalcoholics. Scientists are 
working to identify the particular genes (chemical units 
of heredity) that increase risk. Most experts think that 
many genes are involved and that environment also 
plays a key role in developing the disease. Environmen- 
tal influences may include income level, family stability, 
and community acceptance of drinking. Experts think 
that the relative importance of various genes and envi- 
ronmental factors may differ among individuals. 

Other research focuses on understanding how alco- 
hol affects neurotransmitters, chemicals that carry mes- 
sages among nerve Cells. Studies show that alcohol af- 
fects many neurotransmitters in the brain, including 
dopamine and serotonin. Among other messages, these 
chemicals carry information about pleasure, sadness, 
and other moods. Prolonged drinking changes levels of 
neurotransmitter activity, and the levels do not immedi- 
ately return to normal when drinking stops. As a result, 
problem drinkers may not “feel right” when they stop 
drinking because their neurotransmitters have adapted 
to alcohol. 

Effects of alcoholism. Alcohol affects the entire 
body. Health problems caused by long-term drinking in- 
clude damage to the brain, stomach, intestines, and 
heart. Liver problems, including a disorder called cirrho- 
sis, are especially common in alcoholics. The liver plays 
a key role in breaking down alcohol, and excess drink- 


338 Alcott, Bronson 


ing puts abnormal demands on the organ. When alco- 
holics stop drinking, some experience a severe form of 
withdrawal called defirium tremens. Delirium tremens is 
a state of extreme confusion that is sometimes accompa- 
nied by ha/lucinations (seeing or hearing things that are 
not really present). Drinking is also a factor in many vehi- 
cle crashes, falls, and other accidents. 

Treatment aims to help alcoholics stop drinking and 
remain sober. Behavioral treatments and medications 
are two important approaches that have succeeded with 
some alcoholics. Behavioral treatments include partici- 
pation in Alcoholics Anonymous (A.A.) and various types 
of counseling. Medications include tranquilizers called 
benzodiazepines, sold under such trade names as Libri- 
um and Valium. Benzodiazepines are used in the first 
few days after a person stops drinking to help prevent 
symptoms of withdrawal. Another medication called naf/- 
trexone may be prescribed for longer periods in combi- 
nation with counseling. Fer many people, naltrexone 
lessens the craving for alcohol. A medication called 
disulfiram, sold under the trade name Antabuse, dis- 
courages alcohol use by causing nausea, vomiting, and 
other unpleasant symptoms when people drink. 

Enoch Gordis 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Al-Anon Cirrhosis Mental illness 

Alcoholics Delirium tremens (Substance use 
Anonymous Disulfiram disorders) 

Benzodiazepine Drug abuse Pancreatitis 


Breath testing 


Additional! resources 


Barbour, Scott, ed. Alcohol: Opposing Viewpoints. Greenhaven, 
1998. 

Ketcham, Katherine, and others. Beyond the Influence: Under- 
standing and Defeating Alcoholism. Bantam, 2000. 


Alcott, AWL kuhtor AWL kaht, Bronson (1799-1888), 
was an American social reformer and a leader of a phil- 
osophical movement called Transcendentalism. From 
1834 to 1839, Alcott operated the experimental Temple 
School in Boston. He tried to develop the bodies and 
spiritual natures—as well as the minds—of his students. 

Alcott was a leading abolitionist. He opposed the 
Mexican War (1846-1848) because he felt it resulted from 
a desire by the United States government to extend slav- 
ery into Texas. In the 1840's, Alcott helped found two co- 
operative experimental communities—-the socialist 
Brook Farm and the vegetarian Fruitlands. 

Amos Bronson Alcott was born near Wolcott, Con- 
necticut. He was the father of Louisa May Alcott, who 
wrote the famous novel Little Women. Jobn Clendenning 

See also Brook Farm; Transcendentalism. 

Alcott, AWL kuhtor AWL kaht, Louisa May (1832- 
1888), was an American author. Her best-known book, 
Little Women (1868-1869), tells the story of four sisters 
growing up in a New England town during the mid- 
1800's. Alcott also worked to gain voting rights for 
women and was active in the temperance (antidrinking) 
movement. 

Alcott was born in Germantown, Pennsylvania, but 
she grew up in Boston and Concord, Massachusetts. 
Her father, Bronson Alcott, was a philosopher and edu- 
cational reformer. The family’s friends and neighbors in- 
cluded the writers Ralph Waldo Emerson, Margaret Ful- 
ler, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and Henry David Thoreau. 


William Ellery Channing, a 
prominent Unitarian min- 
ister, was also a friend. All 
these people influenced 
Alcott and helped form 
her ideas about politics 
and social reform. 

Alcott spent most of her 
childhood in poverty be- 
cause her father invested 
in many idealistic projects 
that failed. At an early age, 
she began to help support 
the family by working as a 
seamstress, a household 
servant, and a teacher. Her first book, Flower Fables 
(1854), consisted of fairy stories she made up to tell one 
of her students. 

Alcott’ first novel, Moods, was published in 1864. She 
became editor of Merry’s Museum, a magazine for girls. 
in 1867. That year, a publisher urged her to write a book 
for girls. She wrote Little Women, which became an im- 
mediate success. The income from sales of //ttle 
Women gave her financial security. In Little Women, Al- 
cott gave American juvenile fiction an enduring family 
story, a new kind of girl character, and a less instructive 
narrative style. The March family in the book is largely 
the Alcott family. Jo March, the central character. is 
Louisa. The author continued the story of the March 
family in Little Men (1871) and Jo's Boys (1886). 

Alcott’s other books for young readers include An 
Old-Fashioned Girl(1870) and Eight Cousins (1875). She 
also wrote novels for adults, including Work: A Story of 
Experience (1873) and A Modern Mephistopheles (1877), 
but these were less successful. Alan Gribben 





Chicane Mictnne al Soriety 


Louisa May Alcott 


Additional resources 


Ruth, Amy. Louisa May Alcott. Lerner, 1999. Younger readers. 
Stern, Madeline B. Louisa May Alcott. 1950. Reprint. Northeast- 
ern Univ. Pr., 1999. 


Alden, AW duhn, John and Priscilla, came to 
America on the Mayflower in 1620. They became hus- 
band and wife, probably in 1622. They were among the 
first Mayflower passengers to be married in America. 
The Aldens had 11 children. Their descendants include 
President John Quincy Adams and American poets 
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and William Cullen 
Bryant. Longfellow wrote about the couple's marriage in 
his fictional poem The Courtship of Miles Standish. 

John Alden (1599-1687) was a cooper (barrelmaker) 
from Harwich, in the county of Essex, England. The Pil- 
grims hired him to accompany them on their voyage to 
America. When the Mayflower sailed from England, 
Alden had not yet decided whether he would stay in 
America. But he eventually became one of the leaders of 
the Plymouth Colony. Alden served as an assistant to the 
governor of the colony most of the time from about 
1631 until he died. He served as treasurer from 1656 to 
1658. In 1634, authorities held Alden on a technical 
charge of murder because he had favored defending a 
Plymouth outpost against attack, and in the resulting 
fight two men were killed. However, he was acquitted. 
Alden was a stern, unyielding man, and he led in the 
persecution of Quakers and Baptists. 





Priscilla Mullens Alden (1602?-1685?) was the daughter 
of William Mullens, one of the Pilgrims. The Mullenses 
were from Dorking, in the county of Surrey, England. 

James Axtell 
Alder, AWL duhr, is the name of a group of about 30 
shrubs and small trees that grow in moist ground. 
Alders are found in temperate regions of the Northern 
Hemisphere. They also grow at high elevations in parts 
of Central and South America, Asia, and North Africa. 

Alders have oval leaves with toothed edges and pro- 
duce separate inale and femaie flowers. The female 
flowers grow in catkins (clusters of stalkless flowers) that 
harden into scaly, woody conelike structures. The struc- 
tures have nuts and are later shed by the plant. 


Summer and 
winter appearance 


Cotkins 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Chris Skilton 


The speckled alder has stalkless flowers called catkins. 


Ten species of alders grow in North America. Most 
are large shrubs that form dense thickets. The speckled 
alder grows throughout Canada, south to Virginia, and 
west to North Dakota. The red a/der is the only alder 
large enough for commercial timber production. It is 
the most important hardwood tree in the Pacific North- 
west, where it grows up to 100 feet (30 meters) high. The 
wood of the red alder is soft and light. It is whitish when 
first cut and light reddish-brown when dry. It is used 
mostly for inexpensive furniture. Michael J. Baranski 


Scientific classification. Alders belong to the birch family, 
Betulaceae. The scientific name for the speckled alder is A/nus 
rugosa. The red alder is A. rubra. 


See alsu Tree (Familia: broadleaf and needleleaf trees 
[picture)). 
Aldridge, Ira (1807?-1867), was the first African Ameri- 
Can actor to win fame in the Western world. He was best 
known for his roles in the tragedies of William Shake- 
speare, especially Othello. Unlike other tragic actors of 
his day, Aldridge was also 
a skilled comic actor. 

tra Frederick Aldridge 
was burn either in New 
York City or Senegal and 
raised in New York City. In 
1825, he lett the United 
States because racial prej- 
udice liinited opportuni- 
ties for black actors. He 
went to Britain in 1826 and 
made his debut as Othello 
in London. Aldridge also 
toured other European 
countries and achieved 





Museum of the Citv of New York 


lra Aldridge 





Aleixandre, Vicente 339 


considerable success in Germany and Russia. Aldridge 
became a British citizen in 1863. Stanley L Glenn 
Aldrin, AWL drihn, Buzz (1930- ), a United States 
astronaut, was the second person to set foot on the 
moon. He and Neil A. Armstrong landed there in the 
Apollo 11 lunar module on july 20, 1969. Aldrin stepped 
onto the moon 19 minutes after Armstrong. 

Aldrin was born in Montclair, New Jersey, on Jan. 20, 
1930, and was named Edwin Eugene Aldrin, Jr. His fami- 
ly nicknamed him Buzz, short for Buzzer, his young sis- 
ter's pronunciation of the word brother. He legally 
changed his name to Buzz Aldrin as an adult. 

Aldrin graduated from the U.S. Military Academy in 
1951 and became an Air Force officer. After completing 
pilot training in 1952, he flew 66 combat missions in the 
Korean War. In 1963, he received a doctor's degree in 
astronautics from the Massachusetts Institute of Tech- 
nology. He became an astronaut later that year. 

Aldrin piloted the Gemini 12 space flight in 1966. Dur- 
ing this flight, he left the spacecraft and “walked” in 
space. He was partially or completely outside the space- 
craft for 5 5 hours. This experience helped prove that 
people can work outside an orbiting vehicle. 

In 1971, Aldrin resigned from the astronaut program 
and returned to active duty with the Air Force. He re- 
tired from the Air Force in 1972. Lillian D. Kozloski 

See also Space exploration (Apollo: Mission to the 
moon). 

Aleatory music, AY /ee uh TAR ee, is a type of music 
in which the composer does not determine the specific 
shape of a composition. The composer does not specify 
pitches, rhythms, and tone colors. He or she only gives 
ranges of these materials and relies on chance proce- 
dures or performers to select and shape them. 

There are two basic types of aleatory music. In the 
first type, the composer uses chance procedures, such 
as the tossing of dice, to determine the order and quali- 
ty of sounds. After the chance operations have estab- 
lished the musical details, the composer creates a fixed 
score using traditional musical notation. In the second 
type, the performer largely creates a composition. The 
composer might specify eight measures to be played 
with high notes, followed by six measures of low notes. 
The performers then create melodies, harmonies, and 
rhythms of their own design. 

The most important composer of aleatory music is 
John Cage of the United States. Other important com- 
posers include Earle Brown, Morton Feldman, and 
Christian Wolff of the United States; Pierre Boulez of 
France; and Karlheinz Stockhausen of Germany. 

Mark D. Nelson 

See also Boulez, Pierre; Cage, John; Stockhausen, 
Karlheinz; Electronic music. 

Aleichem, Sholem. See Sholem Aleichem. 
Aleixandre, 4x /ayks AHN dray, Vicente (1898-1984), a 
Spanish poet, won the 1977 Nobel Prize for literature. He 
influenced other Spanish poets for much of the 1900's. 

Aleixandre’s early poetry, which he wrote chiefly in 
free verse, is highly surrealistic. It also praises the beau- 
ty of nature by using symbols that represent the earth 
and the sea. Many of Aleixandre’s early poems are filled 
with sadness. These poems reflect his feeling that peo- 
ple have lost the passion and free spirit that he saw in 
nature. Aleixandre’s early poetry collections include Pas- 





340 Aleppo 


sion of the Earth (1935) and Destruction or Love \1933). 

In Shadow of Paradise (1944), Aleixandre began to 
concentrate on such themes as fellowship, friendliness, 
and spiritual unity. His later books of poetry include His- 
tory of the Heart (1954) and In a Vast Dominion (1962). 

Aleixandre was born on April 26, 1898, in Seville. He 
studied law at the University of Madrid. Selections of his 
work were translated into English in Twenty Poems of 
Vicente Aleixandre (1977). Dick Gerdes 
Aleppo, uf LEHP oh (pop. 1,583,000), is one of the 
largest and most important cities in Syria. An industrial 
center, it lies nestled among the hills in northwestern 
Syria. For location, see Syria (map). 

Aleppo is one of the oldest continuously inhabited 
cities in the world, dating to about 2000 B.C The citys 
bazaar, narrow streets, and limestone buildings reflect 
its ancient past. A medieval citade/ (fort) surrounds the 
city. Aleppo is one of Syria’s most important agricultural 
and industrial centers. Its chief products include cotton, 
wool, and textiles. The city is home to the University of 
Aleppo. 

In ancient times, Aleppo served as a gateway between 
Europe and the eastern Mediterranean to Asia. In the 
1500's, the city flourished as a major trading center of 
the Ottoman Empire. Christine Moss Helms 
Aleutian Islands, uh LOO shuhn, are a volcanic is- 
land chain that extends 1,100 miles (1,800 kilometers) 
west from the tip of the Alaska Peninsula. The Aleutians, 
part of Alaska, separate the Bering Sea from the Pacific 
Ocean. They include 14 large islands, about 55 smaller 
islands, and many islets. The mountains on the islands 
are part of the Alaska Range. 

The Aleutians cover an area of 6,777 square miles 
(17,552 square kilometers). They lie 800 to 1,000 miles 
(1,300 to 1,600 kilometers) south of the Arctic Circle be- 
tween the 51st and 55th parallels. This places the islands 
in the same latitude as England. 

The Aleutians have many hot springs, as well as many 
cool springs and swift streams, on some of the islands. 
No trees grow there, but the islands have many varieties 
of small shrubs, flowers, grasses, and mosses. The cli- 
mate is cool and foggy. The principal industry is fishing. 
A few sheep ranches are operated there. The population 
of the islands is about 8,200. 


East Longitude 180° West Longitude 
bh, j 


a 


Arctic Ocean 


i 
- eo" 
a no 
re worth 
Unataskd | aiscy Harbor! 

ar Ox tslang suntan’ 

NS) feat —Se* Istands of Four 

Andreanot 0 

Slands 


500 Miles 
$ ~SOCmKlom~rers 

WORLD BOOK map 
Location of the Aleutian Islands 





The Aleutian Islands are divided into five main groups 
from east to west. These include the Fox Islands, Islands 
of Four Mountains, Andreanof Islands, the Rat Islands, 
and the Near Islands. Unimak, largest of the Aleutian Is- 
lands, has the highest mountain in the chain, Shishaldin 
Volcano (9,373 feet, or 2,857 meters). The village of Un- 
alaska, on the island of the same name, is the trading 
center of the Aleutians and one of the leading fishing 
ports in the United States. Unalaska is the second largest 
island in the chain. It is the site of Dutch Harbor, which 
served as a United States naval air base during World 
War II (1939-1945). Claus-M. Naske 

See also Alaska (physical map); Aleuts. 

Aleuts, Al ee ootz or uh LOOTZ, are people who have 
traditionally lived on the harsh, windswept Aleutian Is- 
lands, which lie off the mainland of Alaska. The Aleuts 
call themselves Unangan, meaning we the people. They 
descended from Inuit (also called Eskimos) who settled 
on the islands thousands of years ago. But the Aleut lan- 
guage differs from that of the Inuit. 

The early Aleuts lived off the rich sea environment. 
Aleut hunters harpooned whales, seals, and other sea 
mammals from seagoing kayaks. They caught fish with 
spears and on fishhooks and also hunted birds. The 
Aleuts wore parkas made of furs, bird skins, or other 
parts of animals. Several Aleut families lived together in 
large homes sunk 3 to 4 feet (91 to 122 centimeters) into 
the ground. The frames consisted of drift logs or whale 
bones. The homes were covered with a layer of dry 
grass or skins and a layer of sod. 

Russian explorers discovered the Aleutian Islands in 
1741. Russian traders and fur hunters later practically en- 
slaved the Aleuts and killed many of them. Many other 
Aleuts died from diseases brought by the Russians. The 
Aleut population once numbered between 12,000 and 
15,000 people. But by the mid-1800's less than 2,000 re- 
mained. 

In 1867, the United States bought the islands, along 
with the rest of Alaska. Japanese forces attacked the is- 
lands during World War II (1939-1945). They captured 
the Aleut villagers of Attu and later sent them to a prison 
camp in Japan. There, about half the Aleuts died of tu- 
berculosis and malnutrition. The United States govern- 
ment evacuated other Aleuts to Alaska. The Aleuts re- 
turned to the islands in 1945. 

In 1971, the United States Congress passed the Alaska 
Native Claims Settlement Act, and the Aleuts regained 
control of much of their homeland. There are about 
12,000 Aleuts living in Alaska. They follow a modern way 
of life, but many still hunt and fish for food. 

Claus-M. Naske 

See also Aleutian Islands; Inuit; Mask (Burial masks 
and death masks). 

Alewife is a fish that lives mainly in the Great Lakes and 
along the Atlantic coast of North America. It has large 
eyes, a forked tail, silvery sides, and a grayish-green 
back. Freshwater alewives grow 3 to 6 inches (8 to 15 
centimeters) long. Saltwater alewives grow as long as 15 
inches (38 centimeters). Saltwater species are caught 
commercially for human food. Freshwater species are 
used for animal feed and fertilizer. Saltwater alewives 
swim along the Atlantic coast from the Canadian prov- 
ince of Newfoundland and Labrador to South Carolina. 
They are anadromous —that is, they migrate to freshwa- 





WORLD BOOK illustration by James Teason 
The alewife lives in the Great Lakes and along the Atlantic 
Coast of North America. Large numbers of alewives are caught 
for use in animal foods and fertilizers. 


ter rivers to lay their eggs. Each female lays approxi- 
mately 10,000 to 100,000 eggs in the spring. The adults 
then return immediately to the ocean. The young swim 
to the ocean a few months later, after they have grown. 

Alewives probably are not native to any of the five 
Great Lakes other than Lake Ontario. They colonized the 
other four lakes after 1932. Sudden die-offs of alewives 
often occur during the spring in the Great Lakes. Scien- 
tists believe these die-offs may be due to sudden drops 
in water temperature. 


Scientific classification. The alewife belongs to the herring 
family, Clupeidae. Its scientific name is A/osa pseudoharengus. 


Henry W. Robison 


Alexander I (1777-1825) was czar of Russia from 1801 
to 1825. He became known for his stubborn struggle 
with Emperor Napoleon | of France. Russia finally de- 
feated Napoleon after France invaded Russia in 1812. Al- 
exander was influential at the Congress of Vienna, which 
in 1815 approved Russian territorial gains in Poland, Fin- 
land, and Bessarabia. The same year, he led the forma- 
tion of the Holy Alliance (see Holy Alliance). 

Alexander was kind and well-intentioned. At the be- 
ginning of his reign, he considered freeing Russias 
serfs, introducing a constitution, and limiting the czars’ 
powers. But Alexander was also weak, and nothing 
came of these projects. Disappointed liberal army offi- 
cers tried unsuccessfully to overthrow the government 
soon after Alexander died. 

See also Russia (Alexander |); Vienna, Congress of. 
Alexander I (1888-1934) became king in 1921 of the 
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, later called 
Yugoslavia. This country had been created in 1918 as the 
homeland of several closely related peoples. From 1918 
to 1921, Alexander ruled as regent for his father, King 
Peter |. Alexander, a Serb, believed the Serbs should 
rule the new country. But the other peoples opposed 
Serb domination. As a result, Alexander made himself 
dictator in 1929. That same year, he renamed the country 
Yugoslavia. In 1934, he was assassinated by a Macedo- 
nian from Bulgaria who was supported by Croatian rev- 
olutionaries. Alexander was born in Cetinje, Montene- 
gro. See also Peter Il. R. V. Burks 
Alexander Il (1818-1881) was czar of Russia from 1855 
to 1881. He succeeded his father, Nicholas |. Alexander 
is called the “czar liberator’ because he freed Russia's 
serfs in 1861]. He also introduced local self-government 
and a court system based on French models. He mod- 
ernized the Russian army and defeated the Turks in 1878 
(see Russo-Turkish wars). He was assassinated in 1881 
by revolutionaries who thought he was too conservative. 
See also Russia (Alexander 11). 


joseph T. Fuhrmann 


Joseph T. Fuhrmann 


Alexander, Lloyd 341 


Alexander Il (1105-1181) was elected pope in 1159. 
The Holy Roman Emperor Frederick | supported an anti- 
pope, Victor IV, who had been elected by a minority of 
the cardinals. The split between the emperor and pa- 
pacy caused a division within the papacy that resulted in 
the election of four antipopes during Alexander's reign. 
During the split, Alexander spent long periods away 
from Rome because the emperor made it impossible for 
him to reside there. Alexander allied himself with the 
city-states of northern Italy, which formed the Lombard 
League to resist imperial authority. After a long war, the 
league defeated Frederick at the Battle of Legnano in 
1176. Frederick was forced to make peace with the pa- 
pacy and finally recognized Alexander as pope in 1177. 

In 1179, Alexander held a church council called the 
Third Lateran Council. He issued a number of important 
decrees, including a requirement that future popes be 
elected by two-thirds of the cardinals. 

Alexander was born in Siena, Italy. His given and fam- 
ily name was Rolando Bandinelli. Kenneth Pennington 
Alexander III (1845-1894) was czar of Russia from 1881 
to 1894. He became czar after his father, Alexander Il, 
was assassinated by revolutionaries. Alexander II had 
adopted a number of liberal reforms. Alexander III op- 
posed further reform and energetically fought the revo- 
lutionaries. During his reign, Russian industry and sci- 
ence made impressive gains, and culture thrived. See 
also Russia (Alexander III). Joseph T. Fuhrmann 
Alexander VI (1431-1503) was the most worldly of the 
Renaissance popes. He was elected pope in 1492 and 
displayed the character and ambition more typical of a 
secular (nonreligious) ruler. 

Alexander was born in Jativa, Spain. His given and 
family name was Rodrigo Borja (Borgia in Italian). For 
many years, he held the profitable position of vice chan- 
cellor of the Roman Curia, accumulating vast wealth and 
influence. He fathered many children, whose fortunes 
he worked to advance even before becoming pope. 

The first years of Alexander's reign were dominated 
by Italian wars, which broke out when King Charles VIII 
of France invaded Italy in 1494. The pope managed to 
survive the dangers of the conflict, largely through skill- 
ful diplomatic maneuvers. After Alexander's son Juan 
was murdered in Rome in 1497, the grief-stricken pope 
decided to launch a program of church reform. But he 
never carried it out. For the rest of his reign, Alexander 
devoted much of the papacy’s resources to furthering 
the ruthless ambitions of his son Cesare to control cen- 
tral Italy for the Borgias. Charles L Stinger 

See also Borgia, Cesare; Borgia, Lucrezia; Savona- 
rola, Girolamo. 

Alexander, Grover Cleveland (1887-1950), was one 
of baseball's greatest pitchers. He won 373 games and 
pitched 90 shutouts while playing for the Philadelphia 
Phillies, Chicago Cubs, and St. Louis Cardinals from 1911 
through 1930. Alexander set a record in 1916 by pitching 
16 shutouts for the Phillies. He won two games in the St. 
Louis Cardinals’ 1926 World Series victory over the New 
York Yankees. Alexander was born in Elba, Nebr. He was 
elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1938. 

Dave Nightingale 
Alexander, Lloyd (1924- ), an American author, 
won the 1969 Newbery Medal for his story The High 
King (1968). The book was the fifth in Alexander's series 





342 Alexander of Battenberg 


of fantasies about Prydain, an imaginary kingdom in 
Wales. He became interested in Wales and its legends 
while stationed there in 1943 during World War II. His 
Westmark trilogy (1981-1984) and Vesper Holly books 
(beginning in 1986) are adventure-fantasy series for 
young adults. Alexander's interests in cats, music, and 
mythology often apoear in the plots of his stories. He 
was born on Jan. 30, 1924, in Philadelphia. 

Kathryn Pierson Jennings 
Alexander of Battenberg. See Battenberg. 
Alexander of Tunis, Earl (1891-1969), was a British 
military leader and statesman and the last British-born 
governor general of Canada. He was one of the main Al- 
lied battle commanders during World War II (1939- 
1945). Alexander served as governor general of Canada 
from 1946 to 1952. He traveled extensively in the country 
and was highly popular. During his term, in 1949, New- 
foundland (now Newfoundland and Labrador) became 
Canada's 10th province. 

Harold Rupert Leofric George Alexander was born on 
Dec. 10, 1891, in London. In 1911, he became an officer 
in the Irish Guards of the British Army and later com- 
manded a battalion in France during World War | (1914- 
1918). 

During World War II, Alexander organized the evacu- 
ation of Allied troops at Dunkerque, France, in 1940. Lat- 
er, he served as British commander in Burma (now My- 
anmar), the Middle East, and North Africa. Alexander 
directed the Allied campaigns in Sicily and Italy in 1943 
and 1944. In 1944, he was named supreme commander 
of the Allied forces in the Mediterranean area. The same 
year, Alexander became the youngest field marshal in 
the British Commonwealth. He was made a viscount in 
1946 and an earl in 1952. Alexander was Britain's minister 
of defense from 1952 to 1954. Jacques Monet 
Alexander the Great (356-323 B.C) was king of the 
Macedonians and one of the greatest generals in histo- 
ry. He conquered the Persian Empire, which stretched 
from the Mediterranean Sea to India and formed much 
of what was then considered the civilized world. Alexan- 
der's conquests furthered the spread of Greek ideas and 
customs in western Asia and Egypt. He thus made possi- 
ble the rich culture of the Hellenistic Age. 

His youth. Alexander was born in Pella, the capital of 
the Macedonian kingdom. His father was Philip II, the 
shrewd king and general who conquered Greece. His 
mother was Olympias, a brilliant and hot-tempered 
princess from Epirus in 
western Greece. Olympias 
told Alexander that his an- 
cestor was the hero 
Achilles. Throughout his 
life, Alexander carried with 
him a copy of the great 
poem the //iad, which told 
of the deeds of Achilles 
(see liad). Philip taught 
Alexander that the Mace- 
donian kings were de- 
scended from the hero 
Hercules (also called Hera- 
cles), who in Greek 
mythology was a son of 
the god Zeus. 


Roman copy of marble sculpture 
after Lysippus, Capitolino Mu- 
seum, Rome (Alinart from Art 
Reference Bureau! 


Alexander the Great 





There are many stories about Alexander's life. Some 
are true, but others are legends. According to one story, 
the boy Alexander tamed the great horse Bucephalus. 
This magnificent steed later carried Alexander as far as 
India, where it died. Alexander built a city there and 
named it Bucephala after the horse. 

In 343 or 342 B.C, Philip hired the great philosopher 
Aristotle to tutor Alexander. Aristotle may have encour- 
aged Alexander's interest in other countries and peo- 
ples, as well as his curiosity about plants and animals. 

Alexander's education followed the Greek principle of 
“a sound mind ina sound body.” He studied literature, 
philosophy, and politics, and he also received training in 
sports, physical fitness, and warfare. Alexander's official 
schooling ended abruptly at the age of 16, when his fa- 
ther called him away for duties in the government. 

In 338 B.C, the 18-year-old Alexander commanded the 
cavalry in Philip's army in the Battle of Chaeronea. This 
battle brought Greece under Macedonian control. Philip 
next prepared to invade the Persian Empire in Asia. But 
before he could do so, Philip was murdered by one of 
his bodyguards. Thus, at the age of 20, Alexander be- 
came king of the Macedonians. After Philip's death, 
some Greek cities under Macedonian rule revolted. In 
335 B.C, Alexander's army stormed the walls of the re- 
bellious city of Thebes and demolished the city. About 
30,000 inhabitants of the city were sold into slavery. 

Invasion of Asia. With Greece under control, Alexan- 
der turned to his father's plan for attacking the Persian 
Empire. In 334 B.C, he led an army of about 35,000 in- 
fantry and cavalry across the Hellespont from Europe to 
Asia. The Persians sent out troops that met Alexander's 
forces at the Granicus River. Alexander and his cavalry 
charged across the river and won the battle. This victory 
opened Asia Minor to Alexander. 

After marching along the southern coast of Asia Mi- 
nor, Alexander and his army headed north to the city of 
Gordium. There, according to legend, Alexander found 
a wagon with an ox yoke tied by a tight, complex knot. 
An ancient prophecy said that whoever could untie this 
Gordian knot would become ruler of Asia. According to 
the most famous version of the story, Alexander first 
tried unsuccessfully to untie the knot and then drew his 
sword and cut it in a single stroke. 

By 333 B.C, Alexander had reached the coast of Syria. 
There, in a fierce battle at Issus, he defeated the king of 
Persia, Darius III, but could not capture him. Alexander's 
army then marched south into Phoenicia to capture key 
naval bases at port cities. Part of one such city, Tyre, was 
onan island about 5 mile (800 meters) offshore. Unable 
to capture the island from the sea, Alexander had his en- 
gineers build a causeway out to the island, converting it 
into a peninsula that remains even today. His troops 
used battering rams, catapults, and mobile towers in 
their attack. The Tyrians surrendered in 332 B.C, after 
seven months of fighting. Alexander's use of huge siege 
machines at Tyre led to a new age of warfare. 

Alexander next entered Egypt. The Egyptians wel- 
comed him as a liberator from Persian rule, and they 
crowned him pharaoh. On the western edge of the Nile 
Delta, Alexander founded a city in 331 B.C. and named it 
Alexandria after himself. 

From Alexandria, the Macedonian king made a long, 
difficult trek through the Libyan Desert, a part of the 


Alexander the Great 343 








Alexander's empire ex- 
tended from Greece to India, 
with Babylon as its capital. In 
323 B.C, when Alexander 
died, his empire covered RP Qs 
much of what was then con- Greece _“eroneaC Gr 
sidered the civilized world. -—- cong “Hinends 
Alexander's conquests helped | Sea , 
Greek culture spread in Egypt 
and western Asia. 


alicamassus <4 
oo. 


_ | Empire of 
LC | Alexander the Great 


Route of 
Alexonder the Greot 


0 600 Miles 


600 Kilometers 


WORLD BOOK map 


Sahara, to the oasis of Siwah. He consulted the oracle of 
the god Zeus-Ammon, and, according to legend, the or- 
acle pronounced Alexander the son of the god. 

Victory over Darius. Alexander left Egypt in 331 B.C, 
traveling eastward into the Persian Empire. King Darius 
had formed a huge army that met Alexander's forces on 
a vast plain between the villages of Gaugamela and Ar- 
bela, just east of the Tigris River. The Persians far out- 
numbered Alexander's army, but Alexander's tactics and 
the training of his troops proved superior in battle. Da- 
rius was forced to flee, and he escaped across the Zag- 
ros Mountains into Media. This clash of armies, known 
as the Battle of Gaugamela or the Battle of Arbela, 
ended more than two centuries of Persian rule in Asia. 

Alexander easily captured the fabled city of Babylon 
and then the Persian capital at Susa. In the winter of 331- 
330 B.C, Alexander's army marched to Persepolis. There 
he seized the royal palaces and captured a vast store- 
house of gold and silver. Before leaving Persepolis, Al- 
exander had his soldiers burn down the palaces. 

In the spring of 330 B.C, Alexander swung north to- 
ward the Caspian Sea to find Darius. The Persian king 
could not gather enough troops to fight Alexander, and 
he was killed by his own nobles. The death of Darius left 
Alexander king of Asia. 

Central Asia and the Indus. Alexander moved his 
army into Bactria and then across the Hindu Kush moun- 
tains into Sogdiana, overcoming /ocal military chal- 
lenges as he went. In 327 B.C, Alexander married the 
Bactrian princess Roxane. 

By 326 B.C., Alexander's forces had reached the upper 
Indus River Valley, in what is now Pakistan. Alexander 
wanted to continue east toward the Ganges River. But 
his homesick troops were tired of traveling and refused 
to follow him any farther eastward. 

During his years in central Asia, Alexander began to 
adopt the customs of the Persian kings. Many of his 
troops resented this change. They considered their king 
a fellow warrior, not a godlike sovereign. Plots against 
Alexander's life appeared, and he executed several 
prominent Greeks and Macedonians who he believed 
had conspired against him. In a drunken brawl, Alexan- 
der killed his good friend Cleitus, who had saved his life 
at Granicus. 











Return westward. In 325 B.C, Alexander had ships 
built, and part of his army sailed westward from the 
mouth of the Indus River. These troops explored the 
northern shore of the Arabian Sea and the Persian Gulf. 
Alexander led the rest of his troops west across the De- 
sert of Gedrosia. As many as half of his forces died on 
the way—more soldiers than enemy armies had killed. 

Upon his return to Babylon, Alexander became busy 
with the administration of his vast domain, which 
stretched from Greece to the Indus. He probably in- 
tended to make Babylon his capital. Alexander planned 
new expeditions to northern Africa and Arabia. He tried 
to encourage trade and commerce and to develop a 
greater spirit of cooperation between Macedonians and 
Persians. He married a Persian princess who was a 
daughter of Darius, and he performed a mass marriage 
ceremony joining thousands of his soldiers to Persian 
women. Alexander also tried to incorporate large num- 
bers of Persians into his army. But he failed to establish 
a stable kingship to maintain what he had won. 

His death. In the spring of 323 B.C, Alexander be- 
came seriously ill with a fever at Babylon. He also suf- 
fered from exhaustion and the effects of several battle 
wounds. He died at the age of 32 on June 10, 323 B.C. His 
body was placed in a glass coffin in a special tomb at Al- 
exandria. 

After Alexander died, his half-brother, Philip I] Arrhi- 
daeus, became king of Macedonia. At the time of Alex- 
ander's death, Roxane was pregnant with his son, Alex- 
ander IV, who later shared rule over the Macedonians 
with Philip. But Philip was murdered in 317 B.C, and 
young Alexander was killed about seven years later. 

No one succeeded Alexander the Great in the rule of 
his vast empire. His leading generals became governors 
of various areas and fought among themselves for con- 
trol of the empire. By 300 B.C, Alexander's empire had 
split into a number of independent states. The three 
most powerful states were led by Alexander's generals 
Antigonus, Ptolemy, and Seleucus. 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Eugene N. Borza 


Antigonid dynasty Olympias 
Gordian knot Philip 11 
Hellenistic Age Ptolemy | 


Macedonia (region) 





344 Alexandria 


Sculpture (picture: the Alexander Sarcophagus) 
Seleucid dynasty 


Additional resources 


Bosworth, A. B. Alexander and the East. Oxtord, 1996. Conquest 
and Empire. 1988. Reprint. Cambridge, 1993. 

Green, Robert. A/exander the Great. Watts, 1996. Younger read- 
ers. 

Hammond, N. G.L The Genius of Alexander the Great. Univ. of N. 
Corr, la: 

Stewart, Gail B. Alexander the Great. Lucent Bks., 1994. Younger 
readers. 


Alexandria (pop. 3,380,000) is Egypts busiest seaport 
and second largest city. Only Cairo, Egypts capital, has 
more people. Alexandria is also a major industrial cen- 
ter. The city lies on Egypts Mediterranean Coast in the 
northwest corner of the Nile Delta, a fertile agricultural 
area. For location, see Egypt (political map). In ancient 
times, Alexandria was one of the world s most important 
commercial and cultural centers. 

The city is built on along isthmus (strip of land) be- 
tween Lake Maryut and the Mediterranean Sea. A ham- 
mer-shaped peninsula extends out from the isthmus and 
forms two large harbors, east and west. These magnifi- 
cent harbors have made Alexandria one of the Mediter- 
ranean s leading ports for thousands of years. 

Hotels and beaches line the Corniche, a broad, curv- 
ing road along the citys shoreline. The city is the home 
of Alexandria University. The Bibliotheca Alexandrina, a 
large research library scheduled to open in 2002, is a re- 
vival of Alexandria s great ancient library. 

People. Almost all of Alexandrias people are Egyp- 
tians. Most of the Egyptians are Muslims who speak Ara- 
bic. A small number of foreigners live in the city. 

In general, Alexandrias upper- and middle-class resi- 
dents live in the east part of the city. Most working-class 
people live on the west side close to industrial areas, 
and on the peninsula between the two harbors. Most 
residents live in large apartment complexes. 

Economy. Manufacturing plants in or near the city 
produce petroleum products, plastics, processed foods, 
steel, textiles, and other goods. Tourism also contributes 
to the city s economy. Huge numbers of vacationers 
come to Alexandria each summer to take advantage of 
the city’s beaches and resorts. 

History. Alexandria is named after Alexander the 
Great, the king of Macedonia, who founded the city in 
331 B.C after conquering Egypt. After Alexander died in 
323 B.C, one of his generals, Ptolemy, took over Egypt s 
government and founded the dynasty known as the 
Ptolemies. Ptolemy made Alexandria the capital of Egypt. 

Under the reign of the Ptolemies, Alexandria thrived. 
It was one of the great centers of trade and culture, and 
its population was the largest of any Mediterranean City. 
Many of the leading thinkers of the Greek-speaking 
world worked in the city. The towering Lighthouse of 
Alexandria was one of the Seven Wonders of the An- 
cient World (see Seven Wonders of the Ancient World 
[with picture]). The city had a scientific institute called the 
Mouseion and a library with about 500,000 scrolls made 
of an early form of paper called papyrus. These institu- 
tions conserved and developed the science, literature, 
philosophy, and religious culture of the ancient world. 

The Ptolemaic dynasty ended when its last ruler, 
Cleopatra, rebelled against the growing power of Rome. 


After her failure to defend Egypts independence, she 
killed herself in 30 B.C Egypt was then made part of the 
Roman Empire. Under the Romans, Alexandria remained 
an important trade center. It also was a major center for 
the processing of gold and silver and the production of 
glass, jewelry, linen, and papyrus. 

According to tradition, Saint Mark, a Christian mis- 
sionary, founded the Egyptian (Coptic) church in Alexan- 
dria around A.D. 40. The city, which already had a large 
community of Jews, soon also developed a thriving 
Christian community. Bishops of Alexandria exercised 
enormous influence in defining beliefs and practices of 
the new Christian faith. 

During Roman rule, clashes often took place between 
rival ethnic and religious groups in the city. In the late 
200s, the Mouseion and library were destroyed during 
a war over control of the Roman Empire. When the Ro- 
man Empire was divided in 395, Egypt became part of 
the Byzantine Empire. 

In 642, Arab Muslims conquered Egypt. The Arabs 
moved the capital from Alexandria to what is now Cairo. 
Alexandria s population gradually declined, and the city 
ceased to be a cultural center. In 1517, Egypt became 
part of the Ottoman Empire. Under Ottoman rule, 
Alexandrias population fell sharply. 

In 1805, an Ottoman army officer named Muhammad 
Ali was appointed governor of Egypt Under Muham- 
mad Ali and his successors, Alexandria again grew to be 
a center of business, banking, and trade. In 1820, a canal 
connecting Alexandria to the Nile River was completed. 
A railroad linking Alexandria to Cairo was built in the 
1850's. 

The city's population grew rapidly in the 1800's. Most 
of the new residents were Egyptian Muslims. But large 
numbers of immigrants from other countries also came 
to the city. Many of these foreigners became important 
business leaders. Tensions rose between the city's 
Egyptian and foreign communities, and bloody riots 
took place in 1882. Later that year, British warships bom- 
barded the city, and British troops occupied Egypt. The 
British acted to crush a movement for Egyptian self-gov- 
ernment, protect foreigners, and further British influ- 
ence in the region. Foreign business interests strength- 
ened their control of Alexandria in the late 1800's and 
early 1900's. 

After Egypt gained independence from the United 
Kingdom in 1922, foreign control over the city weak- 
ened. By the 1950's, most foreigners had left Alexandria. 
During the 1950's and 1960s, rapid industrial develop- 
ment took place in the city. 

In the 1990's, archaeologists working in waters near 
Alexandria found hundreds of granite blocks, huge stat- 
ues, and other stonework belonging to the ancient light- 
house, which had collapsed during an earthquake in the 
1300 s. The archaeologists also found about 40 sunken 
ships, which showed the wide range of Alexandrias ear- 
ly commercial activity. Michael J. Reimer 
Alexandria, Virginia (pop. 128,283), is a historic city on 
the west bank of the Potomac River, across from Wash- 
ington, D.C. For the location, see Virginia (political map). 
During the 1730's, a warehouse was established on the 
site of Alexandria for the export of tobacco, Virginia's 
chief cash crop. The military leaders George Washing- 
ton, Henry “Light-Horse Harry Lee, and Robert E. Lee, 





who was Henry Lee's son, had homes in Alexandria. 
Their homes are preserved in a historic district that has 
made Alexandria a major tourist center. At Gadsby's Tav- 
ern, Washington recruited his first command in 1754 
and held his last military review in 1799. The Alexandria 
Gazette Packet, founded in 1784, is one of the oldest 
newspapers in the United States. 

Alexandria was part of the District of Columbia from 
1791 to 1846. Today, it is a suburb of Washington, D.C. 
Alexandria has more than 150 technology and research 
and development firms and a large freight yard that 
serves three railroads. It is also the home of more than 
250 national trade and professional associations. It has a 
council-manager form of government. 

Susan L Woodward 
Alexandrite, 41 jhg ZAN drt is a rare gem that has a 
high luster. It is a variety of a mineral called chrysoberyl. 
Alexandrites are dark green in natural light but appear 
red in most kinds of artificial light. Jewelers cut and pol- 
ish alexandrites so that they have numerous flat surfaces 
called facets. Faceted alexandrites are used to create 
earrings, necklaces, rings, and other forms of jewelry. 
The alexandrite is one of the birthstones for the month 
of June. 

Alexandrites were first discovered in the Ural Moun- 
tains in Russia in 1833. The stone was named after 
Alexander II, who later became the czar of Russia. To- 
day, alexandrites are still mined in Russia. Other coun- 
tries that produce alexandrites include Brazil, Myanmar, 
Sri Lanka, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. 

See also Gem (picture). 
Alexia. See Aphasia. 

Alfalfa is a valuable crop that is grown mainly for for- 

age (livestock feed). It is sometimes called the “queen of 
the forages.” It promotes rapid growth and good health 
in the animals, especially cattle and sheep. The alfalfa 


Pansy D. Kraus 





Alfalfa 345 


plant contains large amounts of minerals, proteins, and 
vitamins, and farmers use it in order to make hay, meal, 
and silage. They also grow alfalfa for pasture, for its 
seeds, and to enrich the soil and protect it from erosion. 
Some people grow alfalfa indoors and eat the plant's 
sprouted seeds. These seeds are known as alfalfa 
sprouts. Alfalfa is also known as /ucerne throughout 
most of the world. 

The most important alfalfa-growing regions include 
North and South America, Australia, and parts of south- 
ern and eastern Europe. The United States raises about 
80 million tons (73 million metric tons) of alfalfa annually. 
California, South Dakota, Wisconsin, and Minnesota are 
the leading alfalfa-growing states in the United States. In 
Canada, the leading alfalfa-growing province is Alberta. 
Other leading alfalfa-growing provinces are Ontario and 
Saskatchewan. 


The alfalfa plant 


Alfalfa is a perennia/—that is, it grows from year to 
year without being replanted. In humid regions, alfalfa 
plants live from 5 to 7 years. In dry regions, they live 10 
years and sometimes longer. 

The alfalfa plant is a /egume, a member of the pea 
family. It bears seed pods, in which four to eight seeds 
develop. The plant has many slender stems. They grow 
about 3 feet (0.9 meter) high and bear compound leaves, 
each consisting of three leaflets. New stems grow from 
buds on the plant's woody crown (base), which is be- 
tween the stems and the roots. The stems mature in 
about six weeks. They grow straight up in some types of 
alfalfa and almost parallel to the ground in others. The 
leaves and stems of the alfalfa plant are used for live- 
stock feed. 

Flowers grow on the stems in clusters called racemes. 
Each raceme consists of 5 to 50 flowers. Most alfalfa 





] C Allen and Son 


Fields of alfalfa are harvested as the plants begin to flower. The leaves and stems of the alfalfa 
plant contain large amounts of minerals, proteins, and vitamins. Farmers grow alfalfa mainly for 


livestock feed. 





346 Alfalfa 


Leaves 


—- Nodules 


WORLD BOOK tllustration by Kate Lloyd-fones, Linden Artists Ltd 


The alfalfa plant has many slender stems, which develop from 
buds on the crown (base). Swellings called nodules grow on the 
roots. Bacteria in the nodules take nitrogen from the air. Nitro- 
gen is essential to the plant's health and growth. 


flowers are purple, but some are green, white, yellow, 
or varfegated (multicolored). 

Most of the roots of the alfalfa plant grow in the up- 
per foot (0.3 meter) of soil. But in fertile, well-drained 
soils, some alfalfa roots extend as deep as 15 feet (4.6 
meters) or more. These deep roots can obtain water that 








lies far belowground. Because of their deep roots, alfalfa 
plants have a greater resistance to drought than do 
many other crops. 


Uses of alfalfa 


As livestock feed. Cattle graze on some alfalfa, but 
farmers process most of the crop into hay, silage, or 
meal. All these forms of the feed can be stored. Farmers 
often plant alfalfa mixed with a grass for grazing. They 
let their cattle graze for about a week. Then they keep 
the animals away for four weeks or longer until the alfal- 
fa plants grow back. This method of feeding livestock is 
called rotational grazing. 

ln the United States, farmers harvest alfalfa mainly for 
use as hay. Some hay ts stored in rectangular bales, usu- 
ally weighing from 50 to 150 pounds (23 to 68 kilo- 
grams). Round bales, weighing as much as 2,000 pounds 
(910 kilograms), are also used to store hay. 

To make hay, farmers cut the alfalfa and let the sun 
dry the plants in the field. At the time alfalfa is cut, it con- 
tains 70 to 80 percent moisture. Before being baled as 
hay, the plants should contain about 15 percent mois- 
ture. Hay that is too dry when it is baled will lose its 
leaves. If the leaves, which contain many nutrients, fall 
off, the hay loses much of its food value. If baled hay 
contains io00 Much moisture, it spoils and cannot be fed 
to livestock. 

Baled hay is widely used for cattle, sheep, and horses. 
Farmers prepare hay to feed their own animals or pro- 
duce it as a cash crop for sale to other livestock raisers. 
See Hay. 

Some alfalfa hay is stored in the form of thickly 
packed 1-inch (2.5-centimeter) cubes. Large cubing ma- 
chines make these alfalfa cubes, and the process is ex- 
pensive. However, cubed hay can be transported over 
long distances more economically than baled hay. 

Some alfalfa plants are chopped and then stored as 


} C Allen and Son 


Dehydrating alfalfa. To dehydrate alfalta for use as hay, tarmers cut the alfalfa and let the sun dry 
it in the tield. The hay is then pressed into bales, /eft. Most alfalfa meal is made by drying cut altatfa 
at a high temperature in a dehydrator, right and then pressing it into pellets. 





| 
\ 





silage. Silage is a higher-quality feed than hay, and it 
works better than baled or loose hay in automatic feed- 
ing systems. Hay must remain in the field to dry longer 
than silage and so may be exposed to damp or wet 
weather. Such weather may cause freshly cut alfalfa to 
mold and lose much of its food value. As a result, silage 
retains many nutrients that hay may lose. See Silo. 

Most alfalfa meal is made by drying alfalfa at a high 
temperature in a dehydrator and then grinding it and 
pressing it into pellets. The pellets may be stored or 
sold. Farmers give alfalfa meal directly to their livestock 
or use it in preparing mixed feeds. Poultry farmers often 
add alfalfa meal to poultry feed because it helps pro- 
duce high-quality eggs and chickens. 

As a cover crop. Many farmers use alfalfa as a cover 
crop—that is, to enrich the soil and protect it from ero- 
sion. Alfalfa plants enrich the soil by adding more nitro- 
gen to the soil than they use for growth (see Nitrogen 
(Nitrogen and life). Bacteria that live in nodules 
(swellings) on alfalfa roots take nitrogen from the air for 
the plant's growth and health. Alfalfa uses the nitrogen, 
which later becomes part of the soil as the plants die 
and decay. Farmers often rotate alfalfa crops with small 
grain crops that use the nitrogen left in the soil by alfalfa. 
Alfalfa, especially when mixed with a grass, will hold the 
soil in place and thus help prevent soil erosion. 

As a seed crop. Some farmers grow alfalfa chiefly to 
obtain large quantities of the seeds. They sell the seeds 
to other farmers who raise alfalfa for livestock feed. 

Alfalfa plants cultivated for seed require sunny days 
and cool nights for successful growth, and dry weather 
for harvesting. Alfalfa seed producers must also keep 
bees to pollinate the plants flowers, since the seeds de- 
velop only if the flowers have been pollinated. The lead- 
ing alfalfa seed-producing states of the United States are 
California, Washington, and Idaho, in that order. 


Kinds of alfalfa 


Most types of alfalfa plants grown in the United States 
originated from seeds brought by European immigrants. 
Farmers created many new varieties by planting seeds 
from the alfalfa plants that grew in their fields. These 
plants, called Common alfalfas, were identified by the 
state where they were developed. For example, Kansas 
Common was an important early variety of alfalfa plant. 

New varieties of alfalfa are continually being devel- 
oped by plant breeders. Alfalfas are classified into three 
main groups— hardy, medium hardy, and nonhardy—ac- 
cording to how they withstand winter weather. Hardy al- 
falfas can survive severe winter weather and are grown 
chiefly in regions where such weather occurs. Medium 
hardy alfalfas are raised mainly in places that have less 
harsh winters. The nonhardy alfalfas come from regions 
with mild winters. 

Hardy alfalfas grow primarily in the northern part of 
the United States and in Canada. These plants grow the 
most in spring and early summer. Little or no growth oc- 
curs in fall, even in mild climates. Some hardy alfalfas 
were developed from seeds brought from Russia, 
Turkey, and other countries that have regions with cold 
climates. 

Medium hardy alfalfas are raised mainly in the cen- 
tral United States. Some hardy alfalfas are also grown in 
this region. The two types cannot be distinguished in 


Alfalfa 347 


spring and early summer, but medium hardy alfalfas 
grow more during the fall. 

Nonhardy alfalfas thrive on irrigated land in the 
Southern and Southwestern United States, chiefly in Ari- 
zona, California, Nevada, and New Mexico. In colder cli- 
mates, such alfalfas grow during the fall until frost kills 
the stems and leaves. They cannot survive cold winters. 
Many nonhardy alfalfas were developed from seeds 
brought from Peru and such northern African countries 
as Egypt, Libya, and Tunisia. 


Growing alfalfa 


Cultivating, planting, and harvesting. Alfalfa plants 
flourish in fertile, well-drained soil that is neutral or 
slightly alkaline (see Soil (Chemical conditions)). In arid 
areas, alfalfa needs irrigation for successful growth. Be- 
fore planting alfalfa, many farmers enrich the soil with 
fertilizers and add herbicides (weed-killing chemicals). 
They plow the soil and then plant alfalfa seeds | to } 
inch (6 to 13 millimeters) or less below the surface. 

Most farmers plant alfalfa in early spring or late sum- 
mer. They harvest a new crop every four to six weeks. 
The harvests must be timed so that the alfalfa is cut after 
the plants begin to produce flower buds, but before the 
seed pods form. If alfalfa is cut before the bud stage, the 
next crop will be smaller than normal. Frequent cutting 
before the bud stage also kills the plants. Farmers har- 
vest alfalfa before the seed pods form because the nutri- 
tional value of the plants begins to decline after they 
bear seeds. 

Diseases and pests. A number of diseases and pests 
damage alfalfa crops. The diseases include anthracnose, 
bacterial wilt, crown rot, root rot leaf spot, and spring 
blackstem. All of these diseases are caused by bacteria 
or fungi. 

Anthracnose destroys the base of alfalfa stems, and 
bacterial wilt slows the growth of the plants (see Wilt). 
Both these diseases can kill alfalfa plants. Crown rot and 
root rot severely damage alfalfa that has been injured by 
cold weather, insects, or poor harvesting methods (see 
Rot). Leaf spot and spring blackstem reduce the quality 
and the quantity of alfalfa crops by causing the leaves of 
the plants to drop off. 

Scientists have developed varieties of alfalfa that resist 
anthracnose, bacterial wilt, and leaf spot, but other dis- 
eases that attack the plant remain uncontrolled. Farmers 
often practice crop rotation to reduce losses of alfalfa 
plants to disease. In this method, a crop other than alfal- 
fa is grown ina field for one to three years before alfalfa 
is planted. During the years that alfalfa is not grown in 
the field, pests that thrive on the plant are deprived of 
their primary food source. As a result, the pest popula- 
tions decline and alfalfa can be safely planted in the 
field. See Cropping system. 

Pests that attack alfalfa include such insects as alfalfa 
weevils, potato leafhoppers, and aphids. Some nema- 
todes (roundworms)} and weeds also damage alfalfa. 

Young alfalfa weevils eat alfalfa leaves, reducing the 
yield and quality of the hay (see Weevil). Potato leafhop- 
pers and aphids restrict the growth ot the plants by 
sucking juices from alfalfa stems. Stem nematodes and 
root knot nematodes live as parasites in alfalfa stems 
and roots. They cause the plants to grow slowly, and, in 
some Cases, to die. Weeds use up food and water that 


348 Alfalfa weevil 


alfalfa plants need, and so the alfalfa yield is reduced. 
Farmers use insecticides to control alfalfa weevils and 
potato leafhoppers, and researchers have developed al- 
falfas that resist aphids, root knot nematodes, and stem 
nematodes. Herbicides are used to control weeds. 


History 


Alfalfa is the only crop used for forage that has been 
cultivated since prehistoric times. It probably originated 
in the Middle East. Records on brick tablets found in 
Turkey indicate that alfalfa was an important cattle feed 
crop in that region about 1400 B.C. It was brought to 
Greece by 490 B.C. and later to northern Africa and the 
regions that include present-day Italy and Spain. Today, 
alfalfa grows wild in parts of Africa, Asia, and Europe. 

During the A.D. 1500's, Portuguese and Spanish ex- 
plorers brought alfalfa to Central and South America 
and to what is now the Southwest United States. Many 
settlers brought alfalfa from Europe to the American 
Colonies. However, they could not grow it in the New 
World because of the acidic soils along the Atlantic 
Coast. As a result, alfalfa did not become widely grown 
in the United States until after 1850. That year, an alfalfa 
called Chilean clover was brought to California from 
Chile. It was grown successfully in California, and farm- 
ers in other states began to raise it. 

Various types of alfalfas were also brought to north- 
ern regions of the United States from cold climates in 
Europe and Asia. Plant breeders used seeds of these al- 
falfas to develop the many varieties now cultivated in 
the United States. 


Scientific classification. Alfalfa belongs to the pea family, 
Fabaceae or Leguminosae. The scientific name for the varieties 
of alfalfa plants cultivated in the United States is Medicago sa- 
tiva. Donald J. Reid 


Alfalfa weevil. See Alfalfa (Diseases and pests); Wee- 
vil. 

Alfieri, ah/ FYEH ree, Vittorio, veet TAWR yoh (1749- 
1803), was an Italian playwright and poet. He was born 
into an aristocratic family in Asti, where French was the 
spoken language of the nobility. The experience of writ- 
ing his first play in 1774 taught him how imperfectly he 
knew Italian. He studied Italian language and literature 
so he could write tragedy, a literary form long ignored 
by other Italians. From 1775 to 1787, Alfieri wrote 19 
verse tragedies, most of which reflect his hatred of tyr- 
anny and his admiration of human dignity. These themes 
helped arouse a spirit of nationalism in Italy. All his 
plays have a mythical, Biblical, or historical plot. His best 
works include Filippo (1775), Oreste (1786), and Mirra 
(1786). Alfieri wrote many poems, a treatise in defense of 
liberty, and a lively two-part Autobiography (1790, 1803). 

Richard H. Lansing 
Alfonso XIII, a/ FAHN soh (1886-1941), served as king 
of Spain from 1902 until 1931, when Spain became a re- 
public. Alfonso reigned at a time when Spaniards were 
dissatisfied with political o/igarchy(rule by few), low 
wages, poor living conditions, and a war in Morocco. 
The parliamentary government was unable to solve 
these problems. 

Alfonso XIII was born in Madrid, six months after the 
death of his father, King Alfonso XII. His mother, arch- 
duchess Maria Cristina of Austria, ruled until Alfonso 
came of age. In 1923, with Alfonso's approval, General 


Miguel Primo de Rivera led a bloodless overthrow of 
the constitutional government. Primo controlled the 
government until about 1930. By then support for the 
monarchy had collapsed, and a Republican government 
assumed power in 1931. Alfonso fled into exile, and the 
parliament declared him guilty of treason. The charge 
was dropped after a new government headed by Fran- 
cisco Franco came to power in 1939. Alfonso died in 
Rome in 1941. In 1975, the monarchy was restored in 
Spain. Alfonso’s grandson, Juan Carlos, became king. In 
1980, Alfonso’s remains were removed from Rome and 
reburied in the Escorial, a combination burial place, 
church, college, monastery, and palace near Madrid. 
See Juan Carlos I; Escorial. Stanley G. Payne 

Alfred the Great (849-899) was king of the West Sax- 
ons in southwestern England. He saved his kingdom, 
Wessex, from the Danish Vikings and laid the basis for 
the unification of England under the West Saxon monar- 
chy. He also led a revival of learning and literature. He 
was such an outstanding leader in war and peace that 
he is the only English king known as ‘the Great.” 

Alfred was born in Wantage, now in Oxfordshire, 
England. He was the youngest son of King Ethelwulf of 
Wessex. According to the Welsh writer Asser, who 
wrote a biography of Alfred shortly after his death, Al- 
fred was always eager to learn. Asser says that Alfred’s 
mother offered a book of Anglo-Saxon poems as a prize 
to the first of her sons who could read it. Alfred won. As 
a boy, Alfred twice went to Rome, where the pope ac- 
knowledged the status of the royal house of Wessex. 
The journeys also showed Alfred the contrast between 
England and the more advanced parts of Europe. 

Alfred became king in 871 at the death of his brother 
Ethelred. The West Saxons had been at war with the 
Danes for many years. After several losing battles, Alfred 
made peace with the invaders. But the Danes renewed 
their attacks and defeated Alfred at the Battle of Chip- 
penham in 877. Alfred then defeated the Danes at the 
Battle of Edington in 878. The Danish leader, Guthrum, 
agreed to be baptized a Christian. He also agreed to stay 
north and east of the River Thames, in an area called the 
Danelaw. However, the Danes broke the peace, and Al- 
fred renewed the war. He won London in 886. All the 
English people not subject to the Danes recognized Al- 
fred as their ruler and paid him homage. The old, inde- 
pendent Anglo-Saxon kingdoms began to merge under 
the rule of Wessex. 

Alfred built forts and boroughs (fortified towns) at 
strategic points. He stationed his fleet along the coast as 
protection against further invasions. He also issued a 
code of laws to restore peaceful government. 

Before Alfred, education had declined in England be- 
cause the Danes had looted monasteries and churches, 
the centers of learning. Alfred revived learning by bring- 
ing teachers and writers from Wales and continental Eu- 
rope. He encouraged the translation of famous Christian 
books from Latin into Old English. Under his influence, 
the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle began to be compiled. It is 
now the main source for Anglo-Saxon history up to 
sek Joel T. Rosenthal 

See also Anglo-Saxons; England (The Anglo-Saxon 
period). 

Alfven, Hannes Olof Gosta (1908-1995), a Swedish 
physicist, won a share of the Nobel Prize for physics in 











1970 for his research in magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) 
and plasma physics. Magnetohydrodynamiics is the 
study of the ways in which electric and magnetic fields 
interact with fluids that conduct electricity. 

Alfven developed MHD and applied it to the study of 
plasma, a gas composed chiefly of electrically charged 
particles. He showed that plasma passing through a 
magnetic field produces electromagnetic waves. These 
waves, Called A/fven waves, help explain the behavior of 
plasma, which makes up more than 99 percent of all 
matter in the universe. The results of Alfvén’s work have 
been used in astrophysics and space science and in de- 
signing fusion reactors (see Nuclear energy). 

Alfven was born in Norrk6ping, Sweden, and earned 
a Ph.D. degree in physics from the University of Uppsala. 
He joined the faculty of the Royal institute of Technolo- 
gy in Stockholm in 1940. In 1967, Alfvén became a pro- 
fessor of applied physics at the University of California 
at San Diego. Richard L Hilt 
Algae, Al jee, are simple organisms that live in oceans, 
lakes, rivers, ponds, and moist soil. A single organism of 
this type is called an alga. Some algae are microscopic 
and consist of just one cell, and others are large and 
contain many cells. Some species drift or swim, and oth- 
ers are attached to stones or weeds in the water. Large 
marine algae are called seaweeds. A few algae live on 
land, growing on trees or other land plants, soil, and 
rocks. Others live on sloths or turtles. Still others grow 
within plants or animals. 

All algae contain chlorophyll. They help purify the air 
and water by the process of photosynthesis. Algae also 
serve as food for fish and other animals that live in the 
water. 

Some algae multiply rapidly in polluted lakes and 
rivers. Thick layers of algae, called a/ga/ blooms, may 
form when waste materials, such as sewage and fertiliz- 
ers, are dumped in the water. The increased algal popu- 
lation sometimes upsets the natural balance of life in 
water. The water eventually may become extremely low 
in oxygen and unfit for use by people. 

Most botanists classify the blue-green algae, also 
called cyanobacteria, with bacteria as members of the 





x { Tae vo 


ER Degginger 


Many microscopic varieties of algae grow in oceans, lakes, 
ponds, and streams. The blue-green alga Anabaena, left, consists 
of long strands of single cells. The spherical colonies of the 
green alga Volvox, right, consist of many cells. 


Algae 349 


kingdom Prokaryotae. They classify all other algae in the 
kingdom Protista. 


Blue-green algae 


Some kinds of blue-green algae form slippery, dark 
coatings on rocks along the shores of rivers, lakes, and 
oceans. Others occur in soil, forming a slimy layer on 
wet ground. Lakes with large numbers of blue-green al- 
gae look greenish or bluish-green. A few species of 
blue-green algae may poison fish or cattle and other an- 
imals that drink water containing these organisms. 

Most blue-green algae can be seen only with a micro- 
scope. Some species have only one cell. In others, the 
cells form strands. The cells of blue-green algae lack a 
distinct nucleus. Besides chlorophyll, they contain blue 
or red pigments (coloring matter). The combination of 
pigments causes some to appear pinkish, brownish, or 
black. Many species can take nitrogen from the air, con- 
vert it to compounds called nitrates, and so help to fer- 
tilize soil or water. Most blue-green algae reproduce 
only by cell division. 


Other kinds of algae 


All other algae have cells with at least one nucleus. 
The cells contain chlorophyll and other pigments in 
specialized cell parts called chloroplasts. These algae 
are generally grouped according to color—brown, 
green, or red. They grow and reproduce by cell divi- 
sion. Most kinds can also reproduce sexually. 

This broad group of algae includes diatoms and di- 
notlagellates, most of which have only one cell. Many of 
these algae occur with marine animals in drifting mass- 
es called plankton. Dinoflagellate cells swim by means 
of two hairlike structures called flagella. Diatoms have 
cell walls made up of silica. These “skeletons” resist de- 
cay and may accumulate on the ocean floor. In some 
places, they form a whitish material called diatomite, 
which has many industrial uses. See Diatom; Plankton. 

Brown algae are plentiful along many seashores of 
temperate zones. Some kinds, called ke/ps, grow as 
much as 200 feet (60 meters) long (see Kelp). A/gin, a 
gummy substance obtained from kelp, is used to thick- 
en cosmetics, ice cream, mayonnaise, and other prod- 
ucts. Some brown algae are used as fertilizer. 

Green algae occur in both fresh and salt water. Most 
species are microscopic and live in lakes, ponds, and 
streams. Large quantities of such algae may color an en- 
tire lake. Other species are larger and grow along 
seashores. Many coral beaches of the tropics consist of 
pieces of green seaweeds filled with lime. Some scien- 
tists are experimenting with growing green algae for 
food. 

Red algae are found mostly in subtropical seas, 
where they sometimes grow with corals. A few species 
of red algae live in fresh water. Some red algae have 
blue as well as green and red pigments. Certain red al- 
gae are the source of agar, a gelatinlike substance used 
in laboratories to grow bacteria. In Japan, people eat a 
red alga that is called nori It is usually sold dried as pa- 
pery sheets. Russell G. Rhodes 


Scientific classification. Blue-green algae belong to the 
kingdom Prokaryotae. All other algae belong to the kingdom 
Protista. 


See also Eutrophication; Lichen; Seaweed. 


350 Algebra 


re 3) ces 





WORLD BOOK photo by Sternkamp Ballogg 


An algebra problem involves letters that stand for unknown numbers. 


Algebra is one of the chief branches of mathematics. 
Mastery of mathematics depends on a sound under- 
standing of algebra. Engineers and scientists use alge- 
bra every day. Business and industry rely on algebra to 
help solve many problems. Because of its importance in 
modern living, algebra is studied in schools and col- 
leges in all parts of the world. 

Unknown numbers in algebra are represented by let- 
ters, such as x or y. In some problems, the letter can be 
replaced by only one number. A simple example would 
be x+3=8. For this statement to be true, x must be 5, 
because 5+ 3=8. In other problems, the letter may be 
replaced by one of many numbers. For example, for the 
algebraic statement x+ y=12 to be true, x would be 6 if 
y is 6, or x would be 4 if y is 8. In such an algebraic state- 
ment, you can find many values for x that make true 
statements if you give different values to y. 

People can use algebra to solve problems in ways 
that are beyond the range of arithmetic alone. For exam- 
ple: 

An airplane travels 1,710 kilometers in 4 hours flying 
with the wind, but it travels only 1,370 kilometers in 5 
hours flying against the wind. The speed of the airplane 
in relation to the air is the same in both directions, and 
the wind speed is constant. What is (1) the speed of the 
airplane in relation to the air and (2) the speed of the 
wind? 

The key to solving this problem is to use letters to 
represent the two unknown numbers. For example, you 
might use x to represent the speed of the plane relative 
to the air, and y to represent wind speed. Using letters 


in this way is not part of arithmetic, but is an essential 
part of algebra. 


Learning algebra 


Sets and variables. Letters in algebra are related to 
sets of numbers. Everyone is familiar with sets of ob- 
jects. There are sets of books, sets of stamps, and sets of 
dishes. Sets of numbers are much the same. In algebra, 
one way to describe a set of numbers is to use a capital 
letter, such as N, as a name for the set. Then you list the 
numbers of the set within braces { }. For example, here 
is the set of single-digit whole numbers: 


W= {0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9} 
Here is the set of odd numbers smaller than 20: 
Y= {1,3,5,7,9,11,13,15,17,19} 


These are the kinds of sets used in algebra. 

Imagine a group of people whose ages are 12 years, 
15 years, 20 years, and 24 years. You can write these 
ages as a Set of numbers: 


A={12,15,20,24} 


How old will these people be three years from now? 
One way of answering this question is to write out 

12+ 3, 15+3,20+3, and 24+ 3. However, the number 3 
is the same in all four of these expressions. In algebra, 
you can write all four expressions as one general ex- 
pression, ™-+ 3, in which m can be replaced with any 
number of the set A. For example, you can replace m 
with 12, 15, 20, or 24. 


The letter m is called a variable, and the set A is the 
domain of the variable. The number 3 in the expression 
m-+3is called a constant, because 3 always has the 
same value. A variable in algebra is a letter that can be 
replaced by one or more numbers belonging to a set. 

Statements and equations. In mathematics, a state- 
ment is a sentence that is either true or false. Mathemat- 
ical statements can be illustrated in everyday language. 
For example, here is an incomplete statement: 


“” 


was the inventor of the telephone. 


As it stands, this statement is neither true nor false. Sup- 
pose you write a name in the blank: 


“___Bell was the inventor of the telephone.” 


Now the statement is true. 
You can write a statement with a variable: 


‘y is a state bordered by the Pacific Ocean.” 


You can replace a variable with the members of its do- 
main. That is, you can replace the variable with names 
that will produce a true or false statement. 


“Ohio is a state bordered by the Pacific Ocean.” 


This statement is false. It is true only when you use 
Alaska, California, Hawaii, Oregon, or Washington: 


“Oregon is a state bordered by the Pacific Ocean-” 


The replacements that make true statements are called 
roots. The set that includes all the roots is called the so- 
lution set. As with other sets, braces are used to enclose 
the solution set. The solution set of this example is 
{ Alaska, California, Hawaii, Oregon, Washington}. In al- 
gebra, you do not use names to replace a variable. In- 
stead, you use numbers. 

Equations are one kind of sentence in algebra. They 
are mathematical sentences that say two things are 
equal. Here is a simple equation: 


7+x=12 


Terms used in algebra 


Binomial is an expression in algebra consisting of two terms 
connected by + or — symbols. 

Coefficient is the multiplier of a variable or number, usually 
written next to the variable. 

Constant is a number or a variable whose domain is a set of 
one number. 

Equation is a mathematical sentence that says two expressions 
are equal. 
Exponent is a number placed at the upper right of a number or 
variable to show how many times it is to be used as a factor. 
Expression, in algebra, is a certain number or variable, or num- 
bers and variables, combined by operations such as addition, 
subtraction, multiplication, or division. 

Factors are two or more expressions that are multiplied. 

Monomial is an expression in algebra consisting of a product 
of numbers and variables. 

Polynomial is an expression consisting of two or more terms. 

Quadratic refers to a variable that has been squared (used as a 
factor twice). 

Roots of an equation are numbers that make a true statement 
when they are substituted for a variable in the equation. 


Term is part of an expression connected to other terms by addi- 


tion or subtraction symbols. 
Variable is a symbol in algebra, usually a letter, that can be re- 
placed by one or more numerical values. 








Algebra 351 


This equation means that ‘the sum of 7 and a number 
equals 12.” To solve the equation, you can replace x with 
different numbers until you find one that will make the 
equation a true statement. If you replace x in this equa- 
tion with 5, the equation will be a true statement. If you 
replace x with any other number, the equation will be 
false. So the solution set to this equation is {5}. The so- 
lution set consists of only one root. 

Equations can have more than one root: 


x*7+18=9% 


The little 2 above the first x means that the number x 
represents is squared. That is, the number is multiplied 
once by itself {see Square). Also, one quantity placed 
next to another quantity indicates that one quantity is to 
be multiplied by the other quantity. Therefore, the ex- 
pression 9x means 9X x. 

In the above equation, you can replace x with 3: 


3X34+18=9X3 
oo 1G) 
27 — 27 
You can also replace x with 6: 
6X6+18=9x6 
364+ 18=54 
54=54 


Any other replacements of x make the equation a false 
statement. So 3 and 6 are roots of the equation, and its 
solution set is {3, 6}. 

Some equations do not have roots: 


x=x+3 


This equation becomes a false statement for any num- 
ber you use to replace x. Its solution set is called an 
empty set. An empty set is written { }. 

Some equations have many roots. Some even have an 
infinite (unlimited) number of roots: 


w+ 1}?#=x?4 2x41 


This equation will be a true statement if you replace x 
with any number. Its solution set consists of all numbers. 

Mathematicians use a number of terms to describe 
parts of an equation. They call the expression on each 
side of the equals sign a member of the equation. For 
example, in the equation 3x+2=11, 3x42 is the left 
member and 11 is the right member. Each part of a 
member that is connected by addition or subtraction 
signs—or stands alone~—is called a rerm. Therefore, 3x 
and 2 are the terms in the left member, and 11 is the 
term in the right member. 

Solving equations. The goal in solving an equation 
with a variable is to isolate the variable on one side of 
the equation. It does not matter on which side of the 
equals sign the variable appears because x=5 means 
5=x. But most people prefer to have the variable on the 
left because they read from left to right. 

A variable may be isolated by means of subtraction, 
division, addition, and multiplication. Sometimes, you 
must perform more than one operation to arrive at the 
final answer. 

Subtraction. \f the same number is subtracted from 


352 Algebra 


each side of an equation, the new members remain 
equal. All roots of the original equation are also roots of 
the new equation. Thus, for example, you can subtract 2 
from each member of the equation 3x+2=11: 


3x+2-—2=11-2 
to obtain the new equation 
3x%=9 


The equation 3x=9 is equivalent to 3x+ 2=11. The roots 
of either of these equations will solve the other. To iso- 
late the variable of the new equation, you must perform 
one more operation—the operation of division. 

Division. \f each side of an equation is divided by the 
Same number, except zero, the new members will be 
equal. The roots of the original equation are the roots of 
the new equation. Using this rule you can divide each 
side of 3x=9 by 3: 


So the solution set of the equation 3x+2=11 is {3}. You 
can prove this by replacing x with 3 in the original equa- 
tion: 3X 3+2=11, or 11=11. 

You cannot divide members of an equation by zero. 
Division by zero is meaningless. 

Addition. Another rule for solving algebraic equa- 
tions is that if the same number is added to each mem- 
ber of an equation, the new members will be equal. The 
roots of the original equation are roots of the new equa- 
tion. For example, in the equation x—6=18, you can add 
6 to each member of the equation to isolate the x on the 
left side of the equation. That is, x—6+6=18+6, and 
v= 24. The solution is the set {24}. 

When adding terms with identical variables, the num- 
bers before the variables are added. For example, 5a+ 
2a=7a. When subtracting terms with identical variables, 
the numbers are subtracted, so that 8v—3v=5y. 

Multiplication. The last rule tor solving simple equa- 
tions is that if each member of an equation is multiplied 
by the same number, the new members are equal. It 
would not be useful to multiply bv zero. however, be- 
cause any number multiplied by zero equals zero. 

After multiplying both sides of an equation by the 
same number, the roots of the original equation equal 
the roots of the new equation. For example, vou can 
multiply each member of the equation +x = 5 by 4: 


4x tr=4X5 
to obtain 
x= 20 


Thus, the solution set of +x=35 is | 20}. 
You can use all tour rules to find the solution set of 
the equation 


a sl 
gx—d=1y+6 


First, use multiplication to produce an equation that has 
only whole numbers. Such an equation is easier to solve 
than one containing fractions. The numbers in the de- 
nominators, 3 and 4. have the common factor 12 \see 
Factor). Multiplying both sides of the equation by 12 
therefore changes the fractions into whole numbers: 


12(2x—4)=12(L +6) 
8x—48=3x+72 


Second, add 48 to each member of the equation to elim- 
inate the 48 from the left side of the equation: 


8x—48 +48 = 37+ 72+48 
8x=3x7+120 


Third, subtract 3x. from each member to eliminate the 3x 
from the right side of the equation: 


8x —3x=3x+ 120—3% 
5x1=120 


Finally, divide each member by 5 to isolate the variable x 
on the left side of the equation: 


5x _ 120 
5 5 
x—?74 


The solution set is therefore } 24}. You can verify this by 
replacing x with 24 in the original equation: 
2x 24—4=1 x 244+6 
16—4=6+6 
be—a1Z 
Since the equation-solving techniques did not produce 
any other solutions, 24 is the only solution. 

Positive and negative numbers. In arithmetic, you 
can always add, multiply, or divide numbers. But you 
cannot always subtract. For 
example, 3—5° is mean- 
ingless in ordinary arith- 
metic. Algebra has an ex- 
tended number system that 
solves this problem. 

In ordinary arithmetic, 
numbers indicate only size. 
That is, they show how 
many or how much. But 
many everday measure- 
ments indicate both size 
and direction. The temper- 
ature above or below zero 
is a good example of this. 
In algebra, we use num- 
bers that show direction. 





WORLD BOOA @ustranon i 





You can show these new Sn odie 
numbers on a scale: 
Below zero Above zero 
. . ‘ ° ‘ : ‘ . 5 
Fe =, ££. o 41 82° 2% (of 


The origin or starting point is zero. To the right of zero, 
the points show positive distance or direction. These 
numbers are like temperatures above zero. To the left of 
zero, the points show negative distance or direction. 
These numbers are like temperatures below zero. Point 
A is not just 1, but +1 or positive one. The + sign 
shows its direction from zero. Point & is not just 1, but 





— 1 or negative one. The — sign also shows direction. 
The numbers on this scale are called positive numbers 
and negative numbers. In everyday life, you can use 
these numbers to represent temperatures, distances 
above or below sea level, changes in stock-market 
prices, business earnings, and many other things. For 
every positive number, there is a negative number of 
the same arithmetical size. For example, the number 7 
always means seven things, positive or negative. The ar- 
ithmetical size of a number is called its abso/ute value. 

You can add, subtract, multiply, and divide positive 
and negative numbers, but the rules of these operations 
are different from those in ordinary arithmetic. 

Adding can be illustrated with the problem 
(+5)+(—7), or the sum of positive five and negative 
seven. You can work out the solution on the following 
scale. 


-§5 -4 -3 -2 -1 O +1 #4+2 #43 +4 «+5 


If you were adding (+5) and (+7) ona scale, you 
would count five points to the right from zero, and then 
count seven more to the right to (+12). To add 
(+5)+(—7), start at zero on the scale above and count 
off the first number to be added. This number is +5, so 
you count off 5 to the right. Next, count off in the direc- 
tion indicated by the second number to be added. This 
number is —7,so you count off —7 to the left from +5. 
This takes you to the left of 0, to —2. You can read the 
sum of (+5)+(—7) on the scale: —2. Therefore, 

(+ 5)+(—7)=(—2). Numbers with positive or negative 
signs are often called signed numbers. One rule for 
adding signed numbers has two parts. First, /f the signs 
are the same, add the absolute values of the numbers 
and give the sum the common sign. For example, 

(+ 5)+(+4 8)=(+4 13) and (—5)+(—8)=(—13). Second, if 
the signs are different, subtract the smaller absolute 
value from the larger absolute value, and give the result 
the sign of the number with the larger absolute value. 
For example, (+ 5)+(—8)=(—3) and (—5)+(+ 8)=(-+ 3). 

Subtracting. To subtract positive and negative num- 
bers, remember the method of subtraction in arithmetic. 
The minuend—the subtrahend=the difference: 9—4=5. 
The minuend is the number or quantity from which an- 
other is to be subtracted. The subtrahend is the number 
or quantity to be subtracted. The minuend is also the 
sum of the subtrahend and the difference: J=4+5. In 
subtracting positive and negative numbers, you must 
ask what you need to add to the subtrahend to make a 
sum equal to the minuend. In the problem (+9)—(—4), 
what can be added to (—4) to make it equal to (+9)? One 
way to solve this subtraction problem is to change it 
into an addition problem. Any subtraction problem can 
be changed into an addition problem by (1) changing 
the sign of the subtrahend, and (2) adding the minuend 
and the changed subtrahend. Using this rule, (+ 9)—(—4) 
becomes (+9)+(+4), and (+ 9)+(+4)=(4 13). So(+9)— 


Algebra 353 


(—4)=(+ 13). Using this example, you can see that the 
sum of the subtrahend and the difference is the minu- 
end: (—4)+(+ 13)=(+ 9). Here is another example of the 
use of this rule: (—6)—(+ 8). First, change the sign of the 
(+8). Then add the minuend and changed subtrahend: 
(—6)+(—8)=(—14). 

Multiplying. The rule for multiplying signed numbers 
is to multiply the absolute values. If the signs are alike, 
the product is positive. 


(+ 3)x(+8)=(4 24) 
If the signs are not alike, the product is negative. 
(+3)x(-—8)=(-—24) (—3)x(4+8)=(—24) 


(—3)x(—8)=(+ 24) 


Dividing. The rule for dividing signed numbers is 
similar. Dividing numbers with the same sign gives a 
positive quotient. 


(+ 24) (+ 3)=(+4 8) (= 74)-=(— 5) —(43) 


Dividing numbers with signs that are not alike gives a 
negative quotient. 


(+ 24)~(—3)=(—8) (—24)+(48)=(—3) 


When you use negative numbers in algebra, they can 
extend the domain of the variable. For example, the 
equation x+4=1 has no root with ordinary numbers. 
With the extended number system, its root is —3. Oper- 
ations with negative numbers can be applied to vari- 
ables that represent numbers. That is, you can deal with 
quantities such as —x or —y. 

Writing formulas. Algebra uses general formulas to 
help solve many practical problems in science, engi- 
neering, and everyday life. A wide variety of arithmetic 
situations can be expressed in general formulas. 

One example of the use of general formulas involves 
room dimensions. Consider a room that is 5 meters long 
and 4 meters wide. Its perimeter, or outside measure- 
ment, is5+4+5+4 meters, or 2X(5+4) meters. If the 
room is 5 meters long and the width is unknown, you 
can use Ww, a variable, to represent the width. The perim- 
eter is then 5+w+5+w, or 2X(5+ Ww). Going one step 
further, you can write a formula for the perimeter of any 
rectangular room by using / for the length and w for the 
width. The formula is 2 (/+ v1. You can solve many 
problems with this kind of formula. 

Some situations call for an equation. For example, a 
man collected a sum of money on August 1, and + as 
much on August 2. He collected a total of $6,500. How 
much was each amount? If 7 is the amount collected on 
August 1, then tis the amount collected on August 2. 
The equation is n+ +2=6,500. You can solve this equa- 
tion to find a. First, multiply both members of the equa- 
tion by 3 to change the fraction + to a whole number: 


3 X (n+ tn) =3 X 6,500 


3n+n=19,500 
Add the terms on the left side of the equation: 
4n=19,500 


Divide both members of the equation by 4 to find m7: 
n=4,875 


And 41=4,875~ 3, or 1,625. Therefore, the man col- 
lected $4,875 on August 1 and $1,625 on August 2. To 


354 Algebra 


check this result, add the two amounts collected: 
$4,875+ $1,625 = $6,500. 


Basic algebra 


After you learn to work with variables, equations, and 
signed numbers, you will find that the fundamental prin- 
ciples of algebra are not hard to understand. 

Symbols in algebra. The symbol + indicates addi- 
tion. But in algebra, it also signifies a positive number. 
The symbol — indicates subtraction and a negative 
number. You usually do not use x to indicate multipli- 
cation in algebra, because it might be confused with the 
letter x. Instead, you use a dot: or no symbol at all. You 
write a multiplied by 6 as a - b, (ab), or ab. (Note that 
3-6 and (36) both mean six multiplied by three, but that 
36 still means 36, as in arithmetic.) The symbol = for di- 
vision is the same as it is in arithmetic. 

Parentheses ( ), brackets [ ], and braces { } often en- 
close quantities or numbers. They are called signs of ag- 
gregation because everything within them must be 
treated as a single expression. You must often simplify 
the enclosed expression before it can be used in other 
parts of a problem. Here is an example using numbers: 


{12+14+5—(5—3)+4)—4} 
First, simplify the group (5 — 3): 
{12+14+5—2+4]—4} 
Second, simplify the group [4+5—2+4): 
{12+11—4}=19 


You use the same method to simplify expressions with 
variables. Here is an example of simplifying groups of 
variables: 

{5a+6a+[5a—a+(3a+4a))—a} 


First, simplify the group (3a + 4a): 
{5a+6a+[5a—a+7al—a} 
Second, simplify the group [5a—a-+ 7al: 
{5a+6a+ 1lla—a}=21a 


Sometimes it is useful to remove the parentheses 
from an expression without simplifying it. You can do 
this by using the rules for addition and subtraction of 
signed numbers. For example, the expression a+(b+c) 
can be rewritten a+ 6+-c. To illustrate this, the expres- 
sion 40+(8—2) means that 8— 2, or 6, must be added to 
40, or 40+ 6. Removing the parentheses, 40+ 8—2, or 
48—2, is the same as the simplified expression, 40+6. /f 
an expression within parentheses has an addition or 
positive sign before it, you can remove the parentheses 
without changing the signs of the quantities within the 
parentheses. Thus, a+(—b—c) becomes a—b—c. 

But, ifan expression within parentheses has a sub- 
traction or negative sign before it, you must change the 
subtraction or negative sign, and you must change the 
sign of the quantities within the parentheses. That is, 
you make an addition problem out of a subtraction 
problem. Thus, 6—(—8) becomes 6+(+ 8). Here is an- 
other example: 6—(+ 8) becomes 6 +(— 8). If there is 
more than one quantity within the parentheses, you 
must change the sign of each quantity. For example, 
6—(— 3+2) becomes 6+ 3—2, or 7. For this general situ- 


ation, you can rewrite a—(b+c) as the formula a—b—c. 

If you want to change the signs of expressions or 
numbers, you can reverse the process and put them 
within parentheses. For example, you can rewrite the ex- 
pression 8+7 as —(—8 —7). Or, you can rewrite 8+4—6 
as 8—(—4+6). 

Fundamental laws. There are five fundamental laws 
in algebra. These laws govern addition. subtraction, 
multiplication, and division. They are expressed in vari- 
ables, and the variables can be replaced with any num- 
bers. Here are the laws: 

1. The Commutative Law of Addition is written x+ y= 
¥+x. This means that if you want to add two numbers, 
you can add them in either order, and the sum will be 
the same. For example, 2+3=3+2=5, and (—8)+(—36) 
= (— 36)+(—8)= —44. 

2. The Associative Law of Addition is written x+ 
(v+z)=Ww+YW+z. This means that if you want to add sev- 
eral numbers, you can add any combination first, and 
the final sum will be the same. For example, 
2+(3+4)=(2+3)+4, or 24+7=54+4=9. 

3. The Commutative Law of Multiplication is written 
x: y=y: x This means that if you want to multiply two 
numbers, you can multiply them in either order, and the 
product will be the same. For example, (2)(3)=(3(2)=6, 
and (—8\— 36)=(— 36 —8)=288. 

4. The Associative Law of Multiplication is written 
x (y* z)=(x° W-z. This means that if you want to multiply 
several numbers, you can multiply any combination first, 
and the final product will be the same. For example, 

2(3 - 4)=(2 - 34, or 2(12)=(614 = 24. 

5. The Distributive Law of Multiplication over Addi- 
tion is written dy+ z)=xy-+.z. This law can be illustrated 
with an example: 3 - (4+ 5)=(3 - 4)+(3 - 5). Ifa number 
multiplies a sum, for example. 3(4+5), or 3-9. the result 
is the same as the sum of the separate products of the 
multiplier and each addend, (3 - 4)+(3 -5), or 124.15. In 
this example, you can see that 3: 9=12+15=27. 

Other definitions. It is important to define some 
other words used in algebra. An expression consisting 
of a product of numbers and variables is a monomial. 
For example, 5xy is a monomial. This particular mono- 
mial contains three elements (5. x, and y, called factors, 
that multiply each other. An expression with two or 
more terms connected hy addition or subtraction sym- 
bols is called a po/ynomial For example, x—y+zis a 
polynomial. One kind of polynomial is a binomial, an ex- 
pression with two terms connected by an addition or 
subtraction symbol. For example, x+y and 3a?—46 are 
binomials. 

A number, variable. or expression that acts as a multi- 
plier is called a coefficient. For example, in the expres- 
sion 5a, 5 is the coefficient of 2 and a is the coefficient of 
5. In alv+ Mi, a is the coefficient of x+y and (x+y is the 
coetticient of a. 

Addition in algebra is much like that in arithmetic. In 
algebra, a added to a is 2a. The expressions a and 2a are 
said to be /ike or similar because they contain exactly 
the same variables. To add two or more like quantities in 
algebra, you use the Distributive Law. In this way, 2x+ 3x 
+4yx is (2+3+4)x, or 9x. But there is no single term for 
the sum of un/ike quantities, such as a and b. This sum 
must be written a+b. To add 3a, 46, 6a, and 6, you can 
use the Commutative and Associative laws of addition. 





These laws permit you to add a series of numbers in any 
order. First, add the similar terms: 3a4+6a=9a and 46+ b 
=5b. Then, combine the sums. Thus, 3a+4b+6a+ b=9 
a+ 5b. 

You can use the tollowing form to work out the prob- 
lem: 


3a+4b 
6a+ b 
9a+5b 





To add unlike quantities that are both positive and 
negative, you can use the Visiributive Law of Multiplica- 
tion ove: Addition. The use ot this law can be shown by 
addiny (2a°- -b*c + 6bd* + 2d), (4a* + 3b*c— 4bd*— 3d°), 
(34° + 2b*c + 2bd*-—-4d°), and (— 2a>— 8b*c + 6ba* + 6a"). 
the little 3 above such terms as 2a* means that the num- 
ber represented by the variable is cubed. That is, the 
number is used as a factor three times (see Cube). To 
add these terms, you should first arrange like terms in 
columns: 


2a3— b’c+ 6bd?+2da 
4a°+3b*c— 4ba?—3d° 
3a3+2b*c+ 2bd?—4d 
—2a*—8b‘c+ 6bd?+6d 
7a>—4b*c+10ba?+ d& 


An explanation of the second column illustrates the 
method of addition. This column is — b2c+ 362¢ 4+ 267¢e— 
8b2c. Using the Distributive Law, you can see that these 
terms aie the separate pioducts of a multiplier, b2c. The 
coefficients are the addends thai make up a sum. These 
addends are —1, +3, +2, and —8. You can add them 
together to obtain (— 4)b*c, or —4b7c. Use the same 
method to add the other columns. 

Subtraction of products of numbers and variables 
follows the same rule as the subtraction of signed num- 
bers. To subtract one quantity from another, you must 
change the sign ot the subtrahend and add the two 
quantities together. In the example 8a— 3a, the sign of 
both the minuend and the subtrahend ts positive. That 
is, (+ 8)a—(+3)a. Changing this from a subtraction prob- 
lem to an addition problem converts it to (+ 8)a+(—3)a. 
The sum of 8a and —3a is 5a. 

The subtraction (2a3— b¢c + 6bad? + 2d°) — (4a3 + 3b2c— 
4bd*— 3d°) is more difficult. First, arrange like terms in 
columns: 

2a3— b’e+ 6bd?+2de 


443+ 3b¢c— 4ba?—3d° 
Next, subtract the coefficients of like terms by changing 
the signs in the subtrahend and adding: 
2a3—- b?c+ 6bd?+2d 
—4a3—3b?c+ 4ba?+3e 
— 2a? 4b*c+ 10ba? + 5a 


Multiplication in algebra is usually indicated by writ- 
ing two or more expressions together without an opera- 
tion symbol. For exainple, 4° b is written ab. 

When a variable or number is used as a factor more 
than one time, the multiplication is abbreviated. For ex- 
ample, abb is written ab? and abbbb is written ab*. The 





Algebra 355 


little number is called an exponent. It indicates the num- 
ber of times a quantity is used as a factor. Thus, a° a or 
da is written a2. It is called the square of a. Next, 

a’ 4° a OF aaa is written a*. It is called the cube of a. And 
dada is written as a‘, and aaaaa is written as a>. A variable 
that occurs only one time as a factor has an exponent of 
1. If you are adding or subtracting exponents, you can 
write 2a as a’. 

When you multiply like variables, you add their expo- 
nents. You can see that b?- b> is (b: bb: b- b), or B®. It is 
easier to add the exponents: b? : b> =6?+3, and 67+3=65. 
You cannot combine the exponents in a? b? because a 
and 6 could possibly represent different numbers. 

To multiply abcd by bc*dy, you combine the factors 
that are alike. In (abcd\bc*dyi, there are one a, two O's or 
6b: b, three c's orc: c?, two ds or d- d, and one y. So the 
product of abcd and bc*dy is ab*c*d*y. The Commutative 
Law of Multiplication permits you to multiply variables 
and numbers in any order. 

To multiply an expression consisting of two or more 
terms by a single term or expression, you can use the 
Distributive Law of Multiplication over Addition: 
My+z)=xy+xz. Multiplying (3bd\(5b2c + 2d) shows the 
use of this law. You can modify the form used in arith- 
metic for multiplication: 


5b?c+ 2d 
3bd 
1553cd+ 6ba2 


To find the product in this example, you multiply the 
terms of (562c+ 2d) one at a time. First, multiply 5b2c by 
3bd. This product is 1563cd. Write 1563cd as the first 
term in the answer. Next, multiply 2d by 36d. This prod- 
uct is 6bd?. Write 66d? as the second term in the answer. 
The total product is 1553cd+ 6ba?. 

To multiply two expressions each consisting of two or 
more quantities is more difficult. Here is an example. 
The problem is (a— b\la2— 2ab+ b?). 


a—2ab+ 6 
a— b 

a>—2a*b+ ab? 

— ab+2ab*— b3 


a> — 3a2b + 3ab?— b3 


First, multiply each term in the multiplicand by the first 
term of the multiplier. Write the product of this multipli- 
cation as part of the answer. Next, multiply each term in 
the multiplicand by the second term of the multiplier. 
You can arrange like terms in columns. Write this sec- 
ond product as part of the answer. Last, add the two 
products to obtain the total product. Notice that arrang- 
ing like terms in columns helps you do the addition that 
gives the total product. 

Division in algebra is the opposite of multiplication. 
Remember that to multiply like terms, you add their ex- 
ponents. To divide like terms, you subtract the exponent 
of the divisor from the exponent of the dividend. For ex- 
ample b?— 55-2 andib>-2= b?. 

Here its a more difficult problem: (3x¢+¥2z—9x3yz? — 
6x24) — (3x2). In this case, you must divide each part of 
the dividend in turn by the divisor (3x2y). For each part, 


356 Algebra 


ask what multiplied by (3x2y) will give that part of the div- 
idend. For example, what multiplied by (3x7) will give 
(—9x3yz?)? The answer is (— 3xz?). Using this method, 
(3x4¥7z— Sx3yz?— 6x24) = (34M = bet yz— 3xz?— 2y’). 

Here is another problem: (12a?+ 18ab+ 66?) + (4a+ 
25). For a problem of this kind, you can use a form 
somewhat like the form used in arithmetic for long divi- 
sion: 


1247+ 18ab + 667 

1242+ 6ab 
12ab + 662 _4a+ 26 Divisor 
12ab + 66? 3a+ 3b Quotient 


First, divide the first term of the dividend by the first 
term of the divisor: 12a?+4a=3a. Write the result, 3a, as 
the first term in the quotient to the right. Next, multiply 
both terms of the divisor by 3a, the first term in the quo- 
tient: (4a + 26)(3a)= 1242+ 6ab. Write this product below 
the dividend and subtract it from the dividend. You must 
account for the result of this subtraction, 12ab+ 662, 
with a second term in the quotient. To do this, divide 12 
ab by the first term of the divisor. 12ab~4a= 3b. And 3b 
proves to be the second term of the quotient. Multiply 
the divisor by 3b: (4a+ 26\36)=12ab+ 662. You can see 
that there is no remainder. 

Factoring means to find expressions that are factors 
of a given product. For example, (42+ 25) and (3a + 35) 
are factors of 1247+ 18ab+ 667. If you multiply (4a +25\(3 
a+ 36), the product is 1247+ 18ab+ 657. An expression 
can have more than one set of factors. For example, 
212,3X8, and 4x 6are sets of factors of 24. Factoring 
is important in algebra because it is used to simplify 
complicated expressions (see Factor). 


Working with equations 


Functions. The amount of gasoline used by an air- 
plane is related to its speed. The amount of postage re- 
quired for a parcel depends on its weight. The idea of 
one thing depending on another is important in mathe- 
matics. It is called the re/ation of one thing to another. In 
algebra, a certain relation of two variables is called a 
function. 

You can learn the idea of a function from familiar 
things. For example, imagine a concrete foundation that 
is 16 centimeters above the level of the ground. On this 
foundation, you build up 6 layers of stone blocks. Each 
layer is 8 centimeters thick. As you add each layer of 
blocks, the height of the pile becomes larger. Use x to 
represent the number of layers and y to represent the 
height of the pile. Here is a table showing the relation of 
the number of layers of stone blocks to the height of the 
pile. 


2 s 4 5 6 


x 0 7 
y & 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 


You can show the numbers in this table on a graph. 
Distances along two lines represent the values of x and 


y. One line is horizontal and shows values of x. The other 
line is vertical and shows values of y. These two lines 


y 
* += * 
64 —«- — 
56 a . 
48 e . N 
40 ‘ 
32 e = i i 
24 @ : ‘ 





0 1 2 3 + 5 6 x 


are called coordinates. You can plot the number pairs 
from the table on the graph with 7 dots. 

There is an equation that describes this line of dots: 
y=8x+ 16. You can see how the equation fits the table of 
values. For example, if x=2, then y=8(2)+ 16, or 32. If 
x=5, then y=8(5)+ 16, or 56. 

In the equation, the domain of xis the set of numbers 
{0, 1, 2,3, 4,5, 6}. The values of y are called the range of 


WORLD BOOK silustranon by Sarah Woodward 
- mS 7 











EE —— 


y. The range of y is the set of numbers { 16, 24, 32, 40, 48, 
56, 64}. Mathematicians call the relation between the 
two sets of numbers a set of ordered pairs. This set is 
written {ivi} — {(0, 16), (1, 24), (2, 32)... (6, 64)}. This set 
of pairs is a function. It is called a discrete function be- 
cause it cannot be represented by a continuous line. On 
the graph that appears on page 356, the function is 
shown by the dots or points. 

Now, imagine that the bottom of an aquarium is 20 
inches above the floor. The aquarium is 36 inches high. 
Water flowing into the aquarium causes the level of the 


36 in. 





WORLD BOOK tlustration by Sarah Woodward 


water in the aquarium to rise 4 inches every minute. This 
means that the height of the water above the floor is re- 
lated to the time the water has been flowing. In this ex- 
ample, use x to represent the number of minutes the 
water has been flowing and y to represent the distance 
of the surface of the water from the floor. Here are some 
of the values of x and y: 


When this relation is shown on a graph, the line is solid 
because the height of y increases continuously. You can 
describe this line with an equation: y=4x-+ 20. If x=2, 
then y=4(2)+ 20, or 28. You can see how this equation 
fits the table of values. The domain of x is all numbers 
between 0 and 9, and the range of y is all numbers be- 
tween 20 and 56. This function is called a /inear function 
because it is continuous and can be represented by a 
solid line. The equation y=4x-+ 20 is called a /inear 
equation. The study of linear equations is one of the 
most important topics in algebra. 

Solving linear equations in two variables. The 
equation y=4x+ 20 is linear. It has two variables, 1 and 


Algebra 357 


60 


40 


20 


0 1 2 2 4 5 6 7 8 9 _ 


y. Its continuous line on a graph shows that it has a num- 
ber of solutions. That is, there are many pairs of num- 
bers that will make y= 4x-+ 20 a true statement. 

Because linear equations have many solutions, it is 
often useful to find some sort of restriction or limit for 
them. For example, you might want to use a linear equa- 
tion to solve a practical problem. To do this, you must 
find some way to restrict the equation to one set of val- 
ues. One method is to use a pair of equations that are 
true for only one pair of numbers. 

The equations 2v=x+4 and y+x=5 illustrate this 
method. To solve these equations, you can use a graph. 
First, make tables of a few of the values that solve each 
equation. 


2y=x+4 x+y=5 
x 0 2 4 x 0 3 5 
M4 2 3 4 y 5 2 0 


Plot these points on the graph (as shown on page 358) 
and draw a line for each equation. The two lines cross. 
The point where they cross represents the values that 
will solve both equations. This point is (2, 3). That is, x 
has the value 2, and y has the value 3. Only these values 
for x and y will solve the two equations. 

You can also solve a pair of linear equations in two 
variables by eliminating one of the variables. This results 
in a single equation in one variable. You can use 2v= 
x+4 and y+x=5 again as examples. There are various 
ways of eliminating a variable. The method that can be 
used here is Called substitution. First, solve one of the 
equations for y. That is, find what y equals in one of the 





equations. Naturally, you will not know the value of x 
Using the equation y+ x=5, the solution for yis 5—x 
Substitute this for yin the other equation. The other 
equation is 2y=x+4. Substituting the new value for y, 
you obtain 2(5—¥=x+4. Simplified, this is 10—2x= x+4. 
Subtracting 4 trom both sides of this equation produces 
6—2x= x Adding 2x to both sides of the new equation 
produces 6=3x Therefore, x=2. Now you can replace x 
with 2 in either of the two equations and tind 3 as the 
value tor y.2v=2+ 4 and y+2=5. So the solution of the 
two equations is {(2, 3)}. 

An equation in two variables can also be solved by re- 
stricting the solution to positive whole numbers. You 
can see this in a problem involving a man who bought 
some prize turkeys and ducks. He spent $31. He paid $5 
for each turkey and $2 for each duck. How many of each 
did he buy? Use xto represent the number of turkeys 
and 5.xas their cost. Use yto represent the number of 
ducks and 2yas their cost. You can write this problem as 
an equation: 5x+2y=31. You can substitute only whole 
numbers for xand ybecause, in this case, you cannot 
buy part of a bird. 

To solve this problem, we use the fact that only an 
even and an odd number can have the sum 31. Any 
whole number multiplied by 2 is an even number, so 2y 
is even. This means that 5x must be an odd number. Any 
even number multiplied by 5 is an even number, so x 
cannot be even. Any odd number multiplied by 5 is an 
odd number, so x might be any odd number. Replacing 
xwith odd numbers, you will find that the pairs of num- 
bers that solve the equation are (1, 13), (3, 8), and (5, 3). 
The man could have bought 1 turkey and 13 ducks: 


» 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Sarah Woodward 


SISSGOD 
SISSPS 
Six 








Or three turkeys and eight ducks: 


DOP SSDS 


SIS 


Or five turkeys and three ducks: 


PHHHH ~= 


You cannot use 7 for x because the pair would be (7, 
—2},and —2 ducks is not a solution. 

For another method of solving equations in two vari- 
ables, see Determinant. 

Quadratic equations in one unknown. A quadratic 
equation is one in which the variable is squared. For ex- 
ample, x —8x=~— 16 is a quadratic equation in one un- 
known. By combining terms, you can put any quadratic 
equation with one unknown variable in the following 
form: 








av + bx+c=0 


In this formula, 2, b, and crepresent the Anown num- 
bers or coefficients. For example, bis the coefficient of 
x, and xis the unknown variable. In the simplest example 
of this kind of equation, the coefficient a=1 and the co- 
efficient b=0. For instance, if a=1, b=0, and c=—36, 
then ¥—36=0. This means that ¥=36 and the solution 
set is {6, —6}. If b does not equal zero, there are three 
other methods for solving this type of equation. 

The tirst method is to factor the equation after it has 
been put in the form ax+ 6x+ c=0. You can use 
¥ +8x+15=0 as an example. You can factor the left-hand 
side of this equation: ¥+8x+ 15=(x+ 3Xx+5)}. So 
(x+ 3)(x+ 5}=0. It the product of two numbers is zero, one 
of the numbers must be zero. If x+5=0, then x= —5. Sim- 
ilarly, if x+ 3=0, then x= — 3. The solution set of 
¥+8x+15 is {—3, —5}. 

The second method is called completing the square. 
An expression such as @+2ab+ 6 is called a perfect 
square because it can be rewritten (a+ bY. You can 
change an equation such as ¥+8x+15=0 so that the left- 
hand member is a perfect square. To do this, rewrite the 
equation ¥ + 8x+ 15=0 as ¥+8x=— 15. You know that 
¥*+8x+16 is a perfect square because it can be rewritten 
(x+4¥. You can add 16 to both sides of ¥+8x=— 15. This 
gives you ¥ +8x+16=—15+ 16. Factoring this, you find 
that (v+ 4)2= 1. One of two equal factors of a number is 
called its square root (see Square root). In the equation 
(x+4)2=1, x+4 must equal the square root of 1. The 
square root of 1 is either 1 or —1. So x+4=1 or 
v+4=—1. Then x= ~3 or x= —5. This means that the so- 
lution set to ¥+8x+ 15=0 is {—3, —5}. 

The third method for solving a quadratic equation in 








one unknown is to use the following formula: 


—b+V b—4ac 
2a 


x= 


You can obtain the coefficients a, b, and c from any qua- 
dratic equation put in the form ax+ bx+ c=0. Substitut- 
ing these numbers in the formula will give you the value 
of x In the formula, the symbol + means positive or 
negative. It also indicates that there will be two roots to 
the equation. 

Here is how to apply the equation to the formula 

¥+8x+15=0: 


ya 782N BF 405) 


2(1) 
a —8+V-4 
2 
a ae 
2 
pe 2% 10, 
Z Z 


Therefore, the solution set to + 8x+ 15=0 is {~3, —5}. 
History 


The ancient Egyptians and Babylonians used algebra. 
Evidence for its development appears in an Egyptian 
book that was copied by the scribe Ahmes about 1650 
B.C. The Babylonians used more advanced algebra than 
did the Egyptians. Hundreds of years later, the Greeks, 
Chinese, and people of India contributed to the devel- 
opment of algebra. Diophantus, a mathematician who 
lived in the A.D. 200's, used quadratic equations and 
symbols for unknown quantities. Diophantus, who was 
probably Greek, has been called “the father of algebra.” 

The Arabs made many contributions to the study of al- 
gebra. They adopted the number system of India, in- 
cluding the zero, and developed fractions much as they 
are used today. They helped transmit earlier mathemati- 
cal ideas to the West. Between 813 and 833, al-Khwariz- 
mi, a teacher in the mathematical schoo! in Baghdad, 
wrote an influential book on algebra that was used as a 
textbook. The English word a/gebra comes trom an Ara- 
bic word meaning restoration or completion in the title 
of this work. The Persian astronomer and poet Omar 
Khayyam (c. 1048-1131) wrote a book on algebra. 

There was little progress in the development of alge- 
bra during the Middle Ages. Europeans began to study 
the subiect in the late 1400's and in the 1500's. Many 
mathematicians contributed to its later development. 

The widespread use of computers has caused major 
changes in the study and use of algebra. Inexpensive 
software can perform most problem-solving steps stud- 
ied in algebra. For example, the programs can quickly 
solve linear or quadratic equations. The emphasis in al- 
gebra classes has therefore begun to shift from learning 
basic symbol-manipulation skills to understanding alge- 
bras underlying cuncepts. 


George WW Bright 


Alger, Horatio 359 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Binomial theorem Newton, Sir Isaac 


Boolean algebra Omar Khayyam 
Descartes, Rene Progression 
Deterininant Series 
Factor Sei theory 
Mathematics 

Outline 


i. Learning algebra 
A. Sets and variables 
B. Statements and 
equations 
C. Solving equations 
li. Basic algebra 
A. Symbols in algebra 
B. Fundamental laws 
C. Other definitions 
D. Addition 
E. Subtraction 
Hl. Working with equations 
A. Functions 
B. Solving linear equations in two variables 
C. Quadratic equations in one unknown 
iV. History 


D. Positive and negative 
numbers 
E. Writing formulas 


F. Multiplication 
G. Division 
H. Factoring 


Questions 


How does the use of a variable help solve math problems? 

How may an equation be compared to a balance? 

What is meant by the root or roots of an equation? 

How can numbers in algebra indicate size and direction? 

What is the rule for multiplying positive and negative numbers? 
How are two like variables with exponents multiplied? For exam- 


ple, 53). 

How is a function shown on a graph? 

What is the Commutative Law of Multiplication? 

What methods are used to solve quadratic equations in one un- 
known? 

Where does the word a/gebra come from? 


Additional resources 


Aczel, Amir D. Fermats Last Theorem: Unlocking the Secret of an 
Ancient Mathematical Problem. Four Walls, 1996. 

Amdahl, Kenn, and Loats, Jim. A/gebra Unplugged. Clearwater, 
T9932; 

Downing, Douglas. A/gebra the Easy Way. 3rd ed. Barron’s, 1996. 

Varadarajan, V. S. Algebra in Ancient and Modern Times. Am. 
Mathematical Soc., 1998. 


Alger, AL juhr, Horatio (1832-1899), was an American 
author of novels for boys. He became famous for his sto- 
ries about boys who rose from poverty to wealth and 
fame through hard work, virtuous living, and luck. Al- 
gers works reinforced an image of the United States as 
a land where dreams of material prosperity, high social 
position, and power could come true. The name Horatio 
Alger is still used to describe fictional and real-life indi- 
viduals who achieve “rags to riches’ success through 
their own efforts. 

Critics now consider Alger'’s novels poorly written 
and dull. But during the latter half of the 1800's, his sto- 
ries made him one of the most influential writers in the 
United States. Alger wrote more than 130 books, which 
sold about 40 million copies. Many of his boy heroes ap- 
peared in series, notably Ragged Dick (begun in 1867), 
Luck and Pluck (begun in 1869), and Tattered Tom (be- 
gun in 1871). 

Horatio Alger, Jr., was born in Revere, Mass. From 
1866 to 1896, he devoted much of his time and money to 
helping a home for orphans and runaway boys in New 
York City. Alger used his experiences with the children 


as material for his novels. Ronald T. Curran 


360 Algeria 


© 











Algiers, the capital and largest city of Algeria, is often called A/giers the White because of its many 
white buildings. The city has an excellent harbor on the Mediterranean Sea. Most Algerians live in 


cities in the country’s narrow Mediterranean coastal region. 


Algeria 


Algeria, a//EER ee uh, is a large country in northern 
Africa. Among African countries, only Sudan is larger. 

Northern Algeria stretches along the Mediterranean 
Sea. The country’s narrow Mediterranean region has a 
warm climate and rich farmland. Almost all Algerians 
live in this region. Algiers, the country’s capital and 
largest city, lies on the Mediterranean. To the south, the 
sun-scorched wastes of the Sahara cover more than 
four-fifths of Algeria. Beneath the surface of this desert 
area lie huge deposits of natural gas and petroleum. 

Most Algerians are of mixed Arab and Berber de- 
scent. However, the people form two distinct cultural 
groups—Arab and Berber. Each group has its own cus- 
toms and language. But nearly all Algerians are Mus- 
lims—that is, followers of Islam. 

For about 130 years, Algeria belonged to France. In 
1962, it gained independence following a bloody revolu- 
tion. Algerians then formed a socialist government that 
began a program of rapid industrial development The 
program has been financed chiefly by income from Al- 
geria s government-owned natural gas and petroleum 
industries. But industry has not grown fast enough to 
eliminate poverty and widespread unemployment. 


Government 


National government. A president serves as Alge- 
ria’s head of state. The president is elected by the peo- 





Kenneth |. Perkins, the contributor of this article, is Protessor 
of History at the University ot South Carolina. 





ple to a five-year term and may serve no more than two 
consecutive terms. The president appoints a prime min- 
ister to head the government. The prime minister in turn 
chooses a Council of Ministers to help in carrying out 
the day-to-day operations of the government 

Algeria has two houses in its national! legislature, the 
National People’s Assembly and the National Council. 
The National People s Assembly has 380 members who 


Facts in brief 


Capital: Algiers. 

Official language: Arabic. 

Official name: Al-}umhuriyah al-jaziriyah ad Dimuqratiyah wa 
ash-Shabiyah (Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria). 

Area: 919,595 mi: (2,381,741 km’). Greatest distances— east-west, 
1,500 mi {2,400 km); north-south, 1,300 mi (2,100 km). 
Coastline—750 mi (1,200 km). 

Elevation: Highest elevation—Mount Tahat, 9,573 ft (2,918 m) 
above sea level. Lowest e/evation— Chott Melrhir, 102 ft (31 m) 
below sea level. 

Population: Estimated 2002 population--32,813,000; density, 36 
per mi (14 per km»); distribution, 51 percent urban, 49 percent 
rural. 1987 census— 23,033,942. 

Chief products: Agricu/ture—barley, citrus fruits, cork, dates, 
grapes, meat, milk, olives, potatoes, wheat. Manufacturing— 
machinery, processed foods, textiles, transportation equip- 
ment. Mining—antimony, copper, iron ore, lead, manganese, 
mercury, natural gas, petroleum, phosphates, salt, tungsten. 

National anthem: Kassaman’ (We Pledge’). 

Money: Basic unit dinar. One hundred centimes equal one 
dinar. 











are elected by the people to five-year terms The Na- 
tional Council has 144 members who serve six-year 
terms. Ninety-six of the members of the council are 
elected from representatives of local assemblies. The 
president appoints the other 48. 

Until 1989, the Front de Libération Nationale (FLN), or 
National Liberation Front, was Algeria's only legally per- 
mitted party. Today, Algeria is a multiparty state. How- 
ever, the Constitution bans the formation of political 
parties based on religion, language, sex, or regional dif- 
ferences. Other important political parties in Algeria to- 
day besides the FLN include the Movement of Society 
for Peace and the National Democratic Rally. 

Local government. Algeria has 48 provinces called 
wilayas. Each wilaya has an elected assembly and a wa/i 
(governor), who is appointed by the president. 

Courts. The Supreme Court is Algeria's highest 
court. It reviews cases from 48 wilaya courts. Wilaya 
courts hear appeals from lower courts called tribunals. 

Armed forces. About 120,000 men serve in Algeria's 
army, air force, and navy. About 85 percent of them 
serve in the army. Algerian men 19 years or older may 
be drafted for two years of military duty. Members of 
the armed forces also work on the construction of high- 
ways and other public works projects. 


People 


Ancestry. Most of Algeria's people are of mixed 
Arab and Berber ancestry. Berbers lived in what is now 
Algeria at least 5,000 years ago. Arabs began to arrive 
from the Arabian Peninsula during the A.D. 600’s. 
Through the years, so many Arabs and Berbers inter- 
married that it is now difficult to separate the groups by 
ancestry. However, many Berbers in the country still 
maintain their own language and culture. Less than 1 
percent of the people are of European descent. 

Language. A large majority of Algerians speak Ara- 
bic, the country’s official language. In addition to Ara- 
bic, many Algerians speak French. About a fifth of the 
people speak dialects of the Berber language. 

Way of life. Since Algeria gained its independence 
from France in 1962, the government has worked to rid 
the country of French cultural influences. For example, 
it requires that legal proceedings be in Arabic rather 
than French. Arabic has also replaced French as the lan- 
guage used to teach the country’s elementary and high 
school students. Many Algerians have called for stricter 
observance of Islamic teachings, which regulate family 
and community relationships and many other aspects of 
daily life. 

Rural life. Rural Algerians typically live in large family 
groups made up of several generations. Most houses 
are built of stone or concrete or of sun-dried bricks 
made of mud and straw. Most also have flat tile or tin 
roofs. The majority of rural Algerians make a living rais- 
ing livestock or farming small plots. 

City life. The architecture of Algeria's larger cities re- 
flects Islamic and European influences. Mosques (Islam- 
ic houses of worship) and open-air markets are com- 
mon. Older sections of the cities are called casbahs. In 
these sections, shops and houses are crowded along 
narrow streets. Newer sections have broad boulevards 
and tall office and apartment buildings. 

In Algeria's cities, many men work in factories or of- 


Algeria 361 


fices. The typical household consists of only a father 
and mother and their children. City people have much 
more contact with Western ideas than do rural Algeri- 
ans. As aresult, some city dwellers follow Western cus- 
toms. 


Since Algeria gained independence, many poor rural 
people have moved to cities to seek factory work. But 
many of them have not been able to find jobs. The mi- 
gration and a severe housing shortage have resulted in 


the growth of large slums in many Algerian cities. 


Clothing. Many Algerians, especially in rural areas, 


wear traditional clothing. A woman may wear a long, 
white cotton outer garment called a Aaik. It covers the 


head and the lower part of the face and extends down 
as far as the feet. Traditional clothing for men includes a 
long, hooded cloak called a burnoose. Many people in 
urban areas wear Western-style clothing. 

Foods made from such grains as wheat and barley 
form the chief part of the diet of most Algerians. The na- 
tional dish is couscous. It consists of steamed wheat 
served with meat, vegetables, and a souplike sauce. 
Many city dwellers eat Western-style dishes. 

Recreation. Soccer is the most popular sport in Al- 
geria. Many Algerians enjoy playing the game or watch- 
ing soccer matches. A favorite pastime in cities is going 





Algeria’s flag and coat of arms display a star and crescent, 


symbols of Islam, partly against a background of green, a tradi- 


tional Islamic color. The flag was officially adopted in 1962, 


when Algeria gained its independence from France. The Arabic 
letter jim, which appears twice at the top of the coat of arms, is 
an abbreviation for the Arabic form of Republic of Algeria. 











J 6 - 
Portug a Ds Medilerrs 1g CE A a 
North Atlantic ~ _~ ge °2, e 


Ocaan 


= 





a re) 
isia is 


& 


¢ 





af 






ALGERIA 





re ee ee 


Western Sa 


0 Vw CTE acetll Bee) 


: ae EDN 


—_- ——————— ee ee. eee ane ee 


WORLD BOOK map 
Algeria is a large country in northern Africa. Nearly all its peo- 
ple live in an area that borders the Mediterranean Sea. 


362 Algeria 


to motion pictures. Algerians celebrate several national 
holidays, including their country’s independence day on 
July 5. They also enjoy a number of religious testivals. 

Religion. The Constitution of Algeria declares Islam 
to be the country’s official religion. About 99 percent of 
the people are Muslims, but they do not all agree about 
the role that Islam should play in the country's political 
and social life. 

Education. More than half of all Algerians aged 15 or 
older can read and write. For Algerias literacy rate, see 
Literacy (table: Literacy rates for selected countries). Al- 
gerian law requires all children from 6 to 15 years old to 
attend school. More than 90 percent of all children at- 
tend elementary school. However, only about a third of 



























them go on to high school. The University of Algiers is 
the country's largest university. 

The arts. A large number of Algeria's finest works of 
art reflect the influence of Islam. Outstanding examples 
include the beautiful domed mosques found through- 
out the country. Algerians are also known for their su- 
perb jewelry, pottery, rugs, and other handicrafts in 
which they use distinct Islamic designs and traditional 
techniques 

Algerian painters and writers were strongly influ- 
enced by French culture during the period when Alge- 
ria belonged to France. Since then, they have increasing- 
ly drawn upon their Arabic, Berber, and Islamic cultural 
roots. Today, many Algerian painters use traditional 





























iti * Algiers Bejaia. . . 844,000 ..A 4 Bord} Constantine .808,.000.A 4 
Cities and towns Alger) .1.886,000..A 3 Fave = ey ge Menaiel — «.. maa gis Dilla .. 629,000. B 3 
Adrar 289,600 ..D 3 Annaba ..330,000 A 4 Biskra 301,000..B 4 Boumer- FIAShammn ; she A 3 
Ain Delfat 647,000 A 3 Arzew ot My ss FS Blida 859,000 ..A 3 dest 826,000.A 3 E] Bayadht as 182,000. B 3 
Ain Temou- Batna ... 948,000..B 4 Bordj Bou Bouira . 646,000. A 4 El Oued ..472,000.B 4 

chent .312,000..B 2 Bechar 233,000..C 2 Arrerid} 512,000 A 4 Chleft . 831,000. A 3 El Tarft ... 440,000 B 4 

Ghardaia .. 255,000 ..B 3 
Guelma .. 405,000..A 4 
aie ae 2 >, 000 ne 
ye ..371,000,.A 4 
1 3 4 5 i emis 
= ny hin. = “tia + Miliana ees 
p alearic |s araint Khenchela 287,000. B 4 
Algeria SPAIN Alicante ITALY | Laghouat 263,000 B 3 
‘ aghnia , eee: 
eg Muogy Mediterranean Seg Seti .Maccara 2. 690,000.83 
l | bound so Buzerte Medea 787000 A 3 
nternat: edea . 787, 
het s Giieetie 2 ler Algiers J!) Ouzou r Cape Bon | Milat .. 610,000..A 4 
Road amis pry Rie 3 pbetata Juels Moham- 
; Mostaganem _ Bliga <7 * Ghein madia Bo 3 
Railraod a Mosta- 
anem . 619,000. A 3 
Oil pipeline M‘silat 757,000 B 4 
Naamat ...137,000..B 3 
Seosonal streom wv SabdanCacre Oran .. = .1,110,000. A 3 
; PU neta Duara .. .335,000..C 4 
Nationol capital 4 yt OumEl 
Nas o Bouaghit ..475,000.A 3 
Other city ar town as P vouiall ic Relizane 691,000 A 3 
aghouat i Hahisthes vee" | | Saida 270,000 B 3 
Elevotion abave = AN Setif. . _—«.4.257.000. A 4 
sea level feratt 9 {Jeri Sidi Bel 
TUNISIA ty Abbes —.. 542,000.B 3 
—— Zuyatah Skikda 736,000.A 4 
f — Souk Ahras 346,000. A 4 
— éMarr ry a Taman- 
ul akech, a4 il ia rasset . ..122,000 E 4 
grand, J Tehessa . 486,000 B 4 
r iaret . 708,006 g 
’* MOROCCO ,? ( Tindout ....21,000 .D 1 
* Tipazat . ...799,000 A 3 
Tissemsilt? ...270,000..A 3 
} “ Tizi Ouzou — 1,108,000 A 4 
whe 12? Lo ee Tlemcen . 846.000 B 2 
L 32 — S op. . 
pam ‘ = nthert {| “| Physical features 
"? ad =! 1 Ahaggar 
a7 , Dent 3 YA Mountains E 4 
¢ at > ile de lindouf Platead of LIB Chelif River Has 8) 
Tindouf T ‘ Bord, Omar Oriss ]-n-Amenas Chott Melrhir 
oe. ademhait 4 4) : leap B 4 
¥ ( ; dett ehel Aissa 
x Isle 4 fi Adeb Lareche Oden Tare -, mountain B 3 
9 e ee od. rand Erg 
<- Reggane* _ x. e s / Mae Occidental 
Chenachane A Sebkha FN 2 § ) (desert). cs 
-at 5 Seoih &  F Mekerrhane \ oy Py » Tass; ‘ crane ro 
ezef Mattr ~ 4 =| \ aA, rienta 
MAURITANIA \ S nh is , md idune) C4 
~~ \ Ghat Mediterranea 
of ‘ih os : | oa ae 
. : Mount Tahat £ 4 
a x \ > os - a Mouydir 
; 4 a \ il Mountains £ 4 
Asm <* ° \ ‘ xo. : Plateau of | 
_ ~y te je = VS, Tademaii “O23 
@ { as idiid nate yo A. Sahara (desert) D 3 
Taoudenni © 9.573; it. (2,918 mp oe n. 4 \%. Saharan Atlas 
4° yy < 2 ed (mountains! B 3 
Tanezi outs -Ahenet CN se Sebkha 
: < aa 1 Mekerrhane 
Tach MOSS, a ¥ 44, {lake} Bs 
7 ep | A ee, Tassili 
North Bord) le Prieur y Sy oo" i \ Oua-n-Ahaggat 
} a ye (plateau) F 4 
; ul | \ o ww? awe f-n- Azeoua Tetl Atlas 
/€1 Di? MAL { Tessalit : eo \ {mountains} B 2 
4 . A ae \ - 
0 \ . th-Guezam 1 # N | G ER *Populations are tor wiava, a 
ps - N : pravince which may include sur 
E19 Adrar des * Air ronnding areas as well as the pre 
Itoras ‘ ‘ mary city or town. The Afgean 
= A be ap goverment does not collect pop 
—_ \ L£ 7 re el “~ all ulation data foc individual cities or 
1OWNRS 
0 200 400 600 300 1,000 Mites tNames not shown on iiap, hey 
; shows general location. 
0 200 400 600 BOO 1,000 1.206 1,400 Kilometers Source 1994 ofticial estimates 





WORLD BOOK map 


trom the Afgeian National Statis 
tes Office 


i 








Sarah Emington, Camerapix Hutchison Library 


Algerian townspeople in Timimoun, in the country’s Sahara re- 
gion, wear either traditional or Western-style clothing. The 
group at the right includes schoolchildren. 


Arabic or Berber designs. Numerous Algerian authors 
now write novels and plays in Arabic instead of in 
French. 


The land and climate 


Algeria has three major land regions. They are, from 
north to south: (1) the Tell, (2) the High Plateaus, and (3) 
the Sahara. 

The Tell stretches about 750 miles (1,200 kilometers) 
along the Mediterranean coast. The region is from 
about 80 to 200 miles (130 to 320 kilometers) wide. It 
consists chiefly of coastal plains and gently rolling hills. 
The word 7e//is an Arabic term meaning /i// Much of 
Algerias best farmland lies in the western and central 
parts of the region. Rugged mountains cover most of 
the eastern Tell. Many Aleppo pine, juniper, and cork 
oak trees grow on the mountain slopes. The Tell Atlas 
Mountains rise along the region's southern edge. Over 
90 percent of Algeria's people live in the Tell. 

Near the sea, temperatures in the Tell average 77 F 
(25 °C) in summer and 52 °F (11 °C) in winter. Annual rain- 
fall averages 16 inches (41 centimeters) in the west and 
27 inches (69 centimeters) in the east. 

The High Plateaus lie south of the Tell Atlas Moun- 
tains and range from about 1,300 to 4,300 feet (400 to 
1,300 meters) above sea level. Herders graze cattle, 
sheep, and goats on the grasses and shrubs that cover 





Shostal 
The High Plateaus region stretches across northern Algeria. 
The region's grasses and shrubs provide feed for herds of live- 
stock. This shepherd is grazing a flock of sheep near Tiaret. 


Algeria 363 


much of the region. During rainy periods, shallow salt 
lakes called chotts form on the plateaus. About 7 per- 
cent of the Algerian people live in the region. 

Average temperatures on the High Plateaus range 
from 81 °F (27 °C) in summer to 41 “F (5 °C) in winter. The 
region receives less than 16 inches (41 centimeters) of 
rain a year. 

The Sahara. The Saharan Atlas Mountains form the 
northern border of the Algerian Sahara. This vast desert 
region occupies more than 80 percent of the country. 
Sand dunes cover much of the northern Sahara. Other 
parts of the region consist of bare rock, boulders, and 
stones. A wealth of natural gas and oil lies under the 
eastern part of the wasteland. In the southeast, the Ahag- 
gar Mountains tower above the desert floor. The range 
includes Algerias highest peak, Mount Tahat, which ris- 
es 9,573 feet (2,918 meters) above sea level. 

Daytime temperatures in the Algerian Sahara some- 
times soar above 120 °F (49 'C), During the summer, a 
very hot, dusty wind called the sirocco blows northward 
across the region. The sirocco parches the High Plateaus 
about 40 days each summer and the Tell about 20 days. 

Less than 3 percent of all Algerians live in the Sahara. 
Many of the region's people live in oases and rely on 
underground springs to water such crops as dates and 
grains. Nomads travel between grazing areas with their 
camels, sheep, and other livestock. 


Economy 


Algeria has a developing economy based largely on 
income from natural gas and petroleum production. The 
government controls the nation’s key industries, includ- 
ing the production of natural gas and petroleum and the 
manufacture of construction materials, textiles, and iron 
and steel. However, most farms and small factories and 
service industries are privately owned. 

Service industries account for about 44 percent of 
the total value of Algeria's economic production and 
employ about 45 percent of the nation’s workers. These 
industries—which include banks, government agencies, 
hospitals, insurance companies, and schools— provide 
business, community, or personal services. 

Mining accounts for about 18 percent of the value of 
Algerias economic production and employs about 2 
percent of the nation’s workers. Algeria produces large 
quantities of natural gas and petroleum, chiefly from 
fields in the northeastern part of the Sahara region. 





= 


H. Kanus, Shostal 
The Sahara, a hot desert region, covers over four-fifths of Alge- 
ria. Date palm trees, such as the ones shown here, grow in 
oases, where they are watered by underground springs. 


364 Algeria 


Other important minerals produced in Algeria include 
iron ore, lead, mercury, phosphate rock, and zine. 

Manufacturing and construction account for about 
26 percent of the value of Algeria’s economic produc- 
tion and employ about 30 percent of all workers. The na- 
tion's chief manufactured products include construction 
materials, iron and steel, refined petroleum products, 
liquid natural gas, and textiles. Almost all Algerian facto- 
ries are on or near the coast in such cities as Algiers, 
Annaba, Arzew, Constantine, and Skikda. 

The government has poured much money into the 
construction of factories. But the industries have not 
grown fast enough to provide jobs for all workers. Thus, 
hundreds of thousands of Algerians work in foreign 
countries, especially France. 

Agriculture provides a living for about 22 percent of 
Algeria's workers and generates about 11 percent of the 
value of the country’s economic production. Most farm- 
ers own small plots on which they produce enough to 
feed their families. Other farmers work on large govern- 
ment farms. Grains, especially wheat and barley, are the 
chief crops. Other crops include dates, grapes, olives, 
potatoes, and citrus fruits. Dairy products and meat 
come from cattle, goats, and sheep. 

Trade. Natural gas, petroleum, and refined petrole- 
um products account for about 90 percent of the total 
value of Algeria exports. Algeria belongs to the Organi- 
zation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), an asso- 
ciation of countries whose economies depend heavily 
on oil exports. Other Algerian exports include citrus 
fruits, dates, iron ore, mercury and phosphate rock. Al- 
geria imports large amounts of machinery, raw materi- 
als, and food. Its main trading partners include France, 
Germany, Italy, and the United States. 

Transportation and communication. Algeria has 
about 50,000 miles (80,000 kilometers) of roads and 
about 2,500 miles (4,000 kilometers) of railroad track. 


© Damel Simon, Gamma Lianson 
A gas-processing plant in Arzew changes natural gas into a liq: 
uid so that it can be shipped overseas. Natural gas ts one of Al 
gerias most valuable exports. 





Nearly all the roads and railroad track lie north of the Sa- 
hara. Camel caravans still cross the Algerian Sahara, as 
they have for hundreds of years. However, aircraft, 
jeeps, and trucks are also used to move goods and peo- 
ple across the desert. Algerias chief international air- 
ports are in Algiers, Constantine, and Oran. Algiers and 
Oran are the main seaports. The government controls 
the country’s four daily newspapers. It also operates all 
radio and television stations. 


History 


People have lived in what is now Algeria for at least 
40,000 years. By about 3000 B.C, nomadic Berbers had 
begun migrating to the region. They probably came 
from Europe or Asia. In the 1100's B.C, the Phoenicians, 
who lived on the eastern shore of the Mediterranean 
Sea, established trading posts on the Algerian coast. 

About 200 B.C, the Romans helped a Berber chieftain 
named Massinissa form and become ruler of the King- 
dom of Numidia in northern Algeria. From 46 B.C. to the 
A.D. 600's, the area was controlled, in turn, by the Ro- 
mans, the Vandals, and the Byzantines. 

Arab conquest. In the A.D. 600's, Arabs from the Ara- 
bian Peninsula began to invade much of northern Africa, 
including Algeria. This invasion resulted in the spread of 
Arabic culture throughout northern Africa and into what 
is now Spain. In Algeria, most of the Berbers adopted Is- 
lam—the religion of the Arabs—and, in time, the Arabic 
language. Many Arabs and Berbers also intermarried. 

Ottoman rule. During the early 1500's, Spanish Chris- 
tians captured Algiers and other Algerian coastal cities. 
But in 1518, Barbarossa, a Turkish sea captain, gained 
control of Algiers. He later helped drive the Spanish 
from most other Algerian coastal areas. Barbarossa 
joined the areas under his control to the Ottoman Em- 
pire, an Islamic empire based in what is now Turkey. Al- 
geria remained a part of the empire until the early 
1800's. During that time, ships in the Mediterranean Sea 
were attacked by private warships under the command 
of corsairs from Algeria and other countries. Raids by 
Algerian corsairs on the ships of other nations became 
Algerias chief source of income. 

French rule. In 1830, France invaded and gained con- 
trol of northern Algeria. The French king, Charles X, 
hoped an overseas military victory would strengthen his 
rule in France. The French governed Algeria as part of 
France. Many French and other Europeans settled in Al- 
geria. These settlers became known as co/ons. Non- 
French colons were given French citizenship. However, 
France made it very difficult for Muslims to become 
French citizens, even though Muslims made up the 
great majority of the Algerian population. France gave 
the colons large amounts of Algerian tribal land, and the 
colons soon controlled Algeria's economy and govern- 
ment. Many native Algerians fought against French rule. 
In 1847, the French defeated powerful rebel forces led 
by Abd al-Qadir, a Muslim religious leader. By 1914, 
France controlled all of what is now Algeria. 

As subjects of France, many Algerians fought on the 
Allied side in World War 1 (1914-1918). During World 
War II (1939-1945), Algeria became a battleground. In 
1940, France surrendered to Germany. France, cooperat- 
ing with Germany, formed a government at Vichy in 
central France. The Vichy government ruled Algeria un- 





cs 


til 1942, when the United Kingdom, the United States, 
and other Allied countries invaded and occupied Alge- 
ria (see World War I {In northern Africa). After the war, 
the Allies returned control of Algeria to France. 

The Algerian Revolution. After both world wars, na- 
tive Algerians demanded greater political power. But 
each time, the colons blocked all reforms that would 
have given native Algerians a voice in the government in 
proportion to their population. In 1954, native Algerians 
formed an organization to fight for independence—the 
Front de Libération Nationale (FLN), or National Libera- 
tion Front. The FLN began a revolution on November 1. 
It carried out ambushes, assassinations, and bombing 
raids against the colons and the French forces in Alge- 
ria. In response, the French army destroyed orchards 
and cropland belonging to native Algerians, forced mil- 
lions of native Algerians into concentration camps, and 
tortured rebel leaders. By the late 1950's, the army's tac- 
tics had aroused strong opposition in France. Peace 
talks began in 1961. On July 3, 1962, France finally grant- 
ed Algeria independence. See France (History). 

Independence. Most colons—about a million of 
them—fled Algeria during or soon after the revolution. 
In 1963, one of the rebel leaders, Ahmed Ben Bella, be- 
came Algeria’s first president. Ben Bella proclaimed Al- 
geria a socialist state and urged workers to take over 
businesses and farms abandoned by colons. 

In 1965, Houari Boumedienne, the army commander, 
overthrew Ben Bella. Boumedienne began a program of 
rapid economic development based on government 
ownership and control of industry. He used income 
from natural gas and petroleum to build fertilizer plants, 
steel mills, oil refineries, and other factories. 

Recent developments. Boumedienne died in 1978. 
In 1979, Defense Minister Chadli Bendjedid was elected 
president. He slowed industrial development to devote 
more resources to producing agricultural and con- 
sumer goods. From independence until 1989, the FLN 
was the only political party allowed by Algeria's Consti- 
tution. But a 1989 revision permitted other parties to op- 
erate. The main opposition party, the Front Islamique du 
Salut (FIS)—or Islamic Salvation Front—claimed that 
changes in the electoral law favored the FLN. 

A first round of multiparty elections for the National 
People’s Assembly was held in December 1991, witha 
second round scheduled for January 1992. But the gov- 
ernment canceled the second round after it seemed that 
the FIS would win a majority of seats. The government 
dissolved the Assembly, and President Bendjedid re- 
signed. A military-dominated High State Committee then 
governed Algeria until 1994, when the committee was 
replaced by a president, Liamine Zeroual. In 1995, Zer- 
oual was elected president in a multiparty election. 

The courts banned the FIS in 1992, and thousands of 
FIS members were arrested. Violence increased as tne 
FIS and other Muslim extremists continued to protest 
against the government. In June 1999, the Islamic Salva- 
tion Army, the armed branch of the FIS, announced it 
was ending its tight against the government. However, 
some Muslim extremists have continued to attack Alger- 
ian security forces and civilians. More than 100,000 peo- 
ple have died in the fighting since 1992. 

In 1996, the Algerian people approved a revised con- 
stitution that bans parties based on religion, sex, lan- 


Algiers 365 


guage, or regional differences. Multiparty elections for 
the National People’s Assembly were held in 1997. In 
1999, Abdelaziz Bouteflika, an independent candidate 
supported by the military and Zeroual, was elected 
president in a contest marred by charges of vote fraud. 

In 2001, clashes broke out between security forces 
and Berber protesters in northern Algeria. The protest- 
ers demanded greater political and cultural recognition 
for Berbers. The government agreed to some Berber de- 
mands. In 2002, for example, it made the Berber lan- 
guage, Tamazight, a national language of Algeria. But 
Berber protests continued. —_ Kenneth J. Perkins 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Algiers Fanon, Frantz Organization of 

Arabs Omar the Petroleum 

Barbary States Foreign Legion Exporting Coun- 

Ben Bella, Ahmed France (History) tries 

Berbers Numidia Sahara 

Constantine Oran Western Sahara 
Outline 


. Government 
A. National government 
B. Local government 


C Courts 
D. Armed forces 


ll. People 
A. Ancestry D. Clothing G. Religion 
B. Language _ E. Foods H. Education 
C. Way of life FF. Recreation I. The arts 
Ill. The land and climate 
A. The Tell B. The High Plateaus C The Sahara 


IV. Economy 


A. Service industries D. Agriculture 


B. Mining Ey Trade 
C Manufacturing and F. Transportation and com- 
construction munication 
V. History 
Questions 


How did the Arab invasion of Algeria during the 600s influence 
most Berbers? 

How have literature aad painting changed in Algeria since the 
country became independent? 

What French army tactics aroused strong opposition in France 
during the Algerian Revolution? 

How do Algerians in oases water their crops? 

What is the sirocco? 

How does the Algerian government support Islam? 

Why have many rural Algerians moved to urban areas? 

Why did France invade Algeria in 1830? 

In which land region do most Algerians live? 


Algiers, a//EERZ (pop. 1,886,000), is the capital and 
largest city of Algeria. The city is also the nation’s com- 
mercial and financial center. Algiers lies in northern Al- 
geria, on the Mediterranean Sea (see Algeria [map)). 

Algiers was built on top of a hill. The oldest section of 
the city is the Casbah in the north. The Casbah has a 
large population, and its many old buildings are crowd- 
ed close together. This section was named for the cas- 
bah (fortress) that still stands on the hill. The commercial, 
governmental, and residential areas of Algiers are down 
the hill and in the suburbs. White buildings, constructed 
in the late 1800's, line the waterfront. Algiers has a num- 
ber of museums and mosques (Islamic houses of wor- 
ship) and is the home of the University of Algiers. 

Many of the city’s people work for the national gov- 
ernment. Others are employed in banking and interna- 
tional trade or in industry. The city’s industries include 
food and tobacco processing, metalworking, and the 
production of cement, chemicals, soap, and shoes. 


366 Algin 


Algiers was founded in the A.D. 900s by the chief of a 
Muslim tribe called the Sanhaja. The Ottoman Empire 
ruled the city from the early 1500's until 1830. The 
French took control of Algiers that year. They brought to 
Algiers a European culture, which blended with the 
city’s Muslim culture. Algiers was a colonial capital for 
many years under Ottoman and then French rule. It be- 
came the national capital in 1962, when Algeria gained 
independence from France. The population of Algiers 
has increased several times since 1954, causing severe 
overcrowding in the city. Construction of a subway sys- 
tem to ease the city’s transportation problems was be- 
gun in the late 1980's. Malcolm C. Peck 

See also Algeria (picture). 

Algin. See Algae; Seaweed. 

Algol, Al gahi/, also called Beta Persei, is the second 
brightest star in the constellation Perseus. It ts about 100 
light-years from the earth (see Light-year). Algol appears 
to be a single star, but it is actually a type of double star 
called an eclipsing binary. \n such a binary, a pair of 
stars revolve around each other so that one periodically 
blocks the light of the other. This action reduces the 
brightness of the double star as viewed from the earth. 

Algol’s variations in brightness can be seen with the 
unaided eye. About every three days, Algol loses two- 
thirds of its brightness in a period of five hours. In an- 
other five hours, it returns to its normal apparent magni- 
tude of 2.3 (see Star [Brightness of stars]). Algol was one 
of the first eclipsing variables to be discovered. 

The distance between the centers of the two stars is 
about 7 million miles (11 million kilometers). One star 
has a surface temperature of about 22,000 ‘F (12,000 ‘C). 
The second, fainter star is only one-third as hot. A third, 
more distant star belongs to the Algol system. It orbits 
the other two stars, but it does not take part in the 
eclipses. Sumner Starrtield 

See also Astronomy (map: The stars and constella- 
tions of the Northern Hemisphere), Binary star. 
Algonquin Indians, a/ GAHNG kihn or al GAHNG 
Awihn, once fished and hunted in the Ottawa River re- 
gion of Canada, in what is now Ontario and Quebec. 
They are also called the A/gonkin. The Algonquin, Cree, 
and other tribes spoke Algonquian languages, a group 
of related languages named for the Algonquin. These 
tribes had strong similarities, and scholars use the term 
Algonquian Indians or Algonquian family to refer to all 
of the Algonquian-speaking tribes. 

The Algonquin lived in bands of 100 to 300 members. 
Each band was divided into hunting groups of up to 25 
close relatives. Algonquin families lived in lodges made 
of bent saplings covered with birchbark. Each lodge 
housed a husband and wife, their young children and 
unmarried grown-up daughters, and their married sons 
with their own wives and children. 

In winter, the Algonquin hunted deer, moose, and 
other animals. During the rest of the year, they fished 
and also gathered wild fruits, nuts, and roots. The Al- 
gonquin were experts in building and handling canoes. 
They traveled by canoe during spring, summer, and fall. 
In winter, they used toboggans and snowshoes. 

The Algonquin believed in a great spirit, an especially 
powerful god. But they believed their lives were affect- 
ed mostly by ancestral spirits and the spirits of animals, 
plants, and other natural surroundings. Certain men and 


women, Called shamans, were thought to have spiritual 
powers and served as advisers. 

The Algonquin and their allies the Huron fought a bit- 
ter war against the Iroquois during the 1600's. About 
1640, the Algonquin were defeated and driven from 
their territory. This war and epidemics of measles and 
smallpox reduced the Algonquin population from about 
4,000 to 1,000 in a 10-year period. Today, there are about 
4,000 Algonquin, most of whom live in eastern Ontario 
and southwestern Quebec. Conrad E. Heidenreich 
Algorithm, Al guh rihth uhm, is a step-by-step proce- 
dure for solving a mathematical problem in a limited 
number of steps. The instructions for each step are pre- 
cise. Many algorithms involve repeating the same steps 
several times and can be carried out by a computer. 

Probably the most famous algorithm is Euclid’s algo- 
rithm. It is used to find the greatest common divisor of 
any two whole numbers, aand Bb. To use this algorithm, 
first divide the smaller number (b/into the larger num- 
ber (ai; . If the numbers divide evenly, with a remainder 
(r)of 0, the algorithm ends and bis the answer. But if the 
remainder is not 0, divide the remainder into the former 
divisor: 8. Keep dividing each succeeding remainder 
into the previous divisor until you reach a remainder of 
0. Then stop. The last divisor is the greatest common di- 
visor of the original numbers aand Bb. 

Thomas Butts 
Algren, AWL grihn, Nelson (1909-1981), an American 
author, is best known for fiction describing the brutal 
life of the Chicago slums of the 1930's and 1940’. His 
characters are constantly defeated by their sordid envi- 
ronment, but the reader sympathizes with their yearning 
for love and dignity. 

Algren’ss most moving and artistic novel is The Man 
with the Golden Arm (1949). It records the unsuccessful 
struggle of the central character, Frankie Machine, 
against gambling, drug addiction, and a crippled, neu- 
rotic wife. Algren’s novel A Walk on the Wild Side (1956) 
has arobust comic quality. Algren also wrote a collec- 
tion of stories, Tae Neon Wilderness (1947), and a book 
of stories and nonfiction pieces called The Last Carousel 
(1973). Algren was born in Detroit, but he lived most of 
his life in Chicago. 


Victor A. Kramer 


Alhambra, a/ HAM bruh, was a famous palace and 
fortress in Granada, Spain. It was built by the Moors, a 





© Adam Woolfitt, Woodfin Camp, Inc. 
The Alhambra is a palace and fortress in Granada, Spain. Built 
by the Moors between 1248 and 1354, the Alhambra is one of 
the finest examples of Islamic architecture in Europe. 





Muslim people from northern Africa, between 1248 and 
1354 (see Moors). Now a monument, the Alhambra is 
one of the most elaborate and important examples of Is- 
lamic architecture in the Western world. 

An outer wall encloses the Alhambra, which occupies 
35 acres (14 hectares). Twenty-three towers rise from this 
wall, which is made of red bricks. A/hambra is an Arabic 
word meaning the red. Colortul, delicately ornamented 
plaster moldings cover many of the walls and ceilings of 
the palace. The Alhambra is also noted for its two court- 
yards. The Court of the Lions, in particular, is famous for 
its carved columns, its delicate screens, and its fountain 
(see Spain [picture: The Alhambral} 

The Alhambra was the last stronghold of the Moors in 
Spain. In 1492, it was captured by forces of the Spanish 
monarchs Ferdinand and Isabella. J. William Rudd 
Ali, ah LEE. Muhammad, moo HAM uhd (1942- iF 
was an American heavyweight boxing champion. Ali first 
won the championship by 
knocking out Sonny Liston 
in 1964. Some boxing 
groups recognized Ali as 
champion until 1967. But 
he was stripped of the 
World Boxing Association 
(WBA) title late in 1964 ina 
dispute over a contract. 
The WBA again recog- 
nized Ali as champion af- 
ter he defeated Ernie Ter- 
rell in 1967. In the same 
year, the WBA and other 
boxing groups stripped 
Ali of his title when he re- 
fused induction into the United States Army. He was 
also convicted on charges of refusing induction. 

After his conviction, Ali did not box for 3 3 years. In 
1971, he suffered his first loss in 32 professional fights 
when he attempted to regain the heavyweight title from 
Joe Frazier. Later in 1971, the Supreme Court of the Unit- 
ed States reversed Ali's conviction. 

Ali regained the heavyweight championship by 
knocking out George Foreman, the defending champi- 
on, in 1974. Early in 1978, Ali lost the title to Leon Spinks 
in one of the greatest upsets in boxing history. Later in 
1978, Ali won the title for the fourth time when he de- 
feated Spinks in a 15-round decision. In 1979, Ali gave 
up his title and announced his retirement. In 1980, how- 
ever, he came out of retirement and fought Larry 
Holmes for the World Boxing Council version of the ti- 
tle. Holmes defeated Ali by a technical knockout. In 1984, 
Ali was diagnosed with a brain illness called Parkinson 
disease. 

Ali was born Cassius Marcellus Clay in Louisville, Ken- 
tucky. He became a professional boxer after winning the 
light heavyweight title at the 1960 Summer Olympic 
Games. In 1964, he adopted the Black Muslim religion 
and changed his name to Muhammad Ali. He discussed 
his boxing career and religious views in his autobiogra- 
phy, The Greatest My Own Story (1975). 

Ali became one of the most colorful and controversial 
boxing champions. He bragged about his ability and 
made up poems that scorned his opponents. Early in his 
career, Ali even predicted the round in which he would 





Chicago Daily Detender 
Muhammad Ali 





Alien and Sedition Acts 367 
defeat his opponent. Bert Randolph Sugar 
See also Boxing (pictures). 


Additional resources 


Hauser, Thomas. Muhammad Ali: His Lite and Times. 1991. 
Reprint. Simon & Schuster, 1992. 

Schulman, Arlene. Muhammad Ali. Lerner, 1996. Younger read- 
ers. 


Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument, a/ 
uh BAHT eez, is in Potter County in northwestern Texas. 
The monument has quarries where prehistoric Indians 
dug stone for weapons and tools. Nearby are ruins of a 
Pueblo Indian settlement built in the 1100's and 1200s. 
The monument was authorized in 1965. For area, see Na- 
tional Park System (table: National monuments). 

Critically reviewed by the National Park Service 
Alien, AYL yuhn or AY lee uhn, is a person who is not a 
citizen or national of the country in which he or she is 
living. The legal and social rights of aliens differ in vari- 
ous countries. 

The United States recognizes two kinds of aliens, tem- 
porary visitors and resident aliens. A person in the Unit- 
ed States as a tourist or on business is a temporary visi- 
tor. Temporary visitors may not travel or accept employ- 
ment without permission from the U.S. government. 
They are protected under the Bill of Rights. Resident 
aliens live in the United States on a permanent basis. 
They generally enjoy the same rights as citizens, but 
cannot vote or hold public office. ///ega/ aliens are non- 
citizens living in a country without the proper docu- 
ments. They may be deported if they are discovered. 

The Alien Enemies Act of 1798 gives the president the 
power ‘to apprehend, restrain, secure and remove’ alien 
enemies in wartime. The U.S. government first regis- 
tered aliens in 1940. Robert J. Pranger 

See also Citizenship; Naturalization; Immigration; 
Smith Act; Deportation. 

Alien and Sedition Acts, AYL yuhn or AY lee uhn, 
sth DIHSH uhn, were a series of laws passed by Con- 
gress in 1798 to silence opposition to an expected war 
with France. Neither France nor the United States had 
declared war, but French and American ships had 
fought many battles. 

The Alien and Sedition Acts consisted of three laws 
dealing with a/fens (foreigners) and one dealing with 
sedition (inciting rebellion). The Alien Enemies Act au- 
thorized the president to imprison or deport citizens of 
enemy nations. The Alien Friends Act permitted even 
citizens of friendly nations to be deported if the presi- 
dent considered them dangerous. The Naturalization 
Act required a foreigner to live in the United States for 
14 years before becoming a citizen. The Sedition Act 
was used to fine or imprison anyone who encouraged 
resistance to federal laws or who criticized the govern- 
ment. 

The chief supporters were members of the Federalist 
Party, which controlled Congress. The Federalists gener- 
ally supported Britain in international disputes. Their op- 
ponents were members of the Democratic-Republican 
Party, which usually sided with France. The Democratic- 
Republican Party gained much support from recent im- 
migrants to the United States, most of whom were from 
France or Ireland. 

By passing the Alien and Sedition Acts, the Federal- 


368 Alien Registration Act of 1940 


ists hoped to silence their critics. The plan failed, how- 
ever. Many people objected to the Alien and Sedition 
Acts as a violation of freedom. Thomas Jefferson and 
James Madison, two Democratic-Republican leaders, 
challenged the constitutionality of the acts in the Ken- 
tucky and Virginia Resolutions. The resolutions became 
part of the Democratic-Republican platform in the 1800 
presidential election. The Democratic-Republicans de- 
feated the Federalists in this election. The Alien Friends 
Act expired that year, and the Sedition Act expired in 
1801. Congress repealed the Naturalization Act, and the 
Alien Enemies Act was amended. Jerald A. Combs 

See also Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions. 

Alien Registration Act of 1940. See Smith Act. 
Alienation is the feeling of being isolated from certain 
aspects of one’s environment. Alienation may occur 
when a person's emotional ties with another person, 
group, institution, or belief are disrupted. Sometimes, 
entire groups become alienated. 

There are many causes of alienation. For example, 
alienation may occur when a group loses a leader who 
represented its dreams and hopes, or when a child dis- 
covers the shortcomings of an adult the child has ad- 
mired. Or it may result if a person believes that certain 
political, economic, or social institutions are impersonal 
and unresponsive to change. 

Alienation takes different forms and may have various 
consequences. Alienated persons may become disori- 
ented or hostile, feel helpless, withdraw within them- 
selves, or reject established values. Many social scien- 
tists see a relationship between alienation and such 
behavior as crime, mental illness, and voter apathy. But 
alienation sometimes has such positive consequences 
as artistic creation, invention, and discovery. It is a 
theme of much contemporary literature. For a discus- 
sion of how one writer deals with alienation, see the ar- 
ticle Kafka, Franz. Wolf Heydebrand 
Alienation of affections is the act of a third person 
who turns the affection of one family member away 
from another. In the past, only husbands could sue for 
alienation of affections, and they could do so only if the 
third person had interfered with the husband‘s relation- 
ship with his wife. Today, wives also can sue. In recent 
years, a few plaintiffs have successfully sued for the 
alienation of a parent's affections. A number of states in 
the United States prohibit alienation of affections suits. 
Opponents of the suits argue that they promote family 
conflict and enable dishonest people to obtain money 
by threatening to sue for alienation of affections. Barring 
such suits is also part of a trend in family law to avoid 
placing blame for the failure of a marriage. 

Aidan R. Gough 
Alimentary canal is a long tube through which food 
is taken into the body and digested. In human beings, 
this passage is about 30 feet (9 meters) long. Animals 
that eat meat usually have shorter alimentary canals than 
animals that eat grass. The alimentary canal begins at the 
mouth, and includes the pharynx, esophagus, stomach, 
small and large intestines, and rectum. 

When a person swallows food, muscles of the phar- 
ynx push the food into the esophagus. The muscles in 
the esophagus walls respond with a wavelike contrac- 
tion called peristalsis. At the same time, the /ower eso- 
Phageal sphincter relaxes, allowing the food to pass 





Lorge intestine 


Small intestine 





i} 
WORLD BOOK illustration by Charles Wellek 


The alimentary canal is a tube through which food is taken 
into the body and digested. It is about 30 feet (9 meters) long in 
an adult, beginning at the mouth and ending at the rectum. 


down to the stomach. In the stomach, fluids lubricate 
and partially digest the food. The partially digested food 
is called chyme. Contractions of the stomach mix and 
grind the food into a liquidlike mixture that contains 
small particles. This mixture is emptied into the small in- 
testine. There, juices from the pancreas, liver, and intes- 
tine wall continue the process of digestion. The intestine 
squeezes the chyme back and forth to mix it thoroughly. 
The frequency and pressure of these contractions varies 
and keeps the chyme moving through the intestine. 

Most of the food elements in the digested food are 
absorbed into the bloodstream through the small intes- 
tine. The intestine is lined with a mucous membrane 
made up of tiny fingerlike projections called vi//, The 
villi increase the area through which absorption can 
take place. Soluble parts of the chyme pass through the 
small intestine into the bloodstream, and are carried to 
all parts of the body. The water and salts that remain are 
absorbed in the large intestine. The remaining solid 
wastes, called feces, are mixed with bacteria. The feces 
pass out of the body through the rectum in a process 
called defecation. Andre Dubois 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Digestive system Intestine 

Esophagus Mouth 

Human body Pharynx 
(Trans-vision) Stomach 





Alimony, Al uh Mo# nee, is support money paid by 
one spouse (husband or wife) to the other during a legal 
separation or after a divorce. A court sets the amount of 
alimony and orders that it be paid either in a lump sum 
or in installments. A person may also be ordered to pay 
alimony while waiting for a separation or divorce to be 
granted. In some states, the law does not provide for al- 
imony. See Divorce. 

In many cases in the past, a divorce was granted to 
one spouse because of misconduct by the other. The 
marriage partner who was found at fault would not re- 
ceive alimony. In many states today, courts can grant a 
divorce without finding either person guilty. These 
courts base alimony decisions on the spouses financial 
condition. A court may order that no alimony be paid, 
or that it be paid only temporarily. If the wife has a high- 
er income than her husband, she may have to pay al- 
imony. 

People who fail to pay alimony may have payments 
taken out of their wages, or they may be imprisoned. An 
alimony order may be changed if either spouse's finan- 
cial or marital condition changes. Carlfred B. Broderick 
Alinsky, wh L/IHN skee, Saul David (1909-1972), won 
fame for his efforts to help poor people help them- 
selves. A professional organizer, he helped the poor in 
more than 40 U.S. communities to form groups to gain a 
voice in local affairs and improve their economic and 
social positions. These groups used various methods of 
social protest, including boycotts, picketing, rent 
strikes, and sit-down strikes. 

Alinsky was born in Chicago. He graduated from the 
University of Chicago in 1930. His first community action 
project was the “Back-of-the-Yards’ program in the 
stockyards area of Chicago in 1939. In 1940, several 
wealthy Chicagoans gave him money to establish the In- 
dustrial Areas Foundation. Alinsky continued his work 
through this organization. One of his best-known 
achievements was the creation in 1960 of The Wood- 
lawn Organization (TWO) in a predominantly black 
neighborhood in Chicago. In 1969, Alinsky founded a 
school in Chicago to train organizers for work in poor 
and middle-class neighborhoods. 

James W. Varder Zanden 
Alkali, Al kuh ly, in chemistry, refers to six chemical 
elements that are known as the alkali metals: lithium, 
sodium, potassium, rubidium, cesium, and francium. 
These elements make up group 1 of the periodic table. 
Compounds of alkali metals rank among the most com- 
mon and most useful of all chemicals. Millions of tons 
of alkali metal salts are used by industry each year. The 
salts come from mines and wells. Sodium and potassi- 
um salts are raw materials for sodium hydroxide and 
potassium hydroxide. These alkali metal compounds 
and others made from them are used in making glass, 
paper, soap, and textiles; in refining petroleum; and in 
preparing leather. The word a/ka/i comes from the Ara- 
bic word a/-qgili, meaning plant ashes. Plant ashes were 
the first source of alkali metal compounds. 

When used alone, the word a/ka/i refers to alkali met- 
al hydroxides, and sometimes to alkali metal carbonates. 
An alkali metal hydroxide is a compound that contains 
an alkali metal positive ion (such as Na’) and a negative 
hydroxide (OH } ion. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and 
potassium hydroxide (KOH) are alkalis. When the term 


Alkalosis 369 


alkali metal precedes another word, as in alkali metal 
halide, it refers to the presence of a positive ion of an al- 
kali metal. The salt sodium chloride (NaCl) is an alkali 
metal halide. It is made of the positive ion of the alkali 
metal sodium, and the negative ion of the halogen chlo- 
rine. 

In nature, alkali metals always occur in compounds. A 
process called electrolysis can separate the metals from 
their salts and hydroxides. The average sample of the 
earth's crust is about 3.13 percent sodium, 2.85 percent 
potassium, 0.034 percent rubidium, 0.034 percent ce- 
sium, and 0.007 percent lithium. Francium, a radioactive 
alkali metal, occurs only briefly when uranium decays. 

With the exception of minerals known as common sil- 
icates, most alkali compounds dissolve easily in water. 
Rain washes these compounds from the soil. The com- 
pounds then collect in the ocean and in lakes that have 
no outlets, such as Great Salt Lake in Utah. The evapora- 
tion of ancient seas and lakes left vast deposits of alkali 
salts throughout the world. 

The alkali metals all form singly charged positive 
ions, and are extremely reactive chemically. They react 
violently with water, forming hydroxides and releasing 
hydrogen gas and heat. Duward F. Shriver 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Base Francium Potassium 
Cesium Lithium Rubidium 
Element, Chemical Lye Sodium 


Alkaloid, AL kuh /oyd, is any of a group of organic 
bases found in plants. Alkaloids contain carbon, hydro- 
gen, nitrogen, and oxygen. Small amounts of many alka- 
loids can have a powerful effect on people and animals, 
and are used as medicines or poisons. Some useful al- 
kaloids are synthesized (artificially put together) in 
chemical factories, as well as taken from plants. 

Alkaloids with medicinal value include codeine and 
morphine from the poppy plant, and quinine and quini- 
dine from the cinchona. Others are caffeine from coffee 
and tea, cocaine from coca, ephedrine from the 
Ephedra genus of plants, reserpine from Rauwolfia ser- 
pentina, and tubocurarine from curare. 

Poisonous alkaloids from such plants as curare are 
used on arrowheads by peoples who hunt chiefly with 
bow and arrow. The hemlock plant, which was used to 
kill the Greek philosopher Socrates, contains lethal 
amounts of conine and other alkaloids. Aconitine from 
the aconite plant is also highly poisonous. Nicotine, an 
alkaloid of the tobacco plant, is toxic to human beings 
and is also used to kill insects. Patrice C. Bélanger 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Aconite Morphine 
Base Nicotine 
Cafteine Quinine 
Cocaine 


Alkalosis, 41 kuh LOH sihs, is a condition in which a 
person's body fluids become too alkaline. The body ad- 
justs to mild alkalosis. Severe alkalosis can result in 
muscular weakness, convulsions, coma, and even 
death. 

Most cases of alkalosis arise from disorders or drugs 
that cause the body to lose too much acid, thus upset- 
ting the normal balance of acid and alkali. Disorders 
that can result in alkalosis include prolonged vomiting 
and hyperventilation (abnormally rapid, deep breathing). 


370 All Fools’ Day 


Prolonged vomiting causes excessive loss of hydrochlo- 
ric acid from the stomach. In hyperventilation, a person 
exhales too much carbon dioxide, lowering the level of 
carbonic acid in the blood. Alkalosis can arise froin pro- 
longed use of such drugs as diuretics, which increase 
the flow-—and the acidity—of urine from the kidneys. 

Treatment of alkalosis usually consists of correcting 
the underlying disorder or reducing the drug intake. A 
solution containing a weak acid may be administered 
through a vein to help restore the body's normal acid-al- 
kali balance. Edward E. Morse 

See also Acidosis. 

All Fools’ Day. See April Fools’ Day. 

All Saints’ Day is a Christian holy day observed by 
Western Christians on November 1 and by Eastern 
Christians on the first Sunday of Pentecost (see Pente- 
cost). It honors all Christian saints, especially those who 
do not have days named for them. Halloween takes its 
name from All Saints’ Day because October 31 was 
called A// Hallow's Eve, “eve of all the holy ones’ day.” 

In A.D. 609 or 610, Emperor Phocas gave the Roman 
temple called the Pantheon to Pope Boniface IV as a 
church. The pope rededicated it to the Virgin Mary and 
Christian martyrs. The anniversary of this eveni may have 
been the origin of All Saints’ Day among Western Chris- 
tians. In the early 700’s, Pope Gregory III dedicated a 
chapel to all saints on November 1 in St. Peter's church. 
Some historians think the celebration of that event may 
have fixed the date of the feast at November 1. The gen- 
eral celebration of the feast day by Christians through- 
out Western Europe probably began in the 800's. 

Richard L Schebera 

See also Halloween; Saint. 

Allah, Al uhor AH /uh, is the Arabic name for the 
Supreme Being of the religion of Islam. The word is a 
compound of a/{the) and //ah (god). It denotes the 
Supreme Being in the Quran, which is to Muslims what 
the Bible is to Christians and Jews. Muslims regularly re- 
peat the creed: There is no god but Allah; and Muham- 
mad is the Messenger of Allah.” Richard C. Martin 
Allahabad, 41 uh huh BAD (pop. 990,298; met. area 
pop. 1,049,579), is a holy city of India. The name means 
City of God. Allahabad lies in the state of Uttar Pradesh, 
where the Ganges and Yamuna rivers meet (see India 
[political map|). Hindus consider these rivers sacred. 

Allahabad is a trade center for cotton, sugar, and oth- 
er products of nearby farms. The business and market 
district lies at the main crossroads of the city. 

Allahabad was founded in the 200’'s B.C. Its old build- 
ings include a famous mosque called the Jama Musjid 
and an ancient palace and fort built by the Mughal em- 
peror Akbar in 1583. Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first prime 
minister, was born in Allahabad in 1889. His daughter, 
Indira Gandhi— who also served as prime minister—was 
born in the city in 1917. P. P. Karan 
Allegheny Mountains, 41 u/ CAY nee, form part of 
the Appalachian Mountain system of the eastern United 
States. They extend southwest from central Pennsylvania 
through western Maryland, eastern West Virginia, and 
western Virginia. 

The Alleghenies vary in height from about 2,000 feet 
(610 meters) above sea level inthe north to more than 
4,800 teet (1,460 meters) in the south. Spruce Knob, the 
tallest peak in the Alleghenies, rises 4,861 feet (1,482 me- 












West 
Virginia 4 


Charleston 





Richmond, 










. * . r ¢ 
Rieacke* Virginia . North 
0 100 Miles => Atlantic 
Ly 6 100 Kilometers es Ocean 
WORLD BOOK niap 


Location of the Allegheny Mountains 


ters) in West Virginia. The mountains form a divide be- 
tween streams that flow into the Atlantic Ocean and 
those that empty into the Gulf of Mexico. The Alleghe- 
nies are the eastern edge of the Allegheny Plateau. This 
plateau is the major source of coal used by iron and 
steel plants in Pittsburgh and nearby industrial areas. 
Trees from the mountains, including hickories and 
maples, are shipped to pulp and paper mills and 
sawmills in the Allegheny region. 

The Alleghenies are one of the most thinly populated 
regions in the East. Most of the people live in valleys 
east of the mountains or on the Allegheny Plateau. 

The Alleghenies were created about 230 million years 
ago by disturbances in the earth's crust. Before that 
time, the region made up part of a deep ocean trough. 
About 40,000 feet (12,000 meters) of sediment (bits of soil 
and rock) had piled up in this trough. The upper layers 
of the sediment once formed the floor of dense, 
swampy forests. The remains ot plants from the forests 
created the thick coal deposits of the Alleghenies and 
the Allegheny Plateau. 

In pioneer times, the Alleghenies were major barriers 
to transportation. In 1755, the British general Edward 
Braddock built a road through a mountain pass called 
Cumberland Narrows, near Cumberland, Maryland. Part 
of this road, called Braddocks Road, became part of the 
National Road, which linked the East Coast and the Ohio 
River Valley. Today, the pass is the heart of major trans- 
portation routes through the Alleghenies. 

john Edwin Coffman 

See also West Virginia (picture). 

Allegheny River, Ai uh GAY nee, is a major stream of 
western Pennsylvania and a principal headwater of the 
Ohio River. It rises in the hilly plateau country of north- 
central Pennsylvania, curves across the southwest cor- 
ner of New York, and returns to Pennsylvania. The Alle- 
gheny then continues south to Pittsburgh, where it joins 
the Monongahela River to form the Ohio. The Allegheny 
is about 325 miles (523 kilometers) long, and drains 
about 11,400 square iniles (29,530 square kilometers). 





Its branches include the Kiskiminetas, Clarion, and 
Conemaugh rivers and Red Bank, Oil, and French 
creeks. Major deposits of coal, oil, and natural gas lie in 
the drainage basin. The river is navigable with a channel 
for 70 miles (110 kilometers), from Pittsburgh to East 
Brady. William C Rense 

Allegiance, Pledge of. See Pledge of Allegiance. 
Allegory, Al uh caw ee, is a story with more than one 
meaning. Most allegories have moral or religious mean- 
ings. Famous allegories include the fab/es attributed to 
Aesop, an ancient Greek writer. Aesop's fables seem to 
describe the adventures of animals and human beings. 
But the author actually wanted to teach his readers 
something about human nature. 

One of Aesop’ss best-known fables is “The Fox and the 
Grapes. On its surface, or its /iteral level of meaning, the 
story tells of a fox who wants a bunch of grapes hanging 
above his head. The fox tries desperately to reach the 
grapes but cannot. He finally gives up, saying that the 
grapes are probably sour anyway. The a//egorical mean- 
ing of this story is that people may pretend the things 
they cannot have are not worth having. 

Allegories had their greatest popularity during me- 
dieval and Renaissance times in Europe. The Divine 
Comedy, written by the Italian author Dante Alighieri in 
the early 1300's, literally tells of a man’s journey to heav- 
en through hell and purgatory. Allegorically, the poem 
describes a Christian soul rising from a state of sin toa 
State of blessedness. Other allegories include the para- 
bles of Jesus, and The Faerie Queene, written by the 
English poet Edmund Spenser in the late 1500s. 

Allegories lost popularity in Europe after about 1600, 
but some, such as Pilgrim's Progress (1678, 1684) gained 
recognition in later times. Allegory also exists in other 
ways. Many novels include allegorical suggestions of an 
additional level of meaning. Examples include Moby- 
Dick (1851), a whaling adventure that raises issues of hu- 
man struggle and fate in a mysterious universe, and 
Lord of the Flies (1954), a story about shipwrecked boys 


that examines the persistence of evil. Paul Strohm 
Related articles in World Book include: 

Aesop's fables Fable Morality play 

Bunyan, John Golding, William Parable 


Divine Comedy Melville, Herman Spenser, Edmund 


Allen, Barbara, is the central character in an old 
British ballad. As with all true ballads, more than one 
version exists. In most versions, Allen is called to the 
bedside of a dying man who loves her. She refuses to 
comfort him, but soon after his death, Allen regrets her 
lack of pity and dies of remorse. Like all traditional bal- 
lads, the focus is on the climax of the action and little is 
disclosed about the circumstances leading up to it. 

A ballad about Allen was first printed in England in 
1780, but had existed in oral versions at least 100 years 
before that date. It was first printed in the United States 
in 1836 and became very popular. Mark E Workman 
Allen, Ethan (1738-1789), a fiery patriot and soldier, led 
the Green Mountain Boys in the capture of Fort Ticon- 
deroga from the British in 1775. This was one of the first 
important American victories of the Revolutionary War. 
See Fort Ticonderoga. 

Allen was born on jan. 21, 1738, in Litchfield, Con- 
necticut. Historians know little of his early life. He served 
briefly in the French and Indian War in 1757, and then 


Allen, Richard 371 


settled in the New Hampshire Grants, now Vermont 

New Hampshire granted land to settlers to the west, 
but in 1764 the British decreed the land belonged to 
New York. In 1770, New York courts ruled that land titles 
in Vermont were not good unless purchased from New 
York. The settlers resisted this ruling by force. Allen and 
Seth Warner organized the Green Mountain Boys. They 
terrorized settlers from New York and fought off offi- 
cials. New York's governor offered a reward of 20 
pounds and later, 100 pounds, for Allen’s arrest. 

With the outbreak of the Revolutionary War in 1775, 
Allen and the Green Mountain Boys supported the patri- 
ot cause. On May 10, 1775, Allen and Colonel Benedict 
Arnold led a force of 83 men in the attack on Fort Ticon- 
deroga. They subdued the British garrison and captured 
cannon and other weapons for the American cause. 

In the early fall of 1775, Allen tried to seize Montreal, 
Canada. Captured by the British and held prisoner until 
1778, he wrote A Narrative of Col. Ethan Allen’ Captivity 
(1779). After his release, he petitioned the Continental 
Congress for Vermonts statehood. When Congress re- 
fused, he negotiated with the British to make Vermont a 
British province. Allen was accused of treason, but no 
one could prove his guilt. He then settled in Burlington, 

Vermont. A statue of Allen represents Vermont in Statu- 
ary Hall in Washington, D.C. James Kirby Martin 

See also Green Mountain Boys. 


Additional resources 

Aronson, Virginia. Ethan Allen. Chelsea Hse., 2000. Younger 
readers. 

Bellesiles, Michael A. Revolutionary Outlaws: Ethan Allen and the 
Struggle for Independence on the Early American Frontier. 
1993. Reprint. Univ. Pr. of Va., 1995. 

Hahn, Michael T. Ethan Allen. New England Pr., 1994. Younger 
readers. 


Allen, Hervey (1889-1949), was an American author 
best known for his historical romance Anthony Adverse 
(1933). The story takes place during the era of the French 
ruler Napoleon | in the late 1700's and early 1800's. It fol- 
lows the adventures of a young man as he travels 
through Italy and Africa and finally to New Orleans. 
Allen’s style is rich in historical detail based on his thor- 
ough research of the Napoleonic period. 

Allen planned a series of novels about colonial Ameri- 
ca Called The Disinherited. He completed three works in 
the series: The Forest and the Fort (1943), Bedford Village 
(1944), and Toward the Morning (1948). The novels tell 
the story of Salathiel Albine, a white frontiersman kid- 
napped as a boy by Shawnee Indians in the 1750s. All 
three works were collected and published as The City in 
the Dawn. Allen also wrote /srafe/(1926), a biography of 
American writer Edgar Allan Poe. William Hervey Allen 
was born in Pittsburgh. Samuel Chase Coale 
Allen, Richard (1760-1831), founded the African 
Methodist Episcopal Church (A.M.E,), the first African 
American denomination in the United States. 

Allen was born a slave in Philadelphia. and grew up 
on a plantation in Delaware. He later bought his free- 
dom, and moved to Philadelphia in 1786. Allen helped 
form the Free African Society, a service group for 
blacks, in 1787. He soon came to believe that blacks 
should have their own churches, and founded the 
Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church in 1794. He 
was ordained a minister in 1799. In 1816, Bethel ended 


372 Allen, William 


its link with the Methodist 
Church. That year, Allen 
helped establish the Afri- 
can Methodist Episcopal 
Church, uniting Bethel with 
other A.M.E. churches. He 
became bishop of the new 
church. Edgar Allan Toppin 

See also Jones, Absa- 
lom. 
Allen, William (1803- 
1879), served as an Ohio 
Democrat in the United 
States House of Represent- 
atives from 1833 to 1835 
and in the U.S. Senate from 1837 to 1849. During the 
Mexican War (1846-1848), he was a Senate spokesman 
for President James K. Polk. Allen, known as the “Ohio 
Foghorn’ due to his loud voice, supported westward ex- 
pansion. He threatened war with the United Kingdom to 
get the Oregon Country, a large area between California 
and Alaska. He was governor of Ohio from 1874 to 1876. 

Allen was born in Edenton, North Carolina. A statue of 
him represents Ohio in Statuary Hall in the U.S. Capitol 
at Washington, D.C. Michael F. Holt 
Allen, William Cardinal (1532-1594), a prominent 
English clergyman, defended Roman Catholic beliefs af- 
ter the Protestant Queen Elizabeth | came to the throne 
in 1558. He was soon forced into exile. In 1568, Allen 
founded a seminary in the Spanish Netherlands (now 
Belgium) to provide priests for England. In 1570, Pope 
Pius V excommunicated Queen Elizabeth. She, in turn, 
made it a crime to become a Catholic priest in England. 
But the college continued to supply priests for England. 
Many of them were executed. Allen was born in Lanca- 
shire. He became a cardinal in 1587. Marvin R. O' Connell 
Allen, Woody (1935- ), is an American actor, mo- 
tion-picture director, author, and comedian. Allen won 
two Academy Awards for directing and co-writing An- 
nie Hall(1977). He also won an Academy Award for his 
screenplay for Hannah and Her Sisters (1986), which he 
directed. 

Allen is skilled at depicting the American character in 
a satirical light. He often satirizes the anxieties and ro- 
mantic difficulties of intellectual, urban people. In some 
of his films, Allen portrays a witty but insecure, self-con- 
scious, and rather desperate individual troubled by the 
lack of values in modern society and by his relationship 
with women. In addition, this character is often a Jewish 
outsider yearning for acceptance in the exclusive worlds 
of Hollywood and the white Protestant community. 

Allen was born in New York City. His real name is 
Allen Stewart Konigsberg. He began his career writing 
jokes for magazines, newspapers, and television. During 
the early 1960's, Allen was a popular nightclub comedi- 
an. He made his film debut as an actor in Whats New, 
Pussycat? (1965), which he wrote. He has turned out a 
steady stream of highly personal films, which he has 
written and directed, and which have been shot and 
edited according to his own creative goals. 

Allen wrote, directed, and starred in such comic films 


New York Public Library 


Richard Allen 


as Take the Money and Run (1969), Bananas (1971), Sleep- 


er(1973), Love and Death (1975), Manhattan (1979), Zelig 
(1983), Broadway Danny Rose (1984), Manhattan Murder 





Mystery (1993), Mighty Aphrodite (1995), Everyone Says | 
Love You (1996), and Small Time Crooks (2000), and in the 
comedy-dramas Crimes and Misdemeanors (1989) and 
Husbands and Wives (1992). He also wrote and directed 
The Purple Rose of Cairo (1985), Radio Days (1987), Alice 
(1990), Bullets over Broadway (1994), Celebrity (1998), and 
Sweet and Lowdown (1999). Allen wrote and directed a 
few dramatic films, including /nteriors (1978) and Shad- 
ows and Fog (1992). 

Allen wrote three full-length comic plays, Dont Drink 
the Water (1966), Play It Again, Sam (1969), and The Float- 
ing Light Bulb (1981). He has also written humorous es- 
says and stories. Many of them were published in the 
collections Getting Even (1971), Without Feathers (1975), 
and Side Effects (1980). Gene D. Phillips 
Allenby, Lord (1861-1936), was a British military 
leader. During World War 1, he led British forces in 
Egypt and Palestine. By skillfully combining attacks by 
his own forces with those of Arab guerrillas led by Ma- 
jor T. E. Lawrence (Lawrence of Arabia), he defeated the 
Turks in 1917 and 1918 (see Lawrence, T. E.). His victory 
at Megiddo in Palestine on Sept. 18, 1918, gave the 
British control of Syria and Palestine. 

Allenby served as British high commissioner for Egypt 
from 1919 to 1925. Arabs were bitter because the British 
and French refused to give them independence, and be- 
cause the Allies had promised the Jews a national home 
in Palestine. Allenby handled a difficult situation with 
tact and sympathy. 

Edmund Henry Hynman Allenby was born in Suffolk, 
England. He spent many years with British forces in 
Africa. When World War | began, he commanded first a 
cavalry division and then a corps of the British Expedi- 
tionary Force in France. He became an army comman- 
der in 1915. His full title was Viscount Allenby of Megid- 
do and Felixstowe. Larry H. Addington 
Allende Gossens, ah YEHN day GOH sehns, Sal- 
vador (1908-1973), served as president of Chile from 
1970 to 1973, when military leaders overthrew his gov- 
ernment. The military leaders reported that Allende 
committed suicide during the revolt, after refusing to re- 
sign from office. Allende had been the first Marxist to be 
freely elected to lead a nation of the Western Hemi- 
sphere. As president, he nationalized Chile's banks and 
copper mines and many other industries. 

Allende was born in Valparaiso. He became involved 
in politics in 1926 while a medical student at the Univer- 
sity of Chile. He earned an M.D. degree at that university 
in 1932. In 1933, Allende helped organize Chile's Social- 
ist Party. He was elected to the Chamber of Deputies, a 
house of the Chilean legislature, in 1937. Allende later 
served as Chile's minister of health. From 1945 to 1970, 
he served in the Senate. Kalman H. Silvert 

See also Chile (Marxism and military rule). 
Allentown (pop. 106,632) is a center of manufacturing 
and high technology in eastern Pennsylvania. The city 
lies on the Lehigh River, across from Bethlehem. Allen- 
town, Bethlehem, and Easton form a metropolitan area 
with 637,958 people. For Allentown’s location, see Penn- 
sylvania (political map). 

Factories in Allentown produce clothing, electronic 
equipment, food products, industrial machinery, metal 
products, and trucks. The city is also a chief maker of 
cryogenic equipment and gases, used to produce ex- 





treme cold for scientific and industrial purposes. Allen- 
town is an important point for pipeline transportation 
and tank storage of petroleum and natural gas. It is a re- 
gional headquarters for several telecommunications 
companies. Airlines, truck lines, and freight railroads 
serve the city. 

Allentown's downtown business district is laid out 
around a central square near the Lehigh River. A brick- 
paved mall forms part of the main shopping street. Brick 
row houses, many of which were built during the 1800's, 
are the most common type of housing. Many of the peo- 
ple are descendants of Germans who moved to Pennsyl- 
vania during the 1600's and 1700's. They are often called 
Pennsylvania Dutch. Allentown is an important center of 
Pennsylvania Dutch culture. See Pennsylvania Dutch. 

Allentown is the home of Cedar Crest College and 
Muhlenberg College. The city has a symphony orches- 
tra, a professional theater company, and an art museum. 
The Allentown Band is the oldest municipal band in the 
United States. 

Allentown, originally called Northampton Town, was 
founded in 1762 by William Allen, chief justice of Penn- 
sylvania. British troops captured Philadelphia in Septem- 
ber 1777, during the Revolutionary War. The Liberty Bell 
was then moved from Philadelphia to Allentown for 
safety. It remained concealed in Allentown in Zion's Re- 
formed Church until the summer of 1778, when it was 
returned to Philadelphia. Allentown became an incorpo- 
rated city in 1867. In the late 1900's, the city carried out a 
number of development projects to preserve historical 
districts and rehabilitate housing. 

Allentown is the seat of Lehigh County. It has a mayor- 
council government. William C. Rense 
Allergy is a body reaction that occurs in persons who 
are sensitive to certain substances. A substance that is 
harmless to a nonallergic person may cause mild to ex- 
tremely severe symptoms in an allergic person. A per- 
son can develop an allergy at any time, but in most cas- 
es the first symptoms appear in childhood. About 15 
percent of the people in the United States have an aller- 
gy requiring repeated medical treatment. 

Common forms of allergy include asthma, hay fever, 
and a year-round nasal allergy called perennial allergic 
rhinitis. Others are eczema (itching red swellings on the 
skin), hives, allergic headaches, and allergic digestive 
disturbances. 

A substance that causes an allergy is called an a/ler- 
gen. The allergens that cause most asthma, hay fever, 
and other respiratory allergies include house dust, mold 
spores, pollen, and the dandruff or hair of household 
pets. Many foods may cause allergic reactions. These 
foods include chocolate, cow's milk, eggs, wheat, and 
certain seafoods, especially shellfish. 

Early human beings probably had allergies, and they 
still exist in many animals as well as in people. But not 
until the early 1900's did physicians begin to understand 
the specific causes and characteristics of allergy. Today, 
the term a/lergyis often used to refer to a specialized 
field of medicine. An a/lergist is a doctor who treats al- 
lergic diseases. 

How an allergy develops. The body of an allergic 
person reacts to some allergen or allergens to which it 
previously has been exposed. An allergen is capable of 
stimulating the body to produce proteins called antibod- 


Allergy 373 


ies (see Protein). The allergens and the antibodies then 
act together to release certain substances from the body 
cells into the blood and other body fluids. These sub- 
stances, called H-substances, bring about reactions in 
other cells or tissues. Many H-substances can cause al- 
lergic reactions in people and animals. The chief H- 
substance that causes allergy in people is Aistamine. 

The H-substances that are released into the body af- 
fect allergic target tissues. Most of these tissues are cap- 
illaries (small blood vessels), mucous glands, or smooth 
muscles (muscles of the stomach and of all other inter- 
nal organs except the heart). The location of these tis- 
sues in the body—along with their particular response 
to H-substances—determines the specific allergic dis- 
ease. In general, histamine causes capillaries to enlarge, 
mucous glands to secrete, and smooth muscles to tight- 
en. 

After a person's body has produced antibodies in re- 
sponse to a particular allergen, any future exposure to 
the allergen will stimulate antibody production. But such 
allergic antibodies do not behave in the same manner as 
the protective antibodies that a person's body produces 
to fight infection. The protective antibodies fight disease 
organisms and destroy them or make them harmless. If 
the body continues to make such antibodies after the or- 
ganisms have been destroyed, the person may become 
immune to the disease. 

Emotional factors. The allergen-antibody reaction 
does not fully explain allergy because the allergic target 
tissues are under the basic control of the autonomic 
nervous system (see Nervous system [The autonomic 
nervous system]). The autonomic nervous system tends 
to keep these tissues in their normal state of balance. 
But the autonomic nervous system itself is involved in 
other body responses, such as emotions. As a result, 
strong emotions may also affect the reaction of an aller- 
gic target tissue. Types of emotions that increase the 
probability of an allergic response include anger, fear, 
resentment, worry, and lack of self-confidence. 

Nerve centers in the brain take part in emotional re- 
sponses. A part of the brain called the Aypothalamus 
constantly checks and controls the autonomic nervous 
system. The hypothalamus, in turn, is considerably influ- 
enced by the cerebral cortex of the brain. When certain 
stimuli come into the brain as a result of seeing or hear- 
ing, a message is formulated in the cerebral cortex. If 
the message is one that could cause any kind of emo- 
tional response, it is sent to the hypothalamus. The hy- 
pothalamus then sends the message via the autonomic 
nervous system to the allergic target tissues. If the aller- 
gic target tissues receive an emotionally painful mes- 
sage, they become more likely to react to histamine. See 
Brain (In producing emotions). 

Hereditary factors. Such allergies as asthma, hay 
fever, eczema, perennial allergic rhinitis, and certain 
kinds of allergic headaches tend to run in families. One 
member of a family may have asthma, another may have 
hay fever, and still another may have eczema and hay 
fever. Doctors have observed an inherited tendency to 
develop allergy. If both parents have an allergy, each of 
their children has about a 75 percent chance of develop- 
ing one. If only one parent has an allergy, the probability 
is 50 percent or less. 

An inherited tendency toward allergy apparently does 


374 Allergy 


not follow any strict genetic laws. Therefore, allergy is 
said to be familial, rather than directly inherited. 

The allergic threshold. Many factors besides emo- 
tions and heredity can influence a person's reaction to 
allergens. All patients with an allergy have an a/lergic 
threshold, the particular level of their body's resistance 
to allergic disease. The allergic threshold varies, de- 
pending on the type and seriousness of various factors 
at any given time. For example, whether people develop 
asthma when exposed to pollen or dust may depend on 
their emotional state or a change in the weather. It also 
may depend on whether they already have some other 
disease or are overtired. An increase in one or several 
of these factors might lower the patient's allergic thresh- 
old enough to cause an allergic attack. On the other 
hand, a decrease in one or more of the factors could 
raise the allergic threshold and reduce the chances of 
an attack. 

An allergist, when diagnosing and treating any al- 
lergy, must consider all the forces acting on a patient 
that could contribute to that person's condition. This 
procedure helps explain why the proper treatment of al- 
lergy takes so long to establish in many cases. 

Diagnosis and treatment. There is no complete 
cure for allergy. People may be able to avoid the symp- 
toms of a particular allergy by avoiding the allergen that 
causes it. But they still remain allergic to the substance. 

On the other hand, allergy can be controlled. The rate 
of occurrence and the seriousness of the attacks can be 
decreased, and complications can be prevented. In most 
cases, if treatment starts soon after the first symptoms 
are recognized and continues on a regular basis, it pro- 
duces good results. An untreated allergy tends to be- 
come worse rather than better. 

The physician first gives the patient a physical exami- 
nation and diagnoses the presence of an allergic dis- 
ease from the person's symptoms. Carefully controlled 
skin tests are used to identify the allergens causing the 
trouble. The allergist injects small doses of many of the 
most common allergens in separate areas just beneath 
the skin. Substances to which the patient is allergic 
cause the skin to become red and slightly swollen at the 
injection site. The procedure generally causes little dis- 
comfort and the redness and swelling quickly disappear. 

Next, the allergist compares the results of each skin 
test with the results of the patient's physical exam and 
medical history. Skin tests do not always provide defi- 
nite answers, but they serve as guides to identification 
of allergens. Blood tests and examination of samples of 
the patient's nasal mucus also help in the diagnosis. 

Skin tests cannot identify a food allergy if the food 
causes an allergic reaction only after it has been 
changed during the process of digestion. To detect such 
a food allergy, the physician may put the patient on a 
controlled diet. The allergist removes from the person’s 
diet all foods that most commonly cause allergic reac- 
tions. This step may relieve the symptoms. If so, the phy- 
sician returns the foods one at a time to the diet. If the 
allergy flares up again after the person eats one of the 
foods, he or she probably has an allergy to that food. 

After the substance or substances that trigger the al- 
lergic reaction have been identified, the patient avoids 
them as much as possible. This may be fairly easy if the 
substance is a food, such as chocolate, or the hair of a 


particular kind of animal. But if the allergen is house 
dust or ragweed pollen, the person may have an ex- 
tremely difficult time trying to avoid it. 

If the allergen cannot be avoided, the physician may 
give the patient drugs to relieve the symptoms. Such 
drugs include the antihistamines and, in more severe 
cases, steroids. 

A treatment called Ayposensitization, or desensitiza- 
tion, is helpful for some types of respiratory allergies, 
especially asthma, hay fever, and perennial allergic rhi- 
nitis. Hyposensitization is aimed specifically at the aller- 
gen-antibody reaction. The physician injects an ex- 
tremely small dose of pollen or other allergen into the 
body on a regular basis. In most cases, the patient re- 
ceives injections twice a week for about two months, 
and then once a week. The doctor gradually increases 
the amount of allergen up to what is called a mainte- 
nance dose. The injections cause the body to produce 
antibodies called blocking antibodies. The blocking anti- 
bodies combine with the allergens. This combining 
process results in fewer allergens being left free to 
react with the regular allergic antibodies. 

Joan S. Gallagher 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Antibiotic (Allergic = Asthma Headache 
reactions) Eczema Hives 
Antihistamine Hay fever Steroid 


Alliance. See International relations. 

Alliance for Progress, or, in Spanish, A/ianza para 
el Progreso, was a cooperative program that promoted 
economic and social development in Latin America. It 
involved the United States and more than 20 Latin- 
American nations. The program began in 1961 and 
ended during the early 1970s. 

In 1961, President John F. Kennedy called for the es- 
tablishment of the Alliance for Progress. He proposed 
the cooperative program to replace previous efforts by 
the United States to help Latin-American countries on an 
individual basis. The United States and 19 Latin- 
American countries signed the charter of the Alliance 
for Progress on Aug. 17, 1961, in Punta del Este, Uru- 
guay. Other Latin-American countries later joined the 
program. 

Under the alliance’s charter, the participating Latin- 
American countries provided 80 percent of the funds for 
the program. The remainder was furnished by the 
United States, other wealthy countries, and a variety of 
public and private groups. During the 1960s, the United 
States provided nearly $10 billion for projects con- 
nected with the Alliance for Progress program. These 
projects included housing developments, power plants, 
and roads. 

The Organization of American States, an association 
of Latin-American countries and the United States, coor- 
dinated the activities of the Alliance for Progress. United 
States participation was directed by the Agency for In- 
ternational Development, which was then a part of the 
United States Department of State. Other United States 
government agencies involved in the program included 
the Export-Import Bank and the Peace Corps. Interna- 
tional lending agencies, such as the Inter-American De- 
velopment Bank and the World Bank, also worked with 
the alliance. 

One of the goals of the Alliance for Progress was an 


ee 





annual economic growth rate of at least 2 | percent per 
nation. Almost all the Latin-American countries exceed- 
ed this goal during the 1960's. They also improved their 
educational systems and programs to benefit the poor. 
But the alliance was less successful in providing more 
jobs. Unemployment in much of Latin America remained 
high, though the alliance had pledged to reduce it. Crit- 
ics charged that the alliance failed to deal realistically 
with Latin America’s overpopulation problem. Others 
said the program's goals had been too ambitious. Still 
others blamed the U.S. Congress, which began to cut 
funds for the alliance in the late 1960's. 

During the early 1970's, the U.S. government began to 
emphasize increased trade, rather than direct aid, as a 
means of solving Latin Americas economic problems. 
Also, Latin-American nations were providing more and 
more of their own development resources. In addition, 
international lending agencies, especially the World 
Bank, provided more money for development projects 
in Latin America. Nathan A. Haverstock 

See also Organization of American States. 

Allies. See World War | (introduction); World War II 
(table: The Allies; Strategy). 

Alligator is the name of two kinds of reptiles related to 
crocodiles. The American alligator lives in the waters 
and lowlands of southeastern United States. The Chi- 
nese alligator lives in the lower Yangtze River Valley, in 
China. Other related reptiles are the caimans of Central 
and South America. Caimans are frequently called alliga- 
tors. 

Body. Alligators resemble lizards in their shape, but 
they have thicker bodies and tails than most lizards. Alli- 
gators jaws are set with many sharp teeth. Their eyes 
stick up above their skulls so that alligators can see 
above the water while their bodies are beneath it. They 
use their short, strong legs for walking. Alligators swim 
by moving their tails from side to side. 

An alligator’s skin is tough. The skin on the animal's 
back is rough and ridged with dozens of small bones 
called osteoderms. The skin on the belly is smooth and 
was once used to make a handsome, long-lasting 
leather for handbags, shoes, and other articles. A young 
American alligator has yellow marks across its body, but 
these fade aiter a time. When grown, the American alli- 
gator is dull gray and dark olive in color. 

Alligators in the past grew to be 18 feet (5.5 meters) 





Alligator 375 


long or longer. Today, few can be found that have 
reached even a length of 12 feet (3.7 meters). Male alliga 
tors from 11 to 12 feet (3.4 to 3.7 meters) long weigh 
from 450 to 550 pounds (204 to 249 kilograms). Females 
seldom measure more than 9 feet (2.7 meters) long, or 
weigh over 160 pounds (73 kilograms). 

Habits. The female alligator makes her nest of grass 
and other plants, which she forms into a pile about 3 
feet (0.9 meter) high and 7 feet (2.1 meters) across. She 
lays 20 to 60 eggs in the center of the pile, where the 
nest is wet. The eggs are white, hard-shelled, and slight- 
ly larger than hens eggs. The young emerge from the 
eggs after about nine weeks. 

Alligators provide more care for their young than do 
most reptiles. After laying eggs, the female stays near 
the nest, guarding the eggs against predators. When the 
young hatch, they give high-pitched yelps, and the 
mother comes to scratch open the nest and free them. 
The mother alligator protects her young for a year or 
more. 

When first hatched, the young alligators are about 9 
inches (23 centimeters) long. During the first six years of 
their lives, both males and females grow about 1 foot (30 
centimeters) in length each year. After this time, the fe- 
males grow more slowly. But the males continue to 
grow at the same rate for several years more. Alligators 
probably live 50 to 60 years. 

In winter, alligators remain resting underwater, bury 
themselves in mud, or go into deep holes that they have 
made with their bodies. These holes are called gator 
holes. During droughts, ‘gator holes often provide the 
only refuge for aquatic animals. When rains return, the 
fish, frogs, turtles, and other animals that have survived 
in ‘gator holes repopulate the swamps and marshy lakes 
of the South. 

Alligators eat many kinds of small animals that live in 
or near the water, including fish, snakes, frogs, turtles, 
small mammals, and birds. Large males sometimes at- 
tack dogs, pigs, or even cattle. They drag these animals 
under water to drown them, and then tear them to 
pieces. Alligators do this by grabbing hold of a part of 
their prey with their jaws and twisting until that part 
comes off. Fortunately, even the largest alligators sel- 
dom attack human beings. The muscles that close an al- 
ligator's jaws are very strong. But once the jaws are shut, 
they can easily be held closed by a person's bare hands. 


ET 
doe Seat PANS 


Treat Davidson, NAS 


An alligator’s body is suited for life on land and in water. The alligator uses its short, stocky legs 
for walking. In the water, it swims by sweeping its tail from side to side. 


376 Alligator 





Bruce Coleman Inc 


The alligator’s powerful jaws can crack cattle bones. But if the 
jaws are shut, they can be held closed by a person's hands. 





G. ). Chafaris 


A swimming alligator can keep its eyes and nostrils above the 
water because of the shape of its skull. 


People have sometimes captured alligators in this way, 
without using any weapons. 

Alligators and crocodiles. Alligators are often mis- 
taken for crocodiles but are different from them in some 
ways. The fourth tooth of the alligators lower jaw fits 
into a pocket of the upper jaw. The same tooth in the 
crocodile fits into a groove in the side of the upper jaw, 
making it visible when the animal's mouth is closed. An- 
other way to tell the American alligator from the Ameri- 
can crocodile is that the American alligator has a much 
broader snout. Alligators are also much less aggressive 
and active than crocodiles. In the United States, alliga- 
tors and crocodiles are found together only in the 
marshes at the southern tip of Florida. Both alligators 
and crocodiles belong to the great group of crocodil- 
ians. This group also includes caimans and gavials. See 
Crocodile; Gavial. 

Where alligators live. Alligators were once common 
in lakes, swamps, and rivers along the Gulf of Mexico 
and on the Atlantic Coast as far north as North Carolina. 
They were also found far up the Mississippi River. But 
so many were killed for their hides or for food and sport 
that they became scarce. In 1967, the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service classified the alligator as an endan- 
gered species. This designation gave the animal almost 
complete protection. But by 1977, alligator populations 
had increased so much in Florida and other southern 
coastal regions that the animals were reclassified as 
threatened. This new classification permits tightly regu- 


lated hunting of alligators for commercial purposes. 

D. Bruce Means 

Scientific classification. Alligators are in the crocodile fami- 
ly, Crocodylidae. They make up the genus A/figator. 
Alliteration, uh wT uh RAY shuhn, occurs when the 
same sound starts succeeding accented syllables. In “Pe- 
ter Piper picked a peck of pickled peppers,” for exam- 
ple, alliteration is created by the occurrence of a p 
sound at the beginning of every accented syllable. The 
first sentence of this paragraph has alliteration of s 
sounds. Old English poetry had no rhyme, but was held 
together by a pattern of alliteration. Alliteration, like 
rhyme, assonance, and consonance, is a device of repe- 
tition that helps express the feelings and ideas of a 
poem. Paul! B. Diehl 

See also Poetry (Sounds). 

Allopathy, uh LAHP uh thee, is a method in medical 
practice that tries to cure a disease by producing effects 
on the body that differ from the effects of the disease. 
The term is sometimes wrongly used to cover all the 
practices that medicine and surgery use to cure disease 
and relieve pain. See also Homeopathy. 

Allosaurus, 41 uh SAWR uhs, was a large, meat-eating 
dinosaur that lived about 150 million years ago. A/- 
losaurus lived in what is now the western United States, 
including Colorado, Utah, and Wyoming. It grew about 
36 feet (11 meters) long, stood about 7 feet (2 meters) 
high at the hips, and weighed about 2 tons (1.8 metric 
tons). 

The head of A//osaurus was 3 feet (0.9 meter) long. Its 
jaws had about 70 teeth, each 3 inches (8 centimeters) 
long with jagged edges for slicing flesh. Holes in the 
skull lightened the weight of the dinosaur's large head. 
A pair of distinctive low, bony bumps rose in front of the 
eyes. The short front legs had three strong, curved 
claws on each hand. The hind feet were birdlike, with 
three toes pointing forward and a small inner toe point- 
ing backward. A//osaurus walked on two legs with its 
body parallel to the ground and held its long tail out be- 
hind for balance. The animal could rear up to a height of 
12 feet (3.7 meters) or more. 

Allosaurus preyed on other dinosaurs. Many di- 
nosaurs, including Apatosaurus and Diplodocus, were 
much larger, and so A//osaurus may have eaten mostly 
smaller dinosaurs. When A//osaurus did eat larger di- 
nosaurs, it may have attacked only the weaker ones, 
such as the young or the sick. It may also have eaten di- 
nosaurs that had already died. 

See also Dinosaur (pictures). 
Allotropy, uh LAHT ruh pee, in chemistry, is the ability 
of an element to exist in more than one form. These 
forms are called a//otropes. For example, three common 
allotropes of carbon are: (1) hard, transparent diamond 
crystals, (2) soft, black graphite crystals, and (3) black, 
sooty, uncrystallized carbon black (see Carbon). The 
word a//lotropy comes from two Greek words meaning 
another and way. 

Solid allotropes differ in their crystal structures. But 
allotropic gases differ in their molecular structures. For 
example, each molecule of ordinary oxygen is made of 
two oxygen atoms. Each molecule of the allotrope ozone 
is made of three oxygen atoms. Ordinary oxygen has no 
odor. But ozone has a peculiar sharp odor (see Ozone). 

Robert |. Ouellette 


Peter Dodson 





Alloy is a material made up of a metal and at least one 
other element. Most alloys contain a large amount of the 
main metal, or base metal, and smaller amounts of other 
components. These components can be either metals or 
nonmetals such as carbon or silicon. Many pure metals 
are too soft, rust too easily, or have other disadvantages. 
But often these disadvantages can be overcome if the 
metals are combined with other elements. Three, four, 
or more different substances may be present in a single 
alloy. 

People usually make alloys by melting a base metal 
and adding other components. This liquid alloy then 
cools and solidifies. Many alloys need to be worked into 
a final shape after cooling. Other alloys can be made 
without melting the base metal. For example, manufac- 
turers can blend metal powders together and heat them 
under pressure. The solid powder particles then bond 
to form the alloy. 


Characteristics of alloys 


Alloys consist of tiny crystals called grains. In every 
grain, the atoms are packed together in a particular geo- 
metric arrangement. Each grain is tilted differently from 
those next to it. Manufacturers can control grain size by 
the way they heat, form, and cool the material. Grain size 
determines particular characteristics in alloys. For exam- 
ple, smaller grains make stronger alloys. Boundaries be- 
tween the grains also help determine alloy characteris- 
tics. Boundaries can become sources of weakness when 
an alloy has impurities, or when people use the alloy at 
high temperatures or with damaging chemicals. 

There are two types of alloys: (1) single phase alloys 
and (2) polyphase alloys. Single phase alloys consist of 
grains that all have the same composition. In these al- 
loys, one metal dissolves into another in the same way 
that salt dissolves into water. A mixture of copper and 
nickel in any proportion forms a single phase alloy. 

Polyphase alloys have different types of grains mixed 
together. In these alloys, the different atoms bond to- 





ee oc ae 
Carpenter Technolagy Corporation 
The structure of an alloy consists of tiny crystals called grains. 
This photograph, taken with a microscope, shows the different 
grains of a kind of steel. Steels are iron alloys. 


Alloy 377 





McDonnell Douglas Corporation 


Products made from alloys include the steel landing gear and 
nose on this military airplane, above. Steels, like many alloys, are 
strong materials that resist chemical damage. These properties 
make them useful in many different industries. 


gether in various ways to form strong, stable com- 
pounds. The proportion of metals in polyphase alloys is 
the same in all grains of a particular type. But this pro- 
portion can vary significantly from one grain type to an- 
other. Steels are polyphase alloys that include some 
grains of iron containing small amounts of carbon and 
other grains of a chemical compound called /ron car- 
bide. \ron carbide has one atom of carbon to every three 
atoms of iron. 

Most alloys are stronger and harder than the pure 
metals from which they are made. Alloys also usually 
have lower melting temperatures than pure metals. 
Most alloys are less ducti/e than pure metals—that is, 
they are more difficult to hammer into shape, roll into 
sheets, or draw into wires. However, some special su- 
perplastic alloys are extremely ductile. Few alloys can 
conduct electricity as well as pure metals. But there are 
some superconducting alloys that are excellent conduc- 
tors. 


Kinds of alloys 


The first alloys. People first discovered alloys in na- 
ture during prehistoric times. Such alloys included me- 
teorites of iron and nickel and mixtures of gold and sil- 
ver in river beds. The first alloy made by people was 
bronze. The oldest bronzes consisted of copper and ar- 
senic. Prehistoric copper smelters first produced them 
accidentally in about 3500 B.C. Over the next few hun- 
dred years, people discovered that mixing tin with cop- 
per produced a more useful bronze. They began to 
make tools, ornaments, and weapons out of this bronze. 
Bronze is much harder than pure copper, and it is easier 
to melt and cast into useful shapes. 

Alloys of iron. Iron is the most important industrial 
metal. Manufacturers have almost always used it as an 
alloy rather than as a pure metal. Iron-based alloys are 
called ferrous allovs. 

The most widely used ferrous alloys are the steels. 
Steels vary both in the way people make them and in 
their composition. All steels, however, contain small 
amounts of carbon and manganese and large amounts 
of iron. 


378 Alloy 


Each variety of steel has certain advantages. Carbon 
steels rank as the most widely used steels. Most carbon 
steels contain less than 1 percent carbon. Their strength 
and durability make them popular materials for structur- 
al beams, automobile bodies, and food cans. A/loy steels 
contain nickel, chromium, and molybdenum. They are 
strong enough for such products as bicycle frames and 
aircraft landing gear. Stainless steels contain more than 
12 percent chromium, and many varieties also use nick- 
el. Stainless steels can resist corrosion (rust and other 
chemical damage) extremely well. They are common 
materials for kitchen utensils, pots and pans, and hospi- 
tal equipment. Joo/ steels are ferrous alloys used to 
work and shape other materials. They contain such com- 
ponents as tungsten, chromium, and molybdenum. Ma- 
chines used to shape metal are made with special tool 
steels that keep their hardness and sharp cutting edges, 
even when they become red-hot in use. 

Alloys for strength and lightness. Many alloys used 
in vehicles, and especially aircraft, must be strong and 
light. Aluminum is a common base metal for many of 
these alloys. Pure aluminum is too light and weak for 
construction purposes. But manufacturers can mix the 
metal with other components to make strong, durable, 
alloys. Some common aluminum alloys contain small 
amounts of copper, manganese, and magnesium. These 
alloys are only slightly heavier than pure aluminum and 
are as strong as some steels. Other aluminum alloys 
contain zinc, magnesium, and lithium and are even 
stronger materials. People make aluminum alloys into 
many different products, including beverage cans, bicy- 
cle rims, and house siding. 

Magnesium is only about two-thirds as heavy as alu- 
minum. It is not strong enough by itself for most struc- 
tural purposes, but it serves as the base metal in many 
useful alloys. Products using magnesium alloys include 
aircraft and automobile parts, as well as various tools 
and equipment. Titanium is another base metal for many 
strong, light alloys. Industries use titanium alloys to 
make jet engines, aircraft parts, and corrosion-resistant 
equipment in chemical plants. 

Costly and ornamental alloys. People have long 
used gold and silver as alloys rather than as pure metals. 
Manufacturers usually add cheaper metals to the gold 
or silver. This reduces the cost of the alloy while keep- 
ing the appearance of the precious metal. Alloying also 
hardens the gold or silver and keeps it from wearing 
away rapidly through use. Ye//ow gold is a gold alloy 
containing copper and silver. It is common in jewelry 
and other ornamental items. Dentists use similar gold al- 
loys as fillings for teeth. Jewelry and tableware are often 
made of alloys that contain silver and copper. 

Several cheaper alloys make attractive but inexpen- 
sive household articles. German silver is a blue-white, 
copper-based alloy containing nickel and zinc. People 
use German silver for such objects as candlesticks and 
hardware. Pewter, a silver-colored, tin-based alloy, is 
easy to work and can be highly polished. Plates, mugs, 
and vases are often made of pewter. Coins are common- 
ly made of copper-nickel alloys. 

Other alloys. Among the most common alloys are 
the brasses. These copper-based alloys contain up to 
about 40 percent zinc and small amounts of tin, lead, or 
other elements. Plumbing materials, locks, fasteners, 


and other hardware are among the many products con- 
taining brass. Monel/is a nickel-copper alloy. Manufac- 
turers often use this alloy for materials that must resist 
corrosion in sea water, such as pump fittings and boat 
propellers. 

Many alloys have specialized applications. Ste/lite, an 
extremely hard alloy, consists chiefly of cobalt, chromi- 
um, and tungsten. People use stellite as a surface layer 
On steel to improve its resistance to wear. So/der, which 
has a low melting point, is used to join metal surfaces. 
Woods metal, another alloy with a low melting point, is 
employed in fuses for automatic fire alarms and sprin- 
kler systems. /nvar, an iron-nickel alloy, barely expands 
or contracts when its temperature changes. It is used in 
products that must remain at a constant size, such as 
measuring devices and pendulum rods. 

Several alloys make excellent magnets. One example 
is A/nico, a group of alloys containing aluminum, nickel, 
cobalt, iron, and copper. These alloys can lift up to 60 
times their own weight. However, alloys containing 
large amounts of metallic elements called rare-earth ele- 
ments, such as samarium, produce magnets hundreds 
of times more powertul than Alnico. 

Scientists are developing many alloys that provide 
greater strength and durability than older alloys. For ex- 
ampie, superalloys can resist extremely high tempera- 
tures and severely corrosive conditions. They contain 
the base metals nickel or cobalt alloyed with chromium 
and many other elements. These superalloys are impor- 
tant components of jet engines and spacecraft. 

Michael L Wayman 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Annealing Metallography 

Assaying Monel metal 

Babbitt metals Money (United States curren- 
Brass cy today 

Britannia metal Nickel silver 

Bronze Permalloy 

Duralumin Pewter 

Gold (Gold alloys) Silver 

Iron and steel Solder 


Lead (Properties) Stainless steel 


Metal 


Allport, Gordon W. (1897-1967), was an American 
psychologist known for his research in human personal- 
ity. In a series of books and articles published during a 
period of 30 years, Allport opposed the idea that an indi- 
viduals personality is a bundle of physiological drives 
and conditioned responses. Allport emphasized the 
gradual growth and unfolding of human personality. He 
believed that a person is not a mechanical product of 
environmental forces, but a unique force striving to de- 
velop his or her own potential. 

Gordon Willard Allport was born in Montezuma, Indi- 
ana. He graduated from Harvard University in 1919 and 
received a Ph.D. from Harvard in 1922. From 1930 until 
his death, Allport taught psychology at Harvard. He 
helped establish Harvard's department of social rela- 
tions in 1946. Rober G. Wevant 
Allspice is a spice with a flavor similar to that of a com- 
bination of cinnamon, cloves, and nutmeg. Allspice is 
sometimes called Jamaica pepper, or pimento. It comes 
trom the immature berries of the pimento tree. The 
berries are gathered by hand, dried in the sun or ina 
kiln, and ground into powder or sold whole. 





People use allspice to season baked goods, fish, 
liqueurs, pickles, and smoked meats. Oil from the 
berries is used in making a perfume for soap and to dis- 
guise the taste of some medicines. 

See also Pimento. 

Allston, Washington (1779-1843), was one of the first 
American artists to paint in a Romantic style. He became 
famous for imaginative, dramatic works, many of which 
had supernatural themes. 

Allston based many of his early paintings on the Bible 
and other literature. One of his finest early pictures was 
the Biblical work The Dead Man Revived by Touching 
the Bones of the Prophet Elijah (1813). Allston also paint- 
ed idealized landscapes. He later abandoned elaborate 
and dramatic themes and concentrated on simpler sub- 
jects, particularly graceful, dreamlike women in dim 
landscapes. Allston’s Moonlit Landscape (1819) and other 
night scenes are noted for their delicate tones. Allston 
died before completing his last major painting, Be/shaz- 
zars Feast, which he began in 1817. 

Allston was born in Georgetown County, South Car- 
olina. In 1801, he went to London, where he studied with 
the American painter Benjamin West. While in Europe, 
Allston came into contact with English Romantic litera- 
ture and paintings by Venetian artists of the 1500's that 
influenced his best work. Allston returned to the United 
States in 1818. Sarah Burns 
Aima-Ata. See Almaty. 

Aima mater, Al muh MAH tuhr or AHL muh MAH 
tuhr, is an expression used by students or graduates to 
refer to their university or college. The Latin words 
mean fostering mother. The Romans often used the 
words in speaking of some of their goddesses, such as 
Ceres and Cybele. The expression was applied to Euro- 
pean universities during the Middle Ages, probably first 
at the University of Bonn in Germany. A statue of the Vir- 
gin Mary at Bonn was called A/ma Mater, or Beloved 
Mother. Thomas }. McLernon 

Almanac, AWL muh nak, is a book or pamphlet, usual- 
ly published once a year, that contains many kinds of in- 
formation. An almanac often includes a calendar, out- 
standing dates and events, movements of heavenly 
bodies, and facts about governments, history, geogra- 
phy, and weather. It may also give figures on population, 
industry, and farm production. 

Almanacs originally provided a calendar of the 
months, with eclipses, the movements of the planets, 
and the rising and setting times of the sun, moon, and 
stars. People believed that this information would be 
useful to farmers and to navigators. 

Many scholars believe that the earliest almanacs con- 
tained predictions made by ancient Persian astrologers. 
Later, almanacs appeared in Rome. The oldest existing 
copies of almanacs today were written in the 1300's and 
1400's. Publishers issued almanacs in England in the 
1600's to give information about the calendar. These in- 
cluded the Nautical Almanac, for sailors. 

Almanacs appeared in colonial America in the 1600's. 
They were usually small pamphlets giving calendars, the 
dates of religious feasts, weather forecasts, and signs of 
the zodiac (see Zodiac). Poor Richard's Almanac was the 
best known of these early books. Benjamin Franklin first 
published the almanac for the year 1733. The book had 
poetry, astronomy information, and lists of court justices 


James E. Simon 


Almanac 379 


and roads. Franklin contributed many proverbs (short 
sayings) that became widely quoted. See Poor Richard's 
Almanac. 

In the 1800's, many governments and newspapers be- 
gan issuing almanacs. These included food recipes, first- 
aid advice for injuries and snake bite, weather predic- 
tions, and conundrunis (short, humorous questions and 
answers). Gradually, publishers stopped predicting the 
weather, except in the Old Farmer's Almanac, the 
Farmer's Almanac, and several local almanacs. 

Almanacs today, such as The World Almanac, contain 
general information. Almanacs published by groups, 
such as the United Nations, contain facts, statistics, and 
documents about many countries. Newspapers, reli- 
gious groups, business organizations, and certain trades 
or professions publish almanacs with specialized infor- 
mation. 

A book of great value to navigators and astronomers 
is The Astronomical Almanac, published by the United 
States Naval Observatory. This almanac includes tables 
and charts about stars, tides, eclipses, latitude, longi- 















The Year of our LORD > 
1669. 
Being ib our account Biffextile, or Leap-7y » 


year: and from the Creation 5616, 





Whofe woe Notes are; 
Golden Namber Roman tadifion & 
ny: bend 13 


Cycle ofthe 3un 
Dominical Lercers FE Numb: Dirétion t9 


Fitted forthe Longitude of 3%¢ gre 
and 4% gr. 30 w. of North Lar: 
and may ferve wirhott fenfible 
errour for moft part of N’-kagiands 





By 5b samuel Brakenbury Philomath. 


Job 48.41, Cant rheu'bind the | freemr tr fluencet - 
of Pleiades, oF lose the bands-of Orion? 

Ver.3 2, Lant thor bring furen Mazraceth in biy 

Sesfon pr sangt box Gurwet retarus wrth ag eS ‘ 


fae RR R td 
Printea ns ‘shaeles Ci \ a 7. ae c 
” 


oe } =F. 
1Gy xX es x 


American Antiquarian Society, Worcester Massachusetts. 
Title page of an almanac, printed at Cambridge, Massachu- 
setts, in 1667 by Samuel Green, is one of two known copies. This 
copy is in the American Antiquarian Society library at Worcester, 
Massachusetts. The other is held privately in Albany, New York. 


380 Almandine 


tude, and weather. Navigation officers of most United 
States ships use it. Two useful almanacs published in the 
United Kingdom are Whitaker’s Almanack and The 
Statesman's Year-Book. They provide general informa- 
tion about all countries in the world. Michael H. Harris 

See also Banneker, Benjamin; Calendar (picture: An 
American calendar of 1841). 

Almandine. See Garnet. 

Almaty, a/f/ mah TIH (pop. 1,147,000), also spelled 
Alma-Ata, is the largest city and the economic and cul- 
tural center of Kazakhstan. It lies in the southeastern part 
of the country, in an irrigated valley at the foot of the 
Tian Shan mountain range. For the location of Almaty, 
see Kazakhstan (map). 

Almaty has many treelined boulevards and large 
parks. It is the home of the Kazakh University and a num- 
ber of specialized institutes of higher learning. The 
Medeo sports complex hosts international sports com- 
petitions. Industries in Almaty produce food products, 
metal products, printed material, and textiles. 

Almaty was founded in 1854. It was originally called 
Verny. In 1921, it was renamed Almaty, which means fa- 
ther ot apples. The name refers to nearby apple or- 
chards. In 1929, Almaty became the capital of Kazakh- 
stan, which was then an autonomous republic of the 
Soviet Union. It remained the capital after Kazakhstan 
became an independent country in 1991. In 1997, Akmo- 
la (now called Astana) replaced Almaty as the capital. 

Nancy Lubin 
Almond, AH muhnd or AHL muhnd., is a delicious nut. 
The nuts are the seeds of the beautiful almond tree. 
Each nut grows in a thin shell that looks somewhat like a 
peach stone. A green leathery hull covers the shell. The 
hull splits open when the almond is ripe. 

Some almond trees produce sweet nuts; others have 
bitter ones. Sweet almonds are a popular delicacy when 
toasted, salted, and eaten whole, or added to candies 
and rich pastries. Bitter almonds are not edible. Growers 








-— = 














WORLD BOOS illustration by Kate Lloyd Jones, Linden Arust Ltd. 


The almond is the seed of the almond tree and a delicious nut. 
Each nut grows ina shell that resembles a peach stone. 





cultivate bitter almond trees only for the almond’s oil, al- 
though people also extract oil from the sweet nuts. Oil 
of bitter almonds contains the poisonous hydrocyanic 
(prussic) acid (see Prussic acid). After the acid is re- 
moved, the oil is used in flavoring extracts. 

The almond tree is native to southwestern Asia. But 
today it is widely grown in the countries that border the 
Mediterranean Sea. The trees also thrive in California, 
where commercial groves produce large annual crops 
of almond nuts. 

Almond trees are well-proportioned and may grow 40 
feet (12 meters) high. They have long, pointed leaves that 
curl, and showy pink blossoms that reach about 1 + 
inches (3.8 centimeters) across. The blossoms open early 
in spring, long before the leaves appear. For this reason, 
almonds are grown commercially only in regions that 
do not have early spring frosts. In other regions, people 
grow the trees as ornamentals. Walter S. Judd 

Scientific classification, The almond belongs to the rose 
family, Rosaceae. It is Prunus dulcis. 

Alnico. See Alloy (Other alloys). 

Aloe, Al of, is the name of a group of over 200 fleshy- 
leaved plants native to the Middle East, Madagascar, 
and southern Africa. They are often cultivated in regions 
with warm climates. Aloes are related to lilies, though 
the two differ greatly in appearance. 

Aloe plants range in height from a few inches or cen- 
timeters to 30 feet (9 meters) or more. The leaves of 
many species become large. They are lance-shaped and 
sharp-pointed, with jagged edges that end in sharp 
hooks. The leaves usually grow directly from the ground 
in the form of a large rosette. From the center of this 
rosette springs the flowering stalk that ends in a dense 
cluster of yellow or reddish tube-shaped flowers. The 
century plant, also called American aloe, is similar in ap- 
pearance but unrelated. 

Farmers in southern Texas raise large quantities of the 
Barbados aloe, also known as a/oe vera. This species 
also is acommon houseplant. Its leaves contain a bitter 
juice. Manufacturers heat the juice at low temperatures 
to produce a powder and a gel. The powder is used as a . 
laxative and as an ingredient in some dietary supple- 
ments. Aloe gel is colorless and feels cool on the skin. It 
is used to make a wide variety of cosmetics, including 
skin creams, shampoos, 
and suntan lotions. Re- 
search has shown that 
aloe gel is effective in 
treating burns and frost- 
bite. 

Certain African species 
of aloe have fibers in their 
leaves that are used for 
making rope, fishing nets, 
and coarse cloth. Others 
have a finer fiber that is 
used to make lace, and 
some species are used to 
make violet dye. 

Alwyn H. Gentry 

Scientific classification. Aloes are in the lily family, Liliaceae. 
The Barbados aloe is classified as A/oe vera or A. barbadensis. 
Alpaca, a/ PAK uh, is a grazing animal of South Amert- 
ca that is related to the camel. It is raised usually for its 





David M. Stone, Photo/Nats 
Barbados aloe 


ae 





Francisco Enze, Bruce Coleman Ltd 


The alpaca is a South American animal valued for its thick, 
straight hair, which is used to make warm, soft material. 


fine wool. Sometimes the young are killed for meat. The 
alpaca lives in mountain regions of Peru and Bolivia. It 
thrives at heights from 12,000 to 16,000 feet (3,660 to 
4,880 meters) above sea level. The blood of the alpaca is 
especially efficient in carrying oxygen, which is less 
abundant at high elevations. 

The alpaca resembles the llama. Both of these animals 
are believed to be descended from the guanaco, a wild 
animal of the Andes Mountains. The alpaca has longer 
wool of much better quality than the llama. Alpacas are 
also close relatives of the wild, wool-bearing vicunas 
that live in the Andes. 

The alpaca stands a little less than 4 feet (1.2 meters) 
high at the shoulder. It has a thick coat of black, white, 
or brown hair that grows from 8 to 24 inches (20 to 61 
centimeters) long. This hair is much straighter and finer 
than sheep's wool. It provides one of the best fibers 
known for making warm, soft material. Owners usually 
shear their alpacas every year. They get as much as 7 
pounds (3 kilograms) of wool from some of them. 

Bolivia and Peru have become the world’s most im- 
portant producers of alpaca wool. They export some of 
it to the United States and Europe to be manufactured 
into cloth. They weave the remainder at home and often 
make shawls out of it. Indians of Peru raised alpacas, 
and made the wool into cloth for hundreds of years be- 
fore Europeans came to South America. Much cloth 
called alpaca actually contains sheep's wool and cotton 


and has little or no alpaca wool in it. Anne Innis Dagg 


Scientific classification. Alpacas belong to the family Camel- 


idae. They are Lama pacos. 

See also Guanaco; Llama; Vicuna. 
Alpenhorn. See Alphorn. 
Alpha Centauri, Al fuh sehn TAWE eye, is a multiple 
star system in the constellation Centaurus. It is visible 
only from the Southern Hemisphere. It consists of three 
stars that differ in brightness. One of them is Proxima 
Centauri, the star closest to earth except for the sun. This 
star lies 4.2 light-years away (see Light-year). The other 
two stars, Alpha Centauri A and Alpha Centauri B, are a 


Alphabet 38] 


binary system, a pair of closely spaced stars that orbit 
each other. They are about 4.4 light-years from the earth. 
The brightest of the three stars is Alpha Centauri A, 
which has an apparent magnitude of 0.01. The apparent 
magnitude of Alpha Centauri B is 1.34, and Proxima Cen- 
tauri’s is 11.09 (see Star IBrightness of stars]). Alpha Cen- 
tauri is approaching our solar system at about 14 miles 
(23 kilometers) per second. Sumner Starrfield 

Alpha Orionis. See Betelgeuse. 

Alpha particle is an atomic nucleus that consists of 
two protons and two neutrons. An alpha particle can be- 
come the nucleus of a helium atom by capturing two 
electrons. 

Two processes create alpha particles—(1) radioactive 
decay and (2) nuclear fusion. |n the decay process, a larg- 
er nucleus emits (gives off) an alpha particle. For exam- 
ple, nuclei of heavy chemical elements, such as uranium 
and thorium, decay by emitting alpha particles. Almost 
all the helium on earth formed by radioactive decay. 

In the fusion process, hydrogen atoms fuse (join) to 
create alpha particles. The amount of helium measured 
in stars and galaxies agrees with the big bang theory of 
the beginning of the universe. In that theory, most of the 
helium in the universe was produced by nuclear fusion 
within the first thousand seconds of the big bang. 

Fusion also creates alpha particles inside stars. For ex- 
ample, a series of fusion reactions produces most of the 
sun's energy. These reactions consume four protons 
and make one alpha particle; a single proton is the same 
as the nucleus of the simplest form of hydrogen. The al- 
pha particle has less matter than the protons had. The 
missing matter is converted to energy. William Karl Pitts 

See also Big bang; Helium; Radiation (Sources of ra- 
diation); Star (Fusion in stars). 

Alpha Scorpii. See Antares. 

Alphabet is the series of letters used in writing a lan- 
guage. The word comes from a/pha and beta, the first 
two letters of the Greek alphabet. Another name for the 
26 letters of our alphabet is the ABC's. 

Most books, magazines, and newspapers are printed 
in the 26-letter alphabet called Roman. But the Romans 
did not invent it. They put finishing touches on a system 
that had been growing for thousands of years. See the 
articles on each letter of the English alphabet at the be- 
ginning of each letter in The World Book Encyclopedia. 


The earliest writing 


In early times, people could communicate with one 
another only by speaking or by making gestures. They 
had no way to keep records of important events, unless 
they memorized the story of a great battle or important 
happening. They had no way to send messages over 
long distances unless they passed them from one per- 
son to the next by word of mouth, or had one person 
memorize the message and then deliver it. 

The first stage in writing came when people learned 
to draw pictures to express their ideas. In ideography, 
each picture conveyed an idea. Ideography enabled 
even people who did not speak the same !anguage to 
communicate with each other. Then people learned /o- 
gography, expressing ideas indirectly by using signs to 
stand for the words of the idea. Instead of drawing pic- 
tures of tive sheep to show a herd of five animals, a per- 
son could draw one sign for the numeral “five” and one 


382 Alphabet 


for “sheep.” Gradually people learned to use a syllabic 
system, in which a sign that stood for one word could 
be used not only for that word but also for any phonetic 
combination that sounded like that word. This is what 


we Call rebus writing (see Rebus). lf we used rebus writ- 


ing in English, we could draw a sign for the word “bee” 
followed by a sign for the word ‘leaf’ to stand for the 
word ‘belief.” Finally, people developed alphabets in 
which individual signs stood for particular sounds. 
Today, most written languages in the world use alpha- 
betic writing systems. For more information, see Writ- 


ing. 
The earliest alphabets 


The Egyptians used a system of several hundred 
signs that stood for full words or for syllables. They 
could write the word refer, or good, with a single sign 
for the whole word, or with three signs, for the sounds 


n,f, and r. These signs specified the consonants in sylla- 
bles, but not the vowels. Egyptian writing, which devel- 
oped around 3000 B.C, was formally a picture writing, 
and structurally a word and syllabic writing. 

The Semites, who lived in Syria and Palestine, knew 
something of the Egyptian writing system. They worked 
out an alphabetic writing about 1500 B.C. They used 
signs to show the consonants of syllables, just as the 
Egyptians did. The Semites seem to have adapted some 
of the pictures from Egyptian hieroglyphics, but they 
used these symbols for sounds in their own language. 
The oldest known Semitic alphabets have been found in 
Syria and at a Semitic outpost in the Sinai peninsula. 

The Phoenicians, who lived along the coast of the 
Mediterranean Sea, developed a system of 22 signs 
about 1000 B.C. Their alphabet was structurally related 
to Semitic and Egyptian, with signs for consonant 
sounds, not vowel sounds. Early Phoenician writing con- 


Development of the — The English alphabet developed from a number of early writing systems, beginning with the sign 
writing of Ancient Egypt. The Romans had given most capital letters their modern form by A.D. 
114. But the letters /, U. and Wwere not added to the alphabet until the Middle Ages. 


English alphabet 





Alphabet 383 


Greek ABTAEZH@OIKAMNEOITPZLTY@OXWQ 

Russian ABBIEEX3HAKIMHONPCTY OXILUIMIMNbbIbIION 

Hindi HAMGTIFRUIVAAAaGnTUGsTSAwMHAcseseuwauwcuasy 
GHANA ACIAAMAAESE 

nate GDP UCIU TS Esk bowtie ceeer! 

Galic ADCVDeETFShHitmnoprrcu 


The alphabets of five languages are shown above. Hindi is India’s most widely spoken lan- 
guage. People throughout the Middle East and northern Africa use Arabic, which is read from 
right to left. Gaelic, along with English, is the official language of Ireland. 


sists partly of pictographic forms, which they may have 
borrowed from older pictographic systems, and partly 
of geometric or diagrammatic signs that they invented. 
Historians find it difficult to trace the formal relations 
between Semitic and Phoenician signs, because Phoeni- 
cian has both pictographic and diagrammatic signs, and 
because so little is known of the ancient systems used in 
Syria and Palestine. 

The Cypriots, the people of the island of Cyprus, de- 
veloped an alphabet of their own. Starting with an un- 
known word-syllable system, they worked out an alpha- 
bet of 56 signs, each standing for an initial consonant 
and a different vowel. The next step was to create sepa- 
rate signs for vowels and consonants. 

The Greeks came in contact with Phoenician traders, 
and learned from them the idea of writing individual 
sounds of the language. Sometime during the period 
before 800 B.C, they borrowed Phoenician symbols and 
modified them to form the Greek alphabet. The Phoeni- 
cian alphabet included more consonants than the 
Greeks needed for their language, so they used the 
extra signs for vowel sounds. In this way, the Greeks im- 
proved on both Phoenician and Cypriot ideas, because 
they could combine individual letters for both conso- 
nants and vowels to spell any word they wanted. 

The Greeks took over the Phoenician names for their 
signs, and in most cases the signs themselves. The first 
letter of the Phoenician alphabet,<—, and its name, 
aleph, meaning ox, became ~ or a/pha in Greek. The 
second letter,4 , or beth, meaning house, became>, or 
beta in Greek. The Greeks later modified the shapes of 
these letters, adding and dropping some letters, to form 
the 24-letter Greek alphabet of today. 


The Roman alphabet 


The Etruscans moved to central Italy from some- 
where in the eastern Mediterranean region sometime 
after 1000 B.C. They carried the Greek alphabet with 
them. The Romans learned the alphabet from the Etrus- 
cans, and gave it much the same form we use today. The 
early Roman alphabet had about 20 letters, and gradu- 
ally gained 3 more. 

Capital letters were the only forms used for hun- 
dreds of years. Many people consider the Roman alpha- 
bet perfected by A.D. 114. That year, sculptors carved 
the inscriptions on a memorial column built to honor 


the emperor Trajan. The style of lettering they used is 
considered one of the most beautiful in the world. 

Carving letters in stone is not an easy job, and Roman 
stonecutters rounded or squared, simplified, and pol- 
ished their letters. They developed the beautiful thick- 
and-thin strokes we use today. They also added serifs 
(little finishing strokes) at the tops and bottoms of many 
letters. The practical reason for serifs was that the carv- 
ers found it difficult to end wide strokes without ugly 
blunt lines. And if a chisel slipped while squaring off an 
end, they could not erase the mistake. But serifs also 
added a touch of strength and grace to Roman lettering, 
and are still used today. 

Small letters gradually developed from capitals. 
Scribes who copied books often used uncia/s (rounded 
letters) that were easier to form than some capitals. True 
lower-case letters developed later, when scribes saved 
space in books by using the smaller letters. 

The alphabet today is not well suited to writing 
words in English. It does not have a separate character 
for every distinctive sound in English, and it has several 
characters with more than one sound. Many other lan- 
Quages written with Roman letters use accent marks to 
show changes in sounds. Linguists use an almost perfect 
alphabet, the International Phonetic Alphabet, which has 
more than 80 characters (see Phonetics). 


Other systems of writing 


Arabic and Hebrew, as well as Sanskrit and many al- 
phabets used in various parts of India, developed from 
the Phoenician system. Arabic and Hebrew were influ- 
enced by the Aramaic alphabet and vocabulary. 

The Cyrillic alphabet. In the 800s, Saints Cyril and 
Methodius, two brothers, invented the Glagolithic al- 
phabet while serving as missionaries among the Slavic 
peoples. They based this alphabet on Greek and ona 
Slavic language called Macedo-Bulgarian. About 900, 
the Glagolithic alphabet was modified into the Cyrillic 
alphabet, which was named for Cyril, the more literary 
of the brothers. Missionaries from Constantinople (now 
Istanbul) carried the Cyrillic alphabet with them when 
they converted the Russians, Serbs, Bulgars, and other 
Slavic peoples. Missionaries from Rome used the 
Roman alphabet when they converted the Poles and 
Czechs. They made spelling changes and used accent 
marks for special sounds. Serbs and Croats speak 


384 Alphonsus Liguori, Saint 


Serbo-Croatian. But Serbs write with the Cyrillic or the 
Roman alphabet, and Croats use the Roman alphabet. 

Chinese is the only major language that does not 
have an alphabetical system of writing. Chinese has 
thousands of characters that stand for words. Most char- 
acters are derived from pictographs of objects. Others 
are combinations of pictographs used to form abstract 
words. Still others have no pictographic background at 
all. Some Chinese characters can be used to express the 
syllables of proper names or foreign words. 

Japanese is based on Chinese, but the characters 
represent either syllables or words. Most of the Japa- 
nese characters are taken directly from Chinese, be- 
cause Japanese scholars copied the forms, as well as the 
structure, of the Chinese language. 


Related articles. See the articles on each letter of the alpha- 
bet. See also the following articles: 


Martanne Cooley 


Braille Handwriting Russian language 

Chinese language Hebrew language (Alphabet) 
(Written Chinese} Hieroglyphics Semaphore 

Codes and ciphers Japaneselanguage §Sequoyah 
(Substitution) Manuscript Shorthand 

Cuneiform Morse code Sign language 

Egypt, Ancient({The — Pictograph (picture) 
people) Pronunciation Spelling 

Greek language Rebus Writing 
(Alphabet) Rune 


Alphonsus Liguori, a/ FAHN suhs lee GUAW ree, 
Saint (1696-1787), an Italian religious teacher, founded 
in 1732 the Congregation of the Most Holy Redeemer 
(the Redemptorist Order) for religious work among 
poor people in rural areas. He wrote books on moral 
problems and for devotional and doctrinal purposes. He 
emphasized the power of prayer. Alphonsus Liguori 
also composed many popular hymns. He was born near 
Naples, Italy. He was canonized (proclaimed a saint) in 
1839. His feast day is August 2. Marvin R. O'Connell 


Alphorm, also called a/penhor, is a long tube-shaped 
instrument used chiefly by herders to call cattle in 
mountain regions of Switzerland. It is made of long 
wooden staves tightly bound together with birchbark 
strips to form an airtight tube. Alphorns are from 7 to 12 














Swiss National Tounst Office 


The alphorn is a long. tube-shaped musical insirument used in 
Switzerland and other mountainous countries. 


feet (2.1 to 3.7 meters) long. Their crude construction 
causes Certain irregularities of pitch. The alphorn is 
played with a cup-shaped wooden mouthpiece. Gioac- 
chino Rossini included an alphorn in his opera William 
Tel! (1829). The alphorn has been used since prehistoric 
times. 
Alpinism. See Mountain climbing. 

Alps are the largest mountain system in Europe. The 
snow-capped peaks and sheltered, peaceful valleys of 
the Alps are among Europe's most spectacular sights. 

The Alps stretch across south-central Europe ina 
broad arc. The mountains begin near the Mediterranean 
Sea and form a border between France and Italy. The 
Alps then extend northward and eastward through 
northern Italy, Switzerland, Liechtenstein, southern Ger- 
many, Austria, and Slovenia. The mountains form a chain 
about 660 miles (1,060 kilometers) long and cover an 
area of about 80,000 square miles (210,000 square kilo- 
meters). The broadest part of the Alps is about 160 miles 
(260 kilometers) wide and extends across Switzerland 
between Germany and Italy. The highest Alpine peak, 
Mont Blanc, rises 15,771 feet (4,807 meters) on the bor- 
der between France, Italy, and Switzerland. Other fa- 
mous mountains in the Alps include Monte Rosa, which 
rises 15,203 feet (4,634 meters), and the Matterhorn, 
which reaches 14,692 feet (4,478 meters). Both stand on 
the Swiss-ltalian border. 

The Alps form a major barrier between central and 
southern Europe. Few people made the difficult trip 
through the mountains until the Romans gained control 
of the Alps between 58 and 15 B.C. and built roads 
through several Alpine passes. The roads allowed com- 
munication and trade between the peoples on either 
side of the Alps. Today, modern railroads and highways 
enable people to travel easily through the mountains. 
People come to view the magnificent scenery and take 
part in such sports as mountain climbing and skiing. 

How the Alps were formed. Geologists believe a 
large sea once covered what is now the Alpine region. 
More than 100 million years ago, the land masses north 
and south of this sea began to move closer together. 
The great pressure placed on the seabed forced it to 
gradually fold so that great ridges and valleys formed. 
Rock that once lay deep below the seabed was pushed 
to the top of ridges. The highest parts of the Alps in- 
clude such rocks as gneiss, granite, and schist, which 
were formed by heat and pressure deep within the 
earth. Many Alpine ranges consist chiefly of limestone 
that also formed in the seabed. Most of the Alps had 
taken shape by about 15 million years ago. 

Glaciers occupied valleys high in the Alps from about 
2 million years ago until about 10,000 years ago. As 
these glaciers moved downhill, they gouged the earth 
and rock, creating U-shaped valleys. Other geologic fea- 
tures visible in the Alps include cirques and cols. 
Cirques are bowl-shaped hollows near the peak of a 
mountain. A col is a high pass between two cirques. A 
hanging valley is a small valley that empties into a larger 
and lower valley. A stream flowing through a hanging 
valley may create a waterfall. 

The Alpine glaciers also moved earth and rock that 
had collected along the edges and top of the ice. As the 
ice melted, rock debris piled up along the glacier’s path 
in bands called moraines. Some of these moraines 


Melvin Berger 








Peter Baker 


Three famous Alpine peaks— the Eiger, the Monch, and the 
Jungfrau, /eft to right—ftorm part of the majestic Bernese Alps in 
southern Switzerland. Glaciers lie near the mountaintops. 


formed natural dams across valleys, creating lakes as 
water collected behind the dam. Such Alpine lakes as 
the Lake of Lucerne and Lakes Como, Maggiore, Ge- 
neva, Constance, and Zurich were created by this proc- 
ess. Today, there are about 1,300 small glaciers in the 
Alps. The largest, the Aletsch Glacier, is in southern 
Switzerland. See Glacier; Moraine. 

Chief ranges of the Alps. Most geographers divide 
the Alpine region into the western, central, and eastern 
Alps. The western Alps include the ranges west of the 
Great St. Bernard Pass, which is between northwest Italy 
and southwest Switzerland. The Savoy, Dauphine, Gra- 
ian, Cottian, Ligurian, and Maritime Alps are considered 
western Alps. The central Alps lie between the Great St. 
Bernard Pass and Lake Constance. They include the Ber- 
nese, Pennine, Lepontine, and Rhaetian Alps. The central 
and western Alps are higher and narrower than the east- 


Mante Rasa 
15,203 ft. (4,634 m) 


Matterhorn 
14,692 ft. (4,478 m) 


Mont Blanc 
15,771 ft. (4,807 m) 


Great St. | Jungfrau 
Bernard Pass | 13,642 ft. 
8,100f.(2,469m) | (4,158 m) 











‘ : . Highest railway’ 
11,333 #. (3,454 m) 






ae. wf ”lUC AM Lake Canstance 
<= Greflable, France 1,296 ft. (395 m) 


Western Alps Central Alps 





St. Gatthard Tunnel 
3,600 fi. (1,097 m)} 


Alps 385 


ern Alps. The eastern Alps begin southeast of Lake Con- 
stance and consist of the Bavarian, Noric, and Carnic 
Alps; Hohe and Niedere Tauern; the Dolomites; and the 
Julian and Karawanken Alps. 

Climate of the Alps varies from place to place. In 
general, the Alps have a highlands climate. Such a cli- 
mate is generally cooler and wetter than that of sur- 
rounding areas and is affected by altitude. For example, 
the higher areas of a mountain range are colder. This re- 
sults in greater precipitation because cold air cannot 
hold as much moisture as warm air. 

The Alps separate two distinct climatic regions. The 
land to the south of the Alps has hot, dry summers and 
mild, moist winters. The land to the north and to the 
west has a temperate climate with warm summers, cold 
winters, and precipitation at all times of the year. 

The Alps frequently experience warm, dry, violent 
winds, called foefAns, that blow downward along moun- 
tain slopes. These winds melt snow and ice on the 
mountainsides, frequently causing avalanches. 

Plant and animal life. Various kinds of vegetation 
grow at different elevations in the Alps. The valleys at 
the base of the Alps are filled mainly with grass. Beech 
and oak trees grow on the lower slopes. Fir, pine, and 
spruce trees cover the higher slopes. Above the timber 
line, the elevation above which trees cannot grow, are 
Alpine meadows. Mosses, lichens, bare rock, and ice 
and snow cover the highest elevations of the Alps. 

Many species of animals live in Alpine forests and 
meadows. They include the graceful chamois, which re- 
sembles the antelope; and the ibex, a rare, long-horned 
wild goat. Golden eagles and peregrine falcons live 
among the highest peaks. 

Agriculture and industry. Most farming is done in 
the valleys and on the sunny lower slopes of the Alps. 
Small family-owned farms are most common. The chief 
crops include such grains as barley, oats, and rye. Tradi- 
tional Alpine farmers raise cattle, goats, and sheep. 
Dairy farming is also an important economic activity. 

A variety of industries operate in the foothills and val- 
leys of the Alps. Factories manufacture chemicals, elec- 
trical machinery, and other equipment. Traditional 


Stelvio Poss 
9,045 ft. (2,757 m) 


Grossglockner 
12,457 ft. (3,797 m) 


Brenner Pass 
4,508 ft. (1,374 m) 
Juf (Village) 

6,975 ft. 

(2,126 m) 





= 
* 


af 5 | j » 
Vienna, Austna —> A 
! 


ae 





Eastern Alps 


WORLD BOOK diagram by George Suveoka 


Some features of the Alps are shown in the above illustration. Most of these features are in the 
mountain ranges that include Italy's border with Austria, France, or Switzerland. Lake Constance 
lies in both Switzerland and Germany The measurements show height above sea level. 


386 Alps 


handicrafts still produced in the region include shoes 
and other leather goods, textiles, and ceramics. 

Natural resources found in the Alps include bauxite, 
iron ore, stone, and timber. Many factories run on hy- 
droelectric power that is generated by waterfalls in the 
mountains. Hydroelectricity also powers most railroads 
in the region. Power plants in the Alps transmit some 
electricity to other parts of Europe. 

Tourism is important to the economy of the Alps. 
Well-known Alpine resort communities include Cha- 
monix in France, Lucerne and St Moritz in Switzerland, 
Berchtesgaden in Germany, Cortina dAmpezzo in Italy, 
and Innsbruck and Salzburg in Austria. 

Alpine travel. More than 40 passes occur naturally in 
the Alps. Highways and railroads have been built 
through many of them. The Brenner Pass, 4,508 feet 
(1,374 meters) high, is the most widely used pass in the 
eastern Alps. It lies between western Austria and north- 
ern Italy and has both a major highway and railroad. 

In addition, tunnels have been built through the 
mountains beneath several of the passes. The St Gott- 





The Alps 


WORLD BOOK maps 


irae East an | a 
} u - Aaa . 





100 200 


hard Road Tunnel in south-central Switzerland is 10.1 
miles (16.3 kilometers) long and is one of the longest 
highway tunnels in the world. It is part of the St Gott- 
hard Road, the most-traveled route through the central 
Alps running between western Germany and Italy. The 
Simplon Tunnel is the longest railroad tunnel in the 
Alps. It extends for 12.3 miles (19.8 kilometers) between 
Switzerland and northwest Italy. The Great St Bernard 
Tunnel was the first major highway tunnel to connect 
Italy and Switzerland. The Fréjus Railway Tunnel and the 
Mont Blanc Road Tunnel link France and Italy. 

Climbing the Alps. Few people attempted moun- 
taineering in the Alps until the 1700's, when scientists 
began to study the landforms and the biology of the re- 
gion. In 1786, two Frenchmen, physician Michel G. Pac- 
card and his guide, Jacques Balmat, became the first to 
reach the top of Mont Blanc. They recorded scientific 
observations along the way. 

Many of the Alpine peaks were climbed for the first 
time during the mid-1800's, when mountaineering 
gained popularity as a sport In 1855, a group of Swiss 

















City 
Mountain peok 


| Mountoin pass 


ie ea we “as 


nsipirs evn | 





500 Miles 





100 200 300 400 


and British men made the first successful climb to the 
top of Monte Rosa. In 1865, climbers reached the top of 
the Matterhorn for the first time. Most Alpine summits 
had been conquered by 1900. Mountain climbing in the 
Alps became even more popular in the 1900s. Today, 
professional guides use modern equipment to help 
people scale the highest peaks. Each year, more than 
2,000 people climb to the top of the Matterhorn. 

History. People have lived in the Alps for thousands 
of years. By the 500’s B.C, Celtic tribes controlled much 
of the region. From 58 to 15 B.C, the Romans conquered 
the Alpine Celts. The Romans built roads through vari- 
ous Alpine passes to link Rome with its northern 
provinces. The roads enabled the Romans to expand 
their influence into parts of northern Europe. These 
roads came to rank among the busiest in Europe due to 
Roman trade with the north. 

Travel in the Alps decreased after the Roman Empire 
collapsed in western Europe during the A.D. 400s. But 
merchants, government officials, religious leaders, and 
soldiers continued to use Roman roadways to cross the 
mountains. Through the centuries, the Alpine region 
came under the control of a number of empires and 
states. For more information on the region's political his- 
tory, see the History section of the World Book article 
on each Alpine country. 

In the late 1800's, the first railroads crossed the Alps. 
This service led to the rapid growth of tourism in the re- 
gion. Today, travelers can cross the Alps in under eight 
hours by highway or train. Trans-Alpine routes have in- 
creased trade among the Alpine countries and between 
northern and southern Europe. But environmental pollu- 
tion and overdevelopment caused by growth in high- 
way traffic and tourism are a concern. Howell C. Lloyd 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Austria (pictures) Mont Blanc 
Brenner Pass Saint Bernard passes 
Europe (The Alpine mountain Saint Gotthard Pass 

system) Simplon Pass and Tunnel 
Fréjus Tunnels Switzerland (The Swiss Alps) 
Germany {The Bavarian Alps) Tree (picture: Forests of 


Glacier needleleaf trees) 
Jungfrau Tyrol 
Matterhorn 


Additional resources 


Bullen, Susan. The Alps and Their People. Raintree Steck 
Vaughn, 1994. Younger readers. 

Lee, Stephen. 7he Alps. Batsford, 1991. 

Reifsnyder, William E. and Marylou. Adventuring in the Alps. 2nd 
ed. Sierra Club, 1999. A guidebook. 


Al-Qa ‘ida. See Qaida-Al-. 
ALS. See Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. 
Alsace-Lorraine, Al sas /oh RAYN, is a region in 
northeastern France, on the French-German border. It 
covers 12,289 square miles (31,828 square kilometers). 
Switzerland lies to the south, and Luxembourg to the 
north. The map with this article shows that the region 
looks like a figure “7.” Alsace, the north-south arm, has 
two departments (administrative districts}— Haut-Rhin 
and Bas-Rhin. Lorraine forms the east-west arm. It is di- 
vided into the departments of Moselle, Meurthe-et- 
Moselle, Meuse, and Vosges. 

About 4 million people live in Alsace-Lorraine. Most 
of them belong to the Roman Catholic Church. For hun- 
dreds of years, the inhabitants have been part German 


Altai Mountains 387 





WORLD BOOK maps 
Alsace-Lorraine is a historical region in France. 


and part French. Important products of the region in- 
clude barley, oats, rye, textiles, wheat, and wine. Mineral 
products include iron ore from Lorraine and potash 
from Alsace. The Vosges Mountains district of the west 
supplies timber, coal, and salt; and the streams of this 
district provide hydroelectric power. Alsace-Lorraine 
also supports an important automobile industry. 

Alsace and Lorraine were often a prize in wars be- 
tween France and Germany. In the A.D. 300's and 400's, 
Teutonic bands drove out the Celtic tribes then living in 
the region. In the late 700's, the area became part of 
Charlemagne’s empire. It fell to the middle kingdom be- 
tween France and Germany when Charlemagne’s grand- 
sons divided the empire. But before long Alsace and 
Lorraine came under German rule. 

Alsace and Lorraine remained under German rule un- 
til the 1500's, when France gained control of them by 
slow stages. The people fought efforts to turn them into 
French people. But the French Revolution of 1789 
brought a change of heart. The Alsatian people became 
so French in spirit that more than 50,000 moved to 
France when Germany got almost all of Alsace in 1871. 

The Germans resented the loss of Alsace-Lorraine af- 
ter World War | (1914-1918). They regained control of 
the area in World War II (1939-1945). The Germans 
moved thousands of the people out of the region and 
replaced them with Germans, Poles, and Russians. The 
Allies drove the Germans out of Alsace-Lorraine in 1944- 
1945, and France again took control of the region. 

William M. Reddy 
Alsatian dog, a/ SAY shuhn, is the term used in Britain 
and Commonwealth countries for a German shepherd 
dog. See German shepherd dog. 

Altai Mountains, A/ ty, form a lofty range that runs 
about 1,200 miles (1,900 kilometers) northwest across 

the borders of western Mongolia and Kazakhstan. For 
location, see China (terrain map). The Altai are among 


388 Altar 


the oldest mountains in Asia. They contain rich deposits 
of copper, gold, iron, lead, silver, and zinc. Some have 
pastureland and forests. The highest peak is Belukha, or 
White Mountain (14,783 feet, or 4,506 meters). 

James A. Hafner 
Altar is a raised place or object that serves as the cen- 
tral point of religious worship. An altar may be as simple 
as a mound of earth or as elaborate as a carved stone 
table. Altars may be outdoors, in homes, or in buildings 
of public worship. The word a/tar probably comes from 
the Latin word a/tus, which means high place. 

The ancient Greeks, Romans, and Israelites used altars 
to burn incense and to sacrifice animals or other offer- 
ings to a god or gods. Christians adopted the idea of an 
altar for sacrificial worship by the A.D. 100’s. By the Mid- 
dle Ages, Christian altars had been moved from a more 
central position in the church to the back wall. The 





Richard Kehrwald., Black Star 


Analtar is the central point of worship services in many reli- 
gions throughout the world. The priests shown above celebrate 
Mass behind a tablelike altar in a Roman Catholic church. 


priest stood at the altar, with his back to the worshipers. 
In 1964, the Roman Catholic Church issued a directive 
that altars be moved away from the back wall of the 
church so that the priest could face the congregation. In 
Eastern Orthodox Churches, the altar is behind a screen 
called an iconostasis. In the 1500's, many Protestants 
converted altars into simple tables on which the sacra- 
ment of the Lord's Supper is celebrated. Jill Raitt 

For pictures of an altar, see Religion (The Mass; Con- 
fucius’ birthday); Hinduism; Buddhism (Buddhist monks). 
Alternating current. See Electric current; Electric 
generator; Tesla, Nikola. 

Alternation of generations is a term that describes 
the life cycle of most plants and some algae. The term 
generations is misleading since it refers to two different 
phases that make up a single life cycle. 

In one phase, the plant is known as a gametophyte or 
gamete-bearing plant and produces sex cells called 
gametes. Gametophytes can produce male sperm cells, 
female egg cells, or both. When a sperm cell and an egg 
cell unite, they form a zygote (fertilized egg). The zygote 
develops into the next phase of the reproductive cycle. 
In this phase, the plant is known as a sporophyte or 
spore-bearing plantand produces reproductive cells 
called spores. Then spores develop into gamete- 
producing plants, and the cycle begins again. 


In most plants, the gametophyte and the sporophyte 
differ in size and appearance. For example, the phase 
that people recognize in ferns is the sporophyte. The fa- 
miliar phase of mosses is the gametophyte. The sporo- 
phyte is the familiar phase of all flowering and cone- 
bearing plants. Joseph E. Armstrong 

See also Plant (How plants reproduce); Fern; Liver- 
wort; Moss; Seed (How seeds develop); Spore. 
Alternative medicine refers to a wide range of heal- 
ing practices that generally are not considered part of 
conventional medicine. In general, practitioners of alter- 
native medicine use natural remedies and believe that 
the body can heal itself if given a chance. They feel that 
‘invasive’ treatments, such as drugs and surgery, should 
only be used as a last resort. 

Some forms of alternative medicine—such as 
acupuncture, chiropractic, and naturopathy (use of nat- 
ural agents, such as fresh air, massage, and exercise)— 
are well-established professions with standard training 
and licensing of practitioners. Other forms are less or- 
ganized as professions. These include herbalism (use of 
remedies derived from plants) and homeopathy (use of 
minute amounts of substances that, in a healthy person, 
produce the same symptoms as those of the disorder). 
Still other forms of alternative medicine—including faith 
healing and psychic healing—are even further removed 
from the world of scientific and professional medicine. 

During the second half of the 1900's, growing num- 
bers of people became disillusioned with conventional 
medicine, particularly its expense, risks, and inability to 
cure certain common serious diseases. Many patients 
complain that conventional doctors too readily pre- 
scribe drugs as treatment. Others complain that conven- 
tional medicine is too impersonal—that it focuses on the 
disorder rather than the patient. Such disillusioned pa- 
tients often seek out alternative practitioners. 

Most doctors have regarded alternative medicine as 
unscientific. But an increasing number of doctors are 
trying to combine the best ideas and practices of both 
conventional and alternative medicine. This use of alter- 
native medicine as a potentially helpful supplement to 
conventional treatments is often called complementary 
and alternative medicine. Andrew Weil 

See also Acupuncture; Chiropractic; Homeopathy; 
Pioneer life in America (Health). 

Alternative school is any public or private school 
that differs from traditional schools in curriculum, pur- 
pose, or teaching methods. Most alternative schools at- 
tempt to establish a less formal relationship between 
pupils and teachers. They also try to make greater use of 
community facilities outside the school and to involve 
parents in the educational process. Alternative schools 
developed because of dissatisfaction with the quality 
and aims of traditional schools. 

Alternative schools have voluntary enrollments. A typ- 
ical alternative school has 30 to 40 students. A school of 
this size can easily adjust its program to fit individual 
needs and desires. Some alternative schools work only 
with children of elementary-school age. Others accept 
only teen-agers. Many alternative schools put students 
of several ages into classes based on subject interest 

Many alternative schools in the United States operate 
independently of the public school system. These 
schools, which are privately run, are usually called free 


schools. The word free refers to the independence of 
such schools. It also describes the emphasis of the 
schools in allowing students to make their own deci- 
sions. Other alternative schools operate as part of the 
public school system. Such schools may be in one area 
of a public school building or in a separate building 
provided by the school system. The separate buildings 
are often called magnet schools or specialty schools. 
They attempt to attract students from a wider attendance 
area than a traditional neighborhood school. 


Features of alternative schools 


The basic principle followed by alternative schools is 
that not all children have the same goals and the same 
ways of learning. Many of the people involved in operat- 
ing these schools do not want to convert the whole 
school system to their methods. They want to provide 
the opportunity for a different kind of education for chil- 
dren who would benefit from it. 

The major feature of many alternative schools is the 
open space classroom, sometimes called an open class- 
room. The teacher of an open space classroom, instead 
of lecturing most of the time, helps students find inter- 
esting ways to learn on their own. Many kinds of educa- 
tional materials are kept in the classroom. The students 
work with these materials alone or in groups. The 
teacher gives the students individual help. 

Most alternative schools lack adequate funds and 
such facilities as gymnasiums, laboratories, and shops. 
Parents and volunteers provide most of the finances, 
help run the classes, and help maintain the buildings. 

Many forms of alternative schools have developed in 
response to various needs. Street academies and 
dropout centers, which function in the poor sections of 
big cities, help high school dropouts continue their edu- 
cation. Storefront schools have developed from child- 
care and kindergarten facilities. Work schools hold 
classes part of the day, and the students work at regular 
jobs the rest of the day. 

The school without walls plan, used in some large 
cities, takes advantage of the educational opportunities 
provided by businesses and institutions of the commu- 
nity. Students may spend part of the day at an artists stu- 
dio, a factory, a museum, a newspaper Office, a repair 
shop, a theater, or a government or private agency. The 
purpose of this method is to make learning more realis- 
tic and enjoyable, and to broaden the experiences of- 
fered high school students. 

Some alternative schools emphasize the study of the 
culture and history of a certain minority group. Some ac- 
cept only students from one such group. Others seek 
students from several cultures and ethnic groups. 

A number of alternative schools have been designed 
for children from middle- or upper-class families. Usual- 
ly such schools are in suburban or rural areas. Most of 
them stress the independence of each student and have 
no required subjects. 

A trend in the development of alternative schools has 
been the establishment of such schools within the pub- 
lic school system. One plan offers a variety of learning 
environments from which students, parents, and teach- 
ers may choose. At the elementary school level, parents 
can choose to place their children in a traditional class- 
room or in one of several kinds of open space class- 


Altgeld, John Peter 389 


rooms. High school students decide whether to enter a 
free school with few course requirements, or one of 
several programs in the regular high school program. 


History 


Experimental schools similar to alternative schools 
have been set up throughout the history of public edu- 
cation. But the term a/ternative school first came into 
widespread use during the 1960's. It referred to a wide 
variety of programs and institutions that differed greatly 
from private schools and special programs within public 
schools. Most private schools had been established for 
the children of wealthy families. Most special programs 
worked only with students who had special problems or 
exceptional ability. But most alternative schools wel- 
comed any student. 

African Americans in the Southern States set up some 
of the first alternative schools. During the 1960's, these 
people established freedom schools in communities 
where public schools refused to admit their children. In 
many Northern cities, African Americans set up alterna- 
tive schools because of dissatisfaction with the treat- 
ment of their children in public schools. 

Many people began to realize that a public school 
system could hurt, rather than help, some children. They 
declared that parents and educators should have the 
freedom to set up alternative education methods. 

During the late 1960's, several groups created open 
space classrooms modeled on the United Kingdom's in- 
fant schools. Such schools are attended by children 
from age 5 to 7. In the United States, similar classrooms 
were set up in a number of public schools. Their suc- 
cess contributed to the growth of the alternative school 
movement. Beatrice Gross and Ronald Gross 

See also Edison Project. 


Additional resources 


Greene, Rebecca. The Teenagers’ Guide to School Outside the 

Box. Free Spirit, 2000. 

Koetzsch, Ronald E. The Parents Guide to Alternatives in Educa- 

tion. Shambhala, 1997. 

Weil, Danny K. Charter Schools. ABC-Clio, 2000. 

Alternator. See Electric generator. 

Altgeld, John Peter (1847-1902), was a reformer who 
served as governor of Illinois from 1893 to 1897. Under 
his leadership, Illinois established a board to help settle 
strikes, gave prisoners the right to parole and probation, 
and also improved its public school system. 

Shortly after taking office, Altgeld, a Democrat, par- 
doned three of the men who had been convicted of a 
bombing during the Haymarket Riot (see Haymarket 
Riot). He believed they had not received a fair trial. How- 
ever, he was widely criticized for his action. 

In 1894, President Grover Cleveland sent federal 
troops to Chicago during the Pullman Strike (see Pull- 
man Strike). Altgeld opposed what he considered inter- 
ference ina state matter. He protested to Cleveland but 
again received wide criticism. 

Altgeld was born in Niederselters, Germany, near 
Wiesbaden. His family settled in the United States in 
1848. Altgeld became a lawyer in 1871 and served as a 
superior court judge in Cook County, Illinois, from 1886 
to 1891. His book Our Penal Machinery and Its Victims 
(1884) criticized the U.S. court system for discriminating 
against the poo: Clyde C. Walton 


390 Altimeter 


Altimeter, a/ 7/HM uh tuhr or AL tuh mee tuhr, is an in- 
strument that measures altitude. Aircraft and some satel- 
lites are equipped with altimeters. Mountain climbers, 
surveyors, and scientists also use altimeters. 

There are three main kinds of altimeters: (1) pressure 
altimeters, (2) radar altimeters, and (3) laser altimeters. 
Pressure altimeters are standard equipment on aircraft. 
Some planes also carry radar altimeters. Earth satellites 
carry radar and laser altimeters to measure the height of 
the oceans, land, and icecaps. Scientists have used radar 
and laser altimeters mounted on space probes to map 
the surfaces of other planets and the moon. 

A pressure altimeter resembles a type of gauge 
known as an aneroid barometer. Both devices measure 
the effect of air pressure on a metal chamber from 
which most of the air has been removed. A pressure al- 
timeter determines an aircraft's distance above sea level 
by measuring the pressure of Earth's atmosphere. This 
pressure decreases as altitude increases. 

A radar altimeter measures the time a radio signal 
takes to travel from a plane or satellite to Earth's surface 
and back. A laser altimeter works in the same way, but 
uses pulses of laser light rather than radio waves. 

To use a Satellite-based altimeter to measure the 
height of features on Earth's surface, scientists must first 
measure the satellite's distance above sea level. They do 
this by tracking the satellite by lasers and radio from 
ground-based stations and from satellites of the Global 
Positioning System (GPS). The GPS is a worldwide navi- 
gation system that uses radio signals broadcast by satel- 
lites. The altitudes of the ground stations and the GPS 
satellites are precisely known. Thus, scientists can use 
those altitudes and the tracking data to determine a 
satellite's distance above sea level. 

Researchers have used measurements from satellite- 
based altimeters to determine how the ocean shrinks 
and expands as its temperature changes. They have also 
used satellite data to measure the speed and direction 
of ocean currents. In addition, satellite-based altimeters 
have measured the height of the icecaps covering large 
areas of land in the polar regions. Researchers can use 
the information about the icecaps to determine whether 
the caps are growing or shrinking. George H. Born 

See also Barometer; Global Positioning System. 
Altitude is the height of an object above the surface of 
Earth, the moon, or some other reference body. In ge- 
ography, the height of a physical feature or place is 
commonly called elevation. In astronomy, altitude is the 
angle between a line from an observer to, for example, a 
star and a line from the observer to the horizon. See also 
Air; Altimeter; Mountain; Navigation. 

Altitude record. See Balloon (History); Glider (table). 
Altman, Robert (1925- ), is an American motion- 
picture director known for his unusual, offbeat films. His 
movies have a documentary visual style that seems as if 
the camera just happened to catch revealing moments 
in the characters lives. He prefers ensemble casts, with 
many equally important performers, rather than casts 
dominated by a few stars. His films tend to favor charac- 
ter analysis over plot. They reflect an ironic skepticism 
toward traditional American values and institutions. 
Many of his films have pessimistic, unhappy endings, 
though they use eccentric humor and raunchy comedy. 

Altman was born on Feb. 20, 1925, in Kansas City, Mis- 


souri. He began his career directing industrial films and 
then TV in the 1950's. He gained prominence when he 
directed M"A*S*H (1970), a darkly comic movie about a 
battlefield hospital. In the 1970's, he directed a series of 
offbeat films praised by critics, including McCabe and 
Mrs. Miller (1971), a quirky Western; Thieves Like Us 
(1974), a rural gangster film; and Nashville (1975), about 
the country music industry. His output fell in the 1980's, 
but he made a comeback in the 1990's with The Player 
(1992), a satire on the movie industry; Short Cuts (1993), 
based on stories by the American author Raymond Carv- 
er; Kansas City (1996), set during the Great Depression; 
and Cook/e’s Fortune (1999), a comedy about eccentric 
characters in Mississippi. Dr. T & and the Women (2000) 
portrays the personal and professional life of a gynecol- 
ogist(women’s doctor). Altman's other films include 
Brewster McCloud (1971), California Split(1974), Popeye 
(1980), Fool for Love (1985), The Gingerbread Man (1998), 
and Gosford Park (2001). Louis Giannetti 
Altrusa International is a volunteer organization of 
business and professional leaders who work to improve 
their communities through personal service. Altrusa op- 
erates programs in international relations, vocational 
guidance, and the promotion of literacy. It also sponsors 
youth groups and runs a charitable foundation. About 
17,000 members belong to 550 clubs in the United 
States, Canada, Bermuda, Chile, El Salvador, Guatemala, 
India, Ireland, Mexico, New Zealand, the Philippines, 
Puerto Rico, South Korea, and the United Kingdom. Al- 
trusa International was founded in 1917. Its headquar- 
ters are in Chicago. Critically reviewed by Altrusa International 
Alum, AL uhm, is the name of a group of double salts. 
Double salts consist of two simple salts that form crys- 
tals together in fixed amounts. Common alum is a dou- 
ble salt of hydrated (water-containing) potassium sulfate 
and aluminum sulfate. It is also called potash alum or 
potassium alum. Its formula is K,SO,°Al,{SO,),°24H,O. Oth- 
er alums are ammonium alum, sodium alum, and potas- 
sium chrome alum. Most are manufactured from bauxite 
(aluminum oxide ore). Potassium alum helps stop bleed- 
ing and shrinks human or animal tissues. Alums are 
used to make glue, dyes, baking powder, and leather 
tanning agents; to purify water; and to harden plaster of 
Paris. See also Salt, Chemical. Marianna A. Busch 
Alumina, uh LOO muh nuh, also called a/uminum ox- 
ide, is a compound composed of aluminum and oxygen. 
It has the chemical formula Al,O,. Alumina occurs in na- 
ture as a mineral called corundum. Alumina and water 
occur in different combinations in the minerals boehm- 
ite, diaspore, and gibbsite. These minerals are found in 
bauxite, the chief source of the alumina from which alu- 
minum is made. Refined alumina has wide use as an ab- 
rasive, a material used for grinding and polishing. Alu- 
mina resists high temperatures and is a poor conductor 
of electric current, so it is used in furnace linings and 
electrical insulators. A white clay called kaolin, which 
contains alumina, is used to make porcelain dinnerware. 
Alumina occurs in several crystal forms. These forms 
have the same chemical formula but differ in the ar- 
rangement of their aluminum and oxygen atoms. The 
various forms can be changed from one to another by 
heating them to certain temperatures. David F Hess 
See also Aluminum; Corundum; Kaolin. 
Aluminium. See Aluminum. 


+ ? 
q V4 = 


f 
AS “eff 
f a ad 
Boeing 
Bullding airplanes of aluminum 


m4 


Aluminum Company of America 





WORLD BOOK photo 
Roasting corn on the cob In aluminum foil 


Aluminum alloys have a variety of uses because of their valuable properties. For example, the 
metals are lightweight but strong and so are used in the construction of airplanes. Aluminum cans 
chill quickly and can be recycled. Flexible aluminum foil is used in storing and cooking food. 


Aluminum 


Aluminum, uh LOO muh nuhm, is a lightweight, sil- 
ver-colored metal that can be formed into almost any 
shape. It can be rolled into thick plates for armored 
tanks or into thin foil for chewing gum wrappers. It may 
be drawn into wire or made into cans. Aluminum does 
not rust, and it resists wear from weather and chemicals. 
Aluminum is called a/uminium (at yuh MIHN ee uhm) in 
English-speaking countries outside North America. 
Pure aluminum is soft and has little strength. Thus, 
aluminum producers almost always a//oy (mix) it with 
small amounts of copper, magnesium, zinc, and other 
elements to form a/uminum alloys. The added elements 
give aluminum strength and other properties that make 
it one of the most useful metals. The world uses more 
aluminum than any other metal except iron and steel. 
The largest share of aluminum alloy production goes 
to the packaging industry for use in such items as bever- 
age cans, bottle caps, foil pouches, foil wrappers, and 
food containers. The construction industry uses alumi- 
num alloys in such items as gutters, panels, residential 
siding, roofing, tubes for electric wires, and window 
frames. Manufacturers of transportation equipment use 
huge amounts of aluminum in airplanes, automobiles, 
boats, railroad cars, and trucks. Aluminum is used in 








Kenneth A. Bowman, the contributor of this article, is a tech- 
nical specialist at Alcoa Laboratories. 


———e 





much electrical equipment, including light bulbs, power 
lines, and telephone wires. Thousands of other products 
also contain aluminum. These products include air con- 
ditioners, cookware, golf clubs, knitting needles, lawn 
furniture, license plates, paints, refrigerators, rocket 
fuel, and zippers. 

Aluminum is the most plentiful metallic element in 
the earth's crust and the third most common of all the el- 
ements, after oxygen and silicon. Aluminum makes up 
about 8 percent of the earth's crust. But unlike some 
other metals, such as gold and silver, aluminum never 
occurs free (uncombined) in nature. It is always chemi- 
cally combined with other elements. People had no way 
of separating aluminum from these elements until the 
1800's. Scientists then developed processes for separat- 
ing the elements and producing aluminum. These proc- 
esses have been used to make aluminum ever since. 


Properties of aluminum alloys 


Only a small percentage of aluminum is used in pure 
form. It is made into such items as electrical conductors, 
jewelry, and decorative trim for appliances and cars. 


Properties of pure aluminum 


Atomic number 13 
Atomic weight 26.9815 


Density (at 20 °C) 2.70 (g/cm?) 
Melting point 660.2 °C 
Chemical symbol Boiling point 2500 °C 





392 Aluminum 


Almost all aluminum is used commercially in alloy 
form with up to 15 percent of one or more other ele- 
ments. The chief elements are copper, magnesium, 
manganese, silicon, tin, and zinc. Copper and magne- 
sium increase the strength and hardness of aluminum. 
Magnesium also makes aluminum easier to weld. Man- 
ganese helps aluminum resist corrosion and also pro- 
vides strength. Silicon lowers the melting point of alu- 
minum and makes it easier to cast. Tin makes aluminum 
easier to shape with metalworking tools. Zinc, especially 
when combined with magnesium, gives added strength. 
Other elements may also be alloyed with aluminum for 
special purposes. These elements include bismuth, 
boron, cadmium, chromium, cobalt, iron, lead, lithium, 
nickel, sodium, titanium, vanadium, and zirconium. 

Aluminum, with its alloys, has many valuable proper- 
ties that make it an exceptionally useful metal. These 
properties include (1) light weight, (2) strength, (3) corro- 
sion resistance, (4) electrical conduction, (5) heat con- 
duction, and (6) light and heat reflection. 

Light weight. Aluminum is one of the lightest metals. 
It weighs about 170 pounds per cubic foot (2,720 kilo- 
grams per cubic meter}—about a third as much as steel. 
As a result, aluminum has replaced steel for many uses. 
For example, some parts of airplanes, automobiles, and 
trucks are now made of aluminum rather than of steel 
because lighter vehicles use less fuel. Products packed 
in aluminum containers cost less to ship because the 
containers weigh less than those made of other metals. 
To make aluminum alloys even lighter, the lightest 
metal, lithium, is added to the aluminum. 

Strength. Although pure aluminum is weak, certain 
aluminum alloys are as strong as steel. Such alloys are 
used in airplanes and trucks, in guardrails along high- 
ways, and in other products that require strength. Alu- 
minum alloys lose some strength at high temperatures. 
But unlike many other metals, they get stronger at ex- 
tremely low temperatures. Aluminum alloys are widely 
used in equipment for processing, transporting, and 
storing liquefied natural gas, which can have a tempera- 
ture of — 260 °F {(— 162 °C). 

Corrosion resistance. Some metals corrode (wear 
away) if exposed to oxygen, water, or various chemicals. 
A chemical reaction occurs that causes the metals to 
rust or become discolored. When aluminum reacts with 





Where bauxite is mined 


This map shows the most im- 
portant bauxite-mining areas 
of the world. The richest baux- 
ite deposits lie in tropical and 
near-tropical regions. 





Jamaica 
Vy 


Venezuela 
i 


b Equator 





® Major bauxite-mining area 


© Other bauxite-mining area 


WORLD BOOK map a 





« Guyana 
AS 7 


oxygen, however, the metal forms an invisible layer of a 
chemical compound called a/uminum oxide. This layer 
protects aluminum from corrosion by oxygen, water, 
and many chemicals. It makes aluminum especially valu- 
able for use outdoors, where the metal resists the ef- 
fects of wind, rain, and pollution. 

Electrical conduction. Aluminum and copper are 
the only common metals suitable for use as electrical 
conductors. Aluminum conducts electricity about 62 
percent as well as copper. But aluminum weighs a third 
as much. Aluminum wire can therefore carry the same 
amount of electric power as copper wire that weighs 
twice as much. In addition, aluminum is more ductile 
than copper, which means it can more easily be drawn 
into wires. Aluminum wire is used for nearly all high- 
voltage power lines in the United States. 

Heat conduction. The first large commercial use of 
aluminum was in cookware. Aluminum cookware heats 
up quickly and evenly. Aluminum also cools quickly, 
which helps make it popular for such items as beverage 
cans and ice cube trays. 

Light and heat reflection. Aluminum reflects about 
80 percent of the light that strikes it. This property has 
made the metal widely used in lighting fixtures. Alumi- 
num also reflects heat well. Buildings with aluminum 
roofs reflect much of the sun's heat and so stay cooler in 
hot weather. When fire fighters must walk through 
flames, they wear special suits coated with aluminum. 

Other properties. Aluminum is nonmagnetic, which 
makes it valuable for protecting electrical equipment 
from magnetic interference. Aluminum does not pro- 
duce sparks when struck and can therefore be used 
near flammable or explosive materials. The metal is not 
poisonous, and so food can be safely wrapped in alumi- 
num foil and cooked in aluminum pots. Aluminum can 
be shaped by almost any metalworking process. It can 
also be bolted, glued, riveted, soldered, welded, and 
otherwise joined by most methods used for other met- 
als. Finally, aluminum can be recycled. 


Sources of aluminum 


Most minerals, rocks, and soils contain aluminum 
compounds. But aluminum can be made economically 
only from bauxite. Bauxite is the name for any ore that 
has a large amount of a/uminum hydroxide—a chemical 











ba 
Guine 












SierraN 2 aL” & 
Leone Ghana ‘ 














Se 

2 a § 

Indonesia Tae. iN _ 7 me 
wm — 









= | 
a 4 
4 














Leading bauxite-mining countries 


Tons of bauxite mined in a year 


Australia OSG osaoPregotsed 
59,300,000 tons (53,800,000 metric tons) 

Guinea BEBE 
16,500,000 tons (15,000,000 metric tons) 

Brazil @Oe@Gg 


15,400,000 tons (14,000,000 metric tons) 


Jamaica BE 


12,300,000 tons {11,100,000 metric tons) 


China a P 

9,900,000 tons (9,000,000 metric tons) 
India = 

8,100,000 tons (7,400,000 metric tons} 
Russia 7) 

4,600,000 tons [4,200,000 metric tons} 
Venezuela a 


4,600,000 tons (4,200,000 metric tons) 


Kazakhstan &> 
4,100,000 tons (3,700,000 metric tons) 


Suriname y 
4,000,000 tons (3,600,000 metric tons) 


Figures are for 2000. 
Source: US. Geological Survey. 


combination of aluminum oxide and water. Aluminum 
oxide, also called a/umina, is the compound from which 
aluminum is made. 

Most bauxite consists of 30 to 60 percent alumina and 
12 to 30 percent water. It also contains iron oxide, silica, 
and titanium oxide. The color of bauxite depends chiefly 
on how much iron oxide the ore contains. The more 
iron oxide it has, the darker the color. Bauxite may be 
white, cream, gray, pink, yellow, red, or brown. Most 
bauxite is as hard as rock, but some is as soft as clay. 

The richest deposits of bauxite lie in tropical and near- 
tropical regions. Enough bauxite deposits have been 
found to last several hundred years. The leading bauxite- 
mining countries include Australia, Guinea, Jamaica, and 
Brazil. 

Most bauxite deposits lie near the surface of the earth 
and are mined by the open-pit method. |n this process, 
bulldozers and other earthmoving machines first clear 
away the overburden—the soil, rocks, and trees that cov- 
er the deposits. Next, explosives blast the ore loose. 
Huge power shovels scoop up the bauxite, and trucks or 
railroad cars carry it to a processing plant. 

At the processing plant, the bauxite is crushed and 
then washed to remove clay and dirt. Some of the water 
in the bauxite is removed by drying the ore in Ki/ns 
(ovens). The bauxite is then ground into a powder and 
shipped to a refining plant. 


How aluminum is produced 


There are two chief steps in producing aluminum. (1) 
refining the bauxite to obtain alumina and (2) smelting 
the alumina to obtain aluminum. After smelting, the mol- 
ten aluminum is cast into blocks called ingots or other 
forms that will be shaped into finished products. It takes 
4 to 6 pounds of bauxite to make 1 pound of aluminum. 

Refining the bauxite separates the alumina in the 
ore from the iron oxide, silica, and titanium oxide. To 
separate the alumina, aluminum producers use the Bay- 


Aluminum 393 


er process. This technique was patented by Karl Joseph 
Bayer, an Austrian chemist, in 1888. 

The first step of the Bayer process is mixing pow- 
dered bauxite with a solution of caustic soda (sodium 
hydroxide). Machines pump the mixture into large tanks 
called digesters. The digesters heat the mixture under 
pressure at 300 to 480 F (150 to 250 C) for about 30 min- 
utes. The alumina dissolves in the caustic soda, forming 
a solution of sodium aluminate. The other materials in 
the bauxite remain as solids and are called red mud be- 
cause of their color. 

The mixture of sodium aluminate solution and red 
mud next passes through a series of tanks in which cloth 
filters separate the liquid from the solids. The red mud 
is discarded. The sodium aluminate solution is cooled 
slightly and sent to tanks called precipitators. Crystals of 
aluminum hydroxide are then added to the solution, 
which is agitated (stirred) for several days. This process 
causes most of the alumina in the solution to precipitate 
(come out of solution) and collect on the crystals. 

After the precipitation is complete, the solution is fil- 
tered to separate the aluminum hydroxide crystals from 
the liquid. The crystals are washed to remove any impu- 
rities and then heated at 2000 to 2200 F (1090 to 1200 C). 
The heat drives out water, leaving a fine white powder 
of alumina. The alumina is composed of aluminum and 
oxygen. To recover the alumina that did not precipitate, 
manufacturers take the liquid and refine it with a new 
batch of bauxite and caustic soda. Small amounts of lime 
and soda ash may also be added. 

Smelting the alumina separates the aluminum from 
the oxygen. The smelting is done by the Ha//-Héroult 
process. This method was developed independently in 
1886 by two scientists. They were Charles Martin Hall of 
the United States and Paul L. T. Héroult of France. 

Aluminum producers begin the Hall-Héroult process 
by dissolving the alumina in a chemical bath composed 
mainly of cryo/ite (sodium aluminum fluoride). The bath 
also contains a little aluminum fluoride and calcium flu- 
oride. The bath is held in large rectangular steel contain- 
ers and heated to about 1740 F (950 C). The containers, 
called pots or cells, have a carbon lining. 

Ina process called electro/vtic reduction, one or more 
carbon blocks suspended in each pot send an electric 
current through the bath. The current flows to the car- 
bon lining, completing the electric circuit. The blocks 
act as the anode, or positive pole of the circuit, and the 
lining acts as the cathode, or negative pole. As the cur- 
rent flows through the bath, the alumina breaks apart. 
The oxygen in the alumina combines with the carbon in 
the anode and is released as carbon dioxide gas. The 
aluminum metal collects at the cathode at the bottom of 
the pot. See Electrolysis. 

An aluminum plant may have as many as 200 pots 
electrically connected to one another in long rows 
called potlines. The reduction of alumina to aluminum 
goes on continuously. Alumina is added to the pots reg- 
ularly, and the electric current keeps the bath at the 
proper temperature. A large pot may produce more 
than 2 tons (1.8 metric tons) of aluminum daily. 

Casting the molten aluminum. About once a day, 
molten aluminum from the potlines is drawn off into 
pots called crucibles. Each crucible holds 4,000 to 8,000 
pounds (1,800 to 3,600 kilograms) of aluminum. Most of 


394. Aluminum 


How aluminum is made 


Aluminum comes from bauxite, an ore that has a large amount of a compound called a/umina. Alu- 


minum making involves separating the alumina and then obtaining aluminum from it. 









Bauxite is crushed and then es 
mixed with a solution of caus- i) 
tic soda. A tank called a a/- : 
gester heats the mixture 
under pressure. The heat and 
pressure cause the alumina in 
the bauxite to dissolve in the 
caustic soda, forming a solu- 
tion of sodium aluminate. The 
other materials in the bauxite, 
which are called red mud. re- 
main as solids and are filtered 
out. 


Crusher 


Alumina comes out of the so- 
dium aluminate solution ina 
tank called a precipitator. The 
solution is agitated (stirred) in 
the precipitator after crystals 
of aluminum hydroxide have 
been added. The stirring 
causes alumina in the solution 
to collect on the crystals. The 
solution is then filtered to 
separate the crystals, which 
are heated in a i/n (oven). The 
heat drives the water out of 
the aluminum hydroxide, leav- 
ing a fine white powder of 
alumina. 


Aluminum is made in a Car- 
bon-lined pot. The alumina is 
first dissolved in a chemical 
bath in the pot. Carbon blocks 
suspended in the pot send an 
electric current through the 
bath. The current breaks the 
alumina apart, and molten alu- 
minum collects at the bottom 
of the pot. The aluminum is si- 
phoned into a pot called a 
crucible and later cast into 
forms Called ingots and bil- Pot 
lets. 










the aluminum is cast into ingots. There are two types of 
ingots: (1) fabricating ingots and (2) foundry ingots. Alu- 
minum is also cast into forms called billets. 

Fabricating ingots, or rolling ingots, are used by alu- 
minum producers to make plates, sheets, and foil. The 
ingots may be 30 feet (9 meters) long, 6 feet (1.8 meters) 
wide, and 2 feet (0.6 meter) thick. They may weigh up to 
18 short tons (16 metric tons). To make fabricating in- 
gots, producers alloy other metals with the molten alu- 
minum in a furnace and then purify the mixture. Scrap 
aluminum and recycled aluminum may also be added. 
The purification process, called fuxing, consists of 
pumping nitrogen, argon, or other gases through the 


Bouxite 


Caustic 


Siphon 
Carbon block 


Chemical bath 
Carbon lining 


Molten aluminum 


WORLD BOOK diagram by Arthur Grebetz 


| 


4 


Steam 









Sodium 
aluminate 
and 

red mud 





Digester 


Bisco rded 
red mud 


Ingots 


Crucible 


Billets 


liquid. The gas causes impurities to float to the surface, 
where they are skimmed off. During fluxing, chemical 
reactions cause some hydrogen gas to be trapped in the 
liquid. In a process called degassing, chlorine or some 
other gas is added to remove the hydrogen. 

After fluxing and degassing, the molten aluminum 
alloy is filtered to remove solid impurities. Then it is cast 
into ingots, usually by the direct chill method. \n this 
process, the alloy is poured into a mold, which is then 
passed through a spray of cold water. The water quickly 
cools and freezes the alloy. 

Foundry ingots, also called a/loy ingots or remelt in- 
gots, weigh 4 to 50 pounds (1.8 to 23 kilograms). In most 





cases, the molten aluminum is poured from the cruci- 
bles directly into molds, where it cools and hardens 
gradually. Aluminum producers sell foundry ingots to 
plants called foundries. The foundries remelt the ingots 
with scrap and recycled aluminum and perform the al- 
loying, fluxing, and degassing operations themselves. 
The alloyed aluminum is then recast and turned into 
parts for appliances, automobiles, and other products. 
Aluminum producers supply some foundry ingots in 
alloy form. Foundries near aluminum plants may buy 
molten aluminum that comes directly from the potlines 
to eliminate the need for remelting. 

Billets are made either in long rectangular shapes 
that look like railroad ties or in the shape of thin poles. 
They are produced in the same way as fabricating in- 
gots. Billets can be made into bars, rods, and parts for 
thousands of items. Bars look like small rectangular bil- 
lets. Bars may also be hexagonal or octagonal. Rods look 
like small pole-shaped billets. Bars and rods are made 
into tubing, wire, and various other products. 


How aluminum is shaped and finished 


Aluminum ingots and billets can be shaped by any of 
the metalworking processes. These processes include 
(1) rolling, (2) casting, (3) extruding, (4) drawing, (5) forg- 
ing, and (6) machining. After the aluminum is shaped, 
various finishes may be applied. 

Rolling consists of reducing the thickness of fabricat- 
ing ingots by squeezing them between pairs of heavy 
rollers. The ingots are heated and then rolled to a thick- 
ness of 1 to 3 inches (2.5 to 7.6 centimeters). After cool- 
ing, the metal is rolled again to form plates, sheets, or 
foil. Aluminum plates are 1 inch (6.4 millimeters) thick or 


Some shapes of aluminum 





= 4 

Reynolds Aluminum 

Aluminum sheeting is made by squeez- 

ing ingots between pairs of heavy rollers. 
The sheeting shown above will be used 

for the siding (outside walls) of buildings. 


Aluminum Company of America 


Aluminum tubing is formed by forcing 
a billet or rod through an opening in a 
tool called a die. The tubing above will 
be used in air-conditioning units. 


Aluminum 395 


more. They are used in such things as railroad cars, 
ships, and storage tanks. Aluminum sheets measure +% 5 
to 1 inch (0.15 to 64 millimeters) thick. They are used for 
the “skins” of airplanes and in such products as awnings 
and cooking utensils. Aluminum foil is less than +85 
inch (0.15 millimeter) thick. It has many household uses, 
especially in cooking and in wrapping food. Rolling may 
be used to shape aluminum billets into bars and rods. 

Casting is a process in which alloyed foundry ingots 
are melted and then poured or forced into molds of a 
desired shape. The aluminum is removed from the 
molds after it hardens. Casting is used to make parts of 
particular items, such as the bottoms of electric irons or 
parts for automobile engines. See Cast and casting. 

Extruding consists of forcing a heated billet through 
an opening in a tool called a de. Aram at one end of a 
cylinder forces the billet through a die opening at the 
other end. The aluminum comes out shaped like the die 
opening. The extrusion process is used to make rods 
and tubing, trim for automobiles, and frames for doors 
and windows. See Extrusion. 

Drawing is used to produce aluminum wire and tub- 
ing. To make wire, a pointed aluminum rod is pulled 
through a series of successively smaller dies. The rod 
becomes wire when it reaches a diameter of less than 2 
inch (9.5 millimeters). Tubing is made by pulling an alu- 
minum rod through one die. A steel bar called a man- 
dre/ extends through the center of the die and hollows 
out the rod. 

Deep drawing forms aluminum into beverage cans, 
beer barrels, pots and pans, and various other contain- 
ers. In this process, a ram forces aluminum plate or an 
aluminum sheet into a cavity of the desired shape. 


Aluminum Company of America 
An aluminum forging is made by ham- 
mering an ingot or billet into the desired 
shape. This forging will be installed in the 
tail section of an airplane. 


| 
| 
| 





396 Aluminum 


Forging is the process of hammering or pressing 
heated aluminum ingots or billets into the desired 
shape. Forging produces exceptionally strong parts for 
use in aircraft landing gear, truck wheels, tools, and vari- 
ous other items. See Forging. 

Machining. Aluminum can be shaped with a variety 
of machine tools, including drills, grinders, saws, and 
shears. Such tools shape aluminum bars and rods into 
bolts, screws, and other small items. Machining may 
also be used to put final touches on products that have 
been cast or forged. See Machine tool. 

Other shaping processes produce aluminum in 
such forms as powders and pastes. Powders and pastes 
consist of finely ground particles of aluminum. Alumi- 
num powder goes into such products as explosives and 
inks. In paste form, aluminum is used in paints and in 
metallic finishes for automobiles. 

Aluminum powder is also used to produce gears and 
other small parts by a process called powder metallurgy. 
In this process, the aluminum powder is pressed into 
the desired shape and then heated to bond the particles 
together. Powders of other metals also may be mixed 
with the aluminum. Powders of aluminum alloys also 
may be used. The item is further shaped by forging or 
some other process. See Powder metallurgy. 

Finishing aluminum. Aluminum has an attractive nat- 
ural appearance and so is often used without a special 
finish. However, various finishes may be used for deco- 
ration or to improve resistance to corrosion and wear. 
More kinds of finishes can be applied to aluminum than 
to any other metal. There are four types of finishes. They 
are (1) mechanical, (2) chemical, (3) electrochemical, and 
(4) applied. 

Mechanical finishes include such processes as em- 
bossing and polishing. In embossing, a raised pattern is 
made on aluminum sheets by passing them between 
rollers that have been engraved with a design. A 
method called barrel burnishing polishes aluminum arti- 
cles in a revolving or vibrating barrel that contains an 
abrasive (gritty) substance. 

Chemical finishes include acid and alkaline etches, 
which eat designs into aluminum. Acid etches are also 
used to remove stains from the metal and to prepare it 
for further finishing. Alkaline etches may be used to give 
aluminum a dull finish. 

Electrochemical finishes include anodizing and elec- 
troplating. Anodizing thickens aluminums natural coat- 
ing of aluminum oxide and thus increases resistance to 
corrosion, scratching, and wear. It also makes aluminum 
easy to dye. Electroplating involves coating aluminum 
with another metal. Certain coatings improve alumi- 
num’ corrosion resistance, electricity conduction, or 
other properties. See Anodizing; Electroplating. 

Applied finishes include such coatings as enamel, lac- 
quer, paint, and plastic film. They may be applied by dip- 
ping, spraying, or other methods. 


The aluminum industry 


About 50 countries produce aluminum. The world’s 
annual aluminum production totals about 27 million 
tons (24 million metric tons). The United States is the 
leading aluminum producer, accounting for about 15 
percent of the world total. 

The primary aluminum industry consists of companies 


that produce aluminum ingots and billets and shape 
them into such forms as plates, sheets, foil, bars, rods, 
and wires. The firms also sell the ingots and billets to 
foundries in the secondary aluminum industry, which 
specializes in shaping aluminum. Specialized workers in 
the primary aluminum industry include engineers, geol- 
ogists, and metallurgists. 

In the United States, the primary aluminum industry 
produces about 4 million tons (3.6 million metric tons) of 
the metal yearly. The leading aluminum companies in 
the country are Alcoa Inc., Alumax Incorporated, 
Reynolds Metals Company, and Kaiser Aluminum and 
Chemical Corporation. Two labor unions—the Alu- 
minum, Brick and Glass Workers International Union 
(ABGWIU) and the United Steelworkers of America 
(USWA)—represent most of the workers in the alu- 
minum industry. 

Aluminum producers in the United States use about 
11 million tons (10 million metric tons) of bauxite annual- 
ly. They import all of this bauxite, chiefly from Brazil, 
Guinea, Guyana, and Jamaica. Aluminum producers also 
import alumina. 

In Canada, the primary aluminum industry produces 
about 2 5 million tons (2.3 million metric tons) of the 
metal yearly. About 90 percent of Canadas aluminum is 
made in Quebec. The country's leading aluminum man- 
ufacturer is Alcan Aluminum Limited. Canada produces 
no bauxite. It imports most of this ore from Guinea, 
Guyana, and Suriname. 

In other countries. Only about a third of the 
aluminum-producing countries perform each step in 
aluminum production—mining the bauxite, refining the 
ore, and smelting the alumina. In some countries, such 
as Guinea and Jamaica, the industry mines and refines 
bauxite for export but produces no aluminum. Other 
countries, including Germany and Japan, import bauxite 
and then refine it and smelt the alumina. Some coun- 
tries, such as Norway and Tajikistan, import alumina but 
not bauxite. 

Countries that perform each step in the production 
process include Australia, Brazil, China, Russia, and Suri- 
name. Several bauxite-mining countries have joined to- 
gether to form the International Bauxite Association 
(IBA). 


Recycling 


Recycling has become a very important aspect of the 
aluminum industry in many countries. In the United 


Leading aluminunrproducing countries 


Tons of aluminum produced in a year 


United States @@@OOOSSOOOOOOO 
4,043,000 tons (3,668,000 metric tons) 

Russia Poteet Dole oF TD! 
3,577,000 tons {3,245,000 metric tons) 

China SSOSeseEe se 
2,811,000 tons (2,550,000 metric tons) 

Canada FeESECHHVS 
2,616,000 tons (2,373,000 metne tons} 

Australia 026068664 


1,950,000 tons {1,769,000 metric tons) 


Figures are for 2000 
Source US Geological Suney 


Leading aluminum-producing states 
and provinces 


Annual aluminum-producing capacity* 


Quebec SOSOOSSSEE HH OO 
2,715,000 tons {2,463,000 metric tons) 
Washington O8dtat> 
1,381,000 tons (1,253,000 metric tons) 
Kentucky 6sgi 
466,000 tons (423,000 metric tons) 
Texas 3 
347,000 tons (315,000 metric tons) 
Indiana es 


331,000 tons (300,000 metric tons) 


“Capacity may be greater than actual production. 
Figures are for 2000. 
Sources: U.S Geological Survey. Natural Resources Canada 


States, scrap makes up about 30 percent of the total alu- 
minum supply. Heavily recycled items include used bev- 
erage cans, parts from old automobiles, and scrap accu- 
mulated during the manufacture of aluminum products. 
Beverage cans represent the leading product made 
from aluminum by volume. More than half the beverage 
cans used in the United States are recycled. 

One benefit of recycling aluminum is that it conserves 
natural resources. The most important natural resource 
saved is energy. Recycling saves about 95 percent of the 
energy required to make aluminum from bauxite. One 
recycled aluminum can saves enough energy to keep a 
100-watt light bulb burning for about 3 > hours. In addi- 
tion, recycling preserves natural beauty. It also reduces 
the amount of garbage sent to sanitary landfills. 


History 


The word a/uminum comes from the term a/umen. 
Alumen is the Latin name for a/um, a group of aluminum 
compounds that occur in nature and which ancient peo- 
ples used in dyeing textiles. In 1746, Johann Heinrich 
Pott, a Prussian chemist, prepared alumina from alum. 
Scientists believed that alumina was a chemical com- 
pound that consisted of oxygen and an unknown metal. 
The British chemist Sir Humphry Davy called this metal 
alumium and later changed the name to aluminum. In 
1809, Davy formed an alloy of iron and aluminum by 
electrically melting alumina with iron and carbon. 

The first aluminum. In 1825, Hans Christian Oersted, 
a Danish scientist, produced the first aluminum. Oersted 
prepared aluminum chloride from alumina. He then 
heated the aluminum chloride with an alloy of potassi- 
um and mercury, and a small lump of impure aluminum 
formed in the alloy. 

In 1827, Friedrich WG6hler, a German chemist, pro- 
duced aluminum as gray powder by heating aluminum 
chloride with potassium. In 1845, Wohler produced alu- 
minum particles large enough to be weighed. He dis- 
covered that aluminum was lightweight. \Vohler was the 


first scientist to describe several other properties of alu- 
minum. 
In 1854, Henri Etienne Sainte-Claire Deville, a French 


Deville used 
down aluminum 
\uantities of alu- 
sing Deville’s 


chemist, improved on Wohler's metho 
sodium instead of potassium to brea! 
chloride. This process produced larg: 
minum. Commercial aluminum planis 


Aluminum 397 


method soon opened in France. The price of aluminum 
dropped from $115 a pound ($254 a kilogram) in 1855 to 
$17 a pound ($37 a kilogram) in 1859. However, it was 
still too costly for widespread use. 

The growth of the aluminum industry increased 
greatly following two important developments in the 
1880's. They were the invention of the Hall-Héroult proc- 
ess and of the Bayer process. 

In 1886, two scientists—Charles Martin Hall of the 
United States and Paul L. T. Héroult of France—devel- 
oped an inexpensive way to make aluminum. Neither 
scientist knew that the other was working on the prob- 
lem. However, each thought of dissolving alumina in the 
mineral cryolite and separating aluminum from the mix- 
ture by electrolytic reduction. Today, the Hall-Héroult 
process is used to produce nearly all the aluminum in 
the world. 

Karl Joseph Bayer, an Austrian chemist, further re- 
duced the cost of aluminum production. In 1888, he 
patented an inexpensive method for obtaining alumina 
from bauxite. The aluminum industry still uses the Bayer 
process to produce alumina. The Hall-Héroult and Bayer 
processes are described in the section How aluminum 
is produced. 

Hall and several business associates organized the 
Pittsburgh Reduction Company in 1888. The company 
began producing 50 pounds (23 kilograms) of aluminum 
a day. The firm changed its name to the Aluminum Com- 
pany of America (Alcoa) in 1907. By 1909, Alcoa was pro- 
ducing 16,500 tons (14,970 metric tons) a year. The price 
of aluminum dropped to less than 30 cents a pound (66 
cents a kilogram). Héroult formed a Swiss aluminum 
company in 1888, but it did not begin production imme- 
diately. In 1902, the Northern Aluminium Company, Lim- 
ited (now Alcan Aluminium Limited), was founded in 
Canada. 

Aluminum production soared during World War | 
(1914-1918) as the fighting nations increased output to 
help fill their military needs. During the 1920's, the devel- 
opment of new aluminum alloys and of improved meth- 
ods of turning aluminum into useful products continued 
to boost production. The Great Depression of the 1930's 
cut world aluminum output almost in half. But the start 
of World War II (1939-1945) brought tremendous expan- 
sion in production. In 1941, Reynolds Metals Company 
became the second producer of primary aluminum in 
the United States. 

After World War Il, the aluminum industry developed 
many products that have become commonplace. The 
first successful aluminum foil wrap appeared in 1947. 
Also in the 1940's, aluminum began to replace brass in 
the base of light bulbs. High-strength aluminum wire for 
power lines was introduced in 1957. Aluminum cans be- 
came popular in the 1960's. Today, nearly all beverage 
cans are made completely of aluminum. 

Recent developments. The demand for aluminum 
has grown steadily with the continuing development of 
new uses for the metal. For example, the auto industry 
has used increasing amounts of aluminum in cars to 
lessen their weight and so improve fuel efficiency. 

During the late 1900's, several aluminum producers 
began to sell aluminum to any customer who would buy 
it. This practice led to aluminum’s becoming an interna- 
tional commodity (product of trade). In 1978, aluminum 


398 Aluminum 


appeared on the London Metal Exchange (LME). In 1983, 
it was listed on the Commodities Exchange (COMEX) in 
the United States. Only a small amount of aluminum is 
sold through these markets. But the published market 
prices are used to set the price of aluminum when it is 
sold by a producer to a customer who will fabricate the 
metal into products. 

The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 led to a sharp 
drop in the world price of aluminum. The Soviet Union 
had developed an enormous defense industry that re- 
quired massive amounts of aluminum. After the col- 
lapse, the newly independent former Soviet republics 
maintained their own defense industries. However, the 
total size of these industries was much smaller than the 
Soviet industry had been. As a result, the demand for 
aluminum in the former Soviet Union was much de- 
creased. 

The republics also needed money badly. To raise 
money, they began to export aluminum to countries out- 
side the former Soviet Union. Because of the resulting 
oversupply, the price of aluminum plunged. The alu- 
minum industry throughout the world responded by 
closing relatively old and inefficient smelters. 

Kenneth A Bowman 


Related articles in World Book include: 


Alcan Aluminium Limited Electrolysis 

Alcoa Inc. Electroplating 

Alloy (Kinds of alloys) Extrusion 

Alum Flux 

Alumina Forging 

Anodizing Metallurgy 

Bauxite Oersted, Hans Christian 

Cast and casting Powder metallurgy 

Davy, Sir Humphry Smelting 

Duralumin W6ohler, Friedrich 
Outline 


I. Properties of aluminum alloys 

A. Light weight 
B. Strength 
C Corrosion resistance 
D. Electrical conduction 
E. Heat conduction 
F. Light and heat reflection 
G. Other properties 

ll. Sources of aluminum 

lil. How aluminum is produced 
A. Refining the bauxite 
B. Smelting the alumina 
C Casting the molten aluminum 

[V. How aluminum is shaped and finished 
A. Rolling 
B. Casting 
C Extruding 
D. Drawing 
E. Forging 
F. Machining 
G. Other shaping processes 
H. Finishing aluminum 

V. The aluminum industry 
A. In the United States 


B. In Canada 

C In other countries 
Vi. Recycling 
Vil. History 


Questions 


What is the Ha//-Heroult process? What is the Baver process? 

Why is aluminum wire used for nearly all high-voltage power 
lines in the United States? 

Which are the four largest aluminum companies in the United 


States? How much of the nation s aluminum do they produce? 

What percentage of bauxite used by American aluminum pro- 
ducers is imported? 

What are some benefits of recycling aluminum? 

Why is aluminum usually alloyed with other elements? 

How are aluminum plates, sheets, and foil made? 

How much bauxite does it take to produce 1 pound (0:5 kilo- 
gram) of aluminum? 

What is the purpose of anodizing aluminum? 

How does aluminum resist corrosion? 


Additional resources 


Altenpohl, Dietrich G., and Kaufman, J. G., eds. Aluminum: Tech- 
nology, Applications, and Environment 6th ed. Minerals, Met- 
als & Materials Soc., 1998. 

Davis, Joseph R., ed. Aluminum and Aluminum Alloys. ASM In- 
ternational, 1993. 

Farndon, John. A/uminum. Benchmark Bks., 2001. Younger read- 
ers. 

Nichols, Sarah C, and others. A/uminum by Design. Abrams, 
2000. A history of aluminum as used in design. 

Aluminum Company of America (Alcoa). See Al- 

coa Inc. 

Alva, Duke of. See Alba, Duke of. 

Alvarado, 4x1 vah RAH thoh, Pedro de (1485?-1541], 

helped Hernando Cortes subdue the Aztec in Mexico 

and conquered Guatemala himself. Born in Badajoz, 

Spain, Alvarado went to the West Indies in 1510. Jn 1518, 

he joined an expedition led by Juan de Grijalva to south- 

ern Mexico. Alvarado accompanied Cortés to Mexico in 

1519. After Cortes conquered Mexico in 1521, he sent 

Alvarado to seize Guatemala. Alvarado succeeded in 

1524 with the help of Indian allies. In 1525, he con- 

quered El Salvador for Spain and directed the founding 

of the capital city, San Salvador. Alvarado became gov- 
ernor of Guatemala. Helen Delpar 

See also Cortés, Hernando; Guatemala (History); Latin 
America (map: Early exploration). 

Alyssum, Sweet. See Sweet alyssum. 

Alzheimer’s disease, AWLT7S hy muhrz, often abbre- 

viated as AD, is a brain disease that causes increasing 

loss of memory and other mental abilities. Alzheimers 
disease is the most common cause of severe memory 
loss in elderly adults. The disease attacks few people be- 
fore age 60, but it becomes increasingly common with 
age. In the past, elderly adults suffering from severe 
memory loss were often labeled senile, but they were 
probably suffering from what doctors now recognize as 

AD. The disease is named after Alois Alzheimer, a Ger- 

man psychiatrist and neuropathologist, who first de- 

scribed the effect of the disease on brain cells in 1907. 
Diagnosis. There is no single test used to identify 

people with AD. Patients, or their family members, may 

first notice increasing forgetfulness, often accompanied 
by reduced interest or awareness of ongoing activities. 

Patients may ask the same question repeatedly, misplace 

objects, forget appointments, and neglect their appear- 

ance. Physicians use imaging techniques, such as com- 
puted tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging 

(MRI), to determine that other brain disorders, such as 

stroke or a brain tumor, are not causing the symptoms. 

Doctors suspect AD if no other disease or disorder is 

found to cause the symptoms. 

As the disease progresses, memory loss increases, 
and patients begin to lose other mental functions. They 
may not understand what others are saying, or lose the 
ability to name familiar people or objects. Patients can 





become confused or disoriented, easily getting lost 
even in familiar locations. In later phases, patients lose 
the ability to remember or talk meaningfully. Eventually, 
they cannot care for themselves, and most become 
bedridden and require constant care. In their weakened 
condition, patients are vulnerable to pneumonia and 
other infectious diseases. Most patients die from such 
infections 10 to 12 years after developing AD. 

Only an autopsy performed after the patient dies can 
confirm the diagnosis of AD. Examination of the brain 
tissue with a microscope reveals many deposits of a 
protein called amy/oid. These abnormal deposits, called 
plaques, are surrounded by damaged and dead nerve 
cells. Tangled clumps of abnormal fi/aments (threadlike 
structures) fill many of the nerve cells in the brain of pa- 
tients who died of AD. Gaping holes in the brain tissue, 
caused by the destruction of nerve cells, appear in se- 
vere cases. Chemical tests conducted after an autopsy 
show that AD patients have lower levels of acety/- 
choline, a brain chemical that transmits nerve impulses. 

In a small number of cases, AD is caused by mutations 
(random changes) of genes on chromosome pairs 
known as chromosomes 1, 14, and 21. Another gene, lo- 
cated on chromosome 19, is strongly associated with 
the development of AD. The gene controls production 
of one of three forms of a protein called apo/ipoprotein 
E(ApoE). A person inherits two genes for ApoE produc- 
tion, one from each parent. Each gene produces one of 
three types of ApoE, known as ApoE-2, ApoE-3, and 
ApoE-4. Persons possessing one or two ApoE-4 genes 
have a higher risk of developing AD after the age of 60 
than people who do not have the ApoE-4 gene. Howev- 
er, scientists do not think the ApoE-4 gene causes AD. 
Some people with two ApoE-4 genes do not develop 
AD, while others who do not have the gene at all go on 
to develop AD. Scientists do not know why different 
ApoE types are related to increased risk for the disease. 

Treatment. There is no cure for AD. Good nutrition, 
hygiene, and reassurance can help preserve the comfort 
and dignity of AD patients. Such drugs as donepezi/ and 
revistigmin help improve mental function and slow the 
progression of the disease. These drugs help compen- 
sate for the lower levels of acetylcholine in the brain of 
AD patients by removing other chemicals that destroy 
acetylcholine. Physicians may administer high doses of 
vitamin E, which helps protect nerve cells from damage 
by the amyloid plaques accumulating in the brain. Scien- 
tists are investigating estrogen replacement therapy for 
women, anti-inflammatory drugs, and a vaccine against 
amyloid plaques as possible treatments to prevent or 
slow the development of AD. 

Families provide most of the care that AD patients re- 
ceive and should be included in decisions about care. 
Family members can become distressed by the de- 
mands of providing care to relatives whose disease can 
last more than 10 years. The Alzheimer's Association of- 
fers support and information to patients and their fami- 
lies. Jeffrey L Cummings 

See also Senility. 

A.M. stands for the Latin words ante meridiem, which 
mean before noon. See Hour. 

AMA. See American Medical Association. 

Amadis of Gaul, AM wh dihs, is a famous Spanish ro- 
mance of chivalry. it may have appeared in Spain in the 


Amanites 399 


1300's, but the first preserved version, The Four Books of 
the Virtuous Knight Amadis of Gaul, was published in 
1508. At least part of the work is attributed to Garci Or- 
donez (or Rodriguez) de Montalvo. 

The story describes the adventures of a romantic, 
brave, modest hero named Amadis. His aristocratic man- 
ners and strict sense of justice reveal a Renaissance in- 
terpretation of the ideal medieval knight. The story is 
marked by flowery prose. The episodes deal with spec- 
tacular and fantastic events, including knightly duels, 
magic spells, and fierce combat with giants and drag- 
ons. Young Amadis loves Princess Oriana and, despite 
many obstacles and temptations, remains faithful to her 
until their marriage. Cervantes was influenced by Ama- 
dis in creating Don Quixote. Harry Sieber 
Amado, ah MAH doh, Jorge, ZHAWR zhay(1912- 
2001), was a Brazilian novelist. Amado was born on Aug. 
10, 1912, in tlhéus in the state of Bahia, along the north- 
eastern coast of Brazil. He wrote mainly about the peo- 
ple of Brazil's lower classes living in his native region, 
especially the area around the port of Salvador. ina style 
that is both poetic and realistic, he used the language of 
these people to portray their infectious zest for life. 

Before 1958, Amado wrote essentially Marxist novels, 
such as /ubiaba (1935) and The Violent Land (1942), which 
reflected his sympathy for victims of social injustice. Be- 
tween 1937 and 1952, he was exiled several times be- 
cause of his political views. Beginning with Gabriela, 
Clove and Cinnamon (1958), he wrote in a more sophisti- 
cated style that emphasized satirical humor. Many critics 
regard The Two Deaths of Quincas Wateryell(1961) as 
his masterpiece. 

Amado made an important contribution to Brazilian 
literature by becoming the first major writer to praise 
his nation’s extensive African heritage. This theme domi- 
nates one of his finest works, Tent of Miracles (1969). 
Among his other novels are Dona Flor and Her Two 
Husbands (1966), Tieta(1977), Pen, Sword, Camisole 
(1979), Showdown (1984), and The War of the Saints 
(1993). Earl E. Fitz 
Amalekites, uh MAL uh kyts, were a desert people 
who lived south of Canaan (later called Palestine) in Old 
Testament times. The Israelites considered them their 
oldest enemies. Joshua defeated the Amalekites in the 
late 1200's B.C. King Saul defeated them 200 years later. 
Afterward, the Amalekites destroyed Ziklag, the town 
where David and his followers lived. David found them 
celebrating this victory. He killed many, but 400 escaped. 

H. Darrell Lance 
Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers 
Union. See Union of Needletrades, Industrial and Tex- 
tile Employees. 

Amanites, uh MAN nyts, are members of a religious 
group called the Amana Church Society. The word 
Amana comes from the Song of Solomon 48. It is the 
name of a mountain, and means true or fixed 

The society was founded by Eberhard Gruber and Jo- 
hann Rock in Germany in 1714. it was originally called 
the Community of True Inspiration. Members led simple 
lives according to the Word of God, revealed not only in 
the Bible but also in the “true inspiration’ of their 
prophets. The last leader believed to be inspired died in 
1885. But the group continued to read and study the tes- 
timonies of their past prophets. 


: 
| 





400 Amaranth 


Christian Metz and Barbara Heinemann led the group 
to the United States in 1842. It settled near Buffalo, New 
York, and was called the Ebenezer Society. Members 
owned villages and lands in common. They moved near 
Cedar Rapids, lowa, in 1855. They founded seven vil- 
lages: Amana, East Amana, High Amana, Homestead, 
Middle Amana, South Amana, and West Amana. The 
Amanites farmed and made woolen goods and drugs. 

The society gave up its communal economic life in 
1932, during the Great Depression. But the villagers con- 
tinued to live a simple life and today make crafts and op- 
erate restaurants serving traditional foods. The society 
became a cooperative stock company known for manu- 
facturing refrigerators and other household appliances. 
The religious members organized the Amana 
Church Society. Charles H. Lippy 

See also lowa (Places to visit). 

Amaranth, AM uh ranth, is the common name of a 
genus (group) of plants that includes weeds, garden 
flowers, and crops. This genus is made up chiefly of 
herbs. Amaranths grow widely, especially in warm cli- 
mates. The name amaranth comes from a Greek word 
meaning unfading. |t was given to amaranths because 
their flowers retain their color even when dried. 

Among the weeds that belong to the amaranth genus 
are giant pigweed (often called redroot), spreading pig- 
weed, and a kind of tumbleweed. Love-/ies-bleeding is 
an ornamental amaranth with long, drooping, crimson 
flower clusters. The purple amaranth is a tall plant with 
late-blooming, pinkish-purple flower clusters. Ama- 
ranths cultivated for their edible seeds are called grain 
amaranths. Amaranth seeds were an important food for 
the Aztec and Inca Indians. 


Scientific classification. Amaranths are in the amaranth fam- 
ily, Amaranthaceae. The scientific name for the love-lies-bleed- 
ing is Amaranthus caudatus. Purple amaranth is A. cruentus. 


Anton A. Reznicek 


See also Piqweed; Tumbleweed. 





WORLD BOOK Illustration by Christabel King 


An ornamental amaranth called /ove-/ies-bleeding has a num- 
ber of long, drooping clusters of crimson flowers. 


Amarillo, 41 uh RIHL of \pop. 173,627; met. area pop. 
217,858), is the largest city and commercial center of the 
Panhandle of northern Texas. It serves as a major distri- 
bution and processing center for cattle, oil, and other 
products. For its location, see Texas (political map). 








Amarillo Convention & Visitors Council 


A cattle auction in Amarillo offers animals from the area to the 
highest bidder. Amarillo is a major distribution and processing 
center for cattle, oil, and other products. 


Cattle auctions held by the privately owned Amarillo 
Livestock Auction Company rank among the largest in 
the world. A large plant that slaughters cattle for beef 
operates outside Amarillo. Large deposits of oil and nat- 
ural gas lie in the Panhandle, and Amarillo has many 
petrochemical plants. The city lies in the world's chief 
helium-producing area. An assembly plant for United 
States nuclear weapons is northeast of the city. Other in- 
dustries include copper refining and the manufacture of 
fiberglass machine parts and cement products. 

Amarillo's cultural attractions include an art center, a 
community theater, and a symphony orchestra. Down- 
town Amarillo has a Civic Center with convention and 
entertainment facilities. Amarillo has a community col- 
lege and a branch of the Texas Tech medical school. 
West Texas A&M University and a branch of Texas State 
Technical College are near the city. The American Quar- 
ter Horse Association, the world’s largest horse registry, 
has headquarters in Amarillo. Palo Duro Canyon, a ma- 
jor tourist attraction, is located just southeast of the city. 

In 1887, construction crews of the Fort Worth and 
Denver City Railroad founded the settlement of Ragtown 
near what is now Amarillo. In the same year, a land de- 
veloper laid out the site of Amarillo near the settlement. 
Settlers called the town Amarillo, which means yellow in 
Spanish. The name may refer to the yellowish soil that 
borders nearby Amarillo Creek. 

Amarillo grew rapidly during the early 1900's, when 
other railroads began to serve the community and oil 
and natural gas were discovered in the area. The city has 
a council-manager form of government and is the coun- 
ty seat of Potter County. 
Amaryllis, 41 uh RIHL ihs, is a family of more than 
1,200 species of flowers. Most species grow outdoors in 
warm regions. In colder climates, amaryllises are usually 
grown indoors as potted plants in winter and transplant- 
ed outdoors in summer. 


Dennis Spies 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Richard Lewington, The Garden Studio 


Anamaryllis has a long stem and trumpet-shaped flowers. The 
belladonna lily, pictured here, is a popular species. 


The plants in the amaryllis family have long stems and 
many long, narrow leaves. The flowers are made up of 
six petals, and they may grow in clusters or as a single 
blossom. Some of the amaryllises are especially fragrant. 
More than half of the amaryllis family are grown from 
bulbs. The remaining plants are grown from corms or 
rhizomes (see Corm; Rhizome). 

Certain members of the amaryllis family look like 
plants in the lily family. The two families may be con- 
fused with each other. 

The belladonna lily is a popular amaryllis that blooms 
from August to October. This lilylike plant grows from a 
bulb. Its stalk is 18 to 30 inches (46 to 76 centimeters) 
high. It is topped by a cluster of 6 to 10 flowers. The fra- 
grant blossoms are usually 3 inches (8 centimeters) long 
and may vary in color from rose-red to white. The narcis- 
suses and snowdrops are other popular members of the 
amaryllis family. August A. De Hertogh 


Scientific classification. The amaryllis family is Amarylli- 
daceae. The scientific name for the belladonna lily is Amaryllis 
belladonna. 


See also Jonquil; Narcissus; Snowdrop. 
Amateur Athletic Union (AAU) is an organization 
that promotes and develops amateur sports and physi- 
cal fitness programs in the United States. The AAU is a 
nonprofit, volunteer group. It consists of about 5,000 
athletic clubs affiliated with 58 regional associations. 

The largest program sponsored by the organization is 
the Junior Sports and Junior Olympic Games. This annu- 
al competition attracts about 2 million participants from 
8 to 18 years old. Participants compete in about 20 
sports, including basketball, gymnastics, volleyball, track 
and field, and wrestling. The AAU sponsors other athlet- 
ic competitions at the local, state, regional, and national 
level. It also conducts adult sports programs and physi- 
cal fitness programs for youth and adults. In addition, 
the AAU annually presents the James E. Sullivan Award 
to the nation’s outstanding amateur athlete. The award is 
named for an early AAU executive. 

The AAU was founded in 1888. It has headquarters in 
Indianapolis. 

Critically reviewed by the Amateur Athletic Union of the United States 


Amazon rain forest 401 


Amateur radio. See Radio, Amateur. 

Amati family, ah MAH tee, was a family of violin mak- 
ers who worked in Cremona, Italy, from the 1500's to the 
1700's. Amati violins come in a variety of varnish tones 
ranging from dark red to light yellow. The violins have 
refined proportions and curves, and a high-arched shap- 
ing of the top. The arch helps produce a sweet, some- 
what restrained soprano sound that was preferred for 
the intimate ensemble music popular in the 1600’s. 

Andrea Amati (about 1511-1579) was one of the first vi- 
olin makers to give the instrument its distinctive shape 
and features. His work was carried on by his sons, Anto- 
nio (born about 1540) and Girolamo (1561-1630). Giro- 
lamo’s son, Nicolo (1596-1684), was the most famous and 
influential Amati. Nicolo trained many instrument mak- 
ers, including Andrea Guarneri and Antonio Stradivari. 
Nicolo’s son, Girolamo II (1649-1740), was the last violin 
maker in the family. Abram Loft 
Amazon. See Amazons. 

Amazon rain forest is the world’s largest tropical 
rain forest. It covers approximately 2 million square 
miles (5.2 million square kilometers) in the Amazon River 
Basin of South America. About two-thirds of the rain for- 
est lies in Brazil. The forest also occupies parts of Bo- 
livia, Peru, Ecuador, Colombia, and Venezuela. The Ama- 
zon rain forest receives an average annual rainfall of 50 
to 175 inches (130 to 445 centimeters). Temperatures av- 
erage about 80 °F (27 °C). 

Trees in most of the Amazon rain forest grow in sev- 
eral distinct layers. Some trees, called emergents, tower 
above the rest of the forest and may reach heights of 
over 165 feet (50 meters). The upper canopy generally 
grows 65 to 165 feet (20 to 50 meters) high. Plants called 
epiphytes, or air plants, thrive in this layer. They include 
aroids, bromeliads, ferns, liverworts, mosses, and or- 
chids. One or two /ower canopies consist of saplings of 
the trees found in the upper canopy, in addition to 
smaller trees and shrubs. Lianas (woody vines) wind 
around tree trunks and branches, extending from the 
ground to the upper canopy. The canopies get sunlight, 
but they prevent much light from reaching the forest 


Pacific 
Ocean 





WORLD BOOK map 
Amazon rain forest covers much of northern South America. 
About two-thirds of the rain forest lies in Brazil. The rain forest 
also occupies parts of several other lands. 


402 Amazonrain forest 


7, . i - . 
« 1 5M ie. @ - 
=e ee wre! 


floor. Most of the Amazon rain forest has infertile soil. 

The Amazon rain forest contains a wider variety of 
plant and animal life than any other place in the world. 
Tens of thousands of different plant species live there. A 
2 5-acre (1-hectare) area of the rain forest may contain up 
to 280 or more species of trees. Many economically im- 
portant plants live in the rain forest. They yield such 
products as Brazil nuts, cocoa, curare (an important 
drug), pineapples, and rubber. More than 1,500 species 
of birds make their homes in the rain forest. The re- 
gion’s rivers contain up to 3,000 species of fish. In addi- 
tion, scientists believe that as many as 30 million differ- 
ent insect species may live in the forest. 

The world’s rapid population growth and increasing 
demands for natural resources have seriously threat- 
ened the Amazon rain forest. Loggers cut down trees, 
which the lumber industry uses to make wood products. 
Ranchers and farmers clear land to use for grazing beef 


ll 
'Michael Nichols, Magnum 
Destruction of the Amazon rain forest threatens its plant and 
animal populations as well as its native peoples. The area pic: 


tured here was burned to clear land for cattle grazing. 








The Amazon rain forest 
abounds with lush plant life. 
Many kinds of animals also 
live there. The forest lies in 
the Amazon River Basin of 
South America. It is the 
world's largest tropical rain 
forest. 


© Luiz C. Marige fram Peter Amold 


cattle and growing crops. 

Areas of the rain forest that have been cleared can re- 
generate. However, regenerated areas are much less di- 
verse than the original forest. About 10 percent of the 
Amazon rain forest has been destroyed. Development, 
deforestation (the destruction of forests), and gold min- 
ing also threaten the culture of the few remaining native 
peoples of the Amazon rain forest. Many of these peo- 
ple depend on the forest to support themselves. 

Wm. Wayt Thomas 

See also Forest (Deforestation); Rain forest; Yanoma- 
mi Indians. 

Amazon River, AM wh zahn, is the world’s second 
longest river and the chief river of South America. Only 
the Nile River in Africa is longer. The Amazon is 4,000 
miles (6,437 kilometers) long—longer than the highway 
route between New York City and San Francisco. The 
Amazon carries more water than any other river—more 
than the Mississippi, Nile, and Yangtze rivers together. 

The Amazon is too wide at many points for a person 
on one bank to see the opposite shore. The river ranges 
from 14 to 6 miles (2.4 to 10 kilometers) wide during 
most of its course. It widens to about 90 miles (140 kilo- 
meters) at its mouth. The depth of the Amazon averages 
about 40 feet (12 meters) and increases to more than 300 
feet (90 meters) at some places. 

The Amazon River Basin covers about 2,700,000 
square miles (7,000,000 square kilometers) and includes 
the world’s largest tropical rain forest. The temperature 
averages about 80° F (27 C) and varies little throughout 
the year. Rainfall in the Amazon region ranges from 50 
inches (130 centimeters) in the low-lying areas to 120 
inches (300 centimeters) near the Andes Mountains in 
Peru. The air is very humid in most of the river basin. 

Most ships enter the Amazon River by way of the Para 
River, on the southern side of Marajo Island. Ocean ves- 
sels can sail about 2,300 miles (3,700 kilometers) up the 
Amazon to Iquitos, Peru. Belém, on the Para River about 
90 miles (140 kilometers) from the Atlantic Coast, and 
Manaus, 1,000 miles (1,600 kilometers) upstream from 
the mouth of the Amazon, are important ports. Ships 
bring in clothing, food, tools, and other products. They 
pick up such raw materials as animal skins, Brazil nuts, 


Amazon River = wee uae 


i ‘ wa Ge 
he ‘ . 


A a 


» 


| gee 





Pacific 
Ocean 








Iquitos ¢ ~ —4A}~ 
— sa 





Amazan River 
drainage basin 





Internatianal boundary 








, iy Remorest SO Re 7 
of the Amaz ‘q 
Swamp 
0 500 
WORLD BOOK map 0 500 1,000 


lumber, and rubber. The ships also take aboard live 
birds, fish, and other animals bought by pet shops and 
ZOOS. 

The course of the Amazon begins high in the 
Andes Mountains of Peru as a small stream called the 
Apurimac River. The Apurimac is located 17,200 feet 
(5,240 meters) above sea level. It flows northwest into 
the Ucayali River, the lower branch of the Amazon in 
Peru. The Ucayali flows north through the Andes and 
then turns east and joins the Maranon River, the upper 
branch of the Amazon. This junction takes place near 
Iquitos, Peru, and forms the main channel of the Ama- 
zon. The river continues eastward across Brazil and 
flows into the Atlantic Ocean on the northern side of 
Maraio Island. 

The Amazon tumbles rapidly through the Andes and 
falls about 16,400 feet (4,999 meters) during the first 600 
miles (970 kilometers). It falls about 800 feet (240 meters) 













Rin Neg J ( Marajb-_*9 
ee nF a og “Belém i. 


1,500 


Amazon River 403 








Atiantr , 
Ocean 


a4 NCH 
Ulana 
North 


s Macapa a 


Equator 


> 


Brasilia, 


lh North Latitude 





2.000 


1,500 2.500 3.000 Miles 


2.000 2.500 3.000 3 500 4,000 


4.500 Kilometers 


—— 


| 





more during the rest of its course. The river flows at 
about 14 miles (2.4 kilometers) per hour during the dry 
season. Its flow increases to about 3 miles (5 kilometers) 
per hour when the river is swollen by rain. 

More than 200 smaller rivers flow into the Amazon. 
They include the Japura, the Jurua, the Madeira, the 
Purus, the Tapajos, the Xingu, and the Rio Negro. 

An unusually high ocean tide occasionally overpow- 
ers the current at the mouth of the Amazon. This creates 
a wall of water called a bore that measures up to 15 feet 
(4.6 meters) high and rushes upstream. 

Animal and plant life. Many kinds of fish live in the 
Amazon River. They include the fierce, flesh-eating pira- 
nha and the pirarucu, one of the largest freshwater fish 
of South America. The basin area is the home of such 
animals as alligators, anacondas, monkeys, parrots, 
sloths, and many species of insects. 

The Amazon rain forest has a great variety of plant 


Loren Mcintyre. Woodfin Camp Inc. 


The muddy brown Amazon 
joins the blue-black waters of 
the Rio Negro in northwest- 
ern Brazil. The Rio Negro is 
one of the Amazon's chief 
tributaries. 


404 Amazons 


life. Scientists have found more than 3,000 species of 
plants in 1 square mile (2.6 square kilometers) there. The 
trees stand as tall as 130 feet (40 meters). Their tops 
grow so close together that only a little sunlight can 
reach the ground. 

History. Indians lived in the Amazon River basin be- 
fore white people first came to the area. Vicente Yanez 
Pinzon, a Spanish explorer, was probably the first Euro- 
pean to see the Amazon. !n 1500, he sailed to the coast 
of what is now Brazil. During 1541 and 1542, another 
Spaniard, Francisco de Orellana, led the first exploration 
of the river by a European. His expedition followed the 
Amazon from the mouth of the Napo River in Peru to the 
Atlantic. During Orellana’s journey, his group was at- 
tacked by what appeared to be female Indian warriors. 
The Spaniards called their attackers Amazons, after the 
female warriors in Greek mythology (see Amazons). The 
name was later given to the river and the nearby area. 

In the mid-1800's, trees in the Amazon basin became 
an important source of rubber. But after about 1910, 
plantations in Southeast Asia began to make rubber 
more cheaply. The demand for Amazon rubber fell, and 
the economy of the region collapsed. Since the 1960's, 
the Brazilian government has built highways and air- 
ports in the Amazon basin. New towns and farms have 
been established in this region, and its population has 
grown. 

Increasing demands for natural resources are threat- 
ening the Amazon rain forest. Mining and the clearing 
of land for agriculture and industry are adding to the 
rapid destruction of the plant and animal life in this envi- 
ronment. Jerry R. Williams 

See also Amazon rain forest; Brazil (The Amazon Re- 
gion); Orellana, Francisco de. 


Additional resources 


De Onis, Juan. The Green Cathedral: Sustainable Development of 

Amazonia. Oxtord, 1992. 

Goulding, Michael, and others. Floods of Fortune: Ecology and 

Economy Along the Amazon. Columbia Univ. Pr., 1996. 
MclIntyre, Loren. Amazonia. Sierra Club, 1991. 

Amazons, AM wh zahnz, were a tribe of warrior 
women in Greek mythology. To the male-centered 
Greeks of the 400's B.C, the Amazons symbolized all that 
was barbaric and non-Greek. The Greeks believed that 
the Amazons inhabited a remote region of Asia Minor 
and maintained their female culture by mating periodi- 
cally with men of neighboring tribes. The women sent 
their sons back to the tribes of their fathers, or enslaved 
them, rearing only the girls. 

The name Amazon is usually taken to mean breastless. 
The women, according to some sources, seared off the 
right breast of each daughter so she could shoot the 
bow and arrow more easily. 

Many references to Amazons appear in ancient Greek 
literature. For example, the Amazon queen Penthesileia 
aided the Trojans against the Greeks in the Trojan War. 
After killing many Greeks, she was killed by the Greek 
warrior Achilles. 

Some scholars believe that the concept of a race of 
women warriors Originated when the Greeks fought the 
Scythians, a people who lived north of the Black Sea. 
Scythian women sometimes fought alongside the men 
and had masculine habits. The Greek historian 
Herodotus believed the Sarmatians, who replaced the 


Scythians, were the product of a planned union of the 
Amazons and the Scythians. Nancy Felson 
Ambassador is the personal representative of a coun- 
trys head of state at the capital of another country. An 
ambassador is the nation’s highest-ranking diplomat in 
the other country. The person's full title is ambassador 
extraordinary and plenipotentiary. 

In the United States, the president appoints all ambas- 
sadors, with the approval of the Senate. The rank of am- 
bassador is also given to American chiefs of mission to 
international organizations if the person is appointed by 
the president and confirmed by the Senate. For exam- 
ple, an ambassador heads the United States delegation 
to the United Nations. 

An ambassador heads a country’s embassy in the for- 
eign Capital. The staff may number several hundred peo- 
ple, including minister-counselors, counselors, diplo- 


/ “ ° . va 
matic secretaries, consular officers, attachés, and clerks. 


The ambassador carries on negotiations with the for- 
eign government that deal with the political, economic, 
and cultural relations between the two nations. The am- 
bassador provides the official channel of communica- 
tions by maintaining contacts with the head of state, the 
foreign minister, and other officials. 

The ancient Greeks were among the first people to ex- 
change diplomatic representatives. The Congress of Vi- 
enna in 1814 and 1815 and the Congress of Aix-la- 
Chapelle in 1818 placed diplomacy on a systematic basis 
by creating four classes of representatives. These 
classes consisted of ambassadors (the highest rank), 
ministers, ministers resident, and chargés daffaires. 
During its early history, the United States appointed rep- 
resentatives of the three lower ranks. In 1893, the United 
States appointed its first ambassadors—to Britain, 
France, Germany, and Italy. Today, the United States as- 
signs ambassadors to all countries with which it has dip- 
lomatic relations. Michael P. Sullivan 

Related articles in Wor/d Book include: 


Address, Forms of Diplomacy Minister 
Consul Legation State, Department 
of 


Amber is a hard, yellowish-brown fossilized resin. It 
comes chiefly froin the resins of pine trees that grew in 
northern Europe millions of years ago. These resins 
were gummy materials mixed with oils in the trees. 
When the oils became oxidized (combined with oxygen), 
hard resins were left. These pine trees were buried un- 
derground or underwater, and the resins slowly 
changed into irregularly shaped lumps of amber. Lumps 
of amber often contain insects trapped as the resins 
flowed from the trees. Some lumps have air bubbles. 

The largest supply of amber lies in the Baltic Sea area. 
It comes from a species of pine tree that is now extinct. 
Some experts consider this amber the only true amber. 
Central America has important deposits of amber from 
other sources. Most amber is mined from a claylike soil 
called blue earth. Amber is used to make beads, mouth- 
pieces for pipes, and other ornaments. 

The ancient Greeks called amber e/ektron. When they 
rubbed amber with cloth, it became electrically charged 
and attracted bits of lightweight material, such as straw 
and feathers. The word e/ectricity comes from the Greek 
word elektron. Roger D. Barry 

See also Electricity (History); Gem (picture); Resin. 


Ambergris, AM buhr grees or AM buhr grihs, is a 
waxy substance found in the intestines of some sperm 
whales. It has a musky smell when dried and was once 
used in expensive perfumes. Ambergris was added to 
perfume because its odor made the odor of the per- 
fume last longer. Today, artificial substitutes have almost 
entirely replaced natural ambergris in perfume making. 

Ambergris was once collected chiefly from the bod- 
ies of dead sperm whales. The whales also pass amber- 
gris as a waste product, and clumps of it can sometimes 
be found in the water or on shore. John K. B. Ford 

See also Whale (American whaling). 
Amberjack is a large, fast-swimming game fish found 
in warm and tropical oceans. People who fish for sport 
prize the amberjack for its fierce fighting ability when 
hooked. Amberjacks have a streamlined body and a 








WORLD BOOK illustration by John D Oawson 
The greater amberjack is the largest species of this fast-swim- 
ming game fish. It may weigh more than 150 pounds (68 kilo- 
grams). The greater amberjack lives in tropical seas. 


sharply forked tail. They are variously colored. Some 
species have a brownish, gray-green, or blue back. 
Some have silvery sides and deeply colored fins. 

There are about 12 species of amberjacks. The greater 
amberjack is the largest species. It may grow more than 
5 feet (1.5 meters) in length and may weigh more than 
150 pounds (68 kilograms). It lives in tropical seas 
throughout the world. A species of amberjack called the 





Gemologn al Institute ot Amenca 
Amber is the fossilized resin of pine trees. Amber is used to 
make pipestems and jewelry, such as the pendant shown here. 
Most amber comes trom the Baltic Sea area in northern Europe. 


Ambulance 405 


yellowtail has a bright yellow tail and a yellowish stripe 
along the side of the body. It lives in coastal areas of the 
Pacific Ocean. Robert R. Rofen 


Scientific classification. Amberjacks belong to the family 
Carangidae. The greater amberjack is Seriola dumerili. The yel- 
lowtail is S. falandet. 


Ambler, Eric (1909-1998), an English author, won fame 
for his well-constructed novels of intrigue and interna- 
tional adventure. He also wrote screenplays for motion 
pictures. Ambler’s novels include A Coffin for Dimitrios 
(1939), Journey into Fear (1940), The Light of Day (1963), 
The Levanter (1972), and The Care of Time (1981). During 
World War II (1939-1945), Ambler made educational 
films for the British Army. He continued writing for mo- 
tion pictures after the war. His screenplays include 7he 
Wreck of the Mary Deare and The Cruel Sea. His autobi- 
ography, Here Lies, was published in 1986. Ambler was 
born in London. David Geherin 

Ambrose, Saint (340?-397), was a bishop of Milan and 
one of the most influential people of his time. As bishop, 
he acted as an adviser for three Roman emperors and 
defended the freedom of the church from government 
interference. 

Ambrose preached widely. He also wrote essays pro- 
moting Christian ethics and upholding the ideal of vir- 
ginity. In Concerning Faith (377), Ambrose defended the 
belief in the divinity of Jesus Christ against the ideas of 
the Arians, who believed only God the Father was com- 
pletely divine (see Arianism). Ambrose also helped de- 
feat an attempt to regain government approval of the an- 
cient Roman religion. Historians believe that Ambrose 
popularized the practice of singing hymns in church. His 
sermons and piety inspired Saint Augustine to convert 
to Christianity. Ambrose baptized Augustine in 387. 

Ambrose was born in what is now Trier, in western 
Germany. He pursued a career as a lawyer and provin- 
cial governor. The people of Milan chose him as bishop 
in 374. His feast day is December 7. Marilyn J. Harran 
Ambrosia, am BROH zhuf, was a magical substance 
eaten by the gods of Greek and Roman mythology. Am- 
brosia was eaten with nectar, the drink of the gods. A 
human being who ate ambrosia and drank nectar be- 
came immortal. The word ambrosia/ means sweet- 
smelling or delicious. Mary R. Lefkowitz 
Ambrozic, Aloysius Cardinal (1930- ), Was ap- 
pointed a cardinal of the Roman Catholic Church by 
Pope John Paul Il in 1998. The pope had appointed him 
archbishop of Toronto in 1990. 

Aloysius Matthew Ambrozic was born in Gabrje, 
Slovenia, then part of Yugoslavia. He settled in Canada in 
1948 and studied for the priesthood at St. Augustine's 
Seminary in Scarborough, Ontario (now part of Toron- 
to). He was ordained a priest in 1955. He served as a pro- 
fessor at St. Augustine's from 1960 to 1967 and dean of 
students from 1971 to 1976. He also taught at the Toron- 
to School of Theology from 1970 to 1976. 

Ambrozic became auxiliary bishop of the archdiocese 
of Toronto in 1976 and coadjutor archbishop in 1986. He 
wrote The Hidden Kingdom (1972) and Remarks on the 
Canadian Catechism (1974). Robert P. Imbelli 
Ambulance is a vehicle that is designed to transport 
sick er injured people. Most ambulances are built from 
specially designed automobile vans or trucks. They are 
painted with crosses and other special markings, and 


406 Ameba 





© Larry Mulvei, SPL from Photo Researchers 


Ambulances are staffed by trained medical workers called para- 


medics. Paramedics provide emergency care to patients before 
they reach the hospital. 


they have sirens and flashing lights to warn drivers and 
pedestrians of their approach. Airplanes and helicopters 
also may serve as ambulances. Airplanes can travel long 
distances quickly, and helicopters can reach places that 
have no roads or landing strips. 

The first ambulances were horse-drawn wagons that 
carried sick or wounded soldiers in wartime. The 
Spaniards used such vehicles during the siege of Mala- 
ga in 1487. In 1869, Bellevue Hospital in New York City 
began to use the first civilian ambulances. During World 
War 1] (1939-1945), armies first used helicopters to trans- 
port wounded soldiers from remote battlefields. 

Until the 1970's, ambulances merely carried patients 
to a hospital. The vehicles were too small to allow any 
treatment and they carried little medical equipment. 
Most ambulance workers received only basic first-aid 
training and could not handle serious emergencies. 

Today, most ambulances have room for treatment of 
patients, and they carry equipment that helps ambu- 
lance workers keep patients alive. This equipment in- 
cludes bandages, oxygen masks, resuscitators (breath- 
ing machines), splints, and medications. In addition, 
many ambulances are staffed by highly trained workers 
called paramedics. Paramedics can provide cardiopul- 
monary resuscitation (CPR) and other lifesaving emer- 
gency treatments (see Cardiopulmonary resuscitation). 

Many ambulances carry a two-way radio, which en- 
ables a worker to communicate with a hospital physi- 
cian. The worker reports such information as a patient's 
pulse, blood pressure, and breathing condition, and the 
doctor can determine the proper treatment. Some am- 
bulances have instruments that send the hospital med- 
ical data, such as a patient's heart activity, by a process 
called telemetry (see Telemetry). David R. Boyd 

See also Australia (Transportation [picturel). 

Ameba, uh MEE buh, also spelled amoeba, is a tiny, 
one-celled organism that usually can only be seen under 
a microscope. Amebas vary in size from about 54, inch 
(0.25 millimeter) to 55 inch (2.5 millimeters) across. Some 


! 


amebas live in water and moist soil. Others live in the 
bodies of animals and human beings. 

Only one cel] makes up an amebass whole body. The 
cell contains a nuc/eus, the structure that directs the 
cell's activities, and the cytoplasm, jellylike material 
around the nucleus. A thin, elastic membrane surrounds 
the cytoplasm and nucleus and holds them together. 
Water and gases pass in and out of the ameba through 
the membrane. 

To move about, an ameba must change its body 
shape. The cytoplasm pushes out the membrane to form 
a fingerlike pseudopod 
(false foot), and all of the 
cytoplasm seems to flow 
into it. For every “step,” an- 
other pseudopod must 
form. Cells that move in 
this way are called ame- 
boid cells. The white 
blood cells of human be- 
ings are ameboid cells. 

Amebas eat tiny living 
organisms and particles of 
dead and decaying matter. 
They engulf their food by 
slowly wrapping 
pseudopods around a 
food particle. In this way, the food gets inside the cell. 
The section of the cell that contains the food is called a 
food vacuole. \t floats in the cytoplasm until the food is 
digested. All undigested food passes out of the cell as 
the ameba slowly moves away. Amebas in fresh water 
must control water taken into their bodies or they will 
burst. They have a contractile vacuole to collect the extra 
water that builds up in the cell. When the contractile 
vacuole is filled, it empties through the cell membrane. 

Amebas reproduce by fission (splitting apart) when 
they reach a certain size. The nucleus divides first. Then 
the rest of the body divides. The division results in two 
daughter cells, which can also grow, feed, and divide. 

Most amebas are harmless to people. But one type 
causes a serious ailment called amebic dysentery when 
it gets into the large intestine. 


Scientific classification. Amebas belong to the kingdom 
Protista. A common ameba is Amoeba proteus. The ameba that 
causes dysentery is Entamoeba histolytica. 





Oxford Scientific Films from Animals Animals 


Ameba 


Lawrence C Wit 


See also Dysentery; Protoplasm; Protozoan. 
Amendment, in legislation, is a change ina law, orin 
a bill before it becomes a law. Bills often have amend- 
ments attached before a legislature votes on them. 

Amendments to the Constitution of the United States 
may be proposed in two ways: 

(1) If two-thirds of both houses approve, Congress 
may propose an amendment The amendment becomes 
a law when ratified either by legislatures or by conven- 
tions in three-fourths of the states. 

(2) If the legislatures of two-thirds of the states ask for 
an amendment, Congress must call a convention to pro- 
pose it. The amendment becomes a law when ratified ei- 
ther by the legislatures or by conventions in three- 
fourths of the states. This method has never been used. 

For the text of amendments to the U.S. Constitution, 
see Constitution of the United States. Peter Woll 

See also Parliamentary procedure. 


Amenhotep IV. See Egypt, Ancient (The New King- 
dom). 

Ament. See Catkin. 

America is the great land mass of the Western Hemi- 
sphere. For location, see World (map). It is made up of 
North and South America. The mainland of America is 
the longest north-to-south land mass on earth. The 
greatest distance of its mainland from north to south is 
about 8,700 miles (14,000 kilometers), from the Boothia 
Peninsula in Canada to Cape Froward in Chile. The west- 
ernmost point of mainland America is at the Seward 
Peninsula on the west coast of Alaska. Northeastern 
Brazil is the easternmost point. America also includes 
many islands north, south, east, and west of the main- 
land. North and South America are connected by a land 
bridge that is narrowest at the Isthmus of Panama. 

Many scientists believe that America was connected 
to the western edge of Africa and Eurasia from about 
250 million years ago until about 200 million years ago. 
Volcanic formations in Brazil are similar to such forma- 
tions in South Africa. Likewise, the Appalachian Moun- 
tains of North America may be related to the Caledonian 
Mountains of Scotland. 

The word America is believed to be in honor of the 
Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci. It was first used only 
for South America but was later applied to the whole 
Western Hemisphere. Today, the term is often used to 
refer to the United States of America. 

John Edwin Coffman 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Central America South America 
Exploration United States 
Latin America Vespucci, Amerigo 
North America 


America is one of the national hymns of the United 
States. The words were written in 1831 for a church 
school in Boston by Samuel Francis Smith, who was 
then studying for the ministry. The song was first sung at 
the school’s Fourth of July celebration that year. Smith 
wrote the words to a melody that was popular in many 
European countries. He found the tune in a collection of 
German melodies. “God Save the Queen,’ the British na- 
tional anthem, uses the same melody. Smith wrote five 
stanzas. The third, which called the British “tyrants,” is 
not sung today. See also God Save the Queen. 

Valerie Woodring Goertzen 
America First Committee, founded in September 
1940, was the most powerful isolationist group in Amer- 
ica before the United States entered World War II. It had 
over 800,600 members, who wanted to keep America 
neutral. It tried to influence public opinion through pub- 
lications and speeches. America First disagreed with an- 
other powerful group, the Committee to Defend Ameri- 
ca by Aiding the Allies. Both of the groups wanted to 
build American defenses and keep the United States out 
of the war. However, the Committee to Defend America 
argued that the best way to remain neutral was to aid 
the United Kingdom. America First thought it more im- 
portant to stay out of the war than to assure a British vic- 
tory. America First was dissolved four days after the 
Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor on Dec. 7, 1941. 

David A. Shannon 
America the Beautiful, also called O Beautiful for 
Spacious Skies, is one of the most familiar and popular 


American Association of University Women 407 


American patriotic songs. Katharine Lee Bates, a college 
professor, wrote the words as a poem during a visit to 
Colorado in 1893. She was inspired by the view from 
Pikes Peak. The poem, which describes the wonders of 
America, was published on July 4, 1895. Sometime after 
that the words became associated with the hymn tune 
“Materna’ (also called “O Mother Dear, Jerusalem’), writ- 
ten by American composer Samuel Augustus Ward in 
1882. The music and text were published together in 
Te Katherine K. Preston 

See Bates, Katharine Lee. 

American Academy and Institute of Arts and 
Letters is an organization that promotes literature and 
the fine arts in the United States. It gives awards and 
prizes to notable artists, writers, and composers. In ad- 
dition, it organizes exhibitions of art and manuscripts, 
and buys works by American artists to donate to U.S. 
museums. 

The organization consists of two divisions, the Insti- 
tute and the Academy. A maximum of 250 United States 
citizens may be members of the Institute. They serve for 
life and belong to one of three departments—music, art, 
or literature. Membership openings result from the 
death of a member. After a vacancy occurs, members 
nominate replacements. The department and full Insti- 
tute membership vote on these nominees. The candi- 
dates receiving a majority of votes in both elections be- 
come members of the Institute. The Academy consists 
of 50 Institute members elected for life by Academy 
members. 

The American Academy and Institute of Arts and Let- 
ters was formed in 1976 from the merger of the Ameri- 
can Academy of Arts and Letters, founded in 1904, and 
the National Institute of Arts and Letters, founded in 
1898. Headquarters are in New York City. 
reviewed by the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters 
American Academy of Arts and Sciences. See 
Arts and Sciences, American Academy of. 

American Association for the Advancement of 
Science (AAAS) is the world’s largest federation of sci- 
entific organizations. AAAS has about 285 affiliated soci- 
eties and academies of science, which cover the physi- 
cal, life, and social sciences. Individual members of 
AAAS number about 134,000. Membership is open to 
anyone interested in achieving the objectives of AAAS. 

Main objectives of AAAS are to further the progress 
of science, make it easy for scientists to cooperate with 
one another, help increase scientific freedom and re- 
sponsibility, make science more effective in the promo- 
tion of human welfare, and advance education in sci- 
ence. AAAS publishes a weekly journal called Science. 
The association was founded in 1848. Its headquarters 
are in Washington, D.C. 
Association for the Advancement of Science 
American Association of Retired Persons. See 
AARP. 

American Association of University Women 
(AAUW) is a national organization of men and women 
who have a bachelor's or higher degree. It has about 
140,000 members. The AAUW promotes equality, edu- 
cation, and personal development for women, and so- 
cial reform. Members take part in study and action pro- 
grams, and they support legislation relating to their 
concerns. The AAUWss interests include the arts, com- 


Critically 


Critically reviewed by the American 


408 American Baptist Association 


munity affairs, education, and international relations. 

The AAUW Educational Foundation, a division of the 
AAUW, offers fellowships to women for advanced study 
or research. The AAUW also offers to its members, 
branches, and state divisions grants for public service 
projects and studies. 

The AAUW was founded in Boston in 1882 as the As- 
sociation of Collegiate Alumnae. Jts national offices are 
in Washington, D.C. 

Critically reviewed by the American Association of University Women 
American Baptist Association was organized in 
1924 through the merger of three church groups—the 
General Association of Baptist Churches, the Baptist 
Missionary Association of Texas, and a Baptist conven- 
tion in Oklahoma. The churches in the association do 
not recognize baptism by other denominations and do 
not practice /ntercommunion (mutual services) with 
other denominations. The association believes in the 
equality of all members and the complete independ- 
ence of local congregations. See Baptists. 

Congregations in about 45 states belong to the associ- 
ation. They sponsor 2 colleges, 22 Bible institutes, 5 
seminaries, and support missionary work in many parts 
of the world. The association has almost 1,100,000 mem- 
bers. Its headquarters are in Texarkana, Texas. 

Critically reviewed by the American Baptist Association 
American Baptist Churches in the U.S.A. is an or- 
ganization of Baptist churches, associations, and reli- 
gious bodies. It is a member of the National Council of 
Churches, the World Council of Churches, and the Bap- 
tist World Alliance. The organization sponsors colleges, 
theological seminaries, hospitals, retirement homes, 
and other institutions. It supports evangelistic, educa- 
tional, agricultural, and medical missions in many other 
countries. The organization has about 1,500,000 mem- 
bers. Its headquarters are located in Valley Forge, Penn- 
sylvania. 

The organization was formed in 1907, partly to help 
coordinate the work of national missionary and educa- 
tional bodies which the Baptist churches established in 
1814, 1824, and 1832. For more information about Bap- 
tist doctrine and history, see Baptists. 

Critically reviewed by the American Baptist Churches in the U.S.A. 
American Bar Association is a voluntary organiza- 
tion of lawyers, judges, law students, and law teachers 
of the United States and its possessions. The organiza- 
tion's goals include promoting the administration of jus- 
tice and upholding high standards of legal education 
and ethics. 

The American Bar Association, which is often called 
the ABA, gives accreditation (official approval) to law 
schools. The association also publishes studies on sub- 
jects of legal and public interest, such as legal aid and 
prison reform. In addition, the organization provides op- 
portunities for continuing legal education in these sub- 
jects. Many members of Congress ask the ABA for its 
views on current legislation. The ABA publishes the 
monthly American Bar Journal, plus about 7,800 books 
and pamphlets yearly on topics including business, 
criminal, and taxation law. 

More than 400,000 men and women belong to the 
ABA. The ABA was founded in 1878 and has headquar- 
ters in Chicago. 


Critically reviewed by the American Bar Association 


American Battle Monuments Commission is an 
independent federal agency that commemorates the 
achievements and sacrifices of United States armed 
forces. The commission designs, constructs, operates, 
and maintains U.S. military cemeteries and memorials in 
foreign countries. It also maintains certain monuments 
in the United States. The commission controls the de- 
sign and construction of military monuments and mark- 
ers erected in foreign countries by U.S. citizens and by 
private and public organizations, and it encourages the 
sponsors to maintain these sites. Congress established 
the commission in 1923. Private citizens and members of 
the armed forces serve on the commission. 

Critically reviewed by the American Battle Monuments Commission 
American Bible Society. See Bible Society, Ameri- 
can. 

American Bowling Congress (ABC) is a legislative 
and judicial body that governs about 3 million male 
bowlers in almost 120,000 sanctioned leagues in the 
Western Hemisphere. Jt standardizes equipment, makes 
rules, and issues awards for outstanding scoring per- 
formances. Jt conducts an annual tournament in the 
United States and is a member of the United States 
Olympic Committee. ABC, founded in 1895, has head- 
quarters in Greendale, Wisconsin. 

Critically reviewed by the American Bowling Congress 
American Cancer Society. See Cancer Society, 
American. 

American Chemical Society is an organization of 
chemists and chemical engineers. Jt has more than 
163,000 members and is the world’s largest scientific so- 
ciety. It consists of more than 30 professional divisions. 
Local groups meet throughout the United States and 
Puerto Rico. It was founded in 1876. The societys head- 
quarters are in Washington, D.C. The best-known publi- 
cations of the American Chemical Society are the /our- 
nal of the American Chemical Society, Chemical 
Abstracts, and Chemical and Engineering News. 

Critically reviewed by the American Chemical Society 
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) is a non- 
partisan organization devoted to defending the rights 
and freedoms of people in the United States. It works 
mainly by providing lawyers and legal advice for individ- 
uals and groups in local, state, and federal courts. In ad- 
dition, officials of the ACLU testify before state and fed- 
eral legislative committees, advise government Officials, 
and conduct educational programs. The chief goal of 
the ACLU is to protect the fundamental rights of individ- 
uals as described in the Constitution of the United 
States. These rights include freedom of speech and pro- 
tection against unfair punishment for people accused of 
crimes. 

The ACLU has defended the constitutional rights of a 
wide range of individuals and groups. It played an im- 
portant part in Supreme Court rulings that guaranteed 
legal aid to poor people. The group has supported fair 
treatment of conscientious objectors, people whose 
conscience does not allow them to take part in war. The 
ACLU has urged desegregation of schools and promot- 
ed the black civil rights movement. In 1978, the organiza- 
tion defended the right of a group of American Nazis to 
march in Skokie, Illinois. One of the current goals of the 
ACLU is the abolition of capital punishment. The group 
also calls for further restrictions on government inves- 





tigative agencies and for stricter separation of church 
and state. In addition, it seeks greater protection for the 
rights of immigrants who enter the United States with- 
out the required papers, and for the rights of homosexu- 
als and mental patients. The ACLU also supports the 
rights of women to have abortions. 

The ACLU was founded in 1920. It has about 300,000 
members. Its headquarters are in New York City. 

Harvey Glickman 
American colonies. See Colonial life in America. 
American Council on Alcohol Problems (ACAP) 
is anonprofit organization that warns the public of the 
dangers of alcohol. It also works to deal with the prob- 
lems caused by alcohol. The organization was founded 
as the American Anti-Saloon League in Washington, 
D.C., in 1895. It was renamed the National Temperance 
League during the 1930's. The group took its present 
name in 1964. Headquarters of the American Council on 
Alcohol Problems are in Bridgeton, Missouri. 

Critically reviewed by the American Council on Alcohol Problems 
American Council on Education is an alliance of 
nearly 1,800 institutions and organizations of higher ed- 
ucation. Most members are colleges, universities, com- 
munity colleges, and technical schools. But many nation- 
al, regional, and state associations also belong. The 
council was organized in 1918. It tries to advance educa- 
tion through the cooperation of member institutions. Its 
prime interest has been education beyond high school. 

The council has sponsored national programs of re- 
search and development to improve testing, guidance, 
and the quality of teaching. The council represents 
American higher education in dealing with the govern- 
ment on matters of public policy that affect higher edu- 
cation. Its headquarters are in Washington, D.C. 

Critically reviewed by the American Council on Education 
American Dental Association. See Dental Associ- 
ation, American. 

American Education Week. See Education Week, 
American. 

American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy 
Research sponsors research on government policy, 
the United States economy, and American and world 
politics. The institute, called AEI for short, is home to 
renowned economists, legal scholars, political scien- 
tists, and foreign policy specialists. 

AEI was founded in 1943 mainly to conduct economic 
policy research, which remains the core of its work. Its 
program in foreign and defense policy examines how 
American interests can be advanced and how political 
and economic freedom can be promoted. The institute 
is financed by contributions from corporations, founda- 
tions, and individuals. AEl is based in Washington, D.C. 

Critically reviewed by the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy 
Research 
American Eskimo dog is a small dog known for its 
fluffy, white coat. Breeders in the United States devel- 
oped the dog during the early 1900's. It is descended 
from European spitz breeds. American Eskimo dogs are 
often called “Eskies.” There are three varieties—the 
standard, the miniature, and the toy. Standard Eskies 
measure 15 to 19 inches (38 to 48 centimeters) tall at the 
shoulder, miniature Eskies stand 12 to 15 (30 to 38 cen- 
timeters) inches tall, and toy Eskies are 9 to 12 inches (23 
to 30 centimeters) tall. 


American Farm Bureau Federation 409 





Dartyn Davison 


The American Eskimo dog has a fluffy, white coat. 


American Eskimo dogs are intelligent, alert, and ener- 
getic. They once performed tricks in many American cir- 
cuses but are now kept chiefly as pets and show dogs. 

Critically reviewed by the American Eskimo Dog Club of America 
American Farm Bureau Federation is the largest 
general farm organization in the United States. More 
than 5 million families are members of the federation. 
The federation works to protect and advance the busi- 
ness and economic interests of farmers and ranchers by 
supporting educational programs, promoting favorable 
legislation, and sponsoring helpful services. It is an in- 
dependent and voluntary organization that operates on 
local, state, national, and international levels. When pro- 
moting legislation, the federation works with both Dem- 
ocrats and Republicans. 

The federation he!ps its members solve many prob- 
lems affecting individual farm products. It works to re- 
duce crop surpluses and to expand markets for farm 
products in the United States and in other countries. The 
federation promotes research to find new uses for farm 
products in the home and in industry. In many states, in- 
surance, Cooperative and group purchasing of farm sup- 
plies, and cooperative marketing of farm products are 
among its most important services. The federation also 
promotes farm safety, citizenship, leadership training, 
education, and social and community betterment. 

Organization. The American Farm Bureau Federa- 
tion is composed of state Farm Bureaus from all of the 
states and from Puerto Rico. The state bureaus are com- 
posed of county bureaus, and county bureaus are com- 
posed of farm and ranch families. 

Each year, delegates from the states meet at the feder- 
ation’s national convention to determine the organiza- 
tion's policies and program of action. All the delegates 
are farmers whose chief occupation and interest is farm- 
ing or ranching. The delegates elect a board of directors 
and a president and vice president. Directors and offi- 
cers carry on the federation’s affairs between conven- 
tions. The directors represent all sections of the United 
States. These officials are responsible to the federation 
delegate body for their activities. 

The American Farm Bureau Federation has its national 
headquarters in Park Ridge, Illinois. It also has an office 


410 American Federation of Arts 


in Washington, D.C The federation publishes a weekly 
newsletter. Most of its state bureaus also publish maga- 
zines OF newspapers. 

History. A group of 28 state farm bureaus formed the 
American Farm Bureau Federation in Chicago in 1919. 
The federation played an important part in developing 
farm legislation during the Great Depression of the 
1930 s. This legislation emphasized soil conservation 
programs, price supports, and acreage control regula- 
tions. After World War Il ended in 1945, the federation 
recommended changes in government farm programs. 
The changes were intended to reduce the farmers de- 
pendence on crop price supports and acreage controls. 

Criucalh- reviewed by the American Farm Bureau Federation 
American Federation of Arts. See Arts, American 
Federation of. 

American Federation of Government Employ- 
ees (AFGE) is a union of civilian employees of the Unit- 
ed States government and the District of Columbia The 
AFGE represents general office workers, janitors, 
lawyers, mechanics, and scientists. The union consists of 
about 1,300 local unions called /odges. It is associated 
with the American Federation of Labor and Congress of 
Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIOl 

The AFGE was formed in 1932 by workers who with- 
drew from a similar union, the National Federation of 
Federal Employees |NFFE). In 1931, the NFFE had broken 
its ties with what was then the AFL NFFE members who 
wanted to have an association with the AFL then found- 
ed the AFGE. AFGE headquarters are in Washington, 
D.C For membership, see Labor movement ‘table: Im- 
portant U.S. labor unions}. james G. Scoville 
American Federation of Labor and Congress of 
Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO) is a federation 
of labor unions. The AFL-CIO consists of many national 
and international craft and industrial unions that togeth- 
er have millions of members. The national unions are 
self-governing, but cooperate with one another within 
the federation. Each national union has local unions in 
the United States and its territories. The international 
unions also have local unions in Canada and in Puerto 
Rico, Panama, and other Caribbean lands. Altogether, 
the national and international labor unions have tens of 
thousands of local unions. 

Organization. All the affiliated unions are represent- 
ed at the AFL-C1Os conventions, held every two years. 
The convention is the supreme governing body. It elects 
the president, the secretary-treasurer, the executive vice 
president, and a number of vice presidents who make 
up the executive council. The council determines AFL- 
ClO policy between conventions and carries out poli- 
cies established by the convention. The AFL-CIO has 
central bodies \tederations) in all 50 states and Puerto 
Rico, and hundreds of local central bodies. It also has a 
number of directly affiliated local unions. 

Nine trade and industrial departments are affiliated 
with the AFL-CIO. These departments are the Building 
and Construction Trades, Metal Trades, Union Label and 
Service Trades, Maritime Trades, Industrial Union, Food 
and Allied Service Trades, Professional Employees, 
Transportation Trades, and Public Employees depart- 
ments. The national and international unions affiliate 
with the department or departments that represent their 
interests. 


The AFL-CIO has a number of committees and depart- 
ments. These groups deal with such matters as organiz- 
ing, legislation, civil rights, ethical practices, internation- 
al affairs, education, economic policy, community 
services, and occupational safety and health. 

Activities of the AFL-CIO include working with unions 
to increase their membership, informing union mem- 
bers about legislative and political matters, providing le- 
gal assistance, and representing the interests of work- 
ers families. In the legislative field, the AFL-CIO works 
for enactment of desired legislation on national and 
state levels. The organization promotes the activity of 
union members in such projects as campaigns for voter 
registration and for improvements in education and 
training. It also works to resolve certain types of dis- 
putes among its member unions. The AFL-ClO s publica- 
tions include The AFL-CIO News, published every other 
week, and a weekly newsletter, Mork in Progress. 

History. In 1881, in Pittsburgh, a group of trade 
unionists representing about 50,000 members founded 
the Federation of Organized Trades and Labor Unions of 
the United States and Canada In 1886, the group reor- 
ganized, changing its name to the American Federation 
of Labor. Its approach was to organize workers by crafts 
and skills. In 1935, eight leaders of AFL unions set up the 
Committee for Industrial Organization to carry on an or- 
ganizing drive in mass-production industries. The JO 
tried to sign up all workers in a plant, unskilled as well 
as skilled. Because of a disagreement over this type of 
organizing, the AFL suspended 10 national unions par- 
ticipating in the ClO in 1936. The CO then formed its 
own labor federation in 1938 and changed its name to 
the Congress of Industrial Organizations. The AFL and 
the CIO formally merged in 1955. In 1957, the Teamsters 
Union, then the largest union in the United States, was 
expelled from the AFL-ClO after its leaders were ac- 
cused of unethical practices. The Teamsters rejoined in 
1987. Another of the country s largest unions, the United 
Automobile Workers, disaffiliated in 1968 but rejoined 
in 1981. AFL-CIO headquarters are in Washington, D.C 

james G. Scoville 

Related articles in orld Book include: 

American Federation of Gov- Kirkland, Lane 

ernment Emplovees Labor movement 
Congress of Industral Organ- Meany, George 

izations Reuther, Walter P. 


Gompers, Samuel Shanker, Albert 
Green, William Sweeney, John J. 


American Federation of Musicians. See Musi- 
cians, American Federation of. 

American Federation of State, County, and Mu- 
nicipal Employees is one of the largest unions in the 
United States. It represents public employees and health 
care workers. The union has more than 12 million mem- 
bers. They include employees of state, county. and mu- 
nicipal governments; school districts; public and private 
hospitals; universities; and nonprofit agencies. Health 
and hospital workers form the largest occupational 
group, with more than 325,000 members. 

The unions chief goal is to improve working condi- 
tions and achieve dignity for its members through col- 
lective bargaining with employers. It has over 4,000 local 
unions and is affiliated with the American Federation of 
Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations. 





The organization was founded in 1936. Its headquar- 
ters are in Washington, D.C. For membership, see Labor 
movement (table: Important U.S. labor unions). 

Critically reviewed by the American Federation of State, County, and 
Municipal Employees 
American Federation of Teachers is a union affili- 
ated with the American Federation of Labor and Con- 
gress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO). It is made up 
of various educational workers, including teachers, 
counselors, school custodians, and school-bus drivers. 
It also represents state employees, faculty at colleges 
and universities, and nurses. The American Federation 
of Teachers has about 2,200 local unions in the United 
States and other countries. 

The union's chief objectives are to promote profes- 
sionalism in teaching and to secure appropriate wages, 
better working conditions, and job security for its mem- 
bers. The union supports school-based management, 
better school construction, and equal educational op- 
portunities for people of all races. The federation up- 
holds the rights of teachers to help form school policies 
and programs. Its members believe it can achieve its 
goals through democratic discussions between teacher 
representatives and school administrators, and through 
collective bargaining. 

The American Federation of Teachers was founded in 
1916. Its headquarters are in Washington, D.C. For mem- 
bership, see Labor movement (table: Important U.S. la- 
bor unions). 

Critically reviewed by the American Federation of Teachers 

See also Shanker, Albert. 

American foxhound is a medium-sized hunting dog. 
It is trained to hunt foxes by following the scent they 
leave on the ground. Hounds can be trained to hunt 
singly or in packs of 15 or 20. Most hunt clubs use packs 
of foxhounds. American foxhounds are trained to run 
competitively at field trials. They are well known for 
their speed, endurance, and stamina in the field. 

Foxhounds are usually white, with different-sized 
patches of black or tan or both. But a foxhound can be 
almost any color. The American foxhound stands from 





© Robert Pearcy Animals Animals 
An American foxhound is a medium-sized hunting dog. Most 


foxhounds have a white, black, and tan coat. The dog uses its 
speed, endurance, and sensitive nose to help people hunt foxes. 


American Indian Movement 411 


21 to 25 inches (53 to 64 centimeters) tall at the shoulder 
and weighs 60 to 70 pounds (27 to 32 kilograms). It has 
well-shaped legs, hard muscles, a long tail, ears that 
hang down, and a distinctive bark. See also Dog (pic- 
ture: Hounds); English foxhound. 

Critically reviewed by the American Kennel Club 
American Friends Service Committee (AFSC) is 
a Quaker organization committed to nonviolence and 
social equality. The AFSC promotes peaceful policies 
that respect human rights and the rights of nations to 
choose their own future. The AFSC has played a promi- 
nent role in efforts to end racial separation in South 
Africa. In addition, the AFSC carries out programs in de- 
veloping countries that help people raise food and im- 
prove health conditions. 

Quakers, who started the AFSC, believe in the equali- 
ty of all people. In the United States, the AFSC works for 
fair treatment of American Indians, farm laborers, racial 
minorities, gay and lesbian people, immigrants, and oth- 
ers who experience poverty or discrimination. 

The AFSC was founded in 1917 with the aim of caring 
for civilian victims of World War I. In 1947,the AFSC was 
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for its relief work after 
World War Il. The AFSC is privately funded by individu- 
als from many religious backgrounds. It operates assist- 
ance programs in 30 countries. The organization's head- 
quarters are in Philadelphia. 

Critically reviewed by the American Friends Service Committee 

See also Quakers. 

American GI Forum of the United States is a civil 
rights organization for Mexican American military veter- 
ans and their families. It fights discrimination against 
Mexican Americans in education, employment, and 
housing. 

Hector P. Garcia, a World War II combat surgeon, 
founded the organization in 1948 in Corpus Christi, 
Texas. The previous year, an undertaker in Three Rivers, 
Texas, refused to rebury a Mexican American Gl who 
had been killed during the war and buried overseas. 
Garcia and other veterans organized the American Gl 
Forum of the United States to aid needy and disabled 
veterans who encountered such prejudice after the war. 
The group sponsors programs to help Mexican Ameri- 
cans obtain jobs, medical services, and scholarships. 

The American Gl Forum of the United States has 
about 50,000 members, with local chapters in nearly 
every state. Its national headquarters are in Austin, 
Texas. Feliciano M. Ribera 
American Heart Association. See Heart Associa- 
tion, American. 

American Historical Association. See Historical 
Association, American. 

American history. See United States, History of the. 
American Indian. See Indian, American. 
American Indian Movement (AIM) is a civil rights 
organization in the United States and Canada. It works 
for equal rights for American Indians and improvement 
of their living conditions. The group has participated in 
efforts to establish Indian land ownership rights. 

The American Indian Movement has often been criti- 
cal of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, a U.S. government 
agency that works to promote the welfare of the nation’s 
Indians. AIM believes the bureau has failed to eliminate 
widespread job and housing discrimination and poverty 


412 American Institute of Aeronautics 


among Native Americans. The organization also has de- 
manded the return of property rights guaranteed by 
treaties between the U.S. and Canadian governments 
and various Indian tribes. 

AIM was founded in Minneapolis in 1968 by Dennis 
Banks, George Mitchell, and Clyde Bellecourt. Its origi- 
nal goals were to help improve the lives of the city’s In- 
dians and to protect them from police actions that AIM 
considered brutality. AIM chapters began to be formed 
in other cities in 1970. AIM has carried out several pro- 
tests to call national attention to the problems of Indi- 
ans. In 1972, members occupied the headquarters of the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs in Washington, D.C, for seven 
days. The following year, AIM members and other Indi- 
ans seized the village of Wounded Knee, S. Dak., where 
the U.S. Cavalry massacred as many as 300 Sioux in 1890 
(see Wounded Knee). 

During the 1970s, AIM also established and operated 
a number of organizations to help Indians develop a 
sense of self-determination. These groups, consisting 
only of Indians, worked to improve schools, legal serv- 
ices, employment programs, and health services for Na- 
tive Americans. Since 1974, AIM has attempted to unite 
Native Americans throughout the Western Hemisphere. 
But problems among AIM leaders contributed to the 
group's decline in the 1980s. W. Roger Buffalohead 
American Institute of Aeronautics and As- 
tronautics is a professional society for engineers and 
scientists who are engaged in aviation and space work 
in the United States. The institute encourages research 
and aids education in the fields of science and engineer- 
ing. It sponsors technical meetings and discussions, and 
it publishes six journals, two book series, and a monthly 
magazine. The institute was established in 1963 through 
the consolidation of the American Rocket Society and 
the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences. It has more than 
70 corporate members and more than 44,000 profes- 
sional and student members. Headquarters are in Wash- 
ington, D.C 

Aeronautics and Astronautics 
American Kennel Club (AKC) is the world’s largest 
registry for purebred dogs. The club recognizes 137 
breeds of purebred dogs and registers more than 1 mil- 
lion dogs a year. It maintains a file called the Stud Book, 
which contains a family history of every dog ever regis- 
tered with the AKC 

The AKC is made up of about 500 member dog clubs 
in the United States. The national member breed clubs 
set the standards by which dogs are judged at AKC 
shows. Representatives from the clubs carry out the 
AKC’ activities. The AKC makes rules for dog shows and 
such competitions as obedience trials, field trials, and 
hunting tests. The AKC also approves dog show judges 
and maintains a staff to assist at competitions. 

The AKC encourages interest in purebred dogs and 
promotes their health and welfare. The club publishes a 
number of periodicals, including the monthly magazine 
Pure-Bred Dogs—American Kennel Gazette; and Stud 
Book Register, a monthly listing of male and female 
dogs that have bred for the first time. It publishes the 
reference books 7he Complete Dog Book and AKC Dog 
Care and Training. 

The AKC also produces videos on each breed and on 
other subjects of interest to dog owners. In addition, the 


Critically reviewed by the American Institute of 


AKC maintains a library and a museum. 

The AKC was founded in 1884. Its headquarters are in 
New York City. Critically reviewed by the American Kennel Club 
American League. See Baseball. 

American Legion ranks as the largest veterans or- 
ganization in the United States. Men and women who 
served honorably in the U. S. armed forces during 
World War I, World War II, the Korean War, the Viet- 
nam War, the Persian Gulf War, or in military actions in 
Grenada, Lebanon, or Panama, may join the American 
Legion. The Legion seeks to advance the aims and inter- 
ests of veterans, to continue friendships formed during 
military service, and to see that disabled veterans get 
the care and help they need. It takes part in programs 
that promote the American way of life at the local, state, 
and national levels. It also sponsors patriotic community 
projects and educational and charitable programs. 

The American Legion has about 3 million members. 
They are organized into 58 departments and about 
16,000 local posts. It holds a convention each year to de- 
termine policies and programs and to elect national offi- 
cers, including a national commander. The national ad- 
jutant heads the national headquarters staff at 700 N. 
Pennsylvania Street, Indianapolis, IN 46204. The Legion 
also has a national office in Washington, D.C. The official 
publication is the American Legion Magazine. 

Activities. Legion posts have built community 
houses, swimming pools, playgrounds, and many parks 
throughout the United States. They have supplied ambu- 
lances and special equipment for community hospitals 
and for hospitals operated by the Department of Veter- 
ans Affairs. The Legion be- 
came particularly active in 
education during eco- 
nomic depressions during 
the early 1920's and early 
1930's. More than 1,000 
posts received certificates 
of honor from the National 
Education Association for 
keeping local schools run- 
ning in spite of the re- 
duced budgets with which 
they had to operate. The 
American Legion origi- 
nated the yearly obsern- 
ance of American Educa- 
tion Week (see Education Week, American). 

The Legion has actively opposed Communism, fas- 
cism, and all forms of totalitarianism. Its program of 
youth activities works to build American ideals. The Le- 
gion sponsors vouth baseball leagues in all parts of the 
country. Each year, American Legion posts sponsor 
more than 4,000 baseball and other athletic teams. 

The Legion sponsors more than 1,400 Boy Scout 
troops. Each year, the Legion holds a national high 
school oratory contest to promote the study of the 
United States Constitution and the Bill of Rights. It 
awards $60,000 in scholarships to the finalists. The Le- 
gion also sponsors an annual Boys State. Under this pro- 
gram, boys selected by local Legion posts and civic, reli- 
gious, and educational organizations take part in a one- 
week course on the practical operation of state 
government. The program also includes health and 





Amencan Legion 
Legion emblem 





recreational activities. Boys who have taken part in Boys 
State are selected to attend the Legion's annual Boys Na- 
tion. This is a program in the study of national govern- 
ment (see Boys State). In national defense, the Legion 
has always favored adequate military preparedness. 

History. A group of 20 officers who served in the 
American Expeditionary Forces (A.E.F.) in France in 
World War | is credited with planning the Legion. A.E.F. 
headquarters asked these officers to suggest ideas on 
how to improve troop morale. One officer, Lieutenant 
Colonel Theodore Roosevelt, Jr., proposed an organiza- 
tion of veterans. In February 1919, this group formed a 
temporary committee and selected several hundred offi- 
cers who had the confidence and respect of the army. 

When the first organization meeting took place in 
Paris in March 1919, about 1,000 officers and enlisted 
men attended. The meeting, known as the Paris Caucus, 
adopted a temporary constitution and the name 7he 
American Legion. \t also elected an executive committee 
to complete the organization work. It considered each 
soldier of the A.E.F. a member of the Legion. The execu- 
tive committee named a subcommittee to organize vet- 
erans in the United States. 

The Legion held a second organizing caucus in St. 
Louis, Mo., in May 1919. It completed the constitution 
and made plans for a permanent organization. It set up 
temporary headquarters in New York City, and began its 
relief, employment, and patriotism programs. 

Congress granted the Legion a national charter in 
September 1919. The first national convention, held in 
Minneapolis, adopted a permanent constitution and 
elected officers to head the organization. 

In 1921, the country plunged into a short, sharp eco- 
nomic depression. Millions lost their jobs. About 4 mil- 
lion soldiers had returned to civilian life. The Legion 
turned itself into a nationwide employment service, with 
11,000 branch offices. Veterans reported at Legion posts 
for jobs. More than 1 million people found jobs in this 
way. The Legion also began its fight for the relief of 
wounded and disabled soldiers. It organized a rehabili- 
tation service to help disabled veterans make claims for 
compensation and obtain medical care. At the close of 
World War II, the Legion helped write the Gl Bill of 
Rights and worked for its adoption by Congress. 

Until 1942, membership in the Legion was limited to 
American soldiers, sailors, marines, and nurses who had 
served on active duty during World War I. In 1942, the 
Legion amended its charter to allow World War II veter- 
ans to join. Korean War veterans became eligible in 
1950, Vietnam War veterans in 1966, and Persian Gulf 
War veterans in 1991. Veterans of the actions in Gre- 
nada, Lebanon, and Panama became eligible in 1990. 

During and after the Vietnam War (1957-1975), the le- 
gion promoted job opportunities for returning veterans. 
It also worked to increase veterans benefits under the 
Gl Bill to meet rising educational costs. 

Critically reviewed by the American Legion 
American Legion Auxiliary is the largest women’s 
patriotic organization in the United States. It is affiliated 
with the American Legion. Women eligible for member- 
ship are (1) wives, mothers, sisters, and female cescend- 
ants of American Legion members; (2) wives, mothers, 
sisters, and female descendants of men and women 
who died in World Wars | and II, the Korean War, the 


American Library Association 413 


Vietnam War, the Persian 
Gulf War, and the military 
conflicts in Grenada, Leba- 
non, and Panama, or of 
men and women who died 
after they were honorably 
discharged from the armed 
services; (3) female military 
veterans eligible for mem- 
bership in the American 
Legion; and (4) female 
members of the Legion. 
The Auxiliary has nearly 1 
million members in more 
than 12,000 local units. 

The Auxiliary conducts programs to benefit veterans, 
their families, and the community. It sponsors Girls 
State, an annual program that educates high school girls 
about American government and citizenship (see Girls 
State). The first national American Legion convention in 
1919 authorized the formation of the Auxiliary. The or- 
ganization held its first convention in Kansas City, Mo. in 
1921. The Auxiliary's headquarters are at 777 N. Meridian 
Street, Indianapolis, IN 46204. 

Critically reviewed by the American Legion Auxiliary 
American Liberty League. See Liberty League. 
American Library Association (ALA) is an organi- 
zation founded in 1876 for libraries, librarians, library 
trustees, and other people interested in libraries. It 
works closely with organizations in the fields of educa- 
tion, recreation, and public service. The association's 
50,000 members include individuals and libraries from 
all parts of the world. 

The ALA aims to improve the quality and effective- 
ness of libraries. It seeks to make libraries accessible to 
all people, to improve professional standards of librar- 
ies and librarians, and to promote the distribution of 
books and other library materials without censorship. 
The ALA presents several awards and citations for out- 
standing achievements in librarianship and related 
fields. Its Association for Library Service to Children 
awards the Caldecott and Newbery medals for children’s 
books (see Caldecott Medal; Newbery Medal). 

The association works for legislation to increase the 
availability or to improve the quality of library service. It 
urged passage of the Library Services Act of 1956, which 
was designed to aid the development of public libraries 
in rural areas. In 1964, the act was amended and became 
known as the Library Services and Construction Act. 
This and later amendments authorized aid to both urban 
and rural libraries. After a new copyright law was en- 
acted in 1976, the association helped librarians and li- 
brary users understand the law's provisions. 

The ALA publishes books and periodicals. Its official 
bulletin, American Libraries, is published 11 times a 
year. Other periodicals include Booklist. Choice, Col- 
lege and Research Libraries, Library Resources and 
Technical Services, RQ, and School Library Media Quar- 
terly. The ALA publishes an annual yearbook on library 
and information services. It also provides information 
about careers in the library field. ALA headquarters are 
at 50 E. Huron Street, Chicago, IL 60611. 

Critically reviewed by the American Library Association 


See also Library (School library standards). 





Auxiliary emblem 


414 American literature 
American literature 


American literature cannot be captured in a simple 
definition. It reflects the many religious, historical, and 
cultural traditions of the American people, one of the 
world’s most varied populations. It includes poetry, fic- 
tion, drama, and other kinds of writing by authors in 
what is now the United States. It also includes nonwrit- 
ten material, such as the oral literature of the American 
Indians and folk tales and legends. In addition, Ameri- 
can literature includes accounts of America written by 
immigrants and visitors from other countries, as well as 
works by American writers who spent some or all of 
their lives abroad. 

This article discusses the literature of what is now the 
United States. For information on the literature of Can- 
ada and Latin America, see the articles Canadian litera- 
ture and Latin-American literature. 


Beginnings of American literature 


American literature begins with the legends, myths, 
and poetry of the American Indians, the first people to 
live in what is now the United States. Indian legends in- 
cluded stories about the origin of the world, the histo- 
ries of various tribes, and tales of tribal heroes. With 
rare exceptions, this oral literature was not written 
down until the 1800s. 

The earliest writing in America consisted of the jour- 
nals and reports of European explorers and missionar- 
ies. These early authors left a rich literature describing 
their encounters with new lands and new civilizations. 
They publicized their adventures, described the New 
World, and tried to attract settlers in works that some- 
times mixed facts with propaganda. 


Colonial literature (1608-1764) 


Colonists from England and other European countries 
began settling along the eastern coast of North America 
in the early 1600s and created the first American colo- 
nial literature. The colonies in Virginia and New England 
produced the most important writings in the 1600s. In 
the 1700s, Philadelphia emerged as the literary center of 
the American Colonies. 

Virginia. Captain John Smith wrote what is regarded 
as the first American book, A True Relation of... Vir- 
ginia (1608). It describes how he and other colonists es- 
tablished the first permanent English settlement in 
America at Jamestown, Va., in 1607. Smith told a version 
of the famous story of Pocahontas in The Generall Histo- 
rie of Virginia, New England, and the Summer Isles 
(1624). The story claims that Pocahontas, the daughter of 
an Indian chief, saved Smith's life when her father was 
about to have him killed. 

In The History and Present State of Virginia (1705), his- 
torian Robert Beverley wrote about the tragic destruc- 
tion of the American Indians. To Beverley, the Indians 
represented possibilities for happiness, innocence, har- 
mony, and freedom. William Byrd II, a Virginia planter, 


Donald G. Marshall, the contributor of this article, is Profes- 
sor and Head of the Department of English at the University of 
Illinois at Chicago. 





told about a 1728 surveying expedition in The History of 
the Dividing Line (published in 1841). The ‘line’ divides 
the orderly society of Virginia from the less polished 
settlers of North Carolina. 

New England. In 1620, the Pilgrims founded Plym- 
outh Colony, the second permanent English settlement 
in America. Many Pilgrims belonged to a group of Eng- 
lish Protestants called Puritans, who were followers of 
the religious reformer John Calvin. The Puritans faced 
persecution in England and came to America mainly to 
seek refuge where they could practice their religion. 
The Puritans were an intensely intellectual people. Soon 
after arriving, they began founding schools and colleges 
and writing and printing books. They wrote histories, 
sermons and other religious writings, and poetry. 

Histories. The Puritans recorded their own history out 
of a desire to communicate with fellow believers in Eng- 
land, to attract new colonists, and to justify their bold 
move to a new country. In their histories, the Puritans 
portrayed their successes as evidence of God's favor 
and their hardships as signs of God's disapproval. 

William Bradford, the second governor of Plymouth 
Colony, told the story of the colony in Of Plimoth Planta- 
tion (written between 1630 and 1651 and published in 
1856 as History of Plymouth Plantation). 

Cotton Mather was the greatest of the Puritan histori- 
ans. He wrote more than 400 works on many subjects, 
including a defense of the witchcraft trials of the 1690's 
in Salem, Mass. But he poured his heart into Magnalia 
Christi Americana (1702), a religious history of New Eng- 
land that upholds traditional Puritan beliefs. 

Religious writings. The Puritans based their religion 
on constant study of the Bible. Sermons began with a 
passage from the Bible, followed by an analysis of its 
meaning, and then its application to personal and com- 
munity life. The greatest Puritan preacher and theolo- 
gian was Jonathan Edwards. He wrote learned essays re- 
formulating traditional Calvinist doctrines, but also 
defending them. Edwards most important book is Free- 
dom of Will (1754). In it, he defended the doctrine of 
predestination, the idea that God has chosen certain 
souls to be saved. 

Poetry. Most critics today rate Edward Taylor as the 
best of the Puritan poets. A clergyman, Taylor composed 
a series of meditative poems on Scripture readings. He 
intended the poems to prepare his mind to preach and 
to celebrate Communion. His verse followed the learned 
style of the English metaphysical poets of the 1600s. Like 
them, he mingled everyday words and incidents with 
Biblical language and complex metaphors. Taylor's 
poems were not discovered until 1937 and not pub- 
lished until 1939. 

Although life as a settler was hard, Anne Bradstreet 
found time to write poetry, chiefly for her father and 
husband. Her brother-in-law had her work printed in 
London as 7he Tenth Muse Lately Sprung Up in America 
(1650), the first volume of American poetry ever pub- 
lished. The resulting publicity made Bradstreet more 
conscious of her craftsmanship. She began experiment- 
ing with meter, imagery, structure, and theme. Severa/ 
Poems (1678), a revised second edition, was published 
after her death. It includes her best poem, “Contempla- 
tions,” a nature poem on the briefness of human life. 

Michael Wigglesworth’s The Day of Doom (1662) was 











the most popular poem of colonial times. But the poem's 
jingling meter and threatening theme— about sinners 
being sentenced to hell on Judgment Day— seem quaint 
today. 

Philadelphia was the largest city in the American 
Colonies by 1710. It replaced Virginia and New England 
as the cultural center of the emerging nation. 

During the 1700's, a greater number of people 
learned to read, and a growing press served new liter- 
ary tastes. Literature addressed such interests as politics 
and science. The essay, satire, and novel became impor- 
tant literary forms. 

The publisher, statesman, and scientist Benjamin 
Franklin helped make Philadelphia a center of intellec- 
tual life. His Autobiography tells the story of how he ran 
away from Boston to Philadelphia at the age of 17. His 
rise from ‘rags to riches’ through hard work and self- 
improvement became a model for American success. 
Franklin's writings emphasized practical intelligence and 
material success, balanced by charity and public service. 
His worldliness differed greatly from the earnest spiritu- 
ality of the Puritans. Franklin's witty and often satiric 
proverbs made Poor Richard's Almanac, published 
yearly from 1733 to 1758, one of his most popular publi- 
cations. 


The revolutionary period (1765-1787) 


During the 1760's, a movement to end British rule in 
the American Colonies began to gain strength. The 
United States became an independent nation by win- 
ning the Revolutionary War in America (1775-1783). 
Much of the literature of this period addressed issues 
relating to American independence. 

Thomas Paine, a poor and largely self-taught English- 
man, immigrated to Philadelphia in 1774. He soon be- 
came famous for his fiery essays in support of the Amer- 
ican patriots. His pamphlet Common Sense (1776) called 
for complete independence from Great Britain. In a se- 
ries of pamphlets called 7he American Crisis (1776- 
1783), he encouraged the rebels to persist during the 
darkest days of the Revolutionary War. 

The French-born essayist Michel-Guillaume Jean de 
Crevecoeur, also an immigrant to America, helped the 
colonists think of themselves as Americans rather than 
Europeans. One of the letters in his Letters from an 
American Farmer (1782) begins with the question “What 
is an American?” Crévecoeur saw America as a new land 
where individuals could throw off old prejudices, suffo- 
cating social customs, and tyrannical government. 

Like many writers of the 1700s, Franklin, Paine, and 
Crévecoeur wrote in dignified, but plain and clear, 
prose. This style reached its peak in the ringing elo- 
quence of the Declaration of Independence written by 
Thomas Jefferson. The same type of writing appears in 
the sober language of the Constitution of the United 
States, much of which was drafted by Gouverneur Mor- 
ris. Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay 
used this clear style in The Federalist (1787-1788), a se- 
ries of public letters that persuaded New Yorkers to rat- 
ify the Constitution. 


Literature of a young nation (1788-1830) 


In the early years of United States independence, 
many American writers still patterned their writing after 


American literature 415 


Europe's latest literary styles and forms. Gradually, how- 
ever, American literature began to reflect American ex- 
periences. 

The most successful American writer of the early 
1800's was Washington Irving. He rose to fame with hu- 
morous and satiric writing about New York City and its 
past in the magazine Sa/magundi (1807-1808) and ina 
book, A History of New York from the Beginning of the 
World to the End of the Dutch Dynasty (1809). The book 
is also called Knickerbocker’s History of New York be- 
cause Irving wrote it under the name Diedrich Knicker- 
bocker. In The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent. 
(1819-1820), Irving combined the style of the essay and 
the sketch to create the first short stories in American 
literature. The book includes “Rip Van Winkle” and “The 
Legend of Sleepy Hollow,” two of Irving's most famous 
tales. In “Rip Van Winkle,” the title character awakens 
from a 20-year sleep to find everything changed by the 
Revolutionary War. Irving's doubts about American in- 
dependence, his hostility toward New England culture, 
and his desire to maintain cultural ties with England run 
through all his early writing. 

The poet William Cullen Bryant adapted the style of 
English romantic poetry to describe the American land- 
scape and to find moral significance in its beauty. Such 
poems as Thanatopsis” (1817), “To a Waterfowl” (1818), 
and ‘To the Fringed Gentian’ (1832) reflect Bryant's admi- 
ration of nature. 


The Era of Expansion (1831-1870) 


During the mid-1800s, the United States gained con- 
trol of Texas, California, Oregon, and other Western 
lands. By the 1850's, the nation stretched from coast to 
coast. Americans moved westward by the thousands. 
The Indians who occupied many of these lands were 
forced to surrender their claims and to resettle on reser- 
vations. During this period, many American writers glo- 
rified the frontier or praised the beauty of nature. Much 
American literature reflected the optimism of a rapidly 
growing nation. But other American literature focused 
on the countn’s problems, including slavery. In 1861, 
the Civil War broke out between the North and South 
chiefly over this issue. The North won the war in 1865, 
and slavery was soon outlawed throughout the United 
States. 

Two main forms of fiction were practiced by Ameri- 
can writers in the mid-1800s: (1) the sentimental novel 
and (2) the romance. Other important literary forms in- 
cluded nonfiction prose and poetry. 

The sentimental novel, which had been developed 
by English author Samuel Richardson in the mid-1700s, 
became immensely popular in the United States in the 
mid-1800's. This type of novel emphasized feelings and 
such values as religious faith, moral virtue, and family 
closeness. Its stress on traditional values appealed to 
many people during a period of rapid social and politi- 
cal change. 

The sentimental novel also urged reform. It became 
the means for rousing concern about the plight of black 
slaves, poor people, and other unfortunate members of 
society. Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom's Cabin 
(1851-1852), a powerful description of the evils of slav- 
ery, became a best seller. It combined an exciting plot, 
memorable characters, stirring appeals to the emotions, 


416 American Literature 


William Bradford (1590-1657) Jonathan Edwards (1703-1758) 
Anne Bradstreet {1612?-1672) =| Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790) 
Edward Taylor (1642?-1729} Michel-Guillaume Jean de Crévecoeur (1735-1813) 
Cotton Mather (1663-1728) Thomas Paine (1737-1809) 
Washington Irving (1783-1859) 
James Fenimore Cooper (1789-1851) 
William Cullen Bryant (1794-1878) 
a Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803-1882) = 
. Nathaniel Hawthorne (1804-1864) 
John Greenleaf Whittier (1807-1892) 
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (1807-1882) 
Oliver Wendell Holmes (1809-1894) 
Edgar Allan Poe (1809-1849) 
Harriet Beecher Stowe (1811-1896) 
Henry David Thoreau (1817-1862) 
Herman Melville (1819-1891) 
James Russell Lowell (1819-1891) 
Walt Whitman (1819-1892) 
Emily Dickinson (1830-1886) 
Mark Twain (1835-1910) 
William Dean Howells (1837-1920) 
Henry James (1843-1916) 











Moby-Dick (1851) 
by Herman Melville 





The Adventures of Tom Sawyer 
(1876) 








The Grapes of Wrath (1939) 
by John Steinbeck 


1600 1650 1700 1750 1800 1850 





American literature 417 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Anthony Saris 





The Old Man and the Sea(1952) 
by Ernest Hemingway 
Charles Waddell Chesnutt (1858-1932) 
Edith Wharton (1862-1937) 
Frank Norris {1870-1902) 


Stephen Crane (1871-1900) 
Theodore Dreiser {1871-1945) 
Paul Laurence Dunbar (1872-1906) 
Willa Cather (1873-1947) 
Robert Frost (1874-1963) 
Carl Sandburg (1878-1967) 
Wallace Stevens (1879-1955) 
H. L. Mencken (1880-1956) 
Williain Carlos Williams (1883-1963) 
Sinclair Lewis (1885-1951) 
Ezra Pound (1885-1972) 
Eugene O'Neill (1888-1953) 
Zora Neale Hurston (1891-1960) 
E. E. Cummings (1894-1962) 
Edmund Wilson (1895-1972) 
F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940) 
John Dos Passos (1896-1970) 
William Faulkner (1897-1962) 
Ernest Hemingway {1899-1961) 
Allen Tate {1899-1979) 
Langston Hughes {1902-1967) 
John Steinbeck (1902-1968) 
Richard Wright (1908-1960) 
Eudora Welty (1909-2001) 
Tennessee Williams (1911-1983) 
John Cheever (1912-1982) 
John Berryman (1914-1972) 
Ralph Ellison (1914-1994) 
Saul Bellow {1915- ) 
Arthur Miller {1915- ) 
Carson McCullers {1917-1967) 
Robert Lowell {1917-1977) 
Gwendolyn Brooks {1917-2000) 
J. D. Salinger {1919- ) 
Kurt Vonnegut, Jr. (1922- ) 
Norman Mailer {1923- ) 
James Baldwin (1924-1987) 
Flannery O'Connor (1925-1964) 
Allen Ginsberg {1926-1997) 
John Ashbery {1927- ) 
Anne Sexton (1928-1974) 
Edward Albee {1928- ) 
Toni Morrison {1931- 
Sylvia Plath (1932-1963) 
John Updike {1932-—) 
Joyce Carol Oates (1938- ) 
Alice Walker (1944- ) 
David Mamet {1947- ) 
I 
1900 


1950 


2000 


418 American literature 


and humor. Stage adaptations of the book also drew 
large audiences. 

Louisa May Alcott's novel Little Women (1868-1869) 
was another best-selling sentimental novel. Based 
loosely on the author's own life, it tells the story of four 
sisters growing up. The story centers on the girls home 
and personal life. Two of the sisters fall in love, while Jo, 
the heroine, develops a career as a writer. 

The romance. Most people use the term novel to 
refer to any long fictional story in prose. Critics of the 
1800's, however, distinguished a novel from a romance. 
A romance is a long work of fiction that is less realistic 
than a novel. Instead of everyday events, a romance de- 
scribes exciting adventures or strange events. Writers 


often use the romance to explore dark passions or to ex- 


amine the problem of evil. 

James Fenimore Cooper wrote historical romances ° 
that explored the moral uncertainties of Americans 
push westward. In Cooper's romances, such as The Last 
of the Mohicans (1826) and The Deers/ayer (1841), the 
beauty and majesty of nature inspire a nearly religious 
feeling of awe. But civilization intrudes, and settlers turn 
the wilderness into property that they selfishly or 
thoughtlessly misuse. 

Nathaniel Hawthorne used the romance to study the 
depths of human nature. Many of his romances show 
the psychological effects of the Puritan focus on sin and 
evil. The Scarlet Letter (1850), set in Puritan New Eng- 
land, dramatizes the suffering caused by the conceal- 
ment of sin. 

Most critics consider the greatest American romance 
to be Herman Melville's Moby-Dick (1851). Most of the 
story is set on a whaling ship. It describes the hunt for 
Moby Dick, a fierce white whale. Ahab, the ship's cap- 
tain, has lost his leg in an earlier encounter with Moby 
Dick and is determined to kill the whale. Ahab eventu- 
ally loses his life in the pursuit. On a symbolic level, the 
book describes one man’s struggle against fate. 

A type of romance called the Gothic novel influenced 
the American poet and short-story writer Edgar Allan 
Poe. The Gothic novel featured exotic settings and mys- 
terious or supernatural happenings. These novels were 
called Gothic because they often took place in gloomy 
medieval castles. Poe adapted these elements in short- 
ened form in the Gothic horror story. He filled his pow- 
erful tales with decaying castles, forbidden passions, 
and guilt-ridden and insane criminals. With “The Mur- 





Brown Bros 


Brown Bros 


Nathaniel Hawthorne Henry W. Longfeilow 





ders in the Rue Morgue’ (1841), Poe invented the mod- 
ern detective story. 

Nonfiction prose. During the 1830's and 1840s, a lit- 
erary and philosophical movement called transcenden- 
talism developed in New England. The transcendental- 
ists believed that God was present in nature. They also 
believed that human beings intuitively know what is 
true, and so they stressed self-reliance and individuality. 
The transcendentalists included Ralph Waldo Emerson; 
Henry David Thoreau; George Ripley; Margaret Fuller; 
and Bronson Alcott, Louisa May Alcott's father. 

Emerson was the leader of the movement. He kept a 
journal in which he recorded incidents, ideas, and reac- 
tions to his wide reading. Emerson drew on his journal 
in such essays as Nature (1836) and Self-Reliance’ (1841), 
achieving a prose style that was personal and conversa- 
tional. 

Emerson caught the mood of Americans at the time, a 
buoyant optimism and sense that the United States was 
an exciting new beginning in human history. He urged 
Americans to be independent thinkers and to study life 
directly. Emerson declared that individuals had access 
to the eternal and ideal truths of nature. He therefore 
urged Americans to trust their own creative instincts 
and not look to Europe for models. 

In Wa/den (1854), Thoreau described his experiences 
living close to nature. The book tells how he built a 
cabin in the woods on the shore of Walden Pond in 
Massachusetts and lived there alone. He read, enter- 
tained visitors, worked the land for his food, and re- 
corded his observations in journals. Thoreau’s style 
shows his sensitive response to the root meanings, 
sounds, images, and nuances of words. 

In 1838, Frederick Douglass escaped from slavery and 
fled North. During the early 1840's, he joined the aboli- 
tionists. His fiery attacks on slavery made him a famous 
speaker. In the first edition of his autobiography, the 
Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass (1845), Doug- 
lass vividly describes his life as a slave. 

Poetry. During the 1800s, the most famous American 
poets were William Cullen Bryant, Henry Wadsworth 
Longfellow, James Russell Lowell, John Greenleaf Whit- 
tier, and Oliver Wendell Holmes. They were called the 
“Fireside Poets’ or the “Schoolroom Poets’ because their 
works were most often read ‘by the fireside” at home or 
in school in anthologies (collections of literary works). 
Like the sentimental novelists, these poets concerned 


Portrait by Fhomas C Corner Mrs Raymond Emerson 


Enoch Pratt Free Library, Baltimore 


Edgar Alian Poe Ralph Waido Emerson 





OO _— 


themselves with feelings and called for social reform. 

Edgar Allan Poe wrote haunting, often mournful 
poems. The Raven’ (1845) and Annabel Lee” (1849) ex- 
press despair over the death of a woman. Poe's poetry 
did not make an immediate impact on American poets. 
But he gained a great following in Europe after two im- 
portant French poets, Charles Baudelaire and Stéphane 
Mallarme, praised and translated his work. Influenced 
by Poe, they in turn inspired several modern American 
poets. including T S. Eliot and Wallace Stevens. 

Walt Whitman and Emily Dickinson were the two 
greatest American poets of the 1800s. Whitman took in- 
spiration from Emerson's call for a self-confident Ameri- 
can literature. He expressed the variety of American life 
in long lines that caught the flow of operatic singing. His 
verse often takes the form of rhythmic lists. It sprawls, 
seeming improvised. But Whitman also packed his 
poems with vivid images and memorable phrases. He 
wrote in free verse, a style of poetry that avoids regular 
meter and rhyme. Whitman published the first edition of 
his masterpiece. Leaves of Grass, in 1855. Five more en- 
larged and revised editions of the collection appeared 
between i856 and 1882. Leaves of Grass describes the 
best and worst of American life, from exuberant democ- 
racy to suffering slaves. The longest poem in the collec- 
tion, ‘Song of Myself,” glorifies a spiritual life grounded 
in the body and everyday life. 

Dickinson wrote more than 1,700 short, puzzling 
poems in the mid-1800's. Her subjects were love, death, 
nature, and immortality. Only 11 of Dickinson's poems 
were printed in her lifetime. After an accurate, complete 
edition of her poems appeared in 1955, Dickinson's rep- 
utation and influence rapidly grew. Critics admired her 
precise observations, her complex and unexpected im- 
ages, and her questioning of established religion and 
authority. 


The Age of Realism (1871-1913) 


The Civil War marked a dramatic change in American 
life. The war ended slavery, but it left the deeper prob- 
lem of race relations. After the conflict, the United States 
turned its energies to economic concerns. Machines re- 
placed hand labor as the chief means of manufacturing, 
and industry grew enormously. The new business activ- 
ity centered in cities, and people moved to them in 
huge numbers. While some people made fortunes in 
business, others lived in poverty. 





Ewing Galloway 


Portran by juseye J Eatyu 
Museu af Finte Arts Bost 


Herman Meiviile 


Walt Whitman 





American literature 419 


Realists. Many American writers of the late 1800's 
were inspired by an international literary movement 
called realism. Realism was in part a revolt against ro- 
manticism and its idealized portrayal of life. The realists 
sought to show life as it is. Realism encouraged writers 
to examine the problems and conditions around them 
and to use the language of ordinary people, including 
dialects. In this way, it encouraged the emergence of a 
distinctively American literature. 

The realists explored the new economic conditions 
and often called for social reforms. The American dream 
of “rags to riches’ success was captured in popular nov- 
els by Horatio Alger. But the American realists focused 
on the harsh underside of this dream. They feared that 
success brought greed, materialism, and corruption. 

William Dean Howells, an influential magazine editor, 
vigorously argued for realism against romanticism and 
sentimentalism. In such novels as The Rise of Silas 
Lapham (1885) and A Hazard of New Fortunes (1890), he 
explored the impact of commercial success and failure. 

Many of the realists focused on particular regions of 
the United States. Bret Harte portrayed the West of the 
gold rush in such short stories as “The Luck of Roaring 
Camp” (1868) and “The Outcasts of Poker Flat” (1869). 
Sarah Orne Jewett's The Country of the Pointed Firs 
(1896) shows a rural New England left behind by eco- 
nomic development. 

Early Southern realists included George Washington 
Cable and Joel Chandler Harris. Cable's 7he Grandis- 
simes (1880) portrays the tragic clash of races and cul- 
tures in Louisiana. Harris Uncle Remus: His Songs and 
His Sayings (1881) and later collections of stories were 
immensely popular. They retell, in dialect, black folklore 
and stories. The black writer Charles Waddell Chesnutt's 
The Conjure Woman (1899) is also a collection of folk 
tales in dialect. 

Naturalists were the most extreme and pessimistic 
realists. Unlike the realists, the naturalists believed that 
people could not make moral choices. They showed 
their characters as completely controlled by economic, 
social, or biological forces. 

Hamlin Garland wrote bitterly of the hardships of 
Midwestern farmers in Main-Travelled Roads (1891). 
Frank Norris described the struggle of California farm- 
ers against the powerful railroads in The Octopus (1901). 
Upton Sinclair's The Jungle (1906) exposed unsanitary 
conditions in the Chicago meat-packing industry and 





Bettmann Archwe 


The Trustees of Amherst 
College. Amherst. Mass 


Emily Dickinson 


Mark Twain 





420 American literature 


helped bring about federal regulation. 

In such stories as “The Open Boat” (1897) and “The 
Blue Hotel” (1898), Stephen Crane stressed the need for 
courage and generosity in a universe indifferent to 
human life. His most famous work, The Red Badge of 
Courage (1895), shows a young soldier in the Civil War, 
wandering ina state of shock and confusion through 
scenes of battle. 

Theodore Dreiser was the leading American natural- 
ist. His Sister Carrie traces a young woman's rise to suc- 
cess and social prominence despite her violation of 
moral codes. Her fate contrasts with her first lover's de- 
cline into poverty and suicide. Although Sister Carrie 
was printed in 1900, the publisher refused to advertise 
or distribute the book because his wife thought it lacked 
a sense of right and wrong. Another publisher issued it 
in 1912. 

Mark Twain and Henry James are considered by 
critics as the two greatest American novelists of the late 
1800's. Twain's Adventures of Tom Sawyer (1876) de- 
scribes the adventures of a clever and mischievous boy 
and his friend Huck Finn. Adventures of Huckleberry 
Finn (1884) continues the story. It narrates the adven- 
tures of Huck and the runaway slave Jim as they float 
down the Mississippi River on a raft. In this book, Twain 
contrasts nature— where a white boy and a black man 
can become friends—with the hypocrisy of civilization 
along the shore. Twain also satirized the styles of writing 
that dominated earlier American literature. 

Henry James left the United States in his 30's and set- 
tled in England. In his study of Hawthorne (1879), he ar- 
gued that the lack of a rich cultural tradition made 
American novels thin and abstract. James wrote novels 
of manners, which first appeared in England in the late 
1700's. Novels of manners depict realistic characters and 
scenes and describe the customs ofa particular social 
class. In many of James's works, American characters 
travel to Europe, where their innocence and integrity 
clash with a culture that is attractive but sometimes cor- 
rupt. In The Portrait of a Lady (1881), a young American 
discovers too late the immorality of her husband, an 
American who has immigrated to Italy. James's style 
grew more complex in later novels. He traced with in- 
creasing detail the psychological and moral problems of 
his intelligent and self-conscious characters. 

Women writers. Kate Chopin powerfully portrayed a 
woman's psychological and sexual development in The 
Awakening (1899). However, the hostile reaction to the 
novel ended Chopin's career. 

Edith Wharton was a close friend of James's. Like him, 
she wrote novels of manners. But many of them have 
American, instead of European, settings. Wharton be- 
came known for her keen moral and psychological ex- 
amination of characters. The House of Mirth (1905) ex- 
poses the selfishness and materialism of upper-class 
society in New York City. 

Nonfiction writers also flourished in the United 
States after the Civil War. The philosopher William 
James, brother of Henry James, wrote powerfully on 
many subjects, including religion and psychology. In 
The Principles of Psychology (1890), James invented the 
phrase stream-of-consciousness and thus sparked the 
development of a new fictional technique. In this tech- 
nique, the writer tracks the shifting feelings and 





thoughts flowing through the mind of a character. 

The economist Thorstein Veblen explored social and 
economic issues with biting satire in The Theory of the 
Leisure Class (1899). In The Story of My Life (1903), Helen 
Keller told how she had been helped to overcome 
blindness and deafness. Jane Addams 7wenty Years at 
Hull House (1912) tells of her work among Chicago's Ital- 
ian, Greek, Russian, and other immigrants. As settlement 
in the West became more widespread, many Americans 
wanted to preserve the unspoiled wilderness. In The 
Mountains of California (1894) and other books, the nat- 
uralist John Muir described the American wilderness as 
God's temple and attacked threats to its preservation. 

One of the most notable nonfiction prose writers of 
this period was the historian Henry Adams. In his auto- 
biography, The Education of Henry Adams (privately 
printed in 1907, published in 1918), Adams contrasted 
the power of religion in the Middle Ages with the 
power of science in the modern world. 

Two prominent black leaders disagreed on the best 
course for black advancement. In his autobiography, Up 
from Slavery (1901), educator Booker T. Washington 
urged blacks to temporarily suspend their demands for 
equal rights in exchange for vocational education and 
jobs. He predicted that blacks would achieve equal 
rights once they gained economic power. But historian 
and sociologist W. E. B. Du Bois challenged what he re- 
garded as Washington's surrender of rights for eco- 
nomic gain. Du Bois refused all compromises. He in- 
sisted that “the problem of the twentieth century is the 
problem of the color line.” 


The world wars and depression (1914-1945) 


In 1914, World War | broke out in Europe. In 1917, the 
United States entered the war against Germany, which 
was defeated in 1918. After the war, the United States 
economy boomed. But prosperity did not last. A stock 
market crash in 1929 led to the Great Depression, a 
deep economic slump in the 1930s. 

In 1939, World War II began in Europe. The United 
States fought in the war from 1941 to 1945 and played an 
important role in defeating Germany and Japan. 

About the time of World War I, an international artis- 
tic movement called modernism emerged in Europe. 
Modernist artists believed that the traditional social, re- 
ligious, and political order had broken down. They felt 
that realism could not adequately describe how greatly 





Karsh, Ottawa 


Ernest Hemingway 


Brown Bros 


Henry James 





modern life differed from the past. As a result, they 
sought stylistic innovations that could better portray new 
realities. 

The American writers who lived in Europe around the 
time of World War I made important contributions to 
modernism. Their influence extended to writers in the 
United States. The Great Depression led some writers of 
the period to focus on social or economic issues. 

Modernist poetry leaves out the explanations and 
narrative connections that provide unity and clarity in 
traditional writing. It mixes everyday language with ele- 
gant phrases and short quotations from earlier poems. 
Modernist poets placed contradictory feelings and 
events side by side to evoke the disconnectedness of 
modern life. 

Modernism was influenced by a poetic movement 
called imagism, which lasted from 1908 to 1917. Imagist 
poetry was characterized by precise images and a spare- 
ness of expression. The most important imagist poets 
were Ezra Pound, Amy Lowell, and Hilda Doolittle, who 
wrote under the initials H. D. 

T. S. Eliot, one of the first modernists, moved to Lon- 
don in 1914. There, he became friends with Pound, who 
had already settled in Europe. Together, Eliot and Pound 
discovered and absorbed a wide range of poetic tradi- 
tions. They developed many of the features of modernist 
poetry and made them well known. 

Eliot mastered the modernist style in “The Love Song 
of J. Alfred Prufrock’ (1915). His long poem The Waste 
Land (1922) created an uproar. This complex, pessimistic 
reflection on the emptiness of modern life seemed a 
masterpiece to some but bewildering to others. Eliot 
gradually gained a widespread influence in modern po- 
etry. In many critical essays, he redefined the way peo- 
ple thought about literature. 

Pounds long poem Cantos, published in several in- 
stallments from 1925 to 1968, reflects on poetry and the 
course of European and American history. Pound was 
also important as a critic, vigorously promoting a wide 
range of ancient and modern poets. 

Several important modernist poets emerged in the 
United States. Hart Crane's The Bridge (1930) weaves 
American images and themes, such as the Brooklyn 
Bridge, into a visionary modernist poem. Wallace Ste- 
vens's philosophical poems explore the relation of imag- 
ination to reality. 

A group of Southern poets used the modernist style 
to encourage the preservation of traditional Southern 
culture. These poets included Allen Tate, John Crowe 
Ransom, and Robert Penn Warren. They were called the 
Fugitives because of their contributions to the poetry 
magazine The Fugitive, published from 1922 to 1925. 

William Carlos Williams celebrated everyday objects 
and experiences in short poems and an epic, Paterson 
(1946-1958). He favored a clean, direct style that would 
capture the individuality of the subject matter. E. E. Cum- 
mings experimented with the physical form of poems, 
particularly punctuation, capitalization, and spacing on 
the page. 

Realist poetry. Some poets of the early and mid- 
1900's practiced realism rather than modernism. Edwin 
Arlington Robinson's best poems are realist portraits of 
bleak and wasted lives in a New England village. In 
Edgar Lee Masters Spoon River Anthology (1915), the 





American literature 421 





2 " as 
“t, 4 x 4] 


Wy, 


Schaal, Pix 


Carl Sandburg 


Lofman-Pix 


Robert Frost 


now-dead inhabitants of an imaginary Midwestern town 
tell their life stories. Vachel Lindsay used strong, chant- 
like rhythms in such poems as “General William Booth 
Enters into Heaven’ (1913) and “The Congo’ (1914). Carl 
Sandburg was influenced by Whitman in his use of 
plain, everyday language. He aimed to help readers un- 
derstand the lives of common people. Robinson Jeffers 
undertook such themes as human corruption and indus- 
trial society's destruction of nature. 

The poems of Robert Frost, such as “Mending Wall” 
(1914) and “Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening’ 
(1923), are simple and readable on the surface. But they 
reveal complex feelings, often through subtle irony and 
dry wit. Frost expressed in ordinary language the puz- 
zling hints of doubt and uncertainty that haunt everyday 
incidents. These feelings connect him to modernism, de- 
spite his traditional meter, rhyme, and verse forms. 

Paul Laurence Dunbar was perhaps the first black 
American to achieve national recognition as a writer of 
both poetry and fiction. Many of his poems use standard 
English and traditional meter, but he achieved greater 
fame for his portraits in dialect of black life in the South. 

The Lost Generation. A number of writers joined the 
flourishing arts community in Paris after World War I. 
Many of these newcomers to Paris gathered around the 
novelist and critic Gertrude Stein, who had settled there 
before the war. She described these disillusioned writ- 
ers as a ‘lost generation.” Her experiments with prose 
rhythm, fractured sentence structure, and disconnected 
narrative were challenging and influential. 

Two of the most important writers of the Lost Genera- 
tion were Ernest Hemingway and F. Scott Fitzgerald. 
Hemingway's The Sun Also Rises (1926) describes these 
uprooted Americans in a desperate search for some- 
thing to believe in after the destruction caused by the 
war. In short stories that some critics still consider his 
finest work, Hemingway crafted a bare, blunt prose that 
sought to clear away the emptiness of old ideas and val- 
ues. His prose style has inspired many imitators. 

Fitzgerald focused on American life in the Roaring 
Twenties, also called the Jazz Age. In short stories and in 
such novels as The Great Gatsby (1925) and Tender Is the 
Night{1934), he showed how the values of the American 
dream had been corrupted by materialism and class di- 
visions. Fitzgerald's strong visual sense and way of com- 
posing a story into scenes showed the influence of early 
motion pictures. 

Modernist fiction. Modernism led writers of fiction 
to reexamine the techniques of storytelling. Writers 





422 American literature 


began to strip away descriptions of scenes and charac- 
ters, explanations, direct statements of theme, and sum- 
maries of the plot. A few writers experimented with 
prose styles as fragmented and difficult as some mod- 
ern poetry. 

Some critics regard William Faulkner as the greatest 
American novelist of the 1900s. Faulkner set most of his 
novels, such as The Sound and the Fury (1929) and As / 
Lay Dying (1930), in the imaginary Mississippi county of 
Yoknapatawpha. He saw slavery and racism as the great 
sins haunting Southern history. He believed the South 
fought heroically in the Civil War but for an evil cause. 
Faulkner's Southerners live with this heritage of guilt 
and useless, misguided nobility. Faulkner absorbed all 
the techniques of modernist storytelling. His style is 
symbolic, lyric, and sometimes eloquent. He evoked the 
contradictory feelings of his characters through frag- 
mented and difficult plots. Faulkner often employed the 
stream-of-consciousness technique. 

The Harlem Renaissance. During the early 1900s, 
particularly in the 1920s, black literature began to flour- 
ish in Harlem, a district of New York City. This move- 
ment became known as the Harlem Renaissance. It was 
also called the New Negro after the title of an anthology 
collected by educator and writer Alain Locke. The major 
writers of the Harlem Renaissance were Sterling A. 
Brown, Countee Cullen, Jessie Redmon Fauset, Langston 
Hughes, Zora Neale Hurston, James Weldon Johnson, 
Alain Locke, Claude McKay, and Jean Toomer. 

Johnson's Gods Trombones (1927) consists of seven 
black sermons set in verse. His poetry's dramatic and 
musical qualities also reflect his experience writing 
songs for the musical theater. McKay was one of the 
most powerful black poets. He began with poems in dia- 
lect. Later, he wrote highly formal but emotional verse, 
often on explosive topics. Hughes made a deliberate ef- 
fort to bring the rhythms of African American music into 
poetry. Brown used dialect in subtly varied ways both to 
protest against racial prejudice and to express pride in 
the distinctive cultural tradition of African Americans. 
Cullen was mainly a lyric poet, but he sometimes used 
verse to protest racism. 

Black prose writers also flourished during the Harlem 
Renaissance. Toomer'’s Cane (1923) is a sophisticated 
mixture of short stories, sketches, poetry, and a play. 
Hurston collected African American folk tales and be- 
came well known as a skilled oral storyteller. Her best- 
known novel, Their Eves Were Watching God (1937), 





Random House 


Eugene O'Neill 


United Press Int 


William Faulkner 


traces a black woman's steady growth in insight and 
spiritual strength. Her characters are vivid, realistic mix- 
tures of strength and weakness. Locke wrote several 
nonfiction works on African American culture. 

Satirists. Sinclair Lewis’ novel Main Street (1920) is a 
biting satire on small-town life in the early 1900's. Bab- 
bitt (1922) mocks the businessmen of such communities, 
ridiculing their civic boosterism and their equation of 
“progress with real estate development. In 1930, Lewis 
became the first American writer to win a Nobel Prize 
for literature. 

The sometimes savagely critical journalism of H. L 
Mencken also satirized American life. Mencken, whose 
articles were collected in a six-volume series titled Pre/- 
udices (1919-1927), voiced his disgust with middle-class 
life and values. In The American Language (1919, with 
several later editions), he described and praised the 
American version of English. 

Realist fiction. In O Pioneers! (1913) and My Antonia 
(1918), Willa Cather described frontier life in Nebraska. 
Each story in Sherwood Anderson's Winesburg, Ohio 
(1919) explores, from a psychological viewpoint, a differ- 
ent personality in a small Ohio town. Ole R6lvaag's Gi- 
ants in the Earth (1927; published first as two books in 
1924 and 1925 in Norway) concerns Norwegian immi- 
grants in the Midwest. William Saroyan’s novels portray 
the Armenian-American community in Fresno, Califor- 
nia. Thomas Wolfe studied American morals and values 
in four huge, poetic novels. Each novel, beginning with 
Look Homeward, Ange! (1929), is based on Wolfe's own 
life. James T. Farrell's Studs Lonigan series (1932-1935) 
describes the harsh life of working-class people in Chi- 
cago. One of the most powerful realist novels is John 
Steinbecks The Grapes of Wrath (1939), which depicts 
the sufferings of Dust Bowl farmers who migrate from 
Oklahoma to California during the Great Depression. 
The black writer Richard Wright's Native Son (1940) tells 
the story of a poor young black man driven to brutal vio- 
lence by the hatred and prejudice he meets in a white 
world. 

During the 1920's and 1930's, many writers and critics 
debated the relation between literature and social or 
political change. Particularly because of the depression, 
many writers felt a responsibility to address economic 
and social problems. These authors often used journal- 
istic techniques to educate a wide audience about 
needed reforms. Other writers, such as John Dos Pas- 
sos, experimented with new forms and styles. In his tril- 
ogy The 42nd Parallel (1930), 1979 (1932), and The Big 
Money (1936)— published together as USA. in 1938— 
Dos Passos aimed to portray American society fully and 
realistically. His novels include what he called News- 
reels, which use newspaper headlines, words from pop- 
ular songs, and advertisements to surround characters 
and action. 

Dashiell Hammett and Raymond Chandler pioneered 
the “hard-boiled” detective novel during the 1930s. The 
hard-boiled hero is usually a tough, streetwise private 
detective who sometimes uses illegal methods to solve 
crimes. 

Drama. Most American plays of the 1700's and 1800's 
were sentimental comedies or melodramatic tragedies. 
Eugene ONeill broke this tradition in the 1920s. Early in 
his career, he created highly realistic plays. He wrote 








about the criminals, homeless, alcoholics, laborers, art- 
ists, and radicals he had encountered in several years of 
drifting. These characters spoke in crude, slangy, but 
lively language. Gradually, O'Neill's plays grew longer, 
and he experimented more boldly with artistic tech- 
niques. He moved toward a more symbolic, stylized the- 
ater that could express his characters inner emotions. 
He turned toward autobiographical material for his final 
plays, such as Long Day's Journey into Night written 
from 1939 to 1941 and first performed in 1956) and A 
Moon for the Misbegotten (written from 1941 to 1943 
and first performed in 1957). 

During the 1930's, vigorous debates took place over 
the purpose of drama. Some playwrights wanted the 
theater to be a force for social reform. Others concen- 
trated on experimental technique, and still others aimed 
at frankly escapist and commercially successful work. 
Clifford Odets Wajsting for Lefty (1935) and Awake and 
Sing! (1935) attack social problems of the time. Lillian 
Hellman’s plays, such as The Children’s Hour (1934) and 
The Little Foxes (1939), explore the destructiveness of 
greed, materialism, and sexual repression in American 
life. Elmer Rice's The Adding Machine (1923) is a satire 
on the growing mechanization of humanity. In Our 
Town (1938), Thornton Wilder used uncommon staging 
techniques, such as the absence of scenery or a curtain, 
to balance a somewhat sentimental picture of small- 
town New England life. 


Literature since 1945 


After World War II ended in 1945, the United States 
underwent many changes. The economy prospered, but 
the gulf between the rich and the poor widened. The 
black civil rights movement gathered strength in the 
1960's. Other groups, including women, also began to 
demand fuller rights. The United States remained an im- 
portant world power but was criticized for its participa- 
tion in the Vietnam War (1957-1975) and for its influence 
abroad. Much American literature was concerned with 
these economic and social changes. 

Poetry. By the 1950's, modernism was the dominant 
form. A generation of poets, including Robert Lowell, 
john Berryman, and Theodore Roethke, thoroughly mas- 
tered modernist techniques. 

Variations on modernist poetry. A number of poets 
and groups developed poetic styles that were variations 
on modernism. One group, called the Black Mountain 
poets, gathered around Charles Olson at Black Moun- 
tain College, an experimental arts school in Black Moun- 
tain, N.C. Olson sought to give poetry a physical imme- 
diacy. In The Maximus Poems (1953-1975), he let the 
rhythm of his own breathing determine the length of his 
verse lines. Robert Creeley, Robert Duncan, and Denise 
Levertov carried forward Olson’s style of verse, seeking 
an ‘open’ form that could admit a range of experiences, 
feelings, and insights. 

A group called the beat poets condemned the failings 
of American society and turned poetry into a powerful 
tool of social protest. The beat poets shared a disgust 
with false values and a desire to achieve spiritual eleva- 
tion. One of the most important beat poets was Allen 
Ginsberg. Ginsberg’s “Howl” (1956) describes spiritual 
ecstasy and the torments of urban life in long lines influ- 
enced by Whitman and William Carlos Williams. 





American literature 423 


Gary Snyder's poetry reflects his interest in Asian cul- 
ture and in the relation of human beings to their envi- 
ronment. Snyder's poems are collected in Myths and 
Texts (1960), Turtle Island (1974), and other volumes. 

Frank O'Hara !ed a group of poets centered in New 
York City. His poems read like improvised and casual 
records of quickly changing and scattered urban life. 
John Ashbery, a member of the New York group, wrote 
poems that reflect the influence of modern art and 
music. Many of his poems hint at their subject only indi- 
rectly and vaguely. 

James Merrill began his career with polished formal 
verse, often autobiographical but highly restrained. 7he 
Changing Light at Sandover (1982) is a record of mes- 
sages from a Ouija board, a device supposedly used to 
communicate with the dead. 

A. R. Ammons experimented with verse form and 
punctuation, seeking a language to express the interac- 
tion between a scene being observed and an observer. 
W. S. Merwin’s haunting phrases express his concern 
with political and ecological issues. 

Elizabeth Bishop's highly regarded poems are formal 
and self-restrained, but express powerful personal feel- 
ings and experiences. Questions of Travel (1965) and Ge- 
ography //1(1976) explore themes of travel, exile, and re- 
sponse to exotic landscapes. Robert Penn Warren 
gained fame as a novelist but also wrote verse. His 
poems center on history, memory, and the effort to deal 
with time’s erosive power. 

‘Confessional’ poetry. Some poets began to write po- 
etry, sometimes called “confessional” poetry, that was 
more personal and emotional. Robert Lowell's Life 
Studies (1959) and John Berryman’s 77 Dream Songs 
(1964) speak frankly of their troubled lives. Theodore 
Roethke explored the themes of growth and childhood 
in elegantly written poems. Sylvia Plath sometimes used 
the Holocaust, the mass murder of European Jews by 
the Nazis during World War II, as a metaphor for per- 
sonal crisis. Anne Sexton wrote about her mental illness 
in a direct and open style. Adrienne Rich moved from 
formal verse to steadily deeper probings of her con- 
sciousness as a woman. 

The black experience became the subject of many 
poets in the 1950's and 1960's. The early poetry of Gwen- 
dolyn Brooks showed her skill in traditional rhyming 
verse and forms like the sonnet, a 14-line poem with a 
formal arrangement of rhymes. Yet her words drew on 
oral black preaching and street talk. She described the 





Jill Krementz Bob Black Ohcago Dailh News 
Robert Lowell Gwendolyn Brooks 





424 American literature 


ordinary lives of blacks and the injustices they suffered. 

In the 1960's, with the rise of the civil rights move- 
ment, many African Americans rejected earlier hopes 
for an integrated society and began to call for a separate 
black culture. LeRoi Jones's early poems express the 
personal agonies of living in a prejudiced world. But he 
increasingly saw the problem as social, not personal. He 
began to write plays and helped start the Black Arts 
movement. The movement rejected the literary forms 
and values of white culture, instead founding magazines 
and institutions to support writing that reflected black 
experience. As Jones became more politically active, he 
changed his name to Imamu Ameer Baraka, then to 
Amiri Baraka, to reflect his African heritage. 

Fiction and other prose. In the postwar period, 
many writers continued to create realist fiction. Several 
authors drew their subjects from World War II, includ- 
ing James Jones, Norman Mailer, Irwin Shaw, and Her- 
man Wouk. Others described regions of the country or 
the experiences of certain age groups or races. John 
Cheever and John O Hara wrote about suburban life in 
New England, New York, and Pennsylvania. J. D. Salinger 
exposed the shortcomings of the adult world as seen 
through the eyes of a New York teen-ager in 7he 
Catcher in the Rye (1951). james Baldwin wrote about the 
black experience in such novels as Go Je// It on the 
Mountain (1953) and Another Country (1962). Ralph Elli- 
son, in Invisible Man (1952), provided a haunting picture 
of African American life in the United States. john Up- 
dike examined the materialism of middle-class American 
life in the four-volume “Rabbit” series, from Rabdit Run 
(1960) to Rabbit at Rest (1990). Joyce Carol Oates pro- 
duced a large body of fiction that ranged from realistic 
stories of urban life to nightmarish novels. 

Saul Bellow is one of the most widely respected post- 
war novelists. His early work, such as Henderson the 
Rain King (1959), is exuberant and comic. His later novels 
focus on mature, thoughtful men who experience and 
reflect on the problems of modern life. 

The beat novelist Jack Kerouac’s On the Road (1957) 
tells of young rebels against the boredom and pointless- 
ness of daily life who wander the United States in a 
search for meaning. Kerouac’ strongly rhythmic flow of 
words creates an impression of spontaneity and impro- 
visation, like that in jazz. 

Southern fiction. A number of Southern writers, influ- 
enced by Faulkner, focused on the poor, outcasts, or 


rementz jill Krementz 


Joyce Carol Oates 


Ralph Ellison 





grotesque characters. Among these writers were Carson 
McCullers and Flannery O Connor. McCullers depicted 
the pain of loneliness in many of her works, including 
The Member of the Wedding (1946) and The Ballad of 
the Sad Café (1951). In brilliant short stories and in such 
novels as Wise Blood (1952) and The Violent Bear It 
Away (1960), O Connor presented grotesque characters 
and disturbed behavior in a darkly comic style. 

Eudora Welty sets most of her novels and short sto- 
ries in her native Mississippi. In her works, comic and 
satiric twists lighten the impact of odd characters or mo- 
ments of violence. Walker Percy was strongly influenced 
by European philosophy, especially a movement called 
existentialism, which stresses that individuals must 
choose their own way to live and act. His novels, includ- 
ing The Moviegoer(1961) and The Second Coming 
(1980), humorously take up the existential themes of 
alienation and the search for self-fulfillment. 

Experimental styles. The stylistic experiments of the 
modernists opened the way for a technique called se/f 
reflexive fiction, an innovative manipulation of language 
and narrative. Self-reflexive fiction often calls attention 
to the act of writing itself. For example, it may comment 
on or even argue with itself and address or even mock 
the reader. Self-reflexive fiction and other experimental 
techniques became common among postwar authors. In 
The Sot-Weed Factor (1960), Chimera (1972), and other 
works, John Barth created wild comedies mingling an- 
cient myth, history, and highly unreliable autobiography. 

Thomas Pynchon’s massive Gravitys Rainbow (1973) is 
a fantastic reimagining of World War II filtered through 
the social concerns of the early 1970's. Joseph Heller's 
Catch-22(1961) and Kurt Vonneguts S/aughterhouse- 
Five (1969) use dark comedy to satirize the self- 
satisfaction they felt resulted from the war. Ken Keseys 
One Flew over the Cuckoo s Nest (1962) uses a mental 
hospital and a con-man hero as symbols of modern 
American society. The Polish-born Jerzy Kosinski's child- 
hood experiences during World War II inspired the gro- 
tesque violence of The Painted Bird (1965). The same 
memories haunt the dark comedy of his later novels set 
in the United States, including Being There (1971). 

In Mumbo Jumbo (1972) and other works, the black 
writer Ishmael Reed drew a satiric and disorienting pic- 
ture of race relations and other aspects of modern life. 
In Snow White (1967), The Dead Father(1975), and other 
books, Donald Barthelme aimed to unsettle readers 





jill Krementz 


Kurt Vonnegut 


[ill Krementz 


Saul Bellow 





by violating conventions of 
realistic storytelling. 

John Hawkes used ex- 
perimental and self- 
reflexive styles in The Lime 
Twig (1961) and other nov- 
els. The Russian-born Vla- 
dimir Nabokov won fame 
for his brilliant language 
and self-reflexive tech- 
niques in such novels as 
Lolita (1958; published in 
1955 in France), Pale Fire 
(1962), and Ada (1969). 

Some postwar writers 
blend fiction with historic fact. Truman Capote's /n Cold 
Blood \1966) employed his powerful narrative skills to 
tell the story of a brutal multiple murder. Norman Mai- 
ler's best work has been journalistic and autobiographi- 
cal, in particular 7he Armies of the Night (1968), about a 
mass demonstration against the Vietnam War. The nov- 
elist William Styron gave a fictional version of a slave re- 
volt in Virginia in 1831 in 7he Confessions of Nat Turner 
(1967). E. L. Doctorow used both fictional and real-life 
characters in his reimaginings of American history. 

Works by minority writers. The civil rights movement 
of the 1960's brought forth a number of popular autobi- 
ographies, including 7he Autobiography of Malcolm X 
(1965, edited by Alex Haley), Claude Brown's Manchild in 
the Promised Land (1965), and Eldridge Cleavers Soul on 
Ice (1968). Haley's Roots: The Saga of an American Family 
(1976) traces his family's history back through American 
slaves to his African ancestors. 

The black novelist Toni Morrison wrote about the 
lives of black women in the North in such novels as Sula 
(1973), Tar Baby (1981), and Beloved (1987). The black 
writer Alice Walker won fame with the novel 7he Co/or 
Purple (1982). Walker has presented a range of black 
characters, some heroic, but others deeply flawed, par- 
ticularly black men who treat women unfairly. Like Mor- 
rison, she has increasingly found an exuberantly cre- 
ative language and storytelling technique. 

N. Scott Momaday, a writer of Kiowa and Cherokee 
ancestry, used varied modern narrative techniques in 
House Made of Dawn (1968), the story of an alienated 
American Indian veteran of World War Il. Ceremony 
(1977), by Pueblo Indian novelist Leslie Marmon Silko, 
tells about another World War II Indian veteran. This 
young man, torn by the conflict between ancient Indian 
ways and modern white ways and shattered by his com- 
bat experiences, is gradually healed by an Indian cere- 
mony. Maxine Hong Kingston's 7he Woman Warrior 
(1976) blends fiction with fact to express the complex ex- 
perience of growing up as a Chinese-American woman. 

Essays. Such critics as Irving Howe, Lionel Trilling, 
and Edmund Wilson played an important role from the 
1930's to the 1950's in shaping the public understanding 
of literature and in popularizing important new intellec- 
tual movements. In the 1960's and 1970's, Susan Sontag 
tried to clarify the leading features of contemporary art. 

The journalist Tom Wolfe used an exuberant, inven- 
tive style to report on popular culture during the 1960's 
and 1970's. His writing included cutting satire of those 
who pursued fashion in politics and modern architec- 





' a" 
Jim Anerson, Blac Star 


William Styron 





American literature 425 


ture. Wolfe also wrote fiction, satirizing modern Ameri- 
can culture in the novel 7he Bontire of the Vanities 
(1987). 

Drama. The leading playwrights after World War II 
were Tennessee Williams and Arthur Miller. Williams’ 
drama often shows a conflict between sensitive, poetic 
individuals and the brutality and coarseness of modern 
life. His plays are basically realistic psychological por- 
traits. The Glass Menagerie (1945) and A Streetcar 
Named Desire (1947) are his most famous. His later work 
explores grotesque and sometimes disturbed behavior. 
Miller's Death of a Salesman (1949) lends tragic dignity 
to the anguish of Willy Loman, a traveling salesman. 
Loman is destroyed by accepting popularity and mate- 
rial success as the highest values in life. 

In Whos Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (1962), Edward 
Albee explored with biting wit and grotesque humor 
how love and cruelty are entangled within marital rela- 
tionships and friendships. Albee also adapted the style 
of the theater of the absurd in plays that probed social 
and personal problems, such as The Zoo Story(1959). 
Theater of the absurd was a drama movement of the 
1950's and 1960's that stressed the absurdity and lack of 
meaning the authors saw in modern life. 

During the 1950's and 1960's, black theater often took 
up political themes. Lorraine Hansberry's A Raisin in the 
Sun (1959) is a realistic portrait of a black family who 
move into a white area. They must find the courage to 
resist white prejudice and claim the right to realize their 
hopes. James Baldwin's Blues for Mister Charlie (1964) 
traces the racial myths that trap both blacks and whites. 
The poet Amiri Baraka also wrote plays, promoting 
black nationalism and expressing anger at whites in 
such dramas as Dutchman (1964), The Slave (1964), and 
Slave Ship (1967). 

August Wilson has written powerfully on the black 
experience in America in the 1900's in a cycle of plays. 
The Piano Lesson(1987) describes the conflict between a 
brother and sister over whether to sell or keep the fam- 
ily heirloom, a piano. 

In Ntozake Shange's For Colored Girls Who Have 
Considered Suicide; When the Rainbow Is Enuf(1976), 
seven women dance, sing, and recite poetry. Their per- 
formances create a collage of black women’s feelings 
and experiences. 

In plays such as The Basic Training of Pavio Hummel 
(1971) and Sticks and Bones (1971), David Rabe portrayed 





_ a 
S Bran Lanker from Altred A Knopt 
Toni Morrison 


jill Krementz 


Edward Albee 


i 
| 
| 





426 American literature 


the disillusionment of soldiers in the Vietnam War. Sam 
Shepard's dramas, such as 7rue West(1980) and Foo! for 
Love (1983), are bitter explorations of family relationships 
and the dominant values in American society and poli- 
tics. David Mamet's plays, including American Buffalo 
(1975) and Glengarry Glen Ross (1983), are noted for their 
vigorous dialogue, often profane and rapidly exploding 
into arguments. 


The study of American literature 


During the 1920's, American literature began to be- 
come an important field in higher education. Critics and 
scholars such as Norman Foerster and Bliss Perry played 
a key role in editing texts and creating anthologies for 
use in classes. The need to define a curricu/um (course 
of study) led to the designation of some works as “clas- 
sics’ every student should read. Books that did not win 
this designation were often neglected. 

Scholars also began to seek common themes that uni- 
fied and distinguished American literature. In a series of 
books during the early 1900's, Van Wyck Brooks 
stressed the features and outlook that distinguished 
American from European writing. Historian Perry 
Miller's two-volume The New England Mind (1939-1953) 
was influential in studies of literature. In that work, Mill- 
er traced American culture to the Puritan tension be- 
tween commercial and religious values and between in- 
dividualism and community. 

Educators today have sought to broaden the defini- 
tion and scope of American literature. They believe that 
the past study of American literature concentrated too 
heavily on white male writers whose works were con- 
sidered “classics.” Teachers and critics today pay more 
attention to works by blacks and other minority groups, 
and women. There is also greater interest in nontradi- 
tional forms of literature, including journals and other 
unpublished writing. Donald G. Marshall 


Related articles. See Literature for children and its list of 
Related articles. See also the following: 


Colonial literature (1608-1764) 


Mather, Cotton 
Mather, Richard 

Poor Richard's Almanac 
Smith, John 

Taylor, Edward 
Wigglesworth, Michael 


Bay Psalm Book 

Bradford, William (1590-1657) 
Bradstreet, Anne Dudley 
Byrd, William, II 

Edwards, Jonathan 

Franklin, Benjamin 

Great Awakening 


The revolutionary period (1765-1787) 


Crevecoeur, Michel- 
Guillaume Jean de 

Federalist, The 

Freneau, Philip 


Paine, Thomas 
Warren, Mercy Otis 
Wheatley, Phillis 
Woolman, John 


Literature of a young nation (1788-1830) 


Brown, Charles Brockden 
Bryant, William Cullen 
Dunlap, William 

Irving, Washington 


Payne, John Howard 
Rip Van Winkle 

Tyler, Royall 

Weems, Mason Locke 


The Era of Expansion (1831-1870) 


Alcott, Louisa May 
Cooper, James Fenimore 
Dana, Richard Henny, Jr. 
Dickinson, Emily 
Emerson, Ralph Waldo 
Frietchie, Barbara 


Fuller, Margaret 
Hale, Edward Everett 
Hawthorne, Nathaniel 
Longfellow, Henry 
Wadsworth 
Lowell, James Russell 


Melville, Herman 

Poe, Edgar Allan 
Stowe, Harriet Beecher 
Thoreau, Henry David 


The Age of Realism (1871-1913) 
Short-story and prose writers 


Adams, Henry Brooks 
Addams, Jane 

Ade, George 

Bierce, Ambrose 
Billings, Josh 
Burroughs, John 
Dunne, Finley Peter 
Freeman, Mary E. Wilkins 
Garland, Hamlin 

Hale, Edward Everett 
Harris, Joel Chandler 
Harte, Bret 

Hearn, Lafcadio 


Alger, Horatio 

Bellamy, Edward 

Cable, George Washington 
Chesnutt, Charles Waddell 
Chopin, Kate 

Crane, Stephen 

De Forest, John 


Cohan, George M. 
Fitch, Clyde 


Bates, Katharine Lee 
Field, Eugene 
Kilmer, Joyce 
Lanier, Sidney 


The world wars and depression (1914-1945) 
Short-story and prose writers 


Anderson, Sherwood 
Barzun, Jacques 
Bradford, Roark 
Brooks, Van Wyck 
Day, Clarence 

De Voto, Bernard 
Dobie, J. Frank 
Gale, Zona 
Lardner, Ring 
Locke, Alain LeRoy 
Lovecraft, H. P. 
Marquis, Don 
Mencken, H. L 


Adams, Samuel 
Hopkins 
Algren, Nelson 
Allen, Hervey 
Bromfield, Louis 
Buck, Pearl 
Burroughs, Edgar Rice 
Cabell, James Branch 
Cain, James 
Caldwell, Erskine 
Cather, Willa 
Chandler, Raymond 
Cozzens, James Gould 
Dos Passos, John 
Dreiser, Theodore 
Farrell, James T. 
Faulkner, William 
Ferber, Edna 


Dramatists 


Gillette, William 
Herne, James A. 


Transcendentalism 
Uncle Tom’s Cabin 
Whitman, Walt 
Whittier, John Greenleaf 


Henry, O. 

Holmes, Oliver Wendell 
James, William 
Jewett, Sarah Orne 
Keller, Helen 

Muir, John 

Nasby, Petroleum V. 
Nye, Bill 

Stockton, Frank R. 
Tyler, Moses Coit 
Veblen, Thorstein 
Ward, Artemus 


Novelists 


Dreiser, Theodore 
Eggleston, Edward 
Frederic, Harold 

Grey, Zane 

Howells, William Dean 
London, Jack 

Twain, Mark 


Moody, William 
Vaughn 


Poets 


Lazarus, Emma 
Markham, Edwin 
Miller, Joaquin 

Riley, James Whitcomb 





Parker, Dorothy 
Porter, Katherine Anne 
Runyon, Damon 
Santayana, George 
Saroyan, William 
Stein, Gertrude 
Tate, Allen 
Thurber, James 
Toomer, Jean 
Welty, Eudora 
White, E. B. 
Wilson, Edmund 


————————EO— 


Novelists 


Fitzgerald, F. Scott 
Gardner, Erle Stanley 
Glasgow, Ellen 
Hammett, Dashiell 
Hecht, Ben 
Hemingway, Ernest 
Heyward, DuBose 
Hurston, Zora Neale 
La Farge, Oliver 
Lewis, Sinclair 
Marquan4d, John P. 
McCullers, Carson 
McKay, Claude 
Miller, Henry 
Mitchell, Margaret 
Nordhoft and Hall 
Norris, Frank 

O Hara, John 


American literature 427 


Queen, Ellery Stuart, Jesse McBain, Ed Puzo, Mario Updike, John 
Rawlings, Marjorie Kinnan Tarkington, Booth McKay, Claude Rand, Ayn Uris, Leon 
Richter, Conrad Van Dine, S. S. McMurtry, Larry Roth, Philip Vidal, Gore 
Rinehart, Mary Roberts West, Nathanael Michener, James Salinger, J. D. Vonnegut, Kurt 
Roth, Henry Wharton, Edith Morrison, Toni Shaw, frwin Walker, Alice 
Sinclair, Upton Wolfe, Thomas Nabokov, Vladimir | Stegner, Wallace Welty, Eudora 
Steinbeck, John Wright, Richard Norton, Andre Styron, William West, Jessamyn 
Stout, Rex Oates, Joyce Theroux, Paul Wiesel, Elie 

Carol Tyler, Anne Wouk, Herman 

ride ile tad Ozick, Cynthia 

Anderson, Maxwell Kelly, George 
Barry, Philip Kingsley, Sidney iraraasss 
Behrman, S.N. Lindsay, Howard Albee, Edward Miller, Arthur 
Connelly, Marc Luce, Clare Boothe Baraka, Amiri Shepard, Sam 
Glaspell, Susan Odets, Clifford Hansberry, Lorraine Simon, Neil 


Green, Paul O'Neill, Eugene Inge, William Wasserstein, Wendy 
Hart, Moss Rice, Elmer Mamet, David Williams, Tennessee 
Hecht, Ben Sherwood, Robert McNally, Terrence Wilson, August 


Hellman, Lillian 
Howard, Sidney 
Kaufman, George S. 


Aiken, Conrad 


Van Druten, John 
Wilder, Thornton 


Poets 


Masters, Edgar Lee 


Ashbery, John 
Berryman, John 
Bishop, Elizabeth 
Bly, Robert 


Poets 


Lindbergh, Anne Morrow 


Lowell, Robert 
McGinley, Phyllis 
Merrill, James 


Benet, Stephen Vincent Millay, Edna St. Vincent Brodsky, Joseph Merwin, W. S. 
Benet, William Rose Monroe, Harriet Brooks, Gwendolyn Olson, Charles 
Coffin, Robert P. T. Moore, Marianne Ciardi, John Plath, Sylvia 


Crane, Hart Nash, Ogden Creeley, Robert Rexroth, Kenneth 
Cullen, Countee Neihardt, John Dickey, James Rich, Adrienne 
Cummings, E. E. Pound, Ezra Dove, Rita Roethke, Theodore 


Doolittle, Hilda 
Dunbar, Paul Laurence 
Frost, Robert 

Guest, Edgar 

Hillyer, Robert 
Hughes, Langston 
Jeffers, Robinson 
Johnson, James 


Weldon Williams, William African American Drama Science fiction 
Lindsay, Vachel Carlos literature Essay Short story 
Lowell, Amy Wylie, Elinor Beat movement Lost Generation Western frontier 
MacLeish, Archibald Biography Muckrakers life in 

Colonial life in Nobel Prizes America (Litera- 
Literature since 1945 America Novel ture) 
Short-story and prose writers (Literature) Poetry Westerns 
Agee, James Jackson, Shirley Criticism Pulitzer Prizes Writing 
Angelou, Maya McCarthy, Mary Detective story Satire 
Asimov, Isaac O'Connor, Flannery Outli 
utline 


Bradbury, Ray 
Carver, Raymond 
Cheever, John 


Ransom, John Crowe 
Robinson, Edwin 
Arlington 

Sandburg, Carl 
Stevens, Wallace 
Tate, Allen 

Teasdale, Sara 

Van Doren, Mark 


Parker, Robert B. 
Perelman, S. J. 
Singer, fsaac B. 


Duncan, Robert 
Eberhart, Richard 
Ferlinghetti, Lawrence 
Ginsberg, Allen 
Giovanni, Nikki 

Jarrell, Randall 


Schwartz, Delmore 
Sexton, Anne 
Shapiro, Karl Jay 
Warren, Robert Penn 
Wilbur, Richard 


Other related articles 


I. Beginnings of American literature 
ll. Colonial literature (1608-1764) 


Cleaver, Eldridge Sontag, Susan A. Virginia 
Didion, Joan Stafford, Jean B. New England 
Ellison, Harlan Sturgeon, Theodore C. Philadelphia 
Haley, Alex Wolfe, Tom Ill. The revolutionary period (1765-1787) 
. IV. Literature of a young nation (1788-1830) 
Novelists 


Auchincloss, Louis 
Baldwin, James 


Heller, Joseph 
Herbert, Frank 


V. The Era of Expansion (1831-1870) 
A. The sentimental novel 


B. The romance 


Barth, John Hersey, John C Nonfiction prose 
Bellow, Saul Hillerman, Tony D. Poetry 
Cain, James M. Himes, Chester E. Walt Whitman and Emily Dickinson 


Capote, Truman 
Clark, Mary Higgins 
Cornwell, Patricia 
Crichton, Michael 
Derleth, August 
Doctorow, E. L 
Ellison, Ralph 
Faulkner, William 
Crafton, Sue 
Grimes, Martha 
Grisham, John 
Guthrie, A. B., Jr. 
Heinlein, Robert A. 


Hobson, Laura Z. 
Irving, John 
Kerouac, Jack 
King, Stephen 
Koontz, Dean 

L Amour, Louis 
Lee, Harper 

Le Guin, Ursula K. 
Leonard, Elmore 
MacDonald, John D. 
Macdonald, Ross 
Mailer, Norman 
Malamud, Bernard 


VI. The Age of Realism (1871-1913) 


A. Realists 
B. Naturalists 


C Mark Twain and Henry James 

D. Women writers 

E. Nonfiction writers 
Vil. The world wars and depression (1914-1945) 

A. Modernist poetry 


B. Realist poetry 


C. The Lost Generation 
D. Modernist fiction 
E. The Harlem Renaissance 


F. Satirists 


j 
| 





428 American Lung Association 


G. Realist fiction H. Drama 
Vill. Literature since 1945 

A. Poetry 

B. Fiction and other prose 

C Essays 

D. Drama 


IX. The study of American literature 


Questions 


Who was the Puritan historian who defended the Salem witch- 
craft trials? 

What did publication of The Federalist help accomplish? 

Who wrote what is considered the first American book? 

What was realism? naturalism? 

What characterized Hemingway s style? 

Who were the pioneers of the ‘hard-boiled’ detective novel? 

What was transcendentalism? 

What was the Black Arts movement? 

Which two women were the most important sentimental novel- 
ists? 

Who is considered the leading Puritan poet? 


Additional resources 


For additional resources on specific types of literature, see the 
lists at the end of such articles as Drama and Poetry. See also 
the following: 

Bercovitch, Sacvan, ed. The Cambridge History of American Lit- 
erature. Cambridge, 1994-. Multivolume work. 

Cerrito, Joann, and DiMauro, Laurie, eds. Modern American Lit- 
erature. 3 vols. 5th ed. St. James Pr., 1999. 

Faber, Doris and Harold. Great Lives: American Literature. 
Atheneum, 1995. Younger readers. 

Hart, James D., and Leininger, Phillip. 7he Oxford Companion to 
American Literature. 6th ed. Oxtord, 1995. 

Magill, Frank N., ed. Magills Survey of American Literature. 8 
vols., including supplement. Cavendish, 1991, 1993. Master- 
pieces of American Literature. HarperCollins, 1993. 

Millard, Kenneth. Contemporary American Fiction. Oxtord, 2000. 

Perkins, George, and others, eds. Benet's Reader's Encyclopedia 
ot American Literature. HarperCollins, 1991. 

Seratin, Steven R., and Bendixen, Altred, eds. Encyclopedia of 
American Literature. Continuum, 1999. 

Werlock, Abby H., ed. The Facts on File Companion to the Amer- 
ican Short Story. Facts on File, 2000. 


American Lung Association js the oldest nation- 
wide voluntary public health agency in the United 
States. The agency was founded in 1904 to combat tu- 
berculosis. Today, the association, its medical arm—the 
American Thoracic Society—and its state and local affili- 
ates work to control and prevent all lung diseases. In ad- 
dition, the association and its affiliates work to combat 
some of the related causes of breathing problems, in- 
cluding smoking, air pollution, and occupational lung 
hazards. 

The American Lung Association provides public 
health education programs and materials on such dis- 
eases as lung cancer, emphysema, asthma, pneumonia, 
influenza, tuberculosis, and lung disorders in infants. It 
supports medical research and awards grants to en- 
courage young medical professionals to specialize in 
lung health. The work of the association is funded in 
part by public contributions to its annual Christmas Seal 
Campaign. Headquarters of the American Lung Associa- 
tion are in New York City. 

Critically reviewed by the American Lung Association 
American Medical Association (AMA) is a profes- 
sional society of physicians. Its purpose is to promote 
the science and art of medicine and the betterment of 
public health.” Most members join the AMA through 
one of its state and territorial medical associations. The 


association's membership includes medical students 
and resident physicians, and representatives of govern- 
ment services, medical staffs, and medical specialty soci- 
eties. 

The AMA publishes a weekly scientific journal, the 
Journal of the American Medical Association; a weekly 
newspaper, American Medical News; monthly specialty 
journals; and other publications on medical subjects. 
The AMA was founded in 1847. Its headquarters are lo- 
cated in Chicago. 

Critically reviewed by the American Medical Association 
American Museum of Natural History, in New 
York City, was incorporated in 1869 for the purpose of 
developing the study of natural science. The museums 
scientific departments conduct research programs. It 
also has a department of education. The museum pro- 
duces several publications yearly. A research library is 
also located there. The Rose Center for Earth and Space, 
which includes the Hayden Planetarium, is directed by 
the museum. 

The American Museum of Natural History includes ex- 
hibits on various types of animals, dinosaurs and other 
fossil life, as well as rare gems, minerals, and mete- 
orites. Other exhibits illustrate human cultures and biol- 
ogy, and the origin of life. 

Critically reviewed by the American Museum of Natural History 
American Party is a conservative political party in the 
United States. The party was set up in 1968 under the 
name American Independent Party to support former 
Governor George C. Wallace of Alabama in his cam- 
paign for president. Wallace had been governor of Al- 
abama from 1963 to 1967 and had run unsuccessfully for 
the Democratic nomination for president in 1964. Wal- 
lace had gained national attention by resisting the U.S. 
governments efforts to desegregate Alabama public 
schools. 

The roots of the American Independent Party can be 
traced back to the 1960 presidential election. Six of Al- 
abama’s 11 Democratic electors in the Electoral College 
rejected the national Democratic candidate, John F. Ken- 
nedy. Instead, they cast their votes for Senator Harry F. 
Byrd of Virginia. 

In 1968, Wallace's supporters succeeded in placing 
the American Independent Party on the ballot in every 
state. That year, Wallace chose retired General Curtis E. 
LeMay as his running mate. The party platform con- 
demned government welfare programs, the Civil Rights 
Act of 1964, and what the party considered a “no-win" 
policy in the Vietnam War. Republican Richard M. Nixon 
won the 1968 election. Wallace ran far behind the Dem- 
ocratic candidate, Hubert H. Humphrey. However, Wal- 
lace got 13 | percent of the popular vote and 46 elec- 
toral votes. 

In 1969, representatives from 38 states established the 
American Party as the successor to the American Inde- 
pendent Party. In 1976, the party split into the American 
Party and the American Independent Party. Both of the 
parties have nominated candidates for the presidency 
and other offices. But neither party achieved the 
strength of the American Independent Party under Wal- 
lace's leadership. The Know-Nothing Party of the 1850's 
also used the name American Party (see Know- 
Nothings). Peter N. Carroll 

See also Wallace, George C. 








American Printing House for the Blind is one of 
the world’s major publishers for the blind. It produces 
books and magazines in braille, in large-type form, and 
in recorded versions. It also produces educational tools 
and teaching aids. It is a nonprofit corporation support- 
ed through public donations, sales to individuals and 
agencies, and contracts with agencies that furnish mate- 
rials free or at cost. An annual appropriation by Con- 
gress is used solely for the manufacture and distribution 
of educational materials to blind students at lower than 
college level. 

The American Printing House for the Blind has head- 
quarters in Louisville, Kentucky. The Kentucky legislature 
established the organization in 1858. The federal govern- 
ment authorized its first appropriation in 1879. In 1961, 
the corporation, with the Field Foundation, Inc., and 
Field Enterprises Educational Corporation (now World 
Book, Inc.), published a braille edition of 7he World 
Book Encyclopedia (see Braille). In 1980, the American 
Printing House for the Blind and World Book, Inc., pub- 
lished a recorded edition of World Book. It included 
cassette tapes of the encyclopedia, a special cassette 
player, and indexes in both braille and large type. 

Critically reviewed by American Printing House for the Blind 
American Revolution. See Revolutionary War in 
America. 

American Samoa is a United States territory, about 
2,300 miles (3,700 kilometers) southwest of Hawaii. Six of 
the territory's seven islands are divided among three 
groups—Tutuila and Aunuu; Ofu, Olosega, and Tau (the 
Manua group); and Rose. These islands are in the Sa- 
moan chain. The seventh, Swains Island, lies 200 miles 
(320 kilometers) north. The Jennings family has owned 
Swains Island since 1856. That year, Eli Jennings, an 
American, and his Samoan wife settled there. 

The largest and most important island is Tutuila. Pago 
Pago (pronounced PAHNG oh PAHNG oh/, the capital of 
American Samoa, lies on Tutuila on one of the best and 
most beautiful harbors in the South Pacific. Pago Pago is 
the territory's only port and urban center. 

American Samoas 73,000 people are nationals, but 
not citizens, of the United States. They may freely enter 
the country at any time. Many people of Samoan de- 
scent live in Hawaii and the continental United States. 

Government. American Samoa is administered by 
the U.S. Department of the Interior. It is classified as an 
unorganized and unincorporated territory. For details, 


Manua Islands 
Hawai: Olosege 
» f os 
Pacwfip oe, I. re Tau 
“ Philippines Oc ea § ; 
AREA OF MAP 
Ps ————$—£ quate= 


Pap 
“ngones <f en intload 


| 

LS American® | 
SAMOA 

a | 

| 

} 


iy ew i 


Naw 
Zaaland 


Road 

* Government center 
Village or settlement 

+ Elevation above 5ea level 














ATRIGHT AMERICAN SAMOA 


— ah a ae 


250 Kilometers 


American Samoa 429 


see Territory (In the United States). American Samoans 
adopted a constitution in 1960. They elect a governor to 
a four-year term. American Samoa has a legislature with 
a Senate and a House of Representatives. The Senate 
has 18 members chosen by county councils to serve 
two- to four-year terms. The House has 20 members 
elected by the people to two-year terms. Samoans who 
are 18 years old or older may vote. American Samoans 
elect a delegate to the U.S. House of Representatives. 
The delegate may only vote in House committees. 

People. Almost all American Samoans are Polyne- 
sians. Samoan, a Polynesian language, is the main lan- 
guage, but many people also speak English. Most of the 
people live in villages, and their lives center around 
their families. Each family group is headed by a chief 
who controls the familys property, represents it in the 
village council, and takes care of its sick or aged. Most 
American Samoans are Christians. 

In 1961, the United States began an economic devel- 
opment program in American Samoa. Many people left 
their villages to take jobs in industries around Pago 
Pago. Thatch-roofed fa/e (houses) were replaced by hur- 
ricane-proof concrete buildings. New schools were 
built, and teaching by television was introduced. Chil- 
dren from the ages of 6 to 18 must attend school. 

Land. The islands that make up American Samoa have 
a total area of 77 square miles (199 square kilometers). 
Only a third of the land can be cultivated. Rose and 
Swains islands consist of coral. The others are remains 
of extinct volcanoes. Most of the land is mountainous, 
with some fertile soil in the valleys. Coconuts, bananas, 
and taro are grown (see Taro). There are few natural re- 
sources. The islands have a wet tropical climate. Yearly 
rainfall averages over 200 inches (510 centimeters). Tem- 
peratures range from 70 to 90 F (21 to 32 C). 

Economy. The leading industry is tuna canning. Fish 
products make up over 96 percent of all exports. Other 
exports include handicrafts. A jet airport and a luxury 
hotel were built in the 1960's, and tourism increased. 
The U.S. government has provided large amounts of 
money to give American Samoa a prosperous economy. 

History. The Samoa Islands have been occupied by 
Polynesian peoples for at least 2,000 years. These peo- 
ples probably migrated from eastern Melanesia. Euro- 
pean explorers first reached the Samoa Islands in 1722 
(see Samoa [History)). In 1872, the Samoans agreed to let 
the United States use Pago Pago Bay as a naval coaling 
















Pola |. Cepe 








Tutuila Island + > ciel 
Alao | 
Pago pagog Aua _— 
Fagatogo ofau | 
Faganeg. Matafao P pe -_ pee | 
Rosa i. 2,141 ft { = uuuli 
oe et ee 





PAGO PAGO 


Leon INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT 


oon Dy 







tiga 
SailRock Pont | South Pace f 


af 


Steps Point 


200 Miles 15 Miles 


20 Kilometers 


WORLD BOOK maps 





430 American Samoa, National Park of 





Cameramann International, Ltd 


Pago Pago, American Samoa‘s capital, lies on one of the most 
beautiful harbors in the South Pacific. Pago Pago is the territory's 
only port and urban center. 


station. Later, the United States was given trading rights 
in the islands. 

In 1899, the United States, Germany, and the United 
Kingdom signed a treaty dividing the Samoa Islands be- 
tween the United States and Germany. Germany took 
control of the western islands in 1900. The United States 
took control of Tutuila, Aunuu, and Rose Island in 1900, 
and the Manua group in 1904. Swains Island was an- 
nexed in 1925. The islands were administered by the U.S. 
Navy until 1951, when they were transferred to the De- 
partment of the Interior. Afterward, the governor of 
American Samoa was appointed by the secretary of the 
interior. In the early 1970's, the United States proposed 
that the territory elect its governor. But Samoan voters 
rejected the proposal three times. Many believed the 
change would weaken their ties to the United States. 
American Samoans approved the proposal in 1976. They 
elected a governor in 1977. Donald H. Rubinstein 

See also American Samoa, National Park of. 
American Samoa, National Park of, lies in the 
United States territory of American Samoa in the South 
Pacific Ocean. The park was established primarily to 
protect the areas tropical rain forest on the islands of 
Tutuila and Tau. The rain forest is home to many kinds of 
plants and animals, including two species of large bats 
called flying foxes. A white sand beach and a coral reef 
on the island of Ofu are also protected. 

The national park also protects the way of life of the 
Samoan people. The people practice traditional meth- 
ods of farming and reef fishing in certain areas of the 
park. The park was established in 1988. For its area, see 
National Park System (table: National parks). 

Critically reviewed by the National Park Service 
American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty 
to Animals. See Society for the Prevention of Cruelty 
to Animals. 

American Society of Composers, Authors and 
Publishers (ASCAP) is an association of over 100,000 
writers and publishers of music. Composer Victor Her- 
bert helped found ASCAP in 1914. The federal copyright 


law states that no musical work may be performed pub- 
licly without permission of the copyright owner. ASCAP 
is a clearinghouse between users and creators of music. 
Its license permits users to perform any members mu- 
sic at any time without separate clearance. ASCAP 
collects license fees from music users and distributes 
the income to members and to associated societies. 
Royalties are distributed to members based on the na- 
ture of the performance and how often the music is 
used. ASCAP has mutual agreements with other per- 
forming rights societies in over 40 nations. Its headquar- 
ters are in New York City. 
Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers 

American Staffordshire terrier is a breed of dog 
that originated in the United States. It descended from 
the Staffordshire bull terrier, a breed brought from Eng- 
land in the late 1800's. By the early 1900's, American 
breeders had developed a dog taller and heavier than 

its British ancestors. The American Staffordshire terrier 
has been called Yankee terrier and pit bull. \t was once 
used in vicious dog fights in pits. The dog is still popu- 
larly called pit bull. American Staffordshire terriers stand 
from 17 to 19 inches (43 to 48 centimeters) tall and weigh 
from 45 to 65 pounds (20 to 29 kilograms). The dogs 

have a short, stiff coat that may be any color. They re- 
semble bull terriers. See also Dog (picture: Terriers); Pit 
bull; Staffordshire bull terrier. 

Critically reviewed by the American Kennel Club 
American Stock Exchange, also called the Amex, is 
one of the largest stock exchanges in the United States. 
It is the country's second largest options exchange—that 
is, marketplace for stock-buying rights. The Amex is also 
a leader in exchange-traded funds (ETF’s), publicly trad- 
ed investments similar to mutual funds. 

The Amex conducts trading through an advanced cen- 
tralized specialist system. Under the rules of the ex- 
change, Amex specialists seek to maintain fair and or- 
derly markets in the stocks that are assigned to them. 
More than 80 percent of the Amex's buying and selling 
orders come electronically. Other orders are initiated di- 
rectly on the trading floor by registered brokers. Re- 
gardless of where an order originates, orders for any 
particular stock flow through a single specialist. 

The American Stock Exchange started in the mid- 
1800's as the New York Curb Market. This organization 
consisted of New York City brokers who met outdoors 
at the curb to buy and sell stocks. In 1921, trading 
moved indoors into what has been the Amex's home 
ever since. In 1953, the organization was renamed the 
American Stock Exchange. The Amex became a sub- 
sidiary of the National Association of Securities Dealers, 
Inc., in 1998. The headquarters of the American Stock Ex- 
change are in New York City. 

Critically reviewed by the American Stock Exchange 

See also Nasdaq; Stock exchange. 

American System. See Monroe, James (‘The Ameri- 
can System’); Clay, Henry. 

American Telephone and Telegraph Company. 
See AT&T Corp. 

American water spaniel is a hunting dog that was 
developed in the United States. The dog is especially 
helpful to pheasant and duck hunters. It flushes birds 
(forces them to fly out of their hiding place) so the 
hunter can shoot the birds. The dog then brings the 


Critically reviewed by the American 





dead bird back to the hunter. The dog's thick, curly coat 
protects it from both cold water and thorny bushes Its 
coat may be /iver (reddish-brown), brown, or dark 
chocolate-brown in color. Some American water 
spaniels have white markings on the chest or toes. Most 
of the dogs weigh from 25 to 45 pounds (11 to 20 kilo- 
grams) and stand 15 to 18 inches (38 to 46 centimeters) at 
the shoulder. Critically reviewed by the American Kennel Club 

See also Dog (picture: American water spaniel). 
American's Creed won a nationwide contest for 
William Tyler Page of Maryland in 1917 as ‘the best sum- 
mary of the political faith of America.” It follows: 

“I believe in the United States of America as a govern- 
ment of the people, by the people, for the people; 
whose just powers are derived from the consent of the 
governed; a democracy in a Republic; a sovereign Na- 
tion of many sovereign States; a perfect Union, one and 
inseparable; established upon those principles of free- 
dom, equality, justice, and humanity for which American 
patriots sacrificed their lives and fortunes. 

“I therefore believe it is my duty to my country to love 
it; to support its Constitution; to obey its laws; to respect 
its flag; and to defend it against all enemies.” 

Kenneth janda 
Americans for Democratic Action (ADA) is an in- 
dependent political organization that urges government 
action to promote and maintain liberal policies. The 
ADA favors action to protect and extend civil rights, to 
expand programs to provide economic security for all, 
and to improve international cooperation. The ADA op- 
poses United States participation in military conflicts in 
the developing countries. The ADA tries to influence 
public officials. It publishes materials to influence public 
opinion, and campaigns to elect liberal candidates. The 
ADA was founded in 1947. Its national headquarters are 
in Washington, D.C. 
America’s Cup is the oldest trophy in international 
sports. Itis awarded to the winner of the world’s best- 
known sailboat competition. A yacht from a defending 
country races against a yacht from a challenging coun- 
try. The first yacht to win a certain number of races wins 
the cup. Races are held on a course off the coast of the 
defending nation every three or four years. 

The cup gets its name from the American schooner 
America. In 1851, America defeated 14 British yachts in a 
race around the Isle of Wight to win a silver trophy. The 
yacht’s owners gave the trophy to the New York Yacht 
Club in New York City in 1857. 

The New York Yacht Club successfully defended the 
cup in 16 challenges before the outbreak of World War 
Il in 1939. In the final three prewar races, the competi- 
tors sailed large yachts called /-C/ass. Competition re- 
sumed in 1958 in a match sailed on 72-Meter yachts, 
which were much smaller than the J-Class. 

In 1970, two countries challenged for the cup for the 
first time, requiring selection trials to determine who 
would race the defender. In 1983, Australia Ii defeated 
the New York Yacht Club Libertyand became the first 
challenger ever to win the cup. In 1987, the United 
States yacht Stars & Stripes defeated Australia’s Kook- 
aburra IIl to return the cup to the United States. 

Competition now operates under a code of conduct 
and design specifications established after a one-sided 
match in 1988 between a New Zealand monohull chal- 


Murray Clark Havens 


Amherst, Lord Jeffery 431 


lenger and a United States catamaran defender. The 
new class is called /nternational America’s Cup Class 
([ACC). The yachts are designed to a formula that speci- 
fies length, weight, and sail area. The yachts are about 75 
feet (23 meters) long, made of lightweight carbon fiber, 
and have a crew of 16. 

The first challenge in IACC yachts took place off San 
Diego in 1992 when the U.S. yacht America’ defeated the 
Italian challenger // Moro di Venezia. In 1995, the New 
Zealand yacht Black Magic beat the U.S. defender Young 
America to become only the second challenger to win 
the cup. In 2000, the New Zealand yacht Black Magic de- 
feated the Italian challenger Luna Rossa. 

See also Sailing (America’s Cup). 
Americium, 4M uh RIHSH ee uhm or AM Uh REES ee 
uhm, is an artificially created radioactive element. Its 
chemical symbol is Am, and its atomic number is 95. 
Americium has 12 known isotopes, the most stable of 
which has a mass number of 243 and a half-life of 7,400 
years. Only this isotope and one that has a mass number 
of 241 and a half-life of 432 years can be produced in 
large amounts. At 20 °C, americium has a density of 
13.67 grams per cubic centimeter (see Density). The 
metal melts at 1173 °C 

Americium was discovered in 1944 by the American 
scientists Glenn T. Seaborg, Ralph A. James, Leon O. 
Morgan, and Albert Ghiorso when they bombarded plu- 
tonium with neutrons. It was named for its place of dis- 
covery, the United States of America. Americium is the 
only radioactive element known to be superconductive 
(see Superconductivity). It becomes superconductive 
when cooled to —272.36 °C. Richard L Hahn 

See also Seaborg, Glenn T.; Transuranium element. 
Amerigo Vespucci. See Vespucci, Amerigo. 
Ames, Adelbert, Jr. (1880-1955), was an American sci- 
entist known for his research in optics and visual per- 
ception. His views on visual perception are known as 
the transactional approach. 

Ames believed that a person's perception of the 
world confirms what the individual expects to see. Such 
expectations, according to Ames, result from past expe- 
riences—both conscious and subconscious. In one of 
the visual illusions that Ames designed to study this 
problem, a familiar object such as a playing card is in- 
creased in size while an observer views it. The observer 
would not say the card was increasing in size because 
the person would not expect it to do so. Instead, the 
person would conclude the card was moving closer. 

Ames was born in Lowell, Massachusetts. He earned 
an LLB. at Harvard University. Robert G. Weyant 
Amethyst, AM wh thihst, is a gemstone of a purple or 
bluish-violet color. It is used to make rings, necklaces, 
and brooches. The amethyst is a variety of quartz. The 
color of the stone is believed to be caused by impurities 
such as iron and manganese. Amethysts have been 
mined in Brazil, Uruguay, Siberia, India, Sri Lanka, 
Madagascar, Mexico, and Canada. The amethyst is the 
birthstone for February. The Oriental amethyst is a pur- 
ple variety of the mineral corundum. See also Birth- 
stone; Gem (picture). Frederick H. Pough 
Amherst, AM uhrst, Lord Jeffery (1717-1797), a Brit- 
ish general, helped Britain win Canada from France. He 
captured Louisbourg, a French fort in present-day Nova 
Scotia, in 1758 during the Seven Years’ War (known as 


Charles Mason 








432 Amiens 


the French and Indian War in the United States). 
Amherst was made commander in chief of the British 
Army in North America after that victory. In 1759, he cap- 
tured Crown Point and Fort Ticonderoga, both in pre- 
sent-day New York. In 1760, he directed an advance on 
Montreal, and the city surrendered. 

Amherst was then responsible for administering 
Canada until his return to England in 1763. He was made 
a baron in 1776 and commander in chief of the British 
Army in 1778. He was born on Jan. 29, 1717, in River- 
head, near Tonbridge, England. Phillip Buckner 
Amiens, AM ee uhnz, or in French ah MYAN (pop. 
139,210; met. area. pop.: 160,815), is a city in northern 
France. The city lies along the Somme River (see France 
{political map). The old section of Amiens has numerous 
buildings that date from the Middle Ages. This section is 
dominated by one of the world’s largest and most fa- 


, | ~ i 
JE 
; a. 2 
a 
4 i 


* = 


i sal \ 
al 
a ¢ 
= ee 
, 1 a = a - 
, 
s 
« 
q 
q i 
j 
a 
q t * 
7. ‘4 v. 
rl ; 
| z i “By, | 
e- ¥ 7 
= | 7 4 
~ Py + 
; | 
ra a mS." 
2 
’ 
. 


- r 7 


= =a 


Haester Art Publishers Ant Resource 
The cathedral in Amiens is a magnificent Gothic structure. It 
was built during the 1200's and 1300's. Much of the old section 
of Amiens dates from the Middle Ages. 


+ 


¢ y- 


2. tA A 





‘ial 

— 

a” 

rs 
. 

+ 

> of 

ee & 
7 

—@ 


we 
we 
Ps 


mous Gothic cathedrals, which was built during the 
1200's and 1300's. Much of the modern section of the 
city was built after World War II (1939-1945). 

Amiens serves as the capital of the Somme depart- 
ment(administrative district) and the Picardy region. It is 
also the region's center of commerce, communications, 
and education. The city's chief industries include food 
processing, metalworking, and the manufacture of agri- 
cultural machinery, textiles, and tires. The University of 
Picardy is in the city. 

Julius Caesar had headquarters at the site of what is 
now Amiens in 54 B.C, during the Gallic War. The city 
grew during the Middle Ages, when it became a center 
of the textile trade. It was badly damaged in World War | 
(1914-1918) and World War IL. 

See also Architecture (picture: Gothic cathedrals). 


Mark Kesselman 


Amin Dada, ah MEEN DAH dah, Idi, EE dee 

(1925?- ), was the ruler of Uganda from 1971 to 1979. 
Amin, an army officer, came to power after leading the 
army in overthrowing Uganda's civilian government. His 
rule ended when Ugandans who opposed his policies 
and troops from neighboring Tanzania overthrew his 
government. Amin then fled the country. 

Amin was a controversial leader. In 1972, he forced an 
estimated 40,000 to 50,000 Asians living in Uganda to 
leave the country. He said that he did so to put control 
of the nation’s economy in the hands of Ugandans. Many 
thousands of Ugandans who opposed Amin’s policies 
were killed, at Amin’s order or by order of his support- 
ers. Amin also called for the “extinction of Israel,” 
praised Adolf Hitler for murdering Jews, and de- 
nounced the leaders of many nations. 

Amin was born in northern Uganda. Amin enlisted in 
the army in 1944. He was appointed to the rank of 
deputy commander of the armed forces in 1964. From 
1951 to 1960, Amin was the heavyweight boxing champi- 
on of Uganda. Robert I. Rotberg 
Amino acid, uh MEE noh, is the name for the type of 
organic acids that make up all the proteins in living 
things. Scientists call amino acids the building blocks of 
proteins. All amino acids contain carbon, hydrogen, oxy- 
gen, and nitrogen. Some amino acids contain sulfur. 

Green plants and some microorganisms can make all 
the amino acids they need. But human beings and high- 
er animals cannot make all of the 20 amino acids their 
bodies need to build tissues. Humans must get at least 
nine amino acids from their food. Protein foods, such as 
eggs, meat, milk products, and some vegetables, pro- 
vide amino acids. The body breaks down these foods 
into amino acids. It then links the amino acids to form 
new proteins. 

The body can make many different kinds of proteins. 
A single protein may consist of several hundred amino 
acid units linked together by chemical bonds. Also, the 
order of the amino acids may vary, producing different 
proteins. These different amino acid sequences deter- 
mine the functions of the proteins. 

Some simple proteins may be made up of only four 
different kinds of amino acids. Most of the more com- 
plex proteins contain about 20 amino acids. All amino 
acids contain one or more groups of one nitrogen and 
two hydrogen atoms called amino, or NH., groups. 
Amino acids are made up of amino groups and certain 
organic acids. Kermit L. Carraway 

See also Protein; Cell (The work of a cell); Hormone 
(How hormones work). 

Amis, AY mihs, Kingsley (1922-1995), was an English 
novelist best known for his witty, satirical stories about 
British society. His most famous work is his first novel, 
Lucky Jim (1954). In it, Jim Dixon, a young university in- 
structor, is disgusted by the falseness of his colleagues 
and their work. Amis’s other novels include That Uncer- 
tain Feeling (1955), Take a Girl Like You (1960), One Fat 
Englishman (1964), The Green Man (1970), Jake's Thing 
(1979), The Old Devils (1986), Difficulties with Girls (1989), 
and The Folks That Live on the Hill(1990). 

Kingsley William Amis was born on April 16, 1922, in 
London. In the 1950's, he became identified with the An- 
gry Young Men, a group of writers who ridiculed mid- 
dle-class society. Later, he began writing detective and 


spy fiction under the name Robert Markham. Amis was 
also a noted poet. His Co/lected Poems: 1944-1979 was 
published in 1979. Memoirs (1991) is a book of autobio- 
graphical essays. Amis was knighted by Queen Elizabeth 
Il in 1990. Martin Amis, his son, is a noted English novel- 
ist. Michael Seide! 

Amish, AM ihsh or AH mihsh, belong to a Protestant 
group that originated in Switzerland but is now cen- 
tered in the United States and Canada. They are also 
called Old Order Amish. The Amish teach separation 





Richard Reinhold 


Amish worshipers meet in their homes for services. These 
community members have driven to a service in carriages. 


from the world. Members are forbidden to go to war, 
swear oaths, or hold public offices. Their doctrine re- 
quires farming and personal simplicity as a way of life. 
Men wear dark clothes and wide-brimmed hats; women 
wear plain long dresses and bonnets. Strict adherence 
to Amish ways prohibits the use of electricity, television, 
computers, and telephones in the home. Amish limit ed- 
ucation to the age of 15. Those who break with the Old 
Order usually join the Mennonites (see Mennonites). 
The Amish were named for Jacob Ammann, who led 
them in breaking away from the Swiss Mennonites in 
1693 because of disagreements over church discipline. 
The Amish were stricter and shunned (avoided com- 
pletely) excommunicated members. They first came to 
North America from 1717 to 1732, settling in Berks 
County, Pennsylvania. Today, they live in farm communi- 
ties in 21 states and in Ontario. Their largest communi- 
ties are found in Ohio, Pennsylvania, Indiana, lowa, and 
Illinois. The Amish are part of the group called Pennsyl- 
vania Dutch (see Pennsylvania Dutch). There is no long- 
er a separate Amish group in Europe. 
See also Indiana (Places to visit). 


Charles H. Lippy 


Additiona! resources 


Kraybill, Donald B., and Bowman, C. F. On the Backroad to Heav- 
en. johns Hopkins, 2001. Includes information on the Amish. 

Wagner, Katherine. Life in an Amish Community. Lucent Bks., 
2001. 


Amistad Rebellion was a revolt in 1839 by black 
slaves against Spaniards who had bought them. The re- 


Ammonia 433 


bellion took place ona ship called La Amistad. Joseph 
Cinque, a member of the Mende people of what is now 
Sierra Leone, led the uprising. The slaves were later 
tried in courts in the United States for their rebellion 
and were found not guilty. This legal decision was a 
landmark because blacks had few rights at the time. 

The slaves who became the Amistad rebels were cap- 
tured in western Africa. Early in 1839, Spanish slave 
traders brought them to Cuba illegally on a Portuguese 
ship. In Havana, two Spaniards, Pedro Montez and José 
Ruiz, bought Cinque and 52 other captives from the 
traders. Montez and Ruiz intended to resell the 53 slaves 
in the Cuban town of Puerto Principe (now Camaguey). 
They set sail in the Caribbean Sea on the schooner La 
Amistad. They hired a ship captain and two crewmen. 
The captain brought a cook and a cabin boy with him. 

The slaves were chained to a wall below the deck of 
the ship. One night, Cinque saw an opportunity to es- 
cape. He used a nail to break his wrist chains and iron 
collar. He helped other slaves get free and they, in turn, 
helped others. The slaves attacked the crew and took 
control of the ship. They killed the captain and his cook. 
The two crewmen jumped ship and escaped. Montez, 
Ruiz, and the cabin boy were captured by the slaves. 
Two slaves died during the rebellion. 

The rebels did not know how to sail the ship. Cinque 
ordered Montez and Ruiz to sail it to Africa. During the 
day, the Spaniards sailed slowly eastward, the direction 
of Africa. At night, they secretly changed to a northwest 
course and moved rapidly. The ship ended up at Long 
Island, New York. Eight more rebels had died by then. 

When La Amistad reached New York, Montez and 
Ruiz reported the killings. The rebels were arrested and 
taken to Connecticut, where they were put on trial. 

United States district and circuit courts ruled that the 
rebels had been free people who were illegally en- 
slaved and thus were justified in rebelling. The case 
went to the U.S. Supreme Court in 1841. John Quincy 
Adams, who had been president of the United States 
from 1825 to 1829, defended the rebels in the Supreme 
Court. He based his defense on the right of every person 
to be free. The court ruled in favor of the rebels. Cinque 
and most of the other remaining Amistad rebels re- 
turned to Africa in January 1842. Nudie Eugene Williams 
Amman, AHM mahn (pop. 969,598), is the capital and 
largest city of Jordan. It lies 25 miles (40 kilometers) 
northeast of the Dead Sea (see Jordan [map)). 

Most of Amman’s buildings stand on several hills. The 
main streets run between the hills. Amman has many 
government buildings, churches, and mosques (Muslim 
houses of worship). The city lies on old trade routes and 
still is a major trading center. Its factories produce more 
than half of Jordan’s manufactured goods. 

About 1000 B.C, Amman, then called Rabbath- 
Ammon, was the capital of the Ammonites. The Bible 
describes how the Israelites, led by David and Joab, cap- 
tured it. Greeks, Arab Muslims, and Turks later con- 
trolled the city. In 1921, Amman became the capital of 
the new state of Transjordan. Transjordan changed its 
name to Jordan in 1949. 

See also Jordan (picture). 
Ammonia, uh MOHN yuh or uh MOH nee uh (chemi- 
cal formula NH)), is a colorless alkaline gas made up of 
one part nitrogen and three parts hydrogen. It is lighter 


Bernard Reich 





434. Ammons, A. R. 


than air and has a sharp, stinging odor. Ammonia can be 
inhaled safely if it is greatly diluted in air, but concentrat- 
ed ammonia gas can cause suffocation and death. Am- 
monia does not burn in air, but it burns in oxygen with a 
weak yellow flame. 

Properties of ammonia. Ammonia is highly soluble 
in water and forms a solution known as ammonium hy- 
droxide (ammonia water). Ammonia is not very reactive 
when dry, but it reacts with many chemicals when dis- 
solved in water. Ammonium hydroxide neutralizes acids 
and forms the corresponding ammonium salts. For ex- 
ample, hydrochloric acid (HCI} added to ammonium hy- 
droxide (NH,OH) produces a solution of ammonium 
chloride (NH,Cl). When combined with some metals, 
ammonium hydroxide forms complex compounds 
called ammines. For example, the addition of ammo- 
nium hydroxide to a pale blue solution of cupric sulfate 
(CuSO,) produces a deep blue solution of cupric am- 
mine sulfate (Cu(NH,),SO,]. 

Ammonia gas changes to a liquid at — 33.35 C Liquid 
ammonia boils at the same temperature. It freezes to a 
clear solid at —77.7 C In going from a liquid back to a 
gas, ammonia absorbs a large amount of heat from its 
surroundings. Upon evaporation, one gram of ammonia 
absorbs 327 calories of heat. For this reason, ammonia is 
widely used in refrigeration equipment. 

Preparing ammonia. In the laboratory, ammonia is 
prepared by heating an ammonium salt with sodium hy- 
droxide. 

Commercially, ammonia is made by the Haber proc- 
ess, which combines free nitrogen and hydrogen gases, 
both of which can be obtained easily and cheaply (see 
Haber process). One volume of nitrogen is mixed with 
three volumes of hydrogen under high pressure and 
temperature in the presence of an iron catalyst (see Ca- 
talysis). Ammonia is also obtained as a by-product in the 
production of coal and coke gas. 

Uses. Ammonia is widely used as a fertilizer. Ammo- 
nium nitrate and other ammonium salts help to increase 
crop production because they have a high percentage 
of nitrogen. In some farming areas, anhydrous ammonia 
is now applied directly to the fields from large tanks that 
contain the compressed gas. 

Large quantities of ammonia are oxidized to make ni- 
tric acid, which is needed to make such explosives as 
TNT (trinitrotoluene}, nitroglycerin, and ammonium ni- 
trate. The textile industry uses ammonia in the produc- 
tion of synthetic fibers such as nylon and cuprammoni- 
um rayon. Ammonia is also used in dyeing and scouring 
cotton, wool, and other fibers. Ammonia water some- 
times serves as a cleaning fluid and can be used to re- 
store fabrics that have been stained by acids. Ammonia 
is also vital in the manufacture of many chemicals, plas- 
tics, vitamins, and drugs. David C. Armbruster 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Alkali Gas Refrigeration 
Anhydrous ammo- __ Ice Smelling salts 
nia Nitrogen 


Ammons, A. R. (1926-2001), was an American poet 
whose verse explores natural processes, from the cos- 
mic to the microscopic. Trained in science, Ammons 
brought to his poetry a subtle understanding of how or- 
ganisms and events interact in nature to produce end- 
less complexity. In one poem, Cascadilla Falls, he con- 








templated a single stone while trying to imagine all the 

forces that affect it gravity. the spinning of the earth and 
its orbit around the sun. and the movement of the solar 
system and galaxy. 

The form and language of Ammons's poems often re- 
flect the complexity he saw in nature. Some of his po- 
ems adopt a loose, wandering format with lines and 
phrases scattered across the page in patterns that sug- 
gest the uneven beauty of a wild landscape. Others un- 
rollin regular groups of lines that resemble the rapid 
flowing of a stream. In their complex sentence structure 
and surprising shifts of vocabulary his poems remind 
readers of the intricacy and variety of nature. 

Archie Randolph Ammons was born in Whiteville, 
North Carolina. His Se/ected Poems were published in 
1969, 1977, and 1986. Roger Gilbert 
Ammunition is any object fired or launched from a 
gun or some other weapon. Such objects, also called 
projectiles, include cartridges, shells, and rockets. 
Weapons that fire projectiles include handguns, can- 
nons, and rocket launchers. Guided missiles and torpe- 
dos are also examples of ammunition, but this article 
does not discuss them. For information on these two 


Kinds of bullets 


Bullets consist of a metal core that is either fully or partly cov- 
ered by a metal jacket Bullets with a full metal jacket keep their 
shape when they strike a target. However, partly jacketed bullets, 
called soft point bullets, expand on impact, shown here. 


WORLD BOOK diagram by Steven Liska 


— 


After impact 


ar aS 


Full metal jacket 





ae 


Soft point 
After impact 


Common calibers of cartridges 


Caliber (bullet diameter) is given in decimal fractions of an inch 
or in millimeters (mm). For example, the diameter of a .30-06 
Springfield cartridge, shown here, is ;% inch. This is the same di- 
ameter as that of the 7.62 mm Soviet Model 1943. The illustra- 
tions are not drawn to the same scale. 

\WORLD BOOK illustrations by Bensen Studios 


a fs — 


30-06 Springfield (rifle) 5.56 X 45 mm (nfle} 


_ n> 


7.62 mm NATO (nfle} 


Ps aa 


.50 Brawning (machine gun} 





7.62 Saviet Madel 1943 (nfle} 


9 mm Parobellum (pistol) 


25 mm Oerlikon KBA (mochine gun) 


a 


Kinds of small-arms 
ammunition 


Jacket 


oy 7  _ 
ON ia 
“Ea wl 


PFT 
SZAIENNRG 


. S 


Propellant 


kinds of ammunition, see the Guided missile and Tor- 
pedo articles. 

Most kinds of ammunition contain a propellant, 
which is an explosive or a fuel that provides the force to 
send the projectile to its target. Nearly all ammunition 
also has a primer, a small amount of an explosive that 
detonates (explodes) and ignites the propellant. Some 
types of ammunition contain an additional explosive that 
shatters the projectile when it reaches the target, thus 
increasing the damage. 

Ammunition can be classified into three types, ac- 
cording to its effects: (1) penetrators, (2) high explosives, 
and (3) carrier projectiles. Penetrators pierce targets 
using a single bullet. High explosives burst before hit- 
ting their target, fragmenting into thousands of pene- 
trating pieces or becoming a high-speed jet of molten 
metal. Carrier projectiles break open near the target to 
deliver leaflets, radar-deceiving materials, or submuni- 
tions (small ammunition). 

Ammunition can also be categorized by the kind of 
weapon from which it is fired. Categorized this way, the 
main types of ammunition are (1) small-arms, (2) artillery, 
and (3) armored-vehicle ammunition. 


Small-arms ammunition 


Small arms include light weapons such as pistols, ri- 
fles, and shotguns. Most kinds of small arms fire pe- 
netrators called cartridges. A single cartridge is known 
as a round. 

Cartridges are called fixed ammunition because they 
are manufactured as completely assembled units. Nearly 
all types of cartridges have a propellant, a primer, and a 
casing. However, cartridges differ in the type of projec- 
tile they contain. Most cartridges contain a bullet. Car- 
tridges fired by shotguns hold metal pellets called shot. 

The bullet is the projectile part of a cartridge. Most 
bullets have a steel or lead core covered by a jacket of 
hard metal. Some types of bullets expand when they 
strike their target and thus cause severe damage. Inter- 
national law forbids the military use of such bullets. Mil- 
itary forces use bullets that have a jacket of gi/ding 
metal, an alloy of copper and zinc that prevents expan- 
sion. Cartridges used in weapons other than shotguns 
are measured by caliber (the diameter of the bullet). 
Manufacturers and users of ammunition in the United 
States have traditionally specified caliber in decimal 
fractions of an inch. For example, a .30-caliber cartridge 
has a diameter of 2% inch (7.6 millimeters). However, it 
is becoming customary to use millimeters instead. The 





Ammunition 435 


The various small-arms cartridges differ in the type of projectile they contain. Most cartridges in- 
clude a bullet, /eft. But shotgun cartridges contain a number of metal pellets called shot, right. 


WORLD BOOK diagrams by Steven Liska 


\S 
“ 6] 
YX | 


Primer Propellont Wodding Shot cup 


U.S. armed forces specify caliber in millimeters. Small- 
arms Cartridges are less than 20 millimeters or .78 cali- 
ber. 

The propellant drives the bullet from the gun and 
propels it to the target. Propellants used in guns are 
called /ow explosives: Low explosives deflagrate (burn 
rapidly). This accelerates the buliet through the gun's 
barrel. All small-arms ammunition has a propellant of 
smokeless powder, which consists of nitrocellulose or a 
mixture of nitrocellulose and nitroglycerin. This powder 
is also used in firing projectiles from cannons. 

The primer explodes when struck by the fring pin, a 
hammerlike device inside a gun. Lead styphnate is a 
common primer material. 

The casing holds the propellant and the primer and 
also grips the base of the projectile. It remains in the 
gun or falls out when the bullet is fired. Most casings 
are made of aluminum alloys or brass. Some cartridges 
have no casing. The propellant in caseless cartridges is 
molded to the base of the bullet. Cased, telescoped car- 
tridges hide the bullet inside the propellant. 

Shotgun cartridges consist of a plastic or paper 
tube with a brass or steel case at one end. They contain 
lead or steel shot instead of bullets. 

Riot control ammunition is used by law enforce- 
ment officials to subdue rioters without causing serious 
injury. Most of this ammunition consists of hard rubber 
bullets. Another type is made of soft rubber rings that 
look like doughnuts and may contain tear gas. These 
rings cause less damage than do the rubber bullets. 


Artillery ammunition 


Artillery includes rocket launchers and such mounted 
guns as howitzers, mortars, antiaircraft guns, and naval 
guns. Most types of field and naval artillery ammunition 
are called shells. A single shell, like a single cartridge, is 
known as a round. Field artillery projectiles range in size 
from 50 to 240 millimeters and can weigh over 200 
pounds (90 kilograms). Most artillery shells taper to the 
rear, a shape that gives them greater range. Some have 
streamlined ogives (nose shields). Others, known as 
base-burner shells, have a small amount of propellant 
burning in the tail during flight. This reduces drag (air 
resistance). 

Some shells are high explosives, which detonate on 
impact and damage or destroy the target. Detonating 
the shell’s explosive filler shatters the shell into thou- 
sands of fragments. High explosives include TNT; RDX, 
also known as cyclonite or hexogen; composition B, a 





436 Ammunition 


Artillery ammunition 


Separate loading ammunition consists of separate sections for 
the projectile, the primer, and a propelling charge, upper figure. 
The propelling charge and projectile are shown in detail in the 
two lower figures. 

WORLD BOOK illustrations by Bensen Studios 


———__—_, 


Projectile 





Propellont 


Propellont bogs 
a 





Igniter 
pod 





High explosive chorge 


mixture of RDX and TNT; PETN; and pentolite, a combi- 
nation of PETN and TNT. Other shells contain mines or 
small shells that can be expelled at intervals over a spec- 
ified area or during a certain period of time. 

Still other shells are filled with a nonexplosive sub- 
stance, such as a chemical that is poisonous or that pro- 
duces smoke or fire. //uminating, or star, shells light up 
the battlefield or seascape. A shell with a chaff warhead 
expels strips of aluminum, which produce images on a 
radar screen similar to those caused by aircraft. Such 
images confuse radar operators and thus help protect 
aircraft from enemy attack. 

There are five main types of artillery shells: (1) fixed 
ammunition; (2) semifixed ammunition; (3) separate load- 
ing, or bag, ammunition; (4) separated ammunition; and 
(5) guided ammunition. The word she// often refers not 
only to the entire unit of ammunition but also to the ac- 
tual projectile part of the unit. 

Fixed ammunition fired by artillery consists of a pro- 
jectile, a casing, a primer, and a propellant. Like small- 
arms cartridges, fixed artillery ammunition shells are 
manufactured as complete units. 

Semifixed ammunition resembles fixed ammunition. 
However, the projectile fits loosely into the casing so 
that the sections can be separated. Thus, the amount of 
propellant in the casing can be increased or decreased, 
depending on how far the shell is from the target. 

Separate loading ammunition, also called bag am- 
munition, consists of separate sections for the projec- 
tile, the primer, and the propellant. The propellant is 


Armored-vehicle 
ammunition 


—— 


Cartridge cose 





packed into bags that are placed behind the projectile. 
The number of bags used depends on the distance the 
shell must travel. This type of ammunition is used to fire 
the heaviest artillery shells over great distances. 

Separated ammunition consists of two sections. 
One section is the projectile. The other includes the 
primer, the casing, and a fixed amount of propellant. 

Guided ammunition can correct its flight in the air 
after being fired. It often uses pop-out tail fins to steer it- 
self. Most guided ammunition finds its target by tracking 
a laser spot on the target. This spot is usually produced 
by a forward observer, a person or object forward of 
the line of fire. Some shells known as smart shells have 
small radars and computers in them. These shells can 
search for and find such targets as armored vehicles or 
trucks without help. 

How shells explode. A shell explodes by means of a 
process called the exp/osive train. This process consists 
of a series of explosions that detonate the shell after the 
projectile has been fired. 

The explosive train begins with the explosion of the 
fuse \triggering device). The fuse may explode the in- 
stant the shell hits the target, or it may detonate a few 
seconds earlier or later. Some armor-piercing shells 
have a delayed fuse, which enables the projectile to 
penetrate before exploding. Most fuses operate me- 
chanically or electronically. Mechanical fuses are acti- 
vated by the movement of the shell during launch from 
the weapon, and the rotation of the shell as it travels 
through the air. Electronic proximity fuses are activated 
by devices inside the shell that use radar waves to deter- 
mine when the projectile is near the target. 

In most shells, the fuse ignites the primer and thus 
sets off the first charge in the explosive train. Each suc- 
cessive Charge in the process is more powerful than the 
previous one. The amount of force generated by the ex- 
plosion of the charges increases until enough power 
has been created to detonate the main charge. 


Armored-vehicle ammunition 


Armored-vehicle ammunition consists of projectiles 
fired by guns mounted on tanks and other armored ve- 
hicles. They have diameters from 20 to 125 millimeters. 

A common armored-vehicle penetrator is a projectile 
with a nose cap of tungsten or another heavy metal. The 
cap helps the projectile penetrate opposing vehicles. A 
high explosive projectile is a ho/low-charge warhead. 
This warhead is hollow in the front and has an explosive 
charge in the back. Its explosion Converts a copper cone 
in the warhead to a molten, high-speed jet. The jet pene- 
trates the target. Another armored vehicle projectile is a 
long dart made of tungsten or dep/eted uranium (ura- 


A hollow-charge warhead is hollow in front with an explosive charge in the back. Upon impact, the 
copper liner collapses, creating a shock wave and a jet of metal particles that penetrates the target. 


WORLD BOOk illustrations by Bensen Studios 





Fuse Copper liner 


Impoct switch assembly 


Explosive chorge 








nium with most of its radioactivity removed). The dart 
travels on a device called a sabot, which breaks away af- 
ter the dart leaves the gun's barrel. 


History 


Stones, which people hurled from slings and other 
small weapons, were the first form of ammunition. The 
ancient Romans flung stones from huge siege weapons, 
such as the ballista and catapult. Arrows fired by long- 
bows were effective ammunition against armored 
knights during the European Middle Ages (A.D. 400's to 
1500's). By the mid-1300's, gunpowder was used to fire 
stones from cannons. By the 1400s, iron and lead balls 
were also used as artillery ammunition. 

During the 1400's, people began to use handheld 
weapons that fired lead balls by the use of a trigger. By 
the 1500's, the Dutch had developed powder-filled metal 
bombs that were fired from mortars. Cartridges became 
common in Europe in the early 1600's. During the 1800's, 
people began using paper fuses and shotguns that fired 
lead shot enclosed in paper shells. Smokeless powder 
also was invented in the 1800s. 

During World War | (1914-1918), high explosive shells, 
incendiary (fire-producing) bullets and shells, and chem- 
ical shells became common. In 1953, the United States 
Army fired the first shell with a nuclear charge. In the 
1960's and 1970's, developments included the produc- 
tion of shells and cartridges made of plastics and lighter, 
stronger metals. Increasingly powerful propellants and 
more sophisticated guidance systems also came into 
use. In the 1980's, weapons experts improved ammuni- 
tion by increasing its range. Multiple-rocket launchers 
took the place of many big guns. Weapons experts con- 
tinue to work to create projectiles that can disable sev- 
eral targets, such as an entire tank column, at once. 

Steven L Llans6 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Artillery Cartridge Grenade 

Ballistics Depth charge Magazine (military) 
Bullet Explosive Rocket 

Cannon Firearm Shrapnel 


Amnesia, am NEF zhuf, is a partial or, in rare cases, a 
complete loss of memory. Everyone forgets minor daily 
incidents as time goes by, but a person with amnesia 
has large gaps in memory. People who suffer from am- 
nesia lose the ability to recall past or recent experiences 
(see Memory [Uncommon memory conditions]). They 
may even leave their homes, wander for a while, and 
start a new life somewhere else. This wandering while 
experiencing amnesia is called psychogenic fugue. Am- 
nesia may be caused by emotional shock, disease, or 
physical injury. In emotional shock, amnesia is usually 
restricted to experiences closely related to the cause of 
the shock. Doctors treat amnesia of emotional origin by 
hypnosis or with such drugs as sodium amytal or thio- 
pental. Diseases and injuries may cause changes in the 


brain, making recall impossible. Nancy C. Andreasen 


Amnesty, AM nuh stee, is forgiveness by a govern- 
ment for crimes against it. Amnesty restores wrongdo- 
ers to the legal status they had before committing the 
crimes. The term comes from the Greek word amnestia, 
which means a forgetting. 

Throughout history, governments have granted am- 
nesty to restore unity after a war or an internal uprising. 


Amnesty 437 


One of the earliest recorded amnesties took place in 403 
B.C, when the people of the ancient Greek city of 
Athens overthrew their rulers, the Thirty Tyrants, and es- 
tablished a democracy. The new leader, Thrasybulus, 
declared amnesty for all citizens except the Thirty 
Tyrants and a few other officials. 

The Constitution of the United States gives the presi- 
dent authority ‘to grant reprieves and pardons for of- 
fenses against the United States.” Those words establish 
the president's power to declare amnesty because there 
is no actual difference between an amnesty and a par- 
don. However, a pardon is granted to an individual, and 
an amnesty is granted to a group of people. In addition, 
most pardons are issued after the offender has been 
convicted. Most amnesties are granted before trial. Con- 
gress also can grant amnesties. 

During the late 1700's and early 1800's, several 
presidents used their amnesty powers. In 1795, for ex- 
ample, President George Washington granted amnesty 
to Pennsylvania residents who had participated in an up- 
rising called the Whiskey Rebellion (see Whiskey Re- 
bellion). In 1807, President Thomas Jefferson offered am- 
nesty to all Army deserters who returned to their posts 
within four months. President James Madison extended 
similar amnesty before and during the War of 1812. 

The Civil War brought a number of amnesty declara- 
tions. In 1863, President Abraham Lincoln granted am- 
nesty to Confederates who swore to support the Union. 
Thousands of soldiers accepted his offer. Lincoln and 
his successor, Andrew Johnson, issued several more 
conditional amnesties. In 1898, Congress extended un- 
conditional amnesty to all former Confederates. 

Since the early 1900's, most amnesties have involved 
people who opposed the nation’s involvement in a war. 
In 1917 and 1918, many Americans criticized the U.S. 
role in World War I. Nearly 2,000 persons were impris- 
oned for their protests. During the 1920's, Presidents 
Warren G. Harding and Calvin Coolidge pardoned many 
individuals on a case-by-case basis. In 1933, President 
Franklin D. Roosevelt issued an amnesty that restored 
the voting rights of more than 1,500 of the protesters. 
They had lost these rights by being convicted of certain 
crimes in Connection with their protests. 

After World War II ended in 1945, President Harry S. 
Truman established a panel to study the individual cases 
of men who had evaded the draft or had deserted. The 
board suggested pardons for 1,523 individuals. But it re- 
fused to recommend amnesty for men who, according 
to the board, had “set themselves up as wiser and more 
competent than society to determine their duty.” 

In the 1960's and early 1970's, many Americans op- 
posed the Vietnam War. The government estimated that 
about 93,000 U.S. servicemen deserted or were dis- 
charged for going AWOL (absent without leave), and 
about 13,000 men evaded the draft. Many fled to foreign 
countries or went into hiding in the United States. After 
U.S. involvement in the war ended in 1973, many people 
demanded amnesty for the entire group. The demand 
increased in 1974 after President Gerald R. Ford par- 
doned former President Richard M. Nixon for all federal 
crimes he may have committed as chief executive. Ford 
offered conditional amnesty to deserters and draft evad- 
ers who agreed to take public-service jobs. Only about 
22,000 men applied for amnesty. In 1977, President 





438 Amnesty International 


Jimmy Carter granted a pardon to nearly everyone who 
violated draft laws between 1964 and 1973. The pardon 
covered all except employees of the draft system and 
those who used violence in breaking draft laws. 

In 1987, the U.S. government began an amnesty pro- 
gram for aliens who had entered the country illegally 
before Jan. 1, 1982, and had resided in the United States 
since then. The program was part of the Immigration Re- 
form and Control Act of 1986. 

See also Pardon. 


Stanley I. Kutler 


Additional resources 


Hagan, John. Northern Passage: American Vietnam War Resisters 
in Canada. Harvard Univ. Pr., 2001. Includes discussion of 
amnesty for Vietnam War resisters. 

Moore, Kathleen D. Pardons: Justice, Mercy, and the Public Inter- 
est 1989. Reprint. Oxford, 1997. 

Amnesty International, AM nuh stee, is an inde- 

pendent, worldwide human-rights organization. It works 

to free people imprisoned “for their beliefs, color, ethnic 
origin, sex, religion, or language, provided they have 
neither used nor advocated violence.” The organization 
also works for fair and speedy trials for political prison- 
ers and for an end to torture and executions. It received 

the Nobel Peace Prize in 1977. 

Amnesty International has about 700,000 members in 
over 150 nations and includes about 4,000 volunteer 
groups. Each local group ‘adopts’ prisoners in foreign 
countries. It works for their release by pressuring gov- 
ernment officials and arousing public opinion. The or- 
ganization also sends observers to political trials and on 
missions to investigate human rights abuses. Amnesty 
International was founded in 1961. Its headquarters are 
in London. Critically reviewed by Amnesty International USA 

See also Politica! prisoner. 

Amniocentesis, 4v nee of sehn TEE sihs, is a med- 

ical procedure performed during pregnancy to help de- 

termine the health and maturity of an unborn baby. It in- 
volves the withdrawal and study of a small amount of 
the amniotic fluid that surrounds the fetus in the moth- 
ers uterus. With this procedure, physicians can accu- 
rately diagnose more than 150 serious disorders that 
may affect the fetus. Such disorders include Down syn- 
drome and Tay-Sachs disease. Amniocentesis involves 
little risk to either the mother or the fetus. 

Amniocentesis is usually performed either late in the 
fourth month of pregnancy or during the last three 
months. In the fourth month, its purpose is to detect ge- 
netic disorders. The physician can then immediately 
treat the fetus for certain diseases or plan to treat other 
disorders right after birth. Some parents choose to end 
the pregnancy if amniocentesis reveals an incurable dis- 
order. Amniocentesis is performed during the last three 
months of pregnancy primarily to determine whether 
the fetus has reached a normal stage of development. 

A physician performs amniocentesis with the aid of 
ultrasound (high frequency sound waves). The ultrasonic 
waves produce an image of the fetus on a special 
screen. The physician monitors the position of the fetus 
while inserting a long hollow needle through the moth- 
ers abdominal wall and into the uterus. The physician 
then withdraws a small amount of amniotic fluid, which 
contains cells shed by the fetus. These cells are allowed 
to grow under controlled laboratory conditions for a 
few weeks and are then examined. Other procedures 


used by physicians to determine the health of a fetus are 
chorionic villus sampling and alpha-fetoprotein analysis 
(see Genetic counseling). Henry L. Nadler 

Amoeba. See Ameba. 

Amon, AH muhn, became the most important god in 
ancient Egyptian mythology. He was worshiped mainly 
in the city of Thebes, and was specially honored by the 
kings of Thebes. Amon’s temples at Karnak and Luxor 
were the wealthiest in the country. Amon gained his 
greatest importance during the period of the New King- 
dom (1554-1070 B.C), when Thebes was the capital of 
Egypt. The Egyptians eventually identified Amon with 
the sun god Re to create a new deity called Amon-Re, 
who was known as King of the Gods. 

Amon first appeared in Egyptian mythology about 
2100 B.C. He may have been introduced to Thebes from 
Hermopolis, a city north of Thebes. At Thebes, Amon’s 
wife was the goddess Mut. Their child was Khons, a 
moon god. The three became known as the 7heban tri- 
ad. Amon was uSually portrayed in human form, wear- 
ing a double plumed crown. He sometimes appeared as 
a goose or aram. R.F G. Sweet 

See also Mythology (Egyptian mythology); Thebes. 
Amos, Book of, is a book of the Old Testament, or 
Hebrew Bible, named for an Israelite prophet. Amos 
was the first prophet to have his sayings collected into a 
single work. He expressed for the first time in the 
prophetic literature the idea that there is one God for all 
humanity, for both Israel and the other nations. 

Amos was a native of the southern kingdom of Judah 
and was active at the shrine of Bethel in the northern 
kingdom of Israel. Amos prophesied from about 750 to 
740 B.C. Most of his statements are announcements of 
judgment or prophecies of punishment. He stated that 
God was about to intervene in history to punish Israel 
for its sins. Amos criticized the excesses in the outward 
expression of religion. He declared that the Israelites re- 
ligion had no worth without demonstrating righteous- 
ness and social justice. He pointed out that Israel should 
suffer more for its sins than the surrounding nations be- 
cause the Hebrews knew the true God. 
Amoy. See Xiamen. 

Ampere, AM pihr, is the unit used to measure the rate 
of flow of an electric current. It is one of seven base 
units in the metric system. There is an electric current of 
1 ampere when 1 unit of electric charge flows past a 
cross section of an electric circuit in 1 second. The unit 
of electric charge is called a coulomb (see Coulomb). 
Thus, 1 ampere equals 1 coulomb per second. Physicists 
also define amperes in terms of the magnetic force pro- 
duced by electric currents in parallel wires. 

A 100-watt light bulb requires about 1 ampere of cur- 
rent at 100 volts. Calculators and computers use currents 
so tiny they are measured in microamperes (millionths 
of amperes). Large industrial equipment uses currents 
measured in Ailoamperes (thousands of amperes). The 
ampere was named for the French physicist Andre 
Marie Ampere. He was the first person to show that cur- 
rents flowing through parallel wires cause magnetic 
forces between the wires (see Ampére, André Marie). 

Raymond D. Findlay 

See also Ohm's law. 

Ampere, ain PAIR or AM peer, André Marie, a/in 
DRAY mah REE (1775-1836), a French mathematician 


Eric M. Meyers 


and physicist, discovered the laws of electromagnetism 
in the 1820's. He showed that parallel electric currents 
attract each other if they move in the same direction, 
and repel if their directions are opposite. His mathemati- 
cal theory describing these phenomena provided the 
foundation for the development of electrodynamics. He 
found that an electric current flowing through a coiled 
wire acts like a magnet. This led to the invention of the 
galvanometer, an instrument for detecting and measur- 
ing electric currents. Ampere used the galvanometer to 
show that an electric current completes a circuit 
through the battery which produces the current. 

Born in Lyon, Ampére showed early promise as a 
mathematician. He taught at the Ecole Polytechnique in 
Paris. His classic work, Mathematical Theory of Electro- 
dynamic Phenomena, was published in 1827. 

Richard G. Olson 

See also Ampere; Electromagnetism. 
Amphetamine, am FEHT uh meen, is one of several 
drugs that increase physical and mental activity, prevent 
sleep, and decrease appetite. Many people become psy- 
chologically dependent on amphetamines, and some 
scientists believe these drugs can also cause addiction. 
The United States and many other countries prohibit the 
use of amphetamines unless prescribed by a physician. 
But many people take them illegally for energy or pleas- 
ure. 

Amphetamines include such drugs as Benzedrine, 
Dexedrine, and methamphetamine. They are sometimes 
called “bennies,’ “pep pills,” “uppers,” or “wakeups.” 
Methamphetamine is also called “speed” (see Metham- 
phetamine). 

Medical uses. Doctors prescribe amphetamines for 
three purposes. The drugs decrease appetite, but they 
lose this effect in a few weeks. They also control narco- 
lepsy, an illness that causes sudden, uncontrollable at- 
tacks of sleep. In addition, amphetamines calm children 
with Ayperkinesis, a brain disorder that causes constant 
activity and inability to concentrate. Physicians do not 
know why amphetamines have the opposite effect on 
hyperkinetic children than on other patients. 

Amphetamine abuse. Some people occasionally 
take amphetamines to stay awake or to increase their 
confidence and energy for such activities as study or 
athletics. But amphetamines do little to speed learning, 
and they may slow it down. In athletics, the drugs in- 
crease alertness and may quicken reflex actions. But am- 
phetamines have an unpredictable effect on strength, 
and they may cause poor judgment. 

A person who uses amphetamines regularly must 
take increasingly large doses to get the same effects. In 
time, the person may feel dizzy, irritable, nervous, or 
shaky. 

Some people take large, repeated doses of ampheta- 
mines. Most of these users inject the drugs, but some 
sniff or swallow them. Such doses produce a sense of 
joyous excitement. The user becomes extremely active 
and talkative and feels able to do anything. 

When the effects of anphetamines wear off, users 
sleep for hours. After awakening, they feel hungry, slug- 
gish, and depressed. To feel better, they may start to 
take amphetamines again. Some users feel so de- 
pressed that they attempt suicide. 

Persons who take large, repeated doses of ampheta- 


Amphibian 439 


mines may become overly alert, tense, and suspicious. 
These users may believe that others want to hurt them, 
and they may try to injure these “enemies. Such beliefs 
and actions resemble those of some persons with the 
mental illness called paranoia. Amphetamine users may 
also hallucinate (see, hear, or feel things that are not 
present). If a person stops using the drugs, the paranoid 
feelings and hallucinations will probably disappear. 

Continued use of large amounts of amphetamines 
may cause physical collapse and even death. Constant 
supervision, and group discussions with former am- 
phetamine users, have helped many users break their 
drug habit. Donald J. Wolk 

See also Attention deficit disorder; Drug abuse. 
Amphibian. See Airplane (Seaplanes). 

Amphibian, am FIHB ee uhn, is an animal with scale- 
less skin that—with a few exceptions—lives part of its life 
in water and part on land. There are about 4,000 kinds of 
amphibians, and they make up one of the classes of ver- 
tebrates (animals with backbones). Amphibians include 
frogs, toads, salamanders, and caecilians. 

Most amphibians hatch from eggs laid in water or 
moist ground, and begin life as water-dwelling /arvae 
(young). Through a gradual process called metamorpho- 
sis, the larvae change into adults. The adults look very 
different from the larvae. Some adults continue to live in 
water, but most spend their lives on land. Almost all re- 
turn to water to find mates and produce young. 

Amphibians are generally smaller than such other ver- 
tebrates as fish, birds, and mammals. Most amphibians 
are no more than 6 inches (15 centimeters) long and 
weigh less than 2 ounces (60 grams). The smallest frog 


Caecilian 
~ Typhlonectes compressicaudo 
18 inches (45.7 centimeters) 


Marbled Salomonder 
Ambystomo opacum 


312 to 4Va inches (8.9 to 10.8 cantimeters) 


Plains Spadefoot Toad 
Scophiopus bombifrons 
142 to 2172 inches (3.8 to 6.3 centimeters) 





WORLD BOOk illustration by Richard Lewington 
Amphibians are divided into three main groups: (1) caecilians, 
(2) salamanders, and (3) frogs and toads. These drawings show 
representatives from each of the three groups. 





440 Amphibian 


in the world can sit on a person's thumbnail. The largest 
amphibian is the Japanese giant salamander. Adults can 
be more than 5 feet (14 meters) long. 

Amphibians are cold-blooded—that is, their body 
temperature stays about the same as the temperature of 
their surroundings. Those that live in regions with harsh 
winters hibernate during the cold weather. Many of 
those that live in warm, dry climates estivate—that is, be- 
come inactive during summer. 

Amphibians live on every continent except Antarctica. 
They generally live in moist habitats near ponds, lakes, 
or streams. Certain tropical tree frogs never leave the 
trees. They lay their eggs in rain water that collects at 
the base of leaves. Some amphibians live in dry regions. 
They survive for weeks or months in moist places un- 
derground, waiting for rain to create puddles. After a 
rainfall, they gather at the puddles to mate and lay their 
eggs. The eggs hatch and the larvae develop quickly, 
before the puddles dry up. 

Most amphibians eat insects. In some areas of the 
world, amphibians are quite numerous, and they play an 
important role in maintaining the balance of nature. Am- 
phibians aid people by eating insects and insect larvae 
that destroy crops and carry disease. In some places, 
people use amphibians as food. 


Kinds of amphibians 


Zoologists divide amphibians into three groups: (1) 
frogs and toads; (2) salamanders; and (3) caecilians. 

Frogs and toads have four legs and no tail. Their 
hind legs are very long and are used for jumping. Frogs 
generally have longer legs than toads. There are about 
3,800 species of frogs and toads. Most of them live in 
tropical climates. But two species occur as far north as 
the Arctic Circle, and others are found as far south as 
Tierra del Fuego, at the tip of South America. 

Salamanders have long tails and four—or in a few 
species, two—short, weak legs. There are about 360 spe- 
cies of salamanders. Most live in temperate zones—that 
is, in areas of the world having seasonal changes in tem- 
perature. Salamanders are also common in warm, 
humid areas of Central America and South America. 

Caecilians have no legs and look like large earth- 
worms. There are about 160 species of caecilians, which 
are found only in tropical regions. Most caecilians live 
in underground burrows, but some are aquatic. 


The bodies of amphibians 


Skin of amphibians has no external scales, hair, or 
feathers. Most amphibians have smooth skin, but some 
toads have thick, leathery skin. The outer layer of skin, 
called the epidermis, protects the animal's deeper tis- 
sues. Adult amphibians shed the outermost portion of 
the epidermis several times a year. The inner layer of 
skin, called the dermis, contains many nerves and blood 
vessels. It also has many glands, which open onto the 
skin surface. Many of them produce mucus, a thick, 
slimy substance that moistens and protects the skin. 
Other glands produce poisons that can hurt or kill an 
enemy. 

Many frogs and salamanders have brightly colored 
skin. The color results from pigments (coloring matter) 
found in special cells that lie just below the epidermis. 
Movement of the pigments in the cells allows some spe- 


cies to change color rapidly. For example, some change 
color when the temperature goes up or down. 

Breathing. Most land-dwelling adult amphibians 
breathe with lungs. Water-dwelling adults and larvae 
breathe by means of gills, as do fish. Some adults have 
both lungs and gills. In addition, all amphibians take in 
oxygen through the skin and through the lining of the 
mouth and throat. Some small salamanders have no 
lungs and breathe only through the skin and mouth. 

Digestive system of amphibians includes the mouth, 
esophagus (tube to the stomach), stomach, and intes- 
tines. Food is mixed and partially digested (broken 
down) in the stomach, but most digestion takes place in 
the small intestine. The walls of the stomach and small 
intestine contain numerous glands that secrete digestive 
juices, which break food down into substances that can 
be absorbed and used by the animal's body. In addition, 
two large glands—the liver and pancreas—pour diges- 
tive juices into the small intestine. The digested food is 
absorbed from the small intestine, and the remaining 
wastes travel down the large intestine to the c/oaca, a 
chamber that opens to the outside of the body. Waste 
products, eggs, and sperm (male sex cells) all pass out 
of the body through the cloaca. 

Sense organs. Most frogs, toads, and salamanders 
have good eyesight, which helps them catch insects. 
Caecilians’ eyes are either very small or completely ab- 
sent. Caecilians have little use for eyes in their under- 
ground burrows. Water-dwelling amphibians also have 
a lateral line system, which is a set of sensitive organs 
along the sides of the body. It allows an animal to sense 
movement in the surrounding water. 

Frogs and toads can hear a wider range of sounds 
than salamanders and caecilians. Frogs and toads have 
well-developed voices. Their calls are important in mat- 
ing. Caecilians and most salamanders have no voices. 

Most amphibians smell and taste by means of the /a- 
cobson’s organ, a pair of tiny cavities in the roof of the 
mouth. The tissues that line these cavities respond to 
chemical changes in the mouth or nose. 


Ways of life 


Reproduction. Amphibians generally mate during a 
rainy period. They gather at night into large groups to 
find partners. Among frogs and toads, fertilization—that 
is, the joining of egg and sperm—takes place outside 
the female's body. Among salamanders and caecilians, 
fertilization occurs inside the female's body, before the 
eggs are laid. In most amphibians, the females lay many 
eggs at one time. The eggs generally develop and hatch 
in water or another moist place. 

Amphibian eggs do not have shells but are enclosed 
in a jellylike substance. The adults usually leave the eggs 
unguarded. However, some frogs and toads carry the 
eggs until they hatch, and caecilians wrap their bodies 
around the eggs. The eggs hatch into larvae with gills, a 
flattened tail, and tiny limbs or no limbs at all. Frog and 
toad larvae are known as tadpoles or polliwogs. Meta- 
morphosis into adults takes from two weeks to several 
months. The larvae slowly lose their gills and develop 
lungs. Among tadpoles, the hind legs develop before 
the front legs do. The eyes, digestive system, and other 
organs must also undergo changes to prepare the am- 
phibian for life on land. 


Interesting facts about amphibians 


ae 


Amphibian 441 


WORLD BOOK #lustrations by James Teason 


GEESE 


Some amphibians change color and body form during the mating season. A male smooth 
newt is shown in its nonbreeding form, above /eft, and its breeding form, above right. 





Metamorphosis, which involves striking changes in body structure, occurs during the 
growth of most amphibians. The metamorphosis of a southern leopard frog is shown above. 









The largest amphibian, the Japanese giant sal- 
amander, above, is 5 feet (1+ meters) long. 





Unlike most amphibians, a female 
caecilian, above, guards her eggs. 


A prehistoric labyrinthodont, i aes x 


above, was one of the first amphibians. 





Food and enemies. Most amphibian larvae eat algae 
and plant material, but salamander larvae feed on small 
water animals. Adult amphibians prey on insects and 
many other kinds of small animals. Bullfrogs and other 
large amphibians may eat snakes, small mammals, and 
birds. One group of South American frogs feeds mainly 
on other frogs. Most amphibians use their tongues to 
capture prey. 

Adult amphibians have many enemies, including 
snakes, birds, and mammals. Numerous kinds of fish 
and small water animals prey on amphibian larvae. Am- 
phibians use many methods to protect themselves. 
Some amphibians are hard to see because they are the 
same color as their surroundings. Tree frogs are often 
green, and ground-dwelling salamanders may be dull 


gray or brown. Salamanders and caecilians avoid their 
enemies simply by staying out of sight. Caecilians are so 
well hidden in their burrows that even scientists know 
little about them. Poisons from the skin glands of some 
frogs and salamanders irritate the mouths of attackers. 


The history of amphibians 


According to paleontologists (scientists who study 
prehistoric life), the oldest fossils of amphibians date 
back to the end of the Devonian Period—about 360 mil- 
lion years ago. Amphibians are thought to have been the 
first group of vertebrates to emerge from the water and 
live on land. Most scientists believe the amphibians 
evolved (developed slowly) from the /obe-finned fish. 
Lobe-finned fish had lungs and enlarged fins supported 





442 Amphibious ship 


by bones and muscles. They could use their fins as legs 
to come out of the water for brief periods. These fins 
probably developed into amphibian legs. Amphibians 
were the most important vertebrates on land during the 
Carboniferous Period—from 360 million to 286 million 
years ago. There were many more kinds of amphibians 
then than there are now. 

The groups to which modern amphibians belong did 
not appear until the Mesozoic Era—from 248 million to 
65 million years ago. By then, most of the other amphib- 
ians had died out Scientists do not know all the reasons 
why amphibians became less numerous. The world’s cli- 
mate was becoming drier, and many of the ponds and 
lakes needed by amphibians were disappearing. Also, 
reptiles, which first appeared during the Pennsylvanian 
Period, were becoming more important. Reptiles are not 
so dependent on water because they have hard-shelled 
eggs that will not dry out on land. Reptiles probably ate 
the same foods as many of the early amphibians and 
probably preyed on amphibians themselves. 

Today, there are fewer species of amphibians than of 
any other class of vertebrates. Human activities pose the 
biggest threat to amphibians. Amphibians are successful 
in moist, humid areas of the world, but such habitats are 
continually reduced by the construction of roads, towns, 
and farms. |. Whitfield Gibbons 

See Frog, Salamander, and Toad with their Re/ated 
article lists. See also Heart (Amphibians and reptiles). 
Amphibious ship, am F/HB ee uhs, is a warship that 
lands troops, weapons, and vehicles on beaches during 
amphibious assaults. Some amphibious ships unioad 
troops and equipment directly onto a beach. Others 
transfer troops and cargo using helicopters and small 
amphibious landing craft. 

Amphibious ships generally have only short-range 
guns and missiles for defense against aircraft. However, 
some amphibious ships also have rocket launchers for 
bombing shorelines. Amphibious ships measure up to 
820 feet (245 meters) long and travel at speeds of about 
20 knots (nautical miles per hour). Most are equipped to 
handle helicopter take-offs and landings. Both the Unit- 
ed States and Russia have many amphibious ships. The 
United States Navy has various kinds of amphibious 
ships. They include assault, cargo, command, dock land- 
ing, and tank landing vessels. 

Large amphibious assault ships carry up to 30 heli- 


Boat and aircroft crane 


Shart-range 


Landing craft 





WORLD BOOK diagram by Gearge Suyeoka 
Amphibious ships, such as the U.S.S. Tarawa, land troops, 
weapons, and vehicles for amphibious attacks. The Jarawa, as 
seen from the stern, is shown in this diagram. 


copters. They also have a garage for trucks and armored 
vehicles. Some assault ships have a docking well that 
can be flooded, enabling landing craft to float out and 
carry troops ashore. Amphibious cargo ships carry pro- 
visions, landing craft, and heavy equipment. Amphibi- 
ous Command ships serve as communications centers 
that coordinate air, surface, and shore operations. 

Dock landing ships are combination ships and dry 
docks. They transport landing craft and dry-dock them 
for repairs. Tank landing ships unload troops, cargo, 
and vehicles directly onto a beach through large doors 
in the bow. 
Amphibious warfare, am FIHB ee uhs, is the con- 
duct of military operations by naval, air, and land forces 
for the purpose of seizing a beach or coastal area. Am- 
phibious operations are generally considered the most 
complex form of warfare. In the Pacific Ocean region 
during World War II (1939-1945), a common objective of 
United States amphibious operations was to seize is- 
lands on which to build advance air and naval bases for 
operations against Japan. 

Steps in amphibious operations. Officers of the var- 
ious forces taking part in an amphibious operation first 
decide where the landing will take place. They plan the 
number and kinds of ships, planes, and troops that will 
take part. Even the loading of the ships is carefully 
worked out so that the troops will have the equipment 
they need in the order that they need to use it. 

The first step in an amphibious landing is to gain 
complete mastery of the skies over the area to be seized. 
Planes from aircraft carriers or land bases destroy ene- 
my defenses. Next, warships bombard the landing 
beach with naval guns and rockets to prevent defenders 
from shooting at the approaching landing craft and heli- 
copters. 

Amphibious ships then arrive with troops, weapons, 
vehicles, and other cargo. Some unload the troops and 
equipment directly onto the beach. Others transfer the 
troops and equipment using small amphibious landing 
craft and helicopters. Once a beachhead (foothold) has 
been established, amphibious ships and cargo ships 
send more troops and equipment ashore. 

History of amphibious warfare. The ancient Greeks 
and Romans carried out early forms of amphibious land- 
ings. In 1066, the Normans undertook a successful am- 
phibious landing when they invaded England (see Nor- 
man Conquest). 

Amphibious operations played a major role in World 
War II. The Japanese carried out amphibious assaults on 
the Philippines, Malaya, and the East Indies. American 
forces counterattacked with amphibious landings in the 
Central Pacific. Beginning at Guadalcanal in the Solomon 
Islands, they worked their way toward Japan by landing 
on numerous Pacific islands. Allied troops also made 
amphibious invasions of North Africa and Italy. The Al- 
lied landing at Normandy in northern France on June 6, 
1944— known as D-Day—was the largest amphibious in- 
vasion in history. German and Soviet forces also made 
amphibious landings during the war. 

During the Korean War (1950-1953), U.S. marines 
made a difficult but highly successful landing at the Ko- 
rean port of Inchon on the Yellow Sea. In 1982, British 
forces made a major amphibious landing in the Falkland 
Islands after Argentine troops invaded and occupied the 


Norman Polmar 





islands. U.S. troops undertook an amphibious invasion 
of the Caribbean island of Grenada in 1983 afte: Com- 
munists took control] of Grenada’s government. 

After World War II, American and British forces de- 
veloped techniques for moving troops by helicopter 
from ship to shore. Today, air cushion vehicles (ACV's) 
are also used. ACV's can move troops and equipment at 
high speeds from amphibious ships to the beach. These 
craft travel on a cushion of air and can move over land 
or water (see Air cushion vehicle). The U.S. Navy has 
large numbers of ACV's. Norman Polmar 

See also Airborne troops; D-Day; Warship (Amphibi- 
ous warfare ships); World War II. 

Amphibole, AM fuh bohl is any one of a large group 
of relatively hard minerals found in many igneous and 
metamorphic rocks (see Rock). Many amphiboles are 
shaped like blades. Many are black, brown, or green, 
though they can be almost any color. 

An amphibole called nephrite is the chief source of 
jade, which is widely used for fine carvings and jewelry. 
Amphibole asbestos is used in cement pipe and in fil- 
ters that are resistant to harsh chemicals. 

The general chemical formula for amphiboles is 
A, XY,Z,0,,(OH),, in which A can be potassium or sodi- 
um; Xcan be calcium, magnesium, manganese, or sodi- 
um; Ycan be aluminum, iron, magnesium, manganese, 
or titanium; and Z can be aluminum or silicon. Amphi- 
bole crystals form in the monoclinic or the orthorhom- 
bic system (see Crystal [Classifying crystals]). They have 
pyramid-shaped units of silicon and oxygen that are 
linked in double chains. David L Bish 

See also Asbestos; Jade; Silicate. 

Amphioxus, 4 fee AHK suhs, also called /ancelet, 
LANS fiht, is a small sea animal that lives in shallow wa- 
ter. It is a link between vertebrates and invertebrates. It 
has no distinct brain, but it has a nerve cord running 
along its back that is similar to the spinal cord of animals 
with backbones. Instead of the hard, jointed backbone 
of the vertebrates, the amphioxus has an organ called 





S. Stammmers, Sctence Photo Library 


The amphioxus is a slender, fishlike sea animal that lives in 
shallow water. The amphioxus is also known as the lancelet. 


the notochord. This is a fairly stiff rod of cartilage, found 
along the back just under the nerve cord. This primitive 
form of backbone makes the amphioxus more like a ver- 
tebrate than an invertebrate. L. Muscatine 

Scientific classification. Amphioxus is in the family Bran- 
chiostomidae. A typical lancelet is Branchiostoma costa 
Amphisbaenian, 41 fihs BAY nee uhn, also known as 
worm lizard, is any of a group of wormlike, burrowing 
reptiles related to lizards and snakes. More than 100 am- 
phisbaenian species live in warm regions around the 
world, largely in Africa, South America, and southern 
North America. 

Adult amphisbaenians range from about 3 to 30 inch- 
es (8 to 76 centimeters) long. All species have long bod- 
ies with tiny eyes. An amphisbaenian’'s thick, bony skull 


Amputation 443 





© Jany Sauvanet, Photo Researchers 


An amphisbaenian has a long, wormlike body and tiny eyes. It 
spends most of its life underground in tunnels that it digs 
through the soil. Amphisbaenians inhabit many warm regions. 


helps it dig tunnels through the soil. Its loose skin en- 
ables it to travel underground using rectilinear motion. 
In this motion, the reptile moves part of its skin forward 
and anchors it against the tunnel walls. It then uses mus- 
cles to move the rest of its body forward with the skin. 
Most amphisbaenians have no limbs. However, three 
Mexican species have well developed front limbs with 
toes and claws for digging. 

Amphisbaenians usually lay eggs, but a few kinds give 
birth to live young. All species are effective predators, 
using good hearing and strong jaws to find and capture 
prey. The reptiles feed primarily on such small animals 
as worms and insects. 


Scientific classification. Amphisbaenians belong to the or- 
der Squamata in the class Reptilia. They make up the suborder 
Amphisbaenia. 


D. Bruce Means 


Ampicillin, 4M puh S/HL ihn, is a drug used to treat in- 
fections caused by certain bacteria. It is an antibiotic 
(drug produced by microbes). It belongs to the penicillin 
group of drugs and is a semisynthetic penicillin. 

Ampicillin can kill some bacteria that are not effective- 
ly killed by penicillin G one of the most widely used 
forms of penicillin. For example, ampicillin is used 
against Sa/monella bacteria, which cause a form of food 
poisoning. The drug is also effective in treating severe 
ear and sinus infections, meningitis in children, and uri- 
nary and respiratory tract infections. 

Some people who take ampicillin suffer side effects. 
In most cases, the side effects are minor, such as rashes. 
But some people who take the drug by mouth develop 
diarrhea. In such cases, physicians prescribe a semisyn- 
thetic penicillin called amoxicillin, which produces few- 
er side effects involving the stomach and intestines. 

Ampicillin was introduced in 1961. Since then, its ef- 
fectiveness has decreased as some of the bacteria that 
were once killed by the drug have developed a resist- 
ance to it. Eugene M. Johnson, Jr. 

See also Penicillin. 

Amputation, 4 pyuh TAY shuhn, is the process of 
cutting off a limb, part of a limb, or another part of the 
body. Amputation may be necessary as a result of se- 

vere injury, infection, tumor, or other diseases. 

Before surgery, the patient is given an anesthetic. The 


444 Amritsar 


body part to receive the incision is cleaned, disinfected, 
and protected with a drape. The surgeon uses a tourni- 
quet (tight cloth wrapped around the limb) to stop the 
flow of blood through the large vessels of the limb (see 
Tourniquet). The soft tissues are cut apart in a way they 
can be used to cover the end of the bone. 

Before cutting through the bone, the surgeon severs 
and ties the blood vessels to prevent bleeding. The sur- 
geon then saws through the bone. After this, the tourni- 
quet is released. In most amputations done under war 
conditions, the wound cannot be closed immediately 
because of danger of infection. In such cases, healing 
takes many weeks. Jn most cases resulting from injury in 
civilian life, the wound can be sewed up right after the 
amputation. The most common dangers are infection, 
hemorrhage, and shock. James A. Hilt 

See also Artificial limb. 

Amritsar, uhm KIHT suhr (pop. 975,695), is a manufac- 
turing center in Punjab, a state in northern India {see In- 
dia {political map]). Amritsar was founded in 1577. It is 
the holy city of Sikhism, an Indian religion. The city grew 
up around the famous Golden Temple, the main center 
of Sikh devotion. The temple stands ina tank (pool) of 
constantly changing fresh water. The city was named for 
the tank, which was called Amritsar—meaning the tank 
of nectar or immortality. Sikhs and Hindus live in Amrit- 
sar. Factories include steel mills, cement plants, spin- 
ning mills, carpet and silk-weaving firms, and factories 
that manufacture electrical and chemical products. See 
also Sikhism (picture). P.P. Karan 

Amsterdam (pop. 724,096; met. area pop. 1,100,120) is 
the capital and largest city of the Netherlands. It lies at 
the junction of the Amstel River and the IJ, an arm ofa 
large lake called the IJsselmeer. For location, see Neth- 
erlands (political map). The city’s name means dam of 
the Amstel and refers to a dam built there in the 1200's. 
Amsterdam is the national capital, but the seat of gov- 
ernment is in The Hague, 34 miles (55 kilometers) away. 

The city lies on marshy land slightly below sea level. 
Most of its buildings stand on large wooden or con- 
crete piles (posts) driven into the soggy ground. More 
than 100 canals crisscross the city and help drain the 
land. The canals and attractive buildings help make Am- 
sterdam one of Europe's most charming cities. 


forse ELE 


BH aes 





The old section of Amsterdam lies at the heart of the 
city. This section is a jumble of narrow streets, many of 
which are closed to automobile traffic. Some of its build- 
ings date from the Middle Ages. The Royal Palace, built 
in the mid-1600's, overlooks Dam Square at the center of 
the old section. Next to the palace stands the Nieuwe 
Kerk (New Church), where the nation’s monarchs are in- 
augurated. The church was built in the 1400's. The city’s 
stock exchange, founded in 1612, is nearby. 

The IJ and the port area are just north of the old sec- 
tion. Three canals—the Herengracht, the Keizersgracht, 
and the Prinsengracht- border the old section on the 
east, south, and west. Impressive mansions, built during 
the 1600's by the city’s merchants, line the canals. Many 
of the mansions are now banks or office buildings. Be- 
yond the canals are large neighborhoods and suburbs 
built during the 1800's and 1900's. 

Amsterdain’s major cultural attractions include the 
Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam's principal art museum; the 
Stedelijk Museum, a municipal museum of modern art; 
and the Van Gogh Museum, which features many works 
by the famous Dutch painter Vincent van Gogh. Amster- 
dam also has a municipal theater, two universities, and 
the world-famous Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra. 

Economy. Amsterdam's economy is based on finan- 
cial services, Manufacturing, tourism, and foreign trade. 
The city is the headquarters of the Netherlands Central 
Bank, the nation’s major commercial banks, and many 
insurance and investment companies. Amsterdam's 
stock exchange is part of Euronext, an exchange serving 
all of Europe. Its industries include aircraft manufactur- 
ing, electronics, food processing, publishing, ship re- 
pairing, and production of chemicals and steel. Few oth- 
er cities attract more foreign visitors than Amsterdam. 
Canals link the city to the North Sea and to the Rhine 
River, Europe's chief waterway. Schiphol Airport lies 
south of Amsterdam. 

History. Amsterdam was founded about 1200 asa 
fishing village. A dam was built there during the 1200's. 
The village then became the point for cargo transfers 
between seagoing ships on the IJ and boats on the Ams- 
tel River. By the 1400's, Amsterdam had developed into a 
prosperous center of European trade. 

The city began to grow rapidly in the 1580's. During 


Photre 


Handsome mansions line 
the Keizersgracht, shown 
here, one of the main canals 
of Amsterdam. The city’s mer- 
chants built the mansions dur- 
fees —oing the 1600s. Glass-topped 
Y Fi Re BU es 
boats take visitors on tours of 
] the canals 





that period, and for about the next 100 yeals, thousands 
of political and religious refugees fled to Amsterdam to 
escape persecution. They included Jews from Portugal 
and Protestant merchants from Antwerp and other cities 
in Flanders. They helped establish a variety of industries 
and trade links. The city’s trade spread to Africa, the 
Americas, the East Indies, and elsewhere. Amsterdam 
was Europe’ greatest trading center during the 1600's, 
and the city’s cultural life also flourished. 

During the 1700's, Amsterdam developed into a great 
financial center. Its bankers lent money throughout Eu- 
rope, especially to foreign governments. France took 
control of the Netherlands in 1795 and made Amster- 
dam the capital in 1808. But the Dutch restored their 
government in The Hague after they regained independ- 
ence in 1813. Amsterdam's economy was ruined during 
the period of French rule, but the opening of the North 
Sea Canal in 1876 helped revive it. 

Amsterdam's people suffered greatly during World 
War II (1939-1945). The city was occupied by German 
troops, and its Jewish community was almost wiped out 
in Nazi concentration camps. jews had made up about 
10 percent of Amsterdam's population before the war. 
The city also suffered a severe famine during the winter 
of 1944, and thousands starved. 

Amsterdam had a housing shortage for many years af- 
ter World War Il. To relieve overcrowding, several care- 
fully planned residential areas were built on the out- 
skirts of the city. One apartment complex, constructed in 
the 1970's, houses 100,000 people. A subway connects 
the complex to the old section of the city. 

See also Architecture (picture: The Euronext Amster- 
dam stock exchange). 

Amtrak is a semipublic corporation that operates in- 
tercity passenger trains in the United States. It was creat- 
ed by Congress in 1970 and took over the operation of 
intercity trains in 1971. It is partly financed by the U.S. 
government. All members of Amtrak's board of direc- 
tors are nominated by the president or by the Depart- 
ment of Transportation. 

When Amtrak was created, subsidies (grants) from 
Congress covered about 50 percent of its operating 
costs. But financial support has decreased as the pur- 
chase of new equipment has made Amtrak more effi- 
cient. Amtrak owns and maintains the tracks on the busy 
“Northeast Corridor’ between Boston, New York City, 
and Washington, D.C. Elsewhere, it pays freight rail- 
roads for the use of their tracks. Amtrak hires its own 
train crews, operates its own stations, and buys its own 


Jan de Vries 


Roald Amundsen explored in the Arctic 
and Antarctic regions. During a voyage 
from 1903 to 1906, he sailed his ship, the & 
Gjéa, along the water route called the 
Northwest Passage. In 1911, Amundsen 
crossed the Ross Ice Shelf of Antarctica 
and discovered the South Pole. In 1926, he Benng 
flew over the North Pole in a dirigible, the 
Norge. 







Passage 


WORLD BOOK maps 





Route of 
The Norge 






<a2® 


“Ne : 


tae, 


D a) ri 
ex ee Mor South Pee 
as, a { " 


Amundsen, Roald 445 


locomotives and cars. Amtrak also establishes routes 
and schedules, and handles ticket sales. It receives in- 
come from ticket sales and from carrying mail and ex- 
press parcels. Richard Saunders, Jr. 

See also Railroad (map: Railroad passenger routes). 
Amulet, AM yuh /iht is a charm that supposedly has 
magic power. It may be worn around the neck. Some 
people believe that amulets protect them from evil, sick- 
ness, and witchcraft. Amulets may be made of any mate- 
rial, but many are made of stone. Others are small cloth 
bags filled with a supposedly powerful object. A tooth 
or a piece of horn or wood can also serve as an amulet. 
Some amulets have a symbolic shape, such as a cres- 
cent. Alan Dundes 

See also Birthstone; Evil eye; Magic (Magic objects); 
Superstition. 

Amundsen, AH muhn suhn or AH muhnd suhn, 
Roald, ROH ah/(1872-1928), a Norwegian explorer, led 
the first expedition to reach the South Pole. Amundsen 
and four companions discovered the pole on Dec. 14, 
1911. They beat a British expedition led by Robert F. 
Scott by five weeks. 
Amundsen is also noted 
for his many Arctic explo- 
rations. 

The race to the South 
Pole. Amundsen had orig- 
inally planned on discov- 
ering the North Pole. He 
organized an Arctic expe- 
dition and was about to 
leave when he heard that 
Commander Robert E. 
Peary, an American ex- 
plorer, had just reached 
the pole (see Peary, 
Robert E.). Amundsen 
changed his plans and decided to lead an expedition to 
the South Pole instead. 

Amundsen left Norway secretly in June 1910 aboard 
the ship Fram. At about the same time, Scott, unaware of 
Amundsen’s expedition, also was on his way to the 
Antarctic. While stopping in Melbourne, Australia, in 
October 1910, Scott received a message from Amund- 
sen informing him that Amundsen was proceeding to 
Antarctica. The race to the South Pole was on. 

Amundsen and his crew arrived at the eastern edge 
of the Ross Ice Shelf in January 1911. They spent an 
Antarctic winter there, making short trips inland to set 





Bettmann Archive 


Roald Amundsen 





a O Siabeara 
North Pole 





¢ Bay of Whales camp 


nN 
© Route of the ae 


Ay “ 
NORTH AMERICA Y SOUTH 
— te — be . : 


446 Amur River 


up stores of food and fuel. On Oct. 19, 1911, after spring 
had arrived, Amundsen and his men set off for the pole 

in four sleds pulled by 52 dogs. Near the journey’s end, 

when they were no longer needed to pull the sleds, the 
weaker dogs were killed. They were fed to the surviving 
animals and to the men. 

Scotts expedition met with disaster. Instead of using 
dogs all the way, Scott relied mainly on ponies to pull 
the sledges. But the ponies became exhausted and had 
to be shot. Without ponies, the men had to pull the 
sledges, carrying the supplies. The men also had to fight 
severe cold and fierce winds, and they lacked the prop- 
er clothes for such conditions. See Scott, Robert F. 

Amundsen had a smooth journey by comparison. The 
route he had chosen was shorter than Scott's and cov- 
ered flatter terrain. The dogs withstood the hard work 
and cold well, and the weather was clear. 

On Dec. 14, 1911, Amundsen and his companions cal- 
culated that they had reached the South Pole. They be- 
gan their return journey three days later, leaving behind 
them a tent and a Norwegian flag. Five weeks later, Scott 
and his men finally reached the pole, only to discover 
that Amundsen had been there first. Weary and disap- 
pointed, they began their return. But injuries, fatigue, 
and continued bad weather slowed them down. The en- 
tire party soon died of cold and hunger. 

Other achievements. Roald Engelbregt Gravning 
Amundsen was born in Borge, near Oslo. He studied 
medicine for two years before going to sea in 1897 
aboard the Belgica. During this voyage, Amundsen's ef- 
forts helped to combat scurvy among the crew. In 1898, 
the Belgica, with Amundsen aboard, became the first 
ship to winter in Antarctic waters. In 1906, Amundsen 
completed the first voyage from the Atlantic to the Pacif- 
ic through the Arctic waters of Canada. During this voy- 
age through the Northwest Passage, Amundsen deter- 
mined the precise position of the north magnetic pole. 
From 1918 to 1920, he sailed the Northeast Passage. He 
traveled from Norway through the Arctic Ocean to the 
Bering Sea. Amundsen was the first person to sail both 
the Northwest and Northeast passages. 

In 1926, Amundsen made history by flying over the 
North Pole in an airship called the Norge. The aircraft 
was piloted by Umberto Nobile, an Italian explorer. In 
June 1928, Amundsen and his crew vanished in the Arc- 
tic while searching for Nobile, who had disappeared in 
May. Nobile was eventually rescued. Barry M. Gough 

See also Antarctica (The “Heroic Era’); Exploration 
(picture). 

Additional resources 


Flaherty, Leo. Roald Amundsen and the Quest tor the South Pole. 
Chelsea Hse., 1992. Younger readers. 

Mason, Theodore K. wo Against the Ice: Amundsen and 
Ellsworth. Dodd, 1982. 


Amur River, uh MOOK, is a huge river in eastern 
Siberia, formed by the joining of the Argun and Shilka 
rivers. The Amur-Argun river system is about 2,744 miles 
(4,416 kilometers) long (see Russia [terrain map)). 

The Amur flows east along China's northern border 
and then turns north into the Khabarovsk Region of Rus- 
sia. It empties into the northern Tatar Strait, a narrow 
band of water separating Sakhalin Island from the east 
coast of Siberia. The valleys of the Amur and its branch- 


es cover about 715,000 square miles (1,850,000 square 
kilometers). These branches include the Ussuri, Sungari, 
Zeya, and Bureya rivers. Large dams have been built on 
the Zeya and the Bureya. The Amur becomes wide in 
the Khabarovsk Region, and it often floods there during 
the summer monsoon season. 

Large boats operate on the Amur for most of its 
length from April to November. The cities of Khabarovsk 
and Komsomolsk stand on the banks of the Amur. Rail- 
roads link both cities with the port of Vladivostok to the 
south. 
Amusement park is a permanent outdoor entertain- 
ment complex that typically offers games, rides, and 
shows. There are amusement parks in many countries, 
but most of the larger parks are in the United States. 

Amusement parks developed in the United States in 
the late 1800's. One of the earliest types was the tro/ley 
park. Railways built these at the end of their lines to en- 
courage the weekend use of trolleys. The World's 
Columbian Exposition, held in Chicago in 1893, stimulat- 
ed the development of the amusement park. The first 
important park, and the model for all later parks, was 
opened in the late 1800's at Coney Island, a beach resort 
in the Brooklyn area of New York City. 

Amusement parks flourished from about 1900 until 
World War II (1939-1945). Since then, their popularity 
has declined, and many parks have closed. In the United 
States, theme parks have replaced many amusement 
parks. They are organized around such themes as local 
historical events, pioneer life, and wildlife. They empha- 
size Cleanliness, courtesy, and family entertainment. The 
first theme park, Disneyland, opened in 1955 in Ana- 
heim, California. Its theme is the cartoon characters cre- 
ated by Walt Disney. Don B. Wilmeth 

See also California (Places to visit); Denmark (picture: 
Tivoli Gardens); Ferris wheel; Florida (Places to visit); 
Merry-go-round; Roller coaster; Texas (Places to visit); 
Walt Disney Company. 

Amusements. See Recreation. 

AMVETS is an organization of veterans who have 
served honorably in the United States military. It was 
founded in 1944 during World War II and chartered by 
Congress in 1947. Its major aims are to promote world 
peace, to preserve the American way of life, and to help 
veterans help themselves. AMVETS has about 150,000 
members and about 1,400 local posts. Its headquarters 
are in Lanham, Maryland. Critically reviewed by AMVETS 
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, uh my uh TRAHF 
thk LAT uhr ubl sklih ROH sihs, also called ALS, is a rare, 
incurable disease of the nervous system. It is also called 
Lou Gehrig's disease, atter a baseball player who died 
trom it. ALS gradually destroys the nerves that control 
the muscles. Weakness, paralysis, and eventually death 
result. Physicians advise patients to remain active as 
long as possible. No treatment can halt ALS. 

ALS develops when certain nerve cells in the brain 
and spinal cord degenerate (break down) and die. These 
cells, called motor neurons, make the muscles work by 
sending them impulses (nerve messages). As the motor 
neurons degenerate, they lose the ability to transmit im- 
pulses. The muscles they control gradually stop working 
and then waste away. Physicians believe that there may 
be more than one cause of ALS. In 2000, scientists in Cal- 
ifornia and France discovered traces of a virus, called 


Craig ZumBrunnen 





echovirus 7, in the spinal nerves of several patients who 
died of ALS. If a viral cause is confirmed, treatments for 
ALS might one day be possible. 

Small twitches occur in ALS patients as the dying neu- 
rons send irregular impulses to the muscles. The arms 
and legs grow increasingly weak. Patients find it hard to 
walk and to do simple tasks with their hands. They lose 
weight and gradually become paralyzed as their mus- 
cles grow useless. Talking and swallowing may become 
hard. Death occurs when the muscles that control 
breathing stop working. In most cases, this happens 
within two to five years after the first symptoms appear. 

ALS is painless and does not affect the mind. It afflicts 
slightly more men than women. Most patients develop 
the symptoms in their 50's. William J. Weiner 

See also Gehrig, Lou. 

Anabaptists were one form of what has been called 
the radical wing of the Reformation of the 1500's. The 
Anabaptists believed that the church was a gathering of 
people united by faith, repentance, obedience, and dis- 
cipline. Therefore, baptism as an entrance to this com- 
munity should be limited to believers old enough to 
choose membership. People called them anabaptists (re- 
baptizers) because they baptized adults who had been 
baptized in infancy. The Anabaptists condemned gov- 
ernment involvement in religion, which eventually led to 
the idea of the separation of church and state. 

Many Anabaptists were persecuted in both Protestant 
and Roman Catholic countries. Their movement was 
concentrated in Switzerland, southern Germany, Austria, 
and the Netherlands. The Anabaptists beliefs survive to- 
day in Mennonite and Hutterite religious communities 
(see Mennonites; Hutterites). Stanley K. Stowers 

See also Reformation (Zwingli and the Anabaptists). 
Anableps, AN uh bilehps, also called four-eyed fish, is 
a small fish that lives in freshwater streams of tropical 
America. This fish swims at the top of the water with its 
eyes projecting partway into the air. The upper half of 
each eye can see threatening birds of prey in the air. The 
lower half, different in structure, can see underwater 
and enables the fish to find food. John E. McCosker 


Scientific classification. The anableps belongs to the family 
Anablepidae. It is Anableps anableps. 


See also Fish (Interesting facts about fish). 





—— 
WORLD BOOK tllustration by Harry McNaught 
The anableps swims with its eyes projecting partway into the 
air. Both eyes are divided into two parts. The top part can see 
above water, while the bottom part can see underwater. 


Anaheim 447 


Anaconda, AN uh KAHN duh, is the name of two kinds 
of large snakes found in tropical South America. Ana- 
condas are also called water boas. One kind may grow 
as long as 30 feet (9 meters) or more. But all adult ana- 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Richard Lewington, The Garden Studio 
The anaconda is the largest snake in the Western Hemisphere. 
A typical anaconda has olive-green skin with black rings or 
spots. It lives in the tropical forests and rivers of South America. 


condas are more than 15 feet (4.6 meters) long. No other 
South American snake approaches this length. 

Anacondas have olive-green skin, often with many 
black rings or spots. These snakes live near water, often 
swimming in rivers. Anacondas bear live young. Their 
main foods are birds and small mammals. They kill their 
prey by wrapping their coils tightly around them to 
keep them from breathing. Only the largest anacondas 
ever attack large mammals. Like most snakes, they de- 
fend themselves from enemies by retreating or, if cor- 
nered, by biting. Their bite is not poisonous, but their 
many teeth can inflict deep wounds. Albert F. Bennett 

Scientific classification. Anacondas are members of the 
family Boidae. They are classified as Funectes murinas and EF. no- 
[aeus. 

See also Boa; Boa constrictor; Python. 
Anacreon, uh NAK ree uhn(572?-487 B.C), a Greek 
lyric poet, made wine and love his main themes. Little of 
his work has survived. Most of the so-called Anacreon- 
tics, popular in the 1700's, are imitations. The tune of a 
drinking song about him, “To Anacreon in Heaven,” was 
adopted for ‘The Star-Spangled Banner” (see Star- 
Spangled Banner). He is called “the Teian bard” because 
he was born in Teos, in lonia. The emphasis on wit and 
pleasure in his poems is probably due to the taste and 
demands of his royal patrons. Cynthia W. Shelmerdine 
Anaheim, AN uh Hy (pop. 328,014), is a residential 
and light-industrial city and tourist center in southern 
California. It lies 28 miles (45 kilometers) southeast of Los 
Angeles and 16 miles (26 kilometers) from the Pacific 
Ocean (see California [political map)). !t is part of the Or- 
ange County metropolitan area, which has a population 
of 2,846,289. Anaheim’s more than 1,000 industries in- 
clude aircraft, automotive, electronics, engineering, and 
hardware plants. Disneyland, an amusement park that 
opened in 1955, is the largest employer. A second park, 
Disney's California Adventure, opened in 2001. The Ana- 
heim Angels baseball team is in the American League. 
The Mighty Ducks play in the National Hockey League. 


448 Analgesic 


Anaheim was originally part of a Spanish land grant to 
the San Gabriel mission. The city was founded in 1857 as 
an agricultural community by a group of former Forty- 
Niners, mostly of German descent (see Forty-Niners). 
The name Anaheim means home by the Santa Ana River. 
Anaheim has a council-manager form of government. 

James J. Rawls 
Analgesic, An whl JEE zihk, is any drug that relieves 
pain without causing unconsciousness. People use vari- 
ous analgesics to eliminate or reduce many types of 
pain. Aspirin, a relatively mild analgesic, relieves head- 
aches, muscle pains, and some discomforts of a cold. A 
doctor may prescribe more powerful analgesics, such 
as codeine, for the severe pain caused by back injuries, 
serious burns, and such illnesses as cancer. Analgesics 
relieve pain by acting on the nervous system or by 
blocking the formation of prostaglandins, hormonelike 
chemicals found throughout the body. However, scien- 
tists do not know exactly how analgesics work. 

There are two kinds of analgesics, narcotic and non- 
narcotic. Narcotic analgesics, also known as opioid anal- 
gesics, relieve severe pain but are addictive. Nonnarcot- 
ic analgesics relieve only fairly minor pain but are not 
addictive. The most commonly used nonnarcotic anal- 
gesics include acetylsalicylic acid, or aspirin; and aceta- 
minophen, used by many people who cannot take as- 
pirin without suffering side effects. Acetaminophen is 
sold under many trade names, the best known probably 
being Tylenol. Narcotic analgesics include codeine, 
morphine, and meperidine, a drug that is often referred 
to by the trade name Demerol. 

The misuse of any analgesic can cause severe illness 
or death. Narcotic analgesics are especially dangerous 
because they are addictive. For this reason, narcotic 
analgesics can be legally obtained only with a prescrip- 
tion from a physician or dentist. N. E. Sladek 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Acetaminophen Drug Morphine 
Aspirin Drug abuse Narcotic 
Codeine Ibuprofen 


Analog computer is a device that solves problems 
by measuring a continuously varying quantity, such as 
weight, speed, or voltage. Many familiar devices, includ- 
ing speedometers and thermometers, work as analog 
computers. An analog computer replaces a calculation 
with a physical system that performs the calculation. For 
example, the rise and fall of mercury in a thermometer 
imitates a change in temperature. 

Analog computers reached the peak of their populari- 
ty in the 1940's. During World War Il (1939-1945), they 
were used to calculate the paths of bombs and bullets. 
The development of digital computers since that war 
limited the use of analog computers. A digital computer 
uses numerical digits to represent a quantity. Today, 
most computers are digital. See Computer. 

An electronic analog computer represents numbers 
with electrical quantities, especially voltages, and solves 
problems by manipulating those quantities. Electronic 
analog computers are useful for representing quantities 
that change continuously. They are sometimes used to 
duplicate the behavior of machines and some natural 
systems. Analog computers may be programmed to 
solve a wide variety of equations that describe such sys- 
tems. 


Analog computers can be extremely fast. However, 
they are not as accurate as digital computers because 
they work with quantities that cannot be measured pre- 
cisely. Digital computers count rather than measure, so 
their accuracy is limited only by the number of digits 
they can handle. A. K. Dewdney 
Analogous structures. See Homologous struc- 
tures. 

Analytic geometry. See Geometry. 
Anaphylactic shock, an uh fu LAK tihk, also called 
anaphylaxis, is a rare, life-threatening allergic reaction 
that affects the whole body. The reaction develops rap- 
idly after two or more exposures to an allergen (sub- 
stance that causes an allergy). The allergens that cause 
most anaphylactic reactions include bee and wasp ven- 
om, antibiotics, latex rubber, and such foods as eggs, 
nuts, and shellfish. 

Symptoms of anaphylactic shock include skin rashes, 
wheezing, chest tightness, and nausea. The blood pres- 
sure drops, and the person may collapse. Without im- 
mediate medical attention, death may occur. Doctors 
treat anaphylactic shock with epinephrine or certain 
other drugs and oxygen to help restore normal blood 
pressure and breathing. 

Usually, the speed of an anaphylactic reaction makes 
the allergen that caused the attack obvious. If there is 
any doubt, blood and skin tests can help people identify 
and avoid the allergen. People also should wear a med- 
ical bracelet identifying the allergen and carry an emer- 
gency epinephrine injection for use should another at- 
tack occur. Carol A. Hirshman 
Anarchism, AN uhr kihz uhm, is a belief that every 
form of regulation or government is immoral, and that 
restraint of one person by another is an evil which must 
be destroyed. Anarchism comes from a Greek word 
meaning without government. 

Anarchism dates back to ancient times. The legends 
of many countries tell of a “golden age’ of freedom 
which preceded organized governments. Anarchism 
also appeared among early Christian groups. 

Later anarchism proposed a social organization that 
was based on common ownership and free agreements, 
but its disciples differed among themselves in methods 
and forms. Pierre Joseph Proudhon of France, often 
called the father of anarchism, became the first to make 
anarchism a mass movement. Proudhon's philosophical, 
or individualistic, anarchism urged the willing coopera- 
tion of free individuals without any regulation or gov- 
ernment. 

Terroristic anarchism began under the leadership of 
Mikhail Bakunin (1814-1876) in Russia during the 1800s. 
Followers of this type of anarchism believed in the de- 
struction of the government by violence and terror. They 
thought that land and other means of production should 
be owned in common. Many anarchists throughout the 
world resorted to revolution and assassination in the be- 
lief that terror would correct what they thought to be 
evil. They murdered heads of governments, including 
Czar Alexander lof Russia and President William 
McKinley of the United States. After the death of McKin- 
ley, the U.S. government passed a law barring anarchists 
from entering the country. 

Anarchism under the leadership of Prince Peter 
Kropotkin of Russia, during the late 1800's, assumed a 





more rigid communistic form. Kropotkin rejected the 
terroristic methods of Bakunin, but he also opposed the 
authoritative type of communism. Under his kind of an- 
archism, the state would be eliminated and society 
would be built on the communes, or village communi- 
ties, which had existed in feudal Russian society. Each 
commune would be a self-sufficient group. 

The strength of anarchism declined throughout the 
world in the 1900's. Anarchists played a part in the Span- 
ish Civil War (1936-1939). Anarchism also influenced 
such radical groups as Students for a Democratic Soci- 
ety (SDS) in the United States in the 1960's, and the Baad- 
er-Meinhof gang in West Germany in the 1970's. Some 
groups in Europe practice terroristic anarchism. 

James D. Forman 

See also Goldman, Emma; Nihilism; Proudhon, Pierre 
Joseph; Sacco-Vanzetti case. 


Additional resources 


Avrich, Paul Anarchist Portraits. Princeton, 1988. Anarchist Voic- 
es. 1994. 
Gay, Kathlyn and Martin K. Encyclopedia of Political Anarchy. 
ABC-Clio, 1999. 
Sonn, Richard D. Anarchism. Twayne, 1992. 
Anasazi, 4H nuh SAH zee, sometimes called the cliff 
dwellers or Ancestral Puebloans, were the ancestors of 
the modern-day Pueblo Indians. The Anasazi culture 
centered in the southwestern United States, especially 
in what is now the Four Corners area, where Colorado, 
Utah, New Mexico, and Arizona meet. In that region, 
about A.D. 1100, the Anasazi built homes called cliff 
dwellings in canyon wails or under rocky overhangs. 
History. The Anasazi culture developed from Basket- 
maker ancestors in the Southwest about A.D. 1. They 
lived in villages of pit houses, underground pits with 
roofs formed by a wooden framework covered with 
earth. They farmed and gathered food in the wild. 
Around 750, they began building pueb/os, aboveground 
structures resembling modern apartment buildings. By 
this time, the Anasazi traded extensively with peoples in 
what are now Mexico and California. 
The Anasazi built their first large pueblos about 900, 
in the area known today as Chaco Canyon, New Mexico. 
This broad valley in northern New Mexico held many 





Anasazi 448a 
large pueblos made of shaped stone. The pueblos were 
two or three stories high with many rooms. The largest, 
Pueblo Bonito, had about 800 rooms and may have 
housed as many as 1,200 people. The Anasazi in Chaco 
Canyon produced turquoise beads and figurines. The 
Anasazi of Chaco Canyon traded with peoples in what is 
now Mexico for such items as copper bells, shell trum- 
pets, and macaws. The Chaco Canyon culture ended 
about 1150, perhaps due to drought, warfare, or disease. 

Some of the Chaco Canyon peoples settled in the 
Four Corners area, the location of the famous cliff 
dwellings seen at Mesa Verde National Park in Col- 
orado. These buildings consist of many levels of rooms 
built one above another. The largest cliff dwellings, con- 
structed of sandstone, could house as many as 2,500 
people. 

The Anasazi abandoned the area about 1300. Scien- 
tists have developed several theories to explain why the 
sites were abandoned, including drought, invasion, 
plague, and resource depletion, but no theory has com- 
pletely answered the question. Some people moved to 
northern New Mexico, while others settled on mesas 
(flat-topped hills) in eastern Arizona. There they built 
large multi-story surface pueblos and developed the 
traits of Puebloan culture seen today in the peoples 
known as Hopi and Zuni. 

Way of life. The Anasazi built large permanent struc- 
tures because their agricultural lifestyle allowed them to 
stay in one place for long periods. In valleys and on top 
of mesas, they grew corn, beans, squash, cotton, and to- 
bacco. They raised turkeys, but they also hunted both 
deer and mountain sheep to add to their diet. Hunters 
and warriors launched stone-tipped spears using a de- 
vice called an atlatl (AHT /aht uhl)a stick with a spur at 
one end to hold the butt of the spear. Between 400 and 
700, Anasazi hunters had begun to use the bow and ar- 
row. Anasazi warfare may have included cannibalism. 

During the winter, the Anasazi wore robes and blan- 
kets made from rabbit fur and turkey feathers. During 
the summer, both men and women wore skirts made 
from cotton and other materials. The men held social 
and religious ceremonies in k/vas, underground pits ap- 
proximately 25 feet (7.6 meters) in diameter, Colorful 


© James P Rowan 


A multilevel Anasazi home 
known as the Cliff Palace is 
the largest cliff dwelling in 
Mesa Verde National Park in 
southwestern Colorado. 
Some sections of the Cliff 
Palace are four stories high. 
The Anasazi began building 
cliff dwellings in about 1200. 


448b Anatolia 


symbolic paintings decorated the walls of the kivas. 

The dry climate of the Southwest and the protection 
of the cliffs and canvons preserved many items made by 
the Anasazi. Archaeologists have found many artifacts 
that the Indians used in everyday life, including clothing 
and stone tools. Anasazi potters created fine ceramics. 
the earliest of which were black-on white stvle. Later, 
pottery featured black-and-red patterns painted on jars, 
bowls, and pitchers. As pottery techniques improved, 
these designs became more complex By studying the 
patterns on fragments of potiery. archaeologists can de- 
termine the age of Anasazi ruins. Thomas R Hester 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Canyon de Chelly Nationa! \iesa Verde National Park 
Monument New Mexico |Indian days 
Chaco Culture National His- Pueblo Indians 
torical Park Zuni Indians 


Additional resources 


Amold. Caroline. The Ancient Cif Dwellers of Mesa Verde. Ciar- 
ion, 1992. Younger readers. 

Lavender, David S. fother Earth, Father Skv- Pueblo Indians of 
the American Southwest Holiday Hse., 1998. 

Morrow. Baker H.. and Price. V. B.. eds. Anasazi Architecture and 
Amencan Design. Univ. of N. Mex Pr., 1997. 

Roberts, David. /n Search of the Old Ones: Exploring the Anasazi 
World of the Southwest Simon & Schuster, 1996. 

Anatolia. See Asia Minor; Turkey. 

Anatolian shepherd is a breed of large, rugged 

working dog. It stands about 30 inches !76 centimeters 

tall at the shoulders and weighs from 80 to 150 pounds 

'36 to 68 kilogramsi. The breed has an outer coat that 

varies from short to medium long and a thick undercoat 

Coat colors include fawn (light beige’, white, brindle 

‘black body with brown stripes), and pinto ‘white body 

with beige to dark gray spots). 





Man Bloor & Amencar Kemme: CAH 


The Anatolian shepherd has a strong, sturdy body. 


The Anatolian shepherd originated in Turkey during 
ancient times. Shepherds developed the breed to guard 
their sheep. The breed can make an excellent family pet, 
and is protective of children and property. But it must 
undergo obedience training and become accustomed 
to the people and surroundings outside its home. 

Critically reviewed by the Anatolia 
Anatomy is the study of the biological structure of liv- 
ing things. The term comes from the Greek words 
meaning fo cut up, because knowledge of anatomy was 


) Shepherd Dog Club of Amenca 


first obtained through dissection. The bodies of human 
beings and animals are so complex that scientists divide 
anatomy into many branches. Cross anatomy is the study 
of structures that can be seen with the unaided eye. A/i- 
croscopic anatomy. or histology, is the study of tissues 
under a microscope. Comparative anatomy compares 
the structure ot different animals. Embryology is the 
study of the development of plants and animals in their 
earliest stages. 

Human anatomy includes the study of the structure of 
the skeleton, muscles, nerves, and the various organs of 
the human body. A knowledge of the structure of the 
body is essential for an understanding of its function in 
health and disease. Health care professionals must know 
the structure of the part ot the body they expect to treat 
Physical education and health science teachers also 
need to know how the body is built 

In ancient times, people believed that the dead body 
was a sacred thing. Cutting it up ranked as a serious 
crime. After 400 B.C, the Greeks allowed occasional dis- 
sections. The physician Galen, in the AD. 100s, de- 
scribed many anatomical structures. But he based his 
work mainly on dissections of animals and treatment of 
injured gladiators. After AD. 1300, dissection and anato- 
my became a recognized part of medical education in 
western Europe. In 1543, Andreas Vesalius published his 
classic work on anatomy, which was based on human 
dissections. Since then, steady progress has made possi- 
ble such discoveries as VVilliam Harvey's on blood circu- 
lation. Because of present knowledge ot the bodys 
structure and function, a surgeon can operate on every 
part of the body. Deimas } Allen 

Related articles. See Human body with its list of Related ar- 
ucles. See also the Trans-Vision three-dimensional picture in the 
Human body article. See also: 
Embryology Harvey, William 
Galen Histology 


Physiology 
Vesalius, Andreas 


Anaxagoras, 4. ak SAG uhr uhs (300?-428 B.C), was an 
early Greek philosopher. He argued that, in the begin- 
ning, the world was a uniform mixture of all the things 
that would later emerge during its development Thus, 
nothing really comes to be or perishes in the world, and 
all change is merely rearrangement of the original com- 
ponents. He also argued that matter is infinitely divisible, 
and that everything has a tiny portion of everything else 
in it A thing appears to be the thing that makes up its 
largest part Anaxagoras introduced Mind as a cosmic 
principle. He regarded Mind as composed of exception- 
ally tine and pure matter. Its primary function was to ini- 
tiate a rotary motion in the original mixture of the world 
that led to the separation of the various parts. Anaxago- 
ras was born in Clazomenae in Asia Minor inow Turkey) 
but spent much of his lite in Athens. Carl A Hu#fman 
See also Pre-Socratic philosophy. 
Anaximander, uh vax suh MAN duhr (6112-347? B.C), 
was an early Greek philosopher. He was one of the first 
people to describe the world as governed by systematic 
laws rather than by the actions of the gods. Only one 
fragment survives from a book he wrote on nature, but 
we know his views from other ancient authors. 
Anaximander believed that the world originated from 
what he called the indefinite or unlimited. He probably 
imagined the indefinite as a substance of no definite 
character that was unlimited in extent Opposites such 





as hot and cold and dry and wet emerged from the in- 
definite and came into conflict with one another, thus 
producing the world. None of the opposites gains the 
upper hand. This balancing of opposites in part explains 
such phenomena as the seasons. He anticipated aspects 
of the theory of evolution by stating that animals came 
from a moist environment and that human beings origi- 
nally had fishlike forms. Anaximander was born in Mile- 
tus in Asia Minor (now Turkey). Carl A. Huffman 

See also Pre-Socratic philosophy. 

Anaximenes, an ak S/HM uh neez, was an early Greek 
philosopher who lived in Miletus in Asia Minor (now 
Turkey) during the 500's B.C. Like other Greek philoso- 
phers of his time, Anaximenes was interested in giving 
an account of the natural world. He did so by describing 
how he believed the universe began, followed by a dis- 
cussion of astronomy and meteorology. Almost nothing 
remains of a book he wrote on nature, and we rely for 
our knowledge of his work on the reports of other an- 
cient authors. 

Anaximenes believed that the world developed out of 
air. He argued that air turned into such substances as 
water and earth through condensation and into fire 
through a process called rarefaction. Anaximenes's theo- 
ry may be partly based on the observation of the phe- 
nomenon of evaporation. He also believed that human 
souls consist of air, and he may have chosen air as the 
original substance of the universe because of this belief. 

Carl A. Huffman 

See also Pre-Socratic philosophy. 

Ancestor worship refers to certain beliefs and prac- 
tices of families with regard to ancestors who have been 
dead for many years. In some cultures, deceased ances- 
tors are worshiped as gods. Such worship may involve 
rituals performed at a shrine decorated with objects that 
symbolize the ancestor. In many cultures, people be- 
lieve that the spirits of ancestors are angered by viola- 
tions of law or custom, and they use rituals to pacify 
them. These rituals commonly include offerings of food 
and other items. Ancestor worship forms a part of many 
religions, especially in Asia and Africa. In general, it 
serves to uphold the authority and honor of elders, to 


Some common anchors 


These illustrations show four common kinds of anchors: the stock anchor, the stockless anchor, the 
mushroom anchor, and the grapnel. The stock and stockless anchors are used chiefly on large ves- 
sels. The mushroom anchor and the grapnel are used to hold small boats in place. 





Anchorage 449 


keep the family together, and to maintain the society's 
traditions. Edward O. Henry 

Ancestry. See Genealogy. 

Anchor is a heavy weight used to hold a ship or boat in 
place. A rope or chain is fastened to the anchor and tied 
to the ship. When the anchor is lowered, it generally 
catches at the bottom of the water to keep the vessel in 
place. An anchor may be as simple as a rock tied to the 
end of a line. The most common kinds of anchors are 
made of iron or steel. 

Anchors come in a wide variety of shapes and sizes. 
The shape depends in part upon the expected composi- 
tion of the land at the bottom of the water. For example, 
when the bottom is mud, a small boat may be held in 
place by a mushroom anchor, a cast-iron bowl on the 
end of a shank. But for a rock bottom, the boat would be 
secured with a grapnel an anchor with several hooks on 
the end of its shank. The size of the anchor depends 
mainly on the size of the craft. A huge aircraft carrier 
may use an anchor weighing more than 60,000 pounds 
(27,200 kilograms). Anchors are essential for navigation 
buoys, which must remain in one place at all times and 
in all kinds of weather. Buoys are held to the bottom by 
anchors made of concrete. Robert L Scheina 
Anchorage (pop. 260,283) is Alaska’s largest city in 
population and the state’s main center of commerce and 
transportation. It is also a chief United States defense 
center. Anchorage is one of the largest U.S. cities in area. 
It covers 1,958 square miles (5,071 square kilometers). It 
lies on Cook Inlet in south-central Alaska, west of the 
Chugach Mountains (see Alaska [political map)). 

Anchorage is a modern city with high-rise buildings, 
hotels, and shopping malls. An extensive system of bicy- 
cle paths extends in and around the city. Anchorage In- 
ternational Airport serves as an important transfer point 
for both passengers and freight bound for other desti- 
nations. The city is a chief Alaskan port. The Alaska Rail- 
road, a freight and passenger line, has its headquarters 
in Anchorage. Attractions include an art and history mu- 
seum and the Alaska Center for the Performing Arts. The 
center is the home of the Anchorage Symphony, the An- 
chorage Opera, and the Alaska Light Opera. Alaska 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Arthur Grebetz 


7 2 





450 Anchorage 





Pacific University and a campus of the University of Alas- 
ka are also in Anchorage. Just outside Anchorage are 
two major military installations—Elmendorf Air Force 
Base, and Fort Richardson, an Army post. Anchorage is 
the administrative center of Alaska’s oil industry. 

Athabaskan Indians lived in what is now the Anchor- 
age area before white settlers arrived. Anchorage was 
founded in 1914 as the construction center of the Alaska 
Railroad. The town, originally called Ship Creek and 
then Woodrow, was renamed Anchorage in 1915. Its 
people chose that name because ships anchored there 
with supplies for the railroad. 

The city began to grow quickly after the two military 
bases opened in 1940, during World War II. The discov- 
ery of oil south of the city in 1957 led to further growth. 
On March 27, 1964, one of the worst earthquakes in the 
history of North America hit the Anchorage area. It killed 
131 people and caused $750 million in damage. 

In 1975, Anchorage merged with several other com- 
munities to form an expanded city known officially as 
the Municipality of Anchorage. The construction of the 
Trans-Alaska Pipeline in 1977 provided a strong boost to 
the economy. In 2000, government officials passed “An- 
chorage 2020, a comprehensive plan that will manage 
the city's future growth. Anchorage has a mayor-council 
form of government F. Patrick Fitzgerald 

See also Alaska (Climate; picture). 

Anchovy is a popular food fish related to the herring. 
Anchovies are used in salads, pizza, and sauces, and 
they are often canned, dried, or made into a paste. 
Some people eat freshly cooked anchovies. 








——— 


ee Ee ee le eee —— = 
ration by John F Eggert 


WORLD BOOA 


The anchovy is a popular food fish. 





Anchorage, one of Alaska's 
chief ports, lies on Cook Inlet 
in the south-central part of the 
state. The Chugach Mountains 
rise behind the downtown 
skyline, shown here. 


1 


© Danny Daniels, Alaska Stock 


Anchovies have tender, oily flesh. Most anchovies 
measure less than 4 inches (10 centimeters) long. The 
fish have large eyes and a long snout that sticks out far 
beyond their lower jaw. An anchovy has a silvery under- 
side and a green or blue back Most species have blue 
or silver bands along their sides. 

Anchovies travel in large schools. Most live in the 
shallow coastal waters of warm tropical regions. Large 
quantities of the fish are caught in the Mediterranean 
Sea and along the coast of Peru in South America. The 
type of anchovy caught along the Peruvian coast is 
sometimes called an anchovetta. It is used mainly in ani- 
mal feed or as fish bait. Robert R. Rofen 

Scientific classification. Anchovies belong to the family En- 
graulidae. The European anchovy is Fngraulis encrasicholus, and 
the Peruvian anchovy is £. ringens. The northern anchovy that 
lives off the west coast of North America is £ mordax The bay 


anchovy that ranges from Cape Cod, Massachusetts, to the Yu- 
catan Peninsula, in Mexico, is Anchoa mitchelli. 


Ancient civilization refers to civilizations that flour- 
ished long ago. The term is used especially for the way 
of life that existed around the Mediterranean Sea begin- 
ning before 3000 B.C and ending with the fall of Rome 
in A.D. 476. It includes great civilizations developed by 
the Assyrians, Egyptians, Israelites, and Persians. The 
cultures of ancient Greece and Rome are also consid- 
ered part of it. But great early civilizations also grew in 
the Far East, India, central and southern Africa, and 
North and South America. Barbara Mertz 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Aegean civilization Greece, Ancient Mesopotamia 


Aksum Hittites Mitanni 

Assyria Indian, American Nok 

Babylonia (The first Ameri- —_ Persia, Ancient 
Carthage cans) Phoenicia 
Chaldea Indus Valley civi- Rome, Ancient 
China (History) lization Sumer 

Ebla Jews World, History of 
Egypt. Ancient Kush the 

Etruscans Media 


Additional resources 


Hawkes, Jacquetta H. The Atlas of Early Man. Rev. ed. St Martins, 
1993: 

Starr, Chester G. A History of the Ancient World 4th ed. Oxford, 
Weg). 





Andersen, Hans Christian (1805-1875), was Den- 
mark's most famous author. His fairy tales are aniong the 
most widely read works in world literature. His stories 
of make-believe have enchanted young readers around 
the world for generations. 

Andersen wrote with wisdom, deliberate simplicity, 
and often with sly humor. Like Jonathan Swift's Gu/fiver’s 
Travels, Andersen’s fairy tales can be considered both 
children's literature and adult literature. Many of Ander- 
sens fairy tales have serious moral meanings that are in- 
tended for adults. 

Andersen gave each tale its own style, but his stories 
can be roughly classified into four groups. These 
groups are (1) imitations of folk tales (The Tinder Box,” 
‘Little Claus and Big Claus,” and ‘The Traveling Compan- 
ion’); (2) tales based on Andersen's life (The Ugly Duck- 
ling’ and “She Was Good for Nothing); (3) tales that 
make fun of human faults (The Emperor's New Clothes” 
and “The Rags); and (4) philosophical tales (The Story of 
a Mother and ‘The Shadow’?). Some of the tales use set- 
tings in Denmark ("The Wind Tells About Valdemar 
Daae and His Daughters’ and “Holger Danske), but 
others can take place anywhere. 

Andersen was born in Odense. He was the son of a 
poor shoemaker who died when Hans was 11 years old. 
After attending the city school for poor children, Ander- 
sen left Odense at the age of 14 to seek a career as an 
artist in Copenhagen. He nearly starved while trying to 
earn a living as an actor, singer, and dancer. In Copen- 
hagen, he received help from Jonas Collin, who became 
his lifelong friend. Collin got him a royal scholarship, 
which permitted Andersen to continue his education 
from 1822 to 1828. 

In 1829, his first play, Love in St Nicolai Church Tower, 
was produced. For several years, Andersen's reputation 
as a writer rested on his many plays and novels. But his 
plays are no longer produced. His novels, the best of 
which is The Improvisation (1835), are now seldom read 
outside of Scandinavia. 

Andersen published the first of his 156 fairy tales in 
1835 and continued writing them until he died. They first 
appeared in a series of pamphlets and later were col- 
lected and published in books. The stories became pop- 
ular in the early 1840's, and made Andersen famous. His 
acquaintances included royalty and such fellow artists as 
the composer Franz Liszt, the poet Heinrich Heine, and 
the novelists Charles Dickens and Victor Hugo. 

Andersen traveled throughout Europe and wrote 
many lively books about his experiences. A Poets Bazaar 
(1842) and /n Sweden (1851) are probably his best travel 
books. He also wrote an autobiography called The Fairy 
Tale of My Life (1855). 

Andersen was a sensitive man who eagerly sought 
fame and success. He never married, although he fell in 
love with three women, including the Swedish singer 
Jenny Lind and the daughter of Jonas Collin. None of the 
women returned his love. But Andersen won admiration 
and fame for his writing. 


Niels Ingwersen 


Additional resources 


Andersen, Hans Christian. Fairy Tales of Hans Christian Ander- 
sen. Ed. by Neil Philip. Viking, 1995. Younger readers. 

Bredsdorff, Elias. Hans Christian Andersen: The Story of His Lite 
and Work, 1805-75. Scribner, 1975. 

Burch, Joann J. A Fairy-Tale Life: A Story About Hans Christian 


Anderson, Marian 451 


Andersen. Carolrhoda, 1994. Younger readers. | 
Gronbech, Bo. Hans Christian Andersen. Twayne, 1980. 
Anderson, Carl David (1905-1991), an American | 
physicist, discovered two subatomic particles—the 
positron and the muon. He identified these particles 
while studying cosmic rays with the aid of a Wilson 
cloud chamber (see Cosmic rays). For his discovery of 
the positron, Anderson shared the 1936 Nobel Prize in 
physics with Victor F. Hess. 

The positron, which Anderson discovered in 1932, 
was the first known antiparticle (see Antimatter). The 
positron has a mass equal to that of the negatively 
charged electron, but its electric charge is positive. In 
1937, Anderson discovered the particle now known as 
the muon. Muons have positive or negative charges and 
closely resemble positrons and electrons. But a muon’s 
mass is about 207 times as great as that of an electron. 

Anderson was born in New York City. In 1930, he re- 
ceived a Ph.D. degree in physics from the California In- 
stitute of Technology. Robert H. March 

See also Dirac, Paul A. M.; Meson. 

Anderson, Judith (1898-1992), ranked among the 
leading English-speaking actresses of the 1900's. Ander- 
son was a Character actress and interpreter of intensely 
emotional roles who appeared in a great variety of parts. 
Her greatest stage successes included Strange Interlude 
(1928), Mourning Becomes Electra (1931), Macbeth 
(1941), and Medea (1947). Her major films included Re- 
becca (1940) and King’s Row (1941). 

Anderson was born in Adelaide, Australia. Her real 
name was Frances Margaret Anderson. Queen Elizabeth 
I! named her Dame Commander of the Order of the 
British Empire in 1960, and she became known as Dame 
Judith Anderson. She was the first Australian actress so 
honored. Don B. Wilmeth 
Anderson, Marian (1897-1993), was an African Ameri- 
can contralto. She gained fame primarily as a concert 
singer. In 1955, Anderson became the first black soloist 
to sing with the Metropolitan Opera of New York City. 

The famous conductor Arturo Toscanini praised her 
voice as one ‘that comes once in a hundred years.” 

Anderson was born in Philadelphia and sang in 
church choirs during her childhood. After graduating 
from high school, she studied voice and began to make 
concert tours. Anderson then spent several years study- 
ing and performing in Europe, where her singing won 
wide praise. She became a top concert singer in the 
United States after performing at Town Hall in New York 
City in 1935. 

Racism affected Ander- 
son's career. In 1939, the 
Daughters of the Ameri- 
can Revolution would not 
let her perform in Consti- 
tution Hall in Washington, 
D.C., because she was 
black. She sang instead at 
the Lincoln Memorial for 
over 75,000 people. An- 
derson won the Spingarn 
Medal that year. She was a 
U.S. delegate to the United 
Nations (UN) in 1958 and 
won the UN peace prize in 





Franz Rupp 


Marian Anderson 


452 Anderson, Maxwell 


1977. My Lord, What a Morning (1956) is her autobiogra- 
phy. Thomas Bauman 

See also African Americans (The Great Depression; 
picture); Spingarn Medal (table). 

Anderson, Maxwell (1888-1959), an American play- 
wright, brought seriousness and idealism to the theater. 
He wrote several realistic plays, including the war dra- 
ma What Price Glory? (with Laurence Stallings, 1924) and 
the psychological melodrama The Bad Seed (1955). But 
his major contributions were historical plays, verse dra- 
mas, and his attempts to revive traditional heroic 
tragedy in the modern theater. 

Among Anderson's historical plays, Flizabeth the 
Queen (1930) is one of the most significant. This tragedy 
in verse is based on the romance of Queen Elizabeth 
and Lord Essex. Like many of Anderson's works, it pic- 
tures the defeat of good by the inevitable forces of evil, 
but it also praises the counterforces of nobility and love 
in humanity. Winterset(1935), his most enduring play, is 
based on the Sacco-Vanzetti case (see Sacco-Vanzetti 
case). But it mainly deals with the dilemma created 
when love conflicts with a crusade for justice against 
evil. Another verse tragedy, Key Largo (1939), explores 
the difficulties of deciding to fight evil, as symbolized by 
a gangster. Anderson won the 1933 Pulitzer Prize for his 
political satire Both Your Houses (1933). 

Anderson was born in Atlantic, Pennsylvania. In 1938, 
he helped found the Playwrights Company, which pro- 
duced many notable plays. Thomas P. Adler 
Anderson, Sherwood (1876-1941), was an American 
short-story writer and novelist. Although none of his 
novels was wholly successful, several of his short stories 
have become classics. Anderson was a major influence 
on the generation of 
American writers who 
came after him. These 
writers included Ernest 
Hemingway, F. Scott 
Fitzgerald, and William 
Faulkner. Anderson thus 
occupies a place in literary 
history that cannot be fully 
explained by the literary 
quality of his work. 

Anderson was born in 
Camden, Ohio. He never 
finished high school be- 
cause he had to work to 
support his family. By 
1912, he was the successful manager of a paint factory in 
Elyria, Ohio, and the father of three children by the first 
of his four wives. In 1912, Anderson deserted his family 
and job. In early 1913, he moved to Chicago, where he 
devoted more time to his imaginative writing. He be- 
came a heroic model for younger writers because he 
broke with what they considered to be American mate- 
rialism and convention to commit himself to art. 

Anderson's most important book is Winesburg, Ohio 
(1919), a collection of 22 stories. The stories explore the 
lives of inhabitants of Winesburg, a fictional version of 
Clyde, Ohio, the small farm town where Anderson lived 
for about 12 years of his early life. These tales made a 
significant break with the traditional American short sto- 
ry. Instead of emphasizing plot and action, Anderson 


Schaal Pix: Harcourt, Brace 


Sherwood Anderson 





used a simple, precise, unsentimental style to reveal the 
frustration, loneliness, and longing in the lives of his 
characters. These characters are stunted by the narrow- 
ness of Midwestern small-town life and by their own 
limitations. 

In Winesburg, Ohio, Anderson became one of the 
first American writers to use modern psychological in- 
sights, especially those of the Austrian psychiatrist Sig- 
mund Freud. Anderson's characters tend to make them- 
selves into what the author called grotesques. Anderson 
believed that there were once hundreds of truths, all of 
them beautiful. But people tended to adopt only one 
truth and call it theirs. According to Anderson, the mo- 
ment ‘one of the people took one of the truths to him- 
self, called it his truth, and tried to live his life by it, he 
became a grotesque and the truth he embraced became 
a falsehood.” 

Anderson's most important book after Winesburg, 
Ohio is the short-story collection The Triumph of the 
Egg (1921). His many novels include Poor White (1920) 
and Dark Laughter (1925). He also wrote several volumes 
of revealing autobiography. Daniel Mark Fogel 
Andersonville. See Civil War (Prisons). 

Andes Mountains, AN deez, are the world’s longest 
chain of mountains above sea level. They stretch along 
the entire west coast of South America from Cape Horn 
to Panama and Venezuela for a distance of 4,500 miles 
(7,200 kilometers). 

Only the Himalaya of northern India and Tibet are 
higher than the Andes range. Many Andean peaks rise 
over 20,000 feet (6,100 meters) high. The chain is about 
400 miles (645 kilometers) wide across its widest part In 
Spanish, the Andes are called Cordillera de los Andes, 
which means Andes Mountain Range. 

Physical features. The Andes may be divided into 
three natural regions: southern, central, and northern. 

The southern Andes are less than 10,000 feet (3,000 
meters) high near the southern tip of the continent. Far- 
ther north, the peaks are higher. Aconcagua (22,831 feet, 
or 6,959 meters) is the highest peak in the Americas. It 
stands in Argentina, about 65 miles (105 kilometers) from 
Santiago, Chile. 

The central Andes form the broadest part of the 
mountain system. Two ranges running northwest and 
southeast make up this section. Between these ranges 
lie the wide, high plains, or plateaus, of Peru and west- 
ern Bolivia. The plateaus themselves lie about 13,000 
feet (4,000 meters) above sea level. Farther north, the 
two ranges draw closer together. The highest peaks of 
the central Andes include Pissis (22,241 feet, or 6,779 
meters), Huascaran (22,205 feet, or 6,768 meters), Sorata 
or Illampu (21,276 feet, or 6,485 meters), Sajama (21,463 
feet, or 6,542 meters), Illimani (21,004 feet, or 6,402 me- 
ters), Chimborazo (20,561 feet, or 6,267 meters), and Co- 
topaxi (19,347 feet, or 5,897 meters). 

The northern Andes have three ranges of mountains. 
None of these ranges rise as high as the mountains far- 
ther south. One range runs along the coast through 
Colombia and into Panama. The central range is located 
between the narrow valley of the Cauca River and the 
valley of the Magdalena River. This range includes the 
volcano of Tolima (17,110 feet, or 5,215 meters). The third 
range, on the east, runs northeast into Venezuela. Many 
mountain peaks in the northern Andes reach 15,000 feet 








(4,570 meters) or more. The highest peak is Cristobal 
Colon (18,947 feet, or 5,775 meters) in Colornbia. 

Volcanoes and earthquakes. Many of the high 
mountains of the Andes are volcanoes. Some of them 
are active. The most famous of these volcanoes are Co- 
topaxi, Tungurahua, and Sangay in Ecuador and Nevado 
del Ruiz in Colombia. Earthquakes are common in the 
Andes. Many towns have been wiped out by them. 
Cities that have been greatly damaged by earthquakes 
include Valparaiso, Chile; Lima and Callao, Peru; 
Popayan, Colombia; and Quito, Ecuador. 

Glaciers, lakes, and rivers. Glaciers cover many of 
the high peaks of the Andes, even those close to the 
equator. The largest glaciers are in southern Chile. 
Others reach down to the Pacific Coast. Many of the 
glaciers in the southern Andes have cut deep valleys 
into the rocky coastline. These valleys go far below the 
water level and make the coastline ragged like that of 
Norway. Many deep inlets and rocky islands lie along 
the coast. Rivers flow into the Pacific through gaps cut 
by glaciers on the west side of the Andes. 

Many of the chief headstreams of the Amazon River 
rise on the eastern slopes of the Andes. Two other great 
rivers, the Parana and the Orinoco, also receive tribu- 
taries from the Andes. Rainfall is light on the western 
slopes of the Andes, except in the section north of the 
equator and in the southern third of Chile. 

Nature has played an unusual prank in the section be- 
tween the two ranges of the central Andes in Bolivia and 
northern Argentina. Water from the high plateau does 
not flow to the Atlantic or the Pacific. Instead, it collects 
in Lake Titicaca, and then flows into Lake Poopo. The lev- 
el of this lake has fallen below its outlet. Now water can 
escape only through evaporation, or, when the water is 
high, it overflows into a swamp. 

Natural resources. The name Andes is believed to 
have come from anti, the Quechuan word for copper. 
Much copper is found in the mountains. The Andes also 





Andes Mountains 453 


contain gold, silver, tin, lead, iron, platinum, and quick- 
silver. Many kinds of wild animals live in the mountains, 
including squirrellike chinchillas, condors, deer called 
huemul, and members of the camel family called vicuna. 
Llamas and alpacas, which were tamed in prehistoric 
times, graze in the Central Andes in the high grasslands 
called puna or paramos. Below the grasslands, farmers 
have removed many forests. They have created large ter- 
races and irrigation systems, and they grow such crops 
as potatoes, corn, and coffee. 

Transportation. The passes of the Andes Mountains 
are narrow, steep, and winding. The mountains are so 
high and rise so sharply from low plains that they divide 
the continent into Pacific South America and Atlantic 
South America. Engineers find railroads much harder to 
build in the Andes Mountains than in the Rocky Moun- 
tains. In the central Andes, engineers have had to climb 
more than 10,000 feet (3,000 meters) to find a pass suit- 
able for a railroad. 

Four railroads run up the west slope to the rich min- 
eral beds on the plateaus of Peru and Bolivia. One of 
these, the Central Railway, climbs to over 15,800 feet 
(4,816 meters) above sea level. It is the highest standard 
gauge railroad in the world. 

In Peru, a paved highway runs from Callao on the 
west coast to Cerro de Pasco, over 100 miles (160 kilo- 
meters) inland. From here, an all-weather road continues 
down a deep canyon in the eastern Andes to a branch of 
the Amazon River. Other highways lead over the Andes 
into the eastern lowlands. Trucks, buses, and automo- 
biles travel over these roads. 

Flying also provides an important means of travel in 
the Andes. Regular flights link Santiago, Chile, and 
Buenos Aires, Argentina. Large passenger planes fly 
through foggy, 12,674-foot (3,863-meter) Uspallata Pass. 
Above this pass, passengers may look down and see the 
“Christ of the Andes.’ This huge statue, put up by Ar- 
gentina and Chile, marks the settlement of a boundary 


Chip and Rosa Maria Peterson 


The Andes Mountains stretch along 
the west coast of South America. 
Many Andean peaks rise more than 
20,000 feet (6,100 meters) above sea 
level. 


_ -: 


2 


+ 
“ 


. 
s 4 
* 


i, o 


S 






Pacific = 
Ocean / @ 
/ é 
(4 
Atlantic 
Ocean 


WORLD BOOK map 


454 Andorra 


dispute. A weather station located in Uspallata Pass 
makes reports to pilots. Gregory Knapp 
Related articles in World Book include: 


Aconcaqua Chimborazo Ojos del Salado 
Chile (The land; Cotopaxi Pichincha 
picture) Nazca 


Andorra, one of the smallest countries in the world, 
lies high in the Pyrenees mountains between France and 
Spain. The official name of Andorra in Catalan, a lan- 
guage that closely resembles the Provencal spoken in 
southern France, is Valls d’Andorra (Valleys of Andorra). 
Andorra la Vella (Andorra the Old), a town of about 
22,000 people, is the capital. 

Many tourists visit Andorra each year. They enjoy the 
mountains’ rugged beauty, the old churches, and the 
quaintness of the country. Many people also go to An- 
dorra each year to buy goods that are relatively inexpen- 
sive because Andorra charges almost no tax on them. 

The steep, rocky mountains that surround Andorra 
cut the country off from the rest of the world for hun- 
dreds of years. As a result, Andorras boundaries have 
changed little since the Middle Ages. Andorras legal 
system is based on ancient laws and common /aw (rules 
based on customs) that date from the Roman Empire. 

Government. Andorra is a parliamentary coprin- 
cipality. Until 1993, the bishop of Urgel, Spain, and the 
president of France ruled Andorra jointly under treaties 
signed in the 1200s. Both rulers, known as the ‘princes 
of Andorra, had to agree before any changes could be 
made in Andorra’s government. Each prince had the 
right to veto laws made by the parliament. 

In 1993, Andorra’ citizens adopted their first constitu- 
tion. It made elected officials responsible for governing 
Andorra. The role of the princes became mostly cere- 
monial. But the princes still must approve international 
treaties with France and Spain, and some other matters 
concerning boundaries, defense, and internal security. 

Under the Constitution, a prime minister heads the 
government. The people elect the prime minister. The 
prime minister selects an Executive Council of four to six 
counselors to help administer the government. A 28- 
member parliament known as the General Council of 
the Valleys makes the nation’s laws. Two members are 
elected from each of Andorras seven parishes (districts), 
and the other 14 members are elected nationwide. 

Since Andorra had two rulers for hundreds of years, it 
often has two sets of public services. For example, it has 
two postal systems—one French and one Spanish. Both 
the French franc and the Spanish peseta served as /ega/ 
tender (lawful money). They were replaced by the euro, 
Europe's common currency, in 2002. 

People. From the 1100s to the 1930's, life in Andorra 
changed little. The people worked as farmers and shep- 
herds. The villages and parishes owned the grazing 
lands, and farmers owned their own cropland. To keep 
the cropland from being divided into tiny plots, farmers 
gave at least three-fourths of their inheritance to one of 
their children, usually the oldest son. Many of the other 
children had to move out of Andorra. As a result, more 
people of Andorran descent now live in France and 
Spain than in Andorra. 

The opening of roads to France and Spain in the 
1930's and the sudden growth of tourism in the 1950's 
changed some of the old ways of living. Many who had 





Facts in brief 


Capital: Andorra la Vella. 

Official language: Catalan. 

Area: 175 mi (453 km’). Greatest distances—north-south, about 
16 mi (26 km); east-west, about 19 mi (31 km). 

Elevation: Highest—Coma Pedrosa, 9,665 ft (2,946 m) above sea 
level. Lowest—2,756 ft (840 m) above sea level. 

Population: Fstimated 2002 population—69,000; density, 394 per 
mi* (152 per km’); distribution, 95 percent urban, 5 percent rur- 
al. 1996 official estimate—72,766. 

Chief products: Agricu/ture—potatoes, tobacco. 
Manufacturing—cigarettes and other tobacco products. 

Flag: The national flag, used by the people, has blue, yellow, and 
red vertical stripes. The state flag, used by the government, 
has a coat of arms on the yellow stripe. See Flag (picture: 
Flags of Europe). 

Money: Basic unit—euro. One hundred cents equal one euro. 
The French franc and Spanish peseta were taken out of circu- 
lation in 2002. 


worked as farmers, shepherds, and smugglers became 
storekeepers and hotel owners. Tourists brought new 
wealth, and fewer people had to move out of the coun- 
try. Some people from Spain have moved into Andorra. 
Today, only about one-third of the countrys people are 
Andorran citizens. Over half are citizens of Spain. Other 
inhabitants are mainly from France and Portugal. 

These changes weakened the strong control Andor- 
ran fathers had always held over their families. But in 
other ways life has changed little. Life for the average 
Andorran still centers around the family. Many Andor- 
rans still live in big farmhouses with stone walls and 
rough slate roofs. Most of these houses are three stories 
high with a barn to house livestock or a tool shed on the 
ground floor, a living room and kitchen on the second 


Andorra 












=: Internatianal boundary 
| Rood 

Roilrood 

Nationol copitol 
Other city or town 


Elevotion above seo level 


20 Kilometers 








WORLD BOOK maps 





floor, and bedrooms opening onto wooden or iron bal- 
conies on the third floor. The people speak Catalan, but 
most Andorrans also understand French and Spanish. 

The government prints its official documents in Catalan. 

Almost all Andorrans are Roman Catholics, and their 
religion greatly influences their social life. All public 
records are kept by the church, and only Roman 
Catholics can get married in Andorra. On their national 
holiday, September 8, Andorrans make a pilgrimage 
(journey) to the shrine of Our Lady of Meritxell, patron 
saint of Andorra. 

Children in Andorra must attend school from ages 6 
to 16. Andorra has Andorran, French, and Spanish 
schools. 

Land. Steep mountain peaks as high as 9,665 feet 
(2,946 meters) above sea level tower over the valleys of 
Andorra. Fields and meadows lie in the valleys, and oak, 
pine, and fir trees cover the lower mountain slopes. 
Only grass grows farther up the mountainsides. The 
Valira del Norte (Northern Valira) and the Valira del Ori- 
ent (Eastern Valira) rivers meet near the town of Andorra 
la Vella to form the Valira River, which flows into Spain. 
The main roads in Andorra follow the Valira del Norte 
toward France and the Valira into Spain. 

Andorra has a dry, sunny climate. Three or four heavy 
snows fall each year, and even powerful snowplows 
cannot keep the mountain road between Andorra and 
France open all winter. However, in the valleys south of 
Escaldes, the snows melt in a few days. Winter tempera- 
tures at Escaldes range between 20 and 30 F (-7 and 
—1 °C). In the summer, the valleys are warm during the 
day and cool at night. Temperatures at Escaldes reach 70 
to 80 °F (21 to 27 °C). 

Economy. Tourism is Andorra’s chief source of in- 
come. Andorra’s beautiful mountains and ancient build- 
ings are the main attractions. Ski slopes have been 
opened at Pas de la Casa and Soldeu, where the snow 
lasts until the end of April. Tourists can buy Swiss 
watches, Japanese cameras, French wines, clothing, and 
other goods at low prices in Andorra, because import 
duties (charges) are low. 

A few Andorrans farm. Their main crop is tobacco. 
About half the tobacco is raised in the lower valleys of 
Sant Julia’s parish. Most of the mountain slopes are used 
for grazing sheep and cattle. In some areas, farmers 
have carved terraces into the mountainsides as high as 
5,300 feet (1,620 meters) above sea level. Potatoes are the 
chief crop raised on the terraces. Other mountain crops 
include buckwheat, corn, oats, and rye. 

History. According to legends, Charlemagne either 
founded or freed Andorra. The first known ruler of An- 
dorra was a Spanish noble, the Count of Urgel. He con- 
trolled the region in the A.D. 800s, and then gave it to 
the diocese of Urgel. In the 1000's, the bishop of Urgel 
could not control Andorra by himself, and he asked a 
Spanish noble, the Lord of Caboet, to defend the region. 
A French noble, the Count of Foix, inherited the lord's 
duties through marriages. The French count and the 
bishop fought over Andorra. They finally ended their 
disputes by signing treaties in 1278 and 1288. The 
treaties made them joint rulers. 

Through marriages, the king of France inherited the 
count’s rights. During the French Revolution, France re- 
fused to rule Andorra. But the Andorrans later asked 


Andorra la Vella 455 


Napoleon | to rule them, and he accepted in 1806. 
France's head of state has been a prince of Andorra 
since then. Today, the French president serves as prince. 
Until 1993, as the old treaties required, Andorra paid 
about $2 every other year to the president of France and 
about $8 to the Spanish bishop. The bishop also got 6 
hams, 6 cheeses, and 12 hens every other year. 

In the 1800's, Andorran farmers began raising tobac- 
co. Until the 1900's, many Andorrans made their living 
by smuggling tobacco into France and Spain. 

Until the 1930's, only male citizens who were the 
heads of households could vote in Andorra. In 1933, An- 
dorran youths stormed the General Council and forced 
it to give all male citizens over 25 years old the right to 
vote. In 1970, the voting age was reduced to 21 and fe- 
male citizens won the right to vote. In 1984, a woman 
was elected to the General Council for the first time. In 
1985, the voting age was lowered to 18. 

In 1993, the people of Andorra adopted their first con- 
stitution. The constitution strictly limited the role of the 
princes in the government and placed responsibility for 
governing Andorra in the hands of an elected prime 
minister and parliament. William M. Reddy 

See also Andorra la Vella. 

Andorra la Vella, an DAWR uh lah VEHL yah (pop. 
21,630), is the capital and largest town of Andorra. About 
one-third of Andorra’s people live in Andorra la Vella. 
The town lies beside the Valira River in a valley high 
amid the Pyrenees. For location, see Andorra (map). 

The economy of Andorra la Vella depends on 
tourism. Many visitors come from neighboring Spain 
and France. The town has numerous medieval struc- 
tures, including the Santa Coloma church. Andorra’s 





Cameramann International, Ltd. from Marilyn Gartman 
Andorra‘s capital, called Andorra la Vella, nestles among the 
rocky peaks of the Pyrenees mountains. The quaint old town has 
hecome a leading tourist center. 


456 Andradae Silva, José Bonifacio de 


parliament meets in the Casa de la Vall, which dates 
from the 1500's. 

For hundreds of years, the Pyrenees kept Andorra la 
Vella isolated from the outside world. After the mid- 
1900 s, however, modernization proceeded rapidly. To- 
day, the city bustles with commercial activity, and air 
pollution sometimes clouds the valley. William M. Reddy 
Andrada e Silva, an DRAH duh ee SEFL vuh, José 
Bonifacio de, zhoh ZEH Bou nee FAH syoo duh (1763- 
1838), was a Brazilian statesman known as the “architect 
of Brazilian independence. He supported land reform, 
the ending of slavery, and rule by a monarchy. In 1822, 
he guided Brazil out of the Portuguese empire, and 
served the new emperor, Pedro I. He fell from favor and 
was banished temporarily. Pedro later named him 
guardian of his son, the future Pedro II (see Pedro I; Pe- 
dro Il). 

Andrada was also an accomplished scientist. In 1783, 
he went to Portugal to study philosophy and law at the 
University of Coimbra. In 1790, the king sent him ona 
10-year tour. He studied chemistry in Paris, and mining 
and metallurgy in Germany, Norway, Switzerland, and 
England. He taught at the University of Coimbra and 
held important government posts. Andrada returned to 
Brazil in 1819. He was born in Santos, Brazil. 

Robert M. Levine 
Andre, AHN dray, John (1751-1780), a British officer, 
was hanged as a spy by the American Revolutionary 
Army. He was the messenger of the British general, Sir 
Henry Clinton, who, with Benedict Arnold, had concoct- 
ed a plot for taking the vital American fort at West Point 
(see Arnold, Benedict). 

André was Clinton's personal aide and adjutant gener- 
al of the British forces in America. Clinton chose him to 
meet Arnold and arrange the final details of the plot for 
taking West Point. Clinton sent him up the Hudson River 
ona British sloop. The men met on shore on the night of 
Sept 21m) 730: 

At dawn, the Americans opened fire on the sloop and 
forced it to retreat. André, caught inside the American 
lines, was forced to go overland to New York. Disobey- 
ing Clinton's instructions, he discarded his military uni- 
form for civilian clothes. By this action, Andre lost his 
chance, if captured, to be considered an officer instead 
of a spy. Not far from the British outposts, André was 
stopped by American militia, who searched him and 
found papers that Arnold had given him. He was taken 
to the nearest officer, who notified Arnold. This gave 
Arnold a chance to escape. 

André was tried by a military court and sentenced to 
death. In spite of Clinton's efforts to save him, he was 
hanged on October 2. 

Andre was born in London. He was handsome, witty, 
interested in literature and music, and popular in the 
British army. While in prison, he won the affection even 
of his American captors. His youth, charm, and courage 
in facing death make his story one of the tragedies of 
the war. Paul David Nelson 
Andretti, a7 DRFHT tee, Mario (1940- ), became 
one of Americas finest automobile racing drivers. An- 
dretti won the Grand Prix world driving championship in 
1978. He won the Daytona 500 race for stock cars and 
the Indianapolis 500 race in 1969. Andretti won the 
United States Auto Club national driving championship 


in 1965 and 1966. In 1966, he finished first in eight of the 
races that made up the U.S. championship circuit. He 
won the national championship in 1969 and in 1983. An- 
dretti is the only driver who has won the Grand Prix 
world driving championship, the Daytona 500, and the 
Indianapolis 500. He retired from Indy car racing in 1994. 

Andretti was born near Trieste, a city on the Adriatic 
Sea. He spent more than three years in a displaced per- 
sons camp after World War II, and moved to the United 
States in 1955. Michael Andretti, his son, is also a lead- 
ing racing driver. 
Andrew, Saint, was the first of the 12 apostles of Je- 
sus Christ. He was the brother of the apostle Peter. An- 
drew was a fisherman from Bethsaida, a village on the 
north shore of the Sea of Galilee. In Matthew 4: 19, Jesus 
calls Andrew and Peter to become “fishers of men.” 

In the Gospel of John, Andrew is described as a fol- 
lower of Saint John the Baptist before becoming a disci- 
ple of Jesus. The Gospel tells that Andrew was present at 
the feeding of the multitude and received a request 
from certain Greeks’ who wanted to meet with Jesus. 

According to later tradition, Andrew preached in Asia 
Minor and Greece, and he may have preached in what is 
now Ukraine. He was martyred in Greece by being cru- 
citied on an X-shaped cross. Andrew became the patron 
saint of Greece, Russia, and Scotland. The X on the Scot- 
tish flag is a symbol of his crucifixion. His feast day is No- 
vember 30. Richard A. Edwards 

See also Apostles. 

Andrews, Roy Chapman (1884-1960), was well 
known as an author and explorer, and as a leader of ex- 
peditions for the American Museum of Natural History. 
As a result of work from 1908 to 1914 in Alaska and Asia, 
he became an authority on whales. Between 1916 and 
1930, Andrews led expeditions to central and eastern 
Asia. In the Gobi Desert, he and his co-workers found 
the remains of Ba/uchitherium, the largest land mammal 
that ever lived. They also discovered the first dinosaur 
eggs ever found and unearthed evidence of a prehis- 
toric civilization. 

Andrews was born in Beloit, Wisconsin, and he grad- 
uated from Beloit College. He served as director of the 
American Museum of Natural History from 1935 to 1942. 
He wrote several books, including Whale Hunting with 
Gun and Camera (1916), The New Conquest of Central 
Asta (1932), and Beyond Adventure (1954). G. J. Kenagy 
Andrews Air Force Base, Maryland, is the head- 
quarters of the Air Force Systems Command. The com- 
mand develops and buys aircraft, missiles, and other 
weapon systems for the United States Air Force. Several 
passenger aircraft are kept at the base for the use of the 
president and other government officials. Andrews Air 
Force Base covers about 5,000 acres (2,000 hectares) 
southeast of Washington, D.C. The base was established 
in 1943. It was named for Lieutenant General Frank M. 
Andrews, who died in an aircraft accident. 

Wayne Thompson 
Andreyev, ahn DREH vuht Leonid, /eh ah NEET 
(1871-1919), was a Russian prose writer and dramatist. 
Andreyev created moods of extreme pessimism and de- 
spair in most of his works. A number of his writings deal 
with the themes of loneliness and human suffering. His 
best-known short story, ‘The Red Laugh’ (1904), explores 
the horror and terror of war. The short novel “The Seven 


Sylvia Wilkinson 





That Were Hanged’ (1908) examines the feelings of five 
revolutionaries and two murderers as they await their 
executions. 

Andreyev’s most popular plays were The Life of Man 
(1906) and He Who Gets Slapped (1915). Leonid Niko- 
layevich Andreyev was born in Orel. See also Russian 
literature (Symbolism). 
Androcles, AN druh kleez, also called Androclus, was 
a Roman slave who ran away from his master and hid in 
a cave. He took a thorn from the paw of a suffering lion. 
Later, Androcles faced the same lion in the Roman 
arena. The lion recognized him and refused to harm 
him. George Bernard Shaw's play Androcles and the 
Lion (1912) is based on this Story. Elaine Fantham 
Andromeda, an DRAHM uh duh, is a constellation of 
the northern celestial hemisphere. It extends from the 
constellation Perseus to the northeast corner of the 
great square of the constellation Pegasus. The brightest 
star of Andromeda, called Alpheratz, completes the 
square of Pegasus. The Andromeda Galaxy, which is a 
spiral galaxy close to our solar system, is visible as a 
faint, misty spot in the Andromeda constellation. See 
also Andromeda Galaxy. David H. Levy 
Andromeda, an DRAHM uh duf, in Greek mythology, 
was the daughter of Cassiopeia and Cepheus, rulers of 
Ethiopia. Cassiopeia dared to compare her own beauty 
to that of the Nereids (sea nymphs) who attended Posei- 
don. In anger, Poseidon sent a sea monster to attack 
Ethiopia. An oracle said Andromeda should be sacri- 
ficed to the serpent to save the land. Perseus saw An- 
dromeda chained to a rock, fell in love with her, and 
killed the monster. He then married Andromeda. Among 
their descendants was Hercules. After her death, An- 
dromeda became a constellation. Jon D. Mikalson 
Andromeda Galaxy, an DRAHM uh duh, is the spiral 
galaxy that is closest to our home galaxy, the Milky Way. 
Like the Milky Way—which is also a spiral galaxy—the 
Andromeda Galaxy contains a few hundred billion stars. 
But it appears in the sky as an oval nebula (a fuzzy patch 
of light), even when viewed with a high-quality pair of 
binoculars. It looks fuzzy because it is so far away. The 


Anna Lisa Crone 


© Jason Ware Galaxy Photography 
The Andromeda Galaxy has a large central bulge, a thin disk of 
stars, and spiral arms. Our home galaxy, the Milky Way, has simi- 
lar features but is slightly smaller than Andromeda. 





Andros, Sir Edmund 457 


Andromeda Galaxy is about 2 million /ight-years from 
the earth. A light-year is the distance that light travels in 
a vacuum in a year—about 5.88 trillion miles (9.46 trillion 
kilometers). The Andromeda Galaxy is named for the 
constellation in which it appears. The galaxy is also 
known as the Great Nebula in Andromeda and as M31. 

The galaxy has a thin, circular disk of stars, all of 
which rotate about its center. It also has a large central 
bulge. The disk has two prominent spiral arms consist- 
ing of stars. Next to the arms are dark lanes of dust and 
gas. Surrounding the galaxy is a halo of hundreds of 
globular star clusters. 

The disk is greatly tilted with respect to the line of 
sight from the earth. The tilt accounts for the galaxy’s 
oval appearance when viewed from the earth. 

The Andromeda Galaxy played a key role in the histo- 
ry of astronomy. In 1924, American astronomer Edwin 
Hubble discovered individual variable stars (stars whose 
brightness changes) there. At that time, astronomers did 
not know of any galaxy other than the Milky Way. How- 
ever, they had found that many nebulae (the plural of 
nebula), including the Great Nebula in Andromeda, have 
a spiral shape. Hubble’s discovery indicated that the 
Great Nebula is far beyond the Milky Way, and that all 
spiral nebulae are vast collections of stars at great dis- 
tances and therefore separate galaxies. Mark Morris 

See also Galaxy; Milky Way; Nebula. 

Andropov, ain DRAHP awt Yuri Viadimirovich, 
YOO rih vluh DYEE myih raw vyihch (1914-1984), served 
as general secretary of the Communist Party of the Sovi- 
et Union from November 1982 until his death in Febru- 
ary 1984. The post of general secretary was the most 
powertul in the Soviet Union at the time. Andropov also 
served as chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme So- 
viet—the Soviet Union's head of state at the time—from 
June 1983 until his death. Andropov had been head of 
the country’s secret police, the KGB, from 1967 until May 
1982. He then became a member of the Secretariat of 
the Central Committee of the Communist Party. 

Andropov was born in Nagutskaya, a town in the 
Stavropol region between the Black and Caspian seas. 
His early career was spent in Komsomol (Young Com- 
munist League) activities. Andropov joined the Commu- 
nist Party in 1939. From 1953 to 1957, he served as Soviet 
ambassador to Hungary. There, he helped direct Soviet 
troops who put down the 1956 uprising by Hungarians 
against their Communist government. From 1957 to 
1962, Andropov headed the department of the Central 
Committee responsible for relations between Commu- 
nist-bloc countries. He became a member of the Central 
Committee in 1961. In 1967, he was named an alternate 
(nonvoting) member of the Communist Party's policy- 
making Politburo, as well as head of the KGB. He be- 
came a full member of the Politburo in 1973. 

Herbert J. Ellison 
Andros, AN druhs, Sir Edmund (1637-1714), an Eng- 
lish administrator, served as governor of New York 
colony from 1674 to 1681. 

In 1686, Andros became governor of the Dominion of 
New England, a group of English colonies. In 1687, he 
went to Hartford, Connecticut, to seize the charter that 
gave the people of that colony the right to govern them- 
selves. They refused to surrender it. According to leg- 
end, they hid the charter in a tree, which came to be 


458 Anemia 


called the Charter Oak (see Charter Oak). 

The colonists of the dominion thought Andros ruled 
unfairly. In 1689, Boston citizens imprisoned him. He 
was sent to England for trial but was not tried. He re- 
turned in 1692 as governor of Virginia. Andros was born 
in London. 
Anemia, uh NEE mee uf, is a condition in which the 
number of healthy red blood cells falls below normal. 
Red blood cells pick up oxygen in the lungs and carry it 
to tissues throughout the body. There, the oxygen is 
combined with food to release energy. In an anemic 
person, the blood cannot provide the tissues with 
enough oxygen. Thus, the person feels weak or tired. 
Other symptoms are dizziness, headaches, pale or cool 
skin, rapid heartbeat, and shortness of breath. 

Anemia, which is not a disease itself, is caused by a 
variety of diseases and disorders. The main causes are 
(1) insufficient production of red blood cells, (2) loss of 
blood, and (3) excessive destruction of red blood cells. 

Insufficient production of red blood cells. Each 
day, about 0.8 percent of the body's red blood cells 
wear out and are destroyed. If the body fails to replace 
these cells at the same rate, anemia results. Red blood 
cells are produced in the bone marrow, a tissue in the 
center of certain bones. This process requires the intake 
of various minerals and vitamins, and the proper func- 
tioning of certain hormones in the body. 

Deficiency anemias develop if the diet lacks suffi- 
cient iron, vitamin B,,, or folic acid (also called folate or 
folacin). These nutrients are essential for the production 
of red blood cells. Deficiency anemias also result if the 
body cannot absorb these nutrients properly. For exam- 
ple, pernicious anemia occurs when vitamin B,, cannot 
be absorbed. Physicians treat deficiency anemias by 
adding the missing nutrient to the diet or by administer- 
ing it through injections or in tablets. 

Aplastic anemias occur if the bone marrow loses its 
ability to produce red blood cells. Some cases are due 
to diseases that affect the marrow, such as leukemia in 
its early stages. Other cases result from exposure to 
chemicals or radiation. Many cases have no apparent 
cause. Victims of aplastic anemia may receive a bone 
marrow transplant if they are young and if an appropri- 
ate donor is available. Chances of recovery are good if 
rejection of the transplant and infection do not occur. 
Other victims receive regular blood transfusions until 
their bone marrow begins to function again. In many 
cases, the marrow never regains function, and the victim 
requires a bone marrow transplant to survive. 

Anemia of renal disease occurs as a result of the kid- 
ney’s lost ability to produce a hormone calied enthro- 
poietin. This hormone stimulates bone marrow to make 
red blood cells. People whose kidneys have failed or 
have been removed, as well as some cancer and AIDS 
patients, suffer from this anemia. In 1989, the Food and 
Drug Administration approved Epoetin a/ta, a drug that 
is a genetically engineered form of erythropoietin. The 
drug stimulates bone marrow to make red blood cells. 

Loss of blood. The body responds to excessive 
blood loss by retaining water to replace the fluid part of 
the blood. As a result, the percentage of red cells in the 
blood decreases and anemia develops. The blood toss 
may occur rapidly, as from a wound, or slowly, as trom 
a bleeding ulcer in the stomach. Treatment involves 


Oonna J. Spindel 


stopping the bleeding and, if necessary, providing 
blood transfusions. 

Excessive destruction of red blood cells. Old red 
blood cells are destroyed in the liver and spleen by a 
process called Aemolysis. \f hemolysis occurs faster than 
the production of new red blood cells, anemia results. 
Such hemolytic anemia may be caused by inherited de- 
fects in the red blood cells, or it may be acquired. 

Hereditary causes of hemolytic anemia include sickle 


cell anemia and thalassemia, disorders that affect the Ae- 


moglobin portion of red blood cells. Hemoglobin is the 
molecule that enables red blood cells to carry oxygen. 
Other hereditary defects may involve the ce// mem- 
brane—the envelope that encloses a red blood cell—or 
the enzymes of the red blood cell. All of these heredi- 
tary disorders produce abnormal red blood cells, which 
are destroyed faster than normal. 

Acquired hemolytic anemia can occur if the red 
blood cells are damaged by severe burns or freezing. It 
also sometimes follows infections. Normally, infections 
cause the body to produce antibodies, which attack the 
invading germs. In some cases, the body produces ab- 
normal antibodies, called autoantibodies, which attack 
the person's own red blood cells. 

Treatment of hemolytic anemia varies according to 
the cause and severity. Treatments may include drugs, 
blood transfusions, removal of the spleen, or a bone 
marrow transplant. Edward E. Morse 

See also Blood (Red blood cells); Hodgkin, Dorothy 
Crowfoot; Sickle cell anemia; Thalassemia. 
Anemometer, 4s uvh MAHM uf tuhr, is an instrument 
that measures wind speed. There are several types of 
anemometers. The most common type has three or four 
cone-shaped cups at the end of rods that are from 2 to 8 
inches (5 to 20 centimeters) long. This unit rotates on a 
vertical spindle. The wind 
pressure is greater on the 
concave (inward curving) 
side of the cups, than on 
the convex (outward cun- 
ing) side. Because of this, 
the wind makes the cups 
rotate regardless of wind 
direction. The faster the 
wind blows, the faster the 
cups rotate. The wind 
speed is measured by the 
number of revolutions the 
cups make in a given pe- 
riod of time. This informa- 
tion is often registered on 
a dial on the anemometer. 
However, it can also be 
transmitted by electrical means to display devices lo- 
cated some distance from the anemometer itself. 

David O. Houghton 
Anemone, u/) NEHM uh nee, is any ot more than 150 
species of spring flowers that grow in woodlands and 
prairies in the United States and Canada. Their name 
comes from the Greek word tor wind. They are also 
called windtlowers. The best-known anemone is the del- 
icate wood anenione, with white blossoms. Other spe- 
cies grow much taller, and may be tinted with pink, pur- 
ple, or blue. The wi/d anemone, or pasquetlower, is the 





Qualimetncs tné 


Anemometer 


state flower of South Dakota and the provincial flower of 
Manitoba. See Pasqueflower. 


Scientific classification. Anemones belong to the buttercup 
or crowfoot family, Ranunculaceae. The wood anemone is 
Anemone quinquefolia. J. Massey 


Anemone, Sea. See Sea anemone. 

Anesthesia, an whs THEE zhuh, is the loss of sensa- 
tion— particularly that of pain—in all or part of the body. 
Drugs called anesthetics are used to produce temporary 
anesthesia for medical purposes. Anesthesia is also pro- 
duced by hypnosis and by acupuncture—the insertion of 
needles at certain points on the body. Some injuries and 
diseases, especially those of the nervous system, also 
can lead to loss of sensation. 

Without anesthesia, doctors could not perform most 
surgical Operations. Because an anesthetic makes the 
patient insensitive to pain, it greatly reduces the physi- 
cal shock and emotional stress of the operation. The use 
of anesthetics gives the surgeon time to perform com- 
plicated operations safely. 

General anesthesia is the loss of feeling in the en- 
tire body. It is accompanied by unconsciousness. Gen- 
eral anesthetics are inhaled, injected, or swallowed. The 
blood carries them to the brain, where they block pain 
impulses in the nervous system. Common general anes- 
thetics include enflurane, halothane, isoflurane, nitrous 
oxide (laughing gas), and thiopental (sodium pentothal). 

A person under general anesthesia shows various 
signs that indicate the depth of unconsciousness. In 
deep levels of anesthesia, the patient loses such reflex 
actions as coughing, and heart and respiration rates 
slow. In surgery, the patient's reactions to the anesthetic 
and to the stress of the operation are monitored by the 
anesthetist to maintain a safe level of anesthesia. 

Local anesthesia involves the loss of pain sensation 
in only a part of the body. The individual remains con- 
scious. Local anesthetics may be applied to body sur- 
faces or injected around nerves. Physicians often use 
them when they operate on the eyes, nose, mouth, or 
skin. Dentists also use local anesthetics during painful 
procedures. Common local anesthetics include lido- 
caine, procaine, and tetracaine. These drugs also may be 
used to treat pain associated with injuries or diseases. 

One type 0f local anesthesia, called regional nerve 
block, involves injecting an anesthetic around large 
nerves. With this technique, only the pain impulses from 
a particular region of the body are blocked. Spinal anes- 
thesia occurs when the anesthetic is injected into the 
fluid within the coverings of the spinal cord. Peridural 
anesthesia is caused by injecting the anesthetic into the 
space just outside the covering of the spinal cord. When 
this is done at the lower end of the spine, it is called 
caudal anesthesia. Both spinal and peridural anesthesia 
render the lower parts of the body insensitive to pain, 
but the patient remains conscious. They are commonly 
used during childbirth and for surgery on the legs. 

History. Before the discovery of an effective anes- 
thetic, the great pain and shock of operations severely 
limited the usefulness of surgery. In 1800, Humphry 
Davy, a British chemist, suggested that nitrous oxide be 
used as an anesthetic. However, no one tried this until 
1844, when Horace Wells, an American dentist, used it 
on himself while having a tooth pulled. 

In 1842, Crawford W. Long, a Georgia doctor, per- 


Aneurysm 459 


formed an operation after he had his patient breathe 
ether vapor until he was unconscious. In 1845, Long 
used ether for the first time in delivering a child. He did 
not publish the facts of his discoveries until 1849, by 
which time credit for the discovery of ether anesthesia 
had been given to W. T. G. Morton, a Boston dentist. At 
the recommendation of Charles T. Jackson, a Boston 
chemist, Morton used ether during a tooth extraction in 
the mid-1840s. In 1846, he administered ether during a 
surgical operation at Massachusetts General Hospital. In 
1847 and 1848, Sir James Y. Simpson, a Scottish physi- 
cian, used chloroform to ease the pain of childbirth. 
Queen Victoria was one of the first women to be anes- 
thetized during childbirth. The use of local anesthetics 
did not begin until the mid-1880s. 

During the early 1930's, medical schools began offer- 
ing formal training in anesthesia. Over the following 
decade, the study of anesthesia and the administration 
of anesthetics was recognized as a separate medical 
specialty called anesthesiology. Edwin S. Munson 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Acupuncture Halothane Morton, 
Anesthesiology Hypnotism William T. G. 
Benzocaine Lidocaine Nitrous oxide 
Cocaine Long, Crawford W. _ Procaine 
Ether Thiopental 


Anesthesiology, 4\ vhs THEE zee AHL uh jee, isa 
branch of medicine that deals with the administration of 
drugs for the relief of pain and anxiety during surgery 
and childbirth. Doctors in this field are called anesthes/- 
ologists. They administer drugs called anesthetics. 

Before a surgical operation, an anesthesiologist su- 
pervises the preparation of the patient, recommends 
tests or medications, and selects the appropriate anes- 
thetic. During surgery, the anesthesiologist uses various 
techniques to anesthetize all, or part, of the patients 
body. The anesthesiologist carefully monitors the pa- 
tient’s important body functions and administers oxy- 
gen, drugs, and fluids to keep these functions normal. 

Anesthesiologists also have special knowledge in ob- 
stetrics, pediatrics, internal medicine, and pain manage- 
ment. They frequently treat patients with lung problems 
and supervise intensive care units. They also teach spe- 
cialized breathing therapies to other health workers. 
Many anesthesiologists operate pain clinics and con- 
duct research to improve the care of patients during an- 
esthesia and surgery. Edwin S. Munson 
Aneurysm, AN yuh rihz uhm, is a balloonlike bulge 
that forms in a weakened area of the wall of an artery or 
vein. The most dangerous aneurysms are those that 
form in arteries, especially the arteries of the brain and 
the aorta, the main artery leading from the heart. Most 
aneurysms result from atherosclerosis, a disease caused 
by cholesterol build-up in artery walls. Other causes of 
aneurysms include genetic disorders or other defects 
present at birth. 

The symptoms of an aneurysm vary with its location 
and size. There may be no symptoms, or pain may de- 
velop at the site of the aneurysm. Shortness of breath 
occurs if the aneurysm interferes with the heart's pump- 
ing ability. Some aneurysms press on nearby structures, 
producing a cough, hoarseness, or difficulty in swallow- 
ing. An aneurysm may worsen without the patient know- 
ing and then suddenly rupture, causing a coma, paraly- 


460 Angel 


sis, or death. Many strokes result from the rupture of an 
aneurysm in an artery of the brain (see Stroke). 

Physicians can detect aneurysms with X rays and, in 
many Cases, Can repair them surgically. Surgeons re- 
move the diseased portion of the blood vessel. If it is a 
minor vessel, they tie off the loose ends. In a major ar- 
tery or vein, they replace the diseased portion with a 
plastic tube, a fabric patch, or a piece of another blood 
vessel. Toby R. Engel 
Angel, according to many religions, is a spiritual being 
created by God. The word ange/ comes from a Greek 
word meaning messenger or one who is sent. Accord- 
ing to religious tradition, angels live in heaven and act 
as God's servants and as messengers between God and 
human beings. They also serve as guardians of individu- 
als and nations. Angels traditionally are pictured as hav- 
ing a human body and wings. Poets and artists have por- 
trayed angels as symbols of innocence or virtue. 

Many religions have teachings about angels or simi- 
lar beings. In some primitive religions, legends tell of 
bright, powerful spirits that appear in dreams and vi- 
sions and protect people or tribes. In Hinduism and 
Buddhism, many major gods are accompanied by a 
band or court of spiritual beings. 

Judaism, Christianity, and Islam developed the most 
elaborate doctrines about angels. These religions recog- 
nize an order of beings in which angels rank above 
human beings but under God. God is all-powerful, and 
the human is sometimes portrayed as in God's image. In 
some traditions, Satan and other “fallen angels” rebel 
against this order. According to other traditions, they 
fell because of their lust for women. 

The concept of angels with a human body and wings 
began in the Hebrew Bible, or Old Testament, and in 
Christianity. Later tradition refers to many archangels 
(angels of high rank), including Saint Michael. 

Christian doctrine regarding angels reached full de- 
velopment during the A.D. 1100's and 1200s, especially 
in the teachings of Saint Thomas Aquinas. Aquinas be- 
lieved angels were necessary to fill the gap between 
God and human beings. He taught that countless num- 
bers of angels existed and that they were immortal. Ac- 
cording to Aquinas, angels knew everything except 
what depended on human choice and what was known 
only to God. The concept of angels strongly influenced 
Paradise Lost (1667), a famous epic by the English poet 
John Milton. Paradise Lost includes a version of Satan’s 
fall and of Adam and Eve's expulsion from Paradise. 

The Islamic belief in angels resembles that of Judaism 
and Christianity. These three faiths place angels near 
God and give special duties to some. J. H. Charlesworth 

See also Michael, Saint 
Angel Falls is the highest waterfall in the world. It 
drains into the Churun River in eastern Venezuela. For 
location, see Venezuela (terrain map). Angel Falls has a 
total height of 3,212 feet (979 meters). Its longest unbro- 
ken drop is 2,648 feet (807 meters). 

Angel Falls plunges down a cliff in a highland area 
called La Gran Sabana. This region has many huge, col- 
orful mesas (flat-topped hills) with sandstone surfaces. 
Grasslands and tropical rain forests cover much of the 
mesas. Some of the mesas are more than 2,500 feet {760 
meters) high. There are many steep cliffs in the area. 
Angel Falls is located on the Auyan-Tepui mountain, 


The waterfall is named for Jimmy Angel, an American 
pilot. Angel became the first known white person to see 
the falls, when he flew over it in 1935. He was searching 
for gold in the area. Today, small planes carry tourists 
over Angel Falls and its surroundings. Robert C Eidt 

See also South America (picture); Waterfall (picture). 
Angelfish is the name of a type of fish that has a thin, 
oval body and long, pointed fins. Angelfish also have 
stripes or patterns on the body and patches of vivid | 
color. There are about 75 marine species and 1 freshwa- | 
ter species. The freshwater angelfish is only distantly re- 
lated to the marine angelfishes. 

Marine angelfishes live mainly around coral reefs in 
warm and tropical seas. 
Most feed on animals or 
plants attached to the bot- 
tom of the reefs. Some spe- 
cies feed on plankton (tiny 
water organisms) in waters 
above the reefs. Many spe- 
cies are kept in commer- 
cial aquariums and are 
highly valued for their col- 
orful patterns. 

The freshwater angelfish 
is among the most popular 
fishes for home aquariums. ‘— 
It is native to the Amazon 
River Basin in South Amer- 
ica. Because they are easy 
to breed, most freshwater 
angelfishes sold by aquar- 
ium shops are raised in 
Captivity. 

Scientific classification. Marine angelfish are in the family 


Pomacanthidae. The freshwater angelfish is in the family Cichli- 
dae. It is Prerophyllum scalare. Leighton R. Taylor, Jr. 


Angelico, an /FHL uh KOH, Fra (14002-1455), was an 
Italian painter. He combined the clarity of form, linear 
perspective, and light and shade of the new Renaissance 
style with the flowing line, brilliant color, and symbol- 
ism of earlier medieval painting. 

Fra Angelico was born in Vicchio, Italy, near Florence. 
He was born Guido di Pietro. He became a Dominican 
monk in Fiesole about 1418 and took the name Fra Gio- 
vanni da Fiesole. He was a man of legendary piety and 
came to be called Fra Angelico (angelic brother). 

In 1450, Fra Angelico became prior of the Dominican 
convent of San Marco in Florence. Some of his most fa- 
mous altarpieces, painted in the 1430s, can be seen in 
the museum of his work in San Marco. He and his assist- 
ants also painted the walls of the monks cells in San 
Marco with religious images using a technique called 
fresco. \n 1445, Fra Angelico was called to Rome where 
he painted in the Vatican for two popes during the next 
five years. He also worked in Orvieto and again in Flor- 
ence before his death. His painting 7he Annunciation 
appears in the Painting article. 

See also Aquinas, Saint Thomas (picture). | 
Angelou, AN juh /oh, Maya, MY uh (1928- ), is an 
American author, poet, playwright, editor, actress, di- 
rector, and teacher. She is best known for the first in- 
stallment of her autobiography, / Know Why the Caged 


which rises 8,400 feet (2,560 meters) above sea level. 
| 


——_————“§ 





WORLD BOOk illustration 
by Colin Newman, Linden Arsts itd 


The freshwater angelfish of 
South Americas Amazon 
River is popular in many 
home aquariums. 





David Summers 


Bird Sings (1970). This work tells the story of a black girl 
growing up during the Great Depression. Angelou con- 
tinued to chronicle her life in Gather Together in My 
Name (1974), Singin and Swingin’ and Getting Merry 
Like Christmas (1976), The Heart of a Woman(1981), Alf 
God's Children Need Traveling Shoes (1986), and A Song 
Flung Up to Heaven (2002). 

Angelou’'s autobiographical works are realistic and ex- 
uberant. Her poetry explores issues connected to being 
black. The Complete Collected Poems of Maya Angelou 
was published in 1994. Several of her essays were col- 
lected in Wouldnt Take Nothing for My Journey Now 
(1993)and Even the Stars Look Lonesome (1997) 

Angelou was born on April 4, 1928, in St. Louis, Mis- 
souri. Her given name was Marguerite Johnson. Angel- 
ou was her first husband's family name. Nellie Y. McKay 
Angina pectoris, an /Y nuh PEHK tuhr ihs, is chest dis- 
comfort or pain that occurs when the blood flow to the 
heart is limited. The word angina means to strangle, and 
angina pectoris feels like a pressing or squeezing sensa- 
tion in the area of the breastbone. The pain may travel to 
the shoulders, especially the left shoulder, and down 
the arms. The pain is usually called simply angina. 

An attack of angina can occur any time the heart 
works harder than usual and requires an additional sup- 
ply of blood. For example, an attack may occur following 
physical exertion or during a time of emotional stress. 
Blood flowing through the coronary arteries carries oxy- 
gen to the heart. The coronary arteries can become nar- 
rowed by accumulations of fatty deposits, called plaque, 
and scar tissue. These conditions result in arteriosclero- 





i 


Monastery of San Marco, Florence, Italy ‘SCALA Art Resource) 


Annunciation by Fra Angelico shows the Italian artist's skill in 
combining delicate colors with simple, gracetul figures. 





Angioplasty 461 


sis (hardening of the arteries), a disease that is the prima- 
ry cause of angina pectoris. If the coronary arteries are 
narrowed, extra blood cannot reach the heart. Part of the 
heart muscle is temporarily deprived of oxygen carried 
by the blood, causing pain. Angina can also be caused 
by a spasm in the coronary artery. 

Most people who experience angina are commonly 
middle-aged or older. Many are overweight, have high 
blood pressure, eat foods high in cholesterol, smoke 
cigarettes, and get little exercise. Resting and taking a 
medication called nitroglycerin can relieve most attacks 
of angina. Doctors may also prescribe drugs called beta- 
blockers and calcium channel blockers. These drugs 
help keep the heart from working harder under stress. 

When medication can no longer control angina, other 
treatments are necessary. Physicians may perform a pro- 
cedure called angiop/asty to clear the narrowed arteries. 
Angioplasty involves threading a balloon-tipped 
catheter (slender tube) into the blocked artery. The bal- 
loon is then inflated, flattening the blockage against the 
artery wall. In severe cases of angina, narrowed coro- 
nary arteries may be by-passed by grafts of vessels taken 
from the leg or chest. Surgeons may use lasers to create 
channels in the heart muscle to increase blood flow. 
Scientists are also investigating ways to increase blood 
flow to the heart by stimulating angiogenesis—that is, 
the growth of new blood vessels. James W. Jones 

See also Calcium channel blocker; Heart (Coronary 
artery disease); Nitroglycerin (As a medication). 
Angiography, 4\ jee AHG ruh fee, is a technique that 
makes blood vessels visible using X rays. The X-ray pic- 
ture that is produced is called an angiogram. Angiogra- 
phy is usually performed on arteries or veins connected 
with such structures as the brain, heart, kidneys, or legs. 

Angiography is used to decide whether a narrowing 
of a blood vessel is being caused by a clot or by depo- 
sits of such substarices as cholesterol and calcium. Such 
deposits are called p/aques. Physicians also use angiog- 
raphy to decide possible therapies. For example, coro- 
nary angiography is often performed on patients whose 
coronary arteries have narrowed. This procedure can 
help a physician determine whether medication, sur- 
gery, or such techniques as angioplasty would be the 
best way to treat the condition (see Angioplasty). 

During a typical angiographic procedure, a catheter 
(tong tube) is passed through the skin and inserted into 
a vein or artery, usually in an arm or leg. The catheter is 
advanced to the structure being evaluated, and special 
contrast material, often containing iodine, is injected 
into the area. This material makes the area being exam- 
ined stand out from its background when an X ray is tak- 
en. Julius M. Gardin 

See also Stress test. 

Angioplasty, AN jee oh PLAS tee, is a technique used 
to open arteries that have become blocked by deposits 
of cholesterol, calcium, and other substances. Such de- 
posits are called plaques. Angioplasty is especially im- 
portant for patients whose coronary arteries have be- 
come Critically narrowed and who have angina (chest 
pain that occurs during exertion) or a high risk of heart 
attack. Angioplasty provides an alternative to surgery. 

In coronary angioplasty, a catheter (long tube) with a 
balloon attached to it is inserted into the blocked artery. 
After the catheter enters the narrowed part of the vessel, 


462 Angiosperm 





iu 





WORLD BOOK illustrations by Charles Wellek and Tom Rolain 


In coronary angioplasty, surgeons insert a long tube called a 
catheter through the patients groin and guide the catheter to a 
blocked artery in the heart. The close-ups show the interior of 
the artery during the procedure. A balloon on the catheter is po- 
sitioned in the artery (1) and inflated (2) to crush deposits called 
plaques and expand the artery. The balloon is then deflated (3) 
and removed, leaving the inside diameter of the artery wider (4). 


the balloon is inflated. The balloon then pushes the 
plaque against the artery wall and expands the artery. In 
most cases, slight injury to the wall of the artery accom- 
panies the widening of the vessel's inside diameter. This 
damage may benefit the patient, however, because fur- 
ther widening can occur as the artery wall heals. 

Most angioplasties are successful. In about 30 percent 
of patients, however, the cleared vessel soon renarrows, 
requiring another angioplasty or surgery. In a small 
number of cases, the procedure severely tears the 
artery. In those cases, the patient must undergo immedi- 
ate surgery and repair. Doctors have prevented tears 
and abrupt closures of arteries by inserting an expand- 
able metal mesh called a stentinto the vessel. The stent 
prevents collapse of the artery wall without blocking 
blood flow. In some cases, a stent can also reduce the 
chance that the artery will renarrow. 

Michael H. Crawford 
Angiosperm, AN jee uh spurm, is the technical name 
for flowering plants. Angiosperms make up the vast ma- 
jority of all plant species (kinds). They also occur in many 
of the world’s environments, including Arctic tundra, 
deserts, and rain forests. Among the most important an- 
giosperms are broadleaf trees and crop plants. 

Angiosperm flowers contain both male reproductive 
organs called stamens and female reproductive organs 
called pisti/s. Stamens produce pollen grains that carry 
sperm (male sex cells) to the pistils. Pistils contain ovules, 
or eggs, that become seeds after fertilization by sperm. 
The pistils develop into fruits, which take a variety of 
forms. Berries, for example, are soft and fleshy, while 
nuts are hard and dry. 


Pistil 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Lorraine Moseley Epstein 
The flower and fruit of an angiosperm contain the plant's 
seeds. The seeds develop in the flower’s pistil, which grows into 
the fruit The flower and fruit of an apple tree are shown here. 





About three-fourths of all angiosperms are dicotyle- 
dons, or dicots. Young dicot seedlings bear two tiny 
leaves called cotyledons. The remaining angiosperm 
species, the monocotyledons or monocots, have 
seedlings with one cotyledon. The other major group of 
seed plants, collectively called gymnosperms, do not 
bear flowers or possess pistils. The most common gym- 
nosperms are pines and other needleleaf trees. 

Bruce H. Tiffney 

Scientific classification. Angiosperms make up the class 
Anthopsida within the division Tracheophyta. 

See also Flower; Gymnosperm, Seed. 

Angkor, ANG kohr, was an early civilization that flour- 
ished in northwestern Cambodia from the early 800's to 
the 1400's. The most famous capital of this civilization 
was also called Angkor. Ruins of its temples lie near the 
present-day city of Siem Reap (see Cambodia [map)). 

Cambodian kings built several cities in the vicinity of 
Siem Reap between 820 and the 1100's. The city of Ang- 
kor was the most magnificent. It may have had a million 
people, more than any European city at that time. The 
city included Angkor Thom, which was actually a city 
within the city of Angkor, and covered 4 square miles 
(10 square kilometers). The city of Angkor also contained 
many temples and palaces. The city and its temples rank 
as one of the artistic and architectural wonders of the 
world. Carved scenes of Cambodian life and Buddhist or 
Hindu mythology decorate the walls of the temples. 

One of the temples, Angkor Wat, is probably the 
finest architectural monument in Cambodia. It covers 
nearly 1 square mile (2.6 square kilometers) and has a 
pyramidal form. This form imitates the mythological 
home of the Hindu gods. Angkor Wat was constructed 
in the 1100’s to honor the Hindu god Vishnu. It was also 
used as an astronomical observatory. Angkor Wat later 
became the tomb of the Cambodian king who had or- 
dered its construction. Another temple, the Bayon, 
stands at the center of Angkor Thom. It was dedicated to 
Buddha and the reigning king. More than 200 giant 
stone faces adorn its towers. 

The civilization ot Angkor reached its peak during the 
1100's and then began to decline. Invasions from neigh- 
boring Thailand, epidemics of malaria, and disputes 
within the royal Cambodian family may have caused this 
decline. Thai forces captured the city of Angkor in 1431 
but soon abandoned it, and forest growth gradually 





covered most of the city. In 1860, Henri Movhot, a 
French naturalist, discovered the city’s ruins. From the 
1860's to the mid-1900's, French and Cambodian archae- 
ologists restored and rebuilt many of its temples. 

David P. Chander 

See also Architecture (picture: Angkor Wat). 

Angle, in plane geometry, is a figure formed by two 
rays with the same end point. A ray is a part of a line ex- 
tending indefinitely in one direction from a point. The 
point where the rays of an angle meet is called the ver- 
tex, and the rays themselves are known as the sides. 

The size of an angle is usually measured in degrees. 
When the rays make a square corner, the angle is a right 
angle. A right angle has 90 degrees (90 "), An acute angle 
has less than 90. An obtuse angle has between 90 and 
180. An angle of 180 is a straight angle because its 
sides form a straight line. Two angles are complemen- 
tary if their sum Is 90. They are supplementary if their 
sum is 180. People use a simple device called a protrac- 
torto measure angles. 

In trigonometry, an angle is considered to consist of a 
fixed, or initial, side and a rotating, or terminal, side. The 


Kinds of angles 


B,D, 


ee “Sraght 





amount and direction of rotation of the terminal side de- 
termine the size of the angle and whether it is positive 
or negative. Positive angles are formed when the rota- 
tion of the terminal side is counterclockwise. Negative 
angles are formed when the rotation is clockwise. If one 
hand of a clock is fixed at 3 and the other hand starts at 3 
and turns counterclockwise until it reaches 12, an angle 
of 90 results. This rotation is known as a quarter turn. A 
half turn results in an angle of 180 ; a three-quarter turn, 
in an angle of 270 ; and a ful! turn, in an angle of 360.A 
second complete rotation of the terminal side generates 
angles between 360. and 720, a third rotation produces 
angles between 720 and 1,080 , and so forth for all posi- 
tive angles. 

Negative angles are formed when the terminal side 
moves clockwise. Compass directions in naval naviga- 
tion are given by means of angles measured in the 
clockwise direction from 12. But, the measurements are 
given in positive numbers. Arthur F. Coxford, Jr. 

See also Degree; Protractor; Radian. 

Angle of incidence. See Reflection. 

Angler, a fish. See Fish (How fish get food; picture: A 
fleshy bait). 

Angles made up one of the Germanic peoples who in- 
vaded Britain during the A.D. 400's and 500s. The best 
known of the other invaders were the Saxons and Jutes, 
to whom the Angles were closely related. The invaders 
established small kingdoms, some of which lasted until 
the Norman Conquest in 1066. See Anglo-Saxons. 

The Angles came from Angeln, a district in what is 
now Schleswig-Holstein, and from the southern part of 
the Danish peninsula. They conquered the Britons who 
lived along the east coast, and founded the kingdoms of 


Anglicans 463 


Northumbria, Mercia, and East Anglia in what is now 
north, central, and east England. The name England 
came from an Anglo-Saxon word that meant Angle folk 
or land of the Angles. _ john Gillingham 

See also England (History). 

Angleworm. See Earthworm. 

Anglicans, ANG gluh kuhnz, are Christians who be- 
long to churches that are part of the Anglican Commu- 
nion. These churches developed from the Church of 
England. In addition to the Church of England, the major 
churches in the Anglican Communion include the Angli- 
can Church of Canada and the Episcopal Church in the 
United States. See Church of England; Episcopal 
Church. 

The Anglican heritage dates back to the earliest days 
of Christianity in Anglo-Saxon England. During the Ref- 
ormation of the 1500's, the Church of England separated 
from the Roman Catholic Church. Anglicanism spread as 
British colonists settled in North and South America, 
Australia, New Zealand, Africa, and Asia. See Reforma- 
tion (In England). 

Doctrines. Anglicans believe in the ancient faith of 
the Christian church as expressed in the Apostles’ and 
Nicene creeds (see Apostles’ Creed; Nicene Councils). 
Anglicans base their religion on scripture, tradition, and 
reason. All Anglicans follow the Book of Common 
Prayer, which is the basis for doctrine and discipline as 
well as worship. But they acknowledge the right of na- 
tional churches to revise the Book of Common Prayer 
according to their needs. 

Organization. Anglican clergy consist of bishops, 
priests, and deacons. However, lay people took an in- 
creasingly important part in church affairs in the 1900's. 
The unity of the Anglican Communion is symbolized by 
the Lambeth Conference of bishops, which meets about 
every 10 years in London. The Conference can only ad- 
vise the churches it represents. It is mainly a consulting 
and planning body. The Archbishop of Canterbury ranks 
as the senior bishop but has no formal power outside of 
England. Since 1960, the Anglican Communion has em- 
ployed an executive officer who attends to matters con- 
cerning the entire Communion. 

Christian unity. Under the leadership of such bish- 
ops as Charles Henry Brent, William Temple, Geoffrey 
Francis Fisher, and A. M. Ramsey, the Anglicans have be- 
come deeply involved in promoting the unification of 
Christianity. Each church of the Communion belongs to 
the World Council of Churches and works closely with 
the Church of Sweden, Eastern Orthodox Churches, and 
Old Catholic Churches. Talks between Anglicans and 
representatives of the Roman Catholic Church began in 
the 1960's. 

Anglicans seek unity because they believe that most 
Christians follow the Bible, the Apostles’ and Nicene 
creeds, the sacraments of the Eucharist and Baptism, 
and the historic forms of ministry. Anglicans in several 
dioceses in India showed this desire for unity in 1947 by 
entering the new Church of South India, along with the 
Methodist, Presbyterian, and Congregational mission 
churches there. 

Episcopalians. Anglicans first settled in America as 
members of the first permanent English colony in Vir- 
ginia in 1607. In 1789, after the Revolutionary War, Angli- 
cans in the colonies separated from the Church of Eng- 


464 Anglo-Saxon Chronicle 


land and formed the Protestant Episcopal Church. This 
church's first bishops were Samuel Seabury of Con- 
necticut, William White of Pennsylvania, and Samuel 
Provoost of New York. From that time, the Episcopal 
Church moved westward and spread throughout the 
United States. 

Episcopalians differ on how to interpret and practice 
their Christian faith. High Churchmen believe in follow- 
ing Closely the traditional practices and the authority of 
the church and often have elaborate worship services. 
Broad Churchmen, or Liberals, care less for tradition, 
and believe in expressing their faith in various ways, par- 
ticularly through social action. Low Churchmen, or Evan- 
gelicals, emphasize the personal and Biblical bases of 
faith. Episcopalians today differ over issues such as the 
revision of the Book of Common Prayer and the ordina- 
tion of women as priests and bishops. But they are unit- 
ed in their common worship and sense of tradition. 

Peter W. Williams 
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, ANG gloh SAK suhn, is the 
first great work of English prose and the most important 
source for English history from about 800 to 1066. No 
other European land has a history in its own language as 
old as the Chronicle. 

The Chronicle was begun as part of a cultural renewal 
by King Alfred the Great following destructive raids by 
Danish invaders. The first part of the Chronicle, dealing 
with events up to 891, was adapted from earlier English 
historical sources, now lost. After about 892, a number 
of writers contributed to the Chronicle in copies circu- 
lated among several English cathedrals. 

The Chronicle consists of short yearly descriptions of 
major events, especially warfare, and the activities of 
kings and bishops. Many entries consist of only one line. 
The longest entry runs more than 100 lines and deals 
with the death of William the Conqueror in 1087. Many 
years have no entries. The earliest important entry in the 
Chronicle refers to events in A.D. 449. The final one was 
made in 1154. David S. Chamberlain 

See also Alfred the Great. 

Anglo-Saxons, ANG gloh SAK suhnz, were members 
of the Germanic tribes that settled in what is now Eng- 
land in the A.D. 400’s and 500’'s. These tribes were the 
Angles, the Saxons, and the Jutes. According to tradi- 
tion, a British king named Vortigern invited the German- 
ic tribes to help him drive back the invading Picts and 
Scots. But the allies quarreled, and soon the Germanic 
tribes began to drive out the native Britons. By the end 
of the 500’s, the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes had occupied 
nearly all of southern and eastern Britain. 

At first there were many Anglo-Saxon kingdoms, and 
wars between them were frequent. By the 700’s, there 
were only seven kingdoms: East Anglia, Essex, Kent, 
Mercia, Northumbria, Sussex, and Wessex. Together, 
they were known as the Aeptarchy, which means rule of 
seven. In the early 800's, Egbert of Wessex became the 
first king to establish control over the entire heptarchy. 

In the late 800's, all the kingdoms came under attack 
from Danish Vikings. Only Wessex, under Alfred the 
Great, survived the invasion. Alfred eventually captured 
London and other areas. In the 900’s, Alfred's descend- 
ants defeated the Vikings and incorporated the Viking 
territory into their kingdom. This new and larger king- 
dom was called England, a word that came from Anglo- 


200 Miles 





200 Kilometers 
















Northumbria 
York 


ee 
KINGDOMS 

| Mercia 

| Letcester® 


0 200 Miles ‘ 
0 200 Kilometers 





WORLD BOOK maps 


The seafaring Jutes, Angles, and Saxons who invaded Britain 
in the A.D. 400's, smaller map, became known as Anglo-Saxons. 
They formed seven kingdoms, /arger map. 


Saxon words meaning Angle folk or land of the Angles. 

The Anglo-Saxons left their mark on the English lan- 
guage in its grammar and in thousands of words, in- 
cluding perhaps a fifth of the words we use today. 

John Gilling 

Related articles in Wor/d Book include: 


Alfred the Great English language Jutes 
Angles English literature Saxons 
Egbert (Old English lit- Teutons 
England (History) erature) 


Additional resources 
Campbell, James, and others. The Anglo-Saxons. 1982. Reprint. 
Penguin, 1991. 
Lacey, Robert, and Danziger, Danny. The Year 1000. Little, Brown, 
1999. Describes life in Anglo-Saxon England. 
Williams, Ann. Kingship and Government in Pre-Conquest Eng- 
land. c. 500-1066. St. Martin's, 1999. 


Angola is a country on Africa's southwest coast. Its offi- 
cial name is the Republic of Angola. Cabinda, in the 
northwest, is a district of Angola. The Congo River and 
Congo (Kinshasa) separate it from the rest of the country. 
Most of Angola's people live in rural areas and work 
on farms. Angola produces a variety of crops, including 
bananas, coffee, corn, sugar cane, and a starchy root 
called cassava. Angola also has many natural resources, 
including diamonds, iron ore, and petroleum. Luanda, 
the capital and largest city, is a major African seaport. 
Angola became independent in November 1975. Parts 
of it had been ruled by Portugal for most of the period 





since the 1500's. Since 1975, Angola has beet torn apart 
by a brutal civil war. But a cease-fire was signed in 2002. 

Government A president is the most powerful offi- 
cial in Angolas government. The National Assembly, the 
country’s legislature, makes the laws. The people of An- 
gola elect both the president and the National Assembly. 
The party with the majority of seats in the National As- 
sembly chooses a prime minister to help run the day-to- 
day affairs of the government. 

People. Most of Angola's people are black Africans. 
They belong to several ethnic groups, including the 
Ovimbundu, the Mbundu, the Kongo, and the Luanda- 
Chokwe. Before the nation became independent, more 
than 400,000 Europeans and mestizos (people of mixed 
black African and white ancestry) lived in Angola. Most 
Europeans fled during the civil war that began in 1975. 

People in Angola's rural areas work as farmers and 
herders. Many raise just enough food for their own use. 
Most Europeans and mestizos who did not leave the 
country live in cities. They own small businesses or hold 
other jobs that require technical and management skills. 

Most black Angolans speak a language that belongs 
to the Bantu language group (see Bantu). Europeans, 
mestizos, and some blacks speak Portuguese, the official 
language. About 90 percent of the people are Christians, 
mostly Roman Catholics. Others practice religions based 
on the worship of ancestors and spirits. Most of Ango- 
la’s adults cannot read or write. For the country’s literacy 
rate, see Literacy (table: Literacy rates). 

Land and climate. Angola forms part of the large in- 
land plateau of southern Africa. The country consists 
chiefly of hilly grasslands, but a rocky desert covers the 
south. The land gradually rises from the interior to the 
west, where it drops sharply to a narrow coastal plain. 
Most of the coastal plain has little natural vegetation. 
Tropical forests grow in the north. 

Angola has many rivers and more than 900 miles 
(1,400 kilometers) of coastline. Some of the rivers flow 
north into the Congo River, and others flow west into 
the Atlantic Ocean. A few, including the Cunene and the 
Cuanza, serve as waterways to the interior. 

Temperatures in the coastal plain region average 
about 70 °F (21 “C) in January and about 60 °F (16 °C) in 
June. Most of the inland region has slightly higher tem- 
peratures. From 40 to 60 inches (100 to 150 centimeters) 
of rain falls annually on the northern coast and in most 
of the interior. Only about 2 inches (5 centimeters) of 
rain falls yearly in the desert 

Economy of Angola is based on agriculture. But min- 
ing and manufacturing have become more important. 
The main food crops include bananas, cassava, corn, 
and sugar cane. Angola produces coffee for export. Fish- 
ing is important in coastal areas. Angola has vast de- 
posits of diamonds, iron ore, and petroleum. Diamonds 
are a major source of income for both the government 
and rebel groups. Cabinda provides most of the petrole- 
um, the leading export. Angolan industries produce ce- 
ment, chemicals, processed foods, and textiles. 

Most of Angola's roads are unpaved. An extensive rail- 
road system serves many Angolan cities. The system 
also provides neighboring Zambia and Congo (Kinshasa) 
with an important link to the sea. Luanda has an interna- 
tional airport. Angola has one daily newspaper. 

History. Prehistoric peoples lived in what is now An- 


Angola 465 


gola as early as 50,000 B.C. Bantu-speaking peoples set- 
tled there about 2,000 years ago. The Portuguese estab- 
lished bases in Angola during the 1500's. By the early 
1600's, Angola had become a major source of slave la- 
bor for Portugal's colony in Brazil. In 1641, the Dutch 
forced the Portuguese out of Angola and took over the 
slave trade. Portugal regained control in 1648. During 
the 1800's, after the decline of the slave trade, Por- 
tuguese planters began to grow corn, sugar cane, and 
tobacco in Angola. Angola was sometimes called Por- 
tuguese West Africa during Portuguese rule. 

Portugal began to improve Angola’s economy after 
the Portuguese dictator Antonio de Oliveira Salazar 
came to power in the late 1920's. Thousands of Por- 
tuguese moved to Angola and started businesses there. 

In the 1950's, many Angolans began to demand free- 
dom from Portuguese rule. In 1956, the Popular Move- 
ment for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) was organized. 
MPLA members revolted in Luanda in 1961. Rioting 
spread throughout the country and developed into a 
bloody war. A Portuguese army that included many An- 


Facts in brief 


Capital: Luanda. 

Official language: Portuguese. 

Area: 481,354 mi? (1,246,700 km’). Greatest distances—north- 
south, 850 mi (1,368 km); east-west, 800 mi (1,287 km). 
Coastline—928 mi (1,493 km). 

Elevation: Highest—M6co, 8,596 ft (2,620 m). Lowest—sea level. 

Population: Estimated 2002 population—13,684,000; density, 28 
per mi‘ (11 per km); distribution, 68 percent rural, 32 percent 
urban. 7970 census—5,646, 166. 

Chief products: Agricu/ture—bananas, cassava, coffee, corn, 
sugar cane. Manufacturing—food processing, cement, chemi- 
cals, textiles. Mining—diamonds, petroleum. 

Flag: The top half is red, and the bottom half is black A yellow 
emblem in the center has a five-pointed star that stands for so- 
cialism, a half cogwheel for industry, and a machete for agri- 
culture. Adopted in 1975. See Flag (picture: Flags of Africa). 

Money: Basic unit—new kwanza. 





Hutchison Ubrary 


An Angolan village lies in the rocky desert terrain of the south- 
ern part of the country. About two-thirds of Angola's people live 
in rural areas and work as farmers and herders. 


466 Angola 


golans put down the uprising. The MPLA rebels then set 
up guerrilla bases in neighboring countries. 

Cultural and political differences soon divided the 
rebels. In 1962, a group of northern rebels formed the 
National Front for the Liberation of Angola (FNLA). In 
1966, southern rebels organized the National Union for 
the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA). In 1974, Por- 
tuguese military officers overthrew the government of 
Portugal. In January 1975, they decided to grant inde- 
pendence to Angola. At first, the Angolans agreed to set 
up a government with representatives from all three 
rebel groups. But each group wanted to head the gov- 
ernment A civil war broke out over which would rule. 

Angola gained independence from Portugal on Nov. 
11, 1975. But the civil war continued between the MPLA 
and the FNLA and UNITA, whose forces had united. The 
MPLA received considerable aid from two Communist 
nations, the Soviet Union and Cuba. The United States 
and South Africa assisted UNITA. The MPLA largely de- 
feated its enemies in April 1976 and formed a Marxist 
government (government based on the philosophy of 
Karl Marx). But MPLA leaders denied the government 
was a Communist dictatorship. 

Angola's new government faced major problems. 
Members of UNITA continued to wage guerrilla warfare 


Angola 


National park (N.P.) 


ca IAF RICA — nN 
Cong 


‘on (Kinshasa) ” Tentain 


- “4 








. ANGOLA _ 

ama | (Nternational boundary Zev. AS 

| fgee mic Se 
'———| Railroad Namibia = 


: 5 Botswéna 4 
@ | National capital 


Other city or town 


Se 4 
Ce 





















South Africa al y | 
Elevation above sea level am < 
4 -ellebo \ 
Kinshasa ie a 
mye Sen = Ikitwt CONGO. Lusambo, 
CaBinda’ kenge Ke (Kinshasa) 
mf - Svanza- a-Ngungu ‘. 
: eCabinda Aatad Gungu, anange, aa 
O¥Oq ; *Maquela dp Zombo M4 ; 
M'banza® et ( Pofthaphe Mbt May® y 
Congo. Damba Qui bele y y SE 
N'zerog a bt _ Kahemba, “> Ps 
Uige Jembo Alyma Luachra a 
> r B na la a a ‘ - 
L d i. “Camabatela — fpund f 
uanda - 
~  __,Ndalatando og baeapa “a 
= mufemba 
QUIC AMA ~ulondo aah ae 
@ Ouitaba, 7 or “Caco 
-Quibaia ; 
Sumbe® ane . ANGOLA 
Moco Angelo’ Camacupa ie 
Lobito, Soc ie a ~~“ Moxico 
i, mi4 Plateau “Kit : “=. : 
Benquela® ‘ten ~ . 
sada, Huambo 
__-akKuvango Lumbala N’guimbo® 
Lubanga, Lavelongo *Menongue = 
*Narmbe | ee = *Cuito Cuanavale 
4 
hes lombua ‘Change: g ' 1 
| ‘NP ; “Mawnga 
| JONANP Xangongo, 
\ *; eUndirva 
; _ Luiana® 
| NAMIBIA 
i 4 Sta = 3 aN ra 
0 200 400 600 Miles 
| 
i) 200 400 600 


800 Kilometers 





WORLD BOORA maps 





a4 i 


bh = 





ay 


Hutchison Library 


Luanda, the capital and largest city of Angola, has many modern 
buildings and broad, treelined streets. 


against the government The FNLA also carried out guer- 
rilla activities until 1984, when it became inactive. The 
sudden departure of most of Angola's Europeans 
caused a shortage of executives and technicians. Many 
industries and large farms could not be managed prop- 
erly, and production declined. 

The government began several programs to over- 
come the effects of the civil war. It took control of many 
businesses and started to train teachers and technicians. 
The Soviet Union, Cuba, and other Communist countries 
provided financial and technical aid. But the government 
also encouraged non-Communist nations to invest in 
Angolan businesses. Cuba kept troops in Angola to aid 
the government in its fight against the guerrillas. 

Under an agreement signed by Angola, Cuba, and 
South Africa in late 1988, South Africa stopped sending 
aid to UNITA, and Cuba began withdrawing its troops. 
In 1989, the government and UNITA agreed to a cease- 
fire. The two sides signed a peace treaty in May 1991. Vi- 
olence continued in the Cabinda area, where guerrillas 
demanded Cabinda’s independence from Angola. 

In 1990, the MPLA renounced Marxism, and in 1991, 
legalized all political parties. Multiparty elections were 
held in September 1992. The head of the MPLA govern- 
ment, Jose Eduardo dos Santos, won the first round of 
the elections. But UNITA protested that the elections 
were fraudulent, and civil war erupted again. The sec- 
ond round of the elections did not take place, but dos 
Santos continued as president. 

The two sides signed a peace agreement in Novem- 
ber 1994. However, in 1998 and early 1999, violence in- 
creased, and the peace agreement broke down. The 
fighting continued, mainly in northwestern Angola. In 
February 2002, government troops shot and killed 
UNITA’s longtime leader, Jonas Savimbi. In April, the 
two sides signed a cease-fire agreement. Louis A Picard 

See also Bantu; Cabinda; Kongo; Luanda. 

Angora, ang GAVWR uh, is a hair fiber made from the 
fur of the Angora rabbit. The term is sometimes used for 
hair fiber made from the Angora goat, but the goat fiber 





is correctly called mofhair. Both animals are native to the 
Turkish province of Ankara (formerly Angora). Pure an- 
gora is used to make soft fabrics. It is usually blended 
with other fibers and then spun into yarn. Angora is also 
the name of a type of cat. See also Cat (Long-haired 
breeds); Mohair; Rabbit (picture). Keith Slater 
Angstrom, ANG stru/hm, is a unit of length used to 
measure very small distances. For example, the atoms in 
a Salt crystal are only several angstroms apart. Wave- 
lengths of light are sometimes measured in angstroms. 
The wavelength of visible light measures several thou- 
sand angstroms. One angstrom equals ;, nanometer, or 
yoo00000 Millimeter (53; 500,000 inch). The angstrom is abbre- 
viated A or A. It is named in honor of the Swedish physi- 
cist Anders Jonas Angstrém, who made important stud- 
ies of light. Lawrence P. Brehm 

Anguilla, ang GWIHL ub, is a coral island in the 
Caribbean Sea. It is an overseas territory of the United 
Kingdom. Anguilla covers about 37 square miles (96 
square kilometers) and has a population of about 11,000 
(see West Indies [map)). It has a dry, hot climate and is 
covered by low-lying plant life. Tourism has replaced 
fishing and salt processing as Anguilla’s major industry. 
A community called The Valley is the island's capital. 

Christopher Columbus may have sighted the island in 
1493 during his second voyage to the New World. Ex- 
plorers named the island Anguilla (Latin for ee) because 
of its long, narrow shape. It became a colony of Britain 
in 1650. In 1883, Britain made Anguilla and the 
Caribbean islands of St. Christopher (now called St. Kitts} 
and Nevis a single colony. It became an associated state 
of Britain in 1967. But most Anguillans favored separa- 
tion from St. Kitts and Nevis. In 1980, Anguilla officially 
became a separate British dependency (see West Indies 
[History)). Gerald R. Showalter 
Anhinga, an H/HNC guh, also called American darter, 
is a large bird that lives in swamps, ponds, and rivers in 
warm regions of the Western Hemisphere. It is found 
from the south-central and southeastern United States to 
Argentina. The anhinga measures about 3 feet (91 cen- 
timeters} in length, with a long, thin neck; a small head 
and pointed bill; and webbed feet. It has glossy black 
feathers, with silver markings on the back of the wings 
and neck, and a broad, brown-tipped tail. The anhinga 
feeds on fish and other water animals, which it spears 
with its bill. It is an excellent swimmer and a strong flier. 
The anhinga is sometimes called the snakebird because 
it often swims with only its head and snakelike neck visi- 
ble above the surface. 

The Old World darters, which resemble the anhinga, 
live in tropical and subtropical regions of Africa, Asia, 
New Guinea, and Australia. Most experts recognize 
three species of Old World darters, the African, Orien- 
fal, and Australian darters. 

Scientific classification. Anhingas and darters make up the 
anhinga family, Anhingidae. The anhinga is classified as Anhinga 
anhinga. The African darter is classified as A. rufa; the Oriental 


darter as A. melanogaster; and the Australian darter as A. novae- 
hollandiae. 


james J. Dinsmore 


See also Bird (picture: How birds feed). 
Anhydride, an HY dryd_ is a chemical substance that 
forms acids or bases when combined with water. For ex- 
ample, water and sulfur trioxide (SO,), an acid anhydride, 
make sulfuric acid (H,SO,). Water and calcium oxide 


Aniline 467 


(CaO), a basic anhydride, make basic calcium hydroxide 
(Ca(OH),). Anhydrides can be formed by dehydrating 
acids and bases, or by synthesis directly from other sub- 
stances. Anhydrides are used in the manufacture of arti- 
ficial fibers, plastics, photographic films, and medicines. 
See also Acid; Base. Roger D. Barry 

Anhydrous ammonia, an HY druhs uh MOHMN yuh, 
is the liquid form of pure ammonia gas. Because of its 
high nitrogen content—about 82 percent—farmers use 
anhydrous ammonia as a fertilizer. It may be used alone 
or in a commercial mixture containing compounds of 
phosphorus and potassium. It may be combined with 
water to form a solution for making a mixed fertilizer. 
Anhydrous ammonia is also used as a refrigerant in 
cold-storage and ice-manufacturing plants. It is made by 
compressing dry ammonia gas (NH,). See also Ammo- 
nia; Ice; Refrigeration. Taylor J. Johnston 

Ani, AH nee, is the name of three species of birds in the 
cuckoo family. Anis live in open, brushy country, mainly 
from the West Indies and Mexico to southern South 
America. Two of the species are also found in the ex- 
treme southern United States. The smooth-billed ani 
nests in southern Florida, and the groove-billed ani lives 
in southern Texas. The third species, the greater ani, 
ranges only as far north as central Panama. 

Anis measure from 12 to 15 inches (30 to 40 centime- 
ters) in length, about half of which is tail. They have a 
huge bill with a high arched ridge and black feathers 
that shine with a purple, green, or bronze luster. Anis 
feed chiefly on insects. They often gather in pastures 
where cattle are grazing. There, they seize large ground- 
dwelling insects that are stirred up by the cattle. Anis 
sometimes perch on the cattle’s backs. 

Anis live in noisy flocks of up to about 20 birds. Each 
flock consists of one to four mated pairs and a number 
of younger, unmated birds. During the breeding season, 
the flock claims a territory and prevents other anis from 
entering it. All of the birds in the flock build a single nest 
of twigs in a tree or thorny bush. Each mated female lays 
three to five eggs in the nest. The entire flock helps care 
for the eggs and the young. Sandra L Vehrencamp 


Scientific classification. Anis belong to the cuckoo family, 
Cuculidae. The scientific name for the smooth-billed ani is Cro- 
tophaga ani. The groove-billed ani is C sulcirostris, and the 
greater ani is C major. 


Aniline, AN uh /ihn, is a chemical best known for its 
use in making dyes. Aniline became important in 1856, 
when the British chemist William Perkin accidentally 
made a violet dye from aniline. 

Industries use aniline dyes to color textiles and in 
making inks, paints, and varnishes. Bacteriologists use 
the dyes to stain bacteria and other organisms. Indus- 
tries also use aniline in making drugs, explosives, rocket 
fuels, and other products. 

In the laboratory, chemists prepare aniline through a 
chemical reaction involving nitrobenzene, iron filings, 
and hydrochloric acid. In industry, aniline is prepared by 
heating chlorobenzene and ammonia under high pres- 
sure, or by a process using nitrobenzene 

Aniline is a colorless, oily liquid that is only slightly 
soluble in water. It has a strong, pleasing odor but is 
high!y poisonous. Aniline boils at 184 °C. Its chemical 
formula is CH.NH.,. Howard L Needles 

See also Coal tar; Dye; Indigo. 






468 Animal 


‘ 
Arctic terns 


The variety of animal life is 
almost endless. Animals range 
from complex, humanlike 
apes, such as gibbons, to tiny 
parasites, such as flukes. 
Some animals, such as arctic 
terns, travel great distances 
each year. Others, including 
the plantlike sea fan, spend 
most of their lives fixed to the 
bottom of the ocean. 











WORLD BOOK illustrat by lohn F Eggert 


Fluke 


Animal 


Animal. Animals come in many shapes and sizes. They 
live throughout the world. Animals walk or crawl on 
land and dig through the soil. They swim in the water 
and fly through the air. They even live inside the bodies 
of other animals. Bats. dogs, horses, kangaroos, and 





The contributors ot this article are Raviond B. Huey. Professor 
of Zoology at the University of Washington, and W. Herbert Wil- 
son, Jr, Assistamt Protessor of Biology at Colby College 


\SORLD BOOK illustrations bs Alea Ebel except where noted 


moles are all animals. So are butterflies. frogs. jellyfish, 
pigeons, sharks, snakes, and worms. 

Most kinds of animals are less than 1 inch (2.5 cen- 
timeters) long. Many are so tiny that they can be seen 
only with a microscope. The largest animal is the blue 
whale. It is about as long as five elephants in a row. 

Animals are not the only kind ot living things. Scien- | 
tists divide living things into five main Aingdoms | 
(groups)—animals, plants, fungi, protists, and prokary- 
otes. Fung/ include molds, mushrooms, and yeasts. Pro- 
tists, such as amebas, cannot be seen without a micro- 
scope. Prokaryotes, which include bacteria and certain 
algae, are some of the smallest, simplest forms of life. 


Animal 469 


Interesting facts about animals 





























Kinds of animals. No one knows exactly how many 
kinds of animals there are. New kinds are found every 
year. So far, scientists have identified more than 1 } mil- 
lion types of animals. About | million of these are in- 
sects. There are about 21,000 kinds of fish, 9,700 kinds of 
birds, 6,500 kinds of reptiles, 4,000 kinds of amphibians, 
and 4,500 kinds of mammals. 


Flephant 
Largest ears and eyes. The largest ears of all animals 

are those of the African elephant Elephant ears grow as 
large as 4 feet (1.2 meters) across. The largest eyes of all 
animals are those of the giant squid. They measure 
about 10 inches (25 centimeters) wide. 


+ 
1* 
Y 


The flying dragon is another name for the draco lizard. 
This lizard can spread out folds of skin to form “wings” The huge blue whale is far bigger than the elephant, the biggest 
that it uses to glide through the air from tree to tree. It land animal, or the giraffe, tallest of all the animals. 

lives in Asia and the East Indies. 


The hummingbird, 
right, can fly straight up 
like a helicopter. It can 
hover in front of a flower 
to suck the nectar. The 
bee hummingbird, which 
grows to only 2 inches (5 
centimeters) long, is the 
smallest of all birds. 





The chameleon’s tongue is as long as its body. This lizard 
swiftly shoots out its tongue to capture insects for food. Certain 
chameleons can quickly change color and even develop spots 
and streaks that make them seem to be part of their background. 


A tree-climbing crab lives 
on many tropical islands. It is 
called the coconut crab be- 
cause it cracks coconuts with 
its powerful claws and eats 
the sweet meat. 


Lives of animals range from several hours to many 
years. An adult mayfly survives only a few hours or days. 
Some giant tortoises have lived more than 100 years. 


The platypus, a mammal, 


The world’s only known poisonous bird is the has a bill like a duck and lays 
hooded pitohui, which lives on the island of New eggs as birds do, right But it 
Guinea. This brilliantly colored orange-and-black bird nurses its young with milk as 
has poison on its feathers and skin. This poison serves do other mammals. It lives 
as a defense against hawks, snakes, and other enemies. only on mainland Australia 
It is the same type oj poison as that carried by the and the island of Tasmania. 





deadly poison-dart frog of South America. 
WORLD BOOK illustrations by Alex Ebel and Robert Kuhn 





470 Animal 


Animals are different from other living things in many 
ways. For example, the bodies of animals are made up 
of many cells. But the bodies of prokaryotes and most 
protists have only one cell. Like animals, plants and fun- 
gi also are made up of many cells. However, animals 
can move around. Most plants and fungi are held to one 
place in the soil by roots or rootlike structures. For a 
more complete discussion of the differences between 
the members of the five kingdoms, see the article on 
Kingdom. 

No one knows exactly how many species (kinds) of an- 
imals there are. So far, scientists have classified 


(grouped) and named more than 1 5 million kinds of ani- 
mals. Over half of these are types of insects. Many new 
species are discovered each year. Scientists believe 
there may be trom 2 million to as many as 50 million 
kinds of animals alive today. Many other kinds of ani- 
mals used to live on the earth but have died out. They 
include dinosaurs and dodos. 

This article provides general information on animals 
other than human beings. it includes a classification 
table and pictures of many animals. Separate World 
Book articles give details about hundreds of animals. 
For information on human beings, see Human being. 


Importance of animals 


Animals and the web of life. Living things depend 
on one another. They are connected in what is some- 
times called the web of life. Plants capture the energy 
from sunlight and use it to make roots, stems, leaves, 
flowers, and fruits. Animals eat the plants, or they eat 
other animals that feed on the plants. When animals die, 
their bodies decay and release materials that help ferti- 
lize the soil for plants. 

Animals and plants are also connected in other ways. 
When animals breathe, they take in oxygen from the air 
and give off carbon dioxide. Green plants take in carbon 


SMA Suey, —n es: 
% L 
3 ‘ om | / 
ens i 
« , , 
: be — «= 


SMR 
PRI Ny p 


L, 


; See Bee. 
. th aR Pe 
ptt wen 


5 Pali a 1" 


7m yi s a 
A 5 | a! VON, f A LaF a - 
my ; o 


1)! Wie. aa 


dioxide and give off oxygen in a food-making process 
called photosynthesis. Many plants with flowers need 
insects Or birds to carry their pollen from plant to plant. 
Without this transfer of pollen, these plants are not able 
to reproduce \create new individuals of their own kind). 
Some seeds are prickly and cling to the fur or feathers 
of animals. When the animals move from place to place, 
they take the seeds with them. In this way, the seeds get 
dropped in new areas where they can grow into plants. 
The web of life relies on balance among its parts. A 
change in one part may mean disaster for others. For 





WORLD BOOK illustration by john F Eggert 


Animals and plants are linked in a pattern of nature otten called the web of fife. This pattern can 
be seen in a garden or backyard. There, many kinds of animals keep themselves alive by eating 
some of the plants. Likewise, much of the food that plants need comes from the body wastes of ani 
mals. In most cases, natural forces keep the total number of living things in balance. 





example, if all the trees in an area are cut down, then 
many animals that depend on them will die. For more in- 
formation on how living things are linked, see Ecology. 

Animals and people. Animals have provided people 
with food and clothing since prehistoric times. Without 
animals, people would not have such things as meat, 
honey, eggs, wool, leather, or silk. 

At least 10,000 years ago, people began domesticat- 
ing {taming) animals. Some of these animals provide 
food and clothing. For example, cattle supply meat, milk, 
and leather. Chickens lay eggs. Sheep provide wool and 
meat. 





Melissa me Ges . Photo Researchers 
Some animals make wonderful pets. Cats and dogs are fa- 
vorite pets around the world. They are affectionate and loyal, 
and they provide companionship to people of all ages. 





Animal 471 


Some domesticated animals help people work. Water 
buffaloes pull plows in Asian rice fields. Horses and 
camels carry people from one place to another. At first, 
people kept cats in their houses to catch rats and mice. 
They raised dogs to help them hunt and to warn them 
when danger approached. Today, cats and dogs are 
kept largely as pets. 

Certain insects are useful to people. Bees make 
honey, which people harvest for food. Bees also polli- 
nate many food crops, including fruits and vegetables. 
Silk comes from fiber made by silkworms. 

Some animals harm people. On rare occasions, croc- 





© © 


Larry Stessin, Photo Researchers 


Some animals can be dangerous to people. A great white 
shark, above, usually feeds on tuna and other large sea animals. 
But sharks sometimes kill and eat people. 


Anna E. Zuckerman. Tom Stack & Assoc 


Some animals help people 
work. Through the centuries, 
cattle and horses have pulled 
plows, carts, and wagons and 
carried products and riders 
on their backs. The water buf- 
faloes shown at the left are 
helping a farmer plow a rice 
field in Southeast Asia. 


472 Animal 


odiles, lions, and tigers attack and kill people. So do 
grizzly bears and polar bears. Sharks sometimes kill and 
eat human beings. Bites from such poisonous snakes as 
rattlesnakes and cobras can cause death. The black 
widow spider has a poison that makes people extremely 
sick. 

Some animals pass diseases along from person to 





person. Certain mosquitoes transmit malaria and yellow 
fever. Some ticks carry the bacteria that cause Lyme dis- 
ease and Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Some animals 
cause disease themselves. Worms called flukes, which 
live in human organs, can cause schistosomiasis. This 
disease infects millions of people in many African, 
Asian, and Latin-American countries. 


Kinds of animals 


People often divide animals into various groups 
based on certain similarities the animals share. For ex- 
ample, some animals can be kept as pets, but others are 
wild. Arranging animals according to their similarities is 
a handy way of remembering and understanding them. 

Some common ways of grouping animals. Ani- 
mals can be grouped in many ways. They can be ar- 
ranged according to whether they live on land or in 
water. Animals that live on land are known as ¢ferrestrial 
animals. They include cats, dogs, lizards, mice, and 
worms. Animals that live in water are called aquatic ani- 
mals. They include eels, fish, lobsters, octopuses, and 
whales. 

Animals can be arranged by the number of legs they 
have. Dogs, frogs, and lizards have four legs. Bats and 
birds have two legs. Insects have six legs, and spiders 
have eight. Snakes and worms have no legs. 

Another way to group animals is according to how 
they move. Bats, most birds, and many insects fly. 
Whales, fish, and squid swim. Snakes and worms crawl. 
Antelope and cheetahs run. Frogs, kangaroos, and rab- 
bits hop. 

Some animals are co/d-b/ooded, and others are 
warm-blooded. The bodies of cold-blooded animals are 
warm when their surroundings are warm and cool 
when their surroundings are cool. Warm-blooded ani- 
mals, on the other hand, almost always have the same 
body temperature, regardless of the warmth of their 
surroundings. Birds, mammal/s (animals whose babies 
drink the mother's milk), and a few species of fish and 


The cat and its relatives 


ae 


Domestic cot 


The cat family includes many 
kinds of wild animals with 
similar body characteristics. 
Most members of the cat fam- 
ily have many of the same 
habits. They are clever hunt- 
ers and stalk their prey on 
padded feel. They use their 
sharp claws and teeth to tear 
their food. Some also use 
their claws to climb Irees to 
seek food or escape enemies. 


insects are warm-blooded. All other kinds of animals are 
cold-blooded. 

Animals are also commonly divided into groups ac- 
cording to whether they have backbones. /nvertebrates 
do not have backbones, but vertebrates do. The vast ma- 
jority of animals are invertebrates. They include clams, 
insects, jellyfish, sea urchins, snails, spiders, sponges, 
and worms. Birds, fish, mammals, and reptiles are verte- 
brates. So are amphibians—trogs, salamanders, and 
other animals that spend part of their lives in water and 
part on land. 

The scientific classification of animals involves 
grouping animals according to the biological relation- 
ships among them. This orderly arrangement of animals 
depends in part on the features the animals share. In 
general, the more features they share, the more closely 
they are related. However, the scientific classification of 
animals is based mainly on the belief that certain ani- 
mals share a common ancestor. Animals with a more re- 
cent common ancestor are more closely related than 
those who share an ancestor further back in time. Ina 
somewhat similar way, brothers and sisters are more 
closely related than are cousins. Brothers and sisters 
share parents. First cousins share grandparents. 

In classifying animals, zoo/ogists (scientists who study 
animals) divide them into ever-smaller groups that have 
more and more features in common. The largest group 
is the kingdom Animalia itself, which includes all ani- 
mals. Next, each animal is placed in a group called a 
phylum. Each phylum is divided into groups called 


WORLD BOOA illustration by John D. Dawson 

















> 


Cheetah Mauntain lion 








Animal 473 
Length of life of animals 
Figures in this list are average life spans in years for animals in the wild, unless otherwise noted. 
Mammals Birds 
Buffalo, American 20 Horse 20-30° Blue jay 6-9 Owl (snowy) 10 
Cat 14° Lion 13 Canada goose 12eZ3 Penguin(emperor) 20 
Chimpanzee 30-40 Monkey (rhesus) 27-28 Canary 6-8 Pigeon 6 
Deer (fallow) 20 Mouse (field) 1 Cardinal 13 Raven 5 
Dog 12-26: Sheep 10-20 Chickadee 6-8 Robin, American 17 
Elephant 50-70 Squirrel 7 Condor 35-40 Skylark ) 
Goat, Mountain 14-18 Tiger 20 Heron 10-20 Sparrow 24-7 
Grizzly bear 25 Wolf (gray) 12-16 Macaw 64 Starling 9-116 
Hippopotamus 4] Zebra 22 Ostrich (African) 40 
Fish Reptiles and amphibians 
Dogfish (lesser 8 Perch 2-10 Bullfrog 5 Rattlesnake 
spotted) Pike 60-70 Chameleon 4-5 (diamondback) = 14-15 
Goldfish 10 Salmon (Pacific) 4-5 Cottonmouth 18-20 Salamander 
Halibut 25 Seahorse + Crocodile (Nile) 25-50 (spotted) 20 
Lamprey 7 Sturgeon 50 Garter snake 3-4 Turtle (box) 80 
Lungfish (African) 18 Trout (rainbow) 1] King snake 3 Water snake 11 
Puff adder 14 





“Domesticated animal. life span in captivity 


classes. The classes are broken down into orders, and 
the orders into families. The families are split into 
genera, and the genera into species. The singular form 
of genera is genus, but the word species may be either 
singular or plural. 

Among the animals that scientists have classified are 
about 13,000 species of flatworms; 50,000 species of 
clams, oysters, and other mo/lusks (soft-bodied animals, 
most of which have a hard shell); 1,000,000 species of in- 
sects; 30,000 species of spiders; 21,000 species of fish; 
4,000 species of amphibians; 6,500 species of reptiles; 
9,700 species of birds; and 4,500 species of mammals. 
Each species belongs to one phylum, one class, one 


order, one family, and one genus. For example, tigers 
belong to the kingdom Animalia, the phylum Chordata, 
the class Mammalia, the order Carnivora, the family Feli- 
dae, and the genus Panthera. They are members of the 
species Panthera tigris. Lions are related to tigers. They 
belong to the same kingdom (Animalia), phylum (Chor- 
data), class (Mammalia), order (Carnivora), family (Feli- 
dae), and genus (Fanthera) as tigers. But lions are classi- 
fied in a different species—Panthera /eo, also written 
simply as P. leo. 

A table of animal classification, showing some of the 
major groups of animals, appears at the end of this arti- 
cle. See also Classification, Scientific. 


Where animals live 


Animals live in many kinds of places. The place where 
an animal lives is called its habjtat. Each type of habitat 
presents a special challenge to animals. For example, an- 
imals that live in polar regions must withstand bitter 
cold. Those that inhabit the tropics face extreme heat. In 
spite of these challenges, animals can be found every- 
where on the earth. They live on the highest mountains 
and in the deepest oceans. They roam the driest deserts 
and the wettest rain forests. They swim in fresh water 
and salt water. 

Each habitat supports many kinds of animals. In most 
cases, the animals are the same kinds that have lived in 
those surroundings for thousands of years. As a result, 
the animals have developed bodies and ways of life that 
suit them to that particular habitat. No single species of 
animal can survive everywhere. For example, tropical 
fish from the Amazon River thrive in warm water but 
cannot withstand the cold streams of the Andes Moun- 
tains. On the other hand, many kinds of fish that live in 
the Arctic Ocean would die if they were exposed to the 
warm waters of the Caribbean Sea. However, some ani- 
mals may travel between habitats from time to time. For 


example, African elephants eat both grass and tree parts 
and so move between grassland and forest. But these 
animals would not be able to withstand the freezing 
temperatures of the polar regions. 

Some habitats, including many forests and grass- 
lands, are being destroyed by human beings. The de- 
struction of these habitats usually causes the death of 
many animals. When people convert grassland to farm- 
land, for example, they destroy the homes and source of 
food of many species. Without these necessities, some 
animals will die immediately. Others may try moving to 
another grassland. But the new area may not have 
enough food and shelter to support the additional wild- 
life. As a result, many more animals will die. 

This section tells about some of the major animals, 
grouped according to seven types of habitats: (1) moun- 
tains, (2) grasslands, (3) temperate forests, (4) tropical for- 
ests, (5) deserts, (6) polar regions, and (7) oceans. For de- 
scriptions and pictures of animals grouped according to 
the continent on which they live, see the articles on Af- 
rica; Antarctica; Asia; Australia; Europe; North Amer- 
ica; South America. 


474 Animal Animals of the mountains 


| High mountains WORLD BOOK map 





4 r Asia 
A North Euroge ae - 
/ America a “‘\ ~wwp 
Africa 
South 
America 
’ Australia / 
i | y 
= al Antarctica — 


Mountains support a variety of animal life. The num- 
bers and kinds of animals found on mountains vary with 
altitude. More animals and more kinds of animals live at 
lower altitudes than at higher ones, largely because of 
the differences in climate between elevations. Generally, 
mountain climates become colder, wetter, and windier 
with increasing altitude. The air also gets thinner and 
has less oxygen. In addition, fewer plants are found at 
higher elevations, and therefore less food is available 
for animals. 

Bears, deer, elk, and mink make their homes on the 
forested lower slopes and in the wooded or grassy val- 
leys of mountains. Rainbow trout and graylings swim in 
mountain streams. Many mountains have meadows of 
grasses and herbs. These meadows are home to chin- 
chillas, ibexes, llamas, vicunas, and yaks. Butterflies, 
grasshoppers, and spiders also live there. 

Above the timber /ine—that is, the line beyond which 
trees will not grow because of the cold—stand rocky 
cliffs and peaks dotted with shrubs, mosses, and other 
plants. Small meadows are also found there. Sure-footed 
bighorn sheep and mountain goats dwell among the 
windswept rocks, as do furry marmots and pikas. High 
on the snow-capped peaks, only a few insects, spiders, 
and ice worms can survive. Golden eagles and some 
other birds fly above the mountains. A large African vul- 
ture, Ruppell’s griffon, has been known to soar as high 
as 36,600 feet {11,150 meters). 


mghomn sheep North America 


Akcky Mountain pod 
"Nosth America 









- 
a, 


™ 


* — 
Pestice: 
ten 


Pets any va 


jane Burton Bruce Cr 


.% 
» 








aMeman Ltd 


Rocky Mountain goat 
hlogh America 







Animal 475 


Nepalese swift 
Asia 


Yak 
Asia 












Wolf spider 
North America 


ro 


Himalayan ibex 
Asia 








Russ Kinne. Photo Researchers 


a ae 





Snow leopard 
Asia 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Margaret Estes 





. , ‘ Wa ; 4 iufZ lie 
‘ h f ’ , ar 
ay Lu GLA _ = 


476 Animal 


i=] Grassland 


WORLD BOOK map 








America 


a 








& 
South 
America 


Australia 


Antarctica 


Grasslands include the prairies of North America, the 
pampas of South America, the plains of Europe, and the 
steppes of Asia. The savannas of east Africa have more 
grassland animals than any other area. 

Rainfall in grasslands is seasonal, and animals some- 
times travel great distances to find green grass. Ga- 
zelles, gnus, and zebras migrate by the thousands 
through the African savannas. Smaller groups of ele- 


Hark ® 








Pronghorn 
North America 


Asia 


Blackbuck 


Animals of the grasslands 


phants and rhinoceroses also feed on the grasses there. 
Such meat-eating mammals as cheetahs, hyenas, and 
lions roam the savannas in search of prey. The savannas 
are also home to giraffes, jackals, ostriches, secretary 
birds, and termites. In addition, hippopotamuses live in 
and near bodies of water in African grasslands. Animals 
of other grasslands include the kangaroos and wombats 
of Australia, the cavies and rheas of South America, and 
the coyotes and prairie dogs of North America. 

Many animals of the grasslands have become endan- 
gered due to loss of their habitat and to overhunting. 
The rich soils of grasslands are ideal for farming, and 
people have converted many such areas to farmland. 
Many of the large grassland animals are favorite big 
game for hunters. For example, the once-plentiful pam- 
pas deer of South America have become extremely rare. 
As the pampas are converted to farmland, the tall grass 
that grows there disappears. Without this grass, the 
pampas deer have no shelter and become easy prey. 
Bison once grazed in huge herds in the Great Plains of 


North America. But so many of these animals were killed 


by hunters or died as their grassland habitat was con- 
verted to farmland that they were nearly wiped out. 


Eland 
Africa 





Animal 477 






ee gy Al i 
Yila, Rapho Culllumette 
Indian rhinoceros Asia 








€ Th = ie 4 
I ; K 2 
hag <# 


gisberg. Photo Researchers ‘ ' | a :? , md rs - ! 4 j ~~ a 





a 


| Cug 








Simon Trevor 


African lion 





fi 2: Kangaroo 
PP” Australia 
ie" 





Prairie dog 


North America wee 


ad op ‘ ” 
sie. Remy ee 
vn Oeaee Ok ke 


Peterson, Photo Researchers 


: RS - . 


a 
a¥ 





African vulture WORLD BOOK illustrations by John F Eggert and Rene Martin 


478 Animal Animals of the temperate forests 
Many forest animals have small bodies that allow 
T f 
oa or eas mOReg BOOK™? them to move easily through the underbrush. Forest 





mammals include chipmunks, mice, opossums, porcu- 
pines, raccoons, skunks, and squirrels. Bears, deer, and 
wild boars also live in temperate forests. Bobcats and 
wolves were once common in woodland areas. How- 
ever, so many of these predators have been hunted and 
trapped through the years that they have become rare. 

Salamanders are often plentiful in temperate forests. 
They hide in the leaf litter or under rocks, where they 
feed on insects and other small organisms. In wet for- 
ests, slugs and other snails are common. Beavers, fish, 
frogs, muskrats, otters, salamanders, and turtles live in 
or near woodland streams, ponds, and lakes. Great num- 
bers of birds nest in the trees and shrubs. 


ot . 
North cures 
America 





Africa 


South SS 
America 





Australia 


Antarctica 





Temperate forests consist largely of deciduous trees Many temperate forests have been cleared for farms 
and evergreen trees. Deciduous trees shed their leaves and cities, and many others have been cut down for fuel 
in the fall and grow new ones in the spring. Evergreen and lumber. This deforestation (destruction of forests) 
trees have leaves that live two or more years. Some ev- places woodland animals in danger. Extensive logging 
ergreens have needle-shaped leaves. Most temperate in the Pacific Northwest of the United States, for exam- 
forests are in Asia, Europe, and North America. Australia —_ ple, has destroyed much of the habitat of the spotted 
also has some temperate forests. owl, threatening the existence of that species. 


Redstart wa : Gray squirrel 
North America | _- North America 


. 





Moose North America 







Otter North America 


Red-backed salamander 
North America 





Wood frog 
North America 


Beaver 
North America 





~% 
Downy f- 
woodpecker h a 






, J White-tailed deer 





} 4 
be 
: = j i 
! ri - 
fer fs 
J 4, P y F ca 
' ¥: f ; ny 
—— | xX J , \. 
| a. £ Z om | . 
; V1, ae ' 
On Cig” ill I 
—_ = ae ine 


f 


Ovenbird | 
‘ . 
| ,/ Chipmunk, 


* 


\ ie « if 


a, STF , 
= , ad 


Geoffroy Kinns. Photo Researchers 


Okapia, Publix 
Red deer Europe 


Wild boar Europe 


Walkingstick _ 
North America 2 | 

“ Echidna 

Australia 


Flying squirrel 
North America 


WORLD BOOA illustrations by John § Eqgert and Sian Galh 















ibe 


480 Animals of the tropical forests P Black howler monke 





Tropical forest WORLD BOOK map 
y ip 
yo North Europe Asia \ 
y America N 
/ \ 
Africa \ ir. "e | 
* 
© 
South - mmon 
y America Australia / marmoset .2 
\ / a 


“Ss 
™~ 
= —_— 


Tropical forests stay warm all year and receive plenti- 
ful rainfall. These forests are found in Africa, Asia, Aus- 
tralia, Central and South America, and the Pacific Is- 
lands. More kinds of animals live in tropical forests than 
in any other habitat. Scientists estimate that perhaps as 
many as 30 million species of tropical animals have not 
even been discovered yet. 

Insects make up the largest single group of animals 
that live in tropical forests. They include brightly colored 
butterflies, huge colonies of ants, mosquitoes, and cam- 
ouflaged stick insects. Spiders are also plentiful. Many 
tropical birds, such as quetzals and parrots, are spectac- 
ularly colored. 

The broad leaves of trees in tropical forests form a 
thick overhead covering called a canopy that blocks 
nearly all sunlight from reaching the forest floor. Many 
kinds of animals live in the canopies of tropical forests. 
They include harpy eagles and toucans; tree frogs; flying 
dragons; spider monkeys and howlers; gibbons and 
orangutans; sloths; slow lorises; tree boa constrictors; 
bats; and wasps, beetles, and leaf-cutting ants. 

Jaguars, tapirs, and bushmaster snakes live on the 
ground in tropical forests. Chimpanzees and lowland 
gorillas alternate between the ground and the trees. 
Crocodiles, fish, and turtles inhabit rivers and ponds. 

People are rapidly destroying tropical forests for 
wood and for farming. The continuing destruction of 
this habitat means that many animals will disappear for- 
ever. Scientists believe countless species have already 
been wiped out. 


fateiced sloth 








Parasol ant ’ 
nk 


r "# 7 (\ :— 
s re >. 
- I Se, 
tan NG xo om. Pe 
— ~~ - 
a . Ss 
“ ia 
“ ~~. 


e 


i = 
b ~~ Ocelot 











© _ ‘ 
Tree frog 





Tarantula 
South America 


~~ 2 
A + 
YP iga® 


— 






—_ ! Tree boa 
SS constrictor 





-».. SouthAmericon 
~ rain forest 






South American 
tapir 


Axis deer 
Asia 






” 
7 
‘J 


Malayan tapir 
Asia 


| ~% \ Chevrotain 
coal Ls N = Asia 
| ' 


Nancy Adams, Tom Stack & Assoc. 






Gorilla Africa 


Orangutan 
Asia 





~ 





a 4 


James Simon, Photo Researchers James Simon, Phote Researchers 


Woolly monkey South America Giant anteater South America 





Tiger Asia 


f whet . 

i Sk Jaguar 
Central and South ere i} 
America, Mexico ity 


WORLD BOOA Illustrations by John F Eqgert and Robert Kuhn 





482 Animal Animals of the deserts 


es Desert WORLD BOOK map 


— 


Australia 


aa 


oe 


—  Ringtail 
—_— 


Antarctica 





Most deserts lie near the edges of the tropics. Food 
and water are often scarce in deserts, and temperatures 
in the summer can be scorching. Despite these condi- 
tions, many kinds of animals live there. They include 
geckos, iguanas, and skinks; bees, butterflies, and 
moths; spiders; elf owls and roadrunners; sidewinders; 
dorcas gazelles and mule deer; and bobcats, coyotes, 
and dingoes. 

Animals of the deserts have developed special bodies 
and ways of life that enable them to survive the extreme 
heat. Centipedes, kangaroo rats, rattlesnakes, and scor- 
pions spend the day in burrows. They come out to 
search for food only when temperatures drop at night. 
Many insects, lizards, and tortoises can tolerate high 
desert temperatures and are active in the daytime. But 
even they must retreat underground or find the shade of 
a tree during the hottest part of the day. Some snails, in- 
sects, frogs, lizards, mice, and ground squirrels estivate 
(sleep through the summer). 

Many desert dwellers have light-colored skin, which 
helps keep them cool by reflecting sunlight. Desert 
foxes and hares have long ears. When overheated, these 
animals move to a cool cave or burrow where they can 
get rid of excess body heat through their ears. The Cape 
ground squirrel makes its own shade by using its fluffy 
tail like a parasol. Fairy shrimp and spadefoot toads may 
spend months or years underground waiting for rain to 
create ponds. Then they quickly feed and reproduce be- 
fore the ponds dry again. 





















et) i, & "T 


se 
r mae 
q oo Se 


jerry L. Ferrara Photo Researchers Bob Mickeever Tom Stack & Assoc 


Roadrunner North America Scorpion North America 





Mule deer 


by Antelope 
we ae jack rabbit 
Ne RSF, i 
Cactuswren © Kit fox 


Gila monster 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Rudolf Freund 


Cy LaTour 


Shovel-nosed snake North America 


Elf owl North America 


Lewis W Walker, Photo Researchers © Gail Rubin. Photo Researchers 





— tits 


484 Animal 


are Tundra 


| | Permanent ice 


WORLD BOOK maps 






Antarctica 


Animals that live in polar regions must withstand ex- 
tremely cold temperatures. No land animals except ice 
worms and a few species of insects live in polar regions 
that have ice and snow the year around. But the seas of 
the Arctic and Antarctic have large numbers of wildlife, 
including fish, giant sponges, whales, and tiny shrimp- 


Animals of the polar regions 


like creatures called kri// In addition, polar bears, sea 
lions, and walruses spend much of their time on floating 
sheets of ice in the Arctic. Penguins and seals live on the 
Antarctic coast. 

Many animals inhabit the vast arctic tundras (cold 
treeless plains) of northern Asia, North America, and Eu- 
rope. They include caribou, ermine, musk oxen, rein- 
deer, lemmings, snowy owls, and wolves. Shallow 
ponds in the region provide a place for mosquitoes and 
many other insects to lay their eggs. These insects serve 
as food for the birds that migrate to the tundra each 
summer to nest. 

Animals that live in polar regions have developed 
bodies and ways of life that enable them to deal with the 
frigid winter weather. Caribou, musk oxen, and polar 
bears have thick fur, which helps them stay warm. The 
arctic fox and arctic hare have short ears and tails that 
keep them from losing much body heat. Arctic ground 
squirrels hibernate (sleep through the winter). They curl 
up in a burrow, and their body temperature drops, sav- 
ing energy during the long winter. They also do not eat 
in the winter. They live off fat stored in their bodies. 





Arctic winter 


‘"e 
4 





ws 
‘ 


Cy Lavour 


Polar bear Arctic 


Arctic bumble bee 


Emperor penguin Antarctica 











Animal 485 





Kodiak bear North America 


ju le ewe 
i. 


Arctic loon” © Ae 
= ae - 


aribou 


——— 


od 





Arctic summer 


Krill 
Polar seas 





Steve Mic Cute heon 


Collared lemming 
Arctic Walrus Arctic 


486 Animal! 


Animals of many kinds are found everywhere in the 
vast oceans. Some of the smallest animals live in the sea, 
as does the world’s largest, the blue whale. Cod, halibut, 
seals, and whales swim the frigid waters of the polar re- 
gions. Lobsters, sea urchins, and many types of brightly 
colored fish inhabit coral reefs in warm tropical seas. 
Some ocean animals live near the shore—in shallow 
water, in tide pools, and on rocks. They include anemo- 
nes, barnacles, mussels, octopuses, and starfish. Other 
marine animals— mostly such tiny shrimplike creatures 
as krill and copepods—are found in the open sea. Krill 
and some species of copepods form part of the group 





i 


" 
SJ 


- @ 


VQ 
> 





Blood-red starfish 
North Atlantic 





Fingered limpet 
Pacific Coast 


Copepod 
North America Pon 


All oceans 





G Tomsich Photo Researchers 


Fan worm European coast 


Margiocco from Paul Popper 


Sea pen Warm seas 





Margiocco from Paul Popper 
Disk jellyfish 
Mediterranean Sea 


Dahlia anemone 
Northern seas 





Killer whale 
Pacific 













Saltwater crocodile 
Southeastern Asia 


Animals of the oceans 


of organisms called p/ankton. Many fish and some 
whales feed on plankton. 

The great depths of the ocean are completely dark, 
and the water there is bitterly cold. Even so, anglerfish, 
clams, and certain other creatures live there. On the 
other hand, flyingfish, manta rays, marlins, and por- 
poises generally swim near the ocean surface. Alba- 
trosses, gulls, and petrels fly above the sea. 

Oceans provide people with such foods as crab, fish, 
lobster, and shrimp. However, the demand for seafood 
has led to the overfishing of halibut, herring, and some 
other marine animals. Millions of dolphins, which are 
mammals, have drowned in fishing nets that were in- 
tended to catch cod, tuna, and other fish. In addition, 
spills of toxic materials and other forms of pollution 
have reduced the numbers of some ocean species. 












Purple sea urchin 
Pacific Coast 
North America 


Flatworm 
Tropical seas 


Common octopus 
Americas 


Giant spider crab 
Japan _ 






Manatee 
Tropical Atlantic 













Flyingfish Warm seas 


Deep-sea angler Atlantic and Pacific 


Animal 487 


Mike Bacon, Tom Stack & Assoc 






Bluntnose sting ray 
Atlantic 


Whale shark 
Warm seas 
WORLD BOOK illustrations by Tom Dolan, Alex Ebel, and John F Eggert 


488 Animal 


Animals have special body features that enable them 
to survive in their environment. These special features, 
called adaptations, result from the ability animal species 
have to adapt (adjust) over time to changes in their sur- 
roundings. Adaptations for survival enable animals to 
move about, to eat, to breathe, and to sense their envi- 
ronment. Legs, wings, and fins help animals move. Teeth 
and jaws help them eat. Lungs and gills help them ob- 
tain oxygen. Eyes and ears help them find food and de- 
tect predators. 

Animals live in many kinds of environments. The body 
features of an animal that work well in one type of envi- 
ronment may not work in others. For example, the adap- 
tations that enable fish to breathe in water do not let 
them breathe on land. Even in the same environment, 
animals may have different adaptations for survival. 
Shrimp, fish, and sea turtles can all swim in the ocean, 
but they have different body features for doing so. 


Invertebrates and vertebrates 


The animal kingdom is often divided into two main groups—~ani- 
mals without backbones, called invertebrates, and animals with 
backbones, called vertebrates. invertebrates include sponges, 
worms, centipedes, starfish, mollusks, and insects. Vertebrates 
include fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Inverte- 
brates are commonly known as the /ower animals. Vertebrates 
are known as the Aigher animals. The backbone of a vertebrate 
helps protect the spina/ (main nerve) cord. The main nerve cord 
of invertebrates is unprotected. A small sea animal, the amphi- 
oxus, has a notochord, which is a rod of cartilage that serves as 
a backbone and partly protects the animal's main nerve. The am- 
phioxus is considered to be a link between the lower animals 
and the higher animals. 

WORLD BOOK illustrations by Patricia Wynne 





Invertebrate The mainnerve, blue, af a centipede is 
unprotected by o backbane. 


Amphioxus The moin nerve, blue, 1s partly protected by a 
natachord, white. 





pe fits N See 
Se eet ISTHE LLG 
WYAAA SO remioranint 





Vertebrate The mainnerve blue, afo fish is pratected bya 
backbone, white 


The bodies of animals 


Shrimp have tiny swimming legs, fish have fins and mus- 
cular tails, and turtles have flippers. Because animals 
adapt to their surroundings in many ways, there is a 
wide diversity of animals in any environment. 

This section describes some of the ways animal bod- 
ies are adapted for moving, eating, breathing, and sens- 
ing the environment. For information on the basic proc- 
ess of adaptation, see Adaptation. 


Adaptations for moving about 


Legs and feet. Mammals, birds, insects, and many 
reptiles and amphibians have legs with feet that enable 
them to walk or run on land. Most amphibians, mam- 
mals, and reptiles walk on four legs. Birds and people 
walk on two. Insects have six legs, and spiders have 
eight. Millipedes may have up to 200 legs. 

Animals can crawl without legs and feet. Such tiny 
creatures as planarians and other flatworms slide by 
moving many small hairlike structures, called c/fia, back 
and forth like miniature oars. Snails move by coating the 
ground with a sticky fluid from their bodies. They then 
crawl through the fluid using a muscular organ called a 
foot. Most snakes slide along the ground by bending 
their bodies from side to side. An earthworm crawls 
through the soil by alternately lengthening and shorten- 
ing parts of its body. 

Many walking and crawling organisms live in water. 
Crabs and lobsters have legs that enable them to walk 
across the bottom of a body of water. 

Wings. Three groups of animals have the ability to fly 
under their own power: (1) insects, (2) bats, and (3) birds. 
Most insects have two pairs of wings. Muscles inside 
the thorax (middle section of an insects body) move the 
wings up and down. 

Bats are the only mammals with wings. Batwings are 







Jacana 


Long, powerful tegs and a stride of 15 feet (4.6 meters) make 
the ostrich one of the fastest land animals. Ostriches can reach 
speeds as high as 40 miles (64 kilometers) per hour. 





I i Se em 









A World Book special feature 


p= & 
nae. 2 fan En On ee Eee, B* j ene 9B , — 
| i ; f i j y : 
fg 


Each species of animal plays a part in the delicate balance of 
all living systems. Today, a growing number of animals 
worldwide are threatened with extinction. This World Book 
special feature focuses on vanishing wildlife and how it 
might be saved. 





WORLD BOOA illustratnon by Tin Havward 
Bemard Thorton Anists 





















































What isan endangered animal? 

There are three main classifications for animal species in Eee 4 
danger of becoming extinct (1) endangered, (2) vulnera- An age of mass extinction? by 

ble, and (3) lower risk. Endangered species face the most The earth has had several periods _— 
serious threat of extinction. They require direct human of mass extinction. Many scientists 

protection for survival. Vulnerable species are sometimes believe we are living in one now. 

referred to as threatened species. They are abundant in /n past extinctions, animals died 

some areas, but their numbers are decreasing or they out due to natural causes. Today, 

face serious dangers. Lower risk species either have human activities are mainly 

small populations within a narrow geographic area responsible for the destruction of 


or are thinly scattered throughout a wider range. species. 


























Vulnerable. The giant anteater 
inhabits Central and South 
America. As the population of 
Central America has grown, 
people have destroyed much 

of the anteater’s habitat to make 
way for farms and cities. As a re- 
sult, the animal has disappeared 
from much of this region. In 
South America, the giant 
anteater is hunted for sport 


WORLD BOOK illustrations i 
by Norman Weaver, a 
Colin Newman, and 

John Eggert 


Extinct. Dinosaurs 
died out from natural 
causes about 65 million 
years ago. Many scien- 
tists believe that these 
huge reptiles became 
extinct because of a 
rapid change in climate 
and the dinosaurs’ 
inability to survive it 
Today, a number of hu- 
man activities, such as 
the destruction of 





DAA AA ddan an, 


Endangered. The common sturgeon 
lives in the waters of Europe. Overfishing 
of this species and the pollution of its ‘| in J 
environment have contributed to its ee ee 
decline. The construction of dams and v yy VAAL LL d Fei alee reese 
other waterworks on the rivers where I Mae ALS , Wy erie sallUwOn ofthe air 
common sturgeons migrate to spawn Dh Wel Geese GS lb 7 ye ; ‘ 
(breed) has also harmed these fish. SSS er, z : ps2 A a ha 
called global warming. 
No one knows how 
many animals might fail 


to survive sucha 
change. 





















Lower risk. Harpy eagles are l 
among the largest and strongest ) 
eagles. They are thinly scattered | 
over a wide range, from south- | 
ern Mexico to eastern Bolivia, 
southern Brazil, and northern 
Argentina. The destruction of 
tropical rain forests means loss | 
of habitat for these rare birds of | 


prey. 


How animals become endangered 


Many factors contribute to endangerment. They 


include the destruction of habitats, pollution, 
trade in animal products, overhunting, the 


growing human population. In many cases, 
these factors are linked. 


The destruction of habitats is one of the main 


| threats to animals. The photo at the right shows the 
beginning of slash-and-burn cultivation of part of a 
rain forest. Trees are chopped and burned to make 
way for farmland. However, the soil in such areas is 
relatively unfertile and will support crops for only a 
few years before it is exhausted. Then more trees will 
| have to be cleared to create more farmland. Mean- 
while, the rain forest, which has more species than 
any other habitat, is being destroyed—and countless 


species along with it Some experts estimate that 


day because of human activities. 


© Mark N. Boulton, NAS 


| Saving the spotted owl: 
| A policy issue 


| The spotted owl inhabits the 
forests of the Pacific Northwest 
of the United States. In the late 
1980, conservationists be- 
came concemed that lumber 
companies were destroying 
the habitat of the owl But 
loggers argued that unless 
they could continue to cut 
down the trees, they would 
lose their jobs and face eco- 
nomic hardship. How would 
you solve this problem? 


© John Neel, Tom Stack & Associates 


Pollution in all its forms— 
whether of the land, the air, or 
the water—is a serious threat 
to animals. An oil spill killed 
this cormorant 


introduction of new species to an area, and the 


more than 50 rain forest species become extinct each 


* pty . = 
> je ~~ 
Na 


q 


in| 
























re 
ar po 
Fy “ rp Df 


© Gustavo Gilabert, JB Pictures 






Trade in animal products. Some animals 
become endangered because their fur or some 
other body part is considered valuable. For 
example, rhinoceros horns are prized in some 
parts of the world. In some cases, the animals 
themselves are valued. For instance, certain 
tropical birds are valued by bird collectors. The 
photograph at the left shows some of the booty 
seized from poachers (illegal hunters) who killed 
protected animals. 


Other factors that threaten animals 


® The growing human population will strain existing 
resources and require more land in which to live. As a 
result, more animal habitats will be destroyed. 


Introduction of new species to an area can mean 
disaster for native animals. When Europeans landed in 
Hawaii and other Pacific Islands, rats escaped from their 
ships and then preyed on native birds. Domestic cats 
introduced by Europeans also killed native birds. As a 
result, more than 100 kinds of Pacific Islands birds have 
become extinct since 1600. 


Overhunting a species can threaten it with extinction. 
Sometimes animals are hunted because people consid- 
er them a pest. The red wolf of North America was 
trapped, hunted, and poisoned for this reason. 





488 Animal 


Animals have special body features that enable them 
to survive in their environment. These special features, 
called adaptations, result from the ability animal species 
have to adapt (adjust) over time to changes in their sur- 
roundings. Adaptations for survival enable animals to 
move about, to eat, to breathe, and to sense their envi- 
ronment. Legs, wings, and fins help animals move. Teeth 
and jaws help them eat. Lungs and gills help them ob- 
tain oxygen. Eyes and ears help them find food and de- 
tect predators. 

Animals live in many kinds of environments. The body 
features of an animal that work well in one type of envi- 
ronment may not work in others. For example, the adap- 
tations that enable fish to breathe in water do not let 
them breathe on land. Even in the same environment, 
animals may have different adaptations for survival. 
Shrimp, fish, and sea turtles can all swim in the ocean, 
but they have different body features for doing so. 


Invertebrates and vertebrates 


The animal kingdom is often divided inte two main groups—ani- 
mals without backbones, called invertebrates, and animals with 
backbones, called vertebrates. Invertebrates include sponges, 
worms, centipedes, starfish, mollusks, and insects. Vertebrates 
include fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Inverte- 
brates are commonly known as the /ower animals. Vertebrates 
are known as the Aigher animals. The backbone of a vertebrate 
helps protect the spina/(main nerve) cord. The main nerve cord 
of invertebrates is unprotected. A small sea animal, the amphi- 
oxus, has a notochord, which is a rod of cartilage that serves as 
a backbone and partly protects the animal's main nerve. The am- 
phioxus is considered to be a link between the lower animals 
and the higher animals. 

WORLD BOOK tllustrations by Patricia Wynne 





Invertebrote The main nerve, blue, of o centipede is 
unprotected by a backbone. 





Amphiaxus The mainnerve, blue, is partly pratected by a 
notochard, white. 









‘At nhdae 
&- BD NS LY by 
Te. AMAL 


Vertebrote The mainnerve, blue, af a fish 1s pratected by a 
bockbane, white. 


The bodies of animals 


Shrimp have tiny swimming legs, fish have fins and mus- 
cular tails, and turtles have flippers. Because animals 
adapt to their surroundings in many ways, there is a 
wide diversity of animals in any environment. 

This section describes some of the ways animal bod- 
ies are adapted for moving, eating, breathing, and sens- 
ing the environment. For information on the basic proc- 
ess of adaptation, see Adaptation. 


Adaptations for moving about 


Legs and feet. Mammals, birds, insects, and many 
reptiles and amphibians have legs with feet that enable 
them to walk or run on land. Most amphibians, mam- 
mals, and reptiles walk on four legs. Birds and people 
walk on two. Insects have six legs, and spiders have 
eight. Millipedes may have up to 200 legs. 

Animals can crawl without legs and feet. Such tiny 
creatures as planarians and other flatworms slide by 
moving many small hairlike structures, called cilia, back 
and forth like miniature oars. Snails move by coating the 
ground with a sticky fluid from their bodies. They then 
crawl through the fluid using a muscular organ called a 
foot. Most snakes slide along the ground by bending 
their bodies from side to side. An earthworm crawls 
through the soil by alternately lengthening and shorten- 
ing parts of its body. 

Many walking and crawling organisms live in water. 
Crabs and lobsters have legs that enable them to walk 
across the bottom of a body of water. 

Wings. Three groups of animals have the ability to fly 
under their own power: (1) insects, (2) bats, and (3) birds. 
Most insects have two pairs of wings. Muscles inside 
the thorax (middle section of an insects body} move the 
wings up and down. 

Bats are the only mammals with wings. Batwings are 





Jacana 


Long, powertul legs and a stride of 15 feet (4.6 meters) make 
the ostrich one of the fastest land animals. Ostriches can reach 
speeds as high as 40 miles (64 kilometers) per hour. 





Animals are endangered throughout the world, from the 

sandy deserts of Africa to the steamy forests of South 

America, and from the windswept plains of central Asia to 

the snow-capped mountains of Europe and the cool waters ) 

of North America. This map shows where some 3 ta . 

endangered and vulnerable species live. " fv 7m 
Eg 


LS 








Some endangered or vulnerable animals 


Name 

Adalbert's (Spanish 
imperial eagle) 

American crocodile 


Comments 
Overhunted; harmed by pesticides, destruction of 
forest nesting sites, reduction of food supply 
Southeastern United Overhunted for its hide; suffers from destruction of 
States, Mexico, Central habitat 
and South America, 
Caribbean islands 


Distribution 
Spain, Morocco, Algeria 


Arabian oryx Arabian Peninsula Overhunted for its meat, for its hide, and for sport; 
saved by captive breeding program’ 

Asiatic lion India Formerly wide-ranging; now survives only in the Gir 
Forest in the Gujarat state of western India; has 
been overhunted for sport; also suffers loss of 
habitat 

Cheetah Africa to India Deprived of habitat; overhunted for sport 

Florida cougar (or United States Overhunted because people consider it a pest; suffers 

Florida panther) from habitat destruction; once ranged from eastern 


Golden lion tamarin 


Grevy's zebra 
Malayan tapir 
Queen Alexandra's 


Texas through Florida and north into Arkansas, 
Tennessee and South Carolina; doubtful whether 
any live outside Florida now 

Brazil Declining due to habitat destruction and overcollec- 
tion for medical research and for pets; being saved 
through captive breeding 

Kenya Overhunted for its skin and for sport 

Southeast Asia Forest habitat being destroyed for farms and pasture 

Papua New Guinea Habitat being damaged by logging and expanding 


birdwing butterfly agriculture 
Red wolf Southeastern United Habitat being destroyed; has been hunted, trapped, 
States and poisoned because people consider it a pest 
Zanzibar red colobus Zanzibar (Tanzania) Lives in an extremely restricted range; habitat being 
destroyed 


Reptiles and amphibians 


1 
[UCN {International Union for the Conservation of Nature 
and Natural Resources) includes about 2,100 endangered \ 
species and subspecies of animals on its Red List of Threat- 
ened Animals. \t also classifies about 3,100 types of animals 
as vulnerable (the approximate equivalent of the U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service's threatened category) and more than 
2,100 kinds as /ower risk The list does not include the 
rain forest species—mainly insects—that are destroyed 
before they are identified. 


| 








@ Vulnerable 


Lower risk 





Invertebrates 
other than insects Blue whale 
= aa a All oceans 






0 100 200300 400 500 600 700 800 900 


Overhunted for its blubber, for food, and for whale oil 
















Black-footed ferret 
Wyoming 

Declined due to poisoning of 
prairie dogs, its chief prey 


; — a NORTH 
California condor | AMERICA 


Southern California 

Declined because of habitat destruction, 
being hunted for sport, and overcollection 
of eggs for food; saved through captive 
breeding 





Whooping crane 
North America 
Habitat disturbed by 
human contact 





West Indies, Dominica 


Pallid sturgeon Declined because of 
United States habitat destruction and 
Ilvory-billed woodpecker Habitat altered to create channels illegal capture for pets 











Both subspecies endangered; 
one in the south-central and 
southeastern United States, the 
other in Cuba; United States 
subspecies possibly extinct; 
declined because their habitat 
was destroyed and because 
people killed them 


industrial wastes; overfished 


Green sea turtle 

Temperate and tropical seas worldwide 
Endangered by overhunting for its meat, 
its oil, and its shell; and by overcollection 
of its eggs 





and dams; pollution of habitat by 





SOUTH 
AMERICA 


Woolly spider monkey 

Lives on tops of tallest trees in 
rain forests in southeastern Brazil 
Declined because of habitat 
destruction and being 
overhunted for food 


~ (| 
WORLD BOOK map y 








Pyrenean ibex 
Pyrenees Mountains 
Overhunted since the 1300's; 
severely reduced range 





Mediterranean monk seal 
Northwest African coast, Mediter- 
ranean Sea, Black Sea 
Overhunted by fishing crews who 
consider it a pest; has suffered from 
water pollution and from : 
reduction of its food 
supply by overfishing 











Must compete with 
livestock for food; overhunted 


Black colobus 
Cameroon; Equatorial Guinea 
Formerly overhunted for 

its skin; now overhunted 

for food; habitat being 

lost to logging 


Black rhinoceros 
South of Sahara in Africa 
Overhunted for its horn; 












ASIA 








Plateaus of 
Overhunte 





Snow leopard 
Mountains of central Asia 
Overhunted for its fur 


Tiger 

Temperate and tropical Asia 

Formerly lived throughout southern 
Asia; survives only in isolated pockets; 
declined through habitat destruction 
and being overhunted for sport 


Indian elephant 
South-central and southern A 
Endangered by habitat destrt 


~ 


Indus River dolphir 
Pakistan 

Suffers from loss of 
river water to 
irrigation 










' AyeAye 
Madagascar 
Needs large trees to survive; 
habitat being lost 


habitat being destroyed 










Bridled nailtail wallaby 
Australia 

Suffers from habitat disruption; 
formerly plentiful in the states 
of New South Wales and ; 
Queensland; only one 
known colony survives 
in Queensland 


Mountain gorilla 

Mountain chains of western 
Rwanda, southwestern Uganda, 
eastern Congo (Kinshasa) 

Suffers from poaching and from loss 
of habitat to farmland; habitat also 
damaged in a civil war in Rwanda 


ANTARCTICA 








Giant panda ae 
Western and southwestern = 
China Z 





dying off of bamboo, its 4 
primary food source; slow 
reproductive rate also a 
Tibet —_ factor in its decline 
d | 


rs 


ji Suffers from habitat : q 
destruction and periodic 4% ¢ + & 
Yo 








Przewalski's horse 
Mongolia, China 
Competes with livestock 
for food and water 


Sia 
iction 


AUSTRALIA 





Northern hairy-nosed wombat 
Australia 
Competes with livestock for food 







Several organizations compile lists of animals they consider 
endangered. They do not always agree on the status of an 
animal or on the definition of endangered status. For exam- 
ple, l1UCN (international Union for the Conservation of Na- 
ture and Natural Resources) suspects that Przewalski’s horse 
may no longer occur naturally in the wild. l|UCN puts this 
species in a category with other animals that are almost cer- 
tainly extinct However, more than 1,500 Przewalski’s horses 
live in captivity, and scientists have begun a program to re- 
lease captive-bred Przewalskis into the wild. Because some 
of these horses still exist, the United States Fish and Wildlife 
Service classifies the animal as endangered. With the excep- 
tion of Przewalski’s horse, all animals in this special feature 
are Classified as endangered or vulnerable by l1UCN. 


i} 


Pileated gibbon 
Southeast Asia 
Declined through loss 
of habitat and being 
overhunted for food 


Orangutan 

Borneo, Sumatra 
Declined due to habitat 
destruction and being 
overcollected for zoos 


p WORLD BOOK illustrations by Tim Hayward, 
Bernard Thorton Artists 








Comparative speeds 
of animals 


In the oir 


Sr Housefly 
5 mph (8 kph) 


, Bat a 
8 15 mph(24 kph) Ya 
= io) 





We 
XS 
& 


ill 


\ 


3a mph (0.16 kph) 


Animal 489 


The speeds of animals vary greatly. Birds are the fastest of all animals, with flying speeds of more 
than 200 miles (320 kilotneters) per hour. The speediest land animals outstrip the fastest water ani- 
mals. Many of the figures given in the table below are estimates because scientists have difficulty 
measuring the speeds of wild animals. In addition, the maximum speed of an animal may differ 
widely from its usual speed. A rabbit runs faster than a greyhound for a short time. But the grey- 
hound can keep up its speed for longer distances. 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Linda Kinnatnan and Rober Klunder 


4 \ S 
Owl @ v_' = 


40 mph (64 kph) = Golden eagle MI 


Comman swift 120 mph (193 kph) 
60 mph (97 kph) 











Canvosback duck 


70 mph (110 kph} 
af Y 
ly Robin a Hummingbird 
30 mph (48 kph) 60 mph (97 kph} 
vy Dragon 
Blue joy { agony 
ae” 20 mph (32 kph) 50 mph (80 kph) 
WORLD BOOK illustration by 
Venner Artists Lid 
The fastest animal is the 
Bi jim ie aH rider peregrine falcon. With power- 
€ eae ful wings and a streamlined 
Gheatch body, this bird can reach a 


Snoke 
2 mph (3 kph} 


] On lond 
yy 4 Turtle 













mY Kongaroo 





70 mph (110 kph) speed of more than 200 miles 
(320 kilometers) per hour as it 
















2 vena swoops down on prey. 
House mouse eG ray fox 
ganeni()3 kph) OMEO | 40 mph (64 kph) 
Pronghorn 
‘] 62 mph (100 kph) 
Lizard oC 
19 mph (30 kph) Tr cat a" > «Gorelle 
30 mph (48 kph) 50 mph (80 kph) 
A Human being Jock rabbit 
20 mph (32 on 45 mph (72 kph) 
Ostrich 
40 mph (64 kph) 
Greyhound 
; my 40 mph (64 kph) 
> ae Africon elephont 
iiss 22 mph (35 kph) 
In the water we 
Goldfish .-Borracuda Soilfish 
ye 4 mph (6 kph) 30 mph "i kph) 65 mph (105 kph} 
ape ‘lrout N Swordfish 
Smph(8kph) | D-H 35 mph (56 koh) 
Humon being 
oe” aa mph (8 kph) Bluefin tuna 

- Pike 40 mph (64 kph} 

> “ee mph (25 kph) 








Ey ; a Sea turtle 
| 20 mph (32 kph) 


Phy 






Omph 20 


Dolphin 
25 mph (40 kph} 


Whale 
20 mph (32 kph) 


40 60 80 100 120 












* Whooping crane 
North America 
Habitat disturbed by 
human contact 





— 


Black-footed ferret 
Wyoming 

Declined due to poisoning of 
prairie dogs, its chief prey 


) ee —— Ss NORTH 
California condor AMERICA 


Southern California 

Declined because of habitat destruction, 
being hunted for sport, and overcollection 
of eggs for food; saved through captive 






















breeding Imperial parrot 
West Indies, Dominica 
Pallid sturgeon Declined because of 
United States habitat destruction and 
Ivory-billed woodpecker Habitat altered to create channels illegal capture for pets 


and dams; pollution of habitat by 


Both subspecies endangered; 
industrial wastes; overtished 


one in the south-central and 
southeastern United States, the 
other in Cuba; United States 
subspecies possibly extinct; 
declined because their habitat 
was destroyed and because 
people killed them 





SOUTH 
AMERICA 


Woolly spider monkey 

Lives on tops of tallest trees in 
rain forests in southeastern Brazil 
Declined because of habitat 
destruction and being 
overhunted for food 


\ Green sea turtle 
Temperate and tropical seas worldwide 
\ Endangered by overhunting for its meat, 
SS its oil, and its shell; and by overcollection 


of its eggs 





WORLD BOOK map 









How animals become endangered 


Al 
{ 


| 









. . \ / 
Many factors contribute to endangerment. They 1 j 
include the destruction of habitats, pollution, 
trade in animal products, overhunting, the 
introduction of new species to an area, and the 
growing human population. In many cases, 
these factors are linked. 






















The destruction of habitats is one of the main 
threats to animals. The photo at the right shows the 
beginning of s/ash-and-burn cultivation of part of a 
rain forest Trees are chopped and burned to make 
way for farmland. However, the soil in such areas is 
relatively unfertile and will support crops for only a 
few years before it is exhausted. Then more trees will 
have to be cleared to create more farmland. Mean- 


while, the rain forest, which has more species than Baga i we eS st. 
any other habitat, is being destroyed—and countless YEO" ola ier San, 
LF : = > a A ange 243 


species along with it Some experts estimate that 
more than 50 rain forest species become extinct each 
day because of human activities. 






PAs Ocak SE 


© Gustavo Gilaber, JB Pictures 


Trade in animal products. Some animals 
become endangered because their fur or some 
other body part is considered valuable. For 
example, rhinoceros horns are prized in some 
parts of the world. In some cases, the animals 
themselves are valued. For instance, certain 
tropical birds are valued by bird collectors. The 
photograph at the left shows some of the booty 
seized from poachers (illegal hunters) who killed 
protected animals. 





+ r= 


Pe. 
fe 


SRC RUB Sulton, NAS Other factors that threaten animals 


ai 


The growing human population will strain existing 
resources and require more land in which to live. As a 
result, more animal habitats will be destroyed. 


Saving the spotted owl: 

A policy issue Introduction of new species to an area can mean 

The spotted owl inhabits the disaster for native animals. When Europeans landed in 
| forests of the Pacific Northwest Hawaii and other Pacific Islands, rats escaped from their 
| of the United States. In the late ships and then preyed on native birds. Domestic cats 


introduced by Europeans also killed native birds. As a 
result, more than 100 kinds of Pacific Islands birds have 
become extinct since 1600. 


1980's, conservationists be- 
came concerned that lumber 
companies were destroying 


the habitat of the owl. But Overhunting a species can threaten it with extinction. 


loggers argued that unless Sometimes animals are hunted because people consid- 
they could continue to cut er them a pest. The red wolf of North America was 


down the trees, they would trapped, hunted, and poisoned for this reason. 
lose their jobs and face eco- 


nomic hardship. How would 
you solve this problem? 


© john Neel, Tom Stack & Associates 


Pollution in all its forms— 
whether of the land, the air, or 
the water—is a serious threat 
to animals. An oil spill killed 
this cormorant. 





a Merve me - 


teen STS Geese ae 


A. & 


\fcaee 












If people do not offer endangered animals some 
kind of protection, such animals will become extinct. 
Through the years, concern about vanishing wildlife 
has led people to take a number of steps. Some 
animals are protected in wildlife refuges or parks. 
Others live in zoos. Many zoos and research centers 
breed endangered animals with the hope of 
returning their offspring to the wild. 





ER Degginger 
Wildlife reserves and national parks may 
represent the last hope of survival for some 
species. In such areas, animals are protected by 
law from hunters. However, poachers still 
remain a problem. Zebras and gnus are among 
the many animals that roam the protected lands 
of Tarangire National Park in northern Tanzania, 
above. 





LuRay Parker, Wyoming Game and Fish Department 


Breeding in captivity. Some animals have been saved by breeding 
them in captivity. In the mid-1980's, black-footed ferrets, which lived in 
Wyoming, were on the verge of extinction. In 1986, the last surviving 
community of these animals—consisting of 18 individuals—was rounded 
up to establish a captive-breeding program. In 1991, federal and state 
wildlife officials began releasing black-footed ferrets into southeast 
Wyoming. Before being released, each ferret was fitted with a special 
collar, above, to help track animals in the wild. 






* 
we 


© Al Satterwhite, Camera 5 


Rescuing animals in a crisis. Rescue workers 
also help animals when a crisis, such as an oil 
spill, occurs. A girl carries an oil-soaked seabird 
to a cleaning area to try to save it, above. 





Some wildlife conservation organizations 


For more information on endangered species and what you can do 
to help conserve them, write to the following: 


Greenpeace National Wildlife Federation 
1436 U Street NW 8925 Leesburg Pike — 
Washington, DC 20009 Vienna, VA 22984 Four reasons why people protect animals 
1. For their beauty. Each 3. For their scientific 
Rue tatisey 28 ee i alae Suite 100 animal is different from value. Wildlife study adds 
CH-1196 Gland, Switzerland Arlington, VA 22203 eyo Dect to knowledge Chiat am 
ji : the beauty of nature. mals grow and how they 
; ' 2. For their economic live in their environment 
Izaak Walton League of America Sierra Club ie . : 
707 Conservation Lane 85 Second Street, 2nd Floor ee reat hepsi ua hg ee ~ aa | 
Gaithersburg, MD 20878 San Francisco, CA 94105 wwii animals PEOVICES TUT a ee 
; : and food. Tourists who maintain the balance of 
: J ; ite visit protected areas to nature. The loss of any 
re el Soca bets Preeti os see animals in the wild species may threaten the 
Y also bring in money. survival of many others. 


New York, NY 10003 Washington, DC 20037 

























Animal 489 
Comparative speeds The speeds of animals vary greatly. Birds are the fastest of all animals, with flying speeds of more 
of animals than 200 miles (320 kilometers) per hour. The speediest land animals outstrip the fastest water ani- 
mals. Many of the figures given in the table below are estimates because scientists have difficulty 
measuring the speeds of wild animals. In addition, the maximum speed of an animal may differ 
widely from its usual speed. A rabbit runs faster than a greyhound for a short time. But the grey- 
hound can keep up its speed for longer distances. 
WORLD BOOK illustrations by Linda Kinnaman and Robert Klunder 
S 
SS 
F EB == 
In the air = N “a 
SF Housetfly Owl = > 
5 mph (8 kph) 40 mph (64 kph) . Galdeneagle 1% 
Common swift 120 mph (193 kph) 
60 mph (97 kph) 
BS, Bat oe 
4kph 3 
(fs Bampnies <r J? Canvasback duck 
70 mph {110 kph) 
a. Y 
y - Robin — Hummingbird 
« ” 30 mph (48 kph) 60 mph (97 kph) 
VF 
BS, Blu@iay { Draganfly 
20 mph (32 kph) 50 mph (80 kph) 
WORLD BOOK iflustration by 
Onland Venner Artists Ltd 
nian . : 
a mL The fastest animal is the 
_ A Bi sid ‘ee a pie peregrine falcon. With power- 
Aes se (a < mPa 7 2 kph) ful wings and a streamlined 
fj 19 Mph (0.16 kph) Cheetah body, this bird can reach a 
D FT Snake 7O moh (NO kph) | Peed of more than 200 miles 
J Che 2mph(3 kph) Kangaroa a alae (320 kilometers) per hour as it 
TT Ae ae swoops down on prey. 
House mause B! Gration 
Signal? kPP) @MCZ | 40 mph (64 kph) 
Pranghorn 
; 62 mph (100 kph} 
Lizard ag 
19 mph (30 kph)} Hause cat - 
30 mph (48 kph) 50 mph (80 kph) 
| Human being ; AY, % Jack rabbit 
<j 20 mph (32 kph) , 45 mph (72 kph) 
\ A Ostrich 
a 4 40 mph (64 kph) 
a, Greyhound 
& 40 mph (64 kph) 






















African elephant 
22 mph (35 kph) 











In the water 
Se oldfich dirs Barracuda WS Sailfish 
YR eoh(ékph) 2Pe  30 mph (48 kph) 65 mph (105 kph] 
we = ilraut N Swardfish 
5 mph (8 kph) = 35 mph (56 kph) 
Human being 
eo ~~ Smph(8 kph) Bluefin tuna 
Pike 40 mph (64 kph) 
Se 15 mph (25 kph! 
Geéeu| Sea turtle 
EEE 90 mph (32 kph] 
Dalphin 
25 mph (40 kph} 
Whale 
20 mph (32 kph} 
Omph 20 40 60 80 100 120 





490 Animal 





G. 1! Bernard, Oxtord Scientific Films from Animals Animals 


Long, slender front wings and small hind wings enable the 
fast-flying hawk moth to hover like a hummingbird. 





E R Degginger 


A tail and fins serve most fish in swimming. The tail of a male 
fancy guppy, above, may grow longer than its body. 


made up mostly of skin stretched over long finger 
bones. Muscles in the wings raise and lower them. 

Birds have powerful muscles attached to their wings 
and breastbone. Bird wings are covered with feathers, 
which also aid in flight. 

Some animals, including flying squirrels and flying le- 
murs, can glide but not fly. Such animals jump from 
trees or mountains. They have big feet or folds of skin 
that spread out to serve as ‘wings’ for gliding. 

Fins, tails, and flippers. Many types of animals swim 
in fresh or salt water. Fish have well-developed tails and 
fins. Most fish swim by bending their powerful, muscu- 
lar tail from side to side. Fins on the top, bottom, and 
sides of fish are used to maintain balance and to maneu- 
ver in tight areas. Dolphins, porpoises, and whales swim 
by moving their massive tails up and down rather than 
side to side. Turtles swim by paddling with their 
webbed feet or their flippers. 

Jellyfish and squids swim by jet propu!sion. When a 
jellyfish pushes water out from under its body, it is 
thrust in the opposite direction. A squid takes water into 
its body cavity and then squirts the water out through a 
small opening called a funnel. This action repeated 
many times pushes the squid forward. 

A number of species of birds can swim. Some ducks 
and gulls paddle on the surface of the water using their 
webbed feet as oars. Torrent ducks and loons dive un- 
derwater, where they swim by kicking their feet. Pen- 
guins use their feet and their wings to swim. 


Adaptations for eating 


All animals need food to survive. Animals eat plants, 
other animals, or both plants and other animals. Animals 





E.R Degginger 


The measuring worm crawls by pulling the back part of its 
body toward the front, then pushing the front part forward. 





Stephen Dalton. Animals Animals 


Powertul hind legs make the frog a champion jumper on land, 
above, and an expert swimmer when in the water. 


that eat plants are called herbivores. Zebras, cows, and 
moose are herbivores. Animals that eat other animals 
are Called carnivores or meat-eaters. Dogs, lions, and 
sharks are carnivores. Animals that eat both plants and 
animals are known as omnivores. Bears are omnivores. 

Biologists describe the relationships between animals 
in a habitat and the foods they eat as a food chain. Tech- 
nically, a food chain involves the flow of energy from 
the sun to green plants to animal consumers. For exam- 
ple, a simple food chain in a meadow links the grasses, 
the deer that eat the grasses, and the wolves that eat the 
deer. Sometimes, many kinds of animals and plants are 
involved in complex networks of food chains. Such net- 
works are called food webs. 

Most animals eat a variety of foods. For example, pi- 
geons eat fruits, grains, and nuts, and they sometimes 
feed on insects, snails, and worms. 

Some animals eat only a few foods. A snail called a 
cone shell preys only ona single species of marine 
worm. Several kinds of snakes eat only slugs or other 
snails. Hummingbirds and honey possums live on the 
nectar of flowers. A sapsucker drills holes in trees and 
eats the sap that flows from the holes. The koala of Aus- 
tralia dines only on the leaves of eucalyptus trees. 

Filtering mechanisms. Huge numbers of tiny organ- 
isms called plankton float or swim slowly near the sur- 
face of oceans, lakes, and other bodies of water. Plank- 
ton make up a part of an important food chain in the 
ocean. Plankton are too small to be captured individually 
by animals that feed on them. Some animals, such as 
barnacles, sweep water past themselves while straining 
out the tiny plankton, which are thereby captured. This 
process is called fi/ter feeding. 











© Francois Gohier 


A gray whale filters food from water by squeezing the water 
out of its mouth through thin plates called ba/een. 


E. R Degginger 


A snake swallows food whole. It has loose jaws that enable it to 
swallow eggs or animals much larger than its own head. 


~ Alan Root Okapia, Photo Researchers 
A lion has long, razor-sharp canine (pointed) teeth for killing and 
tearing such prey as antelope and zebras. It does not have teeth 
for chewing, however. It swallows its food in chunks. 


Animal 491 

Baleen whales are probably the best-known filter 
feeders. These animals, which do not have teeth, feed by 
gulping huge mouthfuls of water containing plankton, 
small fish, and other marine organisms. They then force 
the water out of their mouths through a series of strain- 
ers called baleen. The food is captured on the baleen 
and then swallowed. A baleen whale can consume as 
much as 4 tons (3.6 metric tons) of food a day. 

Teeth and jaws. A large number of animals eat food 
that they need to tear into pieces small enough to be 
swallowed and digested easily. Teeth and jaws are adap- 
tations for tearing food. Teeth may also be used to kill 
prey. 

Teeth are adapted for the particular type of food an 
animal eats. Deer, giraffes, and other herbivores have 
teeth with broad surfaces for grinding grasses and 
plants into small bits. The powerful front teeth of 
beavers enable these animals to cut down trees for food 
and shelter. Lions have razor-sharp canine (pointed) 
teeth for killing and then tearing prey. 

Birds have bills that are adapted for certain types of 
feeding. A hawk has a sharp, hooked beak for tearing 
prey. A woodpecker uses its long, pointed bill to drill 
into the bark of trees to find insects. 

Insects have jaws and movable mouthparts that act 
like teeth. The jaws of grasshoppers are adapted for cut- 
ting and chewing plants. Mosquitoes have needle- 
shaped mouthparts for piercing skin and sucking blood. 


Adaptations for breathing 


Most animals need a continuous supply of oxygen to 
survive. The entire process of obtaining and using oxy- 
gen is called respiration. That part of the process that in- 
volves how an animal takes oxygen from its environment 
and gives off carbon dioxide is known as breathing. This 
section focuses on breathing. For a complete descrip- 
tion of how oxygen flows to various cells of an animal's 
body and how it is used by those cells, see Respiration. 

The way that animals breathe depends on where they 
live. Land animals get oxygen from the air. Aquatic ani- 
mals obtain oxygen from water. 

Many land animals have lungs for breathing. As blood 
flows through the lungs, it picks up oxygen from the air 





Oxtord Sctentific Films from Animals Animals 
A water spider breathes underwater by means of large air 
bubbles held close to its body. Small bubbles of air trapped by 
the spider's hairlike body parts help supply extra air. 





492 Animal 


and releases carbon dioxide. The blood then carries oxy- 
gen to the rest of the body. See Lung. 

Many aquatic organisms, such as fish and tadpoles, 
use gills to obtain oxygen that is dissolved in water. 
Some animals pump water across their gills to increase 
the efficiency of breathing. Sharks do this by swimming 
continuously. 

Tiny tubes called tracheae allow insects to breathe in 
air. Tracheae branch throughout an insect's body. They 
open to the outside air through holes called spiracles. 
When air enters the tracheae, oxygen is carried to every 
cell in the body. 

Some animals that live in damp environments have 
unusual ways of breathing. For example, some small sal- 
amanders have no lungs or gills. They breathe through 
their moist skin. 


Adaptations for sensing the environment 


Most kinds of animals have special body parts that re- 
spond to changes in the animal's environment. Such a 


Tracheal system 


a Og Bie % 
fat Lis x 


x 2 
= \/ 
Air sacs YX Spiracles a 


a — Le Q 


Spiracles are openings on the outside of an insects body. Air 
enters the body through these openings and flows into air sacs. 
A tracheal (air tube) system distributes the air. 





Gills are the breathing organs of most fish. The thin tissues of 
the gills absorb oxygen from the water. A fish gulps in water, 
and then forces it out through the gill openings. 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Patricia Wynne 


Lungs supply vital oxygen 
to the blood of the higher 
animals. Air containing ox- 
ygen flows through the 
trachea into the lungs. 
There, the oxygen is ab- 
sorbed by the blood. 












Trachea 


Touch. Woodcocks and many other birds can use the 
tips of their beaks to locate worms underground. 





Smell. The forked tongues of snakes and some lizards 
are used to smell as well as to touch. 





Taste. Catfish and certain other fish have cells called 
taste buds in the skin that covers their bodies. 





Hearing. Bats navigate by the echoes that result from 
their high-pitched sounds striking objects. 


WORLD BOOK illustrations 
by John F Eggert 


Sight. A dragonfly’s large 
compound eyes enable it 
to detect moving objects 

at great distances. 




















| 
; 





A table of animal intelligence 





Many animals can learn to do some tricks if they are carefully 
trained. But the ability to do tricks is not a sign of intelligence. 
Even fleas can be trained as circus performers. 

Scientists measure the intelligence of animals by giving 
them problems to solve and by studying their behavior. In the 
past, most animals were studied in isolation from other ani- 
mals. They were tested for how they performed tasks when 
given food as a reward. 

Today, however, many studies of animal intelligence focus 
on animals in group settings. Such research concentrates on 
the intelligence animals use in their dealing with others of 
their kind and in solving group problems. Scientists believe 
this social intelligence may be closely related to the develop- 
ment of language skills. The ability to use language repre- 
sents a high degree of intelligence. 

The following table provides information on the intelli- 
gence of a number of types of animals, based on various sci- 
entific studies. 


Apes and monkeys have the most humanlike intelligence. 
Chimpanzees seem to be the most advanced. They can make 
tools, plan complicated searches for food, and even count. 
They can also communicate by means of symbols. For exam- 
ple, they may use certain gestures to symbolize particular ob- 
jects, actions, or states of being. 

Large aquatic mammals, such as dolphins, whales, and sea 
lions, have brains much like those of human beings. They are 
capable of learning symbolic communication that may have 


stimulus (change) might come from an odor, a sight, a 
sound, a taste, or a touch. The simplest kinds of animals, 
such as sponges, have no special body parts and react 
to stimuli with their body cells. Animals with more com- 
plex physical structures, especially vertebrates, have 
highly developed organs for reacting to stimuli. These 
organs are described in the articles on Brain and Nerv- 
ous system. 

Some simple animals, such as hydras, react to stimuli 
with special cells. These sensory cells are scattered 
among the outermost cells of the body. The reactions of 
most other kinds of animals depend largely on one or 
more of the major senses. These senses are sight, hear- 
ing, smell, taste, and touch. See Senses. 

Some senses are more important to one kind of ani- 
mal than to another. Most birds cannot find food if they 


Animal 493 


properties like those of language. For example, dolphins 
seem to recognize differences in meaning based on the order 
in which the symbols are presented. 

Carnivorous mammals in the cat and dog families show learn- 
ing ability as good as, or better than, all animals except apes, 
some monkeys, and large aquatic mammals. Lions, tigers, and 
wolves probably can learn more rapidly than domesticated 
cats or dogs can. 

Hoofed animals. Elephants and pigs are the best problem solv- 
ers among the hoofed animals. 

Rodents are generally good at solving problems that involve 
finding their way through complicated pathways. 

Birds, such as the raven and the pigeon, can solve simple 
counting problems. Parrots can learn to say human words and 
use them meaningfully in naming and counting objects. 

Amphibians and reptiles are difficult to test, but alligators, 
crocodiles, turtles, and large monitor lizards may rival mam- 
mals and birds in locating sources of food and in some other 
forms of nonsocial learning. 

Fish. Salmon and some other kinds of fish can remember odors 
for as long as several years. Sharks have brains as large as 
those of some birds and mammals. They have keen senses, 
and they are surprisingly clever at finding food and avoiding 
danger. 

Animals without backbones often seem to learn very little. 
But some have remarkable and specialized abilities involving 
communication, food, and place learning. Many scientists 
consider octopuses to have the most complex brains of all the 
invertebrates. Octopuses learn rapidly and have distinct per- 
sonalities. 


cannot See it. Hearing is vital to bats. If the ears of a bat 
are covered, the animal will crash into objects when it 
tries to fly. A keen sense of smell enables dogs and 
wolves to find food, follow trails, and recognize danger. 
Taste is highly important to many insects. The butterfly 
finds its food by sensing the sweetness of flowers with 
its feet. A cat's long whiskers serve as touch organs. 
They enable the cat to feel its way through underbrush 
and avoid bumping into objects. 

A number of animals have special senses. A rattle- 
snake has pit organs on the side of its face that sense 
heat. These organs enable the snake to tell if a mouse or 
some other warm-blooded prey is nearby, even in total 
darkness. Many scientists believe that some birds and 
insects can detect the direction of the earth’s magnetic 
field. This ability may help these animals navigate. 


How animals protect themselves 


The world of an animal is filled with danger from ene- 
mies. This section describes some of the many ways ani- 
mals protect themselves from such danger. 

Hiding in a safe place. The best protection against a 
predator is to avoid being seen by it. Many animals rest 
or sleep in a safe hiding place. Some desert toads crawl 
down a crack in the mud. A cricket hides under a large 
rock or under the loose bark of a tree. Worms and 
moles dig underground tunnels. 

Many species, such as rabbits, leave their nests 
mainly or only at night, when they are harder for ene- 
mies to spot. Other species become active for only short 
periods so they are not exposed to predators for long. 


Camouflage. Many animals are difficult for enemies 
to see because they resemble their surroundings. The 
various ways animals blend with their surroundings are 
called camouflage. For camouflage to be effective, the 
animals must remain motionless or nearly so. 

Protective coloration is coloring that helps animals to 
hide. A dark moth lying against the brown or black bark 
of a tree is hard to see. However, that same moth would 
be clearly visible if it sat on a green leaf. 

A number of animals can change their colors and 
thus remain camouflaged even when moving among 
backgrounds that have different colors. The chameleon, 
a type of lizard, is green when surrounded by leaves but 


494. Animal defenses and weapons 


Animals defend themselves from enemies by a variety of means. 
Some use such weapons as sharp teeth and claws. Others sim- 
ply run away from attackers. In some cases, the weapons an ani- 
mal uses for defense are the same ones it uses to capture prey. 


Ss 





71g Leseczvnsk: Animals Animats 


A lobster’s claws are powerful weapons. The animal uses its 
claws to seize crabs, fish, snails, and other prey. The strong, 
toothed claws then crush the prev and tear it into pieces. 





ach + : : ' * 
£ Ne : ee 
Leonard Lee Rue 
The armadillo’s armor protects the animal from harm. The 
bony plates of the armor fit together so well that the armadillo 
can roll up tightly into a ball when an enemy comes near. 





led Lev Animals Animals 


Sharp claws called fa/ons are used by owls to defend their 
nests from intruders and to capture prey. A saw-whet owl 
spreads its talons to catch a mouse, above. 





t R Degginger 


Speed is the impala’s main defense. An impala can run as fast as 
50 miles (80 kilometers) per hour in bounding leaps. 





e Bruce Coleman Lid 


Large, heavy horns protect the slow-moving Cape buffalo of 
southern Africa from enemies. A fierce and powerful fighter, 
this animal can kill even an attacking lion 





—— 
E R DOegainger Alan Blank Hruce Cole n ine 
Sharp quills help protect a porcupine from attack. When Rattlesnake fangs inject deadly poison. The needlelike fangs 
touched, the barbed quills come oft the porcupine and hook fold back against the root of the mouth when not in use. They 


into the attacker's flesh, where they can cause paintul wounds move fonvard when the snake opens its mouth to strike 








Animal camouflage Animal 495 


a - 
“A an TP 
Ee 


Eric A. Soder. Tom Stack & Assoc 


David G. Allen 


Protective coloration helps many animals hide from their enemies. In winter, ptar- 

migan feathers match the snow, fop /eft. The roe deer is hard to see because its col- . 
ors resemble those of its woodland home. The gray bark crypsis is typical of many sae wf hts - =r | a ee 
moths whose coloring makes them seem to disappear when they rest on certain » rey oy 4 Ay Pe <a Z. 
trees. The pheasant's colors make it seem part of its surroundings. —— — a a at 













Pierre Labout, Jacana 


E R. Degginger 


Breck Kent, Animals Animals 





Dentse Tackett, Tom Stack & Assoc. 


Mimicry helps many animals avoid pred- 
ators. Some animals m/mic (resemble) 
other objects in their environment or 
other animals. The wings of a dead-leaf 
mantis, above, resemble leaves. Some 
robber flies look so much like a bumble 
bee that enemies often avoid them. The 
razor fish has a long, slender body that 
resembles the thin leaves of a sea plant. A 
treehopper on the stem of a rosebush 
looks so much like a thorn that birds 
often overlook the insect. 





496 Animal 


turns brown when moving slowly on bark or on the 
ground. The ptarmigan, an arctic bird, is brown in sum- 
mer but becomes white in winter, when snow covers 
the ground. 

Mimicry helps many animals avoid predators. Some 
animals mimic (resemble) other objects in their environ- 
ment. For example, many green insects are shaped like 
leaves. Some caterpillars look like lizards or bird drop- 
pings. Walkingstick insects are shaped and colored like 
twigs. Anglerfish resemble rocks on the ocean floor. 

Batesian mimicry is a form of mimicry in which an 
otherwise harmless animal strongly mimics an offensive 
animal. This type of mimicry was named after the Eng- 
lish naturalist Henry W. Bates, who studied it in the 
1800's. Bates observed that some harmless species have 
coloring and behavior that make them look like a dan- 
gerous or bad-tasting animal. A predator spotting sucha 
species may mistake it for the undesirable animal and 
leave it alone. For example, viceroy butterflies are be- 
lieved to be tasty to birds. But birds rarely attack them 
because they look like foul-tasting monarch butterflies. 
See Protective coloration. 

Escaping by flight. Many animals run away from an 
attacker. Antelope sprint away at high speed when 
charged by a lion or a cheetah. Many animals stay near 
safe places, such as burrows, and run to them if at- 
tacked. The octopus squirts a black inky fluid to conceal 
itself and then quickly swims for safety. 

Armor. Some species have a hard shell or covering 
that is used as armor against predators. Clams pull back 
into their shells when a predator approaches. Many tur- 


tles can pull in their head, legs, and tail when attacked. 
Armadillos and pangolins are covered by hard, bony 
plates. When frightened, these animals roll into a tight 
ball that is difficult for enemies to penetrate. 

Playing dead. A few species sometimes fool preda- 
tors by lying motionless and appearing to be dead. If the 
predator does not deliver a killing blow or bite, then the 
animal may have a chance to escape. A threatened opos- 
sum goes limp. The hognose snake flips onto its back 
when a predator approaches. 

Giving up a body part. Many animals break off a 
nonessential part of their body when attacked. The glass 
lizard breaks off its tail, which flops about and attracts 
the attention of the predator. While the attacker strug- 
gles with the tail, the lizard escapes. In most cases, the 
lost body part grows back quickly. 

Fighting. Many animals have special weapons for 
fighting predators. The sharp hooves of a moose or the 
claws of an ostrich can rip open an enemy. Porcupines 
have long, sharp quills on their back, sides, and tail. 
These animals strike attackers with their quilled tails. 
The quills come out easily and stick in the attackers. 
Bees and wasps sting animals that approach their nests. 

Chemical defenses. A number of animals use spe- 
cial chemicals for defense. Hagfish and one kind of star- 
fish give off huge quantities of slime when disturbed. 
The bombardier beetle squirts irritating chemicals at an 
enemy. Some cobras spit blinding venom at the eyes of 
attackers. Skunks spray foul-smelling chemicals. Birds 
from New Guinea called hooded pitohuis have poison- 
ous feathers and skin. 


How animals reproduce 


All types of animals reproduce. Many animals have 
special organs that are used in reproduction. These or- 
gans are called gonads. Some simple animals do not 
have gonads, but they are still able to reproduce. The 
various methods used by living things to reproduce are 
described in detail in the Reproduction article. 

There are two general forms of animal reproduction: 
(1) asexua/ reproduction and (2) sexual reproduction. \n 
asexual reproduction, only one parent produces the off- 
spring. In sexual reproduction, two parents of opposite 
sexes are needed to produce the offspring. Many of the 
simplest animals, including sponges, sea anemones, 
and some flatworms, reproduce asexually most of the 
time. Sometimes, they reproduce sexually as well. Most 
other kinds of animals reproduce only sexually. 

Asexual reproduction. Planarians and some other 
flatworms can reproduce by fragmentation, the division 
of the body into two or more pieces. When a planarian 
reproduces asexually, it typically divides into two sec- 
tions, one with the head and the other with the tail. Each 
section then grows the parts that are missing and be- 
comes a complete new individual. 

Hydras and some sea anemones reproduce by bud- 
ding. The animal produces small projections, called 
buds, from its side. These buds develop into miniature 
copies of the parent. The buds eventually detach from 
the parent, and the individuals produced by budding 
grow to be as large as their parents. Then they can put 
forth buds to create their own offspring. 


Sexual reproduction. Most animals that reproduce 
only sexually do so with special sex cells known as gam- 
etes. Female sex cells are called eggs and are produced 
in the female gonads, the ovaries. The male sex cells are 
known as sperm and are made in the male gonads, the 
testes. Sperm are much smaller than eggs and have a 
tail that enables them to swim toward eggs. When a 
sperm cell unites with an egg cell, a new animal starts to 
form. The process in which the sperm unites with the 
egg is called fertilization. 

External fertilization occurs outside an animal's body. 
Many aquatic animals reproduce sexually without ever 
meeting. Female sea urchins release millions of egg 
cells directly into the water. About the same time, the 
males release their sperm. The sperm swim through the 
water, and some unite with eggs, leading to fertilization. 
The fertilized eggs develop into swimming offspring, 
which are called /arvae. The larvae grow and eventually 
sink to the bottom of the sea, where they become small 
sea urchins with bodies similar to those of their parents. 

Internal fertilization occurs within an animal's body. If 
gametes are released on land, they dry up and die. Con- 
sequently, land-dwelling animals that reproduce sexu- 
ally have developed ways for fertilization to take place 
inside their bodies. 

Animals mate in many ways. Males of such species as 
snakes, lizards, birds, and mammals mate by releasing 
sperm directly into an opening in the female's body. Fer- 
tilization occurs in the female’s reproductive organs. 





Male salamanders do not release sperm directly into 
the female's body. Instead, they deposit a packet of 
sperm at the bottom of a stream or pond. When the fe- 
male passes over the sperm, she draws them into an 
opening in her body that leads to her reproductive or- 
gans. Several other animals, including mites and scorpi- 
ons, mate in a manner similar to that of salamanders. 
Males deposit packets of sperm on the ground, which 
are then picked up by females. 

In almost all mammals and some reptiles, the embryo 
(undeveloped animal) grows inside the female's body 
after fertilization. However, in birds and some reptiles, 
the embryo develops outside the body. The female lays 
an egg in which the embryo develops. See Fertilization. 

Courtship behavior consists of actions that help ani- 
mals find and choose suitable mates. This behavior 
tends to follow a specific pattern according to species. 
As a result, courtship behavior helps ensure that ani- 
mals mate with members of their own species. If two 
different species mate, they may not produce young, or 
their offspring may be unhealthy or unable to repro- 
duce. Such courtship behaviors as singing and display- 
ing colors help animals recognize their own species. 

Animal mates find each other in a number of ways. 
Female birds are attracted to the beautiful songs and 
bright feathers of males. Female grasshoppers, cicadas, 
bullfrogs, and toads also are attracted to the calls made 
by males of their species. Female silkworm moths re- 
lease into the air a perfumelike chemical called a phero- 
mone to attract males from as far away as several miles 
or kilometers. At certain times of the year, female dogs 
give off a pheromone that attracts male dogs. Female 
fireflies watch for male fireflies that flash their lights in a 
certain rhythmic pattern. Male fence lizards bob their 
heads rhythmically when a female approaches. Siamese 
fightingfish perform a complicated courtship dance, fol- 
lowed by the release of eggs and sperm into the water. 

Some animals choose particular mates. The female 
anole lizard typically prefers to mate with the largest 


Animal 
reproduction 


Animal reproduction 





Approximate 





Animal 497 


Typical number 





gestation of newborn 
Animal period 
Alligator (American) 9 weeks* 50-60t 
Bat (common vampire) 210 days 1 
Cat 65 days 4 
Dog 9 weeks 1-10 
Elephant 21-22 months 1 
Frog (bullfrog) 5-20 days* 20,000t 
Gerbil 19-21 days 4-7 
Guinea pig 68 days 1-5 
Hamster (golden) 16 days 6-9 
Horse 332-342 days 1 
Lion 100-119 days 3-4 
Monkey (spider) 226-232 days 1 
Mouse (field) 21-23 days 5-6 
Rabbit (cottontail) 25-40 days 3-6 
Robin, American 12-14 days’ 4t 
Sheep 150-180 days 1-2 
Squirrel (red) 33-35 days 4-6 
Tiger 104-106 days 2-3 
*Approxtmate incubation period 
tApproximate number of eggs a female lays. Not all ol them hatch into newborns 


male. The peacock spreads his fantastic tail feathers, 
hoping to coax a peahen into becoming his mate. Pea- 
hens choose males with many spots on their tail feath- 
ers. Male birds of paradise gather in a tree. When a fe- 
male appears, the brilliantly colored males strut and 
dance to show off their bright feathers. If a female 
chooses to watch this display, she will usually mate with 
the male that has the brightest colors. 
Male bowerbirds build chambers or runways, called 


bowers, made of sticks or other material. They decorate 
these structures with brightly colored stones, bones, or 
other objects. The male dances and bows in front of his 
bower, hoping that a passing female will accept him as a 
mate. If one does, she enters the bower with him, and 
they mate there. 

Some male animals give food to possible mates. A 
male tern Catches a fish and places it into the mouth of 


Animal reproduction may be asexua/ or sexua/. Planarians and hydras can reproduce asexually. Pla- 
narians, /eff, split into two worms. Hydras, midd/e, grow from projections called buds on the par- 


ent. In sexual reproduction, right a sperm cell fertilizes an egg, which develops into a new animal. 


Asexuol reproduction 
Reproducing by dividing 


Plonorions 





Division begins 


DH oivision completed 


Two odult 
plonorions 








Adult ond 
offspring 





Asexual reproduction 
Reproducing by budding 


Hydros 








WORLD BOOA tlustratrons by Patricia Wynne 


Sexuol reproduction 
Sperm cell of male unites 
with egg cell of femole 


Sperm cells 





‘Bud Egg cell 


forms ") 
\ 





Fertilized egg 










ay 


Pe whe IS 


Develaping zygote 





498 Animal 





the female he wants for his mate. A male dance fly 
brings a dead insect to a female. She eats the insect 
while mating with the male. A male that does not bring a 
dead insect risks being eaten by the female. 

Mating is dangerous for some male spiders and in- 
sects. Male black widow spiders are sometimes eaten 
by females after mating. A female praying mantis may 
pounce unexpectedly on a male in her vicinity. Some- 
times, she mates with a male and then eats him. 

Regeneration. Some kinds of animals, mostly simple 
animals, can replace lost body parts by regeneration. If a 
sponge is broken into small pieces, some of the frag- 


The courtship ritual of the 
albatross involves an elabo- 
rate dance between a male 
and female, /ef, before they 
mate. Through courtship ritu- 
als, animals can identify mem- 
bers of their own species for 
mating. In some cases, such 
rituals help them choose spe- 
cific mates. 


Frans Lanting. Photo Researchers 


ments will grow into new sponges. Earthworms and 
their marine relatives can regenerate their heads or tails 
if those parts are broken off. Crabs and lobsters can 
grow new claws. Sea cucumbers sometimes throw out 
their intestines and other internal body parts to distract 
attackers. New parts grow back quickly. 

Even some vertebrates can regenerate parts of their 
bodies. A salamander that loses a leg will grow a new 
one. Many salamanders can break off their tails to es- 
cape the grip of an enemy. These animals soon grow 
new tails. Mammals can regenerate hair, nails, and some 
other body tissues. 


How animals raise their young 


The newborn young of many species need no care 
from their parents. Even from birth, they can move 
about and find food on their own. The young of other 
species need parental care for some time after birth. 
One or both parents provide them with food and pro- 
tection until they are old enough to manage for them- 
selves. 

Most kinds of animals never see their parents. For ex- 
ample, clams and many other invertebrates release their 
eggs and sperm into the water, where fertilization takes 
place. Carried around by ocean currents, the young of 
these animals may travel far from where their parents 
live. The female leatherback turtle swims thousands of 
miles or kilometers in the ocean to tropical beaches. 
She then digs a hole on the beach and lays her eggs. 
The eggs hatch in the warm sand after the female has re- 
turned to the sea. 

Providing food is one of the main ways animals care 
for their young. Even females who never see their off- 
spring provide them with food. The female's eggs con- 
tain yolk and other nourishing substances that serve as 
food for the developing embryos. Female sea urchins 
and herring produce vast numbers of small eggs, each 
of which has little yolk. Offspring froin these eggs are 
extremely tiny when they hatch and must find their own 
food to grow. Their chance for survival is relatively 


small. Female birds, on the other hand, lay only a few 
eggs, each with large amounts of yolk. Offspring from 
these eggs are relatively large and have a higher chance 
of survival. 

Some animals that do not see their offspring provide 
their young with food in addition to that in the egg. 
Many flies lay their eggs on rotting fruits, which supply 
the young flies with food. The female digger wasp lays 
her egg on a grasshopper that she has stung, paralyzed, 
and buried. After hatching, her offspring feeds on the 
grasshopper. The female dung beetle finds fresh dung 
(manure), rolls a piece into a ball, and then buries tt. She 
lays her egg on the dung ball. After hatching, the young 
beetle feeds on the dung. 

Mammals nurse their babies—that is, they feed them 
on the mother’s milk. The nursing period lasts only a few 
weeks in mice, hares, and many other species. But 
along some larger mammals, such as elephants and 
rhinoceroses, the young may nurse several years before 
they are weaned-—that is, taken off the mother's milk. 

Incubation. In many species, the mother and some- 
times the father remain with their eggs and young. Birds 
incubate their eggs by sitting on them in a nest. Incuba- 
tion keeps the eggs warm and helps the embryo inside 
to develop quickly into a young bird. After the eggs 
hatch, the parents may make many hunting trips each 


RO. §  _———— =< s 


————— 


B Amadeus Rubel. Shostal 
Monkeys take good care of their babies. These crab-eating 
macaques show great affection for their young and train them 
carefully. Most monkeys fight fiercely to protect their babies. 





lovce Photographics trom Photo Researchers 


A male Adélie penguin incubates an egg by holding it be- 
tween his feet to protect it from the Antarctic chill. The male 
does not eat while incubating-- a period of 33 to 38 days. 





Animal 499 





David Fleay 


A baby wallaby stays in its mother's pouch until it can care for 
itself. Wallabies belong to a group of animals called marsupials, 
which give birth to extremely undeveloped young. 


day, trying to catch enough insects to feed the hungry 
nestlings (young birds). When the young are old enough 


to hunt, they leave the nest and fly away. 


Among many species of birds, including pigeons and 
starlings, the parents take turns incubating the eggs. 
Among ducks, geese, and some other birds, the females 
are the only incubators. In most species of hornbills, the 


Names of animals and their young 


Animal 
Ant 
Antelope 
Bear 
Cat’ 
Cattle’ 
Chicken 
Deer 
Dog 
Dolphin 
Duck 
Elephant 
Fox 

Goat 
Hog 
Kangaroo 
Lion 
Sheep 
Swan 
Tiger 
Turkey 


Male 


bull 

boar 

tom 

bull 

cock, rooster 
buck, stag 
dog 

bull 

drake 

bull 

renard, dog 
billy, buck 
boar 

buck, boomer 
lion 

buck, ram 
cob 

tiger 

cock, tom 


Female 
queen 
doe 

sow 

tabby 
cow 

hen 

doe 

bitch, dam 
cow 

duck 

cow 
vixen, bitch 
nanny, doe 
sow 

doe, flier 
lioness 
dam, ewe 
pen 
tigress 
hen 


There are numerous alternate names tor this ammmal and Us yount 


Young 
antling 

kid 

cub 

kitten 

calf 

chick 

fawn 

puppy, whelp 
calf 
duckling 
calf 

kit, cub 

kid 

piglet, shoat 
joey 

cub 

lamb, lambkin 
cygnet 

cub 

poult 


500 Animal 





female even imprisons herself inside a walled-up nest 
chamber to incubate eggs. The male passes food to the 
female through a tiny slit in the wall. In a few species of 
birds, the male does all the incubating. For example, a 
female emperor penguin lays a single egg, which the 
male then incubates on top of his toes. He tucks his toes 
and the egg under the fluffy feathers of his belly. When 
the egg hatches, the little penguin stays warm and 
grows in this cozy “nest.” 

Female pythons also incubate their eggs. They pro- 
duce the heat to warm their eggs by twitching their 
muscles, much as people do when shivering. After the 
baby pythons hatch, they must find food and shelter on 
their own. 

Providing shelter. Some species provide shelter for 
their young. A female lizard may lay her eggs in an un- 
derground nest, where they are hidden from predators. 
The huge nests of sociable weavers, a type of African 
bird, protect the baby birds from bad weather and ene- 
mies. Some frogs and fish build nests for their eggs and 
young. A few tropical frogs carry their tadpoles around 
on their backs until they find a safe pool of water for the 
young frogs. 

Parents sometimes provide shelter for their offspring 
within their own bodies. The male seahorse carries the 
female's eggs in a pouch. When the young seahorses 
hatch, the male releases them from the pouch. Female 
kangaroos, koalas, opossums, wallabies, and other mar- 
supials give birth to tiny, poorly developed offspring. 


The babies mature in a pouch on the mother's abdomen. 


There, they nurse and are protected by the mother. One 
kind of Australian frog swallows her eggs into her stom- 
ach, where they develop. After the eggs hatch, the fe- 
male opens her mouth, and tadpoles and small froglets 
come out. 

Providing protection. Parents often protect their 
young from enemies. A male stickleback fish will attack 
any predatory fish or insect that approaches its young. A 
female scorpion carries her babies on her back and de- 
fends them with the poisonous sting on the tip of her 
long tail. Female crocodiles guard their nests and will 
fight any predator that comes near. As young crocodiles 
begin to hatch, they cry out, and the female helps them 
dig out of the nest. She then gently picks them up in her 
jaws and carries them to a nearby pond. A female bear 


Fur seals start life in a group 
with many other pups and 
their mothers. Mother seals 
divide their time between eat- 
ing at sea and nursing their 
pups on land. Each mother 
seal nurses and tends only 
her own young. 


Karl W Kenyon, NAS 


Names of groups of animals 


Animal Group Animal Group 
Bear sloth Lion pride 
Cat clowder troop 
Dog kennel Monkey troop 
Donkey pace Quail covey 
Fox skulk Seal herd 
Frog army trip 
Goose (in flight) skein Toad knot 
(on land or Whale herd 
in water) gaggle pod 
Kangaroo herd Wolf pack 
mob 





will sometimes attack hikers who venture too close to 
her cubs. A female pet dog may attack even her owner if 
she fears that her puppies are threatened. 

Group care. Some animals live together in groups of 
several families. As many as a hundred pairs of sociable 
weavers raise their chicks together in a large nest. Sev- 
eral female lions may care for their young cubs to- 
gether. Naked mole rats live in underground colonies. 
One female produces offspring. Most of the other fe- 
males help tend the young. Many monkeys and baboons 
live in small groups. All the adults in a group will work 
together to defend their young from an attacking leop- 
ard. When attacked by a wolf, a herd of musk oxen will 
protect their calves by placing them between adults. 

Learning and play. Young animals may learn many 
things about the world from their parents. By watching 
what foods its parents eat and reject, a young animal 
can learn to recognize the kinds of foods that are safe. If 
young animals see their mother show fear of another 
type of animal or of certain locations, they learn to avoid 
those animals and places. Thus, they learn which types 
of animals, foods, and environments are safe and which 
are dangerous. 

Many animals play while they are young. Lion cubs 
may try to pounce on the twitching tail of an adult lion. 
They also play with one another as though they were 
fighting. Such games help young animals develop coor- 
dination and strength. Play also helps them learn how to 
defend themselves and to fight effectively. In addition, it 
enables some animals to learn how to stalk and capture 


prey. 





Animal homes and communities 


Animals homes provide shelter from harsh weather 
or protection against enemies. Some animals have shel- 
ters that they use only once. Others make homes where 
they live for many years. However, a number of animals, 
such as fish that live in the ocean, spend their whole 
lives moving about. They never have homes. 

A number of animals use caves, cracks in the ground, 
logs, plants, or rocks as temporary shelter. Garter 
snakes and many insects spend the night under rocks 
but leave this shelter the next day to hunt for food. 

Some animals build their homes. Field mice collect 
dried grass and then construct a small nest under a pro- 
tective log. Many birds and squirrels collect grass and 
twigs to build nests in the trees or on the ground. Go- 
phers and moles dig burrows in the soil. 

Home ranges. Most animals live within certain areas 
that form their home range. An animal's home range in- 
cludes all the resources an animal needs to survive. By 
living within a specific area, an animal can learn where 
best to find food or shelter there. 

The size of an animal's home range depends typically 
on the animal's size. Crickets and sea urchins have small 
home ranges. But elephants and lions may have home 
ranges that cover vast distances. Big animals require ex- 
tensive home ranges to obtain the large amounts of 
food they need to survive. 

Some animals defend their home ranges from other 
animals. A defended home range is called a territory. 
The song of a warbler, the hoot of an ow/, or the roar of 
a lion warns other animals of their kind to stay away. 
Some animals use chemical warnings rather than 
sounds to ward off invaders from their own species. In- 
truders can easily smell the urine of wolves and the 
scent marks of cats and hyenas and know that a territory 
is already occupied. Often the intruder leaves without a 


~ 
a 


Anthony Bannister, Animals Antmals 
A male antelope marks his territory by rubbing his face on 
plants within its borders. His facial glands release a fluid with a 
scent that warns other males to stay away. 


oD ] 


aaa i 








Animal 501 


is 
a ye" 'y 7 r 


eae. 
& 
C7 


¥ 
re ; 
Raveion 


PES 


oat Ay 
“eels st 


a 


Somidste* 


ae 
9 Ki pun 


my 


Dennis Green. Bruce Coleman Ltd 
A raven’s nest is usually built on a cliff in late winter. The bird 
makes its nest out of sticks and lines it with bark, moss, cattle 
hair, wool, seaweed, grasses, or rabbit fur. 





E KR. Degginger 


A mountain lion’s den is usually in a hidden, protected place. 
The animal may use a cave, a thicket, or a group of rocks. 








WORLD BOOk tlustration by James Teason 


A hermit crab’s home is an empty sea snail! shell. When the 
crab grows too large for the shell, it hunts for a !arger one. 











502 Animal 


Meerkats live in colonies of 
up to 30 individuals. These 
burrowing animals of south- 
ern Africa leave their under- 
ground homes only during 
the day. Meerkats stand up- 
right to watch for large birds 
that may attack them, /eft 





s = 

a a . = * 3 
Wine) 

© Charles G. Summers, Jr., Fom Stack & Assoc 


fight. Sometimes, however, fights break out over terri- The dominant individuals have first choice of such re- 
tory, resulting in injury or death. sources as food and water. They also have their pick of 
Group living. Many animals live in groups. Some mates. See Dominance. 
groups, such as herds of elephants, remain together for Some groups are large and complex. Ants, bees, and 
many years. Others are small families that come to- termites live in huge colonies that consist of many thou- 
gether only during the breeding season. A mother and sands or even millions of individuals. The individuals in 
father bird may cooperate in raising their nestlings but these colonies often have specific tasks. With honey 
may separate when the young leave the nest. bees, the queen bee is responsible for producing eggs. 
Wolf packs and some other animal groups have a so- Workers search for pollen, make honey, and feed and 
cial order called a dominance hierarchy. \n such groups, _ care for the queen and her offspring. Drones do little 
every member has a certain rank in the hierarchy. High- but fertilize the queen's eggs. 
ranking members are called dominant individuals, and Fish may form large schools in the open ocean. Her- 
low-ranking ones are known as subordinate individuals. _ ring schools may consist of hundreds of millions of fish. 
Animal migration 


Why animals migrate. The environment of some an- 
imals becomes extremely harsh at certain times of the 
year. In winter, for example, high mountains become bit- 
terly cold. Snow and ice cover the peaks, and food be- 
comes hard for animals to find. Some animals survive by neh 
hibernating. Others travel to places where the weather apa 
is milder and more food is available. The next spring, 
these animals return home. This type of regular round- 
trip journey is called a migration. Many animals that mi- 
grate live in the mountains or far from the equator. Mi- 
grating animals usually travel in large groups. 

Animals migrate for other reasons than to escape 
cold weather. Some travel to favorite feeding areas or to 
special places to produce their young. 

Animal travelers. Many birds make seasonal migra- 
tions. Some simply move short distances from the 
mountains to the valleys below. Others make remark- 


AFRICA 


able long-distance journeys. !n the fall, huge flocks of . = y Indian 
ducks and geese fly south for the winter. European : 7 } Oana 
white storks spend the spring and summer in northern pe ee 


Europe, where they breed and raise their young. They 
fly as far south as southern Africa for the winter. 

The arctic tern is the champion long-distance traveler. 
Terns breed on islands in the Arctic Ocean. !n late sum- 
mer, they begin a long journey and fly all the way to Ant- 
arctica. They feed on the fish that are plentiful there be- 


fore flying north to the Arctic to breed the following ae. 

: : <e Repeated round-trip migrations are made by the European 

summer. A tern making this round trip may fly as many white stork. This bird fives in northern Europe in spring and 

as 22,000 miles (35,400 kilometers). summer. Every fall it flies to Africa over one of the routes on the 
Humpback whales and blue whales also make long map. The white stork returns to Europe by the same route. 





WORLD BOOK map 








migrations. They spend the summer in polar oceans, 
which have plentiful food. In the autumn, they swim to- 
ward the equator until they reach the warm tropical 
seas. There, the females that are pregnant give birth. 
Others mate and then give birth the next year. The warm 
waters provide a comfortable environment for the ba- 
bies. The whales spend the winter, in the tropics before 
returning to the polar feeding area in the spring. 

Monarch butterflies and many other insects also mi- 
grate. When winter approaches, swarms of monarch 
butterflies travel from Canada and the northern United 
States to California and Florida. Some even fly as far 
south as southern Mexico. The butterflies begin the re- 
turn trip in the spring, but few of the adults that flew 
south live long enough to complete it. Female monarchs 
lay eggs along the way back. The offspring, after matur- 
ing, continue the northward journey. 

Some animals travel long distances to find a breeding 
site. Tne green sea turtle feeds along the east coast of 
South America. It then swims 1,200 miles (1,900 kilome- 


Animal 503 


ters) of open ocean to breed on Ascension Island, a 
small island in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean. When 
the baby turtles hatch, they swim to South America, 
where they may remain for many years. When they are 
mature, they swim back to Ascension Island and breed. 

Most salmon live for years in ocean waters. When the 
time comes for them to spawn (lay their eggs), they 
travel thousands of miles or kilometers. The salmon 
swim to inland waters, where they produce their young. 
The adult salmon die before the young hatch. 

Dangers of migration. Migrating animals may face a 
number of dangers, including new predators, during 
their long journeys. Some dangers come from human 
beings. For example, the fences that farmers use to cor- 
ral their livestock prevent antelope from making their 
seasonal migrations. Farmers often shoot migrating ani- 
mals that stop to feed on their crops. The draining of 
wetlands makes it harder for ducks and geese to find a 
safe place to rest and feed during migration. Some win- 
ter feeding areas are also being destroyed. 


The origin and development of animals 


Most scientists believe that all plant and animal spe- 
cies probably developed from a single form of life that 
arose about 33 billion years ago. The basic life form 
gradually changed so that through the centuries, mil- 
lions of kinds of animals have come into being. Some 
kinds are still alive. Others are extinct (no longer living). 
All animals, whether living or extinct, are related to one 
another. 

This set of ideas about how species change over time 
is called the theory of evolution. The theory is supported 
by a vast amount of evidence from many fields, and 
most scientists consider the occurrence of evolution to 
be a scientific fact. However, many people reject the 
concept of evolution because it conflicts with their reli- 
gious beliefs. The Biblical account of the Creation, for 
example, says that God took only a few days to create all 
living things essentially as they exist today. 

This section uses evolutionary theory as the basis of a 
discussion of when some animals originated and how 
species change. For a discussion of religion and evolu- 
tion and for more information on evolution, see Evolu- 
tion. For more information on creationism, see Crea- 
tionism. 

When animals appeared on the earth. Most scien- 
tists believe that the earth formed as a planet at least 44 
billion years ago. The first life forms were simple, sin- 
gle-celled organisms that appeared about 1 billion years 
later. More complex animals and plants gradually 
evolved from these simple organisms. Many groups of 
invertebrates arose about 650 million years ago. The first 
vertebrates—fish— developed about 500 million years 
ago, and the first mammals appeared more than 200 rail- 
lion years ago. 

Another way of looking at these times is to imagine 
the history of life on the earth in terms of a single year. 
Start with the formation of the earth on New Year's Day, 
January 1. Bacteria, the first types of living things, would 
not appear until March 22. Many invertebrates would 
not show up until November 9. Fish would evolve from 
their invertebrate ancestors about November 20. Mam- 


mals would appear on December 16. Monkeys and apes 
would not be found until December 28. Human beings 
would appear only a few minutes before the end of the 
year, on December 31. 

For more information on when various types of ani- 
mals appeared on the earth, see Earth (History of the 
earth). 

How new species are formed. Scientists consider 
groups of animals to represent distinct species when 
they become so different that they cannot produce fer- 
tile offspring together. Imagine a group of birds that 
lived only on one island. Then imagine that a few indi- 
viduals got lost in a storm and landed on a different is- 
land. The two groups, now separated from each other, 
may gradually develop different traits as they adapt to 
different environments. If they become dissimilar 
enough, they cannot produce fertile offspring if they 
mate. They are then two separate species. This process 
can repeat itself many times over many millions of years, 
resulting in great numbers of species. 

How species change. The individuals of any given 
species are not the same. Some individuals are larger, 
some are darker, some tolerate heat better, and some 
are stronger. Some individuals have traits that make 
them better able than others of their species to survive 
and reproduce in their environment. Over long periods, 
those animals will produce more young that survive 
than will individuals with less desirable traits. The off- 
spring of the better-suited species will probably share 
some of the desirable traits of their parents. For exam- 
ple, dark moths will be well hidden in a shady forest. 
More of their offspring will probably survive than will 
those of lighter moths, which may be easily seen and 
eaten by hungry predators. In the next generation, more 
moths in the forest will be dark. This process, which 
causes the traits of animal groups in nature to change 
through time, is called natural selection. See Natural se- 
lection. 

Why species become extinct. Scientists estimate 
that, left to natural processes, most species of animals 


504 Animal 


live 1 million to 10 million years before becoming ex- 
tinct. Natural causes that lead to the extinction of ani- 
mals include drastic changes in climate and failure of a 
species to compete with other animals for food. For ex- 
ample, the dinosaurs died out rather suddenly about 65 
million years ago. Many scientists believe that these 


huge reptiles became extinct because of a rapid change 
in climate and the dinosaurs inability to survive in it. 

Some human activities also cause animals to become 
extinct. Such activities are discussed in the next section 
of this article. For more information on why animals be- 
come extinct, see Extinct animal. 


The future of animals 


Some scientists believe that we are living in a period 
of mass extinction. In the United States alone, about 40 
species of birds, 35 species of mammals, and 25 other 
species of animals have become extinct during the last 
200 years. Many of these species became extinct as a re- 
sult of human activities. Hundreds of other species in 
the United States have become endangered (in danger 
of going extinct). Today, however, more and more peo- 
ple are working to preserve the variety of animal life for 
future generations. 


How human beings endanger animals 


Destruction of habitat. When people build cities or 
cut down forests to obtain wood or to clear land for 
farming, they destroy the habitats that animals need to 
survive. For example, grizzly bears and mountain lions 
once roamed freely where the city of San Francisco now 
stands. But a wild grizzly bear or mountain lion could 
not survive in San Francisco today. 

The habitats of animals in tropical forests are particu- 
larly threatened today. People are rapidly cutting down 
these forests to obtain such valuable hardwoods as ma- 
hogany and teak. They are also clearing the land to plant 
crops. However, soils in such areas are not especially 
fertile, and farms there produce crops for only a few 
years. To continue farming in such areas, people have to 
keep cutting down more of the forests to create new 
farmland. By the early 1990's, about two-fifths of the 
world’s tropical forests had already been destroyed. 

Many scientists and other people are especially con- 
cerned about the destruction of tropical forests. They 
point out that these forests have more biodiversity—that 





is, a greater variety of plant and animal species—than 
any other place. One square mile (2.6 square kilometers) 
of forest in South America may have more species of 
birds and insects than many countries do. In fact, biolo- 
gists discovered a single tree in a tropical forest in Peru 
that supported 43 species of ants. That is as many spe- 
cies of ants as live in the entire United Kingdom. 

Even though many types of plant and animal life can 
be found in one place in the tropics, the total range of 
many tropical species is extremely small. As a result, 
when a large area of forest is cleared, all the members 
of some species are killed. 

Pollution. Various types of pollution can also destroy 
animals and their habitats. Agricultural chemicals and in- 
dustrial wastes sometimes drain into ponds and streams 
and kill the plants and animals there. Air pollution pro- 
duced by factories that burn such fossil fuels as coal and 
oil has seriously damaged forests and wildlife. Acid rain 
—rainfall with a high concentration of sulfuric and nitric 
acids due to air pollution—kills fish and other animals. 

An increase in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere 
presents a long-term threat to animals and habitats. 
Many factories—as well as automobiles and power 
plants— release carbon dioxide into the air. Forest trees 
and plants help absorb this gas, but as more of them are 
cut down, carbon dioxide levels rise. Many scientists be- 
lieve that higher amounts of carbon dioxide in the at- 
mosphere speed up global warming caused by the phe- 
nomenon known as the greenhouse effect. A major 
global warmup could produce significant changes in 
the earth's climate. Such changes could destroy many 
kinds of plants and animals. See Greenhouse effect. 


W.K. Fletcher, Photo Researchers 





Destroying a forest results 
in the loss of habitat for many 
animal species. Animals that 
live in tropical forests are es- 
pecially threatened today. 
People cut down these forests 
to obtain wood and fuel and 
to clear land for farms and cit- 
ies. This photograph shows a 
logging operation in a tropi- 
cal rain forest in Malaysia. 


Introduction of new species into an area can some- 
times have unexpected consequences. In the mid-1800's, 
for example, people introduced rabbits into the wild in 
Australia for sport. However, the rabbits had no natural 
enemies there, and their population grew quickly. Partly 
as a result of the rapid increase and spread of rabbits, 
rabbit-eared bandicoots, which are native to Australia, 
disappeared from some areas of the continent. The 
bandicoots had to compete with the rabbits for burrow 
space. The traps and poisons people set out for rabbits 
also killed bandicoots. 

People may unintentionally cause new species to en- 
ter an area. Zebra mussels are shellfish that are native to 
the area around the Caspian Sea, which lies between Eu- 
rope and Asia. They were first found in North America in 
1988. Their larvae had been unintentionally released into 
the Great Lakes in ba/last water, the water kept in the 
hold of a ship to keep the vessel stable. Today, the mus- 
sels are a major pest in North America. The explosive 
growth of zebra mussel populations may threaten the 
food supply of many species of fish and shellfish that are 
native to the Great Lakes. See Zebra mussel. 

Hunting. Through the centuries, people have over- 
hunted certain animals and caused them to become ex- 
tinct. For example, prehistoric hunters probably helped 
make woolly mammoths and mastodons extinct. 

Overhunting in the past 200 years has been especially 
destructive of animal life. It contributed to the extinction 
of such animals as the great auk, the passenger pigeon, 
and the Steller’s sea cow. 

Human population growth. The human population 
is growing rapidly. By the late 1990's, the world had al- 
most 6 billion people—about five times as many as it had 
in 1850. Some experts predict that by 2050 the popula- 
tion will have about doubled from what it is now—to 
more than 115 billion people. Such a huge increase in 
the number of people on the planet would place addi- 
tional pressure on natural habitats. People would need 
more land for food and housing. In addition, human in- 
dustrial activities would probably increase to process 
the food and manufacture the goods the growing popu- 
lation would need. Many such activities cause pollution, 
which also can damage or destroy habitats. 

For more information on why animals become endan- 
gered, see Endangered species. See also the special 
feature on Endangered animals that appears in this arti- 
cle. 


How human beings protect animals 


Since the late 1800's, people have become increasing- 
ly concerned about the world’s vanishing wildlife. Such 
concerns have resulted in part from a growing aware- 
ness of the interconnectedness of species—the web of 
life. Greater numbers of people now recognize that the 
disappearance of large numbers of species threatens the 
survival of other living things, including human beings. 
People who help protect habitats and animals are called 
conservationists. 

Protected areas. The United States and many other 
countries have created national parks, game reserves, 
and wildlife refuges. In these areas, habitats are protect- 
ed from development and hunting is banned. Many con- 
servationists believe that these areas may represent the 
last hope for saving some threatened species in the wild. 


Animal 505 





Stephen J Krasemann, Nature Conservancy from Photo Researchers 


People protect some animals by raising them in captivity. A 
peregrine falcon chick receives a meal, above. Peregrine falcons 
are rare or absent in many of their former habitats. 


Yellowstone National Park is one of the largest wildlife 
preserves in the United States. Grizzly bears and bison 
roam the park freely, and bald eagles and trumpeter 
swans nest there. All these species are rare. The African 
elephant and black rhinoceros are protected in parks 
and reserves in the African savannas. 

Laws. State and federal laws also protect wildlife in 
the United States. For example, under the Endangered 
Species Act of 1973, officials in the Department of the In- 
terior keep an up-to-date list of species that are in dan- 
ger of extinction. The act prohibits federal projects that 
would destroy the habitat of an endangered species. In 
1982, the act was amended to require anyone who wants 
to develop or change a habitat occupied by an endan- 
gered species to show that the planned changes will not 
harm that species. 

Federal and state agencies in the United States also 
determine the number of certain game animals that can 
be hunted and fished each season. If an animal starts to 
become rare, the agencies can reduce the number of 
that species that can be taken legally. The population of 
that species then has an opportunity to recover. 

Breeding in captivity. Some species have become 
so rare that scientists believe the only hope of saving 
them is to breed them in captivity. For example, nearly 
all the California condors that are still alive are in zoos in 
the United States. A condor chick raised in captivity has 
a better chance of survival than one in nature does. As 
the number of condors grows, biologists are beginning 
to reintroduce a few birds back into the wild. Other en- 
dangered species being bred in captivity include the 
Arabian oryx and the whooping crane. 

In spite of conservation efforts, the future of wildlife 
remains uncertain. The human population continues to 
grow. Forests and grasslands are still being destroyed. 
People continue to hunt African elephants, snow leop- 
ards, and other vanishing species. Air pollution, acid 
rain, and water pollution also still threaten the survival of 


wild species. Raymond B. Huey and W. Herbert Wilson, Jr 


506 Animal 


Scientists classify animals chiefly according to the ani- 
mals’ ancestry. Those with a common ancestor nearer in 
time are more closely related than those who share an 
ancestor further back in time. Closely related animals 
share certain unique features. Scientists today arrange 


Phylum 


Rotifera 
(Rotifers or 
“wheel animals’) 


Bryozoa 
(Bryozoans) 


A classitication of the animal kingdom 


Characteristics 


Rotifers live in lakes, rivers, streams, and the oceans. They have cylin- 
der- or vase-shaped bodies. On their heads are circles of hairlike pro- 
jections known as cilia. The largest rotifers are about + inch (3 millime- 
ters) long. About 2,000 species have been identified. 








Bryozoans live in water, and most form colonies. Some colonies are jel- 
lylike masses. Others form branchlike networks on water plants. Bryozo- 
ans have a boxlike or tube-shaped body that holds fluid. 7entac/es (feel- 
ers) cluster on the head. About 5,000 species hayencen entice’ ae 2 ee have been identified. 





Cnidaria 
{Cnidarians or 
coelenterates) 


Cnidarians may be shaped like a cylinder, a bell, or an umbrella. Their 
bodies contain a jellylike material between two layers of cells. This phy- 
lum includes jellyfish, sea fans, sea anemones, and corals. About 9,000 
species have been identified. 





Brachiopoda 
(Lamp shells) 


Acanthocephala 
(Spiny-headed worms) 


Porifera 
(Sponges) 


Ctenophora 
(Comb jellies or 
sea walnuts) 





Nematoda 
(Roundworms or 
nematodes) 





Lamp shells have two hard shells that cover a soft body. They live in the 
oceans. Some attach themselves to rocks and other hard surfaces. Oth- 
ers burrow or lie loose in sand or mud. About 335 living species have 

been identified, and about 30,000 extinct species have been described. 


animals into 33 major groups called phyla (singular phy- 
lum). The classification below lists some of the phyla and 
some of the features of their members. It is arranged, 
roughly, from the smallest animals to the largest. How- 
ever, sizes of animals within a phylum can vary greatly. 


Example 


Brachionus 
calyciflorus 


Bowing 
ectoproct 
Sea 

anemore 











These parasites live in many animals. They have a spiny tubelike struc- 
ture called a proboscis on their head that attaches them to the wall of 
their hosts’ intestines. Most measure about 3 inch (2 centimeters) or 
less in length. About 600 species have been identified. 





Lamp shell oe 


Leptorynchoides 
thecatus 











Sponges attach themselves to rocks and other objects at the bottom of 
oceans, lakes, or rivers. Many take the shape of such objects. Sponges 
have cells called choanocytes or collar cells that trap food particles 
within chambers in their bodies. About 5,000 species of sponges have 
been identified. 


These transparent animals live in oceans. They have eight bands of 
comblike organs on the side of their bodies. Most are pea-sized to thim- 
ble-sized. Comb jellies of a group called Venus girdle can be over 3 
feet (90 centimeters) long. About 90 species have been identified. 


Many roundworms live in soil, water, or dead tissue. Some are para- 
sites that are found in living plants and animals. Roundworms range 
from microscopic to about 3 feet (90 centimeters) long. The phylum in- 
cludes filariae, hookworms, pinworms, and trichinae. About 12,000 spe- 
cies have been identified. 





Platyhelminthes 
(Flatworms) 


Nemertea or 
Rhynchocoela 
(Ribbon worms or 
proboscis worms) 


Many flatworms live as parasites in other animals. Flatworms have soft, 
thin, flattened bodies with three layers of cells. Most are less than 1 inch 
(2.5 centimeters) long. The largest flatworms, called tapeworms, are as 
long as 100 feet (30 meters). About 13,000 species have been identified. 





Most ribbon worms live in the oceans. They have a slender, often flat- 
tened, body. They shoot out a proboscis from their head to capture 
prey. Most of these worms range from less than 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) 
to 8 inches (20 centimeters) long, but one species can reach a length of 
100 feet (30 meters). About 900 species of ribbon worms have been 
identified. 













Venus’ girdle 
ge 
(A ANG 
ae a 
Hookworm 


Planarian 





Bootlace worm 


$a ane 





Annelida 
(Segmented worms) 


Chaetognatha 
(Arrow worms) 





The bodies of these worins consist of segments. Many of these worms 
have tentacles on their heads and a pair of leglike projections called 
parapodia on each body segment. Earthworms and leeches belong to 
this phylum. About 8,800 species have been identified. 


These worms have an arrow shape. They range from about + to 6 
inches (0.5 to 15 centimeters) long. They have movable hooks on their 
heads that they use to catch prey. They live in open seas, particularly in 
warm waters. About 100 species have been identified. 





Arthropoda 
(Arthropods) 


Animal 507 


Earthworm 








Arthropods have jointed legs, segmented bodies, and an outside shell 
called an exoskeleton. This phylum includes insects, such as ants, bees, 
beetles, and butterflies; crustaceans, such as crabs, lobsters, and 
shrimps; arachnids, such as mites, ticks, and spiders; centipedes; and 
millipedes. More than 1 million species have been identified. 





Echinodermata 
(Echinoderms) 








Echinoderms are spiny-skinned animals that have an internal bony skel- 
eton. They are the only animals that have tiny tubelike structures called 
tube feet. This phylum includes brittle stars, sand dollars, sea urchins, 
sea cucumbers, and starfish. About 6,000 species have been identified. 





Mollusca 
(Mollusks) 


Chordata 
(Chordates) 





Frog 


Mollusks make up the largest group of water animals, though some 
species live on land. Most mollusks have a hard shell that protects a soft 
body. The phylum includes clams, mussels, octopuses, oysters, snails, 
and squids. About 50,000 living species have been identified, and fossils 
of 100,000 extinct species have been found. 


At some point in their life cycle, all chordates have a notochord (a rod- 
like, flexible cord that runs down the back of the body). A hollow nerve 
tube runs above the notochord. This phylum is the one to which human 
beings and many familiar animals belong. It includes amphibians, birds, 
mammals, and reptiles, as well as hagfishes, lampreys, and bony fishes. 
About 45,000 species have been identified. 


Turtle Parrot 


Starfish 








Snail 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by John D Daw 
son; Alex Ebel: John F. Eggert. Alan Male. Lin 
den Artists Lid, Donald Moss, Peter Snow 
ball: James Teason 





Coelacanth 


Bear, seal, monkey 


508 Animal 


Related articles in World Book include: 
The study of animals 


Biology Embryology Marine biology 
Classification, Entomology Ornithology 
Scientific Ethology Paleontology 
Comparative Gnotobiotics Sociobiology 
psychology Herpetology Zoology 
Ecology Ichthyology 
Groups of animals 
Amphibian Fish Reptile 
Arachnid Herbivore Rotifer 
Arthropod Insect Ruminant 
Bird Invertebrate Sponge 
Carnivore Mammal Vertebrate 
Cnidarian Mollusk Viviparous animal 
Cold-blooded Omnivore Warm-blooded 
animal Oviparous animal animal 
Crustacean Parasite Worm 
Echinoderm Primate 


Individual animals 


World Book has hundreds of separate articles on specific ani- 


mals. Many are listed below. 


Study aids 


Amphibians 
Bullfrog Newt Tadpole 
Frog Salamander Toad 
Midwife toad Surinam toad Tree frog 
Mud puppy 


Reptiles 


See Lizard and Snake, with their lists of Related articles. See 
also the following articles: 
Alligator Gavial 
Crocodile Terrapin 


Birds 


For a list of separate articles on birds, see the Related articles 
at the end of the Bird article. 


Tortoise 
Turtle 


Mammals 


See the following general articles and the lists of Related arti- 
cles at the ends of these articles: 


Antelope Human being 
Ape Insectivore 
Bat Marsupial 
Bear Monkey 
Camel Ox 

Cat Rabbit 
Cattle Raccoon 
Cetacean Rodent 
Deer Sheep 

Dog Sirenia 
Edentate Ungulate 
Goat Weasel 
Hog Whale 
Horse 


Extinct and prehistoric animals 


See Dinosaur, with its list of Related articles. See also the fol- 
lowing articles: 


Archaeopteryx Mastodon 
Dodo Moa 
Elephant bird Passenger pigeon 
Eryops Prehistoric animal 
Extinct animal Pterosaur 
Ground sloth Saber-toothed cat 
Hesperornis Trilobite 
Mammoth 

The history of animal life \ 
Adaptation 
Earth (History of Earth) 
Endangered species 
Evolution 
Fossil 
Heredity 
Life 


Natural selection 


Animal habitats 


For a general discussion of animal habitats, see the articles on 
Biome, Habitat, and Environment. See also: 


Desert Prairie Steppe 
Forest Rain forest Swamp 
Marsh Savanna Tundra 
Mountain Seashore Wetland 
Ocean 


Animal traits and behavior 


Cnidarians 

Coral Jellyfish Sea anemone 
Hydra Portuguese man- Sea fan 

of-war 

Worms 

Earthworm Horsehair worm Ribbon worm 
Eelworm Leech Roundworm 
Filaria Lugworm Tapeworm 
Flatworm Nematode Trichina 
Fluke Pinworm Vinegar eel 
Hookworm Planarian 

Echinoderms 
Brittle star Sea lily 
Sand dollar Sea urchin 
Sea cucumber Starfish 

Mollusks 

Abalone Geoduck Periwinkle 
Argonaut Giant squid Scallop 
Chiton Limpet Shipworm 
Clam Mussel Slug 
Cockle Nautilus Snail 
Conch Octopus Squid 
Cowrie Oyster Whelk 
Cuttlefish 

Crustaceans 
Barnacle Fiddler crab Shrimp 
Blue crab Hermit crab Water flea 
Crab Krill Wood louse 
Crayfish Lobster 

Arachnids 
Black widow Mite 
Brown recluse Scorpion 
Chigger Spider 
Daddy longlegs Tarantula 
Deer tick Tick 
House spider Trap-door spider 
Insects 


For a list of separate articles on insects, see the Related arti- 
cles at the end of the Insect article. 


Fish 


For a list of separate articles on fishes, see the Related articles 
at the end of the Fish article. 


Biological clock Mimicry 

Dominance Pheromone 

Estivation Protective coloration 
Growth Reproduction 

Hibernation Sleep (Sleep among animals) 
Instinct Sound {Animal sounds) 


Metamorphosis 
Migration 


Territoriality 





Animal body parts 

Antennae Hand (Animal hands) 
Blubber Hoof 
Brain (The brain in animals; Horn 

illustration) Scale 
Coelom Shell 
Compound eye Skin (Animal skin) 
Ear (The ears of animals) Tail 
Eye (Eyes of animals) Teeth (Teeth of animals) 
Feather Tentacle 
Gizzard Tongue 

Animal diseases 

Anthrax 
Brucellosis 
Canine parvovirus 
Distemper 


Foot-and-mouth disease 
Fungal disease 
Glanders 

Heaves 

Mange 

Psittacosis 

Rabies 

Spavin 

Tularemia 


Organizations 


Audubon Society, National 

Fish and Wildlife Service 

Greenpeace 

Izaak Walton League of America 

National Wildlife Federation 

Nature Conservancy 

Sierra Club 

Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
World Wildlife Fund 


Other related articles 


Animal experimentation 
Animal rights movement 
Animal worship 
Aquarium, Home 
Aquarium, Public 
Biodiversity 

Biogenesis 

Breeding 

Circus 

Conservation 

Farm and farming 
Fauna 

Fishing industry 

Game 

Livestock 

Magnetism (Magnetism in living things) 
Nature study 

Pet 

Poaching 

Safari 

Taxidermy 

Veterinary medicine 
Wildlife conservation 
Zoo 


Outline 


I. Importance of animals 

A. Animals and the web of life 
B. Animals and people 

ll. Kinds of animals 
A. Some common ways of grouping animals 
B. The scientific classification of animals 

HI. Where animals live 
A. Animals of the mountains 
B. Animals of the grasslands 
C. Animals of the temperate forests 


Animal 509 


D. Animals of the tropical forests 

E. Animals of the deserts 

F. Animals of the polar regions 

G. Animals of the oceans 
IV. The bodies of animals 

A. Adaptations for moving about 

B. Adaptations for eating 

C. Adaptations for breathing 

D. Adaptations for sensing the environment 
V. How animals protect themselves 

A. Hiding ina safe place —_E. Playing dead 


B. Camouflage F. Giving up a body part 
C. Escaping by flight G. Fighting 
D. Armor H. Chemical defenses 


VI. How animals reproduce 
A. Asexual reproduction 
B. Sexual reproduction 
C. Courtship behavior 
D. Regeneration 

Vi. How animals raise their young 
A. Providing food 
B. Incubation 
C. Providing shelter 
D. Providing protection 
E. Group care 
F. Learning and play 

VIE Animal homes and communities 

A. Home ranges B. Group living 

IX. Animal migration 
A. Why animals migrate 
B. Animal travelers 

X. The origin and development of animals 

A. When animals appeared on the earth 
B. How new species are formed 
C. How species change 
D. Why species become extinct 

XI. The future of animals 
A. How human beings endanger animals 
B. How human beings protect animals 

XH. A classification of the animal kingdom 


C. Dangers of migration 


Questions 


What is the largest animal of all? 

What groups of animals are warm-blooded? 

What are some ways in which animals and plants are connect- 
ed? 

How do the long ears of desert foxes and hares help them sur- 
vive desert heat? 

What is the difference between protective coloration and mimic- 
ry?What is Batesian mimicry? 

What are the two general forms of animal reproduction? 

Why do animals engage in courtship behavior? 

What is filter feeding? 

What animal is the champion migrator? How far does it usually 
travel each year? 

What is the difference between a home range and a territory? 


Additional resources 


Level! 

Fleisher, Paul. Life Cycles of a Dozen Diverse Creatures. Mill- 
brook, 1996. 

Hickman, Pamela. Animal Senses: How Animals See, Hear, Taste, 
Smell, and Feel. Kids Can Pr., 1998. 

Kerrod, Robin, and Stidworthy, John. Facts on File Wildlife Atlas. 
2nd ed. Facts on File, 1997. 

Perry, Phyllis J. Armor to Venom: Animal Defenses. Watts, 1997. 

Roop, Connie and Peter. Wa/k on the Wild Side! Millbrook, 1997. 

Taylor, Barbara. Animal Homes. D K Pub., 1996. 


Level I 

Grzimek, Bernhard, ed. Grzimek’s Encyclopedia of Mammals. 5 
vols. McGraw, 1990. 

Nowak, Ronald M. Walker's Mammals of the World. 2 vols. 6th 
ed. Johns Hopkins, 1999. 

Whitfield, Philip. The Simon & Schuster Encyclopedia of 
Animals. Simon & Schuster, 1998. 


510 Animal, Extinct 


Animal, Extinct. See Extinct animal. 

Animal, Prehistoric. See Prehistoric animal. 
Animal experimentation is the use of animals in bi- 
ological, medical, and psychological studies. Human be- 
ings and many animals have similar organ systems and 
body processes. Experiments on animals help scientists 
increase knowledge about the way the human body 
works. Animal experimentation has played a part in 
many major medical advances, including the develop- 
ment of antibiotics, vaccines, and surgical techniques. 

People have experimented with animals for hundreds 
of years, but the practice did not become widespread 
until the late 1800's. While animal experimentation has 
produced considerable benefits to people, it often re- 
sults in the suffering and death of animals. Because of 
this, animal experimentation is a highly controversial is- 
sue. Animal experimentation that involves performing 
surgery On live animals is called vivisection. People op- 
posed to this and other forms of animal experimentation 
are sometimes called antivivisectionists. 

In the United States, scientists perform experiments 
on more than 20 million animals each year. However, 
some animal rights advocates estimate that as many as 
100 million animals are used annually. Mice and rats ac- 
count for about 90 percent of the animals used. Scien- 
tists also use birds, cats, dogs, guinea pigs, hamsters, 
monkeys, and rabbits. In addition, educators use ani- 
mals to teach students about anatomy, physiology, biol- 
ogy, and surgery. 

Reasons for experimentation. Medical researchers 
study animals to get a better understanding of body 
processes in humans and animals. They use many ani- 
mals to study the causes and effects of illnesses, such as 
cancer and heart disease. In addition, they use animals 
to develop and test drugs, surgical techniques, and 
other medical therapies. Scientists use animals to test 
the safety of chemicals in food products and cosmetics. 
Psychologists observe the behavior of animals under a 
variety of conditions, such as hunger or stress, to learn 
how similar conditions might affect people. 

The debate over animal experimentation. Some 
people call for an end to all animal experimentation. 
They believe either that such research is morally wrong 
or that benefits gained by animal research are trivial 
compared to the costs in animal suffering. Other people 
accept the need for such experimentation in medical 
and other scientific research but oppose animal testing 
of products that have no scientific value, such as cos- 
metics and perfumes. Many people argue for stricter 
laws to prevent mistreatment of laboratory animals. Crit- 
ics of animal experimentation also believe that scientists 
should more thoroughly investigate other research 
methods. These methods include test-tube experiments 
on bacteria or on bits of human or animal tissue, and the 
use of computer models of living systems. 

Most scientists, on the other hand, argue that without 
animal experimentation they could not continue to make 
significant progress in medicine and other sciences. 
They claim that the animal suffering caused by experi- 
mentation is minor. Scientists also point out that al- 
though other types of experiments are used whenever 
possible, such experiments are not always adequate. For 
example, testing a drug on isolated tissues or organs 
will not show how the drug affects the body as a whole. 


Laws and regulations. In the United States, the Ani- 
mal Welfare Act of 1966 requires scientists to provide 
adequate food and shelter for certain kinds of laborato- 
ry animals. Many private and government agencies that 
provide funds to research institutions regulate experi- 
mentation done by the institution. For example, the Pub- 
lic Health Service, a federal agency, requires each insti- 
tution it funds to set up a committee to oversee the use 
and care of the animals. In 1992, in response to concerns 
about laboratory break-ins by animal rights advocates, a 
law was passed making it a federal offense to damage 
or disrupt animal research. Andrew N. Rowan 
Animal husbandry. See Livestock. 

Animal rights movement is a term that refers to or- 
ganized efforts opposing the use of animals for re- 
search, food, and clothing. People who defend animal 
rights, called animal rights activists, point out that ani- 
mals feel pain and have reasoning ability. They say that 
animals deserve greater moral consideration than hu- 
man beings generally give them. 

Most people agree that human beings have some 
obligations to animals, but they also believe that humans 
can use animals for certain purposes. For example, they 
argue that research ona few animals can save many hu- 
man lives. 

Some animal rights activists work to outlaw laborato- 
ry experiments on animals. Others teach that human be- 
ings do not need to eat animals for survival. Many ac- 
tivists protest the use of fur coats or leather products. 
They also oppose hunting and spectator sports in which 
animals may be treated inhumanely, such as bullfighting 
and dog racing. 

The animal rights movement developed out of the an- 
imal protection movement. The movements have differ- 
ent opinions on how animals may be used. The animal 
protection movement tends to accept the need to raise 
animals for food and to use them in some research if 
they receive proper care. In contrast, the animal rights 
movement opposes any use of animals that results in in- 
jury or death to the animal. Public opinion polls show 
that most people agree with the less radical views of the 
animal protection movement. 

The animal protection movement attracted many sup- 
porters at the end of the 1800's but declined during and 
after World War I (1914-1918). It began to reemerge after 
World War II (1939-1945), especially in the 1960's as in- 
terest in environmental issues increased. Animal rights 
became a central part of the animal protection move- 
ment during the 1970's. Since then, the movement has 
expanded at a dramatic rate worldwide. People for the 
Ethical Treatment of Animals and the Humane Society of 
the United States are leading animal protection organi- 
zations. Andrew N. Rowan 

See also Animal experimentation; Humane Society; 
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. 
Animal worship is the practice of worshiping or hon- 
oring animals. Many societies worship animals because 
of a belief that everything in nature has a soul. This be- 
liet is called animism. A hunting society may worship an 
animal to gain its good will, to apologize for killing it, or 
to acquire the animal's qualities, such as speed or 
strength. 

Many Indians of northern North America worshiped 
animals as part of a belief known as totemism. Each 


group had its own sacred symbol called a totem. Most 
totems were animals. Many groups considered them- 
selves descendants of their totem animal. Some people 
worship a god believed to have taken the form of an ani- 
mal. For example, the ancient Egyptian god Thoth some- 
times appeared as a baboon and sometimes as a wading 
bird called an ibis. Christopher Mcintosh 

See also Animism; Totem. 
Animation is a visual technique that creates the illu- 
sion of motion, rather than recording motion through 
live action. The technique is used mainly for motion pic- 
tures. Animation can be created by illustrators, filmmak- 
ers, video makers, and computer specialists. 


Animation is most popular in creating cartoon movies. 


Advertisers also employ animation to develop commer- 
cials for television. In addition, producers of instruction- 
al films may use animation to help explain a difficult idea 
or one that could not be shown in live action. Animation 
can also be combined with live action in a movie. 
Traditionally, in making an animated film, a filmmaker 
photographs a series of drawings or objects one by one. 
Each drawing or shape of an object takes up one frame 
of the film. The position of a character or scene changes 
slightly from frame to frame. When the film is shown 
through a projector, the pictures appear to move. 
Animation can exist with little technology. One simple 
animation device is the “ip book, a group of sketches in 
sequence placed one on top of the other. When a view- 
er flips the pages rapidly, the images appear to move. 


Preliminary steps in animation 


Today, the use of computers has brought significant 
changes to animation production. But several processes 
remain the same in both traditional and new methods. 

The first step in making any animated film is creating 
a story. After a story has been established, an artist and 
writer prepare a storyboard, which serves as the film's 
script. The storyboard resembles a giant comic strip. It 
consists of rough sketches that portray the action of the 
story, with the dialogue accompanying each sketch. 

After the director and other key personnel approve 
the storyboard, performers make a recording of the dia- 
logue and any music. The recorded sound must be 
synchronized (made to occur at the same time and the 
same speed) with the action. The composer and actors 
carefully follow the storyboard to make sure the music 
and dialogue match each sequence of the action. 

Animators work from a guide called an exposure 
sheet that indicates the number of frames needed to ex- 
press each movement and each word of the recorded 
dialogue. Animators synchronize animation to sound us- 
ing a guide called a bar sheet or working from digitized 
sound files on a computer. Digitizing is the process of 
converting a sound or image into a format that a com- 
puter can read. After completing these preliminary 
steps, the animation process continues, using any of 
several techniques. 


The contributors of this article , john Canemaker and Peter 
Weishar, are animators who have both written widely on the art 
of animation. Canemaker is head of the animation program at 
New York University’s Tisch School ot the Arts. Weishar is a Pro- 
fessor of Film and Television at New York University. 


Animation 511 





© Warner Bros. Inc. 1988 


Animated films have been popular since the earliest days of 
motion pictures. Many short animated films feature humanlike 
animal cartoon characters, such as Bugs Bunny and Daffy Duck. 


Cel animation 


Cel animation has traditionally been the most com- 
mon technique used to make animated cartoons. The 
technique is named for the clear sheets of celluloid ac- 
etate on which animators trace and paint the images and 
backgrounds. Tens of thousands of separate cels in se- 
quence are required for a feature-length animation 
movie, such as Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937) 
or Pinocchio (1940), and a lesser number for many televi- 
sion cartoons. 

Artists called /ayout artists work with the director to 
determine what settings will be drawn, how each char- 
acter will act and look, and how the action can best be 
broken down into scenes. After these decisions have 
been made, the layout artists prepare drawings to guide 
two other groups of artists— background artists and ani- 
mators. The background artists draw all the back- 
grounds for the film—that is, everything that will appear 
on the screen except the characters. 

The animators make separate drawings of the charac- 
ters. Working from the exposure sheet, the animators 
must Create the exact number of drawings required by 
the action and dialogue. In one episode, for example, a 
character may answer the telephone by saying “Hello.” 
The exposure sheet shows that the word “Hello” re- 
quires eight frames. The animators thus must make 
eight drawings in which the character's mouth moves in 
sequence to form the word. They must also include all 
the character's body movements. 

Aiter the animators complete their drawings, another 
group of artists trace them onto the cels. A painting de- 
partment applies the proper colors to the reverse side 
of the cels. The completed cels are then sent to the cam- 
era department, where camera operators photograph 
the cels frame by trame over the proper background. 
The exposure sheets tell the camera operator which cels 
and backgrounds are needed for each frame. After the 


photography is completed, the sound track is added. 


Prints of the film are made, and the movie is released. 


512 Animation 


Computer animation 


Skilled animators continue to make many drawings by 
hand. Since the mid-1980's, however, computer assist- 
ance combined with hand-drawn animation has become 
standard in many movie studios. The combined method 
created such feature-length animated films as The Lion 
King (1994) and The Prince of Egypt (1998). 

Today, computer techniques have replaced cels, as 
well as the tedious tasks of hand-inking, painting, and 
photographing them. Animators scan drawings into a 
computer, which cleans up the images and colors them. 
Hand-painted backgrounds are also scanned into a com- 
puter and combined with the characters. The computer 
eliminates laborious hand coloring and offers a vast 
choice of colors. Computerized backgrounds can also 
have numerous levels, creating an illusion of depth. 
Computer experts match the final animation to the 
sound track and then transfer the animation from the 
computer to film or videotape. 

One increasingly important type of animation is com- 
puter-generated imagery (|CGl), in which the computer 
creates the characters and backgrounds and animates 


Cel animation 


them without actually photographing either cels or fig- 
ures. Films made entirely with CGI include 7oy Story 
(1995), Aniz (1998), and A Bug’s Life (1998). 

Most CGl-animated characters start with a sketch or 
small sculpture called a maquette that is used for refer- 
ence. The artist then creates a computer image called a 
wireframe model The wireframe model serves as a 
framework for a shell or skin that gives the computer 
image a solid, three-dimensional appearance. 

To move the character, a computer animator changes 
the positions of the wireframe model in a number of key 
frames. The computer then supplies the frames between 
the key frames, moving the model from one of the ani- 
mator's positions to the next. 

After creating the three-dimensional model, the artist 
adds color, texture, and shading in a process known as 
texture mapping. Texture mapping makes the surfaces of 
the characters and scenery look real. A texture map can 
be created by a computer program or scanned from an 
actual photograph. 

The final step is called rendering. During rendering, 
the computer calculates the effect of light, color, and 
texture on the model's surface. For a film or video, the 


Cel animation is the technique of creating cartoons on clear sheets called ceils. In the first picture, an animator 


draws the characters, creating drawings for each movement a character makes. After artists trace the drawings 
onto cels, other artists paint the cels with the colors needed for each character (second picture). The complet- 
ed cels are placed over backgrounds drawn by background artists (third picture). A special camera is used to 
photograph the cels and backgrounds, one frame at a time (fourth picture). 





WORLD BOOK photos by John R. Hamilton, Globe Photos 
, wn = 


ye 


We 


Animation 513 


Computer animation is now the leading animation technique. This photo sequence shows some of the steps 
needed to create a single frame The first picture shows a computer image called a wireframe model After 
creating the three-dimensional model, the artist in the next picture has added color, texture, and shading ina 
process known as texture mapping. The third picture shows the rough animation stage of the scene. The fourth 
picture reproduces a completed frame as it will appear on the motion- picture screen. 


Computer 
animation 


WN. 
vt 
Ata \ \S wy 


SS 
SOS 
eS wat 
RSs 
SN 





computer wii! produce a two-dimensional digital pic- 
ture of the characters for each frame of the animation. 
The computer artist usually adjusts many visual effects, 
such as camera focus and transparency, during the ren- 
dering phase. Some computer programs enable the 
artist to “paint’ color directly on the three-dimensional 
model. A single animation may take hours or even 
weeks to render. For example, six powerful computers 
took 24 hours to render a single second of some scenes 
from A Bugs Life. 

Computer-generated characters can be combined 
with live action in a process known as compositing. The 
science fiction film Jurassic Park (1993) popularized this 
technique when it combined realistic, computer-gener- 
ated dinosaurs with actual actors and sets. Compositing 
can also be used to combine real actors with computer- 
generated sets and special effects. 


Other kinds of animation 


There are several kinds of animation in general use 
besides cel and computer-generated animation. They in- 





Prince of Egypt™ & © 1998 DreamWorks LLC, reprinted with 
permission by DreamWorks Animation 





clude (1) puppet animation, (2) clay animation, (3) pixila- 
tion, (4) pin screen animation, and (5) drawing on film. 

Puppet animation uses three-dimensional figures or 
objects. This type of animation is frequently used in 
making short animated films, but it has also been the 
technique of such feature films as The Nightmare Before 
Christmas (1993) and James and the Giant Peach (1996). 
Puppet animation also appears at times in live action fea- 
tures, such as Star Wars (1977) and E.T.: The Extra-Terres- 
trial (1982). 

Two types of photography make puppet animation 
possible. They are called stop motion and go-motion. 
Stop motion uses a camera that is stopped after a single 
frame is photographed. Each time the camera stops, ani- 
mators make slight, sequential adjustments in the posi- 
tions of the figures or objects. When the frames are pro- 
jected in rapid succession, the models appear to move. 

Go-motion is a refinement of stop motion. Special 
computers and other equipment control the movement 
of both the models and the camera photographing 
them. This process slightly blurs the movements of the 


512 Animation 


Computer animation 


Skilled animators continue to make many drawings by 
hand. Since the mid-1980's, however, computer assist- 
ance combined with hand-drawn animation has become 
standard in many movie studios. The combined method 
created such feature-length animated films as The Lion 
King (1994) and The Prince of Egypt (1998). 

Today, computer techniques have replaced cels, as 
well as the tedious tasks of hand-inking, painting, and 
photographing them. Animators scan drawings into a 
computer, which cleans up the images and colors them. 
Hand-painted backgrounds are also scanned into a com- 
puter and combined with the characters. The computer 
eliminates laborious hand coloring and offers a vast 
choice of colors. Computerized backgrounds can also 
have numerous levels, creating an illusion of depth. 
Computer experts match the final animation to the 
sound track and then transfer the animation from the 
computer to film or videotape. 

One increasingly important type of animation is com- 
puter-generated imagery (CGH), in which the computer 
creates the characters and backgrounds and animates 


Cel animation 


them without actually photographing either cels or fig- 
ures. Films made entirely with CGI include Toy Story 
(1995), Antz (1998), and A Bugs Life (1998). 

Most CGl-animated characters start with a sketch or 
small sculpture called a maquette that is used for refer- 
ence. The artist then creates a computer image called a 
wireframe model. The wireframe model serves as a 
framework for a shell or skin that gives the computer 
image a solid, three-dimensional appearance. 

To move the character, a computer animator changes 
the positions of the wireframe model in a number of key 
frames. The computer then supplies the frames between 
the key frames, moving the model from one of the ani- 
mator's positions to the next. 

After creating the three-dimensional model, the artist 
adds color, texture, and shading in a process known as 
texture mapping. Texture mapping makes the surfaces of 
the characters and scenery look real. A texture map can 
be created by a computer program or scanned from an 
actual photograph. 

The final step is called rendering. During rendering, 
the computer calculates the effect of light, color, and 
texture on the model's surface. For a film or video, the 


Cel animation is the technique of creating cartoons on clear sheets called ce/s. In the first picture, an animator 


draws the characters, creating drawings for each movement a character makes. After artists trace the drawings 
onto cels, other artists paint the cels with the colors needed for each character (second picture). The complet- 
ed cels are placed over backgrounds drawn by background artists (third picture). A special camera is used to 
photograph the cels and backgrounds, one frame at a time (fourth picture). 


“=a 





~~ 


WORLD BOOK photos by John R Hamilton, Globe Photos 


oF ' 
~ 2 x 





Computer 
animation 


Animation 513 


Computer animation is now the leading animation technique. This photo sequence shows some of the steps 
needed to create a single frame. The first picture shows a computer image called a wireframe model. After 


creating the three-dimensional model, the artist in the next picture has added color, texture, and shading in a 
process known as fexture mapping. The third picture shows the rough animation stage of the scene. The fourth 
picture reproduces a completed frame as it will appear on the motion-picture screen. 


\ 
Ny \ 
Sa 4 Ki 
Sa |\ 
OS a \ 


A 
NY's 


Ser oo 
ON eed ‘ 
ws: 


computer will produce a two-dimensional digital pic- 
ture of the characters for each frame of the animation. 
The computer artist usually adjusts many visual effects, 
such as camera focus and transparency, during the ren- 
dering phase. Some computer programs enable the 
artist to “paint” color directly on the three-dimensional 
model. A single animation may take hours or even 
weeks to render. For example, six powerful computers 
took 24 hours to render a single second of some scenes 
from A Bugs Life. 

Computer-generated characters can be combined 
with live action in a process known as compositing. The 
science fiction film /urassic Park (1993) popularized this 
technique when it combined realistic, computer-gener- 
ated dinosaurs with actual actors and sets. Compositing 
can also be used to combine real actors with computer- 
generated sets and special effects. 


Other kinds of animation 


There are several kinds of animation in general use 
besides cel and computer-generated animation. They in- 


Prince of Egypt™ & © 1998 DreamWorks LLC, reprinted with 
permission by DreamWorks Animation 





clude (1) puppet animation, (2) clay animation, (3) pixila- 
tion, (4) pin screen animation, and (5) drawing on film. 

Puppet animation uses three-dimensional figures or 
objects. This type of animation is frequently used in 
making short animated films, but it has also been the 
technique of such feature films as The Nightmare Before 
Christmas (1993) and James and the Giant Peach (1996). 
Puppet animation also appears at times in live action fea- 
tures, such as Star Wars (1977) and E.T.: The Extra-Terres- 
trial (1982). 

Two types of photography make puppet animation 
possible. They are called stop motion and go-motion. 
Stop motion uses a camera that is stopped after a single 
frame is photographed. Each time the camera stops, ani- 
mators make slight, sequential adjustments in the posi- 
tions of the figures or objects. When the frames are pro- 
jected in rapid succession, the models appear to move. 

Go-motion is a refinement of stop motion. Special 
computers and other equipment control the movement 
of both the models and the camera photographing 
them. This process slightly blurs the movements of the 


Animation 


Photofest 


Puppet animation was used in the famous motion-picture 
thriller King Kong (1933). Animators used stop motion, creating a 
small model of a gorilla that appeared as a giant on the screen. 


models, making them look more natural on film. For ex- 
ample, the children on bicycles flying across a moonlit 
sky in £.7. were animated by go-motion. 

Clay animation is a type of puppet animation that 
uses figures or objects made of clay. This technique is 
often used for television commercials and short animat- 
ed films. 

Pixilation is a way of animating live action. When the 
camera is stopped, the actors slightly alter their posi- 
tions. Pixilation makes people look cartoonlike on film. 

Pin screen animation is a seldom-used technique 
that employs a large white screen with about 1 million 
pinholes. Animators place headless pins into the holes 
and light the screen from the side. Images are created 
by shadows from the light falling on the pins. Animators 
move the pins to change the images. After each change, 
they photograph the screen to produce a series of 
frames for animation. 

Drawing on film is an inexpensive technique that re- 
quires little equipment. The animator draws or paints 
the sequence of images directly on the film stock, in- 
stead of photographing them with a camera. 


History 


Early animation. The first examples of animation 
were motion toys developed in the 1800's. One of the 
earliest devices was the phenakistoscope, invented by 
the Belgian scientist Joseph Antoine Plateau in 1832. It 
was a notched wheel attached to a handle. One side of 
the wheel had a series of drawings. The viewer held the 
wheel up to a mirror, with the drawings facing the mir- 
ror. When the viewer spun the wheel and looked 
though the notches on the blank side of the wheel, the 
images appeared to move. Such devices contributed to 
the invention of motion pictures. 

Arthur Melbourne-Cooper of England was one of the 
first people to make motion pictures using animation. In 
1899, Melbourne-Cooper moved matchsticks in differ- 
ent sequences and photographed them frame by frame 
to produce an advertisement called Matches: An Appeal. 





J. Stuart Blackton, a British-born American newspaper 
cartoonist, was the first person to film drawings frame 
by frame. In 1906, Blackton made Humorous Phases of 
Funny Faces by filming a series of faces drawn ona 
blackboard. 

Emile Cohl of France was another important early ani- 
mator. Cohl made about 250 short animated films from 
1908 to 1921, beginning with Fantasmagorie. 

Pioneers of American animation. In New York City, 
Winsor McCay exhibited his first animated film, Little 
Nemo, in 1911. McCay’s most famous animated short 
film was Gertie (1914). McCay produced high-quality 
films that featured cartoon characters with graceful 
movements and distinct personality traits. He estab- 
lished the techniques and visual approaches that set the 
standard for character animation. McCay’s work became 
influential for its fluid motion, high-quality draftsman- 
ship, and feeling of weight. 

In 1914, animator John Randolph Bray began stream- 
lining the production processes involved in animation. 
Under Bray, studios hired large staffs and operated like 
assembly lines, making cartoons cheaper and faster to 
produce. Bray collaborated with animator Earl Hurd, 
who had patented the cel technique. Together they rev- 
olutionized the animation process. Before cels were 
used, animators had to completely redraw both the 
characters and the background for each frame ina 
scene. With cels, however, animators draw the back- 
ground only once, saving work. 

American movie studios began producing several se- 
ries of animated films featuring regular cartoon charac- 
ters about 1915. Otto Messmer created the Felix the Cat 
series, which was produced by former newspaper car- 
toonist Pat Sullivan. Felix was the first internationally 
popular animated character. Messmer directed more 
than 150 short Felix films during the 1920's. 

Max Fleischer, a former newspaper cartoonist, and 
his brother Dave produced animated series featuring 
Koko the Clown, Betty Boop, and Popeye the Sailor. Oth- 
er well-known cartoon characters of the early 1900's in- 
cluded Krazy Kat and Mutt and Jeff. Some of the charac- 
ters first appeared in newspaper comic strips. 

Animation in Europe. While animators in the United 
States concentrated on developing cartoon characters, 
animators in Europe experimented with creative tech- 
niques. From 1910 through the 1920's, for example, the 
Polish-born artist Ladislas Starevitch (whose name is also 
spelled Wladyslaw Starewicz) used puppet animation. 
Germany's Lotte Reiniger produced short animated 
films with black sithouettes and created the first feature- 
length animated film, Adventures of Prince Achmed 
(1926). 

Some European artists experimented with abstract an- 
imation. The German artists Walter Ruttmann and Oskar 
Fischinger created animated short films with abstract 
geometric shapes. Two book illustrators in France— 
Russian-born Alexandre Alexeieff and American-born 
Claire Parker—developed pin screen animation during 
the early 1930's. 

Walt Disney became the most famous producer of 
animated films. He created such popular cartoon charac- 
ters as Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck, Goofy, and Pluto. 
Disney produced Steamboat Willie, starring Mickey 
Mouse, in 1928. It was the first animated cartoon with a 





John Canemaker Collection 


An early animated film by Winsor McCay in 1914 starred 
Gertie the dinosaur. McCay pioneered in creating cartoon char- 
acters with flexible movements and distinct personality traits. 


synchronized sound track that integrated music, voices, 
and sound effects. From 1928 to 1939, Disney perfected 
the character animation film, mainly through his popular 
cartoon series called Si//vy Symphonies. 

In 1937, Disney issued Snow White and the Seven 
Dwerts, his first full-length animated film. It became one 
of the most popular films in movie history. Disney later 
produced such animated feature-length films as Pinoc- 
chio (1940), Fantasia (1940), Dumbo (1941), Bambi (1942), 
and Lady and the Tramp (1955). Disney's influence on ani- 
mated storytelling, design, and artistic theory continues 
to be felt throughout the animation industry. 

Animation in the mid-1900’s. Along with Disney, 
several other major film studios dominated the anima- 
tion industry from the 1930's to the early 1950's. At 
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM), William Hanna and 








Animation 514a 


Joseph Barbera made short animated features starring 
Tom and Jerry, a cat and mouse team. Walter Lantz of 
Universal Studios produced animated shorts featuring 
Oswald the Rabbit and later Woody Woodpecker. 

At Warner Brothers, Tex Avery, Chuck Jones, Bob 
Clampett, and Friz Freleng directed animated shorts 
starring Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, Elmer Fudd, and Porky 
Pig. Also during this period, the Scottish-born animator 
Norman McLaren made acclaimed animated films for 
the National Film Board of Canada. McLaren became 
best known for his technique of drawing directly on 
film. His animated movies include Begone Dull Care 
(1949) and Neighbors (1952), a pixilation film. 

In the early 1940's, a group of animation artists left the 
Disney studio. They established United Productions of 
America (UPA) in 1945. This group broke away from Dis- 
ney’s emphasis on realism, stressing instead a bold, flat, 
modernist style. Famous UPA cartoon characters includ- 
ed Gerald McBoing Boing and Mr. Magoo. UPA also 
popularized a technique called /imited animation that 
differed from the full-figure animation done by Disney. 
In limited animation, only certain simple movements of 
a character are animated, allowing portions of the figure 
to be reused. The UPA style proved less expensive than 
full-figure animation and influenced many other studios. 
The low cost of limited animation made it popular for 
children’s television cartoons, such as “The Flintstones” 
and “Yogi Bear’ by Hanna-Barbera Productions. In 1960, 
“The Flintstones’ became the first animated series to ap- 
pear on prime-time television. 

Some animators left UPA to form their own produc- 
tion companies. Among the most talented was John 
Hubley. He and his wife, Faith, created films that expand- 
ed the content and style of character animation. Their 
best-known animated films include Moonbird (1959), 
Windy Day (1968), and The Doonesbury Special (1977). 

Computer scientists and artists began to experiment 
with computer visualization in the 1960's. In the early 
1970's, a few academic institutions, such as the Universi- 
ty of Utah, animated simple shapes with computers. 


Photofest 


Animation and live action 
were combined in the Holly- 
wood musical film Anchors 
Aweigh (1945). Gene Kelly 
danced with Jerry the mouse 
of the popular cartoon team 
of Tom and Jerry. 





514b Animation 





© Walt Disney Pictures from Shooting Star 


Toy Story, released in 1995, was the first feature-length animat- 
ed film that was entirely computer generated. The movie follows 
the adventures of toys living in a boy's bedroom. 


The animation revival. Production of feature-length 
animated cartoons declined from the mid-1950's 
through the 1960's, partly because of the rising populari- 
ty of television. However, a revival of feature-length ani- 
mated cartoons began during the 1970's. The American 
director Steven Spielberg released his first animated 
cartoon feature, An American Tail, in 1986. Disney's Tron 
(1982) and Spielberg's Jurassic Park (1993) became mile- 
stones in their use of computer-generated characters as 
an essential part of the film. The Disney and Spielberg 
studios jointly produced Who Framed Roger Rabbit 
(1988), which combined live action and animation. Dis- 
ney followed with several innovative and popular fea- 
tures, including The Little Mermaid (1989), Beauty and 
the Beast (1991), Aladdin (1992), and The Lion King (1994). 

In the late 1990's, the animation department of a new 
studio, DreamWorks SKG, began releasing animated 
features, notably Antzand The Prince of Egypt Like Dis- 
ney, DreamWorks employed both traditional and com- 
puter-generated methods. DreamWorks also issued the 
popular Chicken Run (2000) in the clay animation style. 
Also in the late 1990's, animated series on television 
proved popular with older viewers. Such series as “The 
Simpsons’ and "King of the Hill” achieved high audience 
ratings. 

Animation today. Today, animators throughout the 
world create films of all lengths. Thousands of artists 
work in animation houses in such countries as South Ko- 
rea and Japan. They turn out hundreds of feature-length 
films as well as animated cartoons and commercials for 
television. Many Canadian, U.S., and Russian animators 
operate smaller studios. 

Computer animation has become a thriving industry. 
Computer-generated images (CGI) now play a major role 
in many Hollywood films. The cost of the technology has 


dropped, helping to make CGI common in TV programs 
and commercials. CGI and other new technologies have 
blurred the boundaries between live action and anima- 
tion. Digital effects combined with animation have 
opened up limitless possibilities for filmmakers because 
almost anything that can be imagined can be realized on 
the screen. John Canemaker and Peter Weishar 

See also Advertising (Production); Cartoon; Comput- 
er graphics; Disney, Walt; Motion picture. 


Outline 


I. Preliminary steps in animation 
Il. Cel animation 
Ill. Computer animation 
IV. Other kinds of animation 
A. Puppet animation 
B. Clay animation 
C. Pixilation 
V. History 


D. Pin screen animation 
E. Drawing on film 


Questions 


What is a storyboard? 

Who starred in Steamboat Willie? 

How does a flip book work? 

What was a phenakistoscope? 

How does pin screen animation work? 

What is the role of animators in cel animation? 
What is CGI? 

How did Winsor McCay influence animation? 
What is rendering in computer animation? 
What animation process was used in Star Wars? 


Additional resources 


Barrier, Michael. Hollywood Cartoons. Oxford, 1999. 

Canemaker, John. Paper Dreams: The Art and Artists of Disney 
Storyboards. Hyperion, 1999. 

Culhane, Shamus. Animation from Script to Screen. St. Martin's, 
1990. 

Laybourne, Kit. The Animation Book Rev. ed. Three Rivers Pr., 
1998. 

Solomon, Charles. The History of Animation. Rev. ed. Wings Bks., 
1994. 

Weishar, Peter. Digital Space: Designing Virtual Environments. 
McGraw, 1998. 


Animism, AN uh mihz uhm, is aterm used to describe 
certain religious beliefs based upon the concept of a 
soul that departs the body after death. The British an- 
thropologist Edward Burnett Tylor introduced the term 
in 1871, from the Latin word animae meaning souls or 
spirits. He argued that early people first developed the 
idea of the soul from dreams about the dead. 

Scholars today have rejected Tylor's theory. However, 
many believe that animism is the basis of later religions, 
including Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Elliot Fratkin 

See also Mythology (Tylor's theory); Religion (Tylor 
theory). 

Anise, AN jhs, is an annual herb related to caraway and 
dill. It is grown mainly for its seeds, which have a spicy 
taste and are used to give candy a licorice flavor. They 
are also used to flavor pastries, cookies, and certain 
kinds of cheese. The oil extracted from the seeds is used 
to make absinthe, an alcoholic beverage. The oil is also 
used in medicines, especially those for treating chil- 
dren's stomach troubles. Many cooks use anise leaves as 
a garnish or for seasoning soups and sauces. 

Anise grows wild in the Mediterranean region. It 
needs warm, dry summers to grow well. Egypt, Ger- 
many, Italy, Mexico, Spain, and Turkey are important 
anise-producing countries. Albert Liptay 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Carol A Brozman 


The anise plant produces seeds that give food a spicy licorice 
flavor. A seed pod grows out of the center of each flower. 


Scientific classification. Anise is in the parsley family, Api- 
aceae or Umbelliferae. Its scientific name is Pimpinella anisum. 
Ankara, ANG kuh ruh (pop. 2,559,500), is the capital of 
Turkey. It ranks second to Istanbul as the country's 
largest city. Ankara lies in a hilly area in west-central 
Turkey. For location, see Turkey (political map). 

Ankara has an old section and a modern section. The 
old section is on a hill and consists of a fortress that is 
hundreds of years old. After Ankara became Turkey's 
capital in 1923, a modern section began to grow at the 
base of the hill. It has merged with the old section. The 
Museum of Anatolian Civilizations in Ankara has an out- 
standing collection of Hittite art. Many Turks and other 
travelers come to the city to visit the tomb of Kemal 
Atattirk, founder of the Republic of Turkey. Ankara is the 
home of the University of Ankara, the Middle East Tech- 
nical University, Bilkent University, and Hacettepe Uni- 
versity. The National Library of Turkey is also in the city. 

The Turkish government employs more of Ankara’s 
people than does any other kind of business. The city 
serves as a market for the grain, Angora wool and mo- 
hair, and other farm products of the area. Ankara’s in- 
dustries process food and produce building materials, 
farm equipment, and various kinds of machinery. 

People probably lived in what is now the Ankara area 
during the Stone Age, which began about 2 5 million 
years ago. By about 700 B.C, Ankara had become an im- 
portant town of Phrygia (now central Turkey). Alexander 
the Great of Macedonia conquered Ankara in the 330's 
B.C. The Romans took over the town in 25 B.C. In the 
Middle Ages (about the A.D. 400’s through the 1400's), 
several groups gained and lost control of Ankara. 

By 1360, the Ottomans had captured the city and 


made it part of the Ottoman Empire. The empire was de- 


Ankylosaurus 515 


feated in World War | (1914-1918). Kemal Atatiirk estab- 
lished a nationalist government in Ankara in 1920. 
Ankara became the capital of the Republic of Turkey in 
1923. Since 1922, its population has grown from about 
15,000 to more than 2 5 million. F. Muge Gocek 

See also Turkey (picture). 

Ankle is the joint where the leg and the foot meet. The 
ankle joint enables the foot to move up and down. 

Each leg has two bony bumps—one on each side— 
that we commonly call the ank/es. These bumps are 
formed by the ends of the lower leg bones, the tibia and 
the fibula. Below the leg bones are seven tarsa/ bones, 
which extend about halfway down the foot. The top of 
the fa/us, the highest tarsal bone, fits between the ends 
of the tibia and the fibula and moves between them like 
a hinge. The Achilles tendon links the heel bone—the 
largest tarsal bone—to the calf muscles and helps move 
the ankle joint. 







Tibia Fibula 


Achilles 
tendon 






- | 


Tarsals — 
a 


7 


Lx | atin | 


— 


i 


Talus {ankle bone) 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Leonard Morgan 


The ankle joint allows movement of the foot. The talus, one of 
seven tarsal bones, fits between the lower ends of the tibia and 
fibula and moves between them like a hinge. 


Three small joints among the tarsal bones enable the 
foot to move sideways. Many strong, cordlike tissues 
called /igaments connect the tarsal bones to the leg 
bones, to the bones lower in the foot, and to one anoth- 
er. If one of these ligaments is torn, a sprained ankle re- 
sults. John F. Waller 

See also Achilles tendon; Ligament; Sprain. 
Ankylosaurus, 4nc kuh luh SAWR uhs, was a large, 
armored dinosaur that lived between 68 million years 
and 65 million years ago in what is now western North 
America. The name Anky/osaurus means fused lizard 
and describes the dinosaur’s armor, which consisted of 
bony pieces that had fused, or grown together. This 
heavy armor protected all the exposed parts of the 
body, including the head, back, and tail. 

Ankylosaurus was one of the largest of the armored 
dinosaurs. It was about 30 feet (9 meters) long and 
weighed about 4 to 5 tons (3.6 to 4.5 metric tons). It was a 
plant-eater with small teeth. The dinosaur’s triangular 
skull was 2 5 feet (76 centimeters) long and equally wide. 
A spike stuck out from each cheek, and two more stuck 
out from the back of the head. Short, thick legs support: 
ed the weight of the dinosaur's low, broad body. The tail 





516 Ankylosis 


ended in a big, heavy ball of bone. 

When attacked, Anky/osaurus may have crouched 
down and pressed itself to the ground. In this position, 
the attacker could only bite or claw at the thick, hard ar- 
mor. Ankylosaurus also may have defended itself by 
swinging its tail and hitting an attacker with the bony 
club at the end. Peter Oodson 

See also Dinosaur (picture: When dinosaurs lived). 
Ankylosis, vc kuh LOH sihs, means a stiffening or a 
fusion of a joint, preventing motion. Ankylosis may re- 
sult from infection or severe injury to a joint. It also may 
be accomplished surgically to eliminate pain, as in an 
arthritic joint, or to stabilize a ioose joint, as in poliomy- 
elitis. Ankylosis of the knee, hip, shoulder, and most oth- 
er major limb joints considerably diminishes the limb’s 
function. But surgical ankylosis to relieve pain or im- 
prove stability may increase limb function, particularly 
when the fusion corrects a deformity. William J. Kane 
Ann Arbor, Michigan (pop. 114,024; met. area pop. 
578,736), is the home of the University of Michigan. It lies 
on the Huron River, west of Detroit. For location, see 
Michigan (political map). 

Several county and civic buildings and part of the Uni- 
versity of Michigan are in downtown Ann Arbor. Anoth- 
er campus of the university is in the northeastern part of 
the city. Many computer and other electronics firms in 
Ann Arbor conduct research and manufacture electron- 
ic equipment. The city is also a printing and publishing 
center. Concordia University is in Ann Arbor. Detroit 
Metropolitan Airport, railroads, and bus lines serve the 
city. 

Two pioneers from Virginia and New York founded 
Ann Arbor in 1823. They named it Ann after the first 
name of both their wives, and arbor for a grove of beau- 
tiful oak trees there. Ann Arbor was incorporated as a 
city in 1851. It is the seat of Washtenaw County and has a 
council-manager form of government. Peter Gavrilovich 
Annan, AN uvhn, Kofi Atta, KOH fee AT uh(1938- 

), is a diplomat from Ghana who in 1997 became the 
seventh secretary-general of the United Nations (UN). He 
replaced Boutros Boutros-Ghali of Egypt, who held the 
office from 1992 through 1996. Annan became the first 
secretary-general from Africa south of the Sahara. 

Annan has received praise for his support of human 
rights and for his campaigns against AIDS and interna- 
tional terrorism. He and the United Nations won the 
2001 Nobel Peace Prize for their efforts in building 
peace and security throughout the world. 

Annan was born in Kumasi, Ghana. He studied in the 
United States, earning a bachelor’s degree in economics 
from Macalester College in 1961. He also received a 
masters degree in management from Massachusetts In- 
stitute of Technology in 1972. 

Annan began his career with the UN as an administra- 
tive and budget officer at the World Health Organization 
(WHO) in 1962. From 1993 to 1996, he served as under- 
secretary-general for peacekeeping operations. He also 
carried out difficult diplomatic assignments. In 1991, An- 
nan negotiated the release of UN staff members held in 
Iraq during the Persian Gulf War. Mark W OeLancey 

See also United Nations (picture). 

Annapolis, uh NAP uh /lihs (pop. 35,838), is the capital 
of Maryland and the home of the United States Naval 
Academy. It lies along the Severn River on the western 





shore of Chesapeake Bay (see Maryland [political map)). 
The layout of the city features two central circles, with 
narrow streets branching off in all directions. Colonial 
buildings give Annapolis a historic charm. They include 
Paca House, built in 1763 by Governor William Paca; and 
the red brick State House, built in 1772. The State House 
is the oldest state capitol still actively uséd by a legisla- 
ture. The Continental Congress met in the State House 


when Annapolis was the United States capital, from Nov. 


26, 1783, to June 3, 1784. It was in this building that 
George Washington resigned as commander of the 
Continental Army on Dec. 23, 1783. St. John’s College 
was founded as an academy in Annapolis in 1696. 

The city is a yachting center. Its economy is based 
heavily on tourism and government activities. Puritans 
founded Annapolis in 1649. Annapolis was named for 
Queen Anne of Britain, who gave the city its charter in 
1708. It has a mayor-council government The city is the 
seat of Anne Arundel County. Thomas L. Marquardt 

See also Maryland (picture: State Capitol); United 
States Naval Academy. 

Annapolis Convention, uh NAF uh lihs, was a meet- 
ing held in Annapolis, Maryland, in 1786 to discuss 
changes in the Articles of Confederation, which had 
served as the basic law of the United States since 1781. 
The proposed changes referred especially to commer- 
cial issues. Virginia invited all the states to the conven- 
tion, but only New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Dela- 
ware, and Virginia attended. Many political leaders, 
including Alexander Hamilton and James Madison, 
urged that all the states send delegates to a second con- 
vention. Meeting in Philadelphia in 1787, this second 
convention abandoned the Articles and wrote the Con- 
stitution of the United States. Oonna J. Spindel 

See also Constitution of the United States. 
Annapolis Royal, uh NAP vh /ihs, Nova Scotia (pop. 
550), is one of the oldest communities in North America. 
It lies along the Annapolis Basin, an inlet of the Bay of 
Fundy (see Nova Scotia [political map)). French colonists 
founded the settlement of Port Royal near what is now 
Annapolis Royal in 1605. English raiders captured and 
burned the colony in 1613. In the 1630's, the French re- 
established the settlement at the present site of Annapo- 
lis Royal. Port Royal became a military outpost and often 
changed hands during continual fighting between 
French and English forces in the area. 

In 1710, the British captured the settlement and re- 
named it Annapolis Royal. The town served as the capi- 
tal of Nova Scotia until Halifax became the capital in 
1749. Annapolis Royal prospered as a shipping center in 
the 1800's. Today, it is a popular tourist resort. Attrac- 
tions include the nearby Habitation, a replica of the orig- 
inal French settlement founded in 1605. O. A Sutherland 
Annapurna, AN uh PUR nuh, a small range of moun- 
tains within the Himalaya, includes some of the highest 
peaks in the world. It stands in north-central Nepal. Its 
highest peak, known as Annapurna I, rises 26,504 feet 
(8,078 meters). The Nepalese call this snowy peak the 
Goddess of the Harvests because they believe it watches 
over the farms below. In 1950, a French expedition led 
by Maurice Herzog climbed it. Until the conquest of 
Mount Everest in 1953, Annapurna was the highest 
mountain people had climbed. See also Mountain (dia- 


gram: Major mountains). James A Hafner 


rr, 


ee 
a ee ae feet a, 


=a 


Anne (1665-1714) was the first queen of Britain, which 
was formed when the Kingdom of Scotland united with 
the Kingdom of England and Wales in 1707. She was 
also queen of Ireland. Anne was the last monarch of the 
royal family called the House of Stuart. She became 
pregnant at least 17 times and had 5 children, but none 
survived her. She was succeeded by her distant cousin 
George, Elector of Hanover. 

Anne was born at Twickenham, near London. She was 
the second daughter of King James II and married Prince 
George of Denmark in — 

1683. She became queen 
in 1702, after the death of 
her brother-in-law William 
lll, who left no heirs. Dur- 
ing most of her reign, 
John Churchill, Duke of 
Marlborough, wielded 
much power. He was cap- 
tain-general in the War of 
the Spanish Succession 
(1701-1714). His wife, 
Sarah, dominated Anne 
for years. Their interfer- 
ence made the court a 
scene of political intrigue. 

Although Anne's health was never good, she took an 
active part in public affairs. She often attended debates 
in the House of Lords and was particularly concerned 
with religious legislation. Anne's reign is often said to 
mark the start of the Augustan Age, because the leaders 
of the times tried to reproduce in England the political 
stability and classical art of Rome under the Emperor 
Augustus. These leaders included the writers Alexander 
Pope, Jonathan Swift, Joseph Addison, and Richard 
Steele. James J. Sack 

See also Marlborough, Duke of; Furniture (The 
Queen Anne style); Stuart, House of. 

Anne, Saint, is traditionally regarded as the wife of 
Joachim and mother of the Virgin Mary. Stories about 
her life are found only in the apocryphal books of the 
New Testament. According to these stories, an angel ap- 
peared to her and announced that her child would be 
blessed by the whole world. Saint Anne has many 
shrines built to her. One of the best known is that of Ste.- 
Anne-de-Beaupre near Quebec City, Canada. See also 
Sainte-Anne-de-Beaupré. J. H. Charlesworth 

Anne of Austria (1601-1666) was the wife of King 
Louis XIII of France and the mother of King Louis XIV. Af- 
ter her husband's death in 1643, she ruled France as 
queen regent (temporary ruler) for her young son. Anne 
governed during the difficult end of the Thirty Years’ 
War (1618-1648) and the civil disruptions in France 
known as the Fronde (1648-1653). In 1651, in response to 
criticism of Anne's regency by rebellious nobles of the 
Fronde, 13-year-old Louis XIV was formally declared old 
enough to rule. But Anne continued to play a dominant 
role in government policy during his teen-age years and 
beyond. Anne's chief minister and principal adviser 
throughout this time was Jules Cardinal Mazarin. 

Anne was born in Valladolid, Spain. Her parents were 
King Philip Ill of Spain and Margaret of Austria. 

Donald A Bailey 

See also Louis XIV; Mazarin, Jules Cardinal. 


Detai! of portrart by M. Dah! (1699). 
National Portrait Gallery, London 


Queen Anne 





Annexation 517 


Annealing, uh NEEL ihng, is a process of heating met- 
als, glass, or other materials and then cooling them. The 
cooling is usually done slowly. Annealing produces vari- 
ous changes in the composition and properties of met- 
als. Most of these changes are desirable. For example, it 
makes metals softer so that they can be machined more 
easily. It also can reduce internal pressures called stress- 
es from metals. Stresses may result during the manufac- 
ture of metal products or during their use. 

The purpose of annealing glass is always to remove 
internal stresses that might later cause sudden cracking 
or breakage. Stresses are likely to be present because of 
unequal temperature distribution in the glass article 
while it is being cooled from its molten state. Glass arti- 
cles are annealed by placing them on a metal belt that 
travels slowly through a long, heated enclosure called a 
lehr. Thin articles can be annealed in 30 minutes or less. 
But it took more than a year to anneal the huge 200-inch 
(508-centimeter) telescope lens for the Palomar Observa- 
tory in California. |. Melvin Bernstein 

See also Tempering. 

Annenberg Foundation is a charitable organization 
that exists to advance the public well-being through im- 
proved communication. The organization achieves its 
goal by encouraging the development of more effective 
ways to share ideas and knowledge. The foundation 
grants money primarily to programs designed to im- 
prove elementary and secondary education. In the mid- 
dle and late 1990's, for example, the foundation donated 
$500 million to public school reform efforts. 

The Annenberg Foundation was established in 1989 
by Walter H. Annenberg, former president and chair- 
man of Triangle Publications, Inc., and United States am- 
bassador to the United Kingdom from 1968 to 1974. The 
foundation offices are in St Davids, Pennsylvania, near 
Philadelphia. Critically reviewed by the Annenberg Foundation 
Annexation, An uk SAY shuhn, is a method that gov- 
ernments use to acquire and establish sovereignty over 
new territory. Some authorities consider conquest or 
the use of force as the only means of annexation. How- 
ever, other authorities believe that cession, purchase, 
and discovery and occupation are other means. Many 
cities and other municipalities in the United States have 
annexed nearby areas by referendum and other legal 
means. 

An annexed territory becomes an integral part of the 
annexing country. Protectorates, leased territories, and 
areas under military occupation are not annexed lands, 
because they do not become an integral part of the 
country controlling them. The citizens of an annexed ter- 
ritory must change their allegiance and become citizens 
of the annexing country. Laws of the annexed territory 
that are not in conflict with those of the annexing coun- 
try may be retained, though special arrangements for 
limited self-government may also be made. The annex- 
ing country also inherits such treaty obligations as the 
territory may have had prior to its annexation. 

Annexations have been the cause or result of many 
wars. For example, Italy annexed Ethiopia in 1936, and 
Germany annexed Austria in 1938. During and after 
World War II, the Soviet Union annexed territories in 
eastern Europe and the Far East covering about 270,000 
square miles (699,000 square kilometers). In 1898, follow- 
ing the Spanish-American War, Spain ceded Puerto 


518 Anniversary, Wedding 


Rico, the Philippines, and Guam to the United States. 
Many annexations have been made peacefully. The 
United States annexed Texas in 1845 and Hawaii in 1898 
following consent by governing authorities. France 
ceded the Louisiana Territory to the United States in 
1803 for about $15 million. Robert J. Pranger 
Anniversary, Wedding. See Wedding anniversary. 
Anno Domini. See A.D. 

Annual is a plant that grows, blossoms, produces 
seed, and dies within one growing season. Plants called 
biennials require two growing seasons to complete 
their life cycles. Other plants, called perennials, can live 
for many years. Many garden vegetables and flowers 
are annuals. Such plants, which include beans, peas, pe- 
tunias, squash, and zinnias, must be raised from seed 
each year. 

See also Biennial; Flower (Garden annuals); Garden- 
ing; Perennial. 

Annuity, uh NOO uh tee, is a sum of money paid out 
at regular times, usually monthly or yearly. The word 
comes from the Latin word annus, meaning year. Insur- 
ance policies, wills, and other documents provide for 
annuities. People may leave money to an heir in the form 
of an annuity. The inheritance will then be paid in install- 
ments instead of in a lump sum. Usually the term annuity 
refers to a type of insurance. Individuals pay the insur- 
ance Company a certain amount of money. They receive 
in return an income that begins at a certain time and 
continues for a certain period. For instance, payments 
may begin when a person reaches 60 and continue until 
the person's death. Pension plans also provide for annui- 
ties. The most common use of annuities is to provide 
regular payments during a person's retirement years. 
See also Insurance (Annuities); Pension; Social security. 

Dan R. Anderson 
Annulment is the declaration that a marriage never 
really existed, or was void from the beginning. Most 
states of the United States, as well as many religious 
groups, have strict laws saying that first cousins may not 
marry each other. If two persons are found to be within 
the forbidden degree of consanguinity (blood relation- 
ship) their marriage can be annulled. 

Annulments are sometimes granted for other rea- 
sons, such as fraud or undue force exercised against 
one of the parties. A marriage can also be annulled if ei- 
ther party is under age, or if both parties declare that 
they considered the ceremony a joke at the time it was 
performed. An annulment differs from a divorce, which 
has the effect of dissolving a valid marriage for some 
cause arising after the ceremony. Except in special 
cases, the Roman Catholic Church does not recognize 
divorce, but it does recognize annulment. 

Carlfred B. Broderick 

See also Divorce; Marriage. 

Annunciation, uh Nunn see AY shuhn, is the an- 
nouncement, according to Luke 1: 26-38, which the 
angel Gabriel made to Mary. He told her that she was to 
be the mother of Jesus, who was to be called “the 
Christ.” 

The Annunciation should not be confused with the 
Immaculate Conception of Mary. In Roman Catholic be- 
lief, the Immaculate Conception means that Mary, at the 
instant of her existence in her mothers womb, was free 
from original sin. 


Joseph E. Armstrong 


Beginning in medieval times, the words of the angel 
at the Annunciation, “Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with 
thee,” gradually became the opening words of the “Hail 
Mary’ prayer, though that prayer did not receive its full 
form until the 1500's. Another devotion honoring the An- 
nunciation developed into the present “Angelus,” and 
began in the early 1300s. Three Hail Marys are recited at 
morning, noon, and evening, when church bells are also 
rung to commemorate the incarnation of Jesus. The An- 
nunciation has been the subject of paintings by great 
artists, including Fra Angelico, Andrea del Sarto, and Jan 
van Eyck. Mary is usually shown holding a book or some 
needlework, and Gabriel carries an olive branch or a 
flower. J. H. Charlesworth 

See also Mary. 

Annunzio, Gabriele d’. See D’Annunzio, Gabriele. 
Anodizing, AN wh pyz ‘hng, is a type of electrolysis 
used to place a protective oxide coating on metal. The 
metal acts as the anode (positive pole) of an electrolytic 
cell. Negatively charged oxide ions pass through a solu- 
tion called an e/ectrolyte, and oxidize the surface of the 
metal. Aluminum can be anodized ina sulfuric acid solu- 
tion. Magnesium is often anodized in dichromate solu- 
tions. The thickness of the coating depends on the 
amount of electricity passed through the cell. Thick- 
nesses usually range from 0.0001 to 0.0008 inch (0.003 to 
0.02 millimeter). Special treatments give the metal a po- 
rous outside layer that can absorb dyes. This makes it 
possible to produce colored surfaces that cannot be 
rubbed off or scratched. 

Anodizing serves several purposes. For example, it 
forms a tough coating on the metal, makes a good elec- 
trical insulator, and resists corrosion. Anodized alumi- 
num or magnesium can be used in airplanes, trains, and 
ships and on the outsides of buildings. Gordon H. Geiger 

See also Aluminum (Finishing aluminum); Electroly- 
sis. 

Anointing of the sick is a sacrament of the Roman 
Catholic Church and of Eastern Orthodox churches. A 
priest administers the sacrament to a person who is 
aged, seriously ill, or in danger of death from sickness 
or an accident. The sacrament may also be administered 
to a group, such as patients in a hospital. In the Roman 
Catholic Church, the sacrament was formerly called ex- 
treme unction. \n administering the sacrament, the 
priest anoints a person's hands and forehead with holy 
oil. At the same time, prayers are said for the person's 
spiritual and physical healing. The prayers are based on 
the Epistle of James (5: 13-15). Richard L. Schebera 

See also Sacrament. 

Anole, uh NOH /ee, is the name of about 300 species of 
lizards that live in the West Indies and in Central and 
South America. One species, the green anole, is native 
to the Southern United States. This species is also called 
the American chameleon, but it is not a true chameleon 
(see Chameleon). 

Most anoles grow to 8 inches (20 centimeters) long. 
They are generally green or brown and may have bright 
colors. Many species can change colors. Male anoles 
have a large, colorful throat flap called a dewlap. They 
fan their dewlap when they want to attract females or 
scare off rival males. Anoles live in shrubs, grasses, and 
trees and have toes suited for climbing. Each toe ends 
with an enlarged pad and a sharp claw. The pad has 








© Michael Fogden, DRK 
Male anoles have large, colorful dewlaps. 


thousands of hairlike bristles that stick to bark. 

Anoles eat mainly small insects. A few large species 
also eat fruit. Most female anoles lay one egg approxi- 
mately every few weeks during the breeding season. 

Raymond B. Huey 

Scientific classification. Anoles belong to the iguanid fami- 
ly, lguanidae. They are genus Anolis. 

Anorexia nervosa, AN uh REHK see uh nur VOH suh, 
is an emotional illness in which a person refuses to eat. 
lt occurs chiefly among adolescent girls and young 
women. The word anorexia means without appetite, but 
anorexics may be extremely hungry most of the time. 
They avoid food for psychological reasons. 

Some anorexics experience bouts of bu/imia—an 
overwhelming craving for food—during which they 
consume large amounts of food. Afterward, they make 
themselves vomit. Some anorexics use laxatives or di- 
uretics to eliminate food from the body. See Bulimia. 

The chief physical symptom of anorexia nervosa is se- 
vere weight loss, involving more than 25 percent of the 
body weight. Other symptoms include low blood pres- 
sure, slow heartbeat, and growth of fine hair on the 
body. In adolescents, the start of puberty may be de- 
layed. Female anorexics may not begin to menstruate, 
or their menstrual periods may stop. The disorder also 
affects the personality. Many anorexics isolate them- 
selves from family and friends and may appear de- 
pressed. Most victims seem unaware of their condition. 
They consider themselves healthy, or even overweight. 

Physicians disagree about the cause of anorexia ner- 
vasa. Some psychiatrists believe that anorexics try to 
starve themselves in order to avoid growing into adults. 
Other experts suggest that anorexics want to gain atten- 
tion and a sense of being special. 

Treatment for anorexia nervosa may include hospital- 
ization, psychotherapy, and medication. Anorexics 
should be hospitalized if they suffer malnutrition. Some 
physicians recommend that the patient's family also un- 
dergo therapy. Most anorexics can be cured if they re- 
ceive prompt treatment. However, the disease is fatal in 
some Cases. Charles Michael Wuhl 

See also Adolescent (Eating disorders). 

Anouilh, ah NCO yuh, Jean, zhahn (1910-1987), was a 
French playwright. Anouilh’s plays explore matters of il- 
lusion and reality and conflicts between the individual 
and society. Many of them feature a sensitive and articu- 
late young woman struggling to preserve her integrity 
in a corrupt, greedy world. His works are noted for pol- 
ished dialogue and tight dramatic action. 


Anselm, Saint 519 


Anouilh classified his plays according to their domi- 
nant mood. He called his tragic plays “black.” One of his 
most famous “black” plays is Antigone (1944), a modern 
version of an ancient Greek myth. Anouilh used “grat- 
ing to describe his bitterly comic plays Poor Bitos (1956) 
and The Waltz cf the Toreadors (1952). His lighter come- 
dies were labeled ‘rose’ or “pink” and “sparkling.” They 
include Thieves Carnival(completed in 1932, first pro- 
duced in 1938), Ring Round the Moon (1947), and The 
Rehearsal(1950). Anouilh called his historical dramas 
‘costumed’ plays. His best-known “costumed” plays are 
The Lark (1953) and Becket(1959). Anouilh was born near 
Bordeaux. Felicia Hardison Londreé 
Anoxia, an AHK see uh, is the lack of a normal supply 
of oxygen to body tissues, or the inability of the tissues 
to use the oxygen. It is also called Aypoxia. 

Anoxic anoxia occurs when blood flowing through 
the lungs does not pick up enough oxygen. This can 
happen when there is a reduced amount of oxygen in 
the air, such as at altitudes above 10,000 feet (3,000 me- 
ters). The blood also can fail to pick up sufficient oxygen 
because of defects in the lungs or because of obstruc- 
tion of the air passages involved in breathing. Rapid, 
deep breathing is a common symptom of anoxic anoxia. 
The condition is often accompanied by cyanosis, a 
bluish coloration of the skin. Severe cases may lead to 
loss of consciousness and even death. 

Anemic anoxia occurs when the blood cannot carry 
its normal load of oxygen. This happens when the blood 
has insufficient amounts of hemog/obin (the substance 
that transports oxygen in the blood), or when the hemo- 
globin is altered by carbon monoxide or other poisons. 

Stagnant anoxia develops when the blood flows so 
slowly that it loses most of its oxygen before completing 
its course through a tissue. Part of the tissue thus re- 
ceives little or no oxygen. An example of stagnant anoxia 
occurs during cold temperatures when blood vessels 
under the fingernails and in the lips constrict, causing 
cyanosis in those body parts. 

Histotoxic anoxia is caused by poisons that make the 
tissues incapable of using the oxygen supplied. Cyanide 
is such a poison. KE. Money 

See also Oxygen. 

Anselm, Saint (1033-1109), was an influential me- 
dieval theologian and church leader. He became fa- 
mous for his long essays Mono/logion and Proslogion. 
In both works, Anselm attempted to prove the existence 
of God through reason. His best-known argument, 
which appears in Pros/ogion, states that the existence of 
the idea of God necessarily means that God exists. 
Anselm also wrote Cur Deus Homo. This book argues 
that only the death of a God-man like Jesus Christ could 
fulfill the debt that sinful humanity owed to God. 

Anselm was born in Aosta, Italy. He joined the Bene- 
dictine monastery of Bec in France in about 1060. There 
he studied with Lanfranc, a noted Italian monk and 
scholar. Anselm rose rapidly in the organization of the 
monastery and became the abbot in 1078. In 1093, he 
was appointed archbishop of Canterbury, the most im- 
portant religious position in England. He held the post 
for the rest of his life. Anselm went into exile from 1097 
to 1100 and again from 1103 to 1107 because he op- 
posed the king's power to select church officials. 
Anselin's feast day is April 21. 


Marilyn J. Harran 








520 Ant 


Fungus-growing ants carry pieces of leaves and other 
plant materials to their nests. They use the materials to 


ers are the /eaf-cutter ants, shown here. 


fertilize gardens of fungi. The best-known fungus grow- 


WORLD BOOK tilustrations by James Teason 





Ants vary in size. One of the 
largest, Dinoponera grandis, 
is over 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) 





Weaver ants make nests from tree leaves. Several ants hold the leaves long. One of the smallest, 
together while others carry silk-spinning /arvae (developing ants) across Strumigenys, is about ;< inch 


the edges. The silk produced by the larvae binds the leaves together. 


Ant 


Ant is the name ofa family of small insects that live in 
organized communities. Ants are therefore known as so- 
cial insects. Other social insects include some kinds of 
bees, all termites, and certain wasps. However, ants are 
perhaps the most highly developed social insects. 

A community of social insects is called a co/ony. An 
ant colony may have a dozen, hundreds, thousands, or 
millions of members. It may have one or many queens. 
A queen's chief job is to lay eggs. Most members of an 
ant colony are workers. All the workers, like the queens, 
are females. The workers build the nest, search for food, 
care for the young, and fight enemies. Males live in the 
nest only at certain times. The only job the males have is 
to mate with young queens. After mating, the males 
soon die. 

Ants have many different ways of life. For example, 
army ants live by hunting other insects. Some species of 


Norman F. Carlin, the contributor of this article, is Lecturer on 
Biology at Harvard University. 





(0.1 centimeter) long. 


army ants march across the land in enormous swarms, 
eating most of the insects they meet. Ants known as 
slave makers raid the nests of other ants and steal the 
young, which they raise as slaves. Harvester ants gather 
seeds and store them inside their nests. Certain species 
of dairying ants keep insects that give off a sweet liquid 
when the ants “milk” them. 

Ants live everywhere on land, except in extremely 
cold areas. They are most numerous in regions with a 
warm climate. Some species live in underground tun- 
nels, and some build earthen mounds. Others live inside 
trees or in hollow parts of certain other plants. Still oth- 
ers construct their nests from tree leaves. Some species, 
such as army ants, do not have permanent nests. 

There are about 10,000 species of ants. Most species 
have drab colors, such as black, brown, or rust. But 
some are yellow, green, blue, or purple. Ants also vary 
greatly in size. The largest species are more than 1 inch 
(2.5 centimeters) long. The smallest are about 5; inch (0.1 
centimeter) long. Like most small insects, however, ants 
can lift objects several times heavier than their bodies. 
Some ants can lift things 30 times heavier than their 
bodies. 

Scientists believe that ants gradually developed from 
wasps more than 100 million years ago. Ants resemble 










Some ants build earthen mounds over their under- 
ground nests. The mounds of harvester ants, above, are 
a common sight in the Southwestern United States. 








Ants use their antennae to smell one another. In this 
way, ants recognize nestmates. The antennae are organs 
of touch, taste, and hearing as well as of smell. 


Ant nestmates share food by regurgitation. Two ants 
stand mouth to mouth, and one spits up food for the 
other. Food is shared among all members of a colony. 


wasps more than they do any other insects. In fact, one 
kind of wasp looks so much like an ant that it is com- 
monly called a ve/vet ant. But an ant has a node (knotlike 
growth) on top of its waist. This node distinguishes ants 
from most anilike wasps. 


The bodies of ants 


Among most species of ants, the queens, workers, 
and males differ in size. In many cases, the queens are 
several times larger than the workers. The males are 
larger than the workers but smaller than the queens. In 
addition, the workers of a particular species may differ 
in size. The largest workers are called so/diers. 

Like other insects, ants have a hard, shell-like cover- 
ing called an exoskeleton. This covering protects the in- 
ternal organs. An ant's muscles are attached to the in- 
side walis of the exoskeleton. 

An ants body has three main parts. They are (1) the 
head, (2) the trunk, and (3) the metasoma. An ant's inter- 
nal organs and sense organs are similar to those of 
many other insects. 

The head. The main features of an ants head are the 
antennae, eyes, and mouthparts. The antennae and eyes 
are described in the section Sense organs. The mouth- 
parts include the mandibles and the maxillae. The man- 





Ant 


521 


Some carpenter ants nest in tunnels in tree branches. Large 
workers are called so/diers. A soldier blocks the nest entrance 
with its pluglike head, above, to keep out enemies. 





Balzekas Museum of Lithuanian Culture (WORLD BOOK photo) 


Fossils of ants indicate that ants have lived on the earth for 
more than 100 million years. This fossil ant, which became pre- 
served in amber, is about 30 million years old. 


Soldier 


Normal-sized worker 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by James Teason 
The classes of ants— queens, males, and workers—differ in 
size. In most cases, queens are the largest, followed by males 
and workers. Among carpenter ants, above, some workers are 
larger than males. These large workers are called soldiers. 


522 Ant 





© David Scharf from Peter Amold, Inc. 


An ant's head includes two antennae, a pair of many-lensed 
compound eyes, and a pair of jaws called mandibles. This highly 
magnified view shows the tiny lenses that make up a compound 
eye and the fine hairs and spines that cover the antennae. 


dibles are a pair of jaws that move from side to side 
rather than up and down. Ants use their mandibles to 
grasp food, carry their young, and fight enemies. Many 
ants also use their mandibles to build nests by digging 
up soil or cutting through wood. The maxillae are a pair 
of structures that lie behind the mandibles. Ants use 
their maxillae to chew food into small particles. The 
food particles are then lapped up with the tongue and 
Pass into a small pouch below the mouth opening. The 
pouch is lined with muscles that contract and so 
squeeze the liquid out of the food particles. Ants swal- 
low the liquid and spit out the remaining pellet of solid 
food. Some tiny food particles may pass through the 
throat. Ants eat various kinds of foods, including insects 
and fruits and other parts of plants. 

Each of an ant’s maxillae has a comb, which consists 
of a row of tiny hairs. An ant cleans its front legs by 
drawing them across the combs. 

The trunk is the middle part of an ant's body. A thin 
neck connects the head to the trunk. 

An ant has three pairs of legs, which are attached to 
the bottom of the trunk. Each leg has nine segments 
connected by movable joints. The foot of each leg has 
two hooked claws. As an ant walks, the claws dig into 
the surface. The claws thus enable ants to climb trees 
and to walk on the undersides of limbs and leaves. 
Many ants use the claws on the front legs to dig up soil 
and tunnel underground. 

On each front leg, an ant has two combs like those on 
the maxillae. An ant uses these combs to clean the other 
pairs of legs and the antennae. 

Among most species of ants, the males and young 
queens have two pairs of wings attached to the trunk. 
They use their wings only once, at mating time. The 
workers do not have wings. 

The metasoma has two parts, the wa/st and the 
gaster. The waist consists of one or two movable, bead- 
like segments. It connects the trunk to the gaster, the 
larger part of the metasoma. 








Some ants have a poisonous sting at the tip of the 
gaster. Instead of a sting, certain other ants have a poi- 
son gland that lies inside the gaster and opens at the tip. 
These ants squirt poison at an enemy. 

internal organs. An ant's brain is connected to a 
nerve cord, which extends through the trunk and meta- 
soma. Nerves branch out from the nerve cord to all parts 
of the body. 

Ants have a simple heart shaped like a long tube. The 
tube extends from the head to the rear of the gaster. 
Muscle contractions force blood forward through the 
tube. The blood empties out of the tube near the brain. 
An ant does not have blood vessels. Instead, the blood 
flows from the head back through the body cavity, bath- 
ing all the tissues and organs. It then reenters the tube 
through small openings along the sides. The openings 
have valves that allow blood to enter the tube but pre- 
vent it from leaking out. An ant's blood is colorless. 

Ants do not have lungs. instead, they have many air 
tubes that branch out to all parts of the body. Oxygen 
enters the tubes through tiny openings along the sides 
of the body. Carbon dioxide passes out of the body 
through the same openings. 

An ants digestive system consists basically of a tube 
that extends from the mouth to the end of the gaster. 
Near the front of the gaster, the tube forms an enlarged 
pouch, called the crop. The crop serves to store liquid 
food temporarily, not to digest it. The crop can expand 
greatly to hold food. It is also called the socia/ stomach 
because an ant frequently regurgitates (spits up) some 
of the food stored in the crop and shares it with other 
ants. A valve separates the crop from the ant's “true” 
stomach. From time to time, some food is pumped from 
the crop into the stomach, where digestion occurs. 

Sense organs. An ants chief sense organs are its an- 
tennae. Ants have two antennae, which are attached to 
the front of the head. The antennae are organs of smell, 
touch, taste, and hearing. When an ant is active, the an- 
tennae move almost constantly. With their antennae, 
ants tap the ground, pick up scents in the air, examine 
pieces of food, and stroke one another. Ants use their 
antennae to find their way about, to search for food, and 
to recognize nestmates. Some researchers believe that 
all the ants within a colony have a distinctive odor and 
that ants may recognize their nestmates by that odor. 

Ants have taste organs on the mouthparts, as well as 
on the antennae. They also have touch organs not only 
on the antennae but also on almost all other parts of the 
body. The touch organs consist of tiny hairs and spines. 

Most ants have two compound eyes, one on each 
side of the head. Each eye consists of tiny lenses set 
close together. The number of lenses varies from fewer 
than 6 to more than 1,000, depending on the species. In 
most cases, the males and queens have more lenses 
than do the workers. Each lens registers an impression 
of only a small part of whatever an ant looks at. Impres- 
sions from all the lenses together form a picture that is 
broken up into bits. Compound eyes enable ants to see 
movements easily. However, ants can see clear images 
of only nearby objects. In addition to compound eyes, 
some species of ants have three simple eyes, called 
ocelli, on the top of the head. These simple eyes can 
only distinguish between light and dark. A few kinds of 
ants do not have any eyes. 


The body of an ant 


The external anatomy Antenna Head 


An ant's body has three main 
parts: (1) the head, (2) the 
trunk, and (3) the metasoma. 
The main features of the head 
are the eyes, antennae, and 
mandibles. Three pairs of legs 
extend from the bottom of the 
trunk. The narrow front part 
of the metasoma is called the 
waist, and the large back part 
is called the gaster. Some ants 
have a sting at the tip of the 
gaster. 


Eye 
/ 
Mandibles 


Brain 


The internal anatomy 


An ant's internal organs in- 
clude a brain and nerve cord 
and a tube-shaped heart. The 
animal breathes through sp/- 
racles (tiny openings along 
the sides of the body). Its di- 
gestive system includes a 
food pouch that squeezes the 
liquid out of food. The liquid 
moves through a food pas- 
sage to the crop, a storage 
pouch, and then to the stom- 
ach, where digestion occurs. 
Wastes pass through the rec- 
tum and out of the body. 


‘ood 


Mouth pouch 


Ants lack ears. But they can hear by means of sense 
cells called chordotonal organs. These organs are on 
the antennae, legs, trunk, and head. The chordotonal or- 
gans respond to sound vibrations that pass through the 
ground or other solid matter. Researchers do not know 
for certain whether ants can hear sounds that pass 
through the air. 

Some ants can make sounds by means of a stridula- 
tory organ on the metasoma. In most cases, this organ 
consists of a row of ridges on one segment of the meta- 
soma and a hard point on another segment. Ants make 
squeaky or buzzing sounds by rubbing the segments 
against each other. In some cases, the sounds are loud 
enough for people to hear. 


Life in an ant colony 


All ants are social insects. But except for the fact that 
they all live in groups, ants vary greatly in their ways of 
life. This section chiefly discusses the general features 
of life in an ant colony. The section Kinds of ants de- 
scribes some of the many ways of life among ants. 

Castes. In almost all ant colonies, the members are 
divided into three castes (classes}—the queen, workers, 
and males. In most cases, a young queen starts a new 
colony after mating with one or several males. After she 


Heart 





Ant 523 


Trunk 


Metasoma 







Gaster Sting 


Legs 


Food passage 


Spiracles 


Crop Stomach 


Rectum 
et 
ea 
+ 


Poison gland 


WORLD BOOK illustration by James Teason 


has established a colony, the queen lays eggs for the 
rest of her life. The queen does not rule the colony. But 
the workers feed and lick her, as they do one another. 
Some colonies have only one queen. But in some spe- 
cies, there may be thousands of queens in a colony. Be- 
sides caring for the queen, the workers enlarge, repair, 
and defend the nest; care for the young; and gather 
food. A worker may chiefly do one job throughout its 
life or change jobs from time to time. Males do not do 
any work in the colony. They live a short time, and their 
only function is to mate with young queens. 

Among many species of ants, the workers differ in 
size and shape. The largest workers, the soldiers, have a 
big head and large mandibles. In some species, the sol- 
diers chief job is to defend the colony from enemies. In 
other species, the soldiers have no special job. Among 
certain carpenter ants, the soldiers have a blunt, plug- 
shaped head. Carpenter ants are large black or brown 
ants that make their nests in tunnels in the branches of 
trees. A soldier keeps enemies out of the nest by block- 
ing the entrance with its head. 

Nests. Most ant species make their nests under- 
ground, carving tunnels and chambers in the soil. Some 
of these species build large mounds of soil, twigs, and 
pine needles over their underground nests. 


524 Ant 


Carpenter ants make their nests in the trunks and 
branches of trees and even in the wooden beams of 
houses. These ants, unlike termites, do not eat wood. 
They chew tunnels in wood only to make nesting space. 
Many kinds of ants make their homes in rotten logs, 
under the bark of trees, or in hollow parts of the leaves 
or thorns of certain plants. Some species chew up plant 
fibers and use the material to build “cardboard” nests. 

Tropical weaver ants construct nests from tree leaves. 
To make a nest, some of the workers hold the edges of 
leaves together, while other workers carry silk-spinning 
larvae back and forth across the edges. Larvae are ants 
in an early stage of development. The larvae produce a 
thick sheet of silken webbing that binds the edges of the 
leaves together. 

Ant nests vary greatly in size. Some nests may have 
only one chamber no bigger than your finger. Sucha 
nest may have as few as 12 ants or as many as 300. Some 
tropical ants build huge underground nests that may ex- 
tend 40 feet (12 meters) below the surface of the ground. 
More than 10 million ants may live in such a nest. Some 
North American and European ants build nests that con- 
sist of 12 or more mounds connected by underground 
tunnels. The nesting site may cover an area the size of a 
tennis court, and some mounds may be 3 feet (0.9 meter) 
high or higher. Millions of ants may live in the mounds 
and underground chambers. 

Most ant nests have a number of chambers. One 
chamber houses the queen and her eggs. Several other 
chambers serve as ‘nurseries, to which the workers 
move the growing young. !f one chamber becomes too 
cold or too wet for the young, the workers move them 
to a warmer or drier chamber. Many chambers serve as 
gathering or resting places for the workers. The nests of 


Inside an ant nest 


This drawing shows the nest 
of a colony of harvester ants. 
The nest consists of various 
rooms and connecting tun- 
nels. The tunnels extend 
through the mound and deep 
underground. One chamber 
houses the queen and her 
eggs. Several rooms serve as 
“nurseries, where the work- 
ers care for the growing 
young. Some chambers are 
gathering or resting places 
for the workers. Harvester 
ants also have rooms for stor- 
ing seeds, which they gather 
outside the nest. As a colony 
grows, the workers make 
more rooms and tunnels. The 
ants spend the winter in the 
deepest rooms of the nest. 


WORLD BOOK tllustration 
by James Teason 





some ants have rooms in which food is stored or fungi 
are raised. As a colony grows, the workers enlarge the 
nest by making more rooms and passageways. Ants that 
live in regions with cold winters move to the deepest 
parts of their nests during the winter. They emerge from 
their nests again in spring. 

Reproduction. Many queens lay thousands of eggs 
in a lifetime. The vast majority of the eggs develop into 
workers. After the colony is established, the queen be- 
gins to lay some eggs that develop into males and 
young queens. A few weeks after they reach adulthood, 
the males and the young queens of most species leave 
their nests and go on a mating flight. They fly ina swarm 
high in the air and mate. 

During mating, a male deposits sperm (male sex cells) 
inside a queen's body. A young queen may mate with 
one or more males. She receives her lifetime supply of 
sperm during the mating flight. The sperm are stored in 
the queen’s gaster. They enter her eggs as she lays them. 

After mating, the male and queen ants land on the 
ground. The male wanders off and dies. The queen tears 
off her wings and begins to search for a nesting site. In 
some cases, the queen returns to her colony, where she 
is accepted as an extra queen. Among parasitic ants, the 
queen takes over the nest of another species of ant. She 
depends on these ants to care for her and her eggs. But 
among most kinds of ants, the queen establishes a new 
nest. 

After the queen prepares a nest, she seals the en- 
trance. She soon begins to lay eggs. During this time, 
the queen lives off her body fat. She also gets some 
nourishment from her now useless wing muscles, 
which dissolve into nutrients that enter the bloodstream. 
In addition, the queen may eat some of her eggs. 





Among certain kinds of hunting ants, the queen may 
leave the nest from time to time and catch insects to eat. 
But among most species, she does not leave the nest. 

Ants go through four stages of development: (1) egg, 
(2) larva, (3) pupa, and (4) adult. Ant eggs are very tiny. 
They hatch within a few days and become larvae. The 
larvae are white, wormlike creatures. Most larvae can- 
not move about. The queen feeds the larvae with her sa- 
liva and with some of her eggs. In general, the larval 
stage lasts a few weeks. After the larvae complete their 
growth, they become pupae. The larvae of some species 
spin a cocoon of fine silk around themselves before be- 
coming pupae. The pupae of other species are covered 
only by their transparent skin. The pupae lie motionless 
and do not eat. They slowly take on the form of adult 
ants. In most cases, the pupal stage lasts about two or 
three weeks. Then, an adult ant emerges from the co- 
coon or skin. 

The first worker ants to become adults leave the nest 
and bring back food for the queen and the larvae. The 
workers take over the care of the brood—the eggs, lar- 
vae, and pupae—and the queen continues to lay eggs. 

Protection against enemies. Anteaters, spiders, 
frogs, toads, lizards, birds, and many kinds of insects 
prey on ants. In most cases, ants from different colonies, 
even if they are of the same species, treat one another 
as enemies. Ants protect themselves against their ene- 
mies by stinging or biting. 

About half of all species of ants have a sting. The 
stings of such ants as fire ants and bulldog ants can 
pierce the skin. The sting releases a painful poison. Cer- 
tain ants have a sting that cannot penetrate tough skin. 
But the sting is an effective defense against other in- 
sects. It releases a poison containing an insect-repelling 
gas. The poison is also thick and gluey. It can gum up 
the antennae, legs, or jaws of another insect. Some ants 
that lack a sting can spray poison from the tip of the 
gaster. 

Worker ants from different colonies often fight one 
another when they meet. Some fights do not result in se- 
rious injuries. For example, honey ants of rival colonies 
have shoving matches in which the workers do not hurt 
one another. But the victors may take over the nest of 
the defeated colony. Some ants have fierce battles that 
result in death. In these battles, ants use their jaws to 
grab enemies by a leg or an antenna. Often, several 


The tife cycle of ants 


Ant 525 


r Pgs 
John R. Conway 


Reproduction. This large queen honey ant is laying eggs, 
which the nearby workers will care for. In time, the developing 
young will be enclosed in cocoons like the three shown here. 


nestmates grab the legs and antennae of an enemy ant 
and hold the victim stretched out. Other nestmates may 
join the fight and tear the victim apart with their jaws. 
Some ants fight huge, grim wars in which thousands of 
ants rip one another to pieces. The winners may invade 
the nest of the defeated colony and carry off the brood, 
which they eat. Some species of ants live entirely by 
robbing the nests of other ants in this way. 

Communication. Ants communicate with one an- 
other in various ways. Ants that live inside plants or in 
leaf nests may tap their gasters against the outside walls 
of the nest when they discover food or an enemy 
nearby. The taps send vibrations through the nest walls, 
arousing the ants inside. The ants may then rush out and 
help carry in the food or fight the enemy. Ants that have 
a stridulatory organ arouse their nestmates by produc- 
ing squeaky or buzzing sounds with the organ. 

Ants also communicate with one another by giving off 
chemicals called pheromones. These chemicals are pro- 
duced by glands that open at certain places in the head, 
trunk, and metasoma. They have a distinctive smell or 


Ants develop in four stages: (1) egg, (2) larva, {3) pupa, and (4) adult. Ant eggs hatch within a few 


days into larvae. The larval stage lasts a few weeks. In some species, the larvae spin a cocoon be- 
fore becoming pupae. The pupal stage lasts about three weeks. The adult ant then emerges. 


oe o Fae 


Eggs Larvae 





WORLD BOOK illustration by James Teason 





Pupa Adult 





. = 





926 Ant 


taste to which ants are sensitive. The various kinds of 
pheromones communicate different information. By re- 
leasing pheromones from the tip of the gaster, for exam- 
ple, an ant may lay a scent trail from a new food supply 
to its nest. The ant then arouses the other workers, 
which follow the trail to the food. To warn nestmates of 
danger, ants can give off “alarm” pheromones. 

Ants probably distinguish members of their colony 
from enemies by odor. When two ants meet, they smell 
each other with their antennae. If they are nestmates, the 
two ants may stand mouth to mouth. One ant then re- 
gurgitates a drop of liquid for the other. 

Life span. Queen, worker, and male ants have differ- 
ent life spans. Queens live the longest, from about 10 to 
20 years. Workers may live from less than 1 year to more 
than 5 years. Males live only a few weeks or months be- 
fore the mating flight, after which they soon die. 


Kinds of ants 


There are about 10,000 species of ants. Entomologists 
(scientists who study insects) classify ants into eight or 
nine groups, based on similar physical features. But ants 
can also be grouped according to their ways of life. This 
section discusses six groups of ants with different ways 
of life. The groups are (1) army ants, {2) slave makers, (3) 
harvester ants, (4) dairying ants, (5) honey ants, and (6) 
fungus growers. Each group includes many species. 

Army ants are fierce hunters. Most species travel 
across the land in narrow columns. Others hunt under- 
ground, moving through tunnels in the soil. Army ants 
prey chiefly on other insects and spiders. But in some 
cases, they also kill and eat larger animals that cannot 
escape quickly. 

Most army ant colonies have from 10,000 to several 
million members. Army ants that live aboveground do 
not build permanent nests. When they rest, they cling 
together in a large cluster. They may hang from a tree 
branch or lie inside a hollow log or another suitable 
place. The queen and her brood lie within the large 
cluster of bodies. 





Army ants are fierce hunters that travel in swarms and prey 
chiefly on other insects. These army ants are attacking a 
grasshopper. The ants bite the victim with their long mandibles. 


Some kinds of army ants hunt for a few weeks and 
then rest for a few weeks. During the hunting periods, 
they may nest at a different site every night. During the 
resting periods, they stay in one place, and the queen 
lays hundreds or thousands of eggs. 

The name army ants is used to describe both /e- 
gionary ants and driver ants. Legionary ants live in North 
and South America. Those that live in cooler regions 
have smaller colonies than do the tropical species, and 
they hunt chiefly at night. Driver ants live in the tropical 
regions of Africa. 

Slave makers attack the nests of other ants to kidnap 
the pupae. After the pupae become adults, they act as 
though the slave makers nest were their own. They thus 
help with the work of the colony. Some kinds of slave 
makers can survive without slaves. But slave makers 
known as Amazon ants cannot. Their mandibles are so 
long and curved that they cannot feed themselves or dig 
nests. Amazon ants need slaves to feed them and to 
work for them. 

After the mating flight, a young slave maker queen 
does not start a new colony. Instead, she takes over a 
nest of another species. She kills or drives away many of 
the workers and may kill the colony's queen. The slave 
maker queen stays with the colony's brood until they 
reach adulthood. These ants then treat her as they 
would their own queen. In time, the eggs of the slave 
maker queen develop into adult workers. They bring 
more slaves into the nest by raiding other nests. Slave 
makers live in cool regions of North America, Europe, 
and Asia. 

Harvester ants collect seeds and store them in spe- 
cial chambers in their nests. They thus always have a 
supply of food available. The ants tear off the husks of 
the seeds and chew the kernels into a soft pulp called 
ant bread. They then squeeze out the liquid and swallow 
it Some kinds of harvester ants also eat flowers, fruits, 
and insects. 

Harvester ants live on all the continents except Antarc- 
tica. Some species have large colonies of 60,000 to 


f 
‘iat 


rs 


r 7 . F 
ie. % » — 
4 , -~ : 
P . a ee, , 
nike ji ° . 
> “4 “ 
2s i - - \ » J Mae wel 
; an SY ; 
1 q =: fi 
_ 1 ~ae 
l 2 e 7 
; ‘ ; , 
: ' c Pl yo 
es, ’ 


datas 
= 


rs ae el * 
iN : 


~ EAwae® S. Rass 


Slave makers raid the nests of other ants and carry off the pu- 
pae, shown here. After the pupae become adults, they help with 
the work in the slave makers colony and so serve as “slaves.” 


90,000 members. The mounds built by colonies of har- 
vester ants are a common sight in the Southwestern 
United States. 

Dairying ants live chiefly on a sugary liquid called 
honeydew. They obtain honeydew from certain insects, 
particularly aphids and other plant lice. Plant lice suck 
juices from plants. These juices contain more sugar and 
water than the lice need, and they discharge the excess 
as honeydew. Dairying ants visit the plants on which the 
lice feed so that they can lick up the honeydew. In many 
cases, a plant louse will release a drop of honeydew 
whenever an ant ‘milks’ the insect by stroking it with its 
antennae. The ants protect the lice by fighting insects 
that come near while the ants are feeding. 

Some kinds of dairying ants keep the eggs of plant 
lice in their nests during the winter. In spring, the eggs 
hatch, and the ants carry the plant lice out of the nest 
and place them on plants. 

Certain species of dairying ants tend “herds” of plant 
lice that feed on roots inside their nests. Among these 
species, the young queens carry an egg-laying plant 
louse between their jaws when they leave the nest and 
go on the mating flight. After a queen digs her new nest, 
she places the louse on a root and starts a new “herd.” 

Some kinds of aphids and other plant lice feed on 
crops and cause great damage. Because dairying ants 
protect the aphids, they are considered agricultural 
pests. For example, Argentine ants are considered agri- 
cultural pests in California and northern Florida, where 
they infest orange groves. These dairying ants are native 
to Argentina. Dairying ants live on every continent ex- 
cept Antarctica. 

Honey ants, also called Honeypot ants, gather honey- 
dew from insects or from plants and store it in their 
nests. Certain workers, called rep/etes, serve as living 
storage tanks for the colony. The workers that gather the 
honeydew feed it to the repletes after returning to the 
nest. The gaster of a replete becomes so swollen with 
honeydew that the ant cannot walk. It hangs motionless 
from the ceiling of a chamber in the nest and regurgi- 


Ant 527 





Fdeard S. Ross 
Dairying ants “milk” honeydew from aphids, above. The aphids 
release drops of honeydew whenever the ants stroke the insects 
with their antennae. The ants then lap up the sugary liquid. 


tates some honeydew whenever a nestmate taps it with 
its antennae. Honey ants live in dry, warm regions 
throughout the world, including parts of the Western 
United States. 

Fungus growers cultivate gardens within their nests. 
They raise various kinds of moldlike or yeastlike fungi. 
The fungi produce tiny, nourishing knobs, which the 
ants eat. The ants fertilize their gardens with leaves, 
flower petals, and other plant materials that they gather 
from outside the nest. When a young queen goes on the 
mating flight, she carries along a pellet of fungus. After 
the queen prepares her nest, she starts a new garden 
with the pellet. She fertilizes the garden with her body 
wastes. Fungus growers live only in North and South 
America, and they are most plentiful in tropical areas. 

Perhaps the best-known and most interesting fungus 





Ross E. Hutchins 


Harvester ants store seeds in special chambers inside their nests, 
above. The ants tear off the husks and chew the kernels into a soft 


pulp. They then squeeze out the liquid and swallow it 


John R Conway 
Honey ant workers called rep/etes serve as storage 
tanks. They store honeydew in their gasters, which expand 
greatly. The repletes feed the liquid to nestmates. 


528 Ant 


growers are the /eaf-cutter ants. They build huge under- 
ground nests in which millions of ants may live. At night, 
columns of workers leave the nest and cut pieces of 
leaves from trees, shrubs, and other plants. They carry | 
the leaf fragments back to the nest, holding them above 
their heads. The ants look as though they are carrying 
parasols, and so they are sometimes called parasol ants 
or umbrella ants. Inside the nest, the ants chew the 
leaves into a pulp, which they place on the fungus gar- 
dens. Leaf-cutter ants are serious agricultural pests in 
parts of South America because they strip leaves from 
crops. In Brazil, colonies of leaf-cutter ants sometimes 
strip all the leaves from an orange grove in one night. 


Keeping an ant farm 


You can study a colony of ants as they work, eat, and 
care for their young by keeping an ant farm. An ant farm 
is a container made of a transparent material through 
which the chambers of the ants’ nest are visible. You can 
purchase a commercial ant farm with a certificate that 
you exchange for live ants. The ants you receive general- 
ly consist entirely of workers. Without a queen, your ant 
farm will not be permanent. The worker ants will live for 
a month or two. 

You can also make your own ant farm. To make one, 
fill a large, clean glass jar halfway with dry soil. Stock the 
jar with ants from a single nest. Collect eggs, larvae, and 
pupae by digging into the soil. Gather the workers ina 
plastic bag. Putting the ants in the refrigerator for half an 
hour will make it easier to transfer them to the jar. Put a 
fine wire screen over the mouth of the jar. Keep the jar 
covered when you are not watching the ants. 

Feed the ants every few days, using honey mixed with 
water. Once a week, add some peanuts or a dead fly or 
cockroach. Remove unused food, or it will spoil. Moist- 
en the soil in the jar every few days. Release your ants at 
their nest entrance after you have observed them for a 
few weeks. 





Edward § Ross 


Leaf-cutter ants are major agricultural pests in parts of South 
America because they strip the leaves from crops. This leaf-cut- 
ter ant is using its mandibles to cut a piece of a leaf from a plant. 
The ant will then carry the fragment to its colony's nest, where it 
will be used to fertilize a garden of fungi. 


The importance of ants 


Ants play an important role in the balance of nature. 
They eat large numbers of insects and so help keep 
them from becoming too plentiful. In the tropics, for ex- 
ample, ants eat more than half the termites hatched each 
year. Ants, in turn, are an important food source for 
birds, frogs, lizards, and many other animals. See Bal- 
ance of nature. 

Ants are both beneficial and harmful to farmers. Some 
species aid farmers by killing insects that damage crops. 
Ants that dig underground nests improve the soil by 
breaking it up, loosening it, and mixing it. Loose soil ab- 
sorbs water more easily than does hard-packed soil. 
Ants can also be agricultural pests. Some dairying ants 
protect aphids and other insects that harm crops. Fire 
ants are serious pests in the Southern United States. 
They build large mounds that interfere with the cutting 
of hay. They also have a painful sting, to which some 
people are allergic. 

Many kinds of ants are household pests. For example, 
Carpenter ants damage houses by tunneling through 
wooden beams. Pharaohs ants and thief ants invade 
houses, restaurants, hospitals, and other buildings and 
eat stored food. Poison sprays or baits can sometimes 
help rid ants from houses. But before using indoor 
sprays or baits, a person should check with the state or 
county agricultural extension office to make sure they 
are both effective and safe to use. 


Scientific classification. Ants, bees, sawflies, and wasps 
make up an order of insects called Hymenoptera. Ants make up 
the family Formicidae. 


Related articles in World Book include: 


Norman F. Carlin 


Aardvark Cocoon Pupa 
Ant lion Fire ant Termite 
Anteater Insect Wilson, Edward 
Aphid Larva Osborne 
Outline 
1. The bodies of ants 
A. The head D. Internal organs 
B. The trunk E. Sense organs 


C. The metasoma 
ll. Life in an ant colony 
A. Castes 
B. Nests 
C Reproduction 
D. Protection against enemies 
E. Communication 
F. Life span 
lil. Kinds of ants 
A. Army ants 
B. Slave makers 
C. Harvester ants 
D. Dairying ants | 
IV. Keeping an ant farm | 
V. The importance of ants 


E. Honey ants 
F. Fungus growers 


Questions 


What are the three castes of ants? 

What are an ant's chief sense organs? 

How do weaver ants make their nests? 

Why are ants called social insects? 

What are the four stages of development that ants go through? 

How long do queen ants live? 

What do male and queen ants do after mating? 

How do dairying ants obtain honeydew? | 
In what ways are ants both beneficial and harmful to farmers? 

How do ants communicate with one another? 


Additional resources 


Level! 

Hoyt, Erich. The Earth Dwellers: Adventures in the Land of Ants. 
Simon & Schuster, 1996. 

Pascoe, Elaine. Ants. Blackbirch Pr., 1998. 

Ross, Edward S. Ants. Child’s World, 1993. 


Level Il 
Bolton, Barry. /dentification Guide to the Ant Genera of the 

World. Harvard Univ. Pr., 1994. 

Holldobler, Bert, and Wilson, E. O. The Ants. Belknap, 1990. /our- 

ney to the Ants. 1994. 

Taber, Stephen W. The World of Harvester Ants. Tex. A & M 

Univ. Pr., 1998. 

Ant bear. See Anteater. 

Ant lion is an insect /arva (immature form) that digs a 
pit in the soil to trap ants and other small insects for its 
food. The adult insect looks like a dragonfly. The ant lion 
larva is often called the doodlebug. 

The ant lion has a plump, hairy body. A pair of sword- 
shaped jaws extends from its narrow head. Three pairs 
of legs are fastened to the body, close behind the head. 
The ant lion can walk only backwards. 

The ant lion usually chooses a place with dry, sandy 
soil for its pit. It starts to work by walking around and 
around backwards, pushing its tail like a shovel down 
into the sand behind it. 
The sand slides up over 
the ant lion’s broad back 
and toward its head. By 
jerking its head suddenly, 
the ant lion throws the 
sand to one side. It moves 
in smaller and smaller cir- 
cles until it reaches the 
center of the circle. Then it 
has formed a funnel- 
shaped hole in the earth. 
This pit sometimes reach- 
es as much as 2 inches (5 
centimeters) across and 1 
inch (2.5 centimeters) deep 
or deeper. 

The ant lion traps its 
prey by hiding under the sand at the bottom of the pit. If 
an ant crawls close to the edge of the pit, the soft sand 
slides away under its feet, and the ant falls into the pit. 
The ant lion then kills it with its jaws and sucks the 
juices from its body. 

Scientific classification. Ant lions belong to the order Neu- 


roptera. They make up the ant lion family, Myrmeleontidae. 
There are hundreds of species. 





Edward S. Ross 
Ant lion 


Sandra J. Glover 


Antabuse. See Disulfiram. 
Antacid is any of a group of drugs that neutralize acid 
in the digestive system. Hydrochloric acid, produced in 
the stomach, is important to digestion. However, it can 
cause pain when it comes in contact with peptic ulcers, 
sores that can occur in the lining of the esophagus, 
stomach, or duodenum (first part of the small intestine). 
Antacids help relieve or prevent pain associated with 
peptic ulcers by neutralizing this acid. People also take 
antacids to stop the pain of heartburn and indigestion. 
Many antacid products contain compounds of alu- 
minum, magnesium, or, often, both. These chemicals re- 
act with acids to form more neutral compounds that do 
not irritate peptic ulcers. By relieving irritation, antacids 


Antarctic Ocean 529 
also can help promote healing of the ulcers. Many doc- 
tors recommend their use along with other antiulcer 
drugs, such as antibiotics and histamine H2-receptor an- 
tagonists (for example, cimetidine). 

Antacids come in tablet, capsule, and liquid form. 
Commonly used antacids include such brand-name 
products as Maalox and Mylanta. Tums, another com- 
mon antacid, contains a compound of calcium that is 
helpful for digestion but not recommended for ulcer 
treatment. 

These drugs ordinarily do not cause harmful side ef- 
fects, and a doctor's prescription is not needed to pur- 
chase them. However, antacids that contain magnesium 
hydroxide can cause diarrhea, while those with alu- 
minum hydroxide can cause constipation. Problems also 
may develop when antacids are used for long periods. 
For example, extensive use of antacids that contain calci- 
um carbonate can cause too much calcium to accumu- 
late in the body. High calcium levels can lead to kidney 
damage and other problems. N. E. Sladek 
Antakya. See Antioch. 

Antananarivo, 4HN tuh NAH nuh REE voh (pop. 
800,000), is the capital and largest city of Madagascar, 
which includes the island of Madagascar and small 
nearby islands. Antananarivo, formerly called Tana- 
narive, is near the center of the island of Madagascar. 
For location, see Madagascar (map). It lies on a moun- 
tain ridge that runs across the island from north to 
south. Railroads running along the ridge link Antana- 
narivo with the rest of the island and bring crops to the 
city for processing. 

The majority of people who live in Antananarivo are 
of Indonesian descent. They are members of the Merina 
and Betsileo ethnic groups. Some of Antananarivo’s resi- 
dents are French. Madagascar was once a French colo- 
ny. The French work with the local people in govern- 
ment, university education, and international trade. The 
University of Madagascar and several scientific research 
institutes are located in the city. Antananarivo’s most fa- 
mous building is the palace of the last queen of Mada- 
gascar's Merina kingdom. Built in the 1800's, the palace 
was destroyed by fire in 1995. Restoration began on the 
building shortly after the fire. 

See also Madagascar (picture). 
Antarctic. See Antarctica. 
Antarctic Circle, ant AHRK tihk or ant AHR tihk, is an 
imaginary line that encloses almost all of Antarctica. 
Points on the Antarctic Circle lie at 66°30’ south latitude, 
about 1,624 miles (2,613 kilometers) from the south geo- 
graphic pole (see Antarctica [map)). 

The Antarctic Circle marks the edge of an area where 
the sun stays above the horizon one or more days each 
year. The sun never sets on the Antarctic Circle during 
the longest day of summer, about December 21. The 
sun never rises On the shortest day of winter, about June 
21. If the South Pole at 90° south latitude were at sea lev- 
el instead of nearly 10,000 feet (3,000 meters) above sea 
level, and if no atmospheric phenomena or other obsta- 
cles affected observations, the sun would be visible 90 
days before and 90 days after the longest day of sum- 
mer. It would stay below the horizon for the same time 
before and after the shortest day of winter. 

Stephen S. Birdsall 
Antarctic Ocean. See Southern Ocean. 


Bruce Fetter 


530 Antarctica 








© Rod Planck, Photo Researchers 


Antarctica’s rugged coast features jagged mountain peaks and glacier-filled valleys. Ice and 
snow cover 98 percent of the continent Antarctica is the world’s coldest region. 


Antarctica 


Antarctica, ant AHRK tih kuh or ant AHR tih kuh, is the 
ice-buried continent that covers and surrounds the 
South Pole. This dry and nearly barren land forms the 
coldest and iciest region in the world. It is colder than 
the region around the North Pole. The South Pole lies 
near the center of the Antarctic continent, on a high, 
windy plateau of ice and snow. The North Pole is in the 
center of the Arctic Ocean. 

Antarctica covers about 5,400,000 square miles 
(14,000,000 square kilometers). It is larger in area than ei- 
ther Europe or Australia. Nearly all of Antarctica is cov- 
ered with two thick ice sheets, one on either side of the 
Transantarctic Mountains. This icy layer, which averages 
approximately 7,100 feet (2,200 meters) thick, makes 
Antarctica the highest continent in terms of average ele- 


Wendy Lawson, the contributor of this article, is Senior Lec- 
turer of Geography at the University of Canterbury in New 
Zealand. She specializes in the study of glaciers and ice mass 
movements, and she has written extensively about Antarctica. 





vation. The average elevation of Antarctica is 7,500 feet 
(2,300 meters) above sea level. 

Stormy waters of the Atlantic, Indian, Pacific, and 
Southern oceans isolate Antarctica from the other conti- 
nents. Ships must steer around towering icebergs to 
reach the continent Planes that fly there must land on 
runways of solid ice. 

Temperatures in Antarctica almost never rise above 
32 °F (0 °C). Scientists recorded the world’s lowest tem- 
perature, — 128.6 °F (—89.2 °C), at Vostok Station, on July 
21, 1983. Strong, bitter winds also chill the air. Antarcti- 
ca’s inland plateau has one of the driest climates on 
Earth. It gets no rain and hardly any new snow each year. 

Only a few small plants and insects can survive in 


Facts in brief 


Area: About 5,400,000 mi? (14,000,000 km). Greatest distance— 
Antarctic Peninsula to Wilhelm II Coast, about 3,450 mi (5,550 
km). Coastline—about 19,800 mi (31,900 km). 

Elevation: Highest—Vinson Massif, 16,864 ft (5,140 m) above sea 
level. Lowest—sea level. 

Physical features: Chief mountain ranges—Antarctic Peninsula, 
Ellsworth, Prince Charles, Transantarctic, Whitmore. Chief 
glaciers—Beardmore, Lambert, Rennick, Support Force. Chief 
ice shelves—Amery, Filchner, Larsen, Ronne, Ross. 


Interesting facts about Antarctica 


The krill—a small, shrimplike 
animal—is a key source of 
food in the Antarctic region. 
Such animals as fish, birds, 
and seals feed on krill and are, 
in turn, eaten by larger ani- 
mals. Swarms of krill form 
huge red masses in coastal 
waters during the day and 
glow bluish-green at night. 


Antarctica’s wandering 
pole, officially called the 
south magnetic pole, moves 
at least 5 miles (8 kilometers) a 
year. This is the South Pole in- 
dicated by compass needles. 


: -_ v* 


Plant fossils found in Antarctica 
reveal that the continent once 
had a warm, ice-free climate with 
trees and other leafy plants. 


Antarctica’s dry interior. But various animals thrive in 
and near the surrounding waters, including fish, krill, 
seals, whales, penguins, and other sea birds. 

Long before Antarctica was discovered, ancient Greek 
philosophers believed that a continent covered the 
southern end of Earth. Antarctica was first sighted in 
1820. During the mid-1800's, explorers sailed along its 
coast and learned that it was large enough to be called a 
continent. Inland exploration began in the early 1900's. 
The Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen reached the 
South Pole in 1911. In what turned out to be a dramatic 
race, he arrived there five weeks ahead of a British expe- 
dition led by Captain Robert F. Scott. 

During the mid-1900’'s, U.S. Navy officer Richard Byrd 
led air expeditions that increased scientific interest in 
Antarctica. In 1959, officials of 12 countries signed an in- 
ternational agreement called the Antarctic Treaty. This 
treaty provides that the continent be used mainly for re- 
search and other peaceful purposes. 

Today, scientists maintain year-round research sta- 
tions in Antarctica. Activities on the continent encourage 
international cooperation and the sharing of scientific 
knowledge. Several countries have claimed parts of the 
continent. But the Antarctic Treaty places a freeze on ex- 
isting claims and prohibits new ones. 






Antarctica 531 


Thick ice 
buries most of 
Antarctica. The 
continent's 
deepest ice is 
more than 10 
times the height 
of the Sears 
- Tower, one of 
> the world's 
tallest buildings. 





First to reach the 
South Pole was Roald 
Amundsen, a Norwe- 
~ gian explorer. His ex- 
-* pedition set off from 
Antarctica’s Bay of 
Whales on Oct. 19, 
1911, and reached the 
pole on Dec. 14, 1911. 





ee 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Paul 0 Turnbaugh 





atianti 
ah 
wre ocea” 0 roa 
€ , 
ts (oy 
ce o 
< ° 
e %, 
% 2 
babi @ 
ps a ~ 
i. ih, 
™ ; indian Ocea 
eS "i ] : f {afi ceat 
ANTARCTICA 
g ~- ea =a 
= A Soutn Pole . 
; i 
‘ ao ~ 


S* 0 
a a 
ec thers O2f 
eS 


Ney, Zeata na 


A 





WORLD BOOK map 
Antarctica is the continent that covers the South Pole. The 
Southern Ocean surrounds the continent. 


532. Antarctica 


Land and climate 


Ice and snow cover 98 percent of the Antarctic conti- 
nent. High mountain peaks and a few other bare rocky 
areas make up the only visible land. Underneath the ice, 
Antarctica has mountains, lowlands, and valleys—much 
like the landforms of other continents. 

The Southern Ocean surrounds Antarctica. The north- 
ern boundary of the ocean is 60° south latitude. Farther 
north, at about 55° south latitude, lies the center of an ir- 
regular band of water, the Antarctic Convergence, 
which is about 25 miles (40 kilometers) wide. Within that 
band, cold southern waters meet warmer, saltier north- 
ern waters. At about 50° south latitude is the massive 
Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC). The ACC flows 
from east to west around Antarctica. 

Geologists believe Antarctica originally belonged to a 
giant supercontinent called Gondwanaland. This super- 
continent also included Africa, Australia, India, and 
South America. By about 140 million years ago, the su- 
percontinent had begun to break apart. The parts gradu- 
ally drifted to their present locations, and Antarctica be- 
came a separate continent. 

Many millions of years ago, Antarctica was an ice-free 
continent. Scientists have found fossils of trees and of 
dinosaurs and small mammals that once lived there. Gla- 
ciers began to form around the South Pole approximate- 
ly 38 million years ago. They grew rapidly about 13 mil- 
lion years ago, forming the thick layers of ice and snow 
known as the Antarctic ice sheets. The ice sheets have 
buried almost all of Antarctica for the last 5 million 


ears. 
: The Antarctic ice sheets are two thick layers of ice 
and snow that together cover most of the continent. 

They formed from layers of snow that were pressed to- 
gether over millions of years. Air between the grains of 









Michael Parfit 


Mount Erebus, Antarctica’s most active volcano, towers 
above Ross Island. In the foreground, a scientist builds an igloo 
from blocks of snow as part of his survival training. 


snow was pushed out or trapped in bubbles as the 
buried layers hardened into ice. The air trapped in bub- 
bles is an important source of information about past cli- 
mates. 

Today, the Antarctic ice sheets form the largest body 
of fresh water or ice in the world. Their volume of 7 4 
million cubic miles (30 million cubic kilometers) repre- 
sents approximately 70 percent of the world’s fresh wa- 
ter. If the ice melted, Earth's oceans would rise nearly 
230 feet (70 meters) and flood coastal cities around the 
world. 

The thickest parts of the ice sheets are over deep 
basins that dip far below sea level. In those areas, the ice 
is as thick as 11,500 feet (3,500 meters). The ice reaches 
its highest point over a mountain peak, where it rises 
about 13,500 feet (4,100 meters) above sea level. 

The weight of the ice sheets causes the ice to spread 
outward and flow toward the coasts. Ice near the coasts 
moves as much as 660 feet (200 meters) a year. Glaciers 
in narrow valleys move even more quickly. In some ar- 
eas, the ice sheets break and form deep crevasses 
(cracks) that are a major hazard to people who visit 
Antarctica. 

Land regions. The Transantarctic Mountains cross 
the entire continent of Antarctica. Several ranges make 
up the Transantarctic chain. Some peaks rise more than 
14,000 feet (4,300 meters). The Transantarctic chain has 
the largest of the ice-free, rocky areas known as dry val- 
leys. These valleys were carved by glaciers that once oc- 
cupied them and later retreated. Snow that falls in dry 
valleys is swept away by winds. Some of the valleys have 
lakes. 

The Transantarctic Mountains separate Antarctica’s 
two ice sheets and form two regions: (1) East Antarctica 
and (2) West Antarctica. 

East Antarctica Covers more than half the continent 
The region consists of rocks more than 570 million years 
old. 

Mountains, valleys, and glaciers mark the coast of East 
Antarctica. The interior of East Antarctica is an ice 
plateau about 10,000 feet (3,000 meters) above sea level. 
The continent's thickest ice is in this area. Winds on the 
plateau blow the snow into ridges, called sastrugi, up to 


© Guy Mannenng, Bruce Coleman Inc. 
ice-free areas called dry valleys appear where Antarctica’s glac- 
iers have retreated and wind prevents snow from collecting. 
About 98 percent of the continent lies beneath ice and snow. 





Antarctica 533 


221 =e 
eae s Astrig™ Riiser-Larsen 


tase: 


Elephant |. 


South Shetland 
_, Joinville !. 


Mts 
“een My ohiae 
| 4 


Muhlig- Say : 





og 
2° 


_ - ersen fies Valkyrie 
: ey al Dome 


Mac. Robertson Lan 
f %&e- ry % ry Y 
Adelaide |° % -_ 
G iv So: 


area. IN , . ; ( 
i rh .. » yo upport Force Glacier 


so. a2 ‘ Pensacola 

te a EAST 
aluaes SSS —~ 

i Be sein! re . AN\TARCTICA 


Dome Argus 


%,. 


American 
~Hightand = \ ? 
Princess, 


Elizabeth 
Land =) ; 
a 


+ South Pole 


ae 
¢ Kirkpatrick 


ft. (4,528 m} 


| 
| 
90° West Longitude 


Ab she itis © . WEST “ling 


\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 


_Watgreen 
’ , Coast @ 


d ore Mh ~~ 
Mt. Markham 
Executive Rocke tai 14,275 ft. (4,351 m) 


Vig : arc 
Dose ‘, ; C —flaememeery IT 
a Range f- ' ates 
i a 1 2° ) * Cape 
j ad. nis @ ;  Poinsett 


Mt. Erebus pe 
12,448 ft (3,794 ma 


Thickest point of 


Antarctic icecap 


15,700 ft. (4,800 m/e - ‘Cape Goodenough 9 


Cape Adare 


Antarctica 
terrain map 


Ice shelf 


Elevation above 
sea level 


2,000 Miles 


WORLD BOOK 
OOK map 3,000 Kilometers 





Physical features 


Adélie Coast. iiiu...m.... G 6 Elephant Island MB Marie Byrd Land ....... Eee Ronne Ice Shelf. ........ Diz Support Force 

American Highland . .D 6 Ellsworth Land BE 2 McMurdo Sound. .....F 4 Ross Ice Shelf. ......... F 4 Cla RCIGh LS «acne cee. is 3 

Amery Ice Shelf ae: Ellsworth MountErebus ...... ....F 4 Rossiislagd .............. F 4 Thickest point of 

Amundsen As IB 7 Mountains... ....... az Mount Kirkpatrick ....E 4 South Atlantic Antarctic icecap mG 6 

Amundsen Sea . a2, Enderby Land ......... (Co Mount Markham a hoe4 Oceana ®...08..:.:A 2 Transantarctic 

Antarctic English Coast .. OZ Mount Menzies wa. 6 South Magnetic Mountains Sauce 
Peninsula... ... ....C 1 Filchner Ice Shelf. ae | Prince Charles Pole. a. ae UG OG Victorialand........ G § 

Beardmore Glacier... .. FE 4 Horlick Mountains . £3 Mountains . pee South Orkney Vincennes Ba F 7 

Bellingshausen Sea .. .D 1 Hughes Bay . eal Princess Elizabeth Islands : Al Vinson Massi 

Branstield Strait Bo) Indian Ocean Be? Land . ae ee 4 South Pacific (mountain) A ee 

Cape Adare mG 4 Joinville Island . B 1 Queen Maud Land .B 4 Ocean J)..— —.-G 2 WeddellSea ......... € 2 

Coats Land g 3 Lamhert Glacier. C 6 Queen Maud SouthPole ....=—:.:.D 4 Whitmore Mountains .— 3 

Davis Sea.... E 7 Larsen IceShelf ..... C | Mountains ... Bi South Shetland Withelm t(Coast...... E 7 

Deception Island BI Mac. RobertsonLand C 6 Rennick Glacier G S$ Islands . 3 | Wilkes Land ...... Fig 7 


534 Antarctica 


6 feet (1.8 meters) high. The South Pole lies on the 
plateau, at the center of the continent. This pole, also 
known as the south geographic pole, is Earth's southern- 
most point, where all lines of longitude meet. 

East Antarctica also has the south magnetic pole, the 
farthest point on Earth in the direction of magnetic 
south. It may move as much as 5 to 10 miles (8 to 16 kilo- 
meters) in a year. In the early 2000's, it was off the coast 
of Wilkes Land. For a description of other south poles, 
see South Pole. 

West Antarctica. \n this region, much of the rock sur- 
face beneath the ice lies below sea level. The region's 
ice sheet fills deep basinlike areas of land in West 
Antarctica. If the ice sheet melted, West Antarctica 
would become a group of islands. 

The Antarctic Peninsula is a mountainous, S-shaped 
finger of land that points out from West Antarctica to- 
ward South America. In fact, the peninsula forms a con- 
tinuation of the Andes Mountain chain of South Ameri- 
ca. Several islands lie near the peninsula. The South 
Shetland Islands to the west include Deception Island, 
an active volcano. 

West Antarctica includes several other mountain 
ranges and volcanoes. Vinson Massif, the highest point 
in Antarctica at 16,864 feet (5,140 meters), stands in the 
Ellsworth Mountains near the peninsula. Mount Erebus, 
Antarctica’s most active volcano, lies on Ross Island, 
which is on the side of West Antarctica that faces New 
Zealand. The volcano rises 12,448 feet (3,794 meters). Oc- 
casionally, it spurts pieces of volcanic rock. 

Coastal waters. Two large gulfs cut into Antarctica at 
opposite ends of the Transantarctic Mountains—the 
Ross Sea and the Weddell Sea. Smaller bays indent the 
coastline. Various channels separate offshore islands 
from the mainland. For example, the Bransfield Strait 
separates the South Shetland Islands from the mainland. 

Broad, flat, floating parts of ice sheets called ice 
shelves fill several of Antarctica’s bays and channels. The 
Ross Ice Shelf, the largest one, measures about 2,300 
feet (700 meters) thick at the inner edge and about 660 
feet (200 meters) thick at the outermost edge. 

In summer, the outer’edges of the ice shelves break 
away and form immense, flat icebergs. This process of 
iceberg production is called ca/ving. These icebergs are 
larger, smoother, and more evenly shaped than ice- 
bergs elsewhere in the world. Scientists have measured 
Antarctic icebergs with an area as huge as 5,000 square 
miles (13,000 square kilometers). The icebergs are like 
giant floating ice cubes. In the future, they may be 
towed to arid lands and used as a source of fresh water. 

Each winter, the surface of the Southern Ocean 
freezes into a sheet of salty ice called sea ice. In sum- 
mer, this sea ice breaks into pieces called ice floes. 
Winds and waves push the floes against one another, 
forming thick masses known as pack ice. Some pack ice 
piles up in ridges against the shore. In winter, pack ice 
extends as far as 1,000 miles (1,600 kilometers) from the 
coast. 

Climate. Antarctica’s climate varies from extremely 
cold, dry conditions on the inland plateau to milder, 
slightly moister conditions along the coasts. Many peo- 
ple call the plateau a “polar desert.” It has only about 2 
inches (5 centimeters) of snowfall each year. Annual! 
coastal snowfall averages 24 inches (61 centimeters). 





The Antarctic winter lasts from May through Septem- 
ber. For several months of the year, the continent is in 
continual darkness. Summer lasts from November 
through February. July temperatures range from alow 
of —94 °F to a high of —40 °F (—70 to —40 °C) inland and 
from —22 to —5 °F (—30to —21 °C) on the peninsulas 
coast. January temperatures range from —31 to 5 “F(—35 
to —15 °C) inland and reach 32 “F (0 °C) on the coast. 
Northern islands may have summer temperatures of up 
to 50°F (10 °C. 

Icy winds make the Antarctic air feel even colder. 
Winds that sweep downward from the plateau can aver- 
age 44 miles (70 kilometers) per hour. Gusts often reach 
the coast at 120 miles (190 kilometers) per hour. 


Plants and animals 


Plant life. Few plants grow in Antarctica because of 
the ice-covered land and the harsh climate. Mosses are 
the most common Antarctic plants. They cling to rocky 
areas, mostly on the coasts. Only two flowering plants 
grow in Antarctica. Both live on the northern part of the 
Antarctic Peninsula. One is a grass that forms dense 
mats on sunny slopes. The other, an herb, grows in 
short, cushionlike bunches. 

Simpler organisms known as a/gae grow on snow, in 
lakes, and on ice surrounding the continent. Some algae 
look like pink or green snow. Other organisms called 
lichens cling to rocks as mosses do. Some lichens sur- 
vive by bunching together to conserve water. Scientists 
have discovered rows of black, white, and green lichens 
growing in tiny cracks in dry valleys. Small plants and al- 
gae also drift on the surface of the Southern Ocean. 

Animal life. Only a few insects and other tiny animals 
spend their entire lives on the Antarctic mainland. The 
continent's largest land animal is a wingless midge, a 
type of fly no more than $ inch (12 millimeters) long. 
Most land animals live at the edges of the continent. To 
avoid freezing to death, some lice, mites, and ticks cling 
to mosses, the fur of seals, or the feathers of birds. 

Unlike the continent, the Southern Ocean has abun- 
dant wildlife. The most common animal of the ocean is 
krill, a small, shrimplike creature that feeds on tiny float- 
ing organisms. Many other Antarctic animals depend on 
krill for food, and several countries catch and sell krill as 
a protein-rich food for people. The squid—a soft, bone- 
less sea animal—also is eaten by many Antarctic animals. 
In addition, about 100 kinds of fish live in the ocean, in- 
cluding Antarctic cod, icefish, and plundertfish. 

Several kinds of whales migrate to Antarctica for the 
summer. Those that feed on krill are blue whales, fin 
whales, humpback whales, minke whales, right whales, 
and sei whales. The blue whale is the largest animal that 
has ever lived. This rare giant grows up to 100 feet (30 
meters) long. Antarctic whales that eat fish and squid in- 
clude killer whales, also called orcas; southern bot- 
tlenose whales; southern fourtooth whales; and sperm 
whales. Killer whales also hunt seals, penguins, and 
smaller whales. 

Various kinds of seals live in Antarctica. They spend 
most of their lives in the water, where they swim, dive, 
and catch food. Most of them nest on the coasts. The 
Antarctic fur seal nests on nearby islands. The largest 
seal in the world is the southern elephant seal, which 
feeds on squid. The males may reach a length of 16 feet 








Anima! life in Antarctica 


Antarctica 535 


Antarctica’s coastal waters have plentiful wildlife, though only tiny animals can survive in the harsh 


interior. Seals and birds nest on the coast and nearby islands, and whales migrate to the area for 
the summer. Many of these animals have extra layers of fat to keep warm in the cold, icy climate. 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Paul D. Turnbaugh 









a Antarctic tern '*\ “ ii? 
/ i a, en 1 ‘ 7 
. rs Snaw petrel mn ; 
\ Brawn skua | "A — 


- s 3 =» 
v Wandering albatross 









Killer whale 


3 - - > ’ » aT 
- — ae é. 
’ > nea! nb 
eG 
- © Gin tum I oo ' s] 
— ; : 


(5 meters). Weddell seals and Ross seals eat fish and 
squid. Crabeater seals and Antarctic fur seals eat krill. 
Leopard seals hunt other seals as well as penguins. 

During the 1800's and early 1900's, hunters greatly re- 
duced the number of whales and Antarctic fur seals. To- 
day, international wildlife laws prohibit or restrict the 
killing of these animals. 

Penguins are the animals most often associated with 
Antarctica. These birds cannot fly, and they waddle awk- 
wardly on land. But they are skillful swimmers. They 
streak through the ocean, diving for fish and other food. 
Six kinds of penguins breed on the continent. Playful 
Adélie penguins, the most common kind, build nests of 
pebbles on the coasts. The tall, quieter emperor pen- 
guin grows to about 4 feet (1.2 meters). After the female 
emperor penguin lays an egg on ice, the male rests ihe 
egg on his feet and warms it with the lower part of his 
belly. Chinstrap penguins, gentoo penguins, king pen- 
guins, and macaroni penguins nest on the Antarctic 
Peninsula and on islands. Rockhopper penguins nest 
only on islands north of Antarctica. 

More than 40 kinds of flying birds spend the summer 
in Antarctica. Many types nest on land but spend most 
of their time diving for food. These birds include alba- 


Sperm whale 






Cape pigean 


Emperor penguins 





Humpback whale 


. $ ee —y sl zZ | 


rt Rockhapper penguin 


trosses, prions, and a large group of sea birds known as 
petrels. Other birds, such as cormorants, gulls, skuas, 
and terns, return to land more frequently. Some of them 
steal food from the nests of other birds. Some land 
birds, such as sheathbills, nest on the peninsula. Others, 
including pintails and pipits, nest on islands. 


Human activities 


People wrote about a southern continent centuries 
before Antarctica was discovered. Ancient Greek 
philosophers supposed that a land mass at Earth’s 
southern end was needed to balance the weight of the 
northern lands. During the A.D. 100’s, the Greek geogra- 
pher Ptolemy gave this undiscovered continent the Latin 
name Jerra Australis Incognita (unknown southern land). 
He believed the land was populated and fertile. The 
name Antarctica later came from two Greek words 
meaning opposite the bear. The Bear is a constellation 
seen from the northernmost region of Earth. 

Early exploration. In 1772, the English navigator 
James Cook began his search for the southern continent. 
In January 1773, he crossed the Antarctic Circle, an 
imaginary line circling Earth at about 66° south latitude. 
A year later, Cook reached a “farthest south” position of 





536 Antarctica 


71° 10’ south latitude. Huge ice blocks prevented him 
from going farther, however, and he never sighted land. 

Nobody knows who first saw the Antarctic continent. 
Many historians divide the credit among three men who 
made separate voyages in 1820. In January of that year, 
Captain Fabian von Bellingshausen of the Russian Impe- 
rial Navy reported reaching a point only 20 miles (32 
kilometers) from the Antarctic Peninsula. Some histori- 
ans believe that he saw land but thought it was ice. 

That same month, Captain Edward Bransfield of the 
British Navy journeyed south of the South Shetland Is- 
lands and probably saw the Antarctic Peninsula. In No- 
vember, an American sealer named Nathaniel Brown 
Palmer reported seeing land during a sealing expedition 
in the same area. Some geographers later called the 
peninsula Graham Land in honor of James Graham, who 
headed the British Navy in Bransfield’s time. Others 
called it Palmer Land. The United States and the mem- 
bers of the Commonwealth of Nations finally agreed to 
the term Antarctic Peninsula in 1964. 

Historians also are unsure of who first set foot on 
Antarctica. Some believe that an American sealer named 
John Davis went ashore at Hughes Bay on the tip of the 
peninsula in 1821. But Davis did not know if he had 
reached the continent or an island. Whalers made the 
first known landing on the continent in the late 1800's. 

In 1823, a British sealer named James Weddell sailed 
south in search of hunting waters. He reached about 74 
south latitude, farther than earlier voyagers had sailed, 
and found what is now called the Weddell Sea. 

In 1831, an English whaler named John Biscoe be- 
came the first to spot land in east Antarctica. Biscoe 
named it Enderby Land after the whaling company that 
owned his ship. 

In 1837, the king of France sent Lieutenant Jules Du- 
mont d’Urville to claim some southern lands for France. 
D'Urville’s first attempt led him to discover what is now 
called Joinville Island, off the tip of the Antarctic Penin- 
sula. He began his next Antarctic voyage from Tasmania, 
an island south of the Australian mainland. In January 
1840, he sighted icy cliffs rising along the east Antarctic 
coastline. Many small penguins dotted the pack ice that 
blocked his way to the land. D’Urville named both the 
land and the penguins after his wife, Adélie. 

About the same time that d'Urville sighted land, Lieu- 
tenant Charles Wilkes of the U.S. Navy headed an expe- 
dition to perform scientific research. Wilkes’s most im- 
portant contribution to the study of Antarctica was his 
coastal exploration. His ship moved from Adélie Coast 
toward Enderby Land, tracing more than 1,500 miles 
(2,400 kilometers) of coastline. This distance showed that 
Antarctica was large enough to be called a continent. 

From 1839 to 1843, the British explorer James Clark 
Ross made several discoveries. Ross was the first person 
to go beyond the pack ice surrounding Antarctica. He 
sailed into the gulf that is now called the Ross Sea. Ross 
also discovered an island with two volcanoes, which he 
named after his ships, Erebus and Terror. He found the 
gulf barricaded by a towering sheet of ice, now known 
as the Ross Ice Shelf. 

In 1895, a Norwegian businessman named Henryk Jo- 
han Bull made the first known landing on the Antarctic 
mainland. He and his whaling crew went ashore at Cape 
Adare, a point on the Ross Sea facing New Zealand. 


The “Heroic Era.” The first two decades of the 1900's 
are often called the “Heroic Era’ of Antarctic exploration. 
During this period, much was learned about the geogra- 
phy and environment of the continent. It was also during 
this period that explorers first reached the South Pole. 

The first inland exploration of Antarctica took place 
from 1901 to 1904. Robert Falcon Scott of the British 
Navy led a team of explorers and scientists to the Ross 
Sea. In November 1902, Scott and two other men head- 
ed south across the Ross Ice Shelf. But illness, harsh 
weather, and lack of food forced them to rejoin the team 
earlier than planned. Another group moved up a glacier 
through the Transantarctic Mountains and reached the 
edge of the icy inland plateau. 

Ernest Shackleton, a member of Scott's team, re- 
turned to Antarctica in 1907. Part of his expedition head- 
ed for the south magnetic pole, the farthest point on 
Earth in the direction of magnetic south. They reached it 
in January 1909. The main group headed for the south 
geographic pole, the meeting point of lines of longi- 
tude. Food shortages forced the men to turn back early. 
But they had arrived within 97 nautical miles (180 kilo- 
meters) of the pole, close enough to prove that the pole 
was on land rather than beneath a frozen sea. 

At the opposite end of Earth, Arctic explorers reached 
the North Pole in 1909. In June 1910, Captain Scott left 
London, hoping to win for the United Kingdom the hon- 
or of reaching the South Pole first. In October, while 
Scott was in Australia, he received a telegram from the 
Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen. The telegram in- 
formed Scott that Amundsen, too, was going to Antarcti- 
ca. Amundsen originally had hoped to be the first North 
Pole explorer. He switched his goal when he heard that 
the North Pole had been reached. 

The race to the South Pole became one of the most fa- 
mous events in the history of Antarctica. Amundsen and 
Scott never met, but both knew that they were racing for 
the same prize. 

Amundsen and his four assistants began crossing the 
Ross Ice Shelf from the Bay of Whales on Oct. 19, 1911. 
To reach the inland plateau, they had to carve their own 
route along an unexplored glacier in the Queen Maud 
Mountains. The men journeyed on skis and wore light, 
warm furs. Fifty-two dogs pulled their four sleds carry- 
ing food and supplies. Amundsen marked his route and 
food storage areas with mounds of snow. He shot the 
weakest dogs for food, when they were no longer need- 
ed to pull the sleds. 

Scott set out with 15 other men on Nov. 1, 1911, from 
Cape Evans, Ross Island. This location was about 800 | 
miles (1,300 kilometers) from the pole, about 60 miles (97 
kilometers) farther than Amundsen’s starting point. How- 
ever, Scott's expedition reached the plateau by way of 
the Beardmore Glacier, a known route. Scott used 
motor-powered sleds to carry some supplies. Ponies 
and dogs pulled other sleds. But the ponies and motor 
sleds bogged down in the soft snow. The men had to 
drag the sleds, and food soon ran low. Scott crossed the 
plateau accompanied by four men. 

Amundsen’s group arrived at the South Pole on Dec. 
14, 1911. They used special navigating instruments to 
calculate their position. Amundsen left his tent, a Nor- 
wegian flag, and a message for Scott at the pole. The 
group then headed back to their base, which they 





Bettmann Archive 


reached on Jan. 25, 1912. By that time, only 11 dogs re- 
mained, but all five men were in good health. 

Scott's group reached the pole on Jan. 17, 1912, greet- 
ed by Amundsen’s flag. Cold, hunger, and exhaustion 
had severely weakened the explorers. They pho- 
tographed themselves at the pole and began their re- 
turn. All five men perished on the way. Two of them 
died after they were injured on the trail. In late March, a 
long blizzard forced Scott and his two remaining assist- 
ants to camp only 11 miles (18 kilometers) away from 
food and supplies. A search party found their frozen 
bodies inside the tent eight months later. 

Exploration by air provided a new way to study 
Antarctica. In 1928, the Australian explorer Sir Hubert 
Wilkins surveyed the Antarctic Peninsula and nearby is- 
lands in the first airplane voyage over Antarctic land. 

In November 1929, the U.S. Navy officer Richard E. 
Byrd led the first flight over the South Pole. A Norwe- 


¥ 





Antarctica 537 


Hulton Getty from Liaison Agency 





A dramatic race to the South Pole began in late 1911. British Navy Captain 
Robert F. Scott, standing in the group photograph, and the Norwegian explorer 
Roald Amundsen, standing next to the flag of Norway, each hoped to be the first 
to arrive at the pole. Amundsen reached the South Pole on December 14, five 
weeks before Scott Amundsen’s group returned safely. Scott and his men died 
on the way back, not long after this photograph was taken. 


gian American pilot, Bernt Balchen, flew Byrd’s crew 
from the Bay of Whales to the pole and back. The flight 
lasted less than 16 hours. This journey was part of an ex- 
pedition that Byrd supervised from 1928 to 1930. Ina 
second expedition from 1933 to 1935, Byrd and his as- 
sistants traveled by plane and tractor over the Antarctic 
interior. They studied the ice, Earth's magnetism, cosmic 
rays, weather, and geology. 

In 1935, the U.S. engineer Lincoln Ellsworth and the 
English-born pilot Herbert Hollick-Kenyon took off from 
Dundee Island, north of the Antarctic Peninsula, hoping 
to make the first flight across the continent. Near the 
Weddell Sea, they discovered what are now called the 
Ellsworth Mountains. Their plane had to land four times 
because of storms and a fuel shortage. They finally com- 
pleted the crossing on foot at the Bay of Whales. 

In 1946 and 1947, Byrd commanded the U.S. Navy's 
Operation Highjump, the largest Antarctic expedition by 


Granger Collection 


Exploration by air greatly ex- 
panded knowledge of Antarc- 
tica’s geography. In 1929, 
Richard E. Byrd of the United 
States Navy first flew over the 
South Pole. Byrd later led ex- 
peditions for the U.S. govern- 
ment in this Fokker trimotor 
plane. 





538 Antarctica 


a single country. Operation Highjump sent 4,700 men, 
13 ships, and 23 airplanes and helicopters to Antarctica. 
The expedition members discovered new land, includ- 
ing 26 islands. They photographed about 1,400 miles 
(2,300 kilometers) of previously unexplored coastline. 

That same year, Captain Finn Ronne led a private U.S. 
air expedition to West Antarctica. Ronne explored areas 
of the Weddell Sea that had never been seen. The crew 
included Ronne’s wife, Edith, and Jennie Darlington, the 
wife of his chief pilot. They were the first women to 
spend a winter on the continent. 

Recent activities in Antarctica have been related 
mainly to scientific research, tourism, and other peace- 
ful purposes. Scientific knowledge of Antarctica in- 
creased rapidly during the International Geophysical 
Year (IGY), a program in which scientists carried out re- 
search and shared their findings. The IGY began on July 
1, 1957, and ended on Dec. 31, 1958. 

During the IGY, 12 countries established more than 50 
scientific stations on Antarctica and nearby islands. 
These countries were Argentina, Australia, Belgium, 
Chile, France, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South 
Africa, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the 
United States. The United States set up a station at the 
South Pole, plus five coastal stations and one other in- 
land station. The Soviet Union built a station at a point it 
named the Pole of Inaccessibility. This station, called 
Vostok, lies in the interior of East Antarctica, far inland 
from all coasts. 

IGY researchers in Antarctica studied such topics as 
earthquakes, gravity, magnetism, oceans, and solar ac- 
tivity. Meteoro/logists (scientists who study weather) de- 


a 


South i =o 


Antarctica exploration 


This map shows the routes of 
major expeditions in the Ant- 
arctic region. The continent 
was first sighted in 1820. In- 
land exploration of Antarctica 
began in the 1900s. 


a 
y 


C 


Falkiand Is. 














N Enderby + 
! \ Land 
TH $\ Antarctic Peninsula 
2 4, 
Cook (U.K.) 1773-74 aneaice on x “ 
%*. ™. 
———- Bellingshausen (Russia) 1819-20 BX ; 
%\ - cS 
Weddell (U.K.) 1823 a SON 
es : aN z East 
———-. Wilkes (U.S.) 1840 enewor® Antarctica 
— : 
ne d‘Urville (France) 1840 a es ; 
_.. Ross (U.K,) 1840-41 cook 74 Antarctica 
/ 
Amundsen (Norway) 1911 \ \.. 1929 3 
pas 
s © 
———— Scott (U.K.) 1911-12 i Little Amencag e 
~ 
ae Byrd (U.S.) 1929 \ S: 
t y 
__... Ellsworth (U.S.) 1935 Lay i oy res 
—...— Fuchs (U.K.) 1957-58 / : Cape Again. a 
1 d Le ® 
eo = Historic base camp ‘ KO a =f, \ pr. n 
Jf o) - U 
/ / 
1.000 Mil as —— a. Ay ae, Re so 
0 i les ¢ \ ps _ _: 
0 1,000 Kitometers Mm J fo \ = Gr ; 
at 


WORLD BOOK map 


z cer - 


termined air pressure, humidity, temperature, and wind 
direction and prepared Antarctica’s first complete 
weather charts. G/aciologists (scientists who study ice) 
measured the thickness of the ice. Geologists studied 
the land formations. 

During the IGY, the British geologist Vivian Fuchs 
headed the first land crossing of the continent. The 
Commonwealth of Nations organized the expedition, 
which covered 2,158 miles (3,473 kilometers). Fuchs left 
on Nov. 24, 1957, from the shore of the Weddell Sea, 
with dogs and snow tractors. A team led by the New 
Zealand explorer Sir Edmund Hillary placed food and 
supplies along the second part of the trail. Hillary met 
Fuchs at the South Pole in January 1958. Fuchs reached 
McMurdo Sound in the Ross Sea on March 2, 1958. 

Seven of the 12 countries that built Antarctic bases for 
the IGY claim parts of Antarctica as their national territo- 
ry. The parts are shaped like pie slices, with the South 
Pole at the center. The Australian government claims 
two slices that face Australia. France claims a strip that 
extends inward from the Adélie Coast. Other claims 
come from Argentina, Chile, New Zealand, Norway, and 
the United Kingdom. Many nations, including the United 
States, do not recognize these claims. 

In 1959, officials of the 12 countries signed the Antarc- 
tic Treaty. This agreement freezes all current territorial 
claims in Antarctica and prohibits new claims. It allows 
people to use Antarctica only for peaceful purposes, 
such as exploration, scientific research, and tourism. It 
also requires scientists to share any knowledge that re- 
sults from their studies. The treaty forbids military forces 
to enter Antarctica, except those assisting scientific ex- 






peditions. It also outlaws the use of nuclear weapons 
and the disposal of radioactive wastes in Antarctica. 
Since 1961, when the Antarctic Treaty took effect, a 
aumber of other nations have joined the treaty. Many of 
these nations have set up scientific programs in Antarc- 
tica. In 1991, the Antarctic Treaty nations signed the 
Madrid Protocol. This agreement, which went into effect 
in 1998, defines Antarctica as a natural reserve devoted 
to peace and science. The Madrid Protocol prohibits 
mineral exploitation in Antarctica and establishes strict 
rules designed to protect the Antarctic environment 
Today, more than 40 year-round scientific stations op- 
erate on the continent and nearby islands. The National 
Science Foundation maintains the three year-round U.S. 


Antarctica 
territorial claims 


Seven countries claim areas in 
Antarctica. This map shows 
the boundaries of these areas, 
some of which overlap. The 
map also pinpoints major 
Antarctic research stations and 
indicates the country that op- 
erates each station. 


8 Stations 
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, 
Se China, Poland, Russia, 
~~ South Korea, and 
viet Uruguay 


Falkland Is. 
(U.K.) 


3 Stations 
Bulgaria, Chile 
and Spai 


ARGENTINA 


J 
/f Palmer’ Ukraine 


DK. *argentina 

e Year-round research station CHILEAN 
CLAIM 

Areas claimed by: 


[J argentina 
[-} Australia 

Chile 

Cj France 

Cc] New Zealand 
Norway 

United Kingdom 


0 1.000 Miles 


ee 
0 1,000 Kilometers 


WORLD BOOK map 





ARGENTINE 
CLAIM 


Antarctica 539 


McMurdo Station, a United 
States research base on Ross 
Island, has Antarctica’s largest 
community. About 1,000 peo- 
ple live there during the 
warmer months. A number of 
other nations—including Ar- 
gentina, Australia, Chile, New 
Zealand, Russia, and the Unit- 
ed Kingdom—also maintain 
research stations in Antarctica. 


ea « 


. © David Ball, Corbis Stock Market 


stations: (1) Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, (2) Mc- 
Murdo Station on Ross Island, and (3) Palmer Station on 
Anvers Island near the Antarctic Peninsula. Other coun- 
tries that maintain research stations include Argentina, 
Australia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Finland, France, 
Germany, India, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, 
Poland, Russia, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, 
Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and Uruguay. 

McMurdo Station has Antarctica’s largest community. 
About 1,000 scientists, pilots, and other specialists live 
there each summer. About 250 people stay for winter. 
A water plant collects and desalts seawater from Mc- 
Murdo Sound. Powerful ships called icebreakers plow 
through the ice, arrive with people and supplies, and 


Boun 

NORW, <2 LNde¢, 
EGian, Cha ee 

Southe,, 7, 

Ce, 

South “7 
Africa 

Germany i India 

\ Russia 


“Finland Norway Japan 4% 
/ Russia 


Japan, r | e@ Mawson (Australia) 


China, Davis (Australia) 


Russia ° z 


[s) 


South Pole 
Amundsen-Scott 
. (U.S.) 2 
@ Vostok (Russia) 


France 


Ital 
ongsery e Casey (Australia) 


“ 
Scott (NZ) 


italy 
a @ ¥ 
“Dumont d’Urville (France) 
. sy, 
9 FRENCH CLAIM 


AUSTRALIAN CLAIM 





540 Antarctica 


leave with waste materials and scientific samples. The 
Station also has runways and a helicopter pad. 

Summer activities in Antarctica vary. Geologists col- 
lect rock samples from the ice-free dry valleys of the 
Transantarctic Mountains. Glaciologists measure the 
speed of ice flow and ice thickness changes. On the 
coasts and at sea, biologists observe how animals adapt 
to their environment. Winter restricts scientists to such 
activities as recording weather data and studying earth- 
quakes and solar radiation. 

Some Antarctic studies address global issues. Signifi- 
cant research deals with ozone, a form of oxygen. Ozone 
is most concentraied in a layer that ranges in altitude 
from about 9 to 18 miles (15 to 30 kilometers). This layer 
protects all living things from certain harmful rays of the 
sun. In the mid-1980's, scientists discovered that the 
ozone layer above Antarctica is becoming less concen- 
trated. Evidence pointed to manufactured compounds 
called fuorocarbons as a major cause of this “ozone 
hole.” See Ozone hole. 

Researchers also are studying the melting of the ice 
sheets. This research helps them predict how much sea 
levels might rise if Earth's average temperature contin- 
ues to increase. 

Antarctica’s future. Since the late 1900's, access to 
Antarctica has become easier, and the number of 
tourists visiting the continent has been increasing rapid- 





Michael Parfit 


A researcher at the South Pole checks data gathered by a tele- 
scope. Antarctica s unpolluted atmosphere enables scientists to 
obtain an especially clear view of the sky. The dome of the 
Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station appears in the background. 


ly. Researchers face many challenges in managing the 
Antarctic environment as the human population grows. 

Many scientists believe that research in Antarctica can 
answer important questions about the past, present, and 
future of Earth. Future scientific work will likely focus on 
problems relating to global climate change, including 
interactions between the northern and southern hemi- 
spheres. In addition, studies will likely be done on the 
biology of huge lakes that have been buried under the 
ice for millions of years. Wendy Lawson 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Amundsen, Roald Hillary, Sir Edmund Percival 
Antarctic Circle Iceberg 
Byrd, Richard Evelyn Ozone hole 


Cook, James Palmer, Nathaniel Brown 
Ellsworth, Lincoln Ross, Sir James Clark 
Enderby Land Scott, Robert Falcon 


Shackleton, Sir Ernest Henry 
South Pole 

Southern Ocean 

Wilkes, Charles 

Wilkins, Sir Hubert 


Outline 


Exploration (The exploration 
of Antarctica) 

Fuchs, Sir Vivian Ernest 

Glacier 

Global warming 


I. Land and climate 

A. The Antarctic ice sheets 
B. Land regions 
C. Coastal waters 
D. Climate 

ll. Plants and animals 
A. Plant life 
B. Animal life 

ill. Human activities 
A. Early exploration 
B. The “Heroic Era” 
C. Exploration by air 
D. Recent activities 
E. Antarctica’s future 


Questions 


What is the largest land animal in Antarctica? 

Who was the first explorer to reach the South Pole? 

What are the two natural Jand regions of the continent? 

How did the Antarctic ice sheets form? 

What are the most common plants in Antarctica? 

What is the Antarctic Treaty? 

How does Antarctica compare in size with the other continents? 

What are ice shelves? 

How does the climate of inland Antarctica differ from that of the 
coasts? | 

What are some of Antarctica s mineral resources? 


Additional resources 


Crossley, Louise. Explore Antarctica. Cambridge, 1995. 
Rubin, Jeff. Antarctica. 2nd ed. Lonely Planet Pubns., 2000. 
Sayre, April P. Antarctica. 21st Century Bks., 1998. Younger read- 
ers. 
Stewart, John. Antarctica. 2 vols. McFarland, 1990. ; 
Anteater is the name of a group of mammals that lack | 
teeth and feed mostly on ants and termites. There are 
four species of anteaters. The largest and best-known 
species is the giant anteater. |t lives in tropical forests 
and grassy plains from Panama to Argentina. The animal 
has become rare in some areas as human settlers push 
into its range. 
The giant anteater has a tube-shaped head with a | 
long, slender snout. !ts coarse, brittle hair is mostly gray 
and forms a bushy mass on the tail and sides. A black 
band of hair bordered by white bands runs from the 
throat to the middle of the back. Some giant anteaters 
grow over 6 feet (1.8 meters) in length, including a tail 


measuring about 3 feet (0.9 meters) in length. 

The giant anteater lives on the ground. It walks with 
its front feet turned on their sides to protect the claws. 
When feeding, the animal uses the large second and 
third claws of its front foot to rip open ant nests. It then 
flits its tongue, which is about 2 feet (60 centimeters) 
long, into the nest in rapid in-and-out movements to lick 
up the ants. ~ 

A female giant anteater gives birth to one baby each 
year. The newborn rides on the mother's back for up to 
a year. 

Two species of anteaters are called tamanduas, or 
collared anteaters. Both live in tropical forests and 
grassy plains. The northern tamandua is found from 
southern Mexico to Peru. The southern tamandua lives 





Peter Weimann, Ammals Animals 


The giant anteater has a tube-shaped head and snout. The ani- 
mal licks up ants and termites with its long tongue. 


only in South America. Tamanduas can live both in trees 
and on the ground. They use their hairless, prehensile 
(grasping) tail for climbing. Tamanduas have short, stiff, 
tan to brown hair. Some have darker hair around the 
neck and on other areas of the body. The animals can 
reach more than 4 feet (1.2 meters) in length. 

The squirrel-sized si/ky anteater resembles a small ta- 
mandua but is covered with soft, golden-yellow or gray 
fur. This anteater can grow about 20 inches (50 centime- 
ters) long. It lives in trees in the tropical forests of south- 
ern Mexico, Central America, and South America. 

Aardvarks, pangolins, and echidnas are also some- 
times called anteaters. These animals feed on termites 
and ants and have other characteristics in common with 
anteaters, but they belong to different orders (scientific 
groups). 


Scientific classification. Anteaters belong to the family 
Myrmecophagidae in the order Xenarthra. The giant anteater is 
Myrmecophaga tridactyla. The northern tamandua is Tamandua 
mexicana, the southern tamandua is 7. tetradacty/a, and the silky 
anteater is Cyclopes didactylus. Duane A. Schlitter 


Antecedent, 4v tuh SEF duhnt is a word or group of 
words to which a pronoun refers in a sentence. An ante- 
cedent may come before or after the pronoun. In the 
sentence Venice is famous for its canals, the antecedent 
Venice comes before the pronoun /ts. In the sentence At 


Antelope 541 


her best, Jill was unbeatable, the antecedent /i//comes 
after the proncun Aer. 

Personal pronouns, such as /, you, he, she, and it, 
must agree with their antecedents in gender, number, 
and person. The pronoun’s case is determined by its use 
in the sentence. For example, the sentence The children, 
after seeing the movie, were asked what they remem- 
bered about it contains two personal pronouns, they 
and /t The pronoun fhey agrees with its antecedent chi/- 
dren in gender (common), number (plural), and person 
(third). Theyis the subjective case because the pronoun 
is the subject of the verb remembered. /t agrees with its 
antecedent movie because both are neuter in gender, 
singular in number, and in the third person. But /tis the 
object of about and so is in the objective case. 

Special problems in agreement arise in cases where 
the antecedent is an indefinite pronoun, such as a//, 
each, none, and some. Some indefinite pronouns, such 
as everyone and somebody, have a singular form but 
are plural in meaning. In formal usage, singular pro- 
nouns are used: Everyone did his or her share. \nformal 
usage, especially in speaking, favors the plural: Every- 
one did their share. 

The pronouns all, any, each, none, and some can be 
either singular or plural, depending on their use. For ex- 
ample, Some of the crop is now atits best(singular); 
Some of the apples are now at their best(plural). 

Agreement problems may develop when the anteced- 
ent is a collective noun, such as crewor jury. The use of 
singular or plural pronouns with collective nouns de- 
pends on the intention of the speaker or writer. The use 
of the singular emphasizes the entire unit: The jury was 
unanimous inits decision. The use of the plural stresses 
the parts of the unit: The judge told the jury they were 
dismissed. 

Confusion can result from the careless use of relative 
pronouns— that, what, which, or who. In the sentence 
The club adopted a new constitution, which we thought 
was a good idea, the relative pronoun could refer either 
to adopted or to constitution. For clarity, the statement 
should be divided into two sentences: The club adopted 
anew constitution. We thought the adoption was a 
good idea. Patricia A. Moody 

See also Pronoun; Case; Gender; Number. 
Antelope is the name of a large group of animals that 
have hoofs and hollow horns. They belong to the same 
animal family as goats and oxen. But antelope more 
closely resemble deer, because most of them are slen- 
der and graceful. Antelope, like cattle, are ruminants 
(see Ruminant). 

Antelope keep their horns as long as they live. 
Among many kinds of antelope, both the males and the 
females have horns. The horns of the males usually 
grow larger. Some antelope have short, straight horns. 
The horns of others are long and curved, sometimes in 
a spiral twist. Some antelope horns are smooth, while 
others have ring-shaped ridges along their length. Ante- 
lope horns form around a single bony core. The horns 
are never forked like tree branches, as are deer antlers. 

Most antelope live in Africa, but a few species (kinds) 
are found in Asia. The North American pronghorn is not 
a true antelope, though it resembles antelope (see 
Pronghorn). Some antelope, such as the du/ker and the 
bongo, live in forests. Others live on mountainsides. A 





542 Antelope 


eee ee 
a et “ge Lam; 
_ = ud oe , —_ 





¥ 2 


Thomas Nebbia, DPI 


A group of impalas bounds across a grassland in Kenya. The females, which lack horns, often 
move together in large herds. 





Mark Boulton, NAS 
The eland can jump an obstacle 6 feet (1.8 meters) high from a 
standing start. This antelope lives in small or large herds. 


few, such as the s/fatunga and the /echwe of central Af- 
rica, live in marshes. But more kinds and greater num- 
bers of antelope live on the dry or grassy plains of east- 
ern and southern Africa than anywhere else. 

Some Africans hunt antelope for food. Game ranches 
also raise many kinds of antelope for meat. Antelope 
make good meat animals in tropical areas, because 
herds of several species feed on more kinds of tropical 
plants than do cattle or sheep. In addition, antelope 
have better resistance to tropical diseases. 

Habits and appearance. Most antelope are timid 
and run away from their enemies. The gaze//e and the 
blackbuck are among the fastest runners in the world. A 
few antelope defend themselves when they must. They 
are the gnu, the roan antelope, and the sab/e antelope, 
all found in Africa. Sometimes other animals warn ante- 
lope of danger. 

Among many antelope, the male defends a territory 
(area of land) during the breeding season so that other 
males may not enter it. The females visit the territories 
and mate with the males of their choice. 

Antelope vary in size. Some, such as the d/k-dik and 
the steenbok are not much larger than jack rabbits. Oth- 
ers, notably the e/and, grow about the size of an ox. 





CG. Hampson, APF 


The dik-dik lives alone or in small family groups in dense 
woodland areas. If startled, dik-diks quickly scurry to safety. 


A smooth coat of hair covers the skin of most ante- 
lope, except a few such as the shaggy-haired waterbuck. 
This coat may appear in various shades and patterns. 
Brown and gray are the most common colors. Antelope 
have long been hunted, both for the thrill of the sport 
and for their flesh and skins. Certain herds of African an- 
telope which contained thousands of animals have been 
completely destroyed by hunters. Many of the most 
handsome kinds of antelope, such as the bontebok, the 
giant sable, and the white oryx, have become scarce. 
Some are found only on private estates. Overhunting 
has wiped out others, such as the b/uebuck. 

Kinds of antelope. Separate articles in World Book 
describe several kinds of antelope. See the list of Ke- 
lated articles at the end of this article. There are many 
other kinds, all in the Eastern Hemisphere. One of these 
is the four-horned antelope. The males of this Indian an- 
telope have two pairs of horns instead of the usual sin- 
gle pair. Several kinds of Aarnessed antelope live in cen- 
tral and southern Africa. The stripes on their bodies 
make them appear to be wearing a harness. Only the 
males of this kind have horns. 

The klipspringer, a small antelope that resembles the 
European chamois, lives in rocky places from southern 











eS Ross 
The gemsbok can live in desert areas where there are few 
plants and no standing water. It is found in southern Africa. 





ES. Ross 


Greater kudus live in small groups in open woodlands. Their 
coloring provides good camouflage among grasses and bushes. 


Africa north to the Sahara. This animal walks on the tips 
of its narrow, round hoofs, which give it sure footing. 

A large bluish-gray antelope of India is called the ni//- 
gai. The male has short horns, and long hair under its 
chin. Several large African antelope, including the 
gemsbok, are named oryx. Both the males and females 
have long horns that are nearly straight. 

The roan antelope is a large, light-colored animal that 
lives from South Africa north to Ethiopia and Gambia. 
The sable antelope, related to the roan but slightly 
smaller, lives in southern Africa. It has large curved 
horns and a coat of black or rich brown with white un- 
derparts. Two kinds of antelope of the southern half of 
Africa are called waterbuck. The defassa waterbuck may 
be trained as a pet, when it is caught young. 


Scientific classification. Antelope belong to the bovid fam- 
ily, Bovidae. There are numerous species. Anne Innis Dagg 


Related articles in World Book include: 


Addax Gazelle Hartebeest Mountain 
Blackbuck Gemsbok Impala goat 
Dik-dik Gnu Kudu Springbok 
Eland Steenbok 


Antenna, also called aeria/, is a device that transmits 
and receives radio, television, and radar signals. These 


Antenna 543 


signals, known as e/ectromagnetic signals, take the form 
of waves of energy. They travel through space at the 
speed of light. Electromagnetic waves differ in their fre- 
quency (rate of vibration). Radio, television, and radar 
stations transmit at different frequencies so their signals 
do not interfere with one another. The two kinds of 
radio transmissions are amplitude modulation (AM) and 
frequency modulation (FM). In general, AM signals have 
lower frequencies than FM signals. Television programs 
are transmitted by electromagnetic waves that are simi- 
lar in frequency to FM signals. 

The size, shape, and complexity of an antenna system 
depend on the range of frequencies being transmitted 
or received. Antenna systems may also be designed 
with different dfrectional properties so that they need 
not send out or pick up signals equally in all directions. 

Transmitting antennas usually consist of one or 
more towers. A group of towers can direct stronger sig- 
nals in certain directions. AM transmitting antennas 
stand from 250 to 500 feet (75 to 150 meters) tall. FM and 
television antennas must be placed as high as possible 
to increase their range. This is because FM signals and 
TV signals spread horizontally and cannot be received 
beyond the horizon as seen from the transmitting an- 
tenna. AM signals, on the other hand, bounce off the at- 
mosphere and can reach beyond the curve of the earth. 
In general, a TV antenna has a range in miles equal to 
the square root of one-and-a-half times its height in feet. 
Thus, an antenna 600 feet (180 meters) high would have 


Kinds of receiving antennas 


Folded dipole 


Dipole 
Metal rod Metol rod 
Coble to 
————-rodio or TV 
Directors 
Multiple element 
antenna 






Dipoles 






ra 
“Reflector 


Coble to 
rodio or TV 


Mast 


Dish reflector 


Coble to 
radio or TV 


WORLD BOOK diagrams by Arthur Grebetz 
Several types of antennas may be used to receive radio or televi- 
sion signals. The illustrations above show four of the most com- 
mon types of receiving antennas. 


544 Antennae 


a range of approximately 30 miles (48 kilometers). 

Receiving antennas for AM radio consist of a wire 
coil inside the radio set. Such /oop antennas receive a 
stronger signal when the coil points toward the trans- 
mitting antenna. Receiving antennas for FM signals are 
similar to antennas used to receive television signals. 

Many kinds of antennas can be used for TV reception. 
The antenna’s size generally depends on the frequency 
of the signals. For example, an adjustable indoor an- 
tenna, commonly called rabbit ears, should be length- 
ened to receive lower frequencies, such as channel 2, 
and shortened to receive higher frequencies, such as 
channel 13. 

The most widely used TV antenna is a dipo/e, which 
consists of a straight metal rod or wire that is split in the 
center. A folded dipole consists of two dipoles that are 
connected at the ends. Only one dipole is split. Dipoles 
range in length from about 6 to 100 inches (15 to 250 
centimeters). Mu/tiple element antennas have several di- 
poles of different lengths to improve the reception of 
various frequencies. Metal rods called directors and re- 
flectors strengthen the signals. 

Dish antennas, also known as parabolic (bowl- 
shaped) reflectors, may be used to relay electromag- 
netic signals to and from artificial satellites. The use of 
satellites has made it possible to transmit television pro- 
grams great distances. An earth-based dish beams sig- 
nals into outer space. A satellite receives the signals, 
amplifies (strengthens) them, and transmits them back to 
the earth. Earth-based dish antennas receive and amplify 
the weak signals. Early receiving dishes had a diameter 
of more than 10 feet (3 meters). Today, a dish antenna 
may measure only about 3 feet (0.9 meter) across. 

Radar antennas emit and collect radar waves. Early 
radar systems needed a large dish antenna to focus the 
signals. Today, police systems, which detect speeding 
vehicles, use antennas small enough to be put on police 
cars. See Radar (The antenna. Thomas T. Liao 
Antennae, an /FHN ee, are long, delicate sensory or- 
gans on the heads of almost all insects and most other 
arthropods (see Arthropod). Insects, centipedes, and 
millipedes have a single pair of antennae. Crustaceans, 
such as lobsters and crabs, have two pairs of antennae. 
Spiders and their relatives have none. 

The antennae contain many nerves and may be sensi- 
tive to heat, vibrations, water vapor, and certain chemi- 


Some types of antennae 











AS Leaflike 
:, Nc (Junebug) / 
Feothered \ 
| {Luno moth) 
Saw-loothed Feelers 
(Long-horned beetle) (Cockroach) 


WORLD BOOA illustration by Marton Pahl 








cals and gases. Fine hairs that cover the antennae serve 
as touch receptors. Tiny pits in the antennae of some in- 
sects make them useful in smelling. A Junebug has 
nearly 80,000 such smelling pits. The antennae of male 
mosquitoes have hairs that are sensitive to sound. These 
mosquitoes can use their antennae to detect the sound 
of female mosquitoes as much as + mile (0.4 kilometer) 
away. FE. W. Cupp 

See also Ant (Sense organs); Bee (The body of the 
honey bee); Beetle (The bodies of beetles); Butterfly 
(The head); Insect (The senses of insects). 

Anthem. See National anthem; Hymn. 

Anther. See Flower (The stamens; diagram: Parts of a 
flower). 

Anthony, Susan Brownell (1820-1906), was a re- 
former and one of the first leaders of the campaign for 
women’s rights. She helped organize the woman suf- 
frage movement, which worked to get women the right 
to vote. 

Anthony was born in Adams, Mass. Her family were 
Quakers, who believed in the equality of men and 
women. Anthony's family supported major reforms, 
such as antislavery and femperance, the campaign to 
abolish alcoholic beverages. 

From 1839 to 1849, Anthony taught school. She then 
joined the temperance movement. But most temperance 
groups consisted of men who did not allow women to 
help the movement. In 1852, she attended a temperance 
rally in Albany, N.Y., but was not allowed to speak be- 
cause she was a woman. Soon after, she formed the 
Woman's State Temperance Society of New York. 

Through her temperance work, Anthony became in- 
creasingly aware that women did not have the same 
rights as men. In 1851, she met Elizabeth Cady Stanton, a 
leader of the women’s rights movement. The two 
women became close friends and co-workers. Soon, An- 
thony devoted herself completely to women’s rights and 
became a leader of the movement. She supported dress 
reform and, for a time, wore bloomers, which became a 
symbol of the women’s rights movement. She also 
worked in support of equal educational opportunities 
and property rights for women. 

Before and during the Civil War (1861-1865), Anthony 
and Stanton supported abolitionism. After the war, how- 
ever, they broke away from those who had been in- 
volved in the abolitionist movement. Many of these peo- 
ple showed little interest in woman suffrage and 
supported the 15th Amendment to the Constitution of 
the United States. This amendment gave the vote to 
black men, but not to 
women. In 1869, Anthony 
and Stanton formed the 
National Woman Suffrage 
Association and worked 
for a woman suffrage 
amendment to the Consti- 
tution. 

From 1868 to 1870, An- 
thony published a weekly 
journal, The Revolution, 
which demanded equal 
rights for women. In 1872, 
she voted in the presiden- 
tial election and was ar- 





Brown Bros 


Susan B. Anthony 


rested and fined $100 for voting illegally. Anthony never 
paid the fine, but no further action was taken against 
her. From 1881 to 1886, Anthony and Stanton coedited 
three volumes of a book called History of Woman Suf- 
frage. Anthony completed a fourth volume of the book 
in 1902. In 1904, she established the International 
Woman Suffrage Alliance with Carrie Chapman Catt, an- 
other leader of the suffrage movement. 

In 1890, the National Woman Suffrage Association 
and the American Woman Suffrage Association united 
to form the National American Woman Suffrage Associ- 
ation. Anthony served as the group's president from 
1892 until 1900. She died on March 13, 1906, 14 years 
before the 19th Amendment to the Constitution became 
law and gave women the right to vote. In 1979 and 1980, 
the United States minted for circulation $1 coins bearing 
Anthony's picture. She was the first woman to be pic- 
tured ona U.S. coin in general circulation. June Sochen 

See also Woman suffrage (Growth of the movement). 


Additional resources 


Gordon, Ann D., ed. The Selected Papers of Elizabeth Cady Stan- 
ton and Susan B. Anthony. 2 vols. Rutgers, 1997, 2000. 

Harper, Judith E. Susan B. Anthony. ABC-CLIO, 1998. 

Sherr, Lynn. Failure Is Impossible: Susan B. Anthony in Her Own 
Words. 1995. Reprint. Times Bks., 1996. 

Ward, Geoffrey C. Not for Ourselves Alone: The Story of Eliza- 
beth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony. Knopf, 1999. 


Anthony of Padua, PA/ 00 wh, Saint (1195-1231), was 
a Christian religious leader and a popular preacher of 
his time. Many miracles have been attributed to Antho- 
ny, both during his lifetime and after his death. Antho- 
ny's body lies in a church built in his honor in Padua, 
Italy. The church has become a shrine, attracting thou- 
sands of pilgrims seeking the saint's aid. 

Anthony was born in Lisbon, Portugal, probably on 
Aug. 15, 1195. His original name was Ferdinand. He en- 
tered the Augustinian canons, a religious order, about 
1210 and joined the Franciscan order in 1220, taking the 
name Anthony. He traveled to Morocco to convert the 
Muslims, but became ill and returned to Europe. Antho- 
ny's ship landed in Sicily, and he settled in Italy. After 
leading a solitary life for a short time, Anthony began to 
preach. He amazed his listeners with his skill as a speak- 
er and his knowledge of the Bible. Anthony delivered 
sermons before huge crowds in Florence and Padua. He 
showed deep concern for the common people, who 
loved him as their protector. He died on June 13, 1231, 
and his feast day is June 13. Marilyn J. Harran 
Anthony of Thebes, Saint (250?-356), was the 
founder of Christian monasticism. Anthony spent much 
of his life as a hermit in the Egyptian desert. He estab- 
lished religious communities of hermits that became 
models for monastic life. 

Anthony was born in a village in Egypt. At about age 
20, he gave away his belongings and began living a her- 
mit's life of asceticism (self-denial). He studied with an- 
other hermit and later lived in empty tombs near his 
home for about 15 years. There he practiced spiritual 
discipline alone. He later lived in an abandoned desert 
fort for 20 years, where he fasted, prayed, and worked. 
During that time, his reputation as a holy man grew, and 
eventually he left his solitude to teach others the ascetic 
life. He spent his last years in solitude on a mountain. 

Saint Athanasius wrote the influential Life of Anthony 


Anthropology 545 


in 357. It described Anthony's piety and his legendary 
battles against temptations sent by the Devil. Anthony's 
feast day is January 17. Marilyn J. Harran 

Anthracite. See Coal (How coal was formed; Where 
coal is found; map; The uses of coal). 

Anthrax is a serious infectious disease that chiefly af- 
fects animals but can also occur in people. It is caused 
by the bacterium Bacillus anthracis. Anthrax usually af- 
fects plant-eating animals infected by eating anthrax 
spores (inactive bacteria) from the soil. Anthrax spores 
can survive harsh conditions and occur in soil through- 
out the world, including the United States. People can 
get anthrax through contact with infected animals or 
contaminated animal products. But, naturally occurring 
anthrax is rare in human beings today. 

In people, anthrax infection can occur in three main 
forms: inhalational, caused by breathing in spores; cuta- 
neous, caused by spores infecting skin sores; and gas- 
trointestinal, caused by swallowing spores. Inhalationa! 
anthrax causes a severe illness that begins in the chest 
and rapidly spreads through the body. Cutaneous an- 
thrax, the most common form, can cause a severe skin 
infection. Gastrointestinal anthrax results from eating un- 
dercooked, contaminated meat. Symptoms include 
fever, vomiting, abdominal pain, and bloody diarrhea. 
Anthrax can be cured with antibiotics if patients receive 
treatment early. However, inhalational and gastrointesti- 
nal anthrax are often fatal if not rapidly treated. 

Some nations and international terrorist groups are 
known to have developed or suspected of having devel- 
oped anthrax as a biological weapon. In 1979, the acci- 
dental release of anthrax spores from a military facility in 
the Soviet Union caused 68 deaths. Jn the 1990's, Rus- 
sia—which had been the largest part of the Soviet 
Union—announced it had ended all biological weapons 
programs. Many nations are now working to end the 
development and use of biological weapons, including 
anthrax. 

In 2001, anthrax spores were used as a weapon when 
they were sent through the United States mail to several 
business and government offices. As a result, a number 
of office buildings and post office facilities were con- 
taminated. Some people became ill with inhalational an- 
thrax, and several of them died. Others contracted cuta- 
neous anthrax. Investigators began trying to determine 
who was responsible for the attack. 
Anthropoid. See Primate. 
Anthropology is the scientific study of humanity and 
of human culture. It is unique among the social sciences 
in that it focuses on all societies and all aspects of hu- 
man physical, social, and cultural life. Anthropologists 
investigate cu/ture, the strategies for living that people 
learn and share as members of social groups. 

Anthropologists also examine the characteristics that 
human beings share as members of a single species and 
the diverse ways that people live in different environ- 
ments. They also analyze the products of social groups— 
both material objects and less material creations, such 
as beliefs and values. 

Like other social scientists, anthropologists look sys- 


Thomas V. Inglesby 


John W. Burton, the contributor of this article, is Professor of 
Anthropology at Connecticut College. 


546 Anthropology 


tematically for general patterns in human behavior. They 
develop theories and use scientific methods to test 
them. Anthropologists study and try to understand cul- 
tures different from their own, and describe them to 
members of their own society. 

Anthropologists are interested in understanding all 
human societies. Their research is cross-cultural, mean- 
ing that they focus on those aspects of human experi- 
ence found in all cultures. But anthropology is also com- 
parative, meaning that anthropologists are interested in 
how the particular features of cultures are alike and how 
they are different. For example, marriage in Western so- 
cieties is a union between one man and one woman. But 
marriages are different in other parts of the world. In 
many African and Islamic societies, a man may be mar- 
ried to more than one woman at a time. Among the Ny- 
inba people and other groups of Nepal, however, a 
woman typically marries several men who are brothers. 

Another important feature of anthropology is its em- 
phasis on an insider's view of a society. Anthropologists 
try to determine how people who snare a culture view 
their world. Anthropology can make major contribu- 
tions to international harmony because it helps provide 
an understanding of various cultures. 

Because different cultures and societies have different 
habits and customs, anthropologists use the term cultur- 
al relativism to describe and understand different cul- 
tures. This concept suggests that one culture is not bet- 
ter or worse than any other—it is merely different 

The concept of cultural relativism in anthropology is 
closely related to the concept of ethnocentrism. Ethno- 
centrism refers to the idea that one’s own culture is in- 
herently superior to a different culture. Such an asser- 
tion is a form of racism, and anthropologists strive to 
show that racist claims have no scientific proof. They are 
instead a form of ethnocentrism. See Ethnocentrism. 


Branches of anthropology 


The chief branches of anthropology include physical 
anthropology, archaeology, linguistic anthropology, and 





pital | ¥ 





social anthropology, also called cultural anthropology. 
These branches often overlap. For example, archaeolo- 
gists and cultural anthropologists study many of the 
same cultural features. But archaeologists concentrate 
on past civilizations, and cultural anthropologists work 
mainly on present ones. 

Physical anthropology, also called biological an- 
thropology or bioanthropology, is the study of human 
physical characteristics. Physical anthropologists, called 
paleoanthropologists, search for fossil remains from 
prehistoric times to trace the development of human 
physical characteristics. They also seek remains, such as 
stone tools and evidence of fires, to analyze the links 
among physical traits and cultural development 

Some physical anthropologists study primates—the 
animals that are most closely related to human beings, 
including chimpanzees and other apes. By observing 
these animals, the scientists try to understand what our 
prehuman ancestors were like and how human beings 
have changed through millions of years. Advances in the 
study of human and animal genes help scientists discov- 
er how closely different species and different groups of 
people are related to one another. 

Other physical anthropologists study physical differ- 
ences among human beings, including blood types, skin 
colors, and hereditary diseases. They also analyze the ef- 
fect of nutrition and environmental factors, such as alti- 
tude and climate, on human growth and development 
For example, studies have shown that people who 
spend their entire lives in the high-altitude Andes 
Mountains have larger hearts and lungs than people 
who live at lower altitudes. The enlarged organs are an 
adaptation to the lower oxygen concentration of high- 
altitude environments. 

Archaeology is the study of objects left by earlier 
peoples, including artwork, buildings, clothing, pottery, 
and tools. Archaeologists trace the development of cul- 
tures by studying the things those people made and 
used. Such objects help them determine what early so- 
cial life may have been like. For example, the size of 


© Fernando Morales, Agence France-Presse 


Physical anthropologists ex- 
amine skeletal remains ina 
Guatemalan laboratory to 
identify victims of a civil war. 
Physical anthropologists are 
often called to help law en- 
forcement agencies identify 
human remains in cases of 
crime, war, or natural disaster. 


houses and the number of cooking hearths may show 
how many people lived together in a household. Differ- 
ences in the number and value of objects put in graves 
may indicate differences in social class. Animal bones 
and plant pollen show whether people raised animals or 
hunted them and whether they grew crops or gathered 
wild plants for food. See Archaeology. 

Linguistic anthropology analyzes the ways that lan- 
guage is used by people of different societies. Anthro- 
pological linguists try to find connections between peo- 
ple's language and other aspects of their culture. In the 
Indonesian language, for example, many statements in- 
clude a reference to the social status of the person ad- 
dressed. Houses and other objects have various names, 
depending on the rank of the listener. This use of lan- 
guage reflects the great importance of social class in In- 
donesian culture. 

Other topics of study for anthropological linguists in- 
clude formal and informal speech, forms of address, in- 
sults, and jokes. These experts also analyze the structure 
of unwritten languages. Some anthropological linguists 
study how words and their definitions and classifica- 
tions reflect people's views of their environment and so- 
ciety. The Nuer, a herding people of eastern Africa, have 
many words for the colors and markings of cattle. Their 
vocabulary shows the importance of livestock in their 
way Of life. 

The ways that different cultures classify such things as 
animals, plants, and relatives show how they view the 
world. The English language uses the same word— 
uncle—for a mother's brother, a father's brother, and the 
husband of either parents sister. But some languages 
have a word for each of these relatives. Such words sug- 
gest differences in the roles and behavior expected of 
such relatives. 

Cultural anthropology is the study of human cul- 
ture. Cultural anthropologists study the artwork, houses, 
tools, and other material products of a culture. They also 
study a culture's nonmaterial creations, including its mu- 
sic, religious beliefs, symbols, and values. 

Some anthropologists specialize in various fields of 
cultural anthropology. Eco/ogical anthropologists inves- 
tigate the way a society fits into its environment and 
how the environment affects the society's culture. Psy- 
chological anthropologists study how individual person- 
alities are shaped by different cultures and how children 
learn to share in their culture. Medical anthropology ex- 
amines the ways in which different peopie and cultures 
experience, describe, and understand illness. 

Social anthropology deals with social relationships 
in groups. Such relationships include marriage, family 
life, authority, and conflict. Social anthropologists de- 
vote much research into how social life is organized in 
different societies. A researcher might study a commu- 
nity to see how people are divided into groups within it 
and to learn about relationships among these groups. 

Many studies examine such human characteristics as 
age, sex, and kinship, which are universal but have dif- 
ferent functions in various societies. In some communi- 
ties, these characteristics determine what society ex- 
pects from an individual. In others, such characteristics 
as education, income, and occupation help define how 
people are expected to behave. 

Early social anthropologists often studied an entire 


Anthropology 547 


community, including all aspects of its life. Today, how- 
ever, these scientists practice several specialties. For ex- 
ample, economic anthropologists concentrate on how 
food and other goods are produced and distributed. Po- 
litical anthropologists analyze how decisions are made 
and how conflicts are resolved within communities. 

Social and cultural anthropologists do not study only 
non-Western societies. Many anthropologists also work 
in Europe and North America. They point out that no hu- 
man society is isolated from other societies. 


How anthropologists work 


The primary method used by anthropologists to col- 
lect and understand information on human cultures is 
known as fieldwork The first anthropological research- 
ers worked in isolated societies about which little was 
known. They attempted to describe the culture of the 
people they studied as completely as possible. The re- 
search and description of a culture, called ethnography, 
describes details on the people’s values, daily life, mate- 
rial culture, and social relationships. See Ethnography. 

To study societies, anthropologists developed a 
method called participant observation. The researcher, 
called a participant-observer, learned about a people by 
living among them and taking part in their daily lives. Al- 
though it is impossible to record information on every 
aspect of a culture during fieldwork, anthropologists try 
to learn all that they can from local people. Today, par- 
ticipant observation is still the most characteristic tech- 
nique of anthropology, but anthropologists use many 
other methods as well. 

Like all scientists, anthropologists begin their re- 
search by asking questions and formulating possible an- 
swers Called Aypotheses. Then they collect evidence 
with which to evaluate the hypotheses. 

Entering the community. Most anthropologists 
have interests in a particular geographic area of the 
world but also look to answer specific questions about 
human culture. For example, in the 1930's, the British an- 
thropologist E. E. Evans-Pritchard lived among the Nuer 
in Sudan. At the time, the Nuer did not have chiefs or 
kings or any kind of government. Evans-Pritchard stud- 





WORLD BOOK photo 
A cultural anthropologist, /eft, conducts fieldwork in a rural 
village in Uzbekistan. He is listening to a grandmother talk about 
life in the village and how village life has changed over time. 


548 Anthropology 


ied the problem of how a society without a political sys- 
tem could hold together and work. 

Before anthropologists begin their fieldwork, they 
read about and try to gain knowledge about the region 
where they will conduct their research. If possible, they 
learn the language that is spoken there before they ar- 
rive at a fieldwork site. 

After arriving at a field site, the anthropologist must 
find a place to live and try to blend into the local society. 
Local people often take in and house such researchers 
and befriend them. After time, the scientist begins to 
learn the language, values, sentiments, and other norms 
(standards) of the culture. Fieldwork usually takes at least 
one year. It is important for an anthropologist to see 
how seasonal changes affect the way people live and 
what they do to gain their livelihood. 

At first, the researcher gathers information mainly 
through observation and conversations with members 
of the community. Many researchers conduct a commu- 
nity census to collect basic information. Most field work- 
ers take notes every day and type them up at night. 
Some anthropologists revisit the same community many 
times over many years, while others carry out fieldwork 
in a number of different societies. 

Developing hypotheses. An anthropologist must 
decide what information he or she wishes to gather 
about the community. Then the researcher asks ques- 
tions and forms hypotheses to answer them. Many new 
questions will arise from what the scientist has already 
learned about the community. 

Collecting evidence. After developing specific hy- 
potheses, the anthropologist gathers information to test 
them. The researcher may conduct a survey by distribut- 
ing questionnaires to everyone in the community or to a 
selected group of individuals. He or she may take inven- 
tories of household possessions or obtain life histories 
from a number of people. An anthropologist may record 
interviews, music, or special events, and make motion 
pictures or photographs of various activities. 

Drawing conclusions. The researcher must organize 
all the information that has been collected so it can be 
used easily and efficiently. The anthropologist, like other 
scientists, May use a computer to analyze large amounts 
of information. Finally, the researcher evaluates the hy- 
potheses that have been formulated and writes up his or 
her conclusions for scientific journals or in books. 


History 


Early anthropological thought. As long as human 
beings have been aware of other human beings, they 
have compared one society to another. In the past, myth 
and imagination often inspired the observation of other 
peoples. Some European travelers in the 1600's and 
1700's reported that they had seen human beings in dif- 
ferent parts of the world with one eye, with four legs, or 
with three heads. Many people were not even aware 
that there was a single species of human being. 

Anthropology did not become a separate area of 
study until the mid-1800's. In 1859, the British naturalist 
Charles R. Darwin presented some key ideas in The Ori- 
gin of Species, one of the most influential science books 
ever written. In it, Darwin explained his theory of natura/ 
selection, the process in nature by which the people, 
other animals, and plants best adapted to their environ- 


ment tend to leave the most offspring. The theory of nat- 
ural selection helped explain the workings of evolution, 
the process by which all living things developed from a 
few simple forms of life through a series of changes. 

Early anthropologists came to the conclusion that all 
members of the human species shared a common past. 
They tried to determine how different societies were re- 
lated and how they had evolved. They viewed the histo- 
ry of human culture as a process of evolution from low- 
er to higher forms. For example, the American scholar 
Henry Lewis Morgan imagined that all human societies 
evolved through a fixed series of stages, from savagery, 
to barbarism, to civilization. 

According to Morgan and other early anthropolo- 
gists, this process climaxed with the cultures of Europe 
and North America. So-called primitive peoples, whose 
technology was less advanced than that of the West, 
supposedly represented earlier stages of development. 

Development of field research. By the late 1800's, 
many anthropologists began to criticize the evolutionary 
theories of Morgan and others. To support their criti- 
cism, such anthropologists as Adolf Bastian of Germany, 
Franz Boas of the United States, and William H. R. Rivers 
of the United Kingdom organized expeditions to ob- 
serve the cultures of other societies firsthand. 

In 1899, at Columbia University in New York City, Boas 
founded the first major department for the teaching of 
anthropology. His students included Ruth F. Benedict, 
Alfred L. Kroeber, Robert H. Lowie, and Margaret Mead, 
all of whom became famous anthropologists. Boas 
trained them to conduct intensive eyewitness studies of 
individual cultures. The resulting field studies highlight- 
ed many differences among societies. 

The early 1900's. During the 1920's, the Polish-born 
British anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski developed 
an approach called functionalism. Functionalism 
stressed the ways that different cultural traits function to 








Margaret Mead 


Margaret Mead, an American anthropologist, /eft, lived among 
the Samoans in 1925 and 1926 to observe their ways of life. Her 
research resulted in the book Coming of Age in Samoa (1928). ; 


satisfy basic human needs, both biological and psycho- 
logical. Malinowski's students included the prominent 
British anthropologists E. E. Evans-Pritchard, Raymond 
Firth, Max Gluckman, and |saac Schapera, and an Amer- 
ican, Hortense Powdermaker. 

By the late 1920's, anthropologists from Europe and 
North America had carried out fieldwork throughout 
the world. The results of their research changed the na- 
ture of anthropology and also revolutionized the West- 
ern view of “primitive” people. The new method of par- 
ticipant observation questioned and dramatically 
changed the idea that such people were less highly 
evolved than European or American society. 

Anthropologists realized that every society had its 
own history, and that these histories did not conform to 
the evolutionary schemes of Morgan and others. Field- 
work showed that human cultures grew, changed, and 
adapted through human invention and creativity, and 
through contact with different cultures. Many anthro- 
pologists recognized that peoples throughout the 
world had been dramatically affected by contact with 
Europeans over the past 300 years. The scientists felt 
that information about various groups should be gath- 
ered before the cultures of those groups were further 
transformed by contact with the West. 

The middle and fate 1900's. Rapid and extensive 
changes in many societies during the middle and late 
1900's stimulated a shift in anthropological thought. In- 
stead of studying a society at a specific point in time, 
anthropologists began to study the culture at intervals. 
They wanted to learn how the society had changed and 
to analyze the process of change itself. For example, 
Clifford J. Geertz of the United States studied economic 
development in Indonesia. Abner Cohen of the United 
Kingdom investigated the changing role of religion 
among the Hausa cattle traders of Africa. 

Nearly all early anthropologists were Europeans or 
North Americans who studied societies in Africa or oth- 
er distant areas. During the mid-1900's, African and 
Asian anthropologists began to study societies in the 
West that formerly had sent researchers to their coun- 
tries. The Nigerian anthropologist John Ogbu investigat- 
ed a suburkan school in California. Another Nigerian 
anthropologist, E. U. Essien-Udom, studied the Nation of 
Islam, also known as the Black Muslims, a religious 
group in the United States. 

Modern anthropology. Early anthropologists main- 
ly studied small communities in technologically simple 
societies. But modern anthropologists work in a wide 
range of settings. An anthropologist may study how a 
small community responds to contact with modern so- 
ciety, as George Foster of the United States did in the 
Mexican village of Tzintzuntzan. 

Anthropologists continue to find new problems and 
topics to study as societies continue to change thrcugh- 
out the world. Today, many anthropologists are inter- 
ested in issues related to globalization and a growing 
population of people termed transnationals. These peo- 
ple are born in one part of the world but later migrate 
to a different region and live in a different culture. Such 
people carry with them elements of two cultures. 


Careers in anthropology 


Most careers in anthropology require either a mas- 


Anthropology 549 


ters degree or a doctoral degree. Many anthropolo- 
gists teach and carry out research in colleges and uni- 
versities. Some collect and supervise the display of 
items for museums. 

An increasing number of anthropologists enter the 
growing field of applied anthropology, the use of an- 
thropological research to achieve a practical goal. They 
may work for government-sponsored development 
projects or relief agencies helping to assist refugee 
populations throughout the world. Applied anthropolo- 
gists also work in advertising and other corporate jobs, 
where they can apply their knowledge about social sys- 
tems to specific problems. John W. Burton 


Related articles. See indian, American and the articles on 
Indian groups listed in the tables with that article; and the Peo- 
ple section of the various country and continent articles, such as 
Argentina (People) and North America (People). See also the fol- 
lowing articles: 


Anthropologists 


Benedict, Ruth Fulton 
Black, Davidson 
Boas, Franz 


Leakey, Meave Gillian 
Leakey, Richard Erskine Frere 
Lévi-Strauss, Claude 


Dubois, Eugene Linton, Ralph 
Frazer, Sir James George Malinowski, Bronislaw 
Gamio, Manuel Mead, Margaret 


Hooton, Earnest Albert 
Johanson, Donald Carl 
Kingsley, Mary Henrietta 
Kroeber, Alfred Louis 

La Farge, Oliver 

Leakey, Louis Seymour Bazett 
Leakey, Mary Douglas 


Morgan, Lewis Henry 

Parsons, Elsie Clews 

Radcliffe-Brown, A. R. 

Sapir, Edward 

Tylor, Sir Edward Burnett 

Westermarck, Edward 
Alexander 


Archaeology 
See the Archaeology article and its list of Related articles. 
Physical anthropology 


Australopithecus Java fossils 
Cave dwellers 
Cro-Magnons 
Homo erectus 


Homo habilis 


Prehistoric people 
Neanderthals Races, Human 
Peking fossils Swanscombe 
Piltdown hoax fossil 


Cultural and social anthropology 


Barbarian Ethnography Mythology 
Cannibal Family Nomad 
Caste Folklore Religion 
Civilization Food (Customs) Shelter 
Clan Funeral customs Social class 
Clothing Headhunter Social role 
Cultural lag Language Superstition 
Culture Magic Taboo 
Custom Marriage Tribe 
Ethnocentrism Mores 

Peoples of Africa and Asia 
Afrikaners Fulani Palestinians 
Ainu Hamites Pashtuns 
Arabs Hausa Pygmies 
Aryans Khoikhoi San 
Ashanti Luba Semites 
Bantu Lunda Swahili 
Bedouins Maasai Tatars 
Berbers Malays Turks 
Dinka Mandingo Xhosa 
Dravidians Moors Yoruba 
Druses Nuer Zulu 

Peoples of Europe 

Anglo-Saxons Cossacks Magyars 
Basques Gaels Slavs 
Celts Gypsies 





550 Anthurium 


Other peoples 
Aborigines, Aus- Cajuns Maori 
tralian Dayaks Mestizo 
Aleuts Inuit Negritos 


Additional resources 


Barfield, Thomas J., ed. The Dictionary of Anthropology. Black- 
well, 1997. 

Barnard, Alan, and Spencer, Jonathan, eds. Encyclopedia of So- 
cial and Cultural Anthropology. Routledge, 1998. 

Batten, Mary. Anthropologist Houghton, 2001. Younger readers. 

Eriksen, Thomas H. Small Places, Large Issues: An Introduction to 
Social and Cultural Anthropology. 2nd ed. Pluto Pr., 2001. 


Anthurium, an 7HUR ee um, is the name ofa large 
genus (group) of flowering plants native to tropical re- 
gions in North and South America. There are about 
1,000 species of anthuriums. They grow wild chiefly in 
rain forests. They are also cultivated in greenhouses and 
gardens. 

Many wild anthuriums wrap around tree trunks and 
branches, though some grow along the ground. Most 
anthuriums have large evergreen leaves shaped like 
hearts. In some species, the leaves are lobed or sepa- 
rated into fingerlike leaflets. Anthuriums bear small 
flowers tightly packed on a cylindrical, fleshy stalk called 
a spadix The spadix rises froma shiny, leaflike spathe, 
which is often brightly colored. 

A commonly cultivated anthurium is the pink fla- 
mingo, also called the flamingo lily. This plant has a 
bright pink spathe that lasts several weeks. Gardeners 
also grow anthuriums for their attractive leaves. The leaf 
veins of some species are outlined in pale green to sil- 
very white against a dark green or purple background. 

David H. Wagner 


Scientific classification. Anthuriums belong to the arum 
family, Araceae. The scientific name for the pink flamingo is An- 
thurium andraeanum. 


Antibiotic, 4, tee by AHT ihk or AN tih by AHT ihk, isa 
substance produced by certain bacteria or fungi that 
kills other cells or interferes with their growth. In nature, 
these substances help some microbes survive by limit- 
ing the multiplication of other microbes that share the 
same environment Antibiotics that attack pathogenic 
(disease-causing) microbes without severely harming 
normal body cells are useful as drugs. 

Antibiotics are especially useful for treating infections 
caused by bacteria. Antibiotics came into widespread 
use during the 1940's. At that time, they were often 
called “wonder drugs’ because they cured many bacter- 
ial diseases that were once fatal. The number of deaths 
caused by meningitis, pneumonia, tuberculosis, and 
scarlet fever declined drastically after antibiotics be- 
came available. Today, physicians prescribe antibiotics 
to treat many diseases caused by bacteria. 

In addition, some antibiotics are effective against in- 
fections caused by fungi and protozoa, and a few are 
useful in treating cancer. Antibiotics are also used to 
treat infectious diseases in animals. Farmers sometimes 
add small amounts of antibiotics to livestock feed. The 
antibiotics support the animals growth for reasons that 
are not entirely understood. 

Antibiotics are not effective against colds, influenza, 
or other viral diseases. In addition, the effectiveness of 
antibiotics is limited because both pathogenic microbes 
and cancer cells can become resistant to them. 





Kinds of antibiotics 


Antibiotics are selectively toxic—that is, they damage 
some types of cells without harming others. Medically 
useful antibiotics attack infectious microbes or cancer 
cells without excessively hurting human cells. Antibi- 
otics fight different types of illnesses in a variety of ways. 

Antibacterial antibiotics. Antibiotics are selectively 
toxic against bacteria because bacterial cells differ great- 
ly from human cells. One of the chief differences is that 
bacteria, unlike animal cells, have a ce// wall This wall is 
a rigid structure that forms the cell's outer boundary. 

The type of cell wall a bacterium has is one factor that 
determines which antibiotics can kill it Scientists use a 
process called Gram staining to classify cell walls of bac- 
teria. Hans C.J. Gram, a Danish bacteriologist of the late 
1800's, developed the process. This method classifies 
bacteria as gram-positive (G+) or gram-negative (G—). 

Some antibiotics selectively kill either gram-positive 
bacteria or gram-negative bacteria. These substances 
are called narrow spectrum antibiotics. The antibiotic 
Vancomycin (VAN koh MY sihn/ selectively kills such 
gram-positive bacteria as Staphylococcus (sTaF uh luh 
KAHK uhs), Streptococcus (sTREHP tuh KAHK uhs), and En- 
terococcus (€HN tuhr oh KAHK uhs) Aztreonam faz TREE 
oh nahm/is a narrow spectrum antibiotic that kills only 
gram-negative bacteria, such as Escherichia coli (e4sH uh 
RIHK ee uh KOH ly/and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (soo 
duh MOH nas th ROO juh nou suh} Other antibiotics can 
kill both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. 
These drugs are called broad spectrum antibiotics. Cef- 
triaxone (sehf try AHKS ohn/is one example of a broad 
spectrum antibiotic. No broad spectrum antibiotic can 
kill all bacteria, and no narrow spectrum antibiotic can 
kill all gram-positive or all gram-negative bacteria. 

Other kinds of antibiotics. Some antibiotics are ef- 
fective against infections caused by fungi and proto- 
zoans, whose cells differ from human cells. Antibiotics 
that fight fungi include miconazole (mih KAHN ah zohl) 
and amphotericin (44m fuh TEHR uh sihn) Paromomycin 
(PAR oh moh MY sihn/is used to treat amebiasis 4m uh 
BY uh sihs), an intestinal disease caused by a protozoan. 

Anticancer antibiotics attack cells while they are divid- 
ing. These drugs are somewhat selectively toxic because 
cancer cells generally divide much more frequently than 
do normal cells. But some normal cells—such as blood- 
forming cells—divide rapidly. Anticancer antibiotics also 
affect these cells. The antibiotic doxorubicin (DAHK soh 
Roo buh sihn/is used to treat certain types of leukemia, 
breast cancer, and other tumors. 


How antibiotics work 


Antibiotics fight microbes and cancer cells by inter- 
fering with normal cell functions. In most cases, this in- 
terference occurs in one of three ways: (1) prevention of 
cell wall formation, (2) disruption of the cell membrane 
(covering), and (3) disruption of chemical processes. 

Prevention of cell wall formation. Penicillins and 
some other antibiotics destroy microbes by interfering 
with their cell wall formation. Animal cells do not form 
walls. As a result, these antibiotics do not damage them. 

Disruption of the cell membrane. All cells have a 
membrane that controls the movement of substances in 
and out of the cell. Some antibiotics, including ampho- 


tericin B and nystatin, disrupt the cell membrane of cer- 
tain microbes. A damaged membrane might allow vital 
nutrients to escape or poisonous substances to enter 
and kill the cell. These antibiotics do not harm human 
cells because the drugs affect membrane components 
found only in microbial cells. 

Disruption of chemical processes. All cells pro- 
duce proteins and nucleic acids, which are vital to life. 
Human cells produce these substances in much the 
same way as microbial cells do. But in some cases, these 
processes differ enough so that antibiotics interfere 
with the chemical activities in microbial cells, but not in 
human cells. For example, streptomycin (sTREHP tuh MY 
sihn)and tetracycline (TEHT ruh sy klihn) prevent certain 
kinds of microbes from producing proteins, and ri- 
fampin (R/IHF am pihn/interferes with the formation of 
nucleic acids. 


Dangers of antibiotics 


Many antibiotics are regarded among the safest 
drugs when properly used. But antibiotics can some- 
times cause unpleasant or dangerous side effects. The 
three main dangers are (1) allergic reactions, (2) destruc- 
tion of helpful microbes, and (3) damage to organs and 
tissues. 

Allergic reactions, in most cases, are mild and pro- 
duce only arash or fever. But severe reactions can oc- 
cur, and can even cause death. All antibiotics are able to 
produce allergic reactions, but such reactions occur 
most often with penicillins. A physician usually asks if a 
patient has ever had an allergic reaction to an antibiotic 
before prescribing that drug. Most people who are al- 
lergic to one antibiotic can take other antibiotics that 
have significantly different chemical compositions. 

Destruction of helpful microbes. Certain areas of 
the body commonly harbor both harmless and patho- 
genic microbes. These two types of microbes compete 
for food, and so the harmless microorganisms help re- 
strain the growth of those that cause disease. Many an- 


Some widely used antibiotics 


Antibiotic Some infections and diseases treated 
Ampicillin G+ and G— infections, including respiratory 
infections and urinary tract infections. 
Ceftriaxone G+ and G- infections, including gonorrhea. 
Chloram- Rocky Mountain spotted fever and G+ and 
phenicol G- infections, including meningitis. 


Ciprofloxacin Urinary tract infections and acute diarrheal 
diseases caused by certain G— infections. 
Penicillin-G resistant, methicillin-sensitive 


staphylococcal infections. 


Dicloxacillin 


Doxycycline Pneumonia, G+ and G— infections, bite 
wounds, acne. 
Azithromycin Many kinds of pneumonia, and certain 


other G+ infections. 

Serious infections, especially G- infectiuns. 
G+ and G- infections, especially skin 
infections and those resulting from burns. 
Fungus infections of the skin, mucous 
membranes, blood, and brain. 

Syphilis, strep throat, and other G+ infections. 
Tuberculosis. 

Tuberculosis and bubonic plague. 

Serious staphylococcal, enterococcal, and 
streptococcal infections that resist other 
drugs. 


Gentamicin 
Neomycin 


Fluconazole 


Penicillin G 
Rifampin 
Streptomycin 
Vancomycin 


Antibiotic 551 


tibiotics—especially broad spectrum drugs—do not al- 
ways distinguish between harmless and dangerous mi- 
crobes. If a drug destroys too many harmless microor- 
ganisms, the pathogenic ones will have a greater chance 
to multiply. This situation can lead to a new infection 
called a superinfection. Physicians usually prescribe a 
second drug to combat a superinfection. 

Damage to organs and tissues is rare in people us- 
ing antibiotics that act only against the cells of patho- 
genic microbes. Extensive use of some antibiotics, how- 
ever, may damage tissues and organs. For example, 
streptomycin has caused kidney damage and deafness. 
Physicians prescribe drugs with such known risks only if 
no other drug Is effective. 

Anticancer antibiotics act against all cells that divide 
rapidly, and so can affect normal cells as well as cancer 
cells. For example, cells in the bone marrow divide con- 
stantly to produce fresh blood cells. Anticancer antibi- 
otics can damage the bone marrow. Such damage in- 
creases the risk of infection by reducing the number of 
white blood cells, which help the body fight disease. 


Resistance to antibiotics 


Some pathogenic microbes develop an ability to re- 
sist the effects of certain antibiotics. The most wide- 
spread and worrisome resistance in pathogenic mi- 
crobes occurs in bacteria. 

Bacteria can become resistant to antibiotics through a 
type of evolution. In bacteria—as in other living things— 
genes Carry instructions controlling life processes. Oc- 
casionally, a gene in a bacterium naturally changes ina 
way that enables the microbe to resist the effects of an 
antibiotic. Such a change is called a mutation. The 
change may provide resistance to one specific antibiotic 
or to a group of chemically similar antibiotics—for exam- 
ple, the penicillins. Bacteria can also acquire resistance 
from other bacteria by transferring genetic material. In 
some cases, these exchanges enable bacteria to acquire 
resistance to more than one type or more than one 
group of antibiotics. 

Bacteria also can become resistant to antibiotics by 
producing an enzyme that breaks down the drug. This 
occurs with Staphylococcus, which may resist penicillins 
and cephalosporins (seHr uh luh SPAWR ihnz) Bacteria 
can also change their cell membranes so that antibiotics 
can not penetrate them. An example of this kind of bac- 
teria is Pseudomonas. Pseudomonas may develop resis- 
tance to the quinolone antibiotics this way. Enterococ- 
cus, a gram-positive bacteria, can become resistant to 
vancomycin by changing the proteins to which van- 
comycin usually binds. Streptococcus can resist peni- 
cillins and cephalosporins in this way. 


Testing and producing antibiotics 


Testing. Every year, scientists test thousands of natur- 
al and chemically modified microbial substances for po- 
tential use as antibiotics. First, they test these substances 
against harmful microbes or cancer cells that have been 
grown either in test tubes or on laboratory plates. 

A substance that shows strong antibiotic activity 
against pathogenic microbes or cancer cells undergoes 
extensive tests in laboratory animals. If it produces no 
harmful effects in the animals, scientists test the antibiot- 
ic in human beings. In the United States, the Food and 


552 Antibiotic 


Drug Administration (FDA) must approve human testing. 
If the drug proves to be safe and effective, it is referred 
to the FDA for approval. Finally, if the FDA approves the 
antibiotic, the developer begins to produce it for sale. 

Production of antibiotics involves several steps. First, 
cultures of antibiotic-producing microbes are grown in 
flasks and then transferred to huge fermentation vats 
(see Fermentation). The microbes multiply rapidly in the 
vats because the environment is controlled to stimulate 
their growth. After fermentation, the antibiotic sub- 
stance is extracted from the culture and purified. 

Some natural antibiotic substances are modified 
chemically to produce semisynthetic antibiotics. Many 
such drugs are more effective than the natural antibi- 
otics from which they were developed. 

Drug companies conduct special tests on antibiotics 
during and after production to ensure their quality. Fi- 
nally, manufacturers make the purified antibiotic sub- 
stances into pills, liquids, and ointments for medical use. 


History 


For more than 2,500 years, people have treated cer- 
tain skin infections with molds that form antibiotics. 
However, modern scientific study of these substances 
did not begin until the late 1800's. At that time, the 
French chemist Louis Pasteur discovered that bacteria 
spread infectious diseases. Then Robert Koch, a German 
bacteriologist, developed methods of isolating and 
growing various kinds of bacteria. Koch also identified 
specific bacteria that cause certain diseases. 

Scientists then began working to develop drugs that 
could destroy pathogenic microbes, but the substances 
they produced proved either ineffective or dangerous. A 
historic breakthrough came in 1928, when British bacte- 
riologist Alexander Fleming observed that a mold of the 
genus Penicillium produced a substance that destroyed 
bacteria. He called the substance penicillin. 

In the early 1940's, American bacteriologist Selman A. 
Waksman tested about 10,000 types of soil bacteria for 
antibiotic activity. In 1943, he discovered that some 


How antibiotics 
are produced 





Taurus 


Penicillin became the first effective antibiotic. It is obtained from 
Penicillium mold and then purified and crystallized. This photo 
gives a microscopic view of Penicillium mold. 


Streptomyces (strehp tuh MY seez/, a type of fungi, pro- 
duced a substance that had potent antibiotic properties. 
A new antibiotic called streptomycin resulted from 
\WWaksman’s research. Thousands of antibiotic substances 
have been found in nature or have been produced 
chemically. Relatively few antibiotic substances, howev- 
er, have proved safe and effective. 

Since the 1990's, resistance to antibiotics has been a 
growing threat to public health. Widespread use of an- 
tibiotics to treat human infections increases the number 
of resistant bacteria. Antibiotic use in livestock promotes 
the development of resistant bacteria that can spread to 
humans. For example, studies in the Netherlands, Spain, 
the United States, and the United Kingdom in the late 
1990's revealed that many chickens were infected with 
antibiotic resistant strains of a bacterium called Campy- 
lobacter (kAm py loh BAK tur), When people cooked the 
meat of these chickens, some of the Campylobacter mi- 
crobes survived, and the people became infected. 

Certain kinds of Enterococcus bacteria are especially 
troublesome because of their resistance. In Europe, 
drug-resistant strains (types) of Enterococcus that origi- 
nated in livestock have spread to people. In the United 
States, Enterococcus resistant to multiple antibiotics has 


Drug manufacturers produce millions of tons of antibiotics yearly, and the production process 
varies among companies. Some drug firms use the process shown here. The companies conduct 


extensive tests during and after production to make sure the antibiotics are safe and effective. 


Culture of microbes 











_Stirrer 


Antibiatic 
broth 


Discarded broth 


Compressed air 


Fermentation causes a cul- 
ture of microbes to grow rap- 
idly and produce antibiotic 
broth. Stirring, air, and nutri- 
ents help stimulate growth. 


Filtered antibiotic brath 


Resin beads 


_- Nutrients with antibiotic Concentrated 
molecules antibiotic 
solution. 


attached 


~Resin beads - 


WORLD BOOK diagram by Arthur Greberz 


Solvent 


Chemicol solution 














S Nv “Le * 
ns oe Antibiotic 
. “")  erystals 


Impurities 


Puntfication. Antibiotic broth is filtered into a tank containing substances called resin 
beads. Antibiotic molecules separate from impure elements in the broth and attach onto 
the resin beads. The remaining broth ts flushed from the tank A chemical solution is added 
to torce the beads to the bottom of the tank, and the concentrated antibiotic solution flows 
into another tank There, a solvent causes the solution to form pure antibiotic crystals. 





a 


caused human infections that are difficult or impossible 
to treat. Infections caused by antibiotic-resistant varieties 
of Enterococcus occur mostly in patients who are al- 
ready seriously ill. 

In the 1990's, scientists combined the antibiotics quin- 
upristin and dalfopristin to create a drug that works 
against resistant strains of Enterococcus. |In 2000, the 
FDA approved /inezolid (lyn AY zoh lid), the first entirely 
new type of antibiotic developed in more than 30 years. 
The antibiotic is effective against gram-positive bacteria, 
including Enterococcus, that have become resistant to 
all other antibiotics. But experts believe antibiotic-resis- 
tant Enterococcus remains a major threat to public 
health. Melanie Johns Cupp 

Related articles in Wor/d Book include: 


Ampicillin Dubos, René Jules — Pasteur, Louis 
Bacteria Erythromycin Penicillin 
Cephalosporin Fleming, Sir Quinolone 

Chain, Ernst Boris Alexander Streptomycin 
Chloramphenicol Florey, Lord Tetracycline 
Disease Koch, Robert Waksman, Selman 


Abraham 


Additional resources 


Aldridge, Susan. Magic Molecules: How Drugs Work Cam- 
bridge, 1998. 

Mann, John, and Crabbe, J.C. Bacteria and Anti-bacterial Agents. 
Univ. Science Bks., 1996. 

Wainwright, Milton. Miracle Cure: The Story of Antibiotics. 
Blackwell, 1990. 


Antibody. See Immune system. 

Antichrist is a power or person opposed to Jesus 
Christ. According to the Bible, the Antichrist will rise to 
power before the Last Judgment, but will then be de- 
feated by Christ. The idea of such a final war between 
good and evil occurred among Babylonians, Persians, 
and Jews before being adopted by Christians. The term 
Antichrist appears only in the First and Second Epistles 
of John. The concept of the Antichrist appears in various 
passages in the New Testament. For example, it is sym- 
bolized in the Book of Revelation as a beast—a form of 
Satan. Joseph M. Haliman 

Anticoagulant, 4n tee koh AG yuh /uhnt is a chemical 
substance used to prevent the normal coagulation (clot- 
ting) of blocd. The chief types are (1) drugs that slow 
clotting in a persons bloodstream and (2) substances 
that prevent the clotting of blood in a test tube. 

Anticoagulant drugs are administered to treat and 
prevent blood clots. They often are used in the treat- 
ment of thrombophlebitis, the formation of a clot ina 
damaged vein (see Phlebitis). When a vein is damaged, a 
series of reactions changes an inactive blood chemical 
called prothrombin into thrombin. Thrombin, in turn, 
helps cause the formation of fibrin, the protein that 
makes up the most important part of a clot. Anticoagu- 
lant drugs reduce the speed of one of these steps. For 
example, dicoumaro! slows the conversion of protkirom- 
bin into thrombin. 

Certain anticoagulants are added to blood stored for 
transfusions and to blood samples used for laboratory 
tests. These anticoagulants work by joining with calcium 
ions in the blood. Free calcium ions must be in the 
blood for clotting to occur. Edward E. Morse 

See also Blood (Controlling bleeding); Coagulant. 
Anticonvulsant is a type of drug used to treat or pre- 
vent seizures. Seizures are episodes of overactive brain 


Antidepressant 553 


function in which people may lose consciousness or ex- 
perience sensory or emotional disturbances. Convul- 
sions are a type of seizure during which violent, involun- 
tary muscle contractions occur. Anticonvulsants are the 
primary drugs for treating epilepsy, a disease that in- 
volves recurring seizures. 

Scientists do not know exactly how anticonvulsants 
work. During a seizure, excessive electrical activity takes 
place in the brain. This activity can begin in widespread 
areas of the brain, or it can start in limited parts of the 
brain and spread to other parts. Scientists think anticon- 
vulsants may prevent the electrical activity from starting 
or reduce its spread to other parts of the brain. 

Throughout history, people have used many magical, 
religious, or medicinal agents to attempt to prevent sei- 
zures. During the 1800's, drugs called bromides were 
found to be somewhat effective against seizures. How- 
ever, bromides often caused mental disturbances and 
other harmful side effects. The use of bromides as anti- 
convulsants ended in the first half of the 1900's, when 
safer and more effective drugs were introduced. These 
drugs included phenobarbital (Luminal) and phenytoin 
(Dilantin). Other anticonvulsants widely used today in- 
clude carbamazepine, clonazepam, and valproic acid. 

Some anticonvulsants are taken only by mouth. Oth- 
ers are usually taken by mouth but also may be injected 
into a vein. All anticonvulsants are very powerful and 
should only be used under the supervision of a doctor. 

N.E. Sladek 
Anticosti, av tuh KAW stee, is a rocky island in the 
Gulf of Saint Lawrence, off the southern coast of Que- 
bec. Anticosti has an area of 3,059 square miles (7,923 
square kilometers) and a population of 266. The French 
explorer Jacques Cartier reached Anticosti in 1534. The 
government of Quebec owns Anticosti. The island is 
used for hunting, fishing, and vacationing. It has a herd 
of more than 100,000 white-tailed deer. Roger Nadeau 
Anti-Defamation League. See B'nai B'rith. 
Antidepressant is the name of a group of drugs 
commonly used to treat major depression, a severe 
mental illness. Antidepressants also help treat other dis- 
orders, including chronic pain, anxiety disorders, and 
obsessive-compulsive disorder. See Depression; Men- 
tal illness. 

Antidepressants are thought to work by regulating 
the brain's neurotransmission system. Chemicals called 
neurotransmitters carry messages from one nerve cell in 
the brain to another. These chemicals attach to special 
molecules on nerve cells called receptors, both in send- 
ing and receiving messages. Antidepressants first in- 
crease the concentration of neurotransmitters in the 
brain. After several weeks of treatment, the receptors 
become less sensitive, and depression lifts. 

The three main types of antidepressants are (1) se/ec- 
tive serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs), (2) tricyclic 
antidepressants (TCA‘s), and (3) monoamine oxidase in- 
hibitors (MAOV's). SSRIs and TCA’s prevent brain cells 
from reabsorbing excess neurotransmitters after the 
chemicals have delivered their messages. SSRI's block 
the reabsorption of the neurotransmitter called seroto- 
nin. SSRIs include the most widely prescribed antide- 
pressant, fluoxetine (Prozac). TCA’s, such as the drug 
amitriptyline (for example, Elavil), block the reabsorption 
of several neurotransmitters, including serotonin and 


554 Antidote 


norepinephrine. MAOIs, which include the drug 
phenelzine (Nardil), inactivate a protein that breaks 
down excess neurotransmitters. 

Most antidepressants are taken by mouth, and all re- 
quire the prescription of a doctor. The drugs may cause 
various side effects. For example, SSRIs can cause in- 
creased anxiety, poor sleep, nausea, and loss of sexual 
interest. TCA’s can cause Aypotension (low blood pres- 
sure), irregular heartbeat, and constipation. MAOI’s may 
combine with certain foods or drugs to create life- 
threatening Aypertension (high blood pressure). 

Alan M. Gruenberg 
Antidote, AN fee doht or AN tih 007, is a substance 
that fights the harmful action of a poison in the body. 
Some antidotes act chemically on poisons to make them 
harmless. Other antidotes produce an action that works 
against the action of the poison. Still other antidotes can 
prevent certain body cells from reacting to the effects of 
a poison. Antitoxins are a special kind of antidote (see 
Antitoxin). 

Most antidotes are effective against only one kind of 
poison. But they usually have either a worsening effect 
or no effect at all when used against another type of poi- 
son. For this reason, a doctor should be called immedi- 
ately in any case of poisoning. David R. Boyd 

See also First aid (Swallowed poisons); Poison; 
Snakebite. 

Antietam, Battle of. See Civil War (Battle of Anti- 
etam). 

Anti-Federalists were a political group in the United 
States in the late 1780's that feared a strong national gov- 
ernment. Many opposed the adoption of the U.S. Consti- 
tution. Others voted for it but said it should be interpret- 
ed to give the national government the least possible 
power. In the 1790's, the name Anti-Federalist was some- 
times applied to Thomas Jefferson's followers, who 
wanted to limit the growth of the central government's 
power. Donald R. McCoy 

See also Democratic-Republican Party; Federalist 
Party. 

Antifreeze is a substance that is added to a liquid to 
lower its freezing point. Antifreezes are used in com- 
pounds that remove ice or prevent it from forming, and 
in refrigerants and heat-transfer fluids. This article dis- 
cusses automotive antifreezes, which are added to an 
automobile engine's cooling system. 

An automobile engine operates at extremely high 
temperatures. It is cooled by fluid circulating through a 
cooling system. This prevents the engine from overheat- 
ing, which can result in engine damage. Previously, wa- 
ter alone was used in the cooling system during the 
summer, and antifreeze was added to the water during 
the winter. Today, however, automobiles are designed 
to use a mixture of equal parts of water and antifreeze as 
the coolant the year around. Antifreeze prevents the wa- 
ter from freezing in cold temperatures. Modern an- 
tifreezes also raise the boiling point of the water. The 
cooling system therefore can operate at higher tempera- 
tures without the risk of boiling. The cooling system also 
operates more efficiently at higher temperatures. 

Such materials as kerosene, honey, salt water, and 
methyl alcohol were once used as antifreezes, but these 
substances can damage a Car's engine. Today, most au- 
tomotive antifreezes are composed chiefly of a liquid 


compound Called ethylene glycol(see Glycol). Automo- 
tive antifreezes also contain chemicals that protect the 
metal parts of the engine's cooling system from corro- 
sion. Kathleen C. Taylor 

Antigen. See Immune system. 

Antigone, an T/HG uh nee, in Greek mythology, was 
the daughter of King Oedipus and Queen Jocasta, the 
rulers of Thebes. Oedipus had unknowingly killed his fa- 
ther and married his mother. When he discovered what 
he had done, he blinded himself and was banished from 
Thebes. Antigone accompanied her father and served as 
his guide during his exile {see Oedipus). 

Following Oedipus death, Antigone returned to 
Thebes, where her brothers Eteocles and Polynices 
were struggling for the throne. The brothers had agreed 
to share the rule of Thebes, but Eteocles broke the 
agreement. Polynices tried to regain his share of the 
throne by attacking the city in an episode called the Sev- 
en Against Thebes. 

During the battle, Eteocles and Polynices killed each 
other. Creon, the new king, buried Eteocles with great 
honor. But he considered Polynices a rebel and a traitor 





The British Museum 


Antigone was a princess in Greek mythology. She gave her 
brother Polynices an honorable burial against the wishes of King 
Creon of Thebes. This painting on a Greek vase shows Creon, 
left, sentencing Antigone, right, to death for her disobedience. 


and forbade anyone to give him a proper burial. Antig- 
one considered Creon’s order a violation of divine law 
and buried her brother. 

Creon sentenced Antigone to death for her disobedi- 
ence, despite the pleas of his son Haemon, whom 
Antigone was to marry. Ancient sources differ on what 
finally happened to her. One says she and Haemon com- 
mitted suicide. Others say she was killed by Creon or 
went into exile. Antigone has come to represent person- 
al Courage and conscience, especially in opposing the 
unjust use of power by the state. Nancy Felson 
Antigonid dynasty, an T/HG oh nihd, was the name 
of a line of kings that ruled Macedonia, a kingdom north 
of Greece. The Antigonid rule lasted from 294 B.C. to 


168 B.C. The family’s first powerful ruler was Antigonus 
|, a general under Alexander the Great. Alexander died 
in 323 B.C, and Antigonus seized a part of Alexander's 
empire in present-day Turkey, Syria, and Iraq. Antigonus 
tried to seize more of the empire, but he was defeated 
and killed at the Battle of Ipsus in 301 B.C In 294 B.C, his 
son Demetrius | became the first Antigonid to rule 
Macedonia. In 277 B.C, Antigonus Il saved Macedonia 
from Celtic invaders. Philip V, grandson of Antigonus II, 
challenged Rome and became an ally of Hannibal of 
Carthage. But Philip was defeated in 197 B.C. The Ro- 
mans ended the Antigonid rule by defeating Perseus in 
168 B.C Thomas W. Africa 

Antigravity is a hypothetical force of repulsion. It is 
described in some science-fiction stories but has not 
been observed by scientists. In theory, antigravity would 
resemble gravity except that it would cause objects to 
repel, rather than be attracted to, one another. For exam- 
ple, gravity on the earth pulls objects toward the planet's 
center. But antigravity, if it existed, would push objects 
away from the earth's center. 

Some people have speculated that, because electric 
forces can be attractive or repulsive, gravitational force 
also may be either attractive or repulsive. However, 
electric force can be attractive or repulsive because it is 
proportional to electric charge, which is either positive 
or negative. For this reason, like charges repel and un- 
like charges attract. Gravitational force, on the other 
hand, is proportional to mass (the amount of matter that 
makes up an object). Mass is always positive and has no 
known negative counterpart. Therefore, it seems that 
gravitational force must always be attractive. 

It is possible, however, that evidence of antigravity 
will be provided by observations of antimatter (see Anti- 
matter). A few scientists have speculated that antimatter 
will fall up. No one has yet been able to observe freely 
falling antimatter. But other experiments have led most 
physicists to conclude that antimatter, just like matter, 
must fall toward the center of the earth. Joel R. Primack 
Antigua, afn TEE gwuh (pop. 30,000), formerly Antigua 
Guatemala, was the capital of Guatemala in colonia! 
days. The city was founded in 1543. It is west of the pre- 
sent capital, Guatemala City (see Guatemala [map)). In 
1773, an earthquake destroyed Antigua. The capital was 
moved to its present site in 1776. Antiguas colonial ruins 
attract many tourists. Gary S. Elbow 
Antigua and Barbuda, an 7FE guhor an TEE gwuh, 
bahr BOO duh or bahr BYOO duh, is an island country 











Antigua and Barbuda 555 


lor @ 6 45 
Goat Point 


Antigua and Barbuda 


National capital 
je 


\ (62mj \\ Barbuda 


Other town 


Elevation above sea level p 
oupere 
oint ; . 
Cocoa ~ Spanish 
Same scale Point | 
as map below 





A Ld ‘ 
* “ yBahamas 
~~ Ndirth At 
ve'zian —-“ North 
# INTERNATIONAL | 
- j 4 


a \ 
a Ji 
BaCuba? > | 
» aa 
—> = Puerto 
Haiti im Rico _ 
> yy 
Jamaica Dominican ie 


p 


fo. 
_ Rep ANTIGUA 
aubbes AND 


Bogay Pea 
1,319 ft. (402 m} > “g 


10 Miles 





10 Kilometers 


WORLD BOOK maps 


in the Caribbean Sea. It consists of three islands—An- 
tigua, Barbuda, and Redonda. The islands lie about 430 
miles (692 kilometers) north of Venezuela. 

Antigua and Barbuda has a total land area of 171 
square miles (442 square kilometers) and a population of 
about 69,000. The island of Antigua covers 108 square 
miles (280 square kilometers); Barbuda, 62 square miles 
(161 square kilometers); and Redonda, only + square 
mile (1.3 square kilometers). About 98 percent of the 
people live on Antigua and 2 percent on Barbuda. Re- 
donda is uninhabited. St. John’s (pop. 36,000}, on the 
northwest coast of Antigua, is the country's capital and 
largest city. The East Caribbean dollar is the country’s 
basic unit of currency. For a picture of the flag of An- 
tigua and Barbuda, see Flag (Flags of the Americas). 

Government. Antigua and Barbuda is a constitutional! 
monarchy and a member of the Commonwealth of Na- 
tions (see Commonwealth of Nations). A prime minister 
heads the government. The prime minister and a Cabi- 
net conduct government operations. A 17-member Par- 
liament—composed of a House of Representatives and 
Senate—makes the laws. The people elect the Parlia- 
ment members. The head of the majority party of the 
House of Representatives serves as prime minister. The 
prime minister appoints the Cabinet members. 

People. The vast majority of the people of Antigua 
and Barbuda are descendants of black Africans. About 
half of the people live in St John’s, and most of the rest 
live in rural areas. Most of the people live in one-story 


]. Alex Langley, DP! 


Antigua and Barbuda is a 
nation in the Caribbean Sea 
that consists of three islands. 
Many tourists visit the islands 
each year to enjoy the beauti- 
ful beaches, clear water, and 
warm, sunny climate. 


556 Antihistamine 


houses made of concrete blocks or wood. They wear 
clothing similar to that worn in the United States and 
other Western nations. Their main foods include beans, 
fish, lobsters, and sweet potatoes. 

Almost all the people of Antigua and Barbuda speak 
English, the nation’s official language. Most of the peo- 
ple are Protestants. Anglicans make up the largest 
Protestant group. Antigua and Barbuda has well-devel- 
oped primary and secondary educational systems. 

Land and climate. The islands of Antigua and Barbu- 
da are mostly flat. They were formed from volcanoes 
that were worn down by wind and rain. The islands have 
beautiful beaches covered with white sand. Antigua’s 
coast has numerous bays and inlets. Redonda is rocky 
and has little plant life. The average temperature of the 
islands is 80 °F (27 °C). The islands receive about 45 inch- 
es (114 centimeters) of rain annually. However, long peri- 
ods of drought strike the area from time to time. 

Economy. Tourism ranks as the major economic ac- 
tivity of Antigua and Barbuda. The country’s beaches, re- 
sorts, and warm sunny climate attract tourists from 
many lands. The tourist industry employs most of An- 
tigua and Barbuda’s people. Sugar is also important to 
the country’s economy. Farmers raise sugar cane, and 
processors refine it into sugar. Cotton is another major 
product. The country's crop production is often harmed 
by droughts. As a result, the government encourages 
the development of small industries to strengthen the 
economy. The country’s industries make clothing, paint, 
and such appliances as refrigerators and stoves. 

History. Carib Indians were the first inhabitants of 
Antigua and Barbuda. In 1493, Christopher Columbus 
became the first European to reach Antigua. British set- 
tlers established a colony on Antigua in 1632. The 
colony, which later included Barbuda and Redonda, was 
called Antigua. The British brought African slaves to the 
islands to work on sugar cane plantations. The slaves 
were freed in 1834, the year after Britain abolished slav- 
ery throughout its empire. Most of the British people 
eventually left, but Britain retained control of the colony. 

In 1967, the colony of Antigua became part of the 
West Indies Associated States and gained control of its 
internal affairs. It became the independent nation of An- 
tigua and Barbuda on Nov. 1, 1981. 

In 1989, Hurricane Hugo struck Antigua and Barbuda. 
The hurricane caused two deaths and $80 million in 
property damage. Another powerful hurricane, Hurri- 
cane Luis, hit the islands in 1995. It resulted in two 
deaths and at least $300 million in property damage. 

Thomas G. Mathews 
Antihistamine, An tee HIHS tuh meen, is the name of 
a group of drugs used to treat symptoms of allergies. 
These symptoms include irritated eyes, runny nose, 
sneezing, and hives. Antihistamine drugs work by coun- 
teracting the effects of histamine, a substance found in 
many body cells. Excessive or inappropriate release of 
histamine into body fluids can cause allergies such as 
hay fever and contribute to dangerous reactions to in- 
sect bites and certain medications. Antihistamines are 
also used to treat motion sickness. 

Chemists working in France developed the first useful 
antihistamines in the early 1940's. Diphenhydramine, a 
common antihistamine drug, was developed in the Unit- 
ed States in 1943. People can purchase diphenhydra- 





mine, known by such trade names as AllerMax and Be- 
nadryl, and many other antihistamines without a doc- 
tors prescription. Nonprescription antihistamines are 
sold to promote sleep and relieve cold symptoms, as 
well as to treat allergies. 

A common side effect of many antihistamines is 
drowsiness. For this reason, people are advised not to 
drive or operate heavy machinery while using the drugs. 
In the 1970's and 1980's, scientists developed the first an- 
tihistamines that did not cause drowsiness. The first 
such drug available in the United States was terfena- 
dine, which was sold until 1997 under the trade name 
Seldane. Another similar drug is astemizole, known by 
the trade name Hismamal. Drugs of this type are much 
more expensive than older antihistamines. In rare cases, 
they have caused irregular heartbeats. These drugs are 
available only with a doctor's prescription. 

Richard W. Sloan 
Antilles. See West Indies. 

Anti-Masonic Party, 4\ fee muh SAHN thk, was an 
American political organization that was active during 
the late 1820's and early 1830's. It was one of the earliest 
American third party movements. The movement began 
in 1826 when William Morgan, a New York Mason, dis- 
appeared mysteriously after threatening to reveal Ma- 
sonic secrets. Many people believed Masons had kid- 
napped and murdered him. Anti-Masonic feelings 
swept through New York and nearby states, and a politi- 
cal party was organized. 

In 1831, the Anti-Masonic Party held the first national 
nominating convention in United States history. The par- 
ty’s presidential candidate, William Wirt, received only 
seven electoral votes in the 1832 election. However, the 
Anti-Masonic Party won the Vermont governorship and 
elected several congressmen. The party then declined. 
Most of its members joined the Whig Party. 

Richard E. Ellis 
Antimatter is matter composed of elementary parti- 
cles that are the opposite of ordinary particles. These 
opposite particles are called antiparticles. An antiparticle 
exactly resembles its corresponding ordinary particle in 
every property except its charge, which is reversed. For 
example, an electron is an ordinary particle that has a 
negative electric charge. Its antiparticle, a positron, ex- 
actly resembles it except that a positron carries a posi- 
tive electric charge. In addition, antiparticles combine in 
the same way that ordinary particles do. For example, an 
antineutron may combine with an antiproton and so 
form an antideuteron, the nucleus of an antideuterium 
atom. 

The British theoretical physicist Paul A. M. Dirac first 
described antimatter in 1930, before anyone had discov- 
ered or produced it. Since then, physicists using high- 
energy particle accelerators have produced various an- 
tiparticles, including positrons, antineutrons, and 
antiprotons. 

In 1996, physicists at the CERN laboratory near Gene- 
va, Switzerland, announced that they had created the 
first known atoms of antimatter. These were atoms of an- 
tihydrogen. Each atom was made up of a nucleus con- 
sisting of a single antiproton, with a positron in orbit 
about the nucleus. 

When an ordinary particle collides with its antiparti- 
cle, the two parties destroy each other, releasing en- 





—— a 


iA . 


See 


ergy. If an extremely large amount of energy is released, 
some of this energy forms another particle and antiparti- 
cle. This collision is called annihilation. Such collisions 
may explain the apparent absence of naturally occurring 
antimatter in the universe. Many scientists speculate that 
the universe began with an explosion—called the big 
bang—and that there was slightly more matter than anti- 
matter immediately after the explosion (see Cosmology 
[Radio waves in space]). According to this theory, the 
matter in the universe today is the tiny remnant left after 
all the antimatter annihilated with most of the matter. 

Joel R. Primack 

See also Antigravity. 

Anti-Monopoly Party was active in U.S. politics in 
1884. The party opposed monopolies in business. In 
1884, it joined with the Greenback Party in backing Ben- 
jamin F. Butler of Massachusetts for president. The party 
broke up after Butler received only 175,000 votes. See 
also Butler, Benjamin F. Donald R. McCoy 

Antimony, AN tuh Mon nee, a chemical element, is a 
bluish-white, brittle metal. It is used to harden and 
strengthen lead. Antimony-lead alloys are used in some 
electric cables and batteries. Compounds containing an- 
timony are used in producing materials used in refriger- 
ators, air conditioners, aerosol sprays, paints, and flame- 
proofing agents. 

Antimony is most commonly found combined with 
sulfur in the mineral stibnite. Pure antimony can exist as 
metallic antimony—the more common form—and as a 
black powder, known as black or gray antimony. 

Antimony has the chemical symbol Sb, from stibium, 
the old name for the element. Its atomic number is 51 
and its atomic weight is 121.760. Its density is 6.691 
grams per cubic centimeter at 20 °C. Antimony melts at 
630.74 °C and boils at 1586.85 °C. It conducts electricity 
better in its liquid form than as a solid. 

Antimony has been used for thousands of years. The 
ancient Egyptians used substances containing antimony 
as cosmetics and medicines. The Bible and ancient writ- 
ings from China, India, and Mexico also refer to medical 
uses of antimony preparations. Raymond E. Davis 

See also Element, Chemical (tables). 

Antioch, AN tee Axx (pop. 123,900), is a commercial city 
in Turkey. Its name in Turkish is Antakya (pronounced 
ANT uh KYAH). Antioch lies along the Orontes River, 
about 7 miles (11 kilometers) from the Mediterranean 
(see Turkey [political map)). The city was founded about 
300 B.C. by Seleucus, the ruler of the area. It was the 
capital of Syria during the A.D. 900’s and 1000's. The Ot- 
toman Empire captured Antioch in 1516. France took 
control of the city after the Ottoman Empire was defeat- 
ed in World War I (1914-1918). In 1939, Antioch became 
a part of the Republic of Turkey. F. Muge Gocek 
Antioxidant, 4v tee AHK suh duhnt, is any of a group 
of chemical compounds that may prevent certain types 
of cell damage. Antioxidants block the effects of oxida- 
tion, a chemical reaction in which a substance loses 
electrons, often while combining with oxygen. Antioxi- 
dants are important because they protect cells from the 
effects of free radicals, unstable molecules produced by 
oxidation. Scientists believe free radicals may be in- 
volved in the aging process as well as in a number of 
diseases. 

In the human body, cells create free radicals when 


Antique 557 


oxygen combines with food molecules to produce ener- 
gy. Radiation, cigarette smoke, and air pollution also 
trigger the production of free radicals. Free radicals can 
attract and “steal” electrons from almost any nearby mol- 
ecule to replace the electrons they lost during oxidation. 
Such attacks can damage the cell and can cause 
changes in genes. Antioxidants are the body’s defense 
against free radicals. An antioxidant can provide an elec- 
tron to a free radical before the free radical attacks im- 
portant cell structures. 

The body naturally produces certain enzymes that are 
antioxidants. In addition, vitamins C and E and certain 
plant chemicals, such as carotenoids and flavonoids (of- 
ten called bioflavono/ds), are antioxidants. 

Fruits and vegetables are rich sources of dietary an- 
tioxidants. Citrus fruits are a rich source of vitamin C. Vit- 
amin E is found in vegetable oils and nuts. Foods plenti- 
ful in beta-carotene or other carotenoids tend to be 
deep yellow or green, such as carrots and spinach. 
Flavonoids occur in many fruits and vegetables. Some 
studies have connected a diet rich in antioxidants with a 
reduced risk of cancer, heart disease, cataracts, and oth- 
er diseases common among older people. Scientists 
are trying to determine if these reduced risks are due to 
the antioxidants or to some other factor. 

Antioxidants also have commercial uses. They are 
added to foods to prevent spoilage. Synthetic antioxi- 
dants are used to prevent oxidation in gasoline, rubber, 
and other products. Jeffrey B. Blumberg 
Antiperspirant. See Deodorant. 

Antique is an object from the past that has artistic or 
historical value. Antiques are commonly called decora- 
tive arts. They range from everyday household items to 
commissioned pieces not intended for personal use. 

Opinions differ as to what is an antique. However, ex- 
perts consider three factors in judging the quality of a 
piece and its value as an antique: (1) its age, (2) its artistic 
value, and (3) its historical importance. According to the 
United States government, which levies no import tax 
On antiques, an item must be more than 100 years old to 
be an antique. Most collectors also use this standard. 

Antiques differ from antiquities and the fine arts. An- 
tiquities are items created by ancient cultures. The fine 
arts include architecture, painting, and sculpture. How- 
ever, the lines separating antiques, antiquities, and the 
fine arts are not always clear. Commercial objects 
known as collectibles—such as advertising items, post- 
cards, and baseball cards—are also popular. They are 
not considered antiques. 

Collectors seek out antiques for pleasure, investment, 
or profit. Museums and other institutions exhibit an- 
tiques. The variety of antiques is enormous. For exam- 
ple, people collect quilts, needlework, embroidery, cos- 
tumes, clocks, arms and armor, musical instruments, 
dolls, toys, games, and lighting devices. However, an- 
tiques generally fall into four major categories—ceram- 
ics, furniture, glass, and metalwork. This article discuss- 
es these categories and their history in America. 

Ceramic antiques usually are divided into two cate- 
gories—pottery and porcelain. Porcelain, commonly 
called china, is hard, thin, and usually white. Pottery is 
any type of ware made from baked clay. Porcelain was 
not made in America until the late 1700's. Until then, the 
colonies imported it from China and Europe. Colonists 





558 Antique 





Hancock Shaker Village, lnc 
Pittsfield, Mass. 


A Shaker rocking chair made about 
1890 is valued for its functional design, 
quality materials, and craftsmanship. 


began making pottery in the 1600's because pottery 
making required simpler technology and clay was avail- 
able. Many early pieces are decorated with painted 
flowers, animals, and other designs. Many of these 
pieces have a delightful! simplicity and are collected by 
folk art enthusiasts. 

Furniture was made by some of the earliest Euro- 
pean settlers in America, who brought their homeland 
traditions in cabinetmaking with them. Few pieces re- 
main from the 1600's. Surviving pieces from the 1600's 
and 1700's often can be linked to a particular region. For 
example, the kas (large wardrobe) was made by the 
Dutch in New York and New Jersey. A style of furniture 
made from about 1790 to 1830 is called the Federal style 
or American Federal. Furniture makers worked in such 
urban centers as Baltimore, Boston, Charleston, S.C; 
New York City, Newport, RI; and Philadelphia. The 
showy, highly decorated pieces from the Victorian Age 
(1837-1901) have become valuable. However, pieces 
crafted in a highly individual rural style are also prized. 

Glass. In the 1600's, several! glassmaking factories 
opened in what is now the United States. But they all 
soon failed. The first successful factory to produce 
blown glass opened in 1739. In the mid-1700's, colonial 
factories also began making blown-molded glass, which 
was glass shaped by being blown into a mold. During 
the 1820's, American glassmakers invented the method 
of making pressed g/ass. Pressed glass was liquid glass 
that was pressed into a mold by a mechanical! plunger. 

Metalwork. Antique American gold is extremely rare, 
but antique silver is not Silversmiths were well estab- 
lished in the colonies and silver was a symbol! of wealth. 
Many silver tankards (large drinking mugs) bear en- 
graved decorations, such as coats of arms, monograms, 
designs, and inscriptions. In the British tradition, most 
silversmiths labeled their wares with their own unique 
mark. Because of its affordability, pewter was made in 
America in large quantities. Pewterers, too, often 
marked their wares. These marks enable collectors to 
trace the origins and dates of particular pieces. Other 





Amethyst cologne bottle (1769-1774); 
The Toledo Museum of Art 


A glass bottle with a distinctive dia- 
mond and daisy pattern was made in the 
glass factory of Henry William Stiegel. 


Clock (about 1820) pokey made by Eli Terry or Seth 
Thomas; Shelburne Museum, Shelbume. Vt 


A shelf clock made in New England in 
the early 1800's had a scroll top and thin 
pillars on the sides. 


metal antiques include brass, copper, and wrought-iron 


household items. Painted tin called to/eware was popu- 


lar in the 1800's. Allison Eckardt Ledes 
Related articles in World Book include: 
Collectibles Furniture Lace Quilt 
Colonial life Glass (History Pewter Sampler 
in America of glass) Porcelain Stoneware 
Doll Jewelry Pottery Watch 
Folk art 


Additional resources 


Prisant, Carol. Antiques Roadshow Primer. Workman, 1999. 
Simpson, Mette T., and Huntley, Michael. Sothebys Caring for 
Antiques. 1992. Reprint Conran Octopus, 1996. 


Antirenters were a group of tenant farmers in New 
York who fought against paying rents to the landlords. 
The antirenters were active from 1839 to 1847. Most 
landlords inherited their property from ancestors of the 
1600's and 1700's. They lost feudal privileges in the Revo- 
lutionary War in America but still owned about 
1,800,000 acres (320,000 hectares) of land. Almost one- 
fourth of this land belonged to Kiliaen Van Rensselaer, a 
Dutch merchant 

Tenant families had lived on the land for generations. 
They felt it rightfully belonged to them. Sometimes they 
went for years without paying rent In 1839, the Van 
Rensselaer heirs tried to collect $400,000 in back rents. 
The angry farmers of Columbia and Delaware counties 
refused to pay the landlords and resisted attempts to 
take away their farms. They formed antirent societies. 
The Antirenters became so strong that they could easily 
defeat any political party that opposed them. In 1846, the 
Antirenters got the New York constitution amended in 
their favor. The farms were handed over to the tenants 
in 1847. Joan R Gundersen 

See also Patroon system. 
Anti-Semitism is prejudice against Jews. However, 
the term is misleading because the root word Semites 
properly refers to all people who speak Semitic lan- 
guages, including Arabs and some other non-Jewish 
peoples (see Semites). 











Since ancient times, the Jews have lived as a minority 
group in many countries. Both Christian and Muslim na- 
tions often persecuted Jews for not accepting the reli- 
gion of the majority. When economic or other condi- 
tions were bad, Jews were blamed for causing the 
troubles of society. 

During the Middle Ages, Jews in many European 
countries were forced to pay special taxes and to live in 
segregated areas called ghettos. Jews also were denied 
the right to own land and to enter certain occupations. 
Some countries even expelled many Jews. In 1492, for 
example, the Jews were driven out of Spain. 

Wilhelm Marr, a German author, coined the term anti- 
Semitism in the anti-Jewish pamphlet “The Victory of 
Jewry Over Germandom’ (1879). The new word indicated 
that many people had begun to discriminate against 
Jews on ethnic rather than religious grounds. In the late 
1800's and early 1900's, many Jews in Poland and Russia 
were killed in organized massacres called pogroms. A 
Jewish movement called Zionism developed partly in re- 
sponse to such persecution. The Zionists hoped to es- 
tablish an independent Jewish nation in Palestine, where 
Jews could escape anti-Semitism. See Zionism. 

In 1933, the Nazi dictator Adolf Hitler came to power 
in Germany and made anti-Semitism an official govern- 
ment policy. The German government stripped the Jews 
of their citizenship, seized their property, and sent thou- 
sands to concentration camps. By the end of World War 
Il in 1945, the Nazis had killed about 6 million Jews ina 
campaign of mass murder known as the Ho/ocaust 

Anti-Semitism still exists in many countries. In some 
countries, it affects government policies. For example, 
the government of Syria denies Jews the right to vote, 
and it restricts emigration by Jews. 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Yosef Levanon 


Concentration Ghetto Jews 
camp Hate crime Mein Kampf 
Genocide Holocaust Racism 


Additional! resources 


Finzi, Roberto. Anti-Semitism: From Its European Roots to the 
Holocaust. \nterlink Pub. Group, 1999. 

Kniesmeyer, Joke. Anti-Semitism, Past and Present N.Y. Univ. Pr., 
2000. 

Levin, Jack. The Violence of Hate: Confronting Racism, Anti-Semi- 
tism, and Other Forms of Bigotry. Allyn & Bacon, 2002. 

Zakim, Leonard P. Confronting Anti-Semitism. Ktav, 2000. 


Antiseptic is a substance that destroys or stops the 
growth of germs on living tissue. Antiseptics are applied 
to skin and mucous membranes to help prevent infec- 
tion. They must be strong enough to fight germs but 
mild enough not to irritate sensitive tissues. Antiseptics 
differ from disinfectants and antibiotics. Disinfectants 
are chemicals that destroy germs on nonliving objects. 
Antibiotics are drugs that treat infection after it occurs. 

Kinds of antiseptics. There are hundreds of antisep- 
tic products, including creams, mouthwashes, oint- 
ments, powders, shampoos, soaps, solutions, and 
sprays. Each type contains a germ-fighting chemical that 
carries out the antiseptic action. Such chemicals include 
alcohols, dyes, iodophors, mercurials, phenols, and sali- 
cylamides. The kinds and amounts of chemicals that are 
used depend chiefly on the type of product. 

The use of antiseptics. Physicians use special anti- 
septic cleansers to scrub their hands and to wash the 


Antitoxin 559 


patients skin before surgery. Doctors also spray serious 
wounds with antiseptics in order to keep them from be- 
coming infected. 

The germ-fighting chemicals in antiseptics can cause 
serious side effects. These effects include a rash or 
some other allergic reaction, or damage to the skin. But 
medical experts generally believe antiseptics are safe if 
used as directed by the manufacturer. In the United 
States, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), an 
agency of the federal government, regulates the manu- 
facture and sale of antiseptics. 

History. People used vinegar and wine as antiseptics 
as early as 2,500 years ago, long before the discovery 
that germs cause disease. Several hundred years ago, 
surgeons noticed that untreated battle wounds and sur- 
gical incisions quickly began to smell like rotting flesh. 
To prevent this odor, they treated the tissues with a vari- 
ety of substances that became known as antiseptics. The 
word comes from two Greek words— anti, meaning 
against, and sepsis, meaning decay. 

Through the centuries, a number of fluids and potions 
were used as antiseptics. In addition to vinegar and 
wine, they included brandy, mercury, pitch, tar, and tur- 
pentine. Some were powerful germ killers but would 
also harm living tissue. As a result, many patients were 
saved from infection but died from the treatment. 

During the mid-1800's, Ignaz P. Semmelweis, a Hun- 
garian physician, showed that a mild solution of lime 
chloride helped prevent infection during childbirth. 
Doctors who rinsed their hands in the solution kept in- 
fection from spreading among their patients. In the mid- 
1860's, Sir Joseph Lister, an English surgeon, pioneered 
the use of antiseptics in surgery. He used carbolic acid 
to help prevent infection in incisions. The work of Sem- 
melweis and Lister led to the creation of many mild but 
effective antiseptics. Some of these products, such as al- 
cohol and iodine, are still widely used. 

Christopher A. Rodowskas, Jr. 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Alcohol Lister, Sir Joseph 
Disinfectant Medicine (Antiseptic surgery) 
Hydrogen peroxide Semmelweis, Ignaz P. 
lodine 


Antislavery movement. See Abolition movement. 
Antitoxin, An tee TAHK sihn, is a substance made by 
living cells that counteracts illness caused by a toxin. 
Toxins are poisons produced by living organisms, such 
as bacteria. Doctors use antitoxins to treat diseases, in- 
cluding tetanus (lockjaw) and diphtheria. Antitoxins are a 
kind of antibody that can cure or prevent diseases or 
make them milder (see Immune system). 

Many commercial antitoxins come from animals, such 
as horses and rabbits. Toxin is injected into an animal's 
bloodstream, and the animal produces an antitoxin that 
circulates in its blood serum. A nonpoisonous, chemi- 
cally modified toxin called a toxoid is sometimes used to 
cause the body to produce antitoxin. The blood serum 
can be removed and then injected into patients. Most 
animal antitoxins are cheaper and easier to make than 
human antitoxins. However, animal antitoxins are less ef- 
fective and may cause bad reactions. 

Injected antitoxins usually do not make a patient per- 
manently immune (safe from disease). The antitoxins 
produced by the body when a person is exposed to a 








560 Antitrust laws 


particular toxin are the most effective. In addition, body 
tissues produce these antitoxins again in future poison- 
ings by the toxin. A reasonable concentration of the anti- 
toxin usually will prevent poisoning. Antitoxins that are 
produced by another person also are effective in neu- 
tralizing a toxin but do not give permanent protection. 
Permanent immunity can be stimulated in the body by 
injecting toxoids. Alan R Hinman 

See also Diphtheria (Treatment); Immunization; 
Serum; Tetanus; Toxin. 

Antitrust laws are designed to protect competition 
and consumers. They prohibit price fixing agreements, 
in which business firms agree on the price they will 
charge for products or services. They also outlaw merg- 
ers—that is, the joining of business firms—that interfere 
with competition. In addition, antitrust laws prohibit 
firms from using their economic power to gain or main- 
tain a monopoly. While the United States pioneered an- 
titrust laws, many other nations have adopted such laws, 
along with freer world trade policies. In the United 
States, both the federal government and state govern- 
ments have antitrust laws. This article discusses federal 
antitrust legislation. 

During the late 1800's, business leaders, such as John 
D. Rockefeller, bought up or stamped out many of their 
competitors. They then brought their surviving competi- 
tors under informal common control in organizations 
called trusts. The trusts limited production and raised 
prices. A public outcry against abuses by the trusts led 
to passage of the Sherman Antitrust Act in 1890. The act 
outlaws any contract, combination, or conspiracy in re- 
straint of trade. It also prohibits any person or business 
from monopolizing or trying to monopolize any market. 

During the early 1900's, the federal government sued 
and broke up existing oil, tobacco, and farm machinery 
trusts, as well as several others. But many companies 
continued to grow by merging with or buying compet- 
ing firms. Also, many businesses sought to eliminate 
competition by buying the stocks of their competitors 
and by forcing their customers to sign exclusive dealing 
contracts, or to buy goods they did not want, in order to 
acquire the goods they needed. Many of these practices 
were allowed by the courts. 

In 1914, Congress responded to these practices by 
passing two laws that gave support to the Sherman An- 
titrust Act. The Clayton Antitrust Act outlaws price dis- 
crimination that gives favored buyers an advantage over 
their competitors. It also forbids anticompetitive agree- 
ments in which manufacturers sell only to dealers who 
agree not to handle the products of a rival manufacturer. 
In addition, the act prohibits mergers that lessen com- 
petition. The Federal Trade Commission Act established 
the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). This government 
agency works to prevent unfair and anticompetitive 
business practices. 

Despite the Clayton Act and the Federal Trade Com- 
mission Act, companies continued to make anticompeti- 
tive mergers and acquisitions. The Celler-Kefauver Act 
of 1950 strengthened the Clayton Act by tightening con- 
trol over mergers that reduce competition. 

In 1998, the U.S. Justice Department, along with 18 
state attorneys general, filed an antitrust lawsuit against 
the Microsoft Corporation. The lawsuit charged that Mi- 
crosoft used anticompetitive practices to destroy its 





competitors in the computer industry. Following a 1999 
trial, a federal district court judge found that Microsoft 
had violated antitrust laws by abusing its monopoly in 
personal computer operating systems. In 2001, Mi- 
crosoft reached a proposed settlement with the Depart- 
ment of Justice and with nine of the state attorneys gen- 
eral. The settlement included measures to protect 
competition and consumer choice in the computer in- 
dustry. 

The late 1900's and early 2000's marked a lowering of 
trade barriers worldwide. As a result, opportunities for 
competition grew. But an increase in the number of 
large corporate mergers also occurred. Debate contin- 
ues over whether a successful global economy requires 
more or less antitrust control. Some people argue that 
business can best respond to consumer needs if left 
alone. Others feel that strict enforcement of antitrust 
laws is necessary to protect competition and con- 
sumefrs. Eleanor M. Fox 

See also Monopoly and competition (History). 
Antiviral drug is the term for a group of chemical 
compounds used to treat diseases caused by viruses. 
Antiviral drugs usually do not cure viral diseases but can 
shorten the duration of the disease and lessen the sever- 
ity of symptoms. But many antiviral drugs can cause side 
effects, such as anemia or kidney damage. 

Many viral diseases can be prevented by using vac- 
cines. But vaccines have not been developed for all viral 
diseases, and vaccines are not useful for treating people 
once they become ill. Other drugs, including antibiotics 
such as penicillin, have no effect on viruses. 

Viruses use substances in the cells of living organ- 
isms, called host cells, to manufacture enzymes and oth- 
er materials they need to reproduce. Antiviral drugs in- 
terfere with parts of the viral life cycle that are different 
from steps completed by the hosts. This allows drugs to 
attack viruses while not harming host cells. But since 
viruses rely on substances made by hosts to carry out 
many steps in their life cycles, the drugs can target only 
a few viral materials. Getting drugs into infected cells is 
also an obstacle. Despite these difficulties, researchers 
have developed many successful antiviral drugs. 

Many antiviral drugs are chemical compounds that 
bind to viral enzymes, changing the structure so the en- 
zymes cannot be used by the viruses. The drugs bind 
only to viral enzymes, while enzymes used by the host 
cell are not impaired. The virus, however, cannot repro- 
duce to infect other host cells. The progression of the 
disease is thus slowed or halted by the drugs. 

The first antiviral drugs were developed in the 1960's. 
One of the earliest, acyclovir, is widely used to treat in- 
fections of herpesviruses, a group of viruses that cause 
chickenpox, mononucleosis, shingles, and cold sores. 
This drug mimics a building block of the genetic materi- 
al DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) which herpesviruses 
need to reproduce. Viral enzymes mistakenly add this 
drug into a growing strand of DNA and stop its produc- 
tion. Acyclovir is given to patients by injection, as a pill, 
or in ointment applied to the skin. Other drugs, such as 
zanamivir, used to treat influenza, can be inhaled. Many 
antiviral drugs available today have been developed to 
treat HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. 

Scientists are developing new antiviral drugs as they 
learn more about the structure and life cycle of viruses. 





Researchers analyze the chemical structure of viral en- 
zymes and proteins. They use computers to design 
chemical compounds that will bind to the viruses with- 
out causing side effects in the host. Nelson M. Gantz 

See also AIDS (Treatments); Interferon; Virus. 
Antivivisection. See Animal experimentation. 
Antler. See Horn; Deer; Reindeer (picture). 
Antoinette, Marie. See Marie Antoinette. 
Antoninus Pius, 2n tuh NY nuhs PY uhs (A.D. 86-161), 
was Roman emperor from 138 until his death. He was 
open-minded and just, and his reign was probably the 
calmest period in Roman history. 

Antoninus was born into a rich and influential family. 
He had a distinguished senatorial career. He also admin- 
istered a court of appeals in Italy and served as procon- 
sul (governor) of the province of Asia in western Asia 
Minor. Antoninus’s legal experience, his wealth and rep- 
utation, and his popularity with the Senate influenced 
Emperor Hadrian to choose him as successor. As em- 
peror, Antoninus left what little fighting there was to his 
generals. He built the Antonine Wall in northern Britain, 
the empire's chief trouble spot. F.G.B. Millar 
Antonioni, ahn toh nee OH nee, Michelangelo, 
mee kehl AHN jehl oh (1912- ), is an Italian motion- 
picture director. He became noted for his method of 
emphasizing visual symbolism instead of the plot in mo- 
tion pictures. Antonioni's best films—LAvwventura (The 
Adventure, 1960) and La Notte (The Night, 1960)—con- 
cern people who have lost their purpose in life despite 
financial success. 

Antonioni was born on Sept. 29, 1912, in Ferrara. He 
was a film critic before becoming an assistant director 
and film writer. He first gained recognition when he 
made the dramatic film Chronicle of a Summer (1950). He 
then directed Le Amiche (The Girl Friends, 1955), The 
Eclipse (1962), and The Red Desert (1964). He achieved in- 
ternational acclaim with B/ow-Up (1966), his first English 
language film, and The Passenger (1975). Gene D. Phillips 
Antony, AN tuh nee, Mark (83?-30 B.C), a Roman gen- 
eral and statesman, served as co-ruler of Rome from 
43 B.C. until his death. Antony and Gaius Octavian be- 
came co-rulers with Marcus Lepidus after the death of 
the Roman ruler Julius Caesar. Antony later married 
Cleopatra, the queen of Egypt, and the two combined 
their military forces. Antony hoped to gain sole control 
of Rome. However, the forces of Antony and Cleopatra 
lost the decisive Battle of Actium in 31 B.C. 

Antony was born into an important Roman family. In 
54 B.C, he became a cavalry officer under Julius Caesar. 
In 48 B.C,, Antony helped Caesar defeat a rebel army led 
by Pompey the Great at the Battle of Pharsalus. 

In 44 B.C, Caesar was assassinated by a group of Ro- 
man aristocrats led by Marcus Brutus and Gaius Cassius 
Longinus. Antony succeeded Caesar as ruler of Rome. 
But in 43 B.C, Octavian, the grandnephew and adopted 
son of Caesar, challenged Antony's rule. Later that year, 
Antony agreed to become a co-ruler with Octavian and 
Lepidus (see Triumvirate). They later murdered many 
opponents in the Senate, a group of powerful govern- 
ment advisers. 

In 42 B.C, an army led by Antony and Octavian defeat- 
ed the army of Brutus and Cassius Longinus in two bat- 
tles at Philippi in Macedonia (now northern Greece). 
These victories were due largely to Antony's military 


Antwerp 561 


skill. Antony then claimed Rome's eastern provinces, 
leaving Italy and the western provinces to Octavian. 

In 41 B.C, Antony conferred with Cleopatra, whom he 
had met several years earlier in Rome. Antony wanted to 
gain sole control of Rome and hoped she would give 
him financial aid. They soon fell in love, and in 40 B.C, 
Cleopatra gave birth to twin sons by Antony. Later that 
year, however, Antony married Octavian’s sister Octavia 
in order to strengthen his political position in Rome. 

Antony left Octavia in 37 B.C. and soon married 
Cleopatra. Cleopatra had another child by Antony in 36 
B.C. In 34 B.C, Antony gave a number of Rome's eastern 
provinces to Cleopatra and their children. Octavian con- 
vinced many Romans that Antony had behaved unpatri- 
Otically. In 32 B.C, Octavian declared war on Antony. Oc- 
tavian’s naval forces defeated Antony and Cleopatra's 
combined fleets in the Battle of Actium off the west 
coast of Greece in 31 B.C. Antony and Cleopatra retreat- 
ed to Egypt. Soon afterward, Octavian pursued the cou- 
ple. They committed suicide in 30 B.C. shortly after Octa- 
vian reached Egypt. 

Antony's story is dramatized in the famous plays /u/ius 
Caesar (1599) and Antony and Cleopatra (1607) by 
William Shakespeare. Antony also appears as a charac- 
ter in John Dryden's play A// for Love (1677). 

William G. Sinnigen 

Related articles in World Book include: 

Actium, Battle of Cleopatra 


Augustus Octavia 
Caesar, Julius Pompey the Great 


Antonym, AN tuh nihm, is a word that has the oppo- 
site meaning of another word. For example, fast and 
slow are opposites and therefore antonyms. 

Words that mean the same or approximately the same 
as one another are called synonyms. Many dictionaries 
follow the definition of a word with a list of synonyms. 
Sometimes, a list of antonyms follows the synonyms. A 
special dictionary called a thesaurus provides lists of 
synonyms and antonyms. Sara Garnes 
Antwerp, ANT wuhrp (pop. 462,800), is Belgium's 
largest city and its main port. Antwerp is one of the ma- 
jor ports of Europe. It is called Antwerpen (pronounced 
AHNT velhr puhn) in Flemish and Anvers (pronounced 
ahn VEHR in French. 

Antwerp lies on the Schelde River, 55 miles (89 kilo- 
meters) from the North Sea (see Belgium [political map). 
Its waterways and railways serve all Belgium and indus- 
trial cities in Germany and France. 

Commerce and industry. The harbor at Antwerp is 
one of the world’s largest. Besides its vast trade, the city 
has many industries, among which are sugar refining, 
lacemaking, brewing, distilling, and shipbuilding. It is 
the world’s largest diamond-trading center. 

Chief buildings. Among the buildings that have been 
preserved from the early period of Antwerp’s greatness, 
the most important is the Cathedral of Notre Dame. The 
cathedral is the largest Gothic church in Belgium and of- 
ten considered the most beautiful. Its graceful tower ris- 
es over 400 feet (120 meters) above the flat surrounding 
plain. The cathedral is famous for artistic treasures, in- 
cluding masterpieces of Peter Paul Rubens. 

The town hall, of Renaissance architecture, was built 
in the 1500's. It contains many carvings, murals, and oth- 
er works of art. Antwerp has a picture gallery with a 


562 Anubis 


fine collection of Flemish paintings. The most famous 
are priceless works of Rubens and Van Dyck. The Plan- 
tin-Moretus, a museum, was the house and workshop of 
the great printer Plantin, and contains a historical collec- 
tion about early printing. The home of Rubens, which is 
also a museum, contains many of the artist's paintings. 

History. Antwerp began to attain prominence in the 
1400's, when it became a great port of trade between the 
European mainland and England. During the 1500's, 
Antwerp was one of the worlds richest cities and the 
chief money market of Europe. The first stock exchange 
was set up there in 1531. Antwerp reached the height of 
its prosperity about 1560, just before entering the strug- 
gle of the Netherlands to gain its freedom from Spain. 

Antwerp declined steadily until 1800, when its popula- 
tion was below 40,000. Napoleon, realizing its strategic 
and commercial value, decided to open and improve its 
harbor and to set it up as a rival to London. He consid- 
ered that Antwerp in the hands of a powerful enemy 
would be “a pistol held at the breast of England.” The 
trade of Antwerp began to grow rapidly, but this lasted 
only until 1830. Then Belgium separated from Holland. 
The Dutch, who controlled the Schelde estuary upon 
which Antwerp is located, imposed heavy tolls upon 
shipping. These tolls were abolished in 1863, and 
Antwerps trade at once began to grow. 

Antwerp was for a long time the key fortress in the na- 
tional defense of Belgium, and one of the strongest 
fortresses in Europe. But modern artillery enabled the 
Germans to capture and occupy Antwerp in World War 
| (1914-1918). In May 1940, during World War Il, German 
troops occupied the city. They mined the harbor, plan- 
ning to destroy the installations upon retreating. But dar- 
ing Belgian underground workers prevented the explo- 
sions when the Allies liberated Antwerp in September 
1944. The port helped Europe recover after the war. 

Aristide R. Zolberg 

See also Belgium (picture). 

Anubis, uh NOO bihs, was an important god of the un- 
derworld among the ancient Egyptians. His main center 
of worship was at Kynopolis, which means Dog Cityin 
Greek. Because the dog, or jackal, was his sacred ani- 
mal, Anubis is often represented in the form of a 
crouching dog or jackal. His functions were associated 
with those of Osiris, the chief god of the underworld, 
and with those of Thoth, another of Osiris’s assistants. It 
was Anubis’s duty to attend to the ritual preparation of 
bodies, to weigh the heart of every person on the scale 
of justice, and to judge a person's good and bad deeds 
on earth. See also Mythology (picture: The gods and 
goddesses); Osiris; Thoth. 
Anvers. See Antwerp. 
Anxiety, ang ZY uh tee, is a term used by mental health 
professionals to mean the same as fear or worry. Sig- 
mund Freud, the founder of psychoanalysis, showed 
that anxiety is a basic emotion that influences everyone's 
life from earliest childhood. This influence shapes the 
lives of people who are mentally healthy as well as those 
who are mentally ill. 

Excessive anxiety is a factor in both mild and severe 
mental illness. People with psychological disorders may 
experience a disruptive amount of anxiety in response to 
many real or imagined circumstances. When people 
dread or avoid particular objects or activities, such as 


Orval Wintermute 





spiders, flying, or being in high places, these special 
dreads are called phobias. Nancy C. Andreasen 

See also Benzodiazepine; Mental illness; Panic disor- 
der; Phobia. 

Anzio, AN zee oH or AHN see oun (pop. 33,497), is a 
small seaport and resort on the west coast of Italy (see 
Italy [political map]). In World War Il, American troops 
landed at Anzio and set up a beachhead after heavy 
fighting in January 1944. Anthony james Joes 

Aorta, ay AWR tuh, is the body's longest and largest 
artery. Its many branches distribute purified blood to all 
parts of the body. The first part of the aorta is the as- 
cending aorta. It rises from the left ventricle of the heart 
almost to the top of the breastbone. The aorta’s first 
branches are the coronary arteries, which supply blood 
to the heart. From near the top of the breastbone, the 
aorta arches backward and slightly to the left to form the 
arch of the aorta. Branches from the arch supply blood 
to the head and neck. The section after the arch, the de- 
scending aorta, passes downward through the chest and 
abdomen. It supplies the bones, organs, and muscles 
with blood. In the chest, or thorax, the aorta is called the 
thoracic aorta; in the abdomen, the abdominal aorta. At 
the hips, the aorta divides into two large arteries, the 
common iliac arteries, which carry blood to the pelvis 
and legs. Joseph V. Simone 

See also Human body (Trans-Vision three-dimension- 
al color picture); Heart (pictures); Aneurysm. 

Apache Indians, uh PACH ee, belong to any of about 
five tribes of the southwestern United States. According 
to the 2000 U.S. census, there are about 55,000 Apache. 
About 25,000 Apache live on reservations in Arizona and 
New Mexico. Apache tribes include the Jicarilla, the 
Mescalero, the San Carlos, and the White Mountain 
Apache. During the late 1800s, the Apache became 
known for their fierce resistance to U.S. government at- 
tempts to restrict them to reservations. 

The Apache once hunted game and gathered wild 
plants for food. They wore animal skins and lived in 
thatched houses or in tepees. These Indians became 
known as warlike because of their raids against early 
Spanish settlers and other Indian tribes in the area 

The Apache were placed on reservations in the 1870's 
after being defeated by the United States Army. Howev- 
er, several Apache bands fled from their reservations 
and resumed their raids. In 1885, Geronimo led the most 
famous outbreak from an Apache reservation. He sur- 
rendered in 1886. The Army imprisoned many peaceful 
Apache along with Geronimo and his followers. 

Today, many Apache work for tribal-owned lumber or 
cattle companies. The Jicarilla of New Mexico earn most 
of their income from mineral deposits on their reserva- 
tions. In 1982, the Supreme Court of the United States 
upheld the right of the Jicarilla to tax the production of 
oil and natural gas on their lands. Keith H. Basso 

See also Cochise; Geronimo; Indian, American (Indi- 
ans of the Southwest); Indian wars (Apache warfare). 


Additional resources 


Bial, Raymond. The Apache. Benchmark Bks., 2001. Younger 
readers. 

Roberts, David. Once They Moved like the Wind: Cochise, 
Geronimo, and the Apache Wars. Simon & Schuster, 1993. 

Tiller, Veronica E. V. The jicarilla Apache Tribe. Rev. ed. 1992. 
Reprint. Univ. of N. Mex. Pr., 2000. 








Apartheid, ah PAHRT hayt or ah PAHRT hyt, was, from 
1948 until 1991, the South African government's policy 
of rigid racial segregation. The word apartheid means 
separateness in Afrikaans, one of South Africa's official 
languages. 

Built on earlier South African laws and customs, 
apartheid classified every South African by race as ei- 
ther (1) black, (2) white, (3) Colored (mixed race), or (4) 
Asian. Apartheid required segregation in housing, edu- 
cation, employment, public accommodations, and trans- 
portation. It segregated not only almost all whites from 
nonwhites but also major nonwhite groups from each 
other. It also limited the rights of nonwhites to own and 
occupy land, and to enter white neighborhoods. 

The South African government tried to justify apart- 
heid by claiming that peaceful coexistence of the races 
was possible only if the races were separated from one 
another. However, white South Africans used apartheid 
chiefly as a way to control the vast nonwhite majority. 

Most South Africans strongly opposed apartheid. 
Leading opposition groups included the African Nation- 
al Congress (ANC). Most ANC members were blacks. Be- 
tween 1948 and 1991, large numbers of people protest- 
ed apartheid by staging boycotts, demonstrations, and 
strikes. Violence often broke out, and thousands of peo- 
ple, most of them blacks, were killed. 

Many countries also opposed apartheid. As a result, 
South Africa grew increasingly isolated in the world 
community. In 1962, the United Nations General Assem- 
bly urged its members to break diplomatic and econom- 
ic ties with South Africa until apartheid was abolished. 
During the 1980's, a widespread economic boycott of 
South Africa took hold. In response to domestic and in- 
ternational pressure, South Africa began repealing 
apartheid laws in the 1970's and 1980's. Finally, in 1991, 
the government repealed the last of the laws that 
formed the legal basis of apartheid. 

But apartheid’s effects continued even after the laws 
were repealed. Today, many blacks and other nonwhites 
continue to face unofficial segregation and discrimina- 
tion in South Africa. Thomas F. Pettigrew 

See also African National Congress; Biko, Steve; 
South Africa (History). 

Apatosaurus, uh pat oh SAWR uhs or AP uh toh 
SAWR uhs, was a giant, plant-eating dinosaur that lived 
about 150 million years ago in what is now the Western 
United States. It belonged to a group of huge, long- 
necked, long-tailed dinosaurs called sauropods. 

Apatosaurus was about 70 feet (21 meters) long, stood 
about 15 feet (4.6 meters) high at the hips, and weighed 
about 33 tons (30 metric tons). It had long, thin teeth and 
may have eaten tree leaves and ferns. Its nostrils were 
on top of its relatively small, slender head. The neck was 
about 20 feet (6 meters) long. The animal's straight, thick 
legs ended in broad feet, and the inner toe of each foot 
had a blunt claw. The front legs were shorter than the 
hind legs, and so the body sloped down from the hips 
to the neck. The tail extended about 30 feet (9 meters) 
and ended in a slender point. 

Apatosaurus is the official name for this dinosaur, but 
itis also known as Brontosaurus. The American scientist 
Othniel C. Marsh, a pioneer in pa/eonto/ogy (the study of 
prehistoric life), first discovered an incomplete skeleton 
of this dinosaur in 1877. He named it Apatosaurus. Two 


Ape 563 


years later, scientists found a more complete skeleton, 
which Marsh mistakenly believed to be a new type of di- 
nosaur. He named it Brontosaurus, meaning thunder liz- 
ard, because of the noise that such a large animal must 
have made when it walked. But scientists soon realized 
that these two dinosaurs were the same, and so the first 
name, Apatosaurus, became the formally accepted 
name. Peter Dodson 

See also Dinosaur (picture: When dinosaurs lived). 
Ape is a member of the group of animals that most 
closely resemble human beings. There are five main 
kinds of apes—bonobos, chimpanzees, gibbons, goril- 
las, and orangutans. All these animals have hairy, tailless 
bodies; longer arms than legs; and long fingers and 
toes. They also have large brains and rank as the most 
intelligent animals next to human beings. 

Most scientists believe apes and human beings devel- 
oped from a common ancestor. Apes resemble humans 
in body structure more than any other animals do. For 
example, they have similar bones, muscles, and organs. 
But human beings also differ from apes in many ways. 
Humans walk on two legs and have longer legs and less 
body hair than apes. They also have a larger brain than 
apes. For more information on human beings and apes, 
see Human being (Physical characteristics). 

Scientists divide the apes into two groups, based 
chiefly on size. Gibbons, the smallest apes, are called 
lesser apes. Bonobos, chimpanzees, gorillas, and orang- 
utans are called great apes. Gorillas are the largest, fol- 
lowed by orangutans, chimpanzees, and bonobos. 

Differences between apes and monkeys. Many 
people confuse apes with monkeys, but the two groups 
of animals differ in many ways. Most monkeys have tails 
and seem less intelligent. The great apes are much 
larger and have longer fingers and toes. Apes are skillful 
tree climbers. On the ground, bonobos, chimpanzees, 
and gorillas walk in a semiupright posture, supporting 
the front part of their bodies on their knuckles. Orang- 
utans walk infrequently on the ground, but when they 
do they support themselves on their fists. Gibbons 
spend almost all their time in trees but often walk on 
two legs on branches. By contrast, monkeys run and 
jump on all fours, both in trees and on the ground. 

Way of life. Apes live in tropical Africa and Asia. All 
apes except gorillas eat mostly fruit. Gorillas eat mainly 
ground plants, such as wild celery and bamboo shoots. 

Gibbons live in the tropical forests of Southeast Asia. 
They spend much time hanging from tree branches or 
swinging from branch to branch. Gibbons form family 
groups of a male and a female and their young. 

Chimpanzees live in a wide range of habitats through- 
out Africa. They are found in rain forests as well as dry 
grasslands, and live in trees and on the ground. Chim- 
panzee groups may vary from 10 to over 50 members. 
Often, the females leave their group and join another. 

Bonobos, also called pygmy chimpanzees, resemble 
chimpanzees but are more slender. Bonobos inhabit a 
section of rain forest in Congo (Kinshasa). Like chimpan- 
zees, they live both in trees and on the ground. Bonobo 
groups normally contain 7 to 10 individuals, including 
both males and females. 

Gorillas live in the lowland forests of western and 
central Africa and in the mountain forests of eastern Af- 
rica. Large males often sleep on the ground, but females 








564 Apelles 


The five types of apes 


There are five major kinds of apes: gorillas, bonobos, chimpanzees, gibbons, and orangutans. 


Gorillas, bonobos, chimpanzees, and orangutans are known as great apes. Gibbons, the smallest 
apes, are called /esser apes. These illustrations include average weight figures for adult males. 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by James Teason 
WORLD BOOK illustration (Bonobo) by Robin Bouttell, Wildlife Act Ltd 


Hylobates lar 
Weight about 13 pound 


Gorilla Bonobo 
Gorilla gorilla 
Weight. about 450 


pounds (204 kilograms) 


Pan paniscus 
Weight: about 100 
pounds (45 kilograms) 


and the young sleep in trees. Gorillas travel in groups of 
up to 20 individuals. Older males develop a patch of 
white or silvery hair on their backs and are called si/ver- 
backs. One of these males leads each group. 

Orangutans live in the tropical forests of Borneo and 
Sumatra. They spend most of the time in trees, though 
large males are often seen on the ground. Orangutans 
usually travel alone, but a female and her offspring trav- 
el together. 

The number of apes is decreasing because people 
hunt them for food and for pets and to sell to zoos and 
research centers. In addition, roads, farms, and the for- 
est industry have destroyed much of the forests where 
apes once lived. Randall L. Susman 

Scientific classification. Apes belong to the order Primates. 
rhe great apes make up the family Pongidae. Gibbons make up 
the family Hylobatidae. Bonobos and chimpanzees are in the 
genus Fan, gorillas are genus Gori//a, and orangutans are genus 


Pongo. Gibbons belong to the genus Hylobates, except for the 
siamang, which is genus Symphalangus. 


See also Bonobo; Chimpanzee; Gibbon; Gorilla; 
Orangutan. 
Apelles, uh PEHL eez, was one of the most famous an- 
cient Greek painters. He lived during the 300’s B.C. Al- 
though none of his paintings has survived, their subjects 
are known from ancient authors who praised the artist 
for the amazing realism of his work. Apelles was court 
painter to Philip Il and Alexander the Great of Macedo- 
nia. Apelles painted a portrait of Philip and another of 
Alexander holding a thunderbolt. Apelles was also fa- 
mous for his painting ot the goddess Aphrodite rising 
from the sea. 
Apennine Tunnel, AP wh wy, is a train tunnel on the 
Florence-Bologna railroad line in north-central Italy. The 
tunnel runs through the mountain range called the 
Apennines. Its 11 3 -mile (18.5-kilometer) length makes it 


Marjorie S. Venit 


Gibbon (Lar gibbon) 


(6 kilograms) = 


ay 












Chimpanzee 

Pan troglodytes 
Weight about 110 
pounds (50 kilograms) 


Orangutan 

Pongo pygmaeus 
Weight. about 180 
pounds (82 kilograms) 


one of the longest train tunnels in the world. The tunnel 
was built between 1920 and 1934. Herbert H. Einstein 
Apennines, AP uf nynz, is a mountain range in Italy 
that extends from the Gulf of Genoa to the Strait of Mes- 
sina, about 840 miles (1,350 kilometers). The range varies 
from about 25 to 80 miles (40 to 130 kilometers) in width. 
The mountains have been worn down by wind and rain 
for millions of years and are among the lowest in Eu- 
rope. Corno Grande, the highest peak, rises 9,554 feet 
(2,912 meters). Vesuvius, a famous peak, is the only ac- 
tive volcano in mainland Europe. Many types of vegeta- 
tion grow in the Apennines. Shrubs and rough pastures 
grow above about 6,000 feet (1,800 meters). Below them 
are forests of beech, chestnut, conifers, and oak. Olive 
groves and farms spread across the lowest elevations. 
The mountains consist mainly of limestone and marble. 
Quarries near Carrara are noted for their marble. See 
also Italy (The Apennines; terrain map). Howell C. Lloyd 
Apgar, Virginia (1909-1974), was an American physi- 
cian who developed a system for evaluating the physical 
condition of a baby immediately after birth. The system, 
known as the Apgar score, assigns a numerical score to 
five vital functions measured one and five minutes after 
birth. Doctors worldwide use the score to determine the 
short-term health care needs of newborn babies. 

Apgar was born in Westfield, New Jersey. She studied 
zoology, chemistry, and physiology at Mount Holyoke 
College in Massachusetts, graduating in 1929. She stud- 
ied medicine at Columbia University, receiving her M.D. 
in 1933. Apgar specialized in anesthesiology, a branch of 
medicine that deals with the administration of drugs for 
the relief of pain, especially during surgery. In 1938, she 
was appointed the first director of anesthesiology at Co- 
lumbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York City. In 
1949, she became the first female professor at Colum- 
bias College of Physicians and Surgeons. That same 





year, she began to study the use of anesthesia during 
childbirth. This research led to the development of the 
Apgar score, introduced in 1952. 

In 1959, Apgar joined the National Foundation-March 
of Dimes {now the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foun- 
dation), where she helped raise public support and 
funds for research on birth defects. She coauthored /s 
My Baby All Right?(1972), which dealt with birth defects. 

See also Apgar score. 

Apgar score is a system for evaluating the physical 
condition of a baby immediately after birth. An Apgar 
score is given to most babies born in the United States 
and to newborns in many other parts of the world. The 
score measures five vital functions: {1) appearance (skin 
color), {2) pulse (heart rate), (3) grimace {reflex response), 
(4) activity (muscle tone), and (5) respiration. The first let- 
ters of these functions form the word Apgar. The Apgar 
score is obtained at one minute and, in most cases, at 
five minutes after birth. 

A newborn baby can score from a low value of 0 to a 
normal value of 2 for each function. The scores are then 
added, for a maximum total of 10. A baby who scores 7 
or higher receives routine care. A score of less than 7 in- 
dicates that the baby may need emergency respiratory 
treatment to survive. In such cases, the five-minute score 
can demonstrate the success of the treatment. If the five- 
minute score remains below 7, the doctor may continue 
treatment and retest the baby every five minutes until a 
score of 7 or higher is obtained. 

Doctors use the Apgar score with other measures of a 
newborns condition to help predict the baby’s short- 
term health prospects. The Apgar score was developed 
by the American physician Virginia Apgar and intro- 
duced in 1952. Gerald B. Merenstein 

See also Apgar, Virginia. 

Aphasia, uh FAY zhuh, is the loss or partial loss of the 
ability to use and understand spoken and written lan- 
guage. It results from damage to the language centers 
of the brain. Many cases result from a stroke, which oc- 
curs when part of the brain does not receive sufficient 
oxygen-carrying blood. Aphasia also may result from a 
brain tumor, an infection, or a blow to the head. 

Aphasia may affect some types of communication 
more than others, depending on the site and extent of 
the brain injury. Most people with aphasia have difficul- 
ty reading, writing, speaking, and understanding words 
and sentences. Their ability to use numbers and ges- 
tures also may be impaired. Some types of aphasia may 
affect only reading or writing. People with such reading 
disabilities as a/exia and dys/exia can see written materi- 
al but cannot read it People with agraphia cannot write 
even though their fingers and hands are undamaged. 

Two speech disorders, dysarthria and apraxia, are of- 
ten associated with aphasia. Dysarthria results from 
damage to the nerves that control the muscles used for 
speech, such as the tongue. In patients with this disor- 
der, speech sounds are slurred. Patients with apraxia 
have forgotten how to make certain sounds though they 
may have normal use of the speech muscles. 

Some aphasia patients can regain part or most of their 
ability to understand language. Working with speech- 
language pathologists can help most patients. But if no 
improvement occurs within several months, complete 
recovery is unlikely. Russell L Malone 


Aphrodite 565 


See also Brain {In the 
use of language). 

Aphid, AY fihd or AF ihd, 
also called plant louse, is a 
tiny, soft-bodied insect 
that feeds on plant juices. 
Many kinds of aphids are 
harmful to gardens, or- 
chards, and farm crops. 
They have plump bodies, 
small heads, and mouths 
shaped into tubes. They 
use the tubes to pierce 
plant stems or leaves and 
feed on the juices. Aphids 
may be green, black, whitish, or other colors. Many 
aphids have four wings. Others are wingless. 

Most kinds of aphids produce a sweet fluid called 
honeydew. This fluid is one of the favorite foods of the 
ant. The ant licks up the honeydew as it pours out of 
tube-shaped organs called cornicles at the tip of the 
aphid’s body. In order to have plenty of honeydew, ants 
take good care of some kinds of aphids. They move the 
aphids from one plant to another and may infest an en- 
tire garden. 

Aphids multiply very rapidly. The males and females 
mate in the fall. The females lay fertilized eggs that hatch 
the next spring. These young do not mate and lay eggs. 
They give birth to living young hatched from unfertilized 
eggs within their bodies. During summer, many genera- 
tions of fatherless aphids are born by this process, 
called parthenogenesis. \n fall, adult males and females 
appear, and the life process repeats. Spiders, ladybugs, 
and lacewings prey on aphids. Candace Martinson 

Scientific classification. Aphids are in the order Hemiptera 
and the aphid family, Aphidae. 

See also Ant (Dairying ants); Mosaic disease; Phyllox- 
era; Whitefly. 

Aphrodite, 4F roh DY tee, was a major Greek goddess. 
She was the Greek version of an Asian goddess of life 
similar to Astarte. Many artists and poets have restricted 
Aphrodite's role to goddess of love and beauty, but her 
functions in ancient Greece were varied and complex. 
The Greeks worshiped Aphrodite as a universal god- 
dess called Urania {queen of heaven) and as a goddess 
of civic life called Pandemos (goddess of all people). In 
some parts of Greece, Aphrodite was considered a god- 
dess of seafaring and warfare. She was also associated 
with the myths and ceremonies surrounding Adonis, a 
fertility god who died and was reborn annually. Many 
myths report that she instigated human love affairs. The 
Roman goddess Venus was identified with Aphrodite. 

In the works attributed to the Greek poet Homer, 
Aphrodite was the daughter of the goddess Dione and 
Zeus, the king of the gods. In earlier myths, Aphrodite 
rose full-grown from sea foam. The name Aphrodite 
may come from aphros, the Greek word for foam. 

According to Homer, Aphrodite was married to Hep- 
haestus, the blacksmith of the gods. But many stories 
give her other lovers, including Ares, the god of war, 
and the Trojan prince Anchises. In later myths, she was 
the mother of Eros, the god of love. F. Carter Philips 

See also Venus; Hephaestus; Mythology (Greek di- 
vinities); Adonis; Ares; Astarte. 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Shirley 
Hooper, Oxford Illustrators Limited 


Aphid 


566 Apia 


Apia, ah PEE ah or AH pee Ax (pop. 36,000), is the capi- 
tal of Samoa. It lies on the northern coast of Upolu Is- 
land (see Samoa [map)). Apia is the countrys commer- 
cial center and only port. It is the headquarters for a 
shipping line that serves the South Pacific region. Au- 
thor Robert Louis Stevenson is buried on nearby Mount 
Vaea. His last home, built on a hill overlooking Apia, is 
now the official residence of the countrys head of state. 

Robert C Kiste 
Apnea. See Sleep apnea. 

Apocalypse. See Revelation, Book of. 

Apocrypha. See Bible (Development of the Christian 
Old Testament). 

Apollinaire, 2 paw /ee NA/K, Guillaume, gee 

YOHM (1880-1918), a French poet, was a leader in the 
arts in Paris during the decade before World War | 
(1914-1918). Apollinaire experimented with new literary 
techniques and crusaded for early abstract painting and 
for the Cubism movement in art. 

Apollinaire was born in Rome. He traveled and read 
widely, and his work suggests many different times, 
places, legends, and people. He often used images of 
rootlessness along with a robust fantasy and a sense of 
wonder at the many discoveries of his time. While re- 
maining highly individual, his poetry covers a wide 
range of styles and moods. The love poetry of his first 
major collection, A/cools (1913), is memorable for its 
delicacy and richness in expressing disappointment in 
love and sorrow at the passing of time. His second vol- 
ume, Calligrammes (1918), published shortly before his 
sudden death, contains war poems and a number of 
highly original compositions. In some of them, words 
are arranged typographically as pictures. 

Jean-Pierre Cauvin 
Apollo, uh PAHL of, was a major god in Greek mythol- 
ogy. He was the son of Zeus, the king of the gods, and 
the goddess Leto. The goddess Artemis was Apollo's 
twin. 

Apollo probably originated in Asia Minor (now Tur- 
key). At one time, he was known as a god of shepherds. 
Apollo also became associated with archery, healing, 
music, poetry, prophecy, purification, and seafaring. Un- 
der the name Phoebus Apollo, he became the god of 
light. He was also considered the god of the sun. Only 
Zeus was more widely worshiped than Apollo. 

Apollo killed a dragon named Python at Delphi and 
established his temple there. The Greeks believed Apol- 
lo foretold the future through an orac/e (prophet) at Del- 
phi. Temple priests asked questions of this oracle, an el- 
derly woman named the Pythia, who responded in the 
words of Apollo. The priests interpreted her responses. 
Delphi became the greatest of Apollo's many oracles 
throughout the ancient world. See Delphi; Oracle. 

The Greeks sometimes blamed Apollo and Artemis 
for sudden deaths. They killed the children of Niobe, 
queen of Thebes, who had boasted that she had more 
children and was superior to Leto (see Niobe). 

Apollo was unsuccessful in many of his love affairs. 
For example, he loved the nymph Daphne, but she fled 
from him. When Apollo was finally about to catch her, 
Daphne called out tor help and was changed into a lau- 
rel tree (see Daphne: Apollo also loved Coronis, a mor- 
tal woman. But Coronis was unfaithful, and either Apollo 
or Artemis killed her and her lover 





The Romans worshiped Apollo primarily as a god of 
healing and prophecy. His influence increased when the 
Roman emperor Augustus made him his patron (protec- 
tor). In art, Apollo is depicted as a beardless young man, 
the Greek ideal of male beauty. He is often shown with a 
bow or lyre. F. Caner Philips 

See also Artemis; Asclepius; Cassandra; Midas. 
Apollo program. See Space exploration (Apollo: 
Mission to the moon; Other moon landings). 

Aponte Martinez, ah POHN tay mahr TEE nays, Luis 
Cardinal, /oo EES (1922- ), archbishop of San Juan, 
became the first Puerto Rican cardinal of the Roman 
Catholic Church. Pope Paul VI appointed him a cardinal 
in 1973. Aponte Martinez was born in Lajas, Puerto Rico, 
and was ordained a priest in 1950. In 1960, he was or- 
dained a bishop and became auxiliary bishop of Ponce, 
Puerto Rico. Aponte Martinez was named archbishop of 
San Juan in 1964. Kenneth Guentert 

Apostlebird, is a quick-moving, gray or black bird 
about 12 inches (30 centimeters) long. It is native to Aus- 
tralia, where it roams woodlands, eating insects and 
seeds. Apostlebirds travel in groups of about 12 and 
were named after the 12 Biblical apostles. 

Bertin W. Anderson 

Scientific classification. The apostlebird belongs to the fam- 
ily Grallinidae. Its scientific name is Struthidea cinerea. 
Apostles, in the New Testament, are the 12 men cho- 
sen by Jesus Christ to be His close companions. The 
term is also used to identify other early missionaries, 
such as Paul and Barnabas. The word is used once in the 
Bible to refer to Jesus Himself. The term apostle should 
be distinguished from disciple, a New Testament term 
for any follower of Jesus. 

There are four lists of the 12 apostles in the New Tes- 
tament. The lists agree on Peter (also called Simon Pe- 
ter), Andrew, James, John, Philip, Bartholomew, Thomas, 
Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon, and Judas 
Iscariot The gospels of Matthew and Mark list Thad- 
deus, while the gospel of Luke and Acts of the Apostles 
list Judas the son of James (or the brother of James in 
some versions of the Bible). After Judas Iscariot killed 
himself for betraying Jesus, Matthias was chosen to take 
his place among the 12. This story, told in Acts 1: 21-26, 
states that an apostle must have accompanied Jesus 
from the time of Jesus's Baptism until His Ascension into 
heaven. Richard A. Edwards 

There is a separate article in World Book for each 
apostle. See also Acts of the Apostles; Barnabas; Jesus 
Christ; Paul, Saint. 

Apostles’ Creed is a statement of the main Western 
Christian beliefs. It contains three sections, dealing with 
God the Father, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit. Both 
Roman Catholic and Protestant churches use it today. 
Here is the basic Catholic form of the Apostles’ Creed: 


! believe in God, the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and 
earth; and in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord; who was con- 
ceived by the Holy Spirit, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered un- 
der Pontius Pilate, was crucified, died, and was buried. He de- 
scended into hell; the third day He rose again from the dead; He 
ascended into heaven; sits at the right hand of God, the Father 
Almighty; from thence He shall come to judge the living and the 
dead. | believe in the Holy Spirit, the holy Catholic Church, the 
communion of saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of 
the body, and lite everlasting. Amen. 


The Protestant form generally substitutes the word 
Maker for Creator and uses catholic or Christian instead 
of Catholic. 

The earliest version of the Apostles’ Creed can be 
traced back to the A.D. 100s. A legend arose stating that 
the creed was composed by the 12 apostles, but this has 
not been proven. It is more likely that the creed simply 
grew out of the life of the Christian church. The creed 
probably was derived from an earlier Roman Creed, 
which was a baptismal confession. Richard L Schebera 
Apostolic succession. See Bishop. 

Apostrophe. See Punctuation. 

Apothecaries’ weight, uh PAHTH uh kenr e€7z, is a 
system of weights once widely used by druggists for 
prescriptions. The metric system has replaced it. Apoth- 
ecaries weight divides the pound into 12 ounces, the 
ounce into 8 drams, the dram into 3 scruples, and the 
scruple into 20 grains. In the apothecaries’ system, 5,760 
grains make 1 pound (0.373 kilogram) and 480 grains 
make 1 ounce (31 grams). See also Metric system; 
Ounce; Pound; Weights and measures. Leland F. Webb 
Apothecary. See Pharmacy. 

Appalachian Mountains, 4P uh LAY chuhn or ar uh 
LACH uhn, are the second largest mountain system of 
North America. Only the Rocky Mountain system is 
larger. The Appalachians extend about 1,500 miles (2,400 
kilometers) between the Gaspé Peninsula in the Cana- 
dian province of Quebec and Birmingham, in central Al- 
abama. The valleys of these mountains include impor- 
tant agricultural and recreational regions. The Appa- 
lachians are also a major source of mineral deposits. 


Appalachian AE 
Mountains = 


The Appalachian system ex- a) 
tends about 1,500 miles {2,400 Pa | 
kilometers) across eastern or ak Oe 
North America, between cen- nn 
tral Alabama and the Gaspé 

Peninsula in Canada. The re- 

gion includes important agri- J 
cultural and mining areas and Ff 
offers many recreational op- 
portunities. 


WC hicagaA f 


i 


cai National Park (N.P.) 


Internationol boundory 





State or provinciol 
boundary 


Appalachian 
Notionol Scenic Trail 


City 
Mauntain peak 


Wind or woter gop 





300 Miles 


300 Kilometers 


WORLD BOOK map 


Appalachian Mountains 567 


The Appalachian Mountains were formed between 
about 435 million and 250 million years ago. The Appala- 
chians are the oldest mountains in North America. The 
name Appalachian comes from the Apalachee Indians. 

Physical features. The chief ranges of the northern 
Appalachians include the Notre Dame Mountains in 
Quebec, the White Mountains in New Hampshire, the 
Green Mountains in Vermont, and the Catskill Moun- 
tains in New York. 

Southwest of the Hudson River, the Appalachians are 
divided into three main sections—the Blue Ridge, the 
Great Valley, and the Ridge-and-Valley Province. The 
Blue Ridge has most of the Appalachians’ tallest moun- 
tains, including the tallest, Mount Mitchell. This peak 
rises 6,684 feet (2,037 meters) near Asheville, N.C. 

North of Virginia, the Blue Ridge Mountains are sepa- 
rated into small sections by major valleys called water 
gaps and wind gaps. A water gap, such as the Delaware 
Water Gap in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, is a valley 
that has a river flowing through it. A wind gap is a dry 
valley. An example of a wind gap is the Cumberland Gap 
on the borders of Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginia. 

Immediately west of the Blue Ridge is the Great 
Valley, which extends from the Hudson River Valley to 
Alabama. The Great Valley includes the Cumberland, 
Lebanon, and Lehigh valleys in Pennsylvania; the Cum- 
berland Valley in Maryland; the Shenandoah Valley and 
the Valley of Virginia in Virginia; the Valley of East Ten- 
nessee; and the Coosa River Valley in Alabama. 

West of the Great Valley is the Ridge-and-Valley Prov- 
ince, which consists of long, sharp ridges separated by 









, a 
: 
ie 
ail * 
a | Vie 


‘ 


. 
cae QueBEg 





Pe 





568 Appalachian National Scenic Trail 


narrow valleys. It is bordered on the west by the Cum- 
berland and Allegheny mountains. North of central Vir- 
ginia, the Alleghenies in the north and the Blue Ridge 
and Great Smoky mountains in the south make the Ap- 
palachians one of the great divides of North America. 
This region separates rivers that empty into the Atlantic 
Ocean from those flowing into the Gulf of Mexico. 

Economic importance. Thousands of people in the 
Appalachians make their living in farming or mining. 
Farmers in the southern sections grow corn and to- 
bacco and raise poultry. In the northern part of the Ap- 
palachians, the chief valley products are apples, barley, 
dairy foods, hay, potatoes, and wheat. Trees from the re- 
gion, including hickories, maples, and oaks, are shipped 
to furniture makers in Hickory and High Point, N.C Coal 
deposits cover about 50,000 square miles (130,000 
square kilometers) in the Appalachians in Alabama, Ken- 
tucky, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and West Virginia. 

Recreation and wildlife. Rivers, lakes, and state and 
national parks provide a wide range of recreational op- 
portunities in the Appalachians. During the winter, ski- 
ers from many states come to the northern Appala- 
chians. Throughout the summer and fall, hikers walk 
along the Appalachian National Scenic Trail, the nation’s 
longest marked footpath. This trail extends about 2,000 
miles (3,200 kilometers} between Mount Katahdin in 
Maine and Springer Mountain in Georgia. 

Many large mammals, including bears, bobcats, and 
deer, live in the Appalachians. Smaller mammals, such 
as raccoons and skunks, and reptiles are also plentiful. 

A type of pollution called acid rain threatens wildlife 
in the region. Appalachian soils and lakes are naturally 
highly acidic because of the kinds of vegetation and 
bedrock \solid rock beneath the soil) found there. This 
acidic environment has been compounded by rain car- 
rying sulfuric and nitric acid, which can harm plants and 
fish. The region is more seriously affected by acid rain 
than any other area in North America. 

History. The Appalachians were formed between 
about 435 million and 250 million years ago by a folding 
in the earth’s crust. During the late 1700's, pioneers fol- 
lowed the Great Valley southward through the Appala- 
chians to the Cumberland Gap and the Wilderness 
Road. Railroads began to transport settlers across the 
mountains in the 1840s. In 1933, Congress created the 
Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) to control flooding 
and provide electric power to the southern Appala- 
chians. The TVA has built dams and power plants and 
has planted forests to halt soil erosion. 

John Edwin Coffman 


Related articles in World Book include: 

Allegheny Mountains Cumberland Mountains 
Appalachian National Scenic Great Smoky Mountains 

Trail Green Mountains 
Blue Ridge Mountains Mount Washington 
Catskill Mountains White Mountains 
Clingmans Dome Wilderness Road 
Cumberland Gap 
Appalachian National Scenic Trail, ar uh LAY 
chuhn or AP uh LACH uhn, is a footpath that extends 
about 2,000 miles (3,200 kilometers) from Mt. Katahdin in 
Maine to Springer Mountain in Georgia. The trail passes 
through 14 states, 2 national parks, and 8 national for- 
ests. It follows the crests of the White and Green moun- 
tains and the Berkshires of New England, the Blue Ridge 





Mountains from Pennsylvania to North Carolina, and the 
Unakas and Great Smokies of North Carolina. The trail 
became a part of the National Park System in 1968. 

Critically reviewed by the Natianal Park Service 
Appaloosa. See Horse (Color types; picture). 
Appeal is the transfer of a legal action to a higher, or 
superior, court for review. The court may review the de- 
cision of a lower, or inferior, court; a government 
board; or the officer of an administrative hearing. The 
appellant (person who appeals) seeks to have the deci- 
sion of the board, officer, or lower court reversed or 
modified. Usually, a dissatisfied party to a suit must file a 
notice of appeal with the court within a specified time 
and show a reason why the appeal should be granted. 
The discovery of new evidence or of an error in the trial 
or hearing are reasons often given for seeking an ap- 
peal. But there is an absolute right of appeal in most 
criminal cases. Many states also provide for an auto- 
matic appeal in criminal cases where a death sentence 
has been imposed. 

Every state has at least one court to which appeals 
may be taken from trial courts. The federal court system 
includes 13 Courts of Appeals to review cases tried in 
lower federal courts. In some cases, the Supreme Court 
of the United States considers and reverses cases de- 
cided by a Court of Appeals or by a state supreme court. 

A party in a state court action cannot appeal directly 
to the U.S. Supreme Court. He or she can only ask that 
court for a writ of certiorari. A writ of certiorari is an 
order from a higher court to a lower court to send up 
the records of a case for review (see Certiorari, Writ of). 
The court can refuse such an ‘appeal’ unless it feels 
there has been a violation of federal law or of the party's 
constitutional rights. Jack M. Kress 

See also Bonding; Court of appeals. 

Appellate court. See Court (Trial and appellate 
courts); Trial (The criminal defendant's rights). 
Appendicitis, uh Penn duh SY tihs, is an inflammation 
of the vermiform appendix (see Appendix). It results 
from an infection caused by bacteria. The appendix be- 
comes swollen and fills with pus. The pus may be 
walled off and form an abscess. Or the appendix may 
break, allowing the infection to spread to surrounding 
body organs. It may also cause peritonitis, an inflamma- 
tion of the membrane that lines the abdominal cavity 
(see Peritonitis). 

Symptoms. An attack of appendicitis usually begins 
with pain in the region of the navel. Then it moves to the 
right lower side of the abdomen. At first the pain is not 
constant—it comes and goes. But soon it becomes con- 
tinuous, and soreness develops over the appendix re- 
gion. The abdominal muscles tighten, and the patient 
becomes nauseated and usually has a fever. A blood 
count shows an increase in white blood cells. 

Treatment. It is very important that no laxatives or 
purgatives, such as castor oil, be given to a person with 
appendicitis. Purgatives should never be given to a per- 
son with an abdominal disorder that might be appendi- 
citis. Any such medicines may cause the appendix to 
rupture, spreading bacteria through the abdomen. The 
patient should remain quiet. A doctor should be called 
immediately. The usual treatment for acute appendicitis 
is surgical removal of the appendix, an operation 
known as an appendectomy. |In mild cases, the inflam- 









“Zs 








Ss 
Adriatic Sea 


Mediterranean 
Sea 


WORLD BOOK map 


Location of the Appian Way 


mation may subside by itself. Some people may have re- 
current appendicitis. Andrew G. Plaut 

See also Surgery (A typical operation). 
Appendix, in anatomy, is a structure attached to a 
larger or more important part. The term usually refers to 
the vermiform(wormlike) appendix, a slender, closed 
tube that extends from the cecum, the first part of the 
large intestine. The vermiform appendix lies in the low- 
er right part of the abdomen in human beings. It is also 
found in the higher apes, some rodents, and various 
other animals. Rats and certain other rodents have a 
long appendix that functions in digestion. In human be- 
ings, it probably has no function. Some people believe 
that the appendix lost its function through evolution. 
When inflamed, it causes a disease known as appendici- 
tis. See also Appendicitis. 
Apperson, Elmer and Edgar. See Haynes, Elwood. 
Appetite. See Hunger. 


Laurence H. Beck 


) Large intestine 


The appendix is a narrow 
tube that extends from the ce- 
cum of the large intestine. A 
normal appendix, above, re- 
sembles a worm. Infection of 
the appendix produces ap- 
pendicitis, right, a condition in 
which the appendix becomes 
swollen and filled with pus. 


Infected appendix 














Apple 569 


The Appian Way is an an- 
cient Roman highway that was 
named for Appius Claudius 
Caecus, who began its con- 
struction in 312 B.C. The high- 
way, lined with the ruins of 
the tombs of prominent Ro- 
mans, is still in use. 


© Ray Manley from Shostal 


Appian Way, AP ee uhn, was the first and most fa- 
mous military highway built by the ancient Romans. It is 
still used today. It was named for Appius Claudius Cae- 
cus, a Roman official who began its construction in 312 
B.C 

The road led 132 miles (212 kilometers) from Rome 
southeastward to Capua, linking Rome to some of its 
early conquests. It was extended 234 miles (377 kilome- 
ters) to Brundisium (now Brindisi) on Italy's southeast 
coast. Early Christians met in tombs and catacombs 
along the road. Arthur M. Eckstein 
Apple is one of the most important fruits that grow on 
trees. It is also one of the most popular of all fruits. 
Since prehistoric times, people have enjoyed the deli- 
cious flavor of apples. 

There are hundreds of varieties of apples. Their color 
ranges from various shades of red to green and yellow, 
and their flavor varies from tart to sweet. Apple trees 
belong to the rose family. Their beautiful white flowers 
open in spring and look like tiny roses. 

Apple growers throughout the world produce about 
2 billion bushels of the fruit annually. China leads the 
world in apple production. The United States ranks sec- 
ond, followed by France, Italy, and Turkey. 

In the United States, apple growing is an important 
industry in several regions, especially the Pacific North- 
west. Washington produces more apples than any other 
state. The nation’s apple crop totals about 260 million 
bushels each year, with a wholesale value of more than 
$1 billion. 

In Canada, apples are the most important fruit crop. 
They are grown commercially in British Columbia, New 
Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Ontario, and Quebec. Canadian 
growers produce about 30 million bushels of apples 
yearly. 

Over half the apples grown are eaten fresh. Apples 
also are baked into pies and many other dishes. Apples 
are used in making apple butter, apple juice, apple- 
sauce, and jelly and wine. Apple juice may be made into 
vinegar. Most apple products are canned or bottled, 
and others are dried or frozen. 

Apples consist of about 85 percent water. They con- 
tain vitamins A and C, potassium, pectin, and fiber. 

Through the ages, apples have appeared in legends, 
poems, and religious books. In the Swiss legend of Wil- 
liam Tell, a tyrant arrests an archer but promises to free 
him if he shoots an apple off his son's head. Tell does 


570 Apple 


so and later kills the tyrant with another arrow. Many 
people believe an apple was the fruit that, according to 
the Bible, Adam and Eve ate in the Garden of Eden. 


Varieties of apples 


Although there are hundreds of kinds of apples, only 
a few varieties account for most of the apples grown 
commercially and in home gardens. For example, three 
varieties of apples— Delicious, Golden Delicious, and 
Granny Smith—make up about two-thirds of the apples 
produced in the United States. Two other varieties— 
McIntosh and Rome Beauty—also rank among the lead- 
ing apples grown in the United States. McIntosh and 
Delicious apples are the chief varieties that are grown in 
Canada. 

The many kinds of apples differ in color, texture, 
taste, and size, as shown in the table in this article. The 
color of the skin may be green, yellow, or various 
shades of red. The flesh of apples is cream-colored, 
white, or yellow. The texture of the fruit may be soft or 


Varieties of apples 





firm, and the flavor is tart or sweet. Generally, sweet ap- 
ples are eaten fresh, and tart varieties are used in mak- 
ing such products as apple butter, applesauce, and 
vinegar. Flavorful cider is made from a blend of several 
varieties. 

There are also about 25 species of wild apples, 8 of 
which grow in the United States. Most wild apples are 
crab apples (see Crab apple). 

Apple growers in other countries raise several varie- 
ties that are seldom cultivated in the United States. For 
example, the Cox’s Orange Pippin is grown in Denmark, 
the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom. The Bramley 
is a favorite cooking apple in Britain. 


Raising apples 


The apple is a pome—that is, a fruit that has a fleshy 
outer layer and a paperlike core. The apple usually has 5 
to 10 seeds. The core encloses the seeds. Pears are also 
pomes. 

Apple trees may grow more than 40 feet (12 meters) 


There are hundreds of kinds of apples, and they differ in color, flavor, shape, size, and texture. Dif- 


ferent varieties are also used for different purposes. For example, Delicious apples are usually 
eaten fresh, but Golden Delicious apples are used primarily for baking pies. 








Cortland 





Golden Delicious Granny Smith 





Rome Beauty Stayman 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by James Teason and Paul D. Tumbaugh 


a ee 
, 
| 
7 


Delicious Empire Gala 





Jonathan Mclntosh 





Winesap 


York Impenial 








=? 


tall. Most apple trees do not grow well in areas with ex- 
tremely cold winters or long, hot summers, but they 
thrive in regions with moderately cold winters. The fruit 
does not grow during the cold season, but the trees 
must have such a season in order to flourish. tn late 
spring, white flowers bloom on apple trees. The flowers 
must be pollinated by insects. For this reason, some 
growers place hives of honey bees in their orchards 
while the trees blossom. 

Seeds grow in the ovary ofa pollinated flower, and 
the ovary and other parts of the flower develop into the 
fruit of the tree. Most varieties of apples ripen in 140 to 
170 days after pollination. 

Apple trees can bear fruit for as long as 100 years. But 
most of the apple trees grown in orchards are replaced 
every 12 to 20 years. 

Planting and caring for apple trees. Most apple 
trees are grown from buds. The buds are cut from a 
healthy tree that has produced the kind of fruit desired. 
The buds are grafted to the rootstocks. A rootstock is a 
root or a root plus a stem (see Grafting). These trees will 
bear apples of the same variety as those of the tree from 
which the buds were cut. Apple growers use the root- 


Varieties of apples 


Cortland, a dark red apple with red stripes, is large and has flat 


ends. It tastes mildly acid to sweet and is tender and juicy. It is 
eaten fresh and used for cooking. Its white flesh makes it an ex- 
cellent salad apple. 


Delicious has a solid dark red color or is dark red with darker 
stripes. It is medium to large and has an oval shape with five 
knobs on the bottom. This sweet-tasting apple is firm, crisp, and 
juicy and is usually eaten fresh. 


Empire is a dark red apple. It has crisp, juicy, slightly tart flesh 
and is eaten fresh. 


Gala is a yellowish-orange to red apple. Its yellow to cream- 
colored flesh is crisp and sweet. 


Golden Delicious has a golden-yellow skin and an oval shape. 
Its juicy, firm flesh has a sweet flavor. It ranges from medium to 
large and is a good all-purpose apple. 


Granny Smith is a bright green apple. It ranges from medium to 
large and has an almost round shape. Its firm flesh tastes tart and 
is eaten fresh and used for cooking. 


Jonathan is bright red, touched with yellow and green. This ap- 
ple varies from small to medium and has a tart flavor and juicy, 
firm flesh. Its shape is round to oval, and it is eaten fresh and 
baked in pies. 


Mcintosh, a bright red apple, is medium sized and round or 
oval. It tastes mildly acid to sweet. It has tender flesh and is usu- 
ally eaten fresh. 


Rome Beauty is red with yellow or green markings. It is large 
and has a round to oval shape. The crisp, firm flesh has a mildly 
acid flavor. This apple is used for cooking, baking, and process- 
ing. 

Stayman is dull red with darker red stripes. This apple varies 
from medium to large and has a roundish shape. Its firm flesh 
has a mildly acid flavor and is eaten fresh and used for process- 
ing. 

Winesap is bright dark red and roundish. It ranges from small 
to medium and has a mildly acid flavor. Its flesh is firm and juicy 
and is eaten fresh and used for processing. 


York hnperial is green or yellow with red stripes. This medium 
to large apple is round to oval and has a slightly lopsided ap- 
pearance. Its firm flesh tastes mildly acid to sweet. It is used 
mainly for processing. 





Apple 571 


Leading apple-growing countries 





Figures are for a three-year average, 1997-1999, 
Source: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 


stocks of trees selected for their resistance to pests and 
to cold temperatures. By choosing different rootstocks, 

growers can also vary the height of the tree from 3 to 30 
feet (0.9 to 9 meters). 

Apple trees in orchards are planted in rows from 10 
to 30 feet (3 to 9 meters) apart. This spacing enables 
growers to spray the orchards and to harvest the fruit 
easily. Growers prune the trees to improve the quality 
and quantity of the fruit. A young apple tree starts to 
bear fruit in 3 to 5 years, depending on the rootstock, 
the variety, and other factors. 

Pests and diseases. Apple trees may be attacked by 
many species of insects and many diseases. The codling 
moth, the most destructive enemy of the apple, lays its 
eggs on the leaves and on the fruits in spring. Larvae 
(caterpillars) hatch from the eggs and bore into the 
young apples. Growers fight codling moths by spraying 
the trees with insecticides during the period that the fe- 
males lay their eggs. 

The European red mite, another pest, damages apple 
leaves. The females lay their eggs on the bark of the 
trees during the fall, and the young mites hatch in 
spring just before the flowers bloom. The mites, which 
suck the sap from the leaves, can be controlled with in- 
secticides. Apple growers also minimize damage from 
these pests by introducing other mites and insects that 
prey on European red mites but do not harm apple 
trees. 

The apple maggot, an insect that attacks the fruit, can 
be killed by spraying apple trees with an insecticide 
about midsummer, when the adult maggots mature and 
begin to lay eggs. Two species of sucking insects, 
aphids and San Jose scales, also harm apple trees. See 
Aphid; Apple maggot; San Jose scale. 


572 Apple 


The most damaging disease that attacks apple trees is 
apple scab, which is caused by a fungus. It is most se- 
vere in humid areas. The fungus spends the winter on 
the ground in the dead leaves of the trees. In spring, 
rain releases spores from the fungus, and they infect the 
flowers, fruit, and leaves. Growers control apple scab by 
spraying the trees with fungicides. 

Fire blight, a disease caused by bacteria, kills blos- 
soms, leaves, and twigs and gives the trees a scorched 
appearance. Growers combat fire blight by pruning in- 
fected wood and by applying various sprays to the trees. 
Some growers also fight the disease by planting apple 
varieties that can resist the bacteria. 

Harvesting and processing. Apple growers start to 
harvest their crop in late summer or early fall. The har- 
vest dates vary according to the variety of apples. Ap- 
ples are picked by hand. 

In the United States, some newly harvested apples are 
soon sold fresh to consumers. However, about one- 
fourth of the annual crop is stored in cold rooms that 
have a controlled atmosphere. The fruit stays fresh in 
these rooms for up to 12 months, and so consumers can 
buy the apples the year around. More than 40 percent of 
the U.S. apple crop is processed, including apples that 
are canned, dried, or frozen. 


History 


Apples have been a favorite fruit of people for at least 
2 + million years. Archaeologists studying the ruins of 
Stone Age villages in Europe have found the charcoal 
remains of apples. By the 300’s B.C, the ancient Greeks 
were growing several varieties of apples. The ancient 
Romans also cultivated the fruit. The Romans spread var- 
ious kinds of apples throughout much of England and 
other parts of Europe during their numerous military 
conquests. The early American colonists brought both 
apple seeds and apple trees with them from England. 
The colonists dried their apples or used them in making 
cider, vinegar, and apple butter. 

As the settlers moved westward across America, they 
took apple seeds and seedling trees with them. Some 





Leading apple-growing states and provinces 


Tons of apples produced in a year 


Washington @Q@@@OSOOSOCOOOCOOOO 
2,884,000 tons (2,616,000 metric tons) 
New York eG 
563,000 tons (511,000 metric tons) 
Michigan Poa a 
509,000 tons (461,000 metric tons) 
California 4 ¢ 
414,000 tons (376,000 metric tons) 
Ontario e( 


244,000 tons (221,000 metric tons) 


Pennsylvania @ 

231,000 tons (209,000 metric tons) 
Virginia @ 

164,000 tons {148,000 metric tons) 


British 

Columbia 162,000 tons {147,000 metric tons) 
North q 

Carolina 96,000 tons (87,000 metric tons) 
Quebec f 


91,000 tons (83,000 metric tons) 


Figures are tor a three-year average, 1998-2000. 
Sources: US. Department of Agriculture; Statistics Canada. 


settlers found that Indians had already brought seeds 
from apple trees in the East and had planted them 
around their villages. 

During the early 1800's, a pioneer apple planter 
named John Chapman distributed apple seeds and ap- 
ple trees to settlers in Ohio and Indiana. He became 
known as Johnny Appleseed. See Appleseed, Johnny. 

Through the years, American apple growers have de- 
veloped new and improved varieties of the fruit. In addi- 
tion, researchers have introduced new ways to preserve 
and use apples. 


Grant Heilman 


Apple harvesters stand on 
ladders to pick the fruit from 
high branches. The workers 
fill their bags with apples and 


Tractors equipped with lifting 
devices take the full bins to 
trucks or warehouses and 
bring empty bins back to the 
orchards. 


empty the fruit into large bins. 





Scientific classification. Apples belong to the rose family, 
Rosaceae. The scientific name for the wild apple of Europe and 
Asia is Malus pumila. All cultivated apples belong to the species 
Malus domestica. 


John A. Barden 

See also Cider; Codling moth (with picture); Fruit 
(table: Leading fruits); Tree (Familiar broadleaf and 
needleleaf trees [picture)). 


Additional resources 


Browning, Frank. App/es. North Point Pr., 1998. 

Landau, Elaine. App/es. Children’s Pr., 1999. Younger readers. 

Phillips, Michael. The Apple Grower. A Guide for the Organic 
Orchardist Chelsea Green, 1998. 

Yepsen, Roger B. Appies. Norton, 1994. 

Apple butter is a spread for bread made by cooking 

apples to a thick, pasty consistency, and seasoning with 

spices. Sometimes cider is added. 

Apple maggot is the wormlike /arva (young) of the ap- 

ple fly. Apple maggots sometimes do serious damage to 

apple crops. These insects are also called rai/road 

worms because they make long, winding trails under 

the apple skin. Apple maggots are especially harmful in 

New England and northern New York. 

The adult fly is a kind of fruit fly. It is slightly smaller 
than the common house fly and has wings marked with 
four black bands. Eight to ten days after appearing in 
midsummer, the female fly begins laying eggs just un- 
der the skin of apples. Sometimes as many as 15 eggs 
are laid in one apple. The maggots that hatch burrow 
through the flesh of the apple, leaving rusty streaks in it. 
After feeding from four to six weeks, the maggots drop 
to the ground and enter the soil. They change to the pu- 
pal stage there and stay all winter. They emerge the fol- 
lowing summer as adult flies. 

Scientists have discovered that apple maggots can be 
controlled by hanging sticky traps of yellow panels or 
red spheres in the apple orchard. Adult flies are attract- 
ed to the shape and color of these traps, and they be- 
come entangled and die in the special adhesive. 

John R. Meyer 


Scientific classification. The apple maggot belongs to the 
fruit fly family, Tephritidae or Trypetidae. Its scientific name is 
Rhagoletis pomonella. 


See also Codling moth; Fruit fly. 
Apple of Sodom is a spiny plant found near Jericho, a 
city in the Middle East. It is related to the tomato and 
bears yellow fruits that look like small apples. Writers in 
Biblical times called a plant that grew near the Dead Sea 
the apple of Sodom. They said it looked tempting but 
turned to bitter ashes in the mouth. Today, some people 
believe the ancients’ story was a legend and was not 
about an actual fruit. Others think the writers referred to 
a plant different from the one bearing the name today. 
The term apple of Sodom is sometimes used to de- 
scribe anything that looks pleasing but proves disap- 
pointi ng. William G. D’Arcy 


Scientific classification. The apple of Sodom belongs to the 
nightshade family, Solanaceae. It is Solanum linnaeanum and 
was formerly S. sodomeum. 


Appleseed, Johnny (1774-1845), was the name given 
to John Chapman, an American pioneer who planted 
large numbers of apple trees along the early frontier. He 
became a folk hero as the result of many novels, short 
stories, and poems about his deeds. However, most of 


Appleton, Sir Edward Victor 573 








= pe = = aS ie me si é ~ i . 4 
Mj — r 
as ee ay ae Sc ~ ice 


—— ee oe 





Engraving trom History of Ashland County, Ohio, frontispiece, 
J. B. Lippincott & Co., Philadelphia; Chicago Historical Society 


Johnny Appleseed was a pioneer planter. 


these deeds were probably imaginary. 

Chapman was born in Leominster, Massachusetts. 
Nothing is known about his childhood. From 1797 until 
his death, he traveled alone through Ohio and Indiana, 
planting orchards as the settlers moved westward. 
Chapman eventually owned about 1,200 acres (490 
hectares) of orchards. 

The most famous story about Chapman tells of his giv- 
ing apple seeds and apple saplings to everybody he 
met. He supposedly traveled hundreds of miles to tend 
one of his orchards. Some people said Chapman wore a 
tin pot as a hat, a coffee sack as a shirt, and no shoes. 
Various tales describe him as a medicine man to the In- 
dians. 

None of the folk stories about Chapman has ever 
been proved true. The tales became widely known after 
an article describing his deeds appeared in Harper’s 
New Monthly Magazine in 1871. The article, called 
“Johnny Appleseed, a Pioneer Hero,” was written by an 
author named W. D. Haley. Harry Oster 
Appleton, Sir Edward Victor (1892-1965), a British 
physicist, won the 1947 Nobel Prize in physics for his 
discovery of the App/eton /ayer in the ionosphere. This 
layer of free electrons, 143 miles (230 kilometers) high, 
reflects radio waves back to the earth. Appleton was 
born in Bradford, England. During World War I (1939- 
1945), he served in the United Kingdom's Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research. In 1949, he became 
the principal and vice chancellor of the University of Ed- 
inburgh, in Scotland. See also lonosphere. 

Joan L Richards 


574 Applied science 


Applied science. See Agriculture; Engineering; 
Medicine; Science; Technology. 

Applique, 4? /ih KAY, is a decorative process used in 
sewing and dressmaking. It consists of sewing cut-out 
designed pieces of cloth onto a larger piece. The edges 








© Richard Nawitz: Corti 
Appliqué is a method of decorating objects by sewing cut-out 
pieces of such materials as cloth or leather onto a larger piece. 


of the designed piece are usually tucked under. Then it 
is sewed onto the larger piece with small, hidden stitch- 
es or ornamental stitches. Patrick H. Ela 

Appomattox Court House, 4? uh MAT uhks, was a 
little country settlement in central Virginia. It was the 
scene of Robert E. Lee's surrender to Ulysses S. Grant on 
April 9, 1865, ending the Civil War. It became a National 
Historical Park in 1954. The park is near the town of Ap- 








Pewseeternus 





at Re ae, 
National Park Service 


Appomattox Court House in Virginia was the site of Robert E. 
Lee's surrender to Ulysses S. Grant in 1865, ending the Civil War. 
The surrender took place in the McLean House, shown here. 


pomattox, Virginia. Among points of interest are the 
McLean House, site of the agreement on the surrender 
terms, a visitor center, and a Contederate cemetery. For 
the area of the park, see National Park System (table: 
National historical parks). See also Civil War (The South 
surrenders). 
Apportionment is the process by which representa- 
tion in legislative bodies is distributed among the peo- 
ple. It may involve the assignment of a number of seats 


Critically reviewed by the National Park Sermce 





to specified areas, such as states or counties. Each area 
may then be divided into districts, from which repre- 
sentatives are elected. The reassignment of seats ina 
legislature among the areas represented is usually 
called reapportionment The division of an area into new 
election districts is called redistricting. However, these 
terms are often used interchangeably to mean any 
change in an areas representation. 

Representation has been apportioned in various ways. 
Two common bases have been (1) population and (2) po- 
litical units, such as states, counties, or townships. In bi- 
cameral (two-house) legislatures, one house may be 
based on population and the other on political units. For 
example, in the United States Congress, each state still is 
allowed two senators regardless of population. States 
are apportioned seats in the House of Representatives 
according to population, with each state guaranteed at 
least one seat. Each state legislature draws up its state's 
congressional election districts. 

Great differences in the population of districts occur 
when representation is not based on population. Differ- 
ences may arise even when population is the apportion- 
ment base. As people move from rural areas to urban 
areas, some districts become more heavily populated 
than others. People in overpopulated districts have less 
influence in the legislature than people in underpopulat- 
ed areas. But legislatures often do not redistrict because 
they wish to protect the seats of some members. In the 
United States as late as 1962, the population of many 
state legislative districts varied by as much as 30 to 1. 

Initial efforts to get U.S. courts to order redistricting 
failed. The Supreme Court of the United States held that 
the issue was of a “political nature” and thus could not 
be decided by the courts. The Supreme Court reversed 
this ruling in the 1962 case of Baker v. Carr. |n this case, 
the court held that voters could bring questions of un- 
fair apportionment before federal courts. Since this rul- 
ing, legislatures have been undergoing a major redis- 
tricting upheaval. Based on 1963 and 1964 rulings, the 
Supreme Court developed the “one-person, one-vote” 
principle. As a result, all congressional districts must be 
“substantially equal” in population, and districts for elect- 
ing both houses of state legislatures must meet the 
same requirement. The principle was extended to local 
governments in 1968. In 1969, the court demanded that 
the states try to make their congressional districts pre- 
cisely equal in population. In 1973, the court clarified its 
position on state legislative districts. It ruled that the 
populations of these districts need not be exactly equal 
if the districts were drawn to reflect legitimate consider- 
ations, such as following political subdivisions or equal- 
izing political opportunity. Robert Agranoff 

See also Baker v. Carr; Gerrymander; House of Rep- 
resentatives (Size); Senate (Size); State government 
(Legislative branch). 

Apposition extends the meaning of a word or phrase 
next to it Words that are in apposition refer to each oth- 
er. Most appositive units can be considered nonrestric- 
tive clauses with the relative pronoun and the verb 
deleted. Appositive units may be classified as nouns, ad- 
jectives, or adverbs. “Abraham Lincoln, {who was) the 
16th President of the United States, was assassinated’ is a 
noun appositive. “The crowd, (which was) anxious to es- 
cape danger, began to panic’ is classified as an adjective 





' 


appositive. The man shouted loudly, (which was) even 
frantically, to calm the crowd’ is an adverb appositive. 

A few appositives, called restrictive appositives, are an 
inseparable part of the word to which they are joined. 
Examples include “Alexander the Great and “Winnie- the- 
Pooh” William F. Irmscher 
Appraisal is an opinion of value, usually the market 
value of a piece of property. Market value is the most 
probable price at which a property would be bought or 
sold by knowledgeable people. Specialists called ap- 
praisers make appraisals. They are trained by profes- 
sional appraisal societies, and many colleges and uni- 
versities offer courses in appraising. 

Lending companies have real estate appraised before 
they grant a mortgage on it. Government agencies use 
appraisals to help determine assessments, property tax- 
es, and the price at which they buy private property for 
public use. Many people have private property ap- 
praised before they buy it or sell it. 

Appraisers consider several factors in arriving at their 
estimates. These include the sale price of similar proper- 
ty, reproduction cost less depreciation, and estimated 
future income from property use. Market prices usually 
provide the best estimate of market value. Property loca- 
tion often affects real estate value more than physical 
improvements made on property. John M. Clapp 
Apprentice is a person who learns a trade by working 
under the guidance of a skilled master. Apprentices 
serve in construction, metalworking, printing, and other 
skilled trades. Many employers and unions jointly direct 
apprenticeship programs. Usually, apprentices must be 
high-school graduates. Most apprentices earn wages 
and work regular hours. People who finish apprentice- 
ships become journeyworkers, also called journeymen. 

Apprenticeship dates from ancient times. But it 
reached its most developed form between about A.D. 
1000 and 1600, under European craft guilds. Apprentices 
served in almost every occupation, including medicine, 
painting, and brewing. Some girls were apprenticed to 
learn domestic skills, but most apprentices were boys. 
Ordinarily, a boy in his early teens went to live with a 
master, who taught him a craft and fed, housed, and 
clothed him In return, the boy worked for the master 
about seven years. Once the training ended, the boy was 
a journeyman. He could sell his labor to any master. 

Between the late 1700's and mid-1800's, apprentice- 
ship changed greatly as power-driven machinery al- 
lowed unskilled workers to perform tasks of skilled 
hands, such as sewing and weaving. But new areas for 
apprenticeship opened, especially among machinists, 
electricians, and tool and die makers. 

Related articles in World Book include: 
Apprenticeship and Training, Guild 


Warren Van Tine 


Bureau of Labor movement (Conducting 
Colonial life in America (Edu- apprenticeship programs; 
cation) Craft guilds) 


Education (History) Vocational education (History) 


Apprenticeship and Training, Bureau of, is an 
agency of the Employment and Training Administration 
of the United States Department of Labor. It promotes 
and helps develop apprenticeship and training pro- 
grams in industry and sets standards for employers in 
these programs. 

The bureau works with states, industries, labor 


Apricot 575 


unions, vocational schools, and community planning 
groups in planning apprenticeship programs. To be reg- 
istered by the bureau, a program must meet standards 
established by the secretary of labor. For example, it 
must include supervised work experience and class- 
room training and must be administered without dis- 
crimination. Apprentices must receive periodic wage in- 
creases and evaluations of their progress. Upon 
completion of a program, an apprentice must be recog- 
nized as a journeyworker. The bureau is authorized by 
the National Apprenticeship Act of 1937. 

Critically reviewed by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training 
Apricot, AY pruh kaht or AP ruh kaht, is a golden, 
peachlike fruit with a pit. Apricots are smaller than 
peaches, and they have a smoother skin. Some have a 
reddish blush on one side. Fresh and dried apricots are 
eaten raw or are cooked to make jams, pies, and pud- 
dings. A liqueur is made from the kernels (seeds) found 
inside the pits. Most kernels are bitter, but some apricots 
have sweet kernels that can be eaten like almonds. 

Apricot trees may grow as tall as 30 feet (9 meters). 
They grow best in dry and mild climates. The trees blos- 
som in early spring, so fruit production is poor where 
spring frosts are common. Apricots are native to eastern 
Asia and were brought to North America from Europe. 
California is the chief U.S. producer of apricots. Utah and 
Washington are also important growers. 

Most apricot trees are grown by grafting buds onto 
the roots of plum, peach, or apricot seedlings. When the 
trees reach 1 year of age, they are transplanted from the 
nursery to orchards. Apricot trees are pruned more 
heavily than most other trees that bear their fruit on 
spurs (short side shoots). Larger fruit is produced by thin- 
ning (removing) some fruit from the tree when the fruit is 
about 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) in diameter. Most apricots 
are harvested by hand, though some mechanical harvest- 
ing is done in California. Fenton E. Larsen 


Scientific classification. Apricot trees are in the family 
Rosaceae. They are Prunus armeniaca. 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Kate Lloyd-Jones, Linden Artists Ltd 
The apricot is a golden fruit with a large pit. The apricot tree 
has delicate white or pink blossoms in the springtime. 


576 April 


April is the fourth month of the year, according to the 
Gregorian calendar, which is used by most of the world 
today. The Romans called the month Aprilis. This name 


might have come from a word meaning to open, or 


from the name of Aphrodite, the Greek goddess of love. 
April was the second month in an early Roman calendar. 
However, it became the fourth month when the ancient 

Romans moved the beginning of the year to January. On 


the first of April, April Fools’ Day, people all over the 
world cause mischief and play tricks on each other. 


Many cultures celebrate the arrival of spring, or other 
aspects of the natural world, in April. Walpurgis Night is 


a spring celebration held in Sweden and Finland on 
April 30. People there welcome spring with bonfires, 


singing, and parties. The Japanese hold Sakura Matsuri, 
the Cherry Blossom Festival, in April. Inthe Netherlands, 


Important April events 


1 April Fools’ Day in many couniries. 

— William Harvey, English physician, born 1578. 

— Otto von Bismarck, Prussian statesman, born 1815. 
— Edmond Rostand, French dramatist, born 1868. 

— Sergei Rachmaninoff, Russian composer, born 1873. 
2 Charlemagne, medieval European ruler, born 742. 
— First federal U.S. mint established, 1792. 


— Hans Christian Andersen, Danish fairy-tale writer, born 


1805. 
— Emile Zola, French novelist, born 1840. 
— Walter P. Chrysler, American automaker, born 1875. 
3 Washington Irving, American author, born 1783. 
— John Burroughs, American naturalist, born 1837. 


— First pony express service began in United States, 1860. 


4 National Day, Senegal. 
— Dorothea Lynde Dix, American prison and asylum 
reformer, born 1802. 


— United States Congress adopted the flag with 13 stripes 


and with 1 star for each state, 1818. 


— Robert E. Sherwood, American playwright, born 1896. 


— North Atlantic Treaty signed, 1949. 

5 Pocahontas married John Rolfe, 1614. 

— Sir Joseph Lister, English surgeon, born 1827. 
— Algernon Swinburne, English poet, born 1837. 


— Booker T. Washington, American educator, born 1856. 


6 Chakri Day, Thailand. 
— Joseph Smith founded the Church of Jesus Christ of 
Latter-day Saints, 1830. 
— Robert Peary, American explorer, reached what he 
claimed was the North Pole, 1909. 


— United States declared war on Germany, World War I, 


1917. 
7 William Wordsworth, English poet, born 1770. 


8 Hana Matsuri (Flower Festival) in Japan celebrates the 


birth of the Buddha. 
— Henry Aaron broke Babe Ruth's career major-league 





flower parades are held toward the end of April, when 
the tulips are blooming. Many people plant trees on Ar- 


bor Day, which occurs on different dates in different 


countries. Many nations celebrate Earth Day on April 22. 
This holiday was organized in 1970 to raise awareness of 
the environment. The Angolan Feast of Nganja, a cele- 
bration of the corn harvest, has no specific date, but al- 


ways falls in April. 


Some cultures welcome the New Year in this month. 


Nava Varsha, the Nepalese New Year, falls on or near 


April 13. Several countries in Southeast Asia, including 
Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, and Thailand, also celebrate 


the new year at this time. In Thailand, the holiday is 
called Songkran. 


Chakri Day, April 6, marks the date in 1782 when King 
Rama | took control of Siam’s (now Thailand’s) govern- 




















home run record, 1974. ami 
3 Isambard Kingdom Brunel, British engineer, bo 
— General Robert E. Lee surrendered to Genera 
Grant in the American Civil War, 1865. 
— Charles P. Steinmetz, German American ph 
electrical engineer, born 1865. | 
— Bataan Peninsula in the Philippines fell to Japa 
10 King James | chartered the Virginia companie 
London and Plymouth, 1606. 7 
— United States patent system established, 1790. 
— Matthew C Perry, American officer who opened 
Japan to world trade, born 1794. 
— William Booth, English reformer and founder 
tion Army, born 1829. a 
— Joseph Pulitzer, Hungarian American publis 
— Clare Boothe Luce, American diplomat and 
born 1903. 
11 Napoleon Bonaparte abdicated for the first time, 1 
— Charles Evans Hughes, U.S. chief justice, born 
12 Henry Clay, American statesman, born 1777 
— The American Civil War began at Fort Su 
— U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt died, 
— Yuri Gagarin, Soviet astronaut, became th 
to orbit the earth, 1961. 
13. The Edict of Nantes gave religious toleratior 
Huguenots in France, 1598. 
~ Thomas Jefferson, third U.S. president, born 
— F.\W. Woolworth, American merchant, born: 
— Samuel Beckett, Irish playwright, born 1906. 
14 Christiaan Huygens, Dutch physicist, born 1 
— Noah Webster copyrighted the first edition 
tionary, 1828. 
~ John Wilkes Booth shot U.S. President Abraham Lir 
1865. 
15 Leonardo da Vinci, Italian artist and scientist, borr 
~— American Revolutionary War declared over, 1783 


za nN 
el eee 










April birthstone 


April flower 
diamond daisy 


April 5 Booker 
T. Washington born 


April 6—Robert E. Peary reaches 
what he claims to be North Pole 








ment. Matatirtha Aunsi, Nepalese Mothers’ Day, also 
falls in April. The Christian celebration of Easter often 
occurs in this month, as does the Jewish festival of Pe- 
sah, also known as Passover. 

April's flowers are the daisy and the sweet pea. The 
birthstone for April is the diamond. Carole S. Angell 


Quotations 


April cold with dropping rain 
Willows and lilacs brings again, 
The whistle of returning birds 
And trumpet-lowing of the herds. 
Ralph Waldo Emerson 


When proud-pied April, dressed in all his trim 


Has put a spirit of youth in everything. 
William Shakespeare 


Important April events 


April Fools Day 577 


The first of April, some do say 
ts set apart for All Fools’ Day; 
But why the people call it so 
Nor f, nor they themselves, do know. 
From Poor Robin's Almanac, 1760 


Related articles in World Book include: 


April Fools’ Calendar Earth Day Holy Week 
Day Daisy Easter Palm Sunday 
Arbor Day Diamond Good Friday Passover 
Spring 


April Fools’ Day, or All Fools’ Day, is the first day of 
April. In many countries, including the United States, it 
is the custom on this day to play tricks on people. A fa- 
vorite joke is to send someone on a fools errand, a 
search for something that does not exist. In the United 
States, the victim is called an April Fool. 


15. Henry James, American novelist, born 1843. 
— Thomas Hart Benton, American painter, born 1889. 


— British ocean liner Titanic struck iceberg and sank, 1912. 


16 Anatole France, French novelist, born 1844. 
— Wilbur Wright, American inventor, born 1867. 
17 tndependence Day, Syria. 
— Samuel Chase, American jurist, born 1741. 
— J. P. Morgan, American financier, born 1837. 
— Nikita Khrushchev, Soviet premier, born 1894. 


— Queen Elizabeth !! signed Constitution Act, making Cana- 
da completely independent of the United Kingdom, 1982. 


18 tndependence Day, Zimbabwe. 
— Famous ride of Paul Revere, American patriot, 1775. 
— San Francisco earthquake and fire began, 1906. 
— Lieutenant Colonel James Doolittle led carrier-based 
planes ina raid on Tokyo in World War Il, 1942. 
19 !ndependence Day, Venezuela. 
— The American Revolution began, 1775. 
20 Adolf Hitler, dictator of Germany, born 1889. 
21 Rome founded, according to tradition, 753 B.C 
— Friedrich Frébel, German founder of the 
kindergarten system, born 1782. 
— Charlotte Bronté, English novelist, born 1816. 
— Hippolyte Taine, French historian and critic, born 1828. 


— Texans routed the Mexicans in Battle of San Jacinto, 1836. 


— The Spanish-American War began, 1898. 
— Queen Elizabeth !! of the United Kingdom born in 1926. 
22 Earth Day celebrated in many countries. 


— fsabella !, Spanish queen and patron of Columbus, born 


1451. 
— Henry Fielding, English novelist, born 1707. 
— Immanuel Kant, German philosopher, born 1724. 
— V.1. Lenin, first dictator of the Soviet Union, born 1870. 
(April 10 on the Russian calendar then in use). 
— Sidney Nolan, Australian artist, born 1917. 
23 Traditional birth date of William Shakespeare, 1564. 





April 8—Henry Aaron breaks April 12—Civil War 
Babe Ruth's home run record begins at Fort Sumter 


23 James Buchanan, 15th U.S. president, born 1791. 
— Sergei Prokofiev, Russian composer, born 1891. 
— First public showing of a motion picture, in New York City, 
1896. 
— Lester Pearson, Canadian Prime Minister, born 1897. 
24 American Library of Congress established, 1800. 
25 William |, Prince of Orange, born 1533. 
— Oliver Cromwell, English general, born 1599. 
— Guglielmo Marconi, ftalian inventor, born 1874. 
— San Francisco Conference to establish the United 
Nations began, 1945. 
26 Union Day, Tanzania. 
— John James Audubon, American ornithologist and painter, 
born 1785. 
— Alfred Krupp, German industrialist, born 1812. 
27 Sierra Leone became independent in 1961. 
— Togo became independent in 1960. 
— Edward Gibbon, British historian, born 1737. 
— Samuel Morse, inventor of the telegraph, born 1791. 
— Ulysses S. Grant, 18th U.S. president, born 1822. 
28 James Monroe, fifth U.S. president, born 1758. 
— Maryland ratified the U.S. Constitution, 1788. 
— Mutiny on the British ship Bounty, 1789. 
— Charles Sturt, British explorer of Australia, born 1795. 
29 Lorado Taft, American sculptor, born 1860. 
— William Randolph Hearst, American publisher, born 1863. 
— Sir Thomas Beecham, British conductor, born 1879. 
30 Washington inaugurated as first U.S. president, 1789. 
— Louisiana Territory purchased from France by U.S., 
1803 (treaty was signed May 2, but dated April 30). 
— Louisiana became the 18th U.S. state, 1812. 
— Television first publicly broadcast, from the Empire 
State Building in New York City, 1939. 
— Adolf Hitler committed suicide, 1945. 
— Vietnam War ended, 1975. 


31 Walpurgis Night (Feast of Valborg), Sweden. 
WORLD BOOK illustrations by Mike Hagel 





April 15—Ocean liner April 18—Paul Revere's 
Titanic sinks famous ride 


578 Apuleius, Lucius , 


No one knows where the April Fools custom began. 
But some historians believe it may have started in 
France. There, the old New Year's festival was observed 
from March 25 to April 1 and ended with an exchange of 
gifts. In the mid-1560's, King Charles IX changed the New 
Year to January 1. People who still celebrated the New 
Year in April were called April fish and sent mock pre- 
sents. April Fools’ Day may be related to the ancient Ro- 
man spring festival Hilaria, which celebrates the resur- 
rection of the god Attis. Jack Santino 
Apuleius, 4° yuh LEE uhs, Lucius, LOO shuhs (A.D. 
125?-170?), wrote the only completely preserved novel in 
ancient Latin, Metamorphoses, also called The Golden 
Ass. This 11-part work is written in an elaborate, flowery 
style. It describes the adventures of a young man named 
Lucius who is accidentally turned into a donkey. He 
wanders about, observing how silly and cruel people 
can be. Lucius eventually is restored to human form by 
the Egyptian goddess Isis. The novel includes several 
short stories, of which the most famous is the tale of Cu- 
pid and Psyche (see Psyche). Apuleius was born in 
northern Africa. His other surviving writings deal with 
magic, oratory, and philosophy. Anthony A. Barrett 
Aqua regia, AK wuh REE jee uh, is a mixture of nitric 
and hydrochloric acids. It is important in metallurgy and 
chemistry because it dissolves such metals as platinum 
and gold. Aqua regia is a Latin term meaning royal wa- 
ter. The mixture was given this name because it can dis- 
solve gold, sometimes called the roya/ metal. 

Aqua regia is made up of one part concentrated nitric 
acid to three parts of concentrated hydrochloric acid. 
Neither of these acids alone can dissolve gold or plat- 
inum. However, the chemical action between the acids 
forms nitrosyl chloride (NOCI) and chlorine gas, both 
powertul oxidizing agents. The presence of these oxidiz- 
ers, plus excess hydrochloric acid, enables aqua regia to 
dissolve gold and platinum. 
Aquaculture, AK wuh kuti chuhr, is the controlled 
raising of aquatic animals and plants. The primary goal 
of the aquaculture industry is to produce food. Aquacul- 
ture provides about a fourth of the seafood eaten in the 
world. In addition, some plants grown through aquacul- 
ture yield substances that are used as thickeners or 
gelling agents in foods, drugs, and other products. 

Aquaculture takes place in natural bodies of water, in 
enclosures built on land, or in artificial ponds or reser- 
voirs. In natural bodies of water, the crop may be grown 
in nets or cages, attached to rafts, or seeded on the bot- 
tom. The animals or plants may be raised in fresh, brack- 
ish(slightly salty), or salt water. By controlling environ- 
ment, nutrition, breeding, and life cycle, aquaculturists 
can improve the quality and productivity of their crops. 

Fish account for more than 50 percent of the annual 
worldwide aquaculture production. Seaweeds account 
for about 25 percent. Mollusks—mainly oysters, mus- 
sels, and clams—make up about 15 percent. Crus- 
taceans—mainly shrimp and prawns—account for about 
3 percent of aquaculture production. 

Aquaculture is an ancient occupation. Chinese people 
practiced aquaculture between 3,500 and 4,000 years 
ago. Today, China still ranks as the world leader in rais- 
ing aquatic plants and animals. It accounts for about 60 

percent of the world s production. 

The aquaculture industry expanded rapidly during the 


Emily Jane Rose 





1980's and 1990's. Worldwide production more than 
doubled from 1985 to 1995. Production in the United 
States nearly doubled during the same period. Many 
people expect aquaculture to continue to increase in im- 
portance as a source of food and other products for the 
world’s rapidly growing population. Henry S. Parker 


Additional resources 


Bardach, John E., ed. Sustainable Aquaculture. Wiley, 1997. 

Koch, Frances K. Mariculture: Farming the Fruits of the Sea. 
Watts, 1992. Younger readers. 

Stickney, Robert R. Principles of Aquaculture. Wiley, 1993. 


Aquamarine, 4« wuh muh REEN, is a light blue or | 
bluish-green variety of a gemstone called bery/ The 
most popular color is a clear sky-blue. Aquamarines are 
often treated with heat or radiation to improve their col- 
or. Almost all aquamarines are transparent. These stones 
are cut in facets (polished flat surfaces) and used in all 
types of jewelry. The aquamarine and the bloodstone 
are the two birthstones for March. Aquamarines have 
been known since ancient times. The ancient Romans 
believed the gem could cure laziness and produce 
courage. The most important source of aquamarines is 
Brazil. The gem is also found in Argentina, China, India, 
Madagascar, Myanmar, Namibia, Northern Ireland, Nor- 
way, Russia, and the United States. Pansy D. Kraus 

See also Beryl; Birthstone (table); Gem (picture). 
Aquarium, Home, is a place where people keep 
their collections of fish and other water animals. Most 
such aquariums are in people's homes, but some indi- 
viduals have aquariums at work or other locations. The 
word aquarium also refers to large institutions that 
maintain extensive exhibits of fish and other creatures. 
For information on these places, see Aquarium, Public. 

A person who has an aquarium is called an aquarist. 
Most home aquarists have freshwater aquariums rather 
than marine aquariums. The freshwater type requires 
less expense and work to set up and maintain. 

Basic equipment for a home aquarium includes (1) a 
tank and tank cover, (2) one or more filters, (3) a heater, 
and (4) a thermometer. 

A rectangular tank that holds 10 to 20 gallons (38 to 76 
liters) is good for a beginning aquarist. Most aquariums 
are made of glass and are held together with silicone 
sealant to make them watertight. A decorative plastic 
strip covers the top and bottom edges. Most tank covers 
include an incandescent or fluorescent lamp that shines 
into the tank. Such covers, called /ight reflectors, make it 
easy to see the fish. Lids that cover the entire top pre- 
vent fish from jumping out of the tank and reduce the 
amount of heat loss. 

The aquarium filter removes dirt suspended in the 
water and keeps the water clean. Some filters are con- 
nected to an electrically operated air pump. The pump 
produces a stream of air that pushes water through the 
filter. An aquarium may have an externa! filter, an under- 
gravel filter, or both. External filters pump the water 
through activated carbon, filter pads, or filter floss, 
which remove particles and some impurities. Under- 
gravel filters suck potentially harmful wastes into the 
gravel at the bottom of the tank. Bacteria in the gravel 
use the wastes as food and convert them into less harm- 
ful substances. 

The electric heater warms the water to the proper 


Pd EK—_ 


> .___e 


SSS SS ee eee re 


Aquarium, Home 578a 


A home aquarium should have an air pump and one or more filters to keep the water clean. 
A heater keeps the water at the desired temperature, and a cover reduces the amount of heat lost. 
Plants and gravel help make the aquarium more attractive and provide a healthier environment for 


the fish. 





Thermometer 


Undergravel filter 


temperature to keep fish healthy. For most fish, the wa- 
ter must be kept between 72 and 80 °F (22 and 27 °C). 
Most heaters hang on the tank's edge and extend into 
the water. Place the thermometer away from the heater 
where you can easily read it. 

Setting up an aquarium. After acquiring a new tank, 
wash the tank inside and out with lukewarm, salty water 
and rinse it thoroughly. Place the tank on a level, strong 
surface near an electrical outlet. The aquarium should sit 
away from direct sunlight, drafts, and radiators. If only 
an external filter is used, the gravel should be rinsed 
and put into the tank in a layer about 1 inch (2.5 centime- 
ters) deep. An undergravel filter should be covered with 
2 to 3 inches (5 to 7.6 centimeters) of gravel. 

Use tap water in your aquarium tank. Be sure to fill the 
tank a little at a time and to watch for leaks. When the 
tank is about two-thirds full, put in plants that can root in 
the gravel. Put the filter and heater in just before the 
aquarium is completely filled. 

In most cases, the water should become suitable for 
fish two to three days after you fill the tank and start the 
electrical equipment. The water will look cloudy at first 
due to unsettled particles of dirt. Bubbles of gas may 
also appear. The cloudiness and bubbles will disappear 
in a day or two. After that time, a new cloudiness might 
appear, caused by bacteria. This condition should clear 
up in a few days. 

Choosing fish and plants. Beginners should choose 
hardy, inexpensive fish that do not tend to fight or chase 
other fish. Popular fish for beginners include angelfish, 


Heater 


WORLD BOOK tHlustration by john F Eggert 


» External filter 


Gravel 


— 


_To electric outlets 








cardinal tetras, guppies, mollies, neon tetras, and platies. 
Place only a few fish in the tank at first. You may add 
more fish gradually over several weeks. The aquarist 
must be careful not to put too many fish in the tank. The 
total length of all the fish in inches should be no greater 
than the number of gallons in the tank. 

Most aquarists begin with fish that give birth to fully 
formed young that are able to swim. These fish, called 
live-bearers, include guppies and platies. Most female 
live-bearers will produce young about every six weeks 
when the water is kept at about 75 °F (24 °C). 

A live-bearer about to give birth has a bulging belly 
and a dark spot on the bottom of her body. Keep the fry 
(young fish) separate until they get big enough to live 
among adult fish without being eaten. 

Some kinds of fish, called egg/ayers, hatch their 
young from eggs. Good egglayers for beginners include 
cardinal tetras, neon tetras, white clouds, and small an- 
gelfish. To breed, a female egglayer swollen with eggs 
should live in a separate tank with a male. Babies of 
egglayers are harder to raise than those of live-bearers. 
Live-bearers and egglayers can live in the same tank. 

Plants make the aquarium more attractive and provide 
some food and shelter for the fish. They also give off 
oxygen, which the fish breathe, and take in carbon diox- 
ide given off by the fish. Good aquarium plants include 
Elodea, which can be stuck in the gravel or floated on 
the surface; and Vallisneria, which takes root in the grav- 
el. Many aquarists use lifelike plastic plants, further re- 
ducing tank maintenance. 


578b Aquarium, Public 


Keeping the fish healthy. Most aquarium fish 
should eat once or twice a day. At each feeding, fish 
should get no more than they can consume in 10 min- 
utes. Most tropical fish will eat any good-quality com- 
mercial fish food. They also may have live and pro- 
cessed brine shrimp, shellfish called Daphnia, and red 
worms Calied 7ubifex Some fish can find particles of 
food overlooked by others, and so help clean the tank. 
These fish include catfish and algae eaters. 

Many fish diseases can spread quickly and kill all the 
fish in an aquarium. Signs of illness include change of 
color, funguslike growths, poor appetite, slow or unusu- 
al movement, and spots. If any of these signs appear, 
place the affected fish into a separate tank A tropical 
fish dealer can provide information on treatment 


Do not place new fish in the aquarium water until they 


have adjusted to the water's temperature. To help the 
fish adjust, float the plastic bag containing the new fish 
in the aquarium for 15 minutes, adding a small amount 
of aquarium water to the bag every 5 minutes. Some 
aquarists keep new fish in a separate tank for several 
days to check them for disease. Louis E. Garibaldi 

See also Goldfish; Tropical fish. 
Aquanum, Public, or aquatic zoo, is an institution 
where people keep and display fish and other animals 
that live in water. Some public aquariums are parts of 
zoos, but most are independent institutions. Aquariums 
called oceanariums primarily display large marine (salt- 
water) mammals, including dolphins, seals, and whales. 
Other aquariums combine a traditional aquarium with 
an oceanarium. Such institutions may have large indoor 
and outdoor exhibits. 

The word aquanum also refers to small collections of 
aquatic life that people keep in their homes. For infor- 
mation on these aquariums, see Aquarium, Home. 


A public aquarium displays 
semble particular marine en 
tralia, includes informatior 





The purpose of aquariums 


Public aquariums serve many purposes. They include 
recreation, education, research, and conservation. 

Recreation. People enjoy seeing live aquatic animals. 
The animals’ interesting behavior and unusual appear- 
ance attract millions of visitors to aquariums each year. 
Aquariums use huge tanks with acrylic (plastic) viewing 
windows to showcase large underwater habitats. These 
exhibits let visitors observe many underwater creatures 
they might othenvise never see. Aquariums may also 
present popular shows featuring seals, dolphins, and 
other trainéd marine mammals. 

Education. Aquarium visitors learn many interesting 
facts about aquatic life from viewing the exhibits, which 
usually display information about the animals. Students 
take school field trips to aquariums to learn more about 
the animals they study in class. Most aquariums provide 
tours and lectures for schoolchildren and other groups. 

Research. Creating the appropriate environment for 
each aquarium animal requires extensive research on 
that animal's habitat and way of life. Much of our knowl- 
edge of the lives of aquatic animals comes from such re- 
search. For example, biologists have learned most of 
what they know about the pregnancy of certain whale 
species by studying the animals in aquariums. Aquari- 
ums also have advanced the practice of aquaculture (the 
raising of aquatic life for food and other uses) by study- 
ing the diets and diseases of food fish and shellfish. 

Conservation. Aquariums help conserve threatened 
aquatic animals in many ways. For example, they may 
raise populations of threatened species whose natural 
habitats have been damaged. Such animals include a 
species of steelhead trout from central California. Water 
levels in the Carmel River, the trout's native habitat, peri- 


SN 


Yah 


N 


eA 
ANY 


Wea ts 





h and other animals in colortul exhibit tanks. Such exhibits often re- 
ynments, such as a coral reef. This aquarium exhibit in Sydney, Aus: 
ut its animals in lighted panels above the tank 





r —_* 


+ = = 


odically become very low because the river is heavily 
used as a human water source. To protect this trout 
from extinction, the Monterey Bay Aquarium continually 
collects the fish’s eggs from the river and raises the fish 
to maturity. When the river's water level is high enough, 
aquarium workers release the captive-raised trout back 
into their natural habitat. Such activities keep river popu- 
lations of the fish high enough to ensure their survival. 
Aquariums also help raise visitor awareness of con- 
servation issues. For example, whale and dolphin shows 
have long informed visitors about the declining num- 
bers of marine mammals. Increased awareness of this is- 
sue has led to the passage of government legislation 
protecting marine mammals and their habitats. 


How aquariums operate 


Obtaining animals. Aquariums often rely on their 
own breeding programs to provide them with many of 
their exhibit animals. To expand the range of their col- 
lections, however, aquariums must purchase animals 
from outside sources. Public aquariums buy many of 
their exhibit animals from the suppliers that sell aquatic 
life to fish markets and pet shops. Aquariums also ex- 
change animals among one another. On occasion, 
aquariums acquire specimens from individual fish col- 
lectors, or they may collect species directly from nature. 
Public aquariums must obtain permits to acquire and 
display threatened species, or species considered harm- 
ful to local water habitats. 

Displaying exhibits. Aquarium exhibits range from 
small 10-gallon (38-liter) glass tanks to huge habitat ex- 


© Ross Denotter, Vancouver Aquanum Marine Science Center 


Aquarium, Public 579 


An aquarium worker can 
help teach people about the 
animals that live in the world’s 
lakes, rivers, and oceans. This 
employee at the Vancouver 
Aquarium in Canada is intro- 
ducing a beluga whale to a 
child visitor. 


hibits in excess of 2 million gallons (7.6 million liters). 
Public aquariums display different animals for different 
reasons. Some Creatures, such as blind cavefish, repre- 
sent animals that have developed specialized adapta- 
tions for unusual habitats. Others, including lobsters and 
groupers, represent animals that provide people with 
important sources of food. 

Aquarium exhibits place together animals that live to- 
gether in nature. Most exhibits attempt to re-create par- 
ticular environments, such as coral reefs, rocky shores, 
or tide pools. Aquarium workers add rocks, plants, and 
other features of an environment to each exhibit. These 
additions help satisfy the animals’ ecological needs. 
They also make the exhibits more realistic for viewers. 

Most large public aquariums display habitats from 
around the world. Smaller, regional ones often empha- 
size environments from their own local waters. Many 
aquariums use one or more tanks to present short-run 
exhibits, which last 12 to 18 months. These presentations 
focus on one region, such as Mexico's Gulf of California, 
or on a group of animals, such as sharks or sea horses. 

A number of aquariums have created presentations 
called immersion experiences that give visitors an un- 
usual perspective of aquatic environments. For example, 
certain aquariums take guests through shark-inhabited 
tanks on moving sidewalks in acrylic tunnels. 

Caring for animals involves many tasks. They include 
feeding, maintaining clean tank environments through 
life support systems, and providing medical care. 

Feeding. Aquarium animals require a variety of spe- 
cialized diets. Most aquarium inhabitants will eat a 














580 Aquarium, Public 


wide range of frozen natural foods, such as fish, shrimp, 
and squid. But many species will consume only live ani- 
mals. Aquariums raise and maintain a number of live 
foods, including algae, crabs, and small bait fish. 

Life support systems. An aquariums exhibit tank must 
always have clean water processed through life support 
systems. These systems maintain a safe environment for 
the animals. They circulate the water, remove particles 
of dirt and animal waste, eliminate dissolved poisonous 
materials, and maintain high levels of dissolved oxygen 
for animals to breathe. Life support systems also keep 
the water at an appropriate and stable temperature. 

Medical care. Nearly all aquariums employ a veteri- 
narian to help care for their animals. When a new animal 
arrives, the aquarium at first keeps it quarantined from 
the rest of the collection. During quarantine, aquarium 
workers clean the animal of parasites and check for dis- 
eases. Daily observations of the animals help identify 
medical problems that may require treatment. 

Jobs. Many aquarium jobs require a college degree, 
experience working with animals, or both. These aquari- 
um professions include veterinarians, biologists and 
laboratory technicians who study the animals, aquarists 
who take care of exhibits, and trainers who work with 
animals in shows. Other aquarium employees help edu- 
cate tour groups and maintain the life support systems. 


History 


Archaeological records indicate that the ancient 
Sumerians, in what is now Iraq, kept food fish in ponds 
over 4,500 years ago. About 2,000 years ago, ancient Ro- 
mans kept both food fish and pet fish in shallow ponds 
and pools. The Chinese probably bred the first domestic 
goldfish more than 1,000 years ago. They displayed 
these fish in porcelain vessels. 

During the mid-1800's, the invention of relatively clear 
glass tanks led to the development of modern aquari- 
ums. In 1853, the Zoological Society of London opened 
its “Fish House,’ the first true public aquarium, at its zoo- 
logical gardens in London. The exhibition became so 
popular that other aquariums Opened in cities across 
Europe over the next 20 years. The first true public 
aquarium in North America, the Boston Aquarial Gar- 
dens, opened in 1859 in Boston. 

Marine Studios, later called Marineland of Florida, 
was founded near St. Augustine in 1938 for filming un- 
derwater motion-picture scenes. It soon became a pop- 
ular tourist attraction and developed the trained animal 
show with dolphins and other sea mammals. Marine- 
land’s success led to the foundation of other similar 
theme parks, including the popular SeaWorld parks. 
Such places, in turn, helped promote the development 
of oceanariums. 

During the late 1900's, aquariums became both more 
numerous and more controversial. The invention of 
large acrylic viewing panels in the 1970's enabled aquar- 
iums to showcase large aquatic habitats. Improved tech- 
nology, along with the spread of oceanariums, greatly 
increased the popularity of aquariums. Some animal 
welfare groups, however, raised concerns about ocean- 
ariums. Such groups oppose keeping large sea mam- 
mals in captivity. They argue that aquarium environ- 
ments are too restrictive for these creatures, whose nat- 
ural habitats often cover large areas of the oceans. 


Despite such criticism, an unprecedented number of 
oceanariums and other aquariums were built world- 
wide in the late 1900's and early 2000's. Louis E. Garibaldi 

See also Zoo (picture: An underwater viewing win- 
dow). 


Additional resources 


Hillard, James M. Aquariums of North America. Scarecrow, 1995. 

Powell, David C. A Fascination for Fish: Adventures of an Under- 
water Pioneer. Univ. of Calif. Pr., 2001. 

Spotte, Stephen H. Captive Seawater Fishes. Wiley, 1992. 


Aquarius, uh KWAIR ee uhs, is the 11th sign of the zo- 
diac. It is symbolized by a person carrying a pitcher of 
water. Astrologers believe that Aquarius is ruled by two 
planets—Saturn, which they consider a stern planet; and 
Uranus, the planet of change and disturbance. Aquarius 
is an air sign. Astrologers believe that people born un- 


Aquarius—The Woter Bearer Signs of 


the Zodiac 


Aries 

Mar. 21-Apr. 19 
Taurus 

Apr. 20-May 20 
Gemini 

May 21~June 20 


Cancer 
June 21—July 22 


Leo 

July 23-Aug 22 
Virga 
ug. 23-Sept. 22 
Libra 

Sept. 23-Oct. 22 
Scarpia 

Oct. 23-Nav. 21 
Sagittorius 

Nav. 22—-Dec. 21 
Capricorn 

Dec. 22-Jan. 19 
Aquarius 

Jan. 21-Feb. 18 


Birth dates: Jon. 20-Feb. 18. 
Group: Air. 

Characteristics: Curious, inde- 
pendent, modern, open-minded, 
outgoing, serious. 


Pisces 
Feb. 19-Mar. 20 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Robert Keys 


der the sign, from January 20 to February 18, show the 
influence of Saturn by being serious-minded. However, 
their independence and love of freedom reflect the in- 
fluence of Uranus. Aquarians do not respect tradition 
and enjoy shocking people by their behavior. 

Aquarians have powerful, logical, and scientific 
minds. They are always open to new ideas. Aquarians 
have many friends but are hard to get to know deeply. 
They usually avoid close personal relationships. Aquari- 
ans support social and political causes with great enthu- 
Ssiasm. Christapher MclIntash 

See also Astrology; Horoscope; Zodiac. 
Aquatic plant. See Water plant 
Aqueduct, AK wuh duhit, is an artificial channel 
through which water is conducted to the place where it 
is used. The materials used for aqueduct construction 
may be masonry, concrete, cast iron, steel, or wood. 
Some aqueducts are tunnels dug through rocks, and 
others are canals in the earth. In many aqueducts, the 
outlet is so much lower than the water source that gravi- 
ty alone carries the water. Where gravity is insufficient, 
the water is forced through the aqueduct by pumps. 

As cities and industries grow, they require more 








water, and more aqueducts must be built. Such modern 
conveniences as commercial air conditioners require 
large quantities of water. Aqueducts also supply water 
to dry lands that must be irrigated to produce crops. 

Ancient aqueducts. It is not known when or where 
the first aqueducts were built. In ancient times, Jerusa- 
lem used a leaky aqueduct made of a series of limestone 
blocks in which 15-inch (38-centimeter) holes had been 
drilled by hand. The Greeks built masonry conduits to 
bring water to their cities, and even bored tunnels by 
hand. One of these tunnels, 4,200 feet (1,280 meters) 
long, was built by Athens 2,500 years ago. Most aque- 
ducts of ancient times were built of stone, brick, or poz- 
zuolana, a mixture of limestone and volcanic dust. 

The city of Rome had many aqueducts and was the 
only ancient city reasonably supplied with water. The 
first person in charge of the Roman waterworks was 
Marcus Agrippa, who was appointed water commis- 
sioner in 33 B.C. By A.D. 97, nine aqueducts brought 
about 85 million gallons (322 million liters) of water a 
day from mountain springs. Later, five additional aque- 
ducts were built. About 200 cities in the Roman colonies 
had aqueducts. One famous Roman aqueduct, the Pont 
du Gard, still stands across a river near Nimes, France. 

Later aqueducts. Only a few new aqueducts were 
built until the Middle Ages. Late in the 1500's, an aque- 
duct was built for the English town of Plymouth by Sir 
Francis Drake, then mayor. It was called the River Leet, 
and was an open channel 24 miles (39 kilometers) long. 
London had no aqueduct until 1609 when the aqueduct 
called New River was built, bringing water 38 miles (61 
kilometers) to London. 

Present-day aqueducts. Costly bridges to carry 
water across rivers and valleys are no longer necessary. 
They have been replaced by pipe through which water 
is carried across hilly country. Sections of pipe called in- 
verted siphons curve downward to pass beneath 
streams and other low places in the aqueduct's course. 

One of the first great modern aqueducts was the first 
Croton Aqueduct, built by New York City in 1842. It was 
made of masonry lined with brick. Iron pipes carried 
water across the Harlem River over a viaduct. During the 
late 1800's, other cities, especially those of Britain, built 
large aqueducts. These cities included Birmingham, 
Glasgow, Liverpool, and Manchester. 

Many of the world’s greatest aqueducts were built in 
the early 1900's. The Catskill Aqueduct, completed in 
1913 for New York City, extends 120 miles (193 kilome- 
ters). The Colorado Aqueduct, in southern California, 
was completed in 1939. It carries water through 29 tun- 
nels across the desert from the Colorado River. 

In 1973, a 685-mile (1,102-kilometer) aqueduct was 
completed in California. Other noted aqueducts in the 
United States include the Hetch-Hetchy (O’Shaugh- 
nessy), which supplies San Francisco, and those of Den- 
ver, Boston, and Tulsa. One of the most noted aque- 
ducts is the Apulian Aqueduct of southern Italy. Other 
major aqueducts include those of Winnipeg, Canada, 
and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Larry W. Mays 

See also Rome, Ancient (picture: Aqueduct construc- 
tion). 

Aqueous humor. See Eye (The uveal tract). 
Aquinas, uh KWY nuhs, Saint Thomas (1 225?-1274), 
was one of the greatest medieval philosophers and 


Aquino, Corazon = 581 


theologians. Through the centuries, he has influenced 
Christian— especially Roman Catholic— thought. 

His life. Thomas was born of a noble family in Rocca- 
secca, Italy, near Cassino. He attended the University of 
Naples from 1239 until 1244, when he joined the Domin- 
ican order. He was ordained a priest in 1250. From 1245 
to 1252, he studied philosophy and theology under the 
German theologian Saint Albertus Magnus. In 1256, 
Thomas was named professor of theology at the Univer- 
sity of Paris. There, he became famous because he de- 
veloped his intellectual talents in the service of the 
Christian faith. 

In 1258, Thomas began to write the Summa contra 
Gentiles. \n this work, he tried to convince non- 
Christians that the doctrines of Christianity were not 
contrary to reason. From 1259 to 1268, Thomas wrote 
commentaries on many writings of the ancient Greek 
philosopher Aristotle. In 1265, he began to write his 
most famous work, Summa Theologica, in which he 
tried to systematically explain Christian theology. But 
Thomas had a mystical experience in 1273 that caused 
him to stop writing. He said that all he had written 
seemed like straw compared with what he had seen in 
this experience. Thomas feast day is January 28. 

His thought. Thomas combined Aristotle's teachings 
with Christian doctrine. For example, Thomas argued 
that no conflict exists between reason and faith. Philoso- 
phy is based on reason, he declared, and theology 
comes from faith in divine revelation, yet both come 
from God. So Thomas believed that any differences be- 
tween divine revelation and the conclusions of philoso- 
phy result from faulty reasoning. He also maintained that 
reason can support faith. Thomas accepted—on faith— 
the idea that God exists. However, he formulated five 
proofs of His existence to support such a belief. 

According to Thomas, all people desire happiness, 
but they can satisfy this desire only through direct com- 
munion with God. He believed that God gives grace to 
help human beings overcome the influence of sin and 
achieve this communion. Thomas taught that the sacra- 
ments are important in communicating God's grace to 
people. 

Thomas believed that governments have a moral re- 
sponsibility to serve people and to help them lead virtu- 
ous lives. He declared that governments must not vio- 
late what he considered human rights—life, education, 
religion, and reproduction. Thomas also taught that—to 
be just—laws passed by human beings must not contra- 
dict divine law. David B. Burrell 

See also Scholasticism. 

Aquino, uh KEE noh, Corazon, KAWR uh ZOHN 
(1933- _-), was the first woman president of the Philip- 
pines. She held the office from 1986 to 1992. Aquino suc- 
ceeded Ferdinand E. Marcos. Both Aquino and Marcos 
claimed victory in an election marked by fraud and vio- 
lence. But Marcos fled abroad when large numbers of 
Filipinos backed military officers who demanded his 
resignation. Aquino then became president. She did not 
run for reelection in 1992. 

Aquino was born in Manila into a wealthy and politi- 
cally influential family named Cojuangco. She studied in 
the United States and graduated from the College of 
Mount St. Vincent in New York City in 1953. In 1954, she 
married Benigno S. Aquino, Jr., who later became 


582 Arabisraeli conflict 


the chief political rivai of Ferdinand Marcos. Benigno 
Aquino was assassinated in 1983, and Corazon Aquino 
blamed the Marcos government for the murder. In No- 
vember 1985, Marcos called for a presidential election, 
and Aquino rallied opposition to end his 20-year rule. 

The Philippines experienced economic growth after 
Aquino became president. However, her critics charged 
her government with corruption and mismanagement. 

Henry S. Bradsher 

See also Philippines (The Philippines today). 
Arabrisraeli conflict is a struggle between the Jew- 
ish state of Israel and the Arabs of the Middle East. 
About 90 percent of all Arabs are Muslims. The conflict 
has included several wars between Israel and certain 
Arab countries that have opposed Israel's existence. Is- 
rael was formed in 1948. The conflict has also involved a 
struggle by Palestinian Arabs to establish their own 
country in some or all of the land occupied by Israel. 

The Arab-Israeli conflict is the continuation of an 
Arab-Jewish struggle that began in the early 1900's for 
control of Palestine. Palestine today consists of Israel 
and the areas known as the Gaza Strip and the West 
Bank. The Palestinians lived in the region long before 
Jews began moving there in large numbers in the late 
1800's. 

The Arab-Israeli conflict has been hard to resolve. In 
1979, Egypt became the first Arab country to sign a 
peace treaty with Israel. Jordan, another Arab country, 
signed a peace treaty with Israel in 1994. But Israel has 
not made final peace agreements with Syria or with the 
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). The PLO is a po- 
litical body that represents the Palestinian people. 

Historical background. In the mid-1800's, Jewish in- 
tellectuals in Europe began to support the idea that Jews 
should settle in Palestine, which the Bible describes as 
the Jews ancient homeland. The word Pa/estine does 
not appear in the Bible. But it has long been used to re- 
fer to the area the Bible describes. The idea that Jews 
should settle in Palestine became known as Zionism. In 
the 1800's, Palestine was controlled by the Ottoman Em- 
pire, which was centered in present-day Turkey. 

Zionism became an important political movement 
among Jews in Europe because of increasing anti-Semi- 
tism (prejudice against Jews) there. The anti-Semitism re- 





WORLD BOOK map 
Israel and its Arab neighbors lie at the eastern end of the 
Mediterranean Sea. Arab countries that have fought wars against 
Israel include Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, and Syria. 


sulted in violent attacks on Jews and their property. In 
the 1800's, the immigration of European Jews to Pales- 
tine accelerated. At first, many of the immigrants and the 
Palestinian Arabs lived together peacefully. But as more 
Jews arrived, conflicts increased. 

After World War | ended in 1918, the United Kingdom 
gained control of Palestine from the Ottoman Empire. In 
the Balfour Declaration of 1917, the United Kingdom had 
supported creating a national homeland for the Jews. 
Under British rule, the Jewish population of Palestine 
continued to grow. 

During World War II (1939-1945), German dictator 
Adolf Hitler tried to kill all of Europe's Jews. Thus, about 
6 million Jews were murdered. After the war, most of 
the countries that defeated Germany supported the idea 
of creating a new Jewish state where Jews would be 
safe from persecution. 

The 1948 war. In November 1947, the United Nations 
(UN) approved a plan to divide Palestine into two states, 
One Jewish and the other Palestinian. Zionist leaders ac- 
cepted the plan. But Arab governments and the Pales- 
tinians saw the division as the theft of Arab land by Zion- 
ists and the governments that supported them. 

British rule over Palestine ended when Zionists pro- 
claimed the state of Israel on May 14, 1948. The next day, 
armies of Egypt, Syria, Lebanon,.Transjordan (which be- 
came known as Jordan in 1949), and Iraq attacked Israel. 
Israel fought back. In the war, Israel absorbed much of 
the land the UN had set aside for the Palestinians. Egypt 
and Jordan occupied the rest of the area that was as- 
signed to the Palestinians. Egypt held the Gaza Strip, a 
small area between Israel and the Mediterranean Sea. 
Jordan held the West Bank, a territory between Israel 
and the Jordan River. By August 1949, Israel and all five 
Arab states had agreed to end the fighting. Because of 
the war, about 700,000 Palestinians became refugees. 
Most fled to Jordan—including the West Bank—or to the 
Gaza Strip. Others went to Lebanon and Syria. 

The Suez crisis of 1956. During the 1950's, national- 
ism spread among the Arab countries of the Middle 
East. Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser and his fol- 
lowers sought to rid Arab lands of the influence of 
Western nations. On July 26, 1956, Nasser took control 
of the Suez Canal from its British and French owners. 
The canal connects the Mediterranean and Red seas 
and is a key shipping route between Europe and Asia. 

Many countries protested Nasser's action. France, Is- 
rael, and the United Kingdom secretly plotted to end 
Egypts control of the canal. On October 29, Israel at- 
tacked Egyptian forces in Egypt's Sinai Peninsula and 
quickly defeated them. The Sinai lies between Israel and 
the canal. Israel, with British and French help, occupied 
most of the peninsula. The UN called a cease-fire on No- 
vember 6. By early 1957, Israel, under international pres- 
sure, returned the Sinai to Egypt. The canal reopened 
under Egyptian management in April of that year. 

After the Suez crisis, Arab guerrillas launched small- 
scale attacks inside Israel, and Israel responded with 
raids into Arab territory. At the same time, the Arab na- 
tionalist movement began receiving financial and mili- 
tary support from the Soviet Union. The United States, 
fearing the spread of Soviet-sponsored Communism, 
gave financial and military aid to Israel. 

In 1964, the PLO was formed to represent the Palestin- 





Oe 


ians. It included guerrilla groups dedicated to defeating 
Israel and creating an independent Palestinian state. 

The 1967 war. In May 1967, Nasser closed the Gulf of 
Aqaba to Israeli shipping. The gulf was Israel's only ac- 
cess to the Red Sea. By June 5, Egypt had signed de- 
fense agreements with Syria, Jordan, and Iraq, creating a 
joint military command. 

These apparent preparations for war alarmed the Is- 
raelis. On June 5, they launched a surprise attack on 
Egypt. Syria, Jordan, and Iraq joined Egypt in fighting Is- 
rael. Within hours, Israeli warplanes destroyed almost 
all the Arab air forces. Israeli tanks then retook the Sinai 
Peninsula. Israel also gained control of the West Bank, 
the Gaza Strip, and East Jerusalem. It had taken West 
Jerusalem in the 1948 war. In the north, Israel took Syr- 
ia's Golan Heights, an area bordering Israel. The fighting 
ended on June 10. Israelis call this conflict the Six-Day 
War. Arabs call it the June War. After the war, Israel de- 
cided it would return the territories it had taken only if 
the Arab countries recognized its right to exist. 

Also after the 1967 war, the PLO sought to become the 
representative of the Palestinians in world politics. It de- 
veloped educational and social service organizations for 
Palestinians, mainly in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and 
in refugee camps in Lebanon and Jordan. 

The PLO also began to take independent military ac- 
tion. In the late 1960's, PLO groups began to attack Is- 
raelis both inside and outside Israel. In response, Israel 
attacked Palestinian reftugee camps in Jordan and 
Lebanon, in which many guerrillas were based. The Is- 
raelis also assassinated a number of PLO leaders. 

The 1973 war. After the 1967 war, Egyptian and Israeli 
troops continued to attack each other across the west- 
ern border of the Sinai Peninsula. On Oct. 6, 1973, Egypt 
and Syria launched a massive assault on Israeli forces in 
the Sinai Peninsula and Golan Heights. The attack took 
Israel by surprise, in part because it came on Yom Kip- 
pur, the holiest day in Judaism. 

At first, Egypt drove Israel's forces out os the western 
Sinai, and Syria pushed Israeli troops from the eastern 
Golan Heights. However, the United States gave Israel 
large amounts of military equipment. By October 24, Is- 
raeli forces crossed the Suez Canal and surrounded the 
Egyptian army. They also defeated the Syrian army in the 
Golan Heights. Israelis call this war the Yom Kippur War. 
Arabs call it the October War or the Ramadan War. 

The Camp David Accords. In 1978, Egyptian Presi- 
dent Anwar el-Sadat joined Israeli Prime Minister Men- 
achem Begin and U.S. President Jimmy Carter in signing 
the Camp David Accords. Under these agreements, 
Egypt recognized Israel's right to exist. In return, Israel 
agreed to give back to Egypt the part of the Sinai it still 
occupied. Israel had returned the far western part of the 
Sinai in 1975. In talks leading up to the accords, Egypt 
and Israel were promised large amounts of U.S. eco- 
nomic and military aid. In 1979, Egypt and Israel signed a 
treaty that confirmed their new peaceful relationship. 

Most Arab leaders strongly opposed the Camp David 
Accords and the 1979 treaty. The Arab League, an organ- 
ization of Arab countries, expelled Egypt in 1979. 

The Israeli invasion of Lebanon. After the signing 
of the Camp David Accords, the PLO continued to 
launch guerrilla attacks on Israel, especially from south- 
ern Lebanon. In 1982, Israel invaded Lebanon and drove 





Arabisraeli conflict 582a 


the PLO out of the southern part of the country. Israeli 
forces remained in southern Lebanon until 2000. 

The first intifada. In 1987, Palestinians in the West 
Bank and Gaza Strip began an uprising against Israel's 
military rule of those territories. During this intifada (an 
Arabic term meaning uprising or shaking off, demon- 
strations occurred throughout the occupied territories. 
Most demonstrations were peaceful, but a few became 
violent. The intifada grabbed international attention and 
triggered criticism of Israel for its extensive use of force 
in trying to control the Palestinians. 

Peacemaking. In 1988, the PLO recognized Israel's 
right to exist. It also declared its readiness to negotiate 
with Israel for peace in return for the creation of an in- 
dependent Palestinian state. In addition, it declared it 
would no longer use violence against Israel. But some 
PLO members continued to attack Israeli targets. 

In 1993, Israel and the PLO, aided by Norway, began 
secret peace talks. As a result, the PLO and Israel signed 
an agreement in Washington, D.C., in September 1993. 
Under the agreement, the PLO again stated its recogni- 
tion of Israel's right to exist. Israel, in turn, recognized 
the PLO as the representative of the Palestinian people. 
It also promised to withdraw from part or all of the West 
Bank and Gaza Strip and to consider allowing the cre- 
ation of a Palestinian state in those lands. In 1994, Israel 
gave the PLO control of the Gaza Strip and the West 
Bank city of Jericho. In 1995 and 1996, Israel gave the 
Palestinians control of most West Bank cities and towns. 

Jordan signed a peace treaty with Israel in 1994. Peace 
discussions between Israel and Syria, however, broke 
down in 1996. Talks resumed in December 1999 but 
stopped the next month because of continuing dis- 
agreement over the Golan Heights. 


APW ide World 
The 1967 war was one of several fought between Arab coun- 
tries and Israel. In this photograph, an Israeli guard watches over 
Jordanian prisoners shortly after the 1967 war ended. 


582b Arab League 


The second intifada. Peace talks between Israeli and 
Palestinian leaders continued in 2000. However, the two 
sides were unable to agree on key remaining issues, es- 
pecially those involving the final status of Jerusalem. In 
September 2000, Palestinians began a second intifada 
against Israeli security forces. Numerous attacks by 
Palestinian militias and suicide bombers took place 
throughout Israel, the West Bank, and the Gaza Strip, 
killing hundreds of Israelis. Israeli forces repeatedly 
bombed and invaded the West Bank and Gaza Strip, 
killing more than 1,700 Palestinians. In 2002, Israel reoc- 
cupied much of the West Bank. William B. Vogele 


Related articles in World Book. See the History sections of 
the articles on countries involved in the struggle. See also: 


Olympic Games (Terrorism in Palestinians 
Munich) Suez Canal 
Palestine United Nations (Working for 


Palestine Liberation peace and security) 

Organization Zionism 
Arab League is an organization of 21 Middle Eastern 
and African nations and the Palestine Liberation Organi- 
zation (PLO). The PLO is an organization of Palestinian 
Arabs (see Palestine Liberation Organization). The Arab 
League’s purpose, as stated in the Pact of the League of 
Arab States, is to promote closer political, economic, 
cultural, and social relations among the members. 

A council composed of representatives of the mem- 
ber states works to settle disputes peacefully. It can also 
decide by unanimous vote how to repel aggression 
against a member. Leaque activities are carried out by 
five major committees: (1) political, (2) economic, (3) so- 
cial and cultural, (4) legal, and (5) Palestinian affairs. 

The league was created in 1945, with seven Arab 
countries—Iraq, Saudi Arabia, the Lebanese Republic, 
Yemen (Sanaa), Transjordan (now Jordan), Egypt, and 
Syria. Since then, 16 other members have joined—Libya 
(1953), Sudan (1956), Morocco (1958), Tunisia (1958), 
Kuwait (1961), Algeria (1962), Yemen (Aden, 1968), 
Bahrain (1971), Oman (1971), Qatar (1971), United Arab 
Emirates (1971), Mauritania (1973), Somalia (1974), the 
PLO (1976), Djibouti (1977), and Comoros (1993). In 1990, 
Yemen (Aden) and Yemen (Sanaa) united as Yemen. 

Generally, the league has not lived up to the aspira- 
tions of its founders. Mutual suspicions and rivalries 
among the members have made its political and de- 
fense agreements largely ineffective. The league has 
achieved some success in coordinating Arab opposition 
to Israel and in expressing the rights of the Palestinians. 
But its greatest accomplishments have probably oc- 


curred in the social, cultural, and communications fields. 


The formation in 1976 of ARABSAT, an Arab communi- 
cations satellite system, is an example of the league’s in- 
fluence in fostering cooperation among Arab countries. 

The league has often reflected rather than settled dis- 
putes among its members. In 1979, Egypt reversed its 
policy of hostility toward Israel, and the two nations 
signed a peace treaty. The league then suspended 
Egypt's membership and transferred its headquarters 
from Cairo to Tunis, Tunisia. Egypt was readmitted to 
the league in 1989. In 1990, most league members voted 
to move the headquarters back to Cairo. 

The league became divided over an invasion of 
Kuwait by Iraq in August 1990. A majority of its members 
voted for a proposal to send Arab troops to join foreign 
forces defending Saudi Arabia from a possible attack by 





Iraq. But other members opposed the proposal and the 
presence of foreign troops. Michael C Hudson 

See also Flag (picture: Flags of world organizations). 
Arabesque, ar uh BEHSK, is a term used to describe 
the lacy surface decoration common in Islamic art. It is 
also used to mean any fanciful ornamentation com- 
posed of intertwined lines, leafy vines, and scrolls. 

Arabesque design prominently features curving fo- 
liage patterns. These patterns may incorporate fruits, 
flowers, and leaves or such geometric shapes as circles, 
stars, and octagons. The Islamic religion forbids the por- 
trayal of human or animal figures. Famous arabesque 
decoration appears in the walls and arches of the Al- 
hambra (1248-1354), a palace and fortress in Granada, 
Spain. Arabesque became popular in Europe during the 
Renaissance and appeared on such objects as book- 
bindings, pottery, silver, and textiles. John W. Keefe 

See also Bookplate (picture); Islamic art. 

Arabia. See Arabian Peninsula; Saudi Arabia 
Arabian Desert, uh RAY bee uhn, is a desert that cov- 
ers most of the Arabian Peninsula. It occupies about 1 
million square miles (2.6 million square kilometers). 
Countries entirely in the desert are Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, 
Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, and Yemen. 
Parts of Jordan, Syria, and Iraq also lie within the desert. 
The northwestern Arabian Desert is also known as the 
Syrian Desert. For location, see Desert (map). 

Most of the Arabian Desert consists of barren, stony 
highlands and plains, but sand in the form of dunes and 
thin sheets is common. An area in the southeast called 
Rub al Khali is the largest continuous area of desert sand 
on the earth. It covers about 250,000 square miles 
(647,500 square kilometers). 

Average annual rainfall in most of the Arabian Desert 
is less than 4 inches (10 centimeters). Mountainous areas 
in the southwest get up to 20 inches (50 centimeters). 
Most of the desert is hot all year, but freezing tempera- 
tures occur in some areas in winter. 

See also Syrian Desert. 
Arabian Nights, a collection of about 200 stories, is 
probably the most famous piece of Arabic literature in 
the West It includes the adventures of such well-known 
characters as Aladdin, Ali Baba, and Sinbad. 

The Arabian Nights, also called The Thousand and 
One Nights, begins with the story of King Shahriyar, 
whose wife has been unfaithful. He orders her killed and 
vows to marry a new maiden each night and have her 
beheaded the next morning. One of the king's officials 
has a beautiful and talented daughter, Scheherazade, 
who insists on being the ruler's bride. She asks her sis- 
ter to come to the bedchamber on the wedding night 
and request permission for Scheherazade to tell one last 
story. The king agrees, and she tells a tale so entertain- 
ing that he allows her to live another day to finish it One 
story leads to another, and Scheherazade tells tales for 
1,001 nights. By then, the king has fallen in love with her. 

The stories of the Arabian Nights are folk tales from 
Arabia, Egypt, India, Persia, and other countries. The 
work in its present form was written in Arabic about 
1500. In the early 1700 s, Jean Antoine Galland translated 
the Arabian Nights into French. John Payne and Sir 
Richard Francis Burton wrote English translations of the 
collection in the 1880's. Dick Davis 

See also Burton, Sir Richard Francis; Genie. 


Wayne Lambert 


Arabian Peninsula, in southwestern Asia, is a vast 
land that is largely desert. Saudi Arabia occupies most 
of the peninsula. The other countries on the peninsula 
are Yemen, Oman, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, and 
Kuwait. Bahrain, an island country, lies just east of the 
peninsula. The Arabian Peninsula has an area of about 
1,160,000 square miles (3,004,000 square kilometers). 
Most of it is dry wasteland. Rain seldom falls in some 
parts, and temperatures in the interior may rise to 130 °F 
(54 °C). But in parts of Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Oman, and 
the United Arab Emirates, rainfall and irrigation support 
farming. The peninsula is an area of great economic im- 
portance because it has large deposits of petroleum. 

For detailed information on the Arabian Peninsula, 
see Saudi Arabia and the articles on the region's other 
countries. See also Arabs. Malcolm C. Peck 
Arabian Sea, part of the Indian Ocean, lies between 
the Arabian Peninsula and India. Iran and Pakistan bor- 
der it on the north. For location, see Asia (map). The Red 
Sea, Gulf of Aden, Persian Gulf, and Gulf of Oman are 
arms of the Arabian Sea. Along the Indian coast are the 
gulfs of Kutch and Khambhat. The Indus, Narmada, and 
Tapti rivers empty into the Arabian Sea. The chief is- 
lands in the sea are the Laccadive Islands, off the west 
coast of India; Socotra, northeast of Somalia; and Masira 
and the Kuria Muria Islands, off Oman’s coast. In ancient 
times, the Arabian Sea was an important shipping route. 
Goods from the Far East were brought by ship to its 
western shores and carried inland by camel caravans. 
Today, tankers pass through the sea to and from the Per- 
sian Gulf, where they take on cargoes of crude oil and 
petroleum products. Malcolm C. Peck 
Arabic language is one of the world’s most widely 
used languages. It is the official language of many Arab 
nations in the Middle East and northern Africa, includ- 
ing Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, and Syr- 
ia. For the general distribution of Arabic, see Language 
(map). 

There are two types of Arabic, spoken and written. 
Spoken Arabic consists of dialects in different areas of 
the Arabic-speaking world. These dialects can be rough- 
ly divided into Gulf, Iraqi, Levantine, Maghrebi, North 
Egyptian, Saudi, South Egyptian and Sudanese, and 
Tunisian. These dialect areas can be subdivided further. 
Written Arabic serves as the standard written language 
of all Arab nations. It is the descendant of the language 
of the Quran, the sacred book of the Islamic religion. 
Arabs use a spoken form of written Arabic for radio and 
TV news broadcasts, and in plays and motion pictures. 
This form also serves as a common spoken language for 
Arabs who speak different dialects. 

Arabic belongs to the Semitic language groups, and 
is thus related to Hebrew and Ethiopic. The Arabic al- 
phabet has 28 symbols. The alphabet is written from 
right to ieft or from the top of the page to the bottom. 
The alphabet appears in the Alphabet article. Many Eng- 
lish words come from Arabic. They include a/cohol, al- 
gebra, check, checkmate, lute, magazine, and tariff 

No one knows when Arabic originally developed, but 
people of the Arabian Peninsula were the first to use it. 
During the A.D. 600's, Islam spread throughout south- 
western Asia and northern Africa, and the Arabic lan- 
guage was introduced in these areas 

Since the mid-1900's, many Arab countries have 





Arabic literature 583 


played an increasingly important role in world affairs. As 
a result, Arabic has become a major language in interna- 
tional business and politics. Roger Allen 

See also Arabic literature; Arabs (Language); Quran; 
Semitic languages. 

Arabic literature is the literature of people who 
speak the Arabic language, the official language of 19 
Arab nations. Because it is also the language of the 
Quran, the holy book of Islam, Arabic is read and chant- 
ed by millions of Muslims throughout the world. 

The earliest examples of Arabic literature date from 
the A.D. 500's, though they were not written down until 
up to 200 years later. Likewise, the Quran originally had 
no written form. When the Muslim community in the 
mid-600’'s felt the need for a recorded version of the sa- 
cred text, the Quran and other memorized texts from the 
earlier period were written down. 

From its origin in the Arabian Peninsula, Islam spread 
to the west and east from the 600's to the 900’s. With the 
spread of Islam, Arabic literature became known over a 
vast area, which, at its height, stretched from Spain 
across North Africa, through the Middle East, and to In- 
dia. Today, the Arabic-speaking area still extends across 
North Africa and the Middle East. 

From the earliest beginnings in the 500's to the pres- 
ent day, poetry has been the most important form of lit- 
erary expression. During the 1800's, increased contacts 
with the Western world introduced Arab authors to new 
ideas and forms. They included the novel, short story, 
and theater. Poetry today retains its status as the most 
prestigious form of literature, but fiction has become 
very popular. 

Poetry is described as the “register of the Arabs’ in 
their literary tradition. Poetry is a powerful source of 
identity within Arab culture. From the beginning, it has 
been a public form, to be recited and sung. Tribal poets 
celebrated the qualities of their tribe: courage, loyalty, 
the beauty of their women, the speed of their horses, 
and the hardiness of their camels. 

With the spread of Islam, poetry moved from the tribe 
in the desert to the court of the ruler in various Islamic 
cities, such as Baghdad, Iraq; Damascus and Aleppo, 
Syria; Cairo, Egypt; Fez, Morocco; and Cordoba, Spain. 
New themes were added, including wine, hunting, 
philosophical reflections on the individual's role in life, 
and the glory of the ruler. These themes were mostly ex- 
pressed in the ancient poetic forms. However, new po- 
etic structures emerged, particularly in Spain starting in 
the 900's, which combined aspects of both Arabic and 
Spanish poetry. Among the most famous classical poets 
are Imru al-Qays, Abu Nuwas, Abu Tammam, al- 
Mutanabbi, and al-Maarri. 

In the 1900's, Arab poets imported Western forms, 
such as free verse and the prose poem. Perhaps most 
significantly, Arab poets felt free to break with tradition 
and compose their poems in a variety of forms and ona 
range of topics unavailable to their predecessors. 
Among the major poets of the 1900's were Kahlil Gibran, 
Khalil Hawi, and Adunis from Lebanon; Badr Shakir al- 
Sayyab from Iraq; and Salah ‘Abd al-Sabur from Egypt. 

Fiction. Several types of stories are found in early 
Arabic literature. For example, the maqgamah usually 
contains short, witty narratives in which two characters 
visit cities through the Middle East. They observe the 


584 Arabic numerals 


way people behave and play tricks on them. From the 
1300's, the famous collection of stories called The Thou- 
sand and One Nights, or Arabian Nights, was gathered. 
These tales were mostly performed in public by story- 
tellers. Written versions were fairly rare until they were 
translated into Western languages. 

In the 1900's, the novel and short story became popu- 
lar in Arabian literature. The most famous modern fic- 
tion writer is Naguib Mahfouz, an Egyptian who in 1988 
became the first Arab author to win the Nobel Prize for 
literature. Other important modern fiction writers in- 
clude Yusuf Idris and Gamal al-Ghitani from Egypt, al- 
Tayyib Salih from the Sudan, Emile Habibi from Pales- 
tine, Hanan al-Shaykh from Lebanon, and Zakariyya 
Tamir from Syria. 

Drama. Before the 1800's, there were several types of 
dramatic performances in the Arab world, though few 
of them were written down. In the 1800's, Arab writers 
visited Europe, where they saw plays performed. They 
began the process of transferring the form to the Arab 
world. One of the first major dramatists was Tawfiq al- 
Hakim of Egypt. He published many plays, ranging from 
one-act comedies of manners to !ong tragedies. 

Since the 1950's, drama has flourished in many Arab 
countries. The most famous playwrights include Alfred 
Farag and Yusuf Idris of Egypt, Sadallah Wannus of 
Syria, Al-Tayyib al-Siddiqi of Morocco, and Yusuf al-Ani 
of Iraq. Roger Allen 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Arabian Nights Averroés Ibn Battuta 
Arabic language Avicenna Ibn Khaldun 
Arabs (Literature Egypt (The arts) Quran 

and the arts) Gibran, Kahlil Syria (The arts) 


Arabic numerals, AR uh bihk, also called Hindu- 
Arabic numerals, are the most common symbols used to 
represent numbers. Every number can be expressed in 
Arabic numerals by using 10 basic symbols, alone or in 
combination. The basic symbols, called digits, are 0, 1, 2, 
3,4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. The position of a digit in an Arabic 
numeral determines its value. For example, the Arabic 
numeral for the number two hundred thirty-seven is the 
sequence of digits 237. In this numeral, the digit 2 has a 
value of two hundred, the digit 3 has a value of thirty, 
and the digit 7 has a value of seven. The Arabic numeral 
for the number seven thousand three is 7,003. In this 
case, the digit 7 has a value of seven thousand, and the 
digit 3 has a value of three. The digit 0 (zero) fills empty 
positions so that the other digits have their proper val- 
ues. See Decimal system. 

Scholars do not know how Arabic numerals origi- 
nated. But the symbols for all the digits except zero 
probably originated with the Hindus in India, possibly as 
early as the 200's B.C. The Hindus developed the zero 
sometime after A.D. 600. The word zero probably comes 
from the Arabic form of the Hindu word sunya, which 
means empty (see Zero). Traders and merchants helped 
spread the Arabic numeral system across the Mediterra- 
nean region, especially into Spain. Beginning in the 


800's, merchants and scholars introduced it throughout 
the rest of Europe. The system came into general use in 
Europe when the digit symbols were standardized. This 
was brought about by the invention of the printing press 


in the mid-1400's. Nadine | lert 





b 7 





A. ‘ 

Andy Hernandez, Sipa Press 
Arabs follow many ways of life. But they are united mainly by 
their history and their culture. Most Arabs are Muslims, like 
these men praying on a street in Amman, Jordan. Islam requires 
its followers to pray five times a day. 


Arabs 


Arabs are a large group of people whose native lan- 
guage is Arabic and who share a common history and 
culture. Most Arabs live in the Middle East, which 
spreads across southwestern Asia and northern Africa. 
Arabs also have migrated to such countries as Brazil, 
Britain, Canada, France, and the United States. 

This article discusses the approximately 200 million 
Arabs who live in the Arab world. There are two chief 
definitions of the Arab world, a political definition and a 
linguistic (\anguage-related) one. Politically, the Arab 
world is usually said to include 18 countries—Algeria, 
Bahrain, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, 
Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, 
Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, and 
Yemen. These are called Arab countries because a ma- 
jority of their people are Arabs and their governments 
regard themselves as Arab. Two other countries—Dji- 
bouti and Somalia—have only small Arab populations, 
but they are sometimes included in this political defini- 
tion because they belong to an organization of Arab 
states called the Arab League. 

In a linguistic sense, the term Arab world refers to 
those areas where most people speak Arabic as their 
native language. This linguistic definition differs from 
the political one because some Arab countries include 
large areas populated by non-Arabs, and some non- 
Arab countries have significant Arab minorities. For ex- 
ample, the Kurds of Iraq and the Berbers of northern Af- 
rica are non-Arabs inhabiting Arab countries. At the 
same time, many Arabs live within the borders of such 


Fred M. Donner, the contributor of this article, is Associate 
Professor of Islamic History at the University of Chicago. 


non-Arab nations as Iran and Israel. In this article, the 
term Arab world chiefly refers to the 18 countries usual- 
ly considered Arab in a political sense. 

Originally, the word Arab was probably associated 
with the camel-herding nomadic tribes of the Arabian 
Peninsula and nearby parts of the Middle East. Later, it 
was applied to settled people who spoke the Arabic lan- 
guage. The number of Arabs who follow a nomadic way 
of life has gradually shrunk over the years. Today, almost 
all Arabs live in cities, towns, or villages. 

Arabs today are united mainly by aspects of their cul- 
ture—above all, by the Arabic language and Arabic liter- 
ature and music. Religious and historical factors also 
bind the Arabs together. Most Arabs are Muslims, fol- 
lowers of a religion called Islam. The Arabs rise to polit- 
ical and cultural importance during the Middle Ages 
was Closely associated with the rise of Islam. For this 
reason, even non-Muslim Arabs hold Islam in special re- 
gard. The modern Arab identity emerged during the 
1800's and 1900's, when most Arab lands were colonies 
of European powers. Thus, Arabs also share a sense of 
themselves as former subjects of European rule. 

Despite this common heritage, deep differences exist 
among the Arab countries. For example, many Arab 
countries possess valuable petroleum deposits. The ex- 
port of oil has made some of these countries, such as 
Kuwait and Qatar, extremely rich. But such countries as 
Sudan and Yemen remain poor. Some countries, includ- 
ing Jordan and Lebanon, have highly urban societies, 
where many people work in industry or commerce. Oth- 
ers, such as Mauritania and Yemen, have rural societies 
and rely on farming or herding. Some nations, such as 
Lebanon and Tunisia, have been heavily influenced by 
Western culture. Others, including Oman and Saudi 
Arabia, remain strongly traditional. These and other dif- 
ferences have caused conflicts, and even wars, within 
the Arab world. 


Land of the Arabs 


The Arab world extends over about 5 million square 
miles (13 million square kilometers). It covers roughly 
three main regions: the Arabian Peninsula (sometimes 
called Arabia); northern Africa; and part of an area called 
the Fertile Crescent, which includes Iraq, Jordan, 










The Arab world has both a 
political and a /inguistic (lan- 
guage-related) definition. Po- 
litically, it includes 18 coun- 
tries in the Middle East and 
across northern Africa. West- 
ern Sahara, also shown, is 
claimed by Morocco. In a lin- 
guistic sense, Arab world 
refers to those areas where 
most people speak Arabic as 
their native language. 


) 
Portuga 
f 


North Atlantic Om 
Ocean 

» Casablanca, ~ 
Morocco 0% 





Arab country boundary 


Fal Arabic language area 


0 1,000 Miles 


arene REEEEEEEEEEEEE EERE 
0 1,000 Kilometers 


WORLD BOOK map 






*algiers ’ 
Tunisia! 


Arabs 585 


ii 


t 


f 
é 


Dd 


i _k 


ite 
Re yh +) * 


yt Pay Su 


(Lae - a E 
4 f ° | 


le 


at 
A ig 


4Ba 


Eddie Adams, Contact 


The Egyptian potato farmers shown here live in one of the 
few fertile regions of the Arab world. Despite its vast area, only a 
small percentage of Arab land is suitable for human settlement. 


Lebanon, Syria, and the historical land of Palestine. Pal- 
estine today consists of the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, 
and the non-Arab state of Israel. 

Despite the vast area of the Arab world, only a small 
percentage of it is suitable for human settlement. Much 
of the region is hot and dry, and it has large desert ar- 
eas. These include the Sahara in northern Africa, the 
deserts of the Arabian Peninsula, and the Syrian Desert. 


_ At the other extreme are snow-capped mountains, such 


as those of the Grand Atlas range in Morocco and parts 
of the Lebanon Mountains. The vast majority of Arabs 
live in well-watered hilly regions, fertile river valleys, 
and humid coastal areas. The most densely settled area 
is the Nile Valley and Nile River Delta of Egypt. Virtually 
all the people of Egypt—about a fourth of all Arabs—live 
in this area. A large number of Iraq's people live in the 
fertile delta between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. 
Other population centers include the coastal and hill 


ae EUROP aN an 


Sb? 


unis 


»tipoh 





Saudi Arabia 
ofiyadh 


Libya 
me Egypt 


ae 
Sudan. 
Khartoum? 


Medina. arasian 
: PENINSULA United” 









~ 
™~ 


* Ta 
Mecca Emirates Oman 






eAden 
{ Djibouti 


JZ Somalia 


Jou 


586 Arabs 





zones of northwestern Africa and of Lebanon, Syria, and 
parts of Palestine. 

Historically, the scarcity of water and the resulting lim- 
ited farming capacity have hampered population growth 
and economic development in Arab lands. However, 
they may have encouraged the development of trade, 
especially before the 1800's. 


Life in the Arab world 


When people think of Arabs, they often picture no- 
madic herders, or Bedouins, living in tents and crossing 
the desert with their camels, sheep, goats, or cattle in 
search of water and grazing land. Today, less than 1 per- 
cent of Arabs are nomads. Livestock herding now re- 
sembles ranching rather than nomadic life, and ani- 
mals —even camels—are usually transported by truck. 

About half of all Arabs live in cities and large towns. 
Many of these people work in factories or in such fields 
as business, government, and health care. Most other 
Arabs live in villages or small towns and work as farm- 
ers or in local trades. In many Arab countries, the cre- 
ation of modern road networks has enabled industries 
to spread to rural areas, and some villagers have jobs in 
nearby factories. 

Language. Virtually all people who consider them- 
selves Arabs speak Arabic as their native language. But 
the forms of spoken Arabic vary considerably from one 
region to another. Arabs who speak different dialects 
can communicate through a common form of Arabic, 
usually called Modern Standard Arabic (MSA)— fusha in 
Arabic. MSA is a simplified version of the Arabic of the 
Quran, the sacred book of Islam. MSA serves as the 
chief form of written Arabic in all Arab lands. It is also 
the language used in most schools and in radio and TV 
news broadcasts throughout the Arab world. 

Many other languages are used in various parts of the 
Arab world. For example, French is widely spoken in the 
former French colonies of Algeria, Morocco, and 
Tunisia, where the French language struck deep roots in 
cultural and political life. 

Religion. About 90 percent of Arabs are Muslims. 
Most belong to the Sunni branch of Islam. However, sig- 
nificant Shiite Muslim communities exist in Iraq, the 





Harsh, sparsely populated deserts 
cover much of the Arab world. Nomads 
once roamed these deserts with their 
herds, but today nearly all livestock 
herders live in towns or villages. The Su- 
danese goatherds in this photograph are 
drawing water from a well. 


Mark Edwards. Svgma 


eastern Arabian Peninsula, and Lebanon. Some Shiites 
live in most other Arab countries. Small numbers of 
Arabs belong to other Muslim groups. 

Druses, who follow a religion related to Islam, live 
mainly in Lebanon, Syria, and the historical region of 
Palestine. Most non-Muslim Arabs are Christians. The 
Copts of Egypt belong to one of the oldest Christian 
sects. Other Christian Arabs belong to various Eastern 
Orthodox, Roman Catholic, or Protestant churches. They 
live mainly in Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, and Palestine. 
Small communities of Jews live in some Arab countries. 

Family life. Arabs strongly value family ties and hos- 
pitality. Traditionally, Arabs have placed great impor- 
tance on belonging to family or kinship groups, includ- 
ing the extended family, clan, and tribe. An extended 
family includes members of two or more generations, 
many of them sharing one home. A clan consists of sev- 
eral related families. A tribe might include hundreds of 
families. In the past, most social and even many business 
activities took place within these groups. Often, parents 
sought marriage partners for their children within the 
clan or tribe. The kinship system also stressed hospitali- 
ty as a source of honor. A host who richly entertained a 
guest raised the standing of the entire tribe. 

Today, some kinship ties have loosened, especially in 
the cities. The impact of Western values and the need 
for some people to move far from home to earn a living 
have tended to weaken family relationships. But for 
many Arabs, the family continues to be the main source 
of social and economic support. Many rural Arabs still 
live in extended families, and even most city dwellers 
live near relatives. Many Arab children are raised by 
grandparents, aunts, uncles, and other relatives in addi- 
tion to their parents. It is still common for parents to 
arrange their children’s marriages. 

Traditionally, women formed the focus of family life. 
They supervised the raising of children, the preparation 
of meals, and the organizing of family celebrations. In 
some countries, economic pressures and educational 
opportunities have led a growing number of women to 
work outside the home. 

Education. Until the 1900's, religious authorities op- 
erated most schools in the Arab world. Today, all Arab 


a 


— 


nations also have free, nonreligious primary and sec- 
ondary schools. In most Arab countries, about 90 per- 
cent of all children receive at least an elementary educa- 
tion. Some Arabs consider education less important for 
girls than for boys. But all Arab nations provide public 
schooling at all levels for both sexes. 

Some Arab institutions of higher education have exist- 
ed for centuries. For example, al-Azhar University in 
Cairo, Egypt, was founded about 970. Today, there are 
approximately 85 universities in the Arab world. 

Literature and the arts. Arabic literature began 
about 1,500 years ago. The first major Arabic work was 
the Quran, the holy book of Islam, which dates to the 
600's. The Quran is still regarded as the greatest master- 
piece of Arabic literary style. See Quran. 

Classical Arabic literature extends from the time of the 
Quran to about the mid-1800's and includes a rich tradi- 
tion in both poetry and prose. Prose literature covers a 
wide range of forms and styles, from the popular tales 
of the Arabian Nights to such scholarly works as the 
Mugaddima of ibn Khaldun, a historian of the 1300's. 
The Mugaddima examines the rise and fall of civiliza- 
tions. A highly developed poetic tradition flourished be- 
ginning in the 700's. Arabic poets produced verses of 
great lyric beauty as well as poetic works expressing 
deep philosophical or religious thought. 

Today, poetry remains especially beloved by Arabs. 
Nearly all Arabs delight in reciting and listening to vers- 
es, and many compose their own poetry. Stories, novels, 
and plays are also published in great numbers. 

Arabs took part in the flowering of art and architec- 
ture throughout the Muslim world from the mid-700's to 
about 1700 (see Islamic art). Such traditional crafts as 
glass blowing, metalworking, and pottery making still 
flourish today. Since 1900, painting and sculpture have 
become popular in many Arab lands. 

Traditional Arab music, with its strong rhythmic pat- 
terns, is closely linked with the poetic tradition. Today, 
many musicians experiment with new styles, mixing as- 





Richard Steedman, The Stockh Market 
Traditional Arab architecture places great importance on pri- 
vacy. Many houses are constructed around a central courtyard, 
like the homes in this neighborhood in Damascus, Syria. 


Arabs 587 


pects of Arab and non-Arab music or combining styles 
from different parts of the Arab world. 

Food and drink. Beans, chickpeas, lentils, and rice 
are basic foods in most Arab lands. They may be made 
into stews, or cooked with water, oil, vegetables, and 
seasonings to form various pastes. People eat the pastes 
by scooping up mouthfuls with thin Arab bread, called 
pita in the West In northern Africa, couscous (steamed 
cracked wheat) replaces rice as a basic food to some ex- 
tent. Arabs also enjoy meat, fish, and a wide variety of 
salads and cooked vegetables. Sesame seed paste or oil 
adds a special flavor to many dishes. Some form of yo- 
gurt often accompanies meals. 

Fresh and dried fruits are the main desserts. But sweet 
pastries such as baklava, which is made with honey and 
chopped nuts, are served on special occasions. Coffee 
and tea are the most popular beverages. 

Clothing. Because of the hot climate of most Arab 
lands, both men and women have traditionally worn 
loose-fitting garments that cover most of the body and 
head, shielding them from the sun. For women, such 
garments usually consist of a floor-length dress and a 
headscarf or hood. In areas where Islam is strong, 
women may wear a veil in public. Many women wear 
Western-style dresses or slacks. But they rarely wear 
short or sleeveless dresses or let their hair hang free. 

Traditional men’s clothing might consist of a full- 
length robe, or a cloak over some combination of shirt, 
vest, skirt, and /oinc/oth (a cloth wrapped around the 
hips and between the thighs). Some farmers wear baggy 
trousers. Many men also wear a turban, skullcap, or kaf 
fiveh—a loose, folded headscarf, often held in place by a 
decorative cord called an agal, also spelled igal Today, 
many men wear Western-style clothing, especially in the 
cities. Some men combine elements of Western and tra- 
ditional dress. For example, they may wear a Western- 
style sports jacket over a robe. 

Shelter. Most rural Arabs live in one- or two-story 
houses of brick, mud-brick, or stone. Mud-brick archi- 
tecture, in particular, takes a wide variety of forms, from 
simple rectangular structures to the beehive-shaped 
houses of northern Syria (see Syria ipicture]). Mud-brick 
is cheap and easy to use, and it provides excellent insu- 
lation against heat and cold. However, concrete and cin- 
der blocks are increasingly replacing mud-brick as 
building materials. 

Western-style apartment buildings are common in 
large cities. But traditional Arab architecture can also be 
found in urban areas. The distinctive many-storied mud- 
brick or stone buildings of Yemen and southern Saudi 
Arabia rank among the world’s first “skyscrapers” (see 
Yemen Ipicture]). Privacy is an important factor in much 
Arab architecture, both urban and rural. Many homes or 
buildings open onto a private or semiprivate central 
courtyard, while blank walls face the street. 

Economy. For centuries, the Arab world was a cross- 
roads of international commerce. Arab and other mer- 
chants carried such goods as spices, textiles, and glass 
between Asia, Africa, and Europe. Beginning in the 
1700's, the expansion of European commerce and indus- 
try led to economic decline in the Arab world. Then, 
during the 1900's, petroleum became one of the world’s 
most important economic resources. Together, the Arab 
lands hold about three-fifths of the world’s reserves of 


588 Arabs 





Robert Harding Picture Library 


Petroleum, the Arab world’s most important resource, has 
brought great wealth to some Arab countries. Arab lands hold 
about three-fifths of the world’s oil reserves. 


oil. Petroleum has brought enormous prosperity to 
many Arab governments, permitting rapid improvement 
in education, health care, transportation, and other serv- 
ices. But some Arab countries still face great poverty. 

The countries most dependent on petroleum include 
Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the 
United Arab Emirates. But nearly all Arab states rely 
heavily on the export of petroleum, other raw materials, 
and agricultural products. Manufacturing is developing 
slowly in the Arab world. Only Jordan, Lebanon, Moroc- 
co, Tunisia, and, to a lesser extent, Egypt receive a signif- 
icant amount of income from manufacturing. 

A scarcity of fresh water limits agricultural develop- 
ment in most areas. Agriculture can be extended only 
through large-scale irrigation projects, which are expen- 
sive and unreliable. In addition, in many countries, a 
small number of wealthy landowners once controlled 
most of the farmland, which was worked by poverty- 
stricken peasants. Since the mid-1900's, Arab govern- 
ments have put more land in the hands of the farmwork- 
ers. But most of them remain poor. 


History 


The Arabs before Islam. The word Arab first ap- 
pears in documents about 850 B.C. The documents— 
written by the Assyrians, a people of what is now Iraq 
suggest that the early Arabs were nomadic camel 
herders centered in what are now Jordan and Israel. The 
Arabs then spread north and east through present-day 
Syria and Iraq, and south into the Arabian Peninsula. 

About the 400's B.C, Arab families or tribes began to 
establish small states, often at centers for the overland 
caravan trade. Two important states were centered at 
Petra and Palmyra. Petra, in what is now Jordan, was the 
capital of Arabs known as Nabateans. It was conquered 
by the Romans in A.D. 106 but continued to flourish until 
the early A.D. 200's. Palmyra, in the Syrian Desert, fell un- 
der Roman domination by about A.D. 160. It reached its 
height in the mid-200s. 





The rise and spread of Islam. Muslims believe that 
God revealed the teachings of Islam to the prophet 
Muhammad. Muhammad was born about A.D. 570 and 
grew up in Mecca, a town in western Arabia. He began 
to preach about 610. Muhammad founded the first com- 
munity of Muslims in Medina, then called Yathrib, north 
of Mecca. This community rapidly grew into a state that 
controlled much of the peninsula. 

After Muhammad’ss death in 632, leaders called 
caliphs headed the Islamic state. Armies under the 
caliphs soon seized the rest of Arabia and an area 
stretching from Egypt to Iran. The result was a vast new 
empire dominated by Arabian Muslims, with Islam as 
the official religion of the empire and Arabic as the offi- 
cial language. 

For several hundred years, the political life of the em- 
pire was dominated by three families from Muham- 
mad ss tribe of Quraysh: the Umayyads, the Abbasids, 
and the Alids. The Umayyads ruled from 661 to 750. They 
extended the empire as far west as Spain and as far east 
as India. In 750, the Umayyads were overthrown by the 
Abbasids, though they retained control of Spain. After 
about 850, the Abbasids increasingly lost control of dis- 
tant parts of the empire, which became independent un- 
der local Islamic dynasties (ruling families). The Alids, 
the main rivals of the Umayyads and Abbasids, made 
many unsuccessful attempts to overthrow them. The 
Alids finally established the Fatimid dynasty in northern 
Africa in 909. It ruled until 1171. 

A sense of Arab identity seems to have emerged in 
connection with the spread of Islam. This sense of 
“Arabness resulted partly from use of the Arabic lan- 
guage and partly from pride in the Islamic empire. It 
also stemmed from identification with the rich literary 
culture that developed under the Umayyads and Ab- 
basids. For more information on the history of this peri- 
od, see Muslims (The Muslim Empire). 

From the 1000's to the 1500's, parts of the eastern Arab 
lands were conquered by several waves of non-Arab in- 
vaders. Chief among these were the Seljuk Turks and 
the Mongols, who executed the last Abbasid caliph in 
1258. Northern Africa remained in the hands of local 
groups, mainly Arabs and Berbers. 

Ottoman and European rule. By the mid-1500's, 
nearly all the Arab lands had come under the control of 
the Ottoman Empire, centered in what is now Turkey. 
The Arab lands were an important part of the empire. 
Many high Ottoman officials were of Arab origin, and 
the Arabs regarded themselves as Ottomans and Mus- 
lims, not as Arabs. 

Beginning in the mid-1700's, the rapid economic and 
military development of much of Europe gave European 
States an advantage over the Ottomans. In their efforts to 
modernize their economies, the Ottomans often devel- 
oped large debts to European financiers. The financiers 
then sometimes persuaded their governments to seize 
economic or political control of Ottoman possessions to 
ensure repayment of the debts. In other cases, European 
nations simply invaded Ottoman territories. France be- 
gan occupation of Algeria in 1830, and it controlled 
Tunisia and Morocco by the early 1900's. Beginning in 
the late 1800's, Britain took over Egypt and Sudan, and it 
controlled many coastal areas of Arabia. Italy gained 
control of Libya in 1912. 


Arab nationalism arose against the background of 
both European colonial rule and increasing nationalist 
feeling among the Ottoman Empire's Turkish majority. It 
was part of a nationalist idea that spread through much 
of the world during the 1800's and 1900s. This idea stat- 
ed that humanity was divided into distinct nations or 
peoples. The members of each nation shared a common 
history and language, and each nation had a historic 
claim to a particular national homeland. 

Significant Arab nationalist movements did not devel- 
op until the early 1900's. These movements then took 
two forms. In some cases, nationalist feeling arose 
around particular areas. In others, it centered on the 
Arabic language as a source of unity. This form of na- 
tionalism later grew into the movement for Arab politi- 
cal unification called Pan-Arabism. 

After the Ottoman Empire entered World War I on 
the side of Germany in 1914, the United Kingdom 
helped stir up an Arab nationalist revolt against the Ot- 
tomans. The United Kingdom promised the leaders of 
the revolt that it would recognize an independent Arab 
government in former Ottoman territories after the war. 
But the United Kingdom also made a secret agreement 
with France to divide these territories into British and 
French spheres of influence after the war. When World 
War I ended in 1918, the League of Nations—a forerun- 
ner of the United Nations—divided the Arab lands still 
held by the Ottomans between the United Kingdom and 
France. In turn, the United Kingdom and France were ex- 
pected to supervise these lands—known as mandated 
territories—and help them attain self-government. The 
United Kingdom received mandates over Iraq and over 
Palestine, which then included present-day Jordan and 
Israel. France received what are now Syria and Lebanon. 

Struggles for independence. By the early 1920's, the 
main centers of population in the Arab world had been 
split into more than 15 European colonies and protec- 
torates (territories under partial control). These colonies 
had become divided politically, economically, and, in- 
creasingly, culturally. Because of these divisions, the 
goal of Pan-Arab unification became less important than 





© Bill Lyons 


Arab nations are working to develop a wider variety of eco- 
nomic activities. These computer operators, members of a grow- 
ing middle class, work for a Jordanian papermaking firm. 


Arabs 589 


that of independence within each colony. 

Beginning in the 1920's, the Arab countries gradually 
gained independence. Some, such as Bahrain and 
Kuwait, made the change peacefully. In others, notably 
Algeria, violent struggles took place. The last colonies to 
become independent—British-ruled Bahrain, Qatar, and 
the states that now make up the United Arab Emirates— 
did so in 1971. 

Since independence. Traditionally, political life in 
most Arab lands had been dominated either by a small 
number of wealthy individuals or by the army. The Euro- 
pean powers took limited steps toward developing insti- 
tutions of democratic government in their Arab 
colonies. But they kept such institutions from becoming 
strong enough to threaten colonial rule. They also failed 
to create economic or educational systems that would 
stimulate the growth of a middle class. As a result, the 
independent Arab states have continued to be ruled by 
traditional wealthy families or by the army. 

The independent Arab nations have struggled with 
other issues as well. These include (1) the search for uni- 
ty and (2) the Arab-Israeli conflict. 

The search for unity. Several times, two or three Arab 
nations have attempted to unite into a single state. For 
example, Syria and Egypt joined to form the United Arab 
Republic in 1958. The union ended when Syria withdrew 
in 1961. Such efforts have stemmed partly from a belief 
in Pan-Arabism. But in many cases, they also represent- 
ed attempts by a weak government to maintain its rule 
by uniting with a stronger neighbor. 

In 1945, seven countries founded the Arab League. 
Today, 21 countries and the Palestine Liberation Organi- 
zation (PLO) belong to the league. The organization 
works to promote closer political, economic, and social 
relations among its members. 

Pan-Arab unity remains an ideal for some Arabs. But 
the different economic needs and political goals of the 
Arab states have at times made them bitter rivals. The 
wealth of some Arab countries from petroleum exports 
has contributed greatly to tension. Petroleum-poor 
states resent the wealth of their richer neighbors and 
seek to share in the oil income. Disagreements have also 
occurred among petroleum exporters over pricing and 
production policies. Such disagreements helped set off 
the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq in 1990, which severely di- 
vided the Arab states. Several Arab countries, most no- 
tably Saudi Arabia and Egypt, took part in the Persian 
Gulf War in 1991 helping expel Iraqi forces from Kuwait. 

The Arab-Israeli conflict can best be understood as a 
struggle between two nationalist movements, both of 
which claim Palestine as their national homeland. The 
conflict dates to the early 1900's, after significant num- 
bers of European Jewish immigrants began to enter 
Palestine. In 1917, the United Kingdom declared its sup- 
port for the creation of a Jewish homeland in Palestine. 
But the United Kingdom had also promised support for 
an independent Arab state in former Ottoman Arab 
provinces, including Palestine. Tension between the 
Arabs and the Jewish settlers grew, accompanied in- 
creasingly by violence on both sides. 

In 1947, the United Nations adopted a plan dividing 
Palestine into an Arab state and a Jewish one. The Arabs 
rejected this plan, and in 1948 several Arab nations in- 
vaded the newly formed state of Israel. During the war 


590 Arabs 


that followed, hundreds of thousands of Palestinian 
Arab refugees fled to neighboring Arab countries. 

The war ended in 1949, but no peace treaty was 
signed. Since then, the Arab-Israeli conflict has been of 
major importance in the Arab world. Thousands of peo- 
ple died in wars fought in 1956, 1967, and 1973, and in 
an Israeli invasion of Lebanon in 1982. Thousands more 
have died in Palestinian guerrilla attacks and in two in- 
titadas (uprisings) by Palestinians. The first intifada began 
in 1987 and lasted into the early 1990 s. The second in- 
tifada began in 2000. 

Egypt and Israel signed a peace treaty in 1979. In 1994, 
Jordan and Israel signed a declaration that formally end- 
ed the state of war between the two countries. But Israel 
has not made final peace agreements with Syria or with 
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). The PLO is a 
group approved by Arab countries to represent the 
Palestinians. In 1993, Israel and the PLO agreed to a plan 
for Palestinian self-government in the Gaza Strip and the 
West Bank Israel occupied those Arab lands in 1967. 
During the 1990s, Israel withdrew from most of the 
Gaza Strip and parts of the West Bank But in 2000, 
peace talks between the two sides failed to resolve sev- 
eral remaining disagreements. Later that year, Palestini- 
ans began a violent intifada, and Israel responded with 
police crackdowns and military attacks. 

The Arabs today continue to face major challenges. 
The problems of poverty, overpopulation, poor health 
Care, and inadequate educational facilities are severe in 
some Arab states. In other countries—especially thinly 
populated ones—enormous oil wealth has provided 
high-quality medical care and education. But an effective 
way of bringing those benefits to poorer, more populat- 
ed countries has yet to be found. In addition, the oil-rich 
states must plan carefully for the day when oil reserves 
run dry. Many of these countries are working to develop 
other economic activities that can help maintain their 
growth in the post-petroleum age. 

Most Arab countries also must work to create strong 
institutions of multiparty, civilian government Another 
challenge is to find ways to solve religious or ethnic 
conflicts, such as that between Arabs and Kurds in Iraq 
or among Sunni Muslims, Shiite Muslims, Christians, 
and Druses in Lebanon, as well as the Arab-Israeli dis- 
pute. Arabs also must deal with powerful conflicts be- 
tween Islamic tradition and the influence of the West 

Fred M Donner 


Related articles. See the separate articles on the countries 
where Arabs live. See also the following articles: 


Africa Ways of lite = Averroés Music (Arab mu- 
in northem Avicenna sic) 
Afnca) Bedouins Muslims 
Arab-Israeli con- Harun al-Rashid Palestine 
flict Ibn Battuta Palestine Libera- 
Arab League Ibn Khaldun tion Organiza- 
Arabian Nights Islam tion 
Arabic language Islamic art Palestinians 
Arabic literature Israel Sahara 
Arabic numerals Middle East Semites 
Asia (Way of life in Muhammad Suez Canal! 
Southwest Asia Zionism 
Outline 


i. Land of the Arabs 

i. Life in the Arab world 
A Language’ C Family lite 
B. Religion D. Education 


E Literature and 
the arts 














F. Food and drink H. Shelter 
G Clothing l. Economy 
lil. History 
Questions 


What percentage of Arabs today are nomads? 

What is the most densely settled area in the Arab world? 

When did a sense of “Arabness’ first appear? Why? 

What kind of literature is especially beloved by Arabs? 

In what way is privacy important in much Arab architecture? 

How did European nations gain control of many Arab lands in 
the 1800's and 1900's? 

Where is French widely used in the Arab world? 

When did significant Arab nationalist movements develop? 

What is an extended family? A clan? A tribe? 

\What two groups have traditionally dominated political life in 
most Arab lands? 


Additional resources 


Fernea, Elizabeth W. and Robert A The Arab World: Forty Years 

of Change. Rev. ed. Doubleday, 1997. 

Field, Michael. Inside the Arab World. Harvard Univ. Pr., 1995. 
Arachne, wh RAK nee, was a skilled weaver in Greek 
mythology. She boasted that she could weave fabrics 
more beautiful than those woven by Athena, the god- 
dess of arts and crafts. Athena, disguised as an old 
woman, warned Arachne not to be so boastful. When 
Arachne scorned her advice, Athena revealed herself as 
a goddess and accepted Arachnes challenge to a weav- 
ing contest 

Athena wove a tapestry that pictured mortals being 
punished by the gods for their pride. Arachne's work 
showed the shocking misbehavior of gods and god- 
desses. When Athena saw that Arachne’s work was as 
beautiful as her own, the goddess angrily ripped the 
fabric. As Arachne attempted to hang herself in terror, 
Athena took pity on her and transformed her into a spi- 
der. Arachne's skill survived in the spinning of webs by 
Spiders. Nancy Felson 
Arachnid, uh RAK nihd, is the name of any member of 
a class of small, insectlike, land animals. The best-known 
arachnids are spiders, ticks, mites, scorpions, and daddy 
longlegs, or harvestmen. Arachnids, unlike insects, have 
no wings. Their bodies are divided into two main parts, 
the abdomen and the cepha/othorax, which consists of 
the head and the thorax joined together. Insects, howev- 
er, have three main body parts: the head, the thorax, and 
the abdomen. Arachnids have four pairs of legs but have 
no antennae \feelers). Insects have antennae, but only 
three pairs of legs. 

Arachnids have from one to six pairs of simple eyes. 
Some species are eyeless. Unlike insects, arachnids 
have no compound eyes (eyes that are made up of many 
smaller eyes crowded together!) Some arachnids 
breathe like insects by means of air tubes. Others have 
breathing organs somewhat like lungs, called book 
lungs. These are small sacs within the abdomen, con- 
nected with the outer air by small openings. Within each 
sac are many layers of tissue resembling the leaves of a 
book The air enters the sac through the small openings 
and furnishes oxygen to the blood flowing through the 
leaves. Most spiders have air tubes and book lungs. | 

Some arachnids are harmful to people. Certain of 
them can inflict poisonous bites or stings. Others suck 
the blood of human beings and animals, and may carry 
serious diseases. Many arachnids are helpful to people 
because they eat harmful insects. james E Carico 


Scientific classification. Arachnids make up the class Arach- 
nida in the phylum Arthropoda. 


Related articles in World Book include: 


Arthropod Deer tick Spider 

Black widow House spider Tarantula 

Cattle tick Mite Tick 

Chigger Scorpion Trap-door spider 


Daddy longlegs 


Arafat, AHR uh FAT, Yasir (1929- ), has been chair- 
man of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) since 
1969 and president of the Palestinian Authority since 
1996. The PLO is an alliance of Palestinian Arab groups 
that work to establish an Arab state in what was once 
Palestine. The area that made up Palestine now consists 
mainly of Israel, the Gaza Strip, and the West Bank The 
Palestinian Authority was created in 1994 to govern 
Palestinian-controlled parts of the West Bank and Gaza 
Strip. 

Arafat was born in 1929, probably on August 24. He 
claims he was born in Jerusalem, in what was then the 
British mandate of Palestine, but many sources say he 
was born in Cairo, Egypt. His full name is Mohammed 
Abdel-Raouf Arafat al-Qudwa al-Husseini. He acquired 
the nickname Yasir, which means easygoing, as a teen- 
ager. He earned a degree in civil engineering at Cairo 
University. In the 1950's, he helped organize Arab guer- 
rilla groups, including A/ Fatah, now part of the PLO. Be- 
ginning in the 1960's, he helped plan many Al Fatah raids 
against Israel. Israel then 
attacked PLO bases. Arafat 
addressed the United Na- 
tions (UN) General Assem- 
bly in 1974, and the UN 
then recognized the PLO 
as the representative of 
Palestinian Arabs. 

In 1983, fighting broke 
out between PLO support- 
ers of Arafat and those 
who opposed him. The 
rebels forced Arafat and 
his supporters to leave 
their bases in northern 
Lebanon. But Arafat re- 
mained as PLO chairman. 

The PLO did not recognize Israel's right to exist. But in 
1988, Arafat persuaded the PLO to accept Israel's right to 
exist alongside a Palestinian state in the Gaza Strip and 
West Bank. Israel had occupied them after the 1967 
Arab-Israeli war. The PLO declared the existence of the 
state and elected Arafat its president. But Israel contin- 
ued to occupy and, in effect, govern the areas. 

In 1993, the PLO—under Arafat's leadership—and Is- 
rael gave recognition to each other. In 1993 and 1995, 
they signed agreements that led to the withdrawal of Is- 
raeli troops from the Gaza Strip and most West Bank 
towns by early 1996. As the Israelis withdrew, the Pales- 
tinian Authority took control of these areas. In 1994, 
Aratat and the Israeli leaders Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon 
Peres shared the Nobel Peace Prize for their peace ef- 
forts. In January 1996, Arafat was elected president of the 
Palestinian Authority. Michael C Hudson 
Aragon. See Castile and Aragon. 

Aral Sea, AR ul is a large saltwater lake in Kazakhstan 


©Barthelemy, Sipa Press 
Yasir Arafat 





Ararat 591 


and Uzbekistan (see Asia [physical map)). It is one of the 
world’s largest inland bodies of water. Since the early 
1960's, however, irrigation has caused the lake to shrink 
to about 40 percent of its former size. The lake now cov- 
ers about 11,000 square miles (28,500 square kilometers). 
it contains many islands. Leslie Dienes 

Aramaic language, 4& uh MAY ihk, is a language of 
the Middle East. It belongs to the Semitic family of lan- 
guages, along with Hebrew and Arabic. The earliest evi- 
dence of Aramaic dates from about 900 B.C. Jesus Christ 
and His disciples spoke Aramaic. Aramaic is still spoken 
by Assyrian Christians in isolated areas of Syria, Turkey, 
Iraq, and Iran. The long history of Aramaic and the wide 
extent of its use have resulted in many dialects. 

The earliest samples of Aramaic writing date from 
about 900 B.C. Parts of the Biblical books of Ezra and 
Daniel and some of the ancient manuscripts known as 
the Dead Sea Scrolls were written in Aramaic. A number 
of major Jewish works of the period from A.D. 1 to 600 
were composed in Aramaic. R.F.G. Sweet 

See also Hebrew language; Semitic languages. 
Aramid is a manufactured fiber that is chemically simi- 
lar to nylon but is stronger by weight than steel. Like ny- 
lon fibers, aramids are made of chemical compounds 
called amides. The amides are linked to aromatic rings 
(rings of six carbon atoms) to form long, chainlike mole- 
cules called polymers. But unlike the amides in nylons, 
at least 85 percent of the amides in aramids are attached 
directly to two aromatic rings. This arrangement results 
in a stronger and more heat-resistant fiber than nylon. 

Aramids are used in many products, including tires, 
parachutes, reinforced tape, and bulletproof vests. They 
are also used as a reinforcing material in boat hulls and 
the bodies of aircraft Aramids are manufactured under 
the trade names Kevlar and Nomex. Richard V. Gregory 
Arapaho Indians, uh RAP uh hoh, are a tribe who 
once hunted on the Great Plains of North America. They 
moved about frequently, living in tepees and following 
the buffalo herds, their major source of food. At first, the 
Arapaho fought to keep white settlers from taking their 
hunting lands. But the Arapaho Indians made peace in 
the 1860's and 1870's and moved to reservations. 

The Arapaho religion involved belief in a powerful 
spirit world. The most important religious ceremony 
was the sun dance (see Sun dance). The men belonged 
to special clubs that performed sacred ceremonies and 
enforced tribal laws. A women’s group that was called 
the Buffalo Society also carried out certain rituals. 

Today, there are about 4,500 Arapaho. They have split 
into three groups: (1) the Southern Arapaho of Okla- 
homa; (2) the Northern Arapaho of Wyoming; and (3) the 
Gros Ventre (see Gros Ventre Indians). The Arapaho 
work in farming, ranching, and other occupations. The 
Northern Arapaho also receive income from oil and nat- 
ural gas obtained from their land. Stanton K Tefft 
Ararat, AK uf rat, was the country where, according to 
the Bible, Noah's ark landed after the Deluge. The Bibli- 
cal story is told in Genesis 6-8. Ararat was the area sur- 
rounding Lake Van in ancient Armenia, now part of 
Turkey. Many people believe that Noah’s ark came to 
rest on Mount Massis, the tallest mountain in Ararat, 
known today as Mount Ararat. However, the Aramaic 
and Syriac translations of the story speak of the ark land- 
ing in the mountains of Kurdistan, southeast of Lake Van. 


Araucanian Indians 


592 


The land of Ararat is also mentioned in !! Kings 19:37 
and Isaiah 37:38. These passages tell that the sons of the 
Assyrian king Sennacherib fled to Ararat after they killed 
their father. 

See also Armenia (map); Noah. 

Araucanian Indians, Ak aw KAY nee un, a large 
group in South America, are famous for their long and 
successful resistance to the Spaniards. A famous Span- 
ish epic poem, La Araucana, written by Alonso de Ercilla 
y Zuniga, describes these struggles. The Araucanians 
were formerly divided into many tribes. The Picunche, 
Mapuche, and Huilliche lived west of the Andes along 
the central coast of Chile; the Pehuenche inhabited the 
central Chilean highlands; and the Argentine Araucani- 
ans lived east of the Andes. Their way of life varied, but 
most were vegetarians. Pinons from the Chilean pines 
provided a staple food for some. Others farmed, grow- 
ing maize, squash, beans, and potatoes. Those who lived 
along the coast depended heavily on fishing. 

The Araucanians originally lived in coastal Chile. They 
took horses from the Spanish in the mid-1500's and be- 
gan moving into Argentina An Argentine army defeated 
them in 1879, and Chilean forces subdued other groups 
in 1883. Today, there are about 250,000 Araucanians. 
Most of them are farmers. Roberto DaMatta 
Arawak Indians, AH rah wahk, were the first Ameri- 
can Indians that Christopher Columbus met in the Amer- 
icas in 1492. The Arawak lived in most of the islands of 
the West Indies. Arawak who lived in what are now east- 
ern Cuba and the Caribbean islands of Hispaniola and 
Puerto Rico are also called Taino Indians. Other groups 
of Indians speaking Arawakan languages lived in the 
Amazon River Basin and other parts of South America. 

Arawak villages were organized into chiefdoms, with 
up to 80 villages under the leadership of one cacique 
(pronounced kuf SEEK), or chief. The Arawak grew corn, 
yams, cotton, and cassava, a root crop. Their diet includ- 
ed fish, shellfish, and the meat of iguanas, sea turtles, 
and a rodent called the Autia. 

Many Arawak died from diseases brought to the 
Americas by European explorers. Spanish colonists 
forced the Arawak to mine gold or perform other physi- 
cal labor. This forced labor further reduced the Arawak 
population and destroyed their traditional way of life. By 
the mid-1500's, nearly all the Arawak Indians of the 
Caribbean had died. Samuel M. Wilson 
Arbitration, 4HR buh TRAY shuhn, is the judging of a 
dispute by one or more impartial persons whose deci- 
sion will be final and binding. The judges are called ar- 
bitrators or members of an arbitration board The arbi- 
trators are chosen by the parties to the dispute, or by 
some neutral agency designated by them. The decision 
of the arbitrators is known as an award. Arbitration may 
be employed between individuals, groups, or nations. 

Commercial arbitration is a process in which busi- 
nesses submit their disputes to one or more arbitrators. 
It has been practiced in Europe for many years. In the 
United States, the American Arbitration Association 
maintains panels of arbitrators. The decisions of these 
panels have been enforced by the courts of many states. 

industrial, or labor, arbitration is the settlement of 
disputes between employers and labor. !n voluntary ar- 
bitration, management and labor agree to submit the 
dispute to arbitration and to abide by the award. In com- 


Jacob Neusner 





pulsory arbitration, the government orders a dispute to 
be submitted to arbitration because the dispute affects 
the public interest Compulsory arbitration is usually or- 
dered only after voluntary methods have failed. 

Most industrial disputes involve fixing wages, hours, 
and conditions of labor. Arbitration is sometimes a way 
of settling grievances and avoiding or ending costly 
strikes and lockouts. 

In the United States, arbitration has been used most 
widely in disputes over existing contracts, especially in 
the railroad industry. In 1963, Congress prevented a na- 
tional railroad strike over work rules by requiring com- 
pulsory arbitration. !t was the first compulsory arbitra- 
tion law ever passed in peacetime. 

international arbitration is the settlement of dis- 
putes that arise between two or more nations. The dis- 
pute is submitted to judges chosen because of their 
knowledge of international affairs. These judges may be 
members of the Permanent Court of Arbitration or may 
be other individuals selected for the purpose. Their de- 
cisions are regarded as binding. Daniel Quinn Mills 

See also Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service; 
International relations; Labor movement (Handling la- 
bor disputes); Peace. 

Arbor Day is a day set apart for planting trees. It is ob- 
served especially by schoolchildren. Most states in the 
United States and most provinces of Canada celebrate 
Arbor Day. Arbor Day is celebrated as a legal holiday in 
some states and provinces. The Southern States and 
Hawaii celebrate it at various times from December to 
March. Most Northern States celebrate it in April or 
May. Many other countries also celebrate Arbor Day by 
planting trees, or they have other special days or weeks 
for tree planting. 

Arbor Day began in Nebraska. Julius Sterling Morton, 
a newspaper publisher, realized that trees would enrich 
the soil and conserve moisture in it Through his efforts, 
April 10, 1872, was set aside as Nebraska's first Arbor 
Day. After Morton died, the Nebraska Legislature 
changed the date of Arbor Day to his birthday, April 22, 
and made it a legal holiday. Jack Santino 

See also Morton, Julius Sterling; Nebraska (Places to 
visit); Tree (Planting and caring for trees). 

Arboretum, 4H buh REE tuhm, is an outdoor labora- 
tory where trees, shrubs, and other woody plants are 
grown under natural conditions. The plants are often 
arranged and labeled according to the family and the re- 
lationship to other plants of the same species. Most ar- 
boretums are open to the public and have helped create 
widespread appreciation of this kind of landscaped 
botanical garden. They have also increased the scientific 
methods of growing hardier and more beautiful plants. 
Most arboretums also conduct experiments in raising 
new and rare plants. Richard C. Schlesinger 

Arbutus, ahr BYOO tuhs, is the name given to a num- 
ber of evergreen plants of the heath family. Most of 
them are shrubs or trees. In eastern and central Canada 
and the United States, the best-known is the trailing ar- 
butus, a creeping plant with fragrant white or pink flow- 
ers. In New England, it is called mayflower. The Pilgrims 
are said to have given it this name. The trailing arbutus is 
the provincial flower of Nova Scotia and the state flower 
of Massachusetts. James L Luteyn 

Scientific classification. The trailing arbutus is in the heath 





family, Ericaceae. Its scientific name is Epigaea repens. 

See also Flower (picture: Flowers of woodlands and 

forests). 

Arc, in geometry. See Circle (Parts of a circle). 

Arc, Joan of. See Joan of Arc, Saint. 

Arc de Triomphe, a/rk duh tree AWNF, in Paris is 
the largest triumphal arch in the world. The arch stands 
162 feet (49.5 meters) high. It is known as the Arch of Tri- 
umph in English. It stands at the western end of the 
broad avenue called the Champs Elysées. See Paris (pic- 
ture: The Arc de Triomphe; map: Central Paris). 

Emperor Napoleon I commissioned the arch in 1806 
as a memorial to his imperial armies. It was designed by 
architect Jean-Francois Chalgrin, who patterned it after 
the triumphal arches of ancient Rome. The arch was left 
unfinished when Napoleon lost power in 1814. It was 
completed in 1836. The structure is an example of the 
Neoclassical style of the late 1700's and early 1800's. The 
arch is decorated with relief sculpture, notably the 
group of figures called La Marseillaise (1836) by Francois 
Rude. The grave of France's Unknown Soldier of World 
War I lies beneath the arch. Leland M. Roth 
Arcadia, ahr KAY dee uh, a departments of present- 
day Greece, was an important region in ancient times. 
About 100,000 people live in this region of mountains 
and fertile valleys in the Peloponnesus (Greece's south- 
ern peninsula). Arcadia was the only part of the Pelopon- 
nesus not overrun by Dorians in the 1100's B.C. In the 
500’s B.C, Arcadia joined the Peloponnesian League, a 
military alliance of Peloponnesian cities led by Sparta. 
Arcadian cities were loyal to Sparta until 369 B.C, when 
they formed their own defensive league. The Arcadian 
League soon split, but Macedonia and then the Achaean 
and Aetolian leagues protected Arcadia. _ John J. Baxevanis 
Arcaro, ahr KAIR oh, Eddie (1916-1997), an American 
jockey, rode 4,779 winners in 31 years of racing. Arcaro 
became the first jockey to win the Kentucky Derby five 
times (see Kentucky Derby). He was also the first to win 
the Triple Crown (Kentucky Derby, Preakness, and Bel- 
mont Stakes) twice. He won it riding Whirlaway in 1941 
and Citation in 1948. Edward Arcaro was born in New- 
port, Kentucky. He retired in 1962. His purses totaled 
$30,039,543, a record until 1964. William F. Reed 
Arch is a curved structure that supports or strengthens 
a building. Almost all arches span openings and support 
weight above them. Others are enclosed in walls. 

Most arches are made of stone, brick, concrete, or 
steel. Arches of stone or brick consist of wedge-shaped 
blocks called voussoirs. During the construction of most 
such arches, the blocks are supported by a wooden 
frame. The last block to be inserted is the keystone, the 
center stone at the top. The pressure of each side of the 
arc against the keystone supports the arch when the 
frame is removed. In addition, the arch is supported on 
both sides by masonry or by other arches to keep it 
from collapsing under the weight above. 

The first people to fully utilize the arch were archi- 
tects of ancient Rome. During the 300's B.C, they began 
to use semicircular arches to build aqueducts and 
bridges. Later, they also constructed triumphal arches to 
honor their leaders. Pointed arches were developed 
during the Middle Ages. Medieval architects arranged 
arches in rows to form passageways called arcades. 
They also built arched roofs called vau/ts. Arches 





Archaea 593 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Arthur L Grebetz 


An arch is made up of parts that support one another. Wedge- 
shaped arch stones called voussoirs (labeled V) make up most of 
the arch, rising from springers (S)to the Keystone (K) at the top. 
The crown (Ciis the highest part of the arch. The haunches (H) 
are the sides of the arch, from the crown to the springers. 


shaped like horseshoes are common in Islamic architec- 
ture. William J. Hennessey 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Arc de Triomphe Spain (picture: Ancient Roman 
Architecture (pictures) structures) 
Bridge (Arch bridges) Vault 
Romanesque architecture 


Archaea, afr KEE uh, also called archaebacteria, are a 
group of single-celled organisms that make up one of 
three basic divisions of life. The other two kinds of living 
organisms are eukaryotes, which include animals and 
plants, and eubacteria, which include most of the organ- 
isms commonly called bacteria. Eukaryotes have eukary- 
otic cells, or cells with a nucleus, while eubacteria and 
archaea have prokaryotic cells, or cells that lack a nucle- 
us. Scientists had traditionally classified archaea with eu- 
bacteria because of their similar cell structures. But be- 
ginning in the 1970's, close analyses of their genes 
revealed that archaea and eubacteria are too different to 
be grouped together. In many respects, archaea more 
closely resemble eukaryotes than they do eubacteria. 

Archaea rank among the oldest forms of life on earth. 
Some scientists believe these organisms are similar to 
the original ancestors of all modern life. Archaea have 
developed unusual properties. For example, various 
kinds of archaea can consume acetic acid, hydrogen, or 
sulfur. Some archaea can even produce the gas meth- 
ane. Other kinds have developed an unusual form of 
photosynthesis, a process by which they make food. Un- 
like photosynthesis in plants and bacteria, archaeal pho- 
tosynthesis does not use the green pigment chlorophyll. 

Archaea live in a wide variety of habitats. Many live in 
such harsh conditions as oil wells, deep-sea hydrother- 
mal vents (hot springs), and anaerobic (oxygen-free) envi- 
ronments. Other archaea grow in soils and within vari- 
ous living organisms. Cattle, termites, and even people 
have archaea living harmlessly in their digestive sys- 
tems. Gary J. Olsen 

See also Cell (Inside a living cell). 


Archaeology 


Archaeology, 4H& kee AHL uh jee, is the scientific 
study of the remains of past human cultures. Archaeo- 
logical research is the chief method available for learn- 
ing about societies that existed before the invention of 
writing about 5,500 years ago. It also provides an impor- 
tant supplement to our knowledge of ancient societies 
that left written records. 

Archaeologists investigate the lives of early people by 
studying the cultural remains they left behind. Such re- 
mains can include buildings, artwork, tools, or pottery. 
Archaeologists also examine the context and associa- 
tions of the remains, which can provide information 
about how the remains were used. The preserved resi- 
dues from food items, such as bones and plant parts, 
can also reveal much about how ancient people lived. 

Archaeology in the Americas and in Europe is consid- 
ered a branch of anthropology, the scientific study of 
human culture. Some archaeological investigations are 
closely linked to history, though historians mainly study 
events in the past recorded in written documents. 

Archaeologists look for information about how, 
where, and when cultures developed. Like other social 
scientists, they search for reasons why major changes 
have occurred in certain cultures. Some archaeologists 
try to understand why ancient people stopped hunting 
and started farming. Others develop theories about 


Thomas R. Hester, the contributor of this article, is Director of 
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory and Professor of 
Anthropology at the University of Texas at Austin 








James Stantield, National Geographic Society Image Collection 
Archaeologists excavate ruins of the ancient city of Ubar in Oman searching for remains of past 

human activities. Modern archaeology often combines hard work, such as digging with hand tools, 

with complex technology. These ruins were found in 1981 using radar images obtained from space. 


what caused people to build cities and to set up trade 
routes. In addition, some archaeologists look for rea- 
sons behind the fall of early civilizations, such as the Ro- 
man Empire, or examine why large cities of the Maya 
were abandoned around A.D. 850. 


What archaeologists study 


Archaeologists examine any evidence that can help 
explain how people lived in the past. Such evidence 
ranges from the ruins of a large city to a few stone flakes 
left by someone making a stone tool long ago. 

The three basic kinds of archaeological evidence are 
(1) artifacts, (2) features, and (3) ecofacts. Artifacts are any 
objects made by human hands. An artifact can be a pyra- 
mid, a point chipped from flint, a ceramic pot, or a vari- 
ety of other items made from a wide range of materials. 
Features are evidence of past human activities visible as 
disturbances in the earth. Such disturbances can be pro- 
duced by people digging pits for storage, building a 
house or tomb, or constructing canals for irrigation. Un- 
like artifacts, features cannot be separated from their 
surroundings. Ecofacts are natural objects found with ar- 
tifacts or features. Ecofacts reveal clues about past envi- 
ronments and how ancient people utilized the re- 
sources available to them. For example, charred seeds 
and animal bones tell archaeologists about the foods of 
ancient peoples, while preserved pollen can provide ev- 
idence about vegetation and climate changes over time. 

Any place where archaeological evidence is found is 
called an archaeological site. To understand the behav- 
ior of the people who occupied a site, archaeologists 
must study the relationships among the artifacts, fea- 
tures, and ecofacts found there. For example, American 
archaeologists discovered tlint spearpoints among the 
bones of extinct, lce Age buffalo at the Folsom site in 





Archaeology 595 


An army of life-sized stat- 
ues of soldiers and horses 
form an amazing collection 
of artifacts (objects made 
by people). The clay figures 
were found in 1974 in bur- 
ial pits near Xi’an, China, 





eS) ‘ FG a close to the tomb of Shi 
aa i ' Huangdi, who ruled China 
Le E in the 200's B.C 
a 
New Mexico. These artifacts demonstrated that ancient ATIC ARISOL ES 8 OE ger UCU QE a 
peoples had reached the New World at least 10,000 Archaeologists use special techniques and equipment 
years ago. to gather archaeological evidence precisely and accu- 

If objects are buried in the ground, their position in rately. They also maintain detailed written records, pho- 
the earth is also of interest to archaeologists. The scien- tographs, maps, and plans of sites because archaeologi- 
tists study the layers of earth and rock in which objects cal research actually destroys much of the site. 
are found to understand the conditions that existed Locating sites is the first job of the archaeologist. 
when the objects were placed there. In some places, ar- — Sites may be aboveground, underground, or underwa- 
chaeologists find many levels of deposits called strata ter. Underwater sites include sunken ships as well as en- 
The archaeological study of strata, called stratigraphy, tire towns that have been submerged because of shifts 
developed from the study of rock layers in geology. in land or water level. 


i 
mt Set ¥.3* a4 
u . ab ‘Om gs Cw 


© Phil Deqqinger Bruce Coleman Ine. National Museum of Man, Ottawa. Canada 


The foundation of a Roman bath at Caesarea, near Hadera, Is- Whale bones, foreground, were among the ecofacts found in 
rael, is an example of an archaeological feature. Fealures are evi- diggings on Bathurst Island in the Canadian Arctic. Such natural 
dence of human activities often visible as changes in the earth. objects reveal how ancient people related to their surroundings. 


596 Archaeology 


Some large sites are located easily because they are 
clearly visible or can be traced from descriptions in an- 
cient stories or other historical records. Such sites in- 
clude the pyramids in Egypt and the ancient city of Ath- 
ens in Greece. Some less obvious sites have been 
discovered accidentally by nonarchaeologists. In 1940, 
for example, four children in search of their dog found 
the Lascaux Cave in southwestern France, which has 
prehistoric wall paintings. Many important discoveries 
have been made by archaeologists who searched tire- 
lessly over many years for a specific site or type of site. 
Working in this way, an English archaeologist named 
Howard Carter discovered the treasure-filled tomb of 
the ancient Egyptian king Tutankhamen in 1922. 

Archaeologists use systematic methods to discover 
sites. The traditional way to find all the sites in a region 
is through a foot survey. In this method, archaeologists 
space themselves at measured distances and walk in 
preset directions. Each person looks for archaeological 
evidence, such as bits of flint or pottery fragments, 
while walking. Archaeologists use this method when 
they want to know where sites do not occur as well as 
where they do. For example, they might use it to confirm 
that sites in a particular region occur on hilltops but nev- 
er in valleys. 

Archaeologists use a variety of scientific methods to 
help discover sites that have been covered over by nat- 
ural forces, such as floods or blowing sand, or obscured 
by human activities, such as farming. Remote sensing, 
the use of instruments to observe and record informa- 
tion from a distance, is a common technique used by ar- 
chaeologists. Aerial photography, for example, can re- 
veal variations in vegetation that indicate the presence 
of an archaeological site. Plants that are taller in one area 





Aerofilms Ltd. | 


Aerial photography can reveal unsuspected sites. The outlines 
of a royal Ceitc monument were discovered in County Meath, 
Ireland. The monument, called Tara, dates from about 2,000 B.C 


en from orbiting satellites. On the ground, remote sens- 
ing techniques, such as ground-penetrating radar, can 
reveal buried structures or graves. Even simple metal 
detectors can be used to detect buried metal artifacts. 
Surveying sites. Archaeologists begin to study a site 
by describing it and plotting the location on a topo- 
graphic map (map showing surface features). Handheld 
tools called Global Positioning System (GPS) devices en- 


of a field may be growing over an ancient grave or Irri- 
gation ditch. Plants that are shorter in another area may 
be growing in shallow ground over an ancient building 
or road. Today, archaeologists may locate sites with in- 


able archaeologists to determine precise locations 
through readings obtained from satellites. Archaeolo- 
gists make detailed notes about the condition of the site 
and the kinds of evidence visible on its surface. They 


frared (heat detecting) imaging or even photographs tak- _—_ also take photographs of the site. 


Pat Baker, Western Australian Mantime Museum 


An underwater site may 
contain cargo from sunken 
ships. Such cargo has added 
to our knowledge of ancient 
Greek and Roman times. Ar- 
chaeologists working off the 
west coast of Australia use a 
vacuum device to scoop up 
coins and other small objects, 
as shown here. 











Archaeologists make maps of most sites they find. The 
type of map drawn depends on the importance of the 
site, the study's goals, and the amount of time and mon- 
ey available. In some cases, simple maps are made after 
pacing off distances or using a measuring tape. In other 
cases, a special instrument called a transit is used to sur- 
vey the site carefully. Today, many archaeologists use a 
total data station, a device utilizing laser and computer 
technology, to rapidly survey and map a site. 

After making a map, the scientists collect artifacts 
from the surface of the site. They divide the surface into 
a grid pattern of squares and examine one square ata 
time. The locations where artifacts are found are record- 
ed on the map. Some surface artifacts can give informa- 
tion about when or how a site was used. 

Excavating sites. Archaeologists dig carefully for 
buried remains in a process called excavation. The meth- 
od of excavation depends partly on the type of site. The 
archaeologist must use precise techniques and careful 
observation to determine the context and association of 
buried artifacts and features. For example, archaeolo- 
gists working in a cave might divide the floor and the 
area in front of the cave into square units and then exca- 
vate each unit separately. Archaeologists working ona 
temple platform might dig a trench into the front part of 
the platform and extend the trench into the ground next 
to the platform. At large sites, excavation may be limited 
to certain areas. Other considerations that frequently de- 
termine the excavation method include the climate and 
soil at the site. Today, archaeologists often expose broad 
areas of a site in a technique called open area or block 
excavation so the patterns of an ancient settlement can 
be detected. 

Tools used in excavation range from backhoes and 
other heavy equipment to shovels and paintbrushes. 
The most common tool used is the trowel, a small, flat, 
pointed implement often used in bricklaying. A trowel is 
used to carefully remove earth so that artifacts and fea- 
tures can be found in place, carefully exposed, and doc- 
umented. In most excavations, archaeologists screen ex- 
cavated deposits through wire-mesh sieves to recover 
small artifacts and ecofacts. They also collect soil sam- 
ples to be analyzed in a laboratory to detect microscop- 
ic pollen grains or charred plant remains. Chemical 
analysis of the soil can also detect hidden evidence of 
human activities. 

Working underwater. Archaeologists who work un- 
derwater use many methods adopted from land archae- 
ology. Aerial photography over clear water may reveal 
the outlines of sunken harbors and towns. A method 
called sonar scanning helps detect underwater objects 
by the reflection of sound waves. In addition, divers use 
metal detectors to uncover metal objects. Photographic 
maps of sites can be made from submarines or by 
divers carrying underwater cameras. Archaeologists 
work at underwater sites in submersible decompression 
chambers. They sometimes use balloons to raise large 
objects to the surface for further study. 

Some underwater sites require extraordinary meas- 
ures. Archaeologists working in rough waters on the 
French ship La Belle, which had sunk off the Texas coast 
in the 1700's, exposed the site by building a giant steel 
enclosure around it. After the ocean water was pumped 
out, they could begin excavation on the fragile wreck. 








Archaeology 597 





Douglas Gann Homo!'evi Research Program, Anzona State Museum 
A rendering of an ancient Anasazi ceremonial center called 
a kiva was produced by archaeologists using computer software. 
Archaeologists often use computers to evaluate information. 


Recording and preserving evidence. Archaeolo- 
gists describe, photograph, and count the objects they 
find. They group the objects according to type and loca- 
tion. For example, broken pieces of pottery, called pot- 
sherds, are bagged together by excavation unit and lev- 
el. This collection then goes to the field laboratory to be 
cleaned and labeled. Some artifacts, such as knives or 
spearpoints, should not be washed. Washing removes 
residues, such as fat or blood, that can be identified 
through microscopic or chemical analysis. Identification 
of the residues can indicate how the artifact was used. 

At the field laboratory, archaeologists must take spe- 
cial care to preserve objects made of such materials as 
metal and wood. For example, rust on a metal object 
must be removed without damaging the surface. Water- 
soaked wooden objects may crack or lose their shape 
when exposed to the air. These objects must be kept wet 
until specialists called conservators can preserve them. 


How archaeologists interpret findings 


Archaeologists follow three basic steps in interpret- 
ing the evidence they find: (1) classification, (2) dating, 
and (3) evaluation. 

Classification. Archaeologists can interpret their 
findings only if they can detect patterns of distribution 
of artifacts in space or through time. To find these pat- 
terns, archaeologists must first classify artifacts into 
groups of similar objects. 

Typology is the most common approach in classifica- 
tion. Artifacts are usually first sorted into groups based 
on their shape, known as morphological types. \f the 
shape and manufacturing methods found among mor- 
phological types are distinctive during certain periods, 
they may represent temporal types. Archaeologists use 
temporal types to construct a sequence that reflects 
changes in the style or manufacture of artifacts over 
time. A sequence of different temporal types from a re- 
gion reflects cultural change through the years. More 


598 Archaeology 


detailed studies, such as the microscopic examination of 
a flint blade or the analysis of residues on a potsherd, 
can lead to the recognition of functional types. Some 
types are defined by the archaeologist, while other typo- 
logical classifications actually reveal the designs and 
shapes intentionally developed by ancient peoples. 

Dating of archaeological objects is called archaeome- 
try. The methods of archaeometry are divided into two 
major types: (1) relative dating and (2) absolute dating. 

Relative dating gives information about the age of an 
object in relation to other objects. Thus, relative dating 
methods produce only comparisons, not actual dates. 
For example, archaeologists can determine the relative 
ages of bones found at a site by measuring their fluorine 
content. Fluorine from underground water gradually re- 
places other elements in bones, and so older bones 
contain more fluorine. 





a ‘a . 
Christopher Cunningham, Stratford Hall Plantation 
A reconstructed slave cabin stands at Stratford Hall, the birth- 
place of Robert E. Lee in Virginia. Historical archaeologists work 
with historians and architects to re-create such historic buildings 








Absolute dating determines the age of an object in 
years. There are many absolute dating methods. The 
method used in a specific case depends mainly on the 
type of object being dated. 

The most widely used dating method is radiocarbon 
dating. This method requires organic materiaf-that is, 
something that was once living, such as plant parts, 
charcoal from cooking pits, bone, or shells. Two types 
of radiocarbon dating are available to archaeologists to- 
day. Traditional radiocarbon dating is less expensive to 
perform but it requires several grams of organic materi- 
al. Accelerator mass spectrometry dating is used when 
only a small amount of organic material can be recov- 
ered from a site, or if only a tiny sample can be removed 
from a fragile artifact. See Radiocarbon. 

Other absolute dating techniques have more narrow 
applications. Potassium-argon dating is used mainly in 
Africa to determine the age of rocks associated with fos- 
sils of early human ancestors. Other techniques, such as 
electron spin resonance, uranium-series dating, and ob- 
sidian-hydration dating, are used in special circum- 
stances or when radiocarbon dating is not possible. 

The best-known method for dating wood is called 
dendrochronology. This technique is used mainly in the 
southwestern United States. It involves counting the 
yearly growth rings on cross sections of cut trees used 
to construct ancient pueblos (houses). Archaeologists 
match tree ring patterns with overlapping patterns to a 
reference sample that extends back at least 8,000 years. 

Evaluation. Archaeologists evaluate artifacts and fea- 
tures to learn such information as how and where the 
objects were made and used. In some cases, the scien- 
tists learn by direct experimentation. Flintknapping \chip- 
ping stone to make a tool) is one widely used form of ex- 
perimentation. Many archaeologists are skilled at 
producing exact duplicates of the flint tools found in ar- 
chaeological sites. Flintknapping helps archaeologists 


Chnstopher Cunningham. Stratford Hall Plantation 





Historical archaeologists 
often study the everyday lives 
of people in the recent past 
not recorded in historical 
documents. These archaeolo- 
gists have uncovered evi- 
dence of a small building and 
other articles left by former 
residents at Stratford Hall 
near Montross, Virginia. The 
statesman Richard Henry Lee 
and the military leader Robert 
E. Lee were born at Stratford 
Hall, a large plantation built 
between 1730 and 1738. 


understand ancient too] manufacturing techniques and 
interpret the broken artifacts and flint chips found in ex- 
cavations. Artifacts and features can also help explain 
the social lives of ancient people. For example, the size 
of houses can show how many people lived in one 
household. The number and value of objects found in 
graves Can indicate differences in social class. 

The evaluation of ecofacts reveals such information as 
what food people ate and whether they grew crops or 
gathered wild plants. Ecofacts can even explain ancient 
migration patterns. A seed of grain not native to the area 
where it is found may reveal how and when eating 
habits spread from one place to another. 

Archaeologists evaluate evidence with the help of 
specialists from other fields. Zoologists help identify ani- 
mal bones and butchering techniques. Botanists analyze 
seeds to learn about ancient agricultural practices. Such 
specialists as geologists, architects, and engineers also 
work with archaeologists. 

Computers are extremely valuable in evaluating ar- 
chaeological information. Archaeologists use computer 
software to produce site maps, plot the distribution arti- 
fact types throughout a site, and perform the many sta- 
tistical analyses necessary to interpret the huge num- 
bers of artifacts and ecofacts recovered in an excavation. 


History 


Beginnings. The idea of studying the past through 
ancient objects has developed gradually. But the most 
intense interest has occurred in the past 200 years. Dur- 
ing the 1700's, some wealthy Europeans began to study 
and collect art objects from the times of ancient Greece 
and Rome. This interest in classical art is called antiquar- 
anism. These first diggers looked only for treasures and 
threw away ordinary objects. 

Also during the 1700's, European scholars began to 
debate how long human beings had lived on the earth. 
Their interest resulted partly from discoveries of primi- 
tive stone tools together with the bones of extinct ani- 
mals. These scholars also knew about the huge mounds 
and ruined cities in the Americas that pointed to ancient 
human life there. They realized that human beings had a 
prehistoric past, but they could not decide when and 
where this past had begun. 

The 1800's brought a more scientific approach to the 
study of the past. The great length of human prehistory 
became widely accepted due to advances in geology 
and biology. By the early 1800's, geologists had deter- 
mined that rock formation resulted from extremely slow 
processes, such as erosion and volcanic activity. This 
view, known as uniformitarianism, led most scholars to 
believe that the earth was much older than previously 
thought. Then, in 1859, the British biologist Charles R. 
Darwin proposed the theory of biological evolution in 
his book The Origin of Species. This theory suggested 
that human beings, like other animals and the earth it- 
self, had developed slowly over a vast time. 

By the mid-1800's, archaeology had become a sepa- 
rate field of study, and evidence of human prehistory 
was accumulating rapidly. Important discoveries includ- 
ed prehistoric lake dwellings in Switzerland, ancient 
cave paintings in France and Spain, and part of a prehis- 
toric human skull found in Germany. In the late 1800's, 
archaeologists began to use techniques of excavation 

















Archaeology 599 


that made it possible to determine sequences of cultural 
development. In an excavation at Naqada, near Qus, 
Egypt, the British scholar Sir Flinders Petrie became one 
of the first diggers to look carefully for all remains, not 
just for treasures. Others who undertook major excava- 
tions at that time included the British nobleman Sir 
Austen Henry Layard, at Nineveh in what is now Iraq, 
and the German businessman Heinrich Schliemann, at 
Troy in what is now Turkey. 

European archaeologists of the late 1800's focused 
their studies on the ancient European and Middle East- 
ern civilizations described by classical and Biblical au- 
thors. American archaeologists, however, could find al- 
most no written records of the civilizations they studied. 
Partly for this reason, they turned to anthropology for 
methods of interpreting their discoveries. For example, 
they studied artifacts produced by contemporary Ameri- 
can Indians to help interpret objects from past societies. 

The 1900's. The scope of archaeology expanded 
greatly during the 1900's. Archaeologists began to ex- 
plore the past civilizations of Central and South Ameri- 
ca, China, Japan, Southeast Asia, and other areas. By the 
early 1900's, archaeologists were using stratigraphy to 
date their finds. During the mid-1900's, new techniques 
made dating much easier and more accurate. The most 
significant of these techniques was radiocarbon dating, 
developed in the 1940's by an American chemist named 
Willard F. Libby. 

Great advances in underwater archaeology also oc- 
curred during the mid-1900's. Previously, underwater ex- 
cavation had been both difficult and expensive. The 
aqualung and other diving devices invented during the 
1940's enabled divers to move more freely. 

Beginning in the 1970's, space satellites began to pro- 
vide valuable sources of data. Photographs taken from 
satellites helped locate archaeological sites. In 1995, 
Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites became fully 





The Griffith Institute, Ashmolean Museum, Oxford 
The tomb of King Tutankhamen of Egypt was discovered in 
1922 by the English archaeologist Howard Carter. Carter, /eft, 
and his sponsor, Lord Carnarvon, stand at the tomb’s entrance. 





600 Archaeology 


important dates in archaeology 


1797 British geologist John Frere found flint tools at Hoxne, Eng- 


land, and reported that they belonged to a period “beyond 
that of the present world.” 

1837 Christian J. Thomsen, a Danish curator, proposed that the 
history of humankind, before written records began, could 
be divided into Stone, Bronze, and Iron ages. 

1853-1854 A drought revealed Swiss lake villages dating back at 
least 5,000 years. 

1870 Heinrich Schliemann, a German businessman, began exca- 
vations on the site of Troy in what ts now Turkey. 

1879 Prehistoric wallpaintings were found in a cave at Altamira, 
Spain. 

1884 French archaeologist Marcel-Auguste Dieulafoy uncov- 


ered the palace of Persian King Darius | in what is now Iran. 


1900 British archaeologist Arthur J. Evans began excavating 
Knossos, capital of the Minoan civilization of Crete. 

1922 Howard Carter of the United Kingdom created worldwide 
interest in archaeology after finding King Tutankhamen’s 
tomb in Egypt. 

1925 Flint points found at Folsom, New Mexico, showed that 
people lived in lce Age North America more than 10,000 
years ago. 

1952 British archaeologist Kathleen Mary Kenyon led excava- 
tions at Jericho, Jordan, that proved it to be one of the old- 
est known communities. 

1977-1985 Excavations by American archaeologist Thomas D. 
Dillehay at Monte Verde, Chile, revealed the earliest 
known occupation of the New World, more than 12,000 
years old. 

1991 Hikers in the Alps discovered the frozen, preserved body 
of aman who lived more than 5,000 years ago. Nicknamed 
Otzi, this accidental find provided archaeologists with 
many new insights into pre-Bronze Age. 


operational. The GPS satellites produce signals that can 
be used to calculate exact locations on the earth (see 
Global Positioning System). 

Archaeology today. A major concern among ar- 
chaeologists today is the preservation of archaeological 
sites that have not yet been studied. Many such sites are 
threatened by construction projects, the expansion of 
agriculture, and other types of development, or by theft. 
Several countries, including the United States, have en- 
acted laws that require government agencies to identify 
and preserve places that might be of historic or archae- 
ological importance. Today, governments and private 
consulting businesses employ many archaeologists to 
survey, excavate, and protect endangered sites in a 
process Called cultural resource management. 

Another major concern is protecting the rights of lo- 
cal peoples whose ancestors left the remains unearthed 
by archaeologists. Many local peoples argue that the 
skeletal remains of their ancestors deserve a proper 
burial and should not be considered specimens for re- 
search. They also say that many artifacts were sacred ob- 
jects used for religious purposes and should be treated 
with reverence. In the United States, the Native Ameri- 
can Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of 1990 deals 
with the ownership of remains and artifacts. The law re- 
quires archaeologists to consult with Native American 
tribes when ancient burials are found in excavations on 
public lands or at sites where federal funds or permits 
have been issued. If the archaeologists find human re- 
mains or artifacts and a tribe can prove that it has a valid 
claim to the items, the scientists must return them to the 
tribe. Australia, New Zealand, and other countries have 
similar laws protecting the grave sites of local peoples. 


On an international scale, archaeologists seek to halt 
the illegal sale of archaeological objects. They urge de- 
veloped nations to enact and enforce laws to prohibit 
the import of ancient objects unless an export certificate 
has been obtained from the country of origin. 


Careers in archaeology 


Most careers in archaeology require a masters or 
doctoral degree. Jn college, most students who wish to 
become archaeologists major in anthropology but also 
take courses in history, languages, biology, computer 
science, statistics, and geology. In addition, their studies 
should include experience in excavation. Jn graduate 
school, students generally select a geographic area that 
becomes their research specialty. 

Archaeologists are employed in three main fields: (1) 
academic, (2) museum work, and (3) government service. 
Most archaeologists who teach at colleges and universi- 
ties also carry out research and publish their findings. 
Archaeologists who work in museums conduct re- 
search, publish articles, preserve and restore ancient 
objects, and use those objects to educate the public. To- 
day, the largest number of archaeologists have jobs in 
the field of cultural resource management. They often 
work directly for a government agency or for a private 
business that is hired by the government or by other pri- 
vate companies. Thomas R. Hester 

Related articles in World Book include: 

Biographies 
Schliemann, Heinrich 
Stephens, John Lloyd 
Ventris, Michael G. F. 


Winckelmann, Johann J. 
Woolley, Sir Leonard 


Breasted, James H. 
Carter, Howard 
Evans, Sir Arthur J. 
Leakey, Mary Douglas 
Piranesi, Giovanni B. 


Egypt 
Egypt, Ancient Necropolis Rosetta stone 
Hieroglyphics Obelisk Sphinx 
Mummy Pyramids Valley of the Kings 
Greece 

Acropolis Corinth Knossos Parthenon 
Aegean civi- — Elgin Marbles Mycenae Sparta 

lization Ephesus Olympia Troy 

Italy 
Appian Way Pantheon 
Forum, Roman Pompeii 
Herculaneum Rome (Ancient city) 
Middle East 

Babylonia Ebla Nineveh Sumer 
Dead Sea Mesopotamia Persia, Ancient Ur 

Scrolls Moabite stone Phoenicia 

The Americas 
Anasazi Indian, American Maya 
Aztec (The first Ameri- | Monte Alban 
Chichen Itza cans) Mound builders 
Copan Kensington rune Tenochtitlan 
Easter Island stone Teotihuacan 
Folsom point Machu Picchu Tikal 
Inca 
Cther related articles 

Angkor India (History) 
Anthropology Lake dwelling 


Carthage (picture) 
Civilization 


Megalithic monuments 
Metal detector 





Radiocarbon 
Stonehenge 


Outline 


1, What archaeologists study 
li, How archaeologists gather information 
A. Locating sites D. Working underwater 
B. Surveying sites E. Recording and preserving 
C. Excavating sites evidence 
lll. How archaeologists interpret findings 
A. Classification C. Evaluation 
B. Dating 
IV. History 
V. Careers in archaeology 


Paleontology 
Prehistoric people 


Questions 


What are the main steps in surveying an archaeological site? 

How do archaeologists use aerial photography? 

Why do archaeologists classify the artifacts they find? 

How do archaeologists determine the age of remains through 
radiocarbon dating? 

In what ways do other scientists help archaeologists evaluate 
their findings? 

What are artifacts, features, and ecofacts? 

What tools do archaeologists use in excavation? 

What are the three main fields in which archaeologists work? 

How did advances in geology and biology contribute to the de- 
velopment of archaeology? 


Additional resources 


Fagan, Brian M., ed. The Oxford Companion to Archaeology. Ox- 
ford, 1996. 

McMillon, Bill. Tae Archaeology Handbook Wiley, 1991. 

Renfrew, Colin, and Bahn, Paul. Archaeology. Rev. ed. Thames & 
Hudson, 1996. 

Scarre, Christopher, ed. Past Worlds: The Times Atlas of Archae- 
ology. 1988. Reprint. Crescent Bks., 1995. 

Schnapp, Alain. The Discovery of the Past Abrams, 1996. 


Archaeopteryx, 4k kee AHP tuhr ihks, is the name of 
a genus (group) of feathered animals that lived about 140 
million years ago, during the late Jurassic Period. These 
crow-sized creatures had a reptilelike skeleton closely 
resembling that of a small dinosaur. But they also had 
fully developed feathers and birdlike wings. As a result, 
most scientists classify Archaeopteryx as birds. The first 
Archaeopteryx fossils were discovered during the 1860's 
in Bavaria, a state in Germany. These fossils provided the 
first solid evidence that birds descended from reptiles. 

Unlike modern birds, Archaeopteryx had teeth; a long, 
reptilelike tail lined with feathers; and three “fingers” 
with claws on its wings. Scientists believe that the ani- 
mal used its claws to climb trees. Archaeopteryx was 
most likely an excellent glider. The animal could proba- 
bly fly, though scientists do not know how well. The 
word Archaeopteryx is Greek for ancient wing. 

Alan Feduccia 

See also Bird (The first known birds). 
Archangel. See Arkhangelsk. 
Archbishop is the chief bishop of a religious province 
in the Roman Catholic Church and other churches. A 
province consists of a number of dioceses (districts). An 
archbishop usually governs a diocese, called an arch- 
diocese, and has limited authority over the bishops of 
the other dioceses. Ralph W. Quere 

See also Bishop; Metropolitan; Address, Forms of. 
Archerfish is any of six species of large-eyed fish that 
can shoot drops of water from their mouth into the air 
with force and accuracy. Archerfish are found in south- 
eastern Asia from India to Indonesia and the Philippines, 





Archery 601 


and in Australia. They live in fresh or slightly salty water, 
often among the roots of mangrove trees. They grow as 
long as 16 inches (41 centimeters), but most are about 6 
inches (15 centimeters) long. 

An archerfish shoots water drops by squeezing its gill 
covers and forcing water forward along a groove locat- 
ed within the bones of the roof of its mouth. It can shoot 
water more than 3 feet (90 centimeters) into the air. 
Archerfish aim at insects on the stems and leaves of 
plants hanging over the water surface. They also shoot 
at spiders in webs above the water. When hit, the in- 
sects or spiders fall to the water, where the archerfish 
eats them. John E. McCosker 











WORLD BOOK illustration by John F. Eggert 
An archerfish hunts insects at the water surface. 


Scientific classification. Archerfish belong to the archerfish 
family, Toxotidae. The scientific name for the best-known spe- 
cies is Toxotes jaculatrix 


See Fish (picture: An archerfish). 

Archery is the sport of shooting with a bow and arrow. 
Archers may participate in several forms of the sport. 
The most popular versions are bow hunting, target arch- 
ery, field archery, indoor archery, and flight archery. |n 
bow hunting, the archer hunts game with a bow and ar- 
row. In target, field, and indoor archery, archers com- 
pete in shooting at targets. In flight archery, competitors 
shoot for distance. 

Millions of people take part in archery. The sport is 
especially popular in schools and summer camps. All 
the states and most provinces in the United States and 
Canada have special hunting seasons for archers, who 
shoot such animals as bear, deer, and rabbits. Some 
archers shoot fish in the shallow waters of lakes and 
streams. Archers participate in international archery 
competitions. In addition, archery is an event of the 
Summer Olympic Games. 


Archery equipment 


Bows. Three main kinds of bows are used in archery 
—the recurve bow, the compound bow, and the /ong- 
bow. The recurve bow, the most common type used by 
target archers, has tips that curve away from the archer. 
A compound bow has a system of two cables and from 
two to six pulleys built into it. The cables and pulleys 
make this kind of bow easier to draw (pull back) than 
other types. Compound bows are popular with bow 


602 Archery 


hunters and field archers, but they may not be used in 
Olympic archery competition. The longbow, once the 

most popular type of bow, is now used only by a small 
number of archers. An unstrung longbow looks some- 
what like a straight line. 

Most bows are made of carbon-reinforced plastics or 
wood. The core consists of several layers of wood that 
have been /aminated (glued together). Some bows can 
be separated into two or three pieces for carrying or 
storage. They are commonly called “take-down’ bows. 

Bowstrings are made of plastics, notably Dacron or 
polyethylene cord, and have a wrapping of nylon thread 
opposite the handle of the bow. This wrapping protects 
the string at the nocking point, the place where the 
notch of the arrow fits. Each end of the string has a loop 
that is used in stringing the bow. In recurve bows and 
longbows, the loop fits into a notch at each tip of the 
bow. In compound bows, the loop is attached to one of 
the two cables. 

The amount of pull required to bring a 28-inch (71- 
centimeter) arrow to full draw is cailed the draw weight 
of the bow. For example, a 40-pound (18-kilogram) bow 
requires 40 pounds of force to draw a 28-inch arrow. 
Some bows have a weight of more than 60 pounds (27 
kilograms). A beginning archer should use a bow of 30 
pounds (14 kilograms) or less. 

Bows vary in length, depending on their use. Archers 
also choose a bow that is comfortable for their draw 
length. Many recurve target archers use bows 68 to 70 
inches (173 to 180 centimeters) long. Compound bows 
average about 45 inches (114 centimeters) in length. 

Arrows are made of carbon, aluminum, fiberglass, or 
wood. Target archers prefer lightweight carbon com- 
posite or aluminum arrows, which travel especially fast 
and accurately. Hunters and other archers who some- 
times must shoot on rough land generally use alumi- 
num arrows, which can withstand rough treatment. Be- 


ginners should shoot with aluminum or wooden arrows. 


All arrows have three main parts—the point, which in 
most cases is made of metal; the shaft; and the nock, 
which attaches to the string. Points vary in shape and 
size. Bow hunters use points that have blades with two 
or more Cutting edges. Target and field archers use a 
conical, bullet-shaped point. The nock has a notch for 
the bowstring. Three or four vanes (feathers) on the shaft 
help provide accuracy in shooting. An arrow may be 
fletched (feathered) with plastic vanes or turkey feathers. 

Arrow length varies from about 24 to 32 inches (61 to 
81 centimeters). An archer can determine the proper 
length to use by holding an arrow perpendicular to the 
chest and extending the other arm straight out. The ar- 
row should reach just beyond the fingertips. 

Most archers carry their arrows in a holder called a 
quiver. The quiver may be attached to the bow ora belt, 
or placed on the ground. 


Archery safety 


Archers should observe the following rules to avoid injuring 
themselves or others: 


Never point a drawn bow at any object or animal you do not 
want to hit. 


Never shoot an arrow unless the area is free of people or animals. 
Never shoot an arrow straight up. 
Keep all archery equipment in good condition 


Other equipment includes an armguard made of 
leather or plastic. The guard is worn on the forearm of 
the hand that holds the bow. It protects the forearm 
when the bowstring snaps back after being released. 
Archers also wear a shooting glove or a leather tabto 
protect the fingers that draw the bowstring. 

Many bows are equipped with a sight used for aim- 
ing. Sights range from simple metal pins to telescopic 
eyepieces. Most target archers use one or two compos- 
ite or metal rods called stabilizers to reduce the vibra- 
tions in a bow after the bowstring is released. These 
rods, manufactured in various lengths and weights, are 
usually attached to the back of the bow handle. 


Archery competition 


Archers take part in many types of competition. The 
most popular contests include those in target archery, 
field archery, flight archery, indoor archery, and 3-D 
archery. 

Target archery is the most common form of compe- 
tition. The archers shoot down a long course at woven 
straw or foam mats called buttresses. The buttresses are 
covered with a target that is divided into five colored 
circles. A thin line divides every color into two rings, 
each of which counts for a different score. The colors 
and their value in points are: gold, 10 and 9; red, 8 and 7; 
blue, 6 and 5; black, 4 and 3; and white, 2 and 1. 


Recurve bow 


Bowstring ——_-——_____— 


Stabilizer 


Shooting glove 








WORLD BOOK illustration by David Cunningham 
Archery equipment includes accessories that help an archer 
shoot better and more comfortably. Most target archers use re- 
curve bows equipped with a sight and one or two stabilizers. 





The number of shots allowed each archer is called a 
round. \n the United States, the National Archery Associ- 
ation has established many kinds of rounds for men, 
women, and children. Olympic archery competition and 
all international tournaments are held under the rules of 
the International Archery Federation. These rules call for 
men and women to shoot from varying distances, 90 
meters (98 yards) being the maximum distance for men 
and 70 meters (77 yards) the maximum for women. The 
types of rounds that the archers shoot vary according to 
the level of competition, such as the World Champi- 
onships or the Olympic Games. In the 90-, 70-, and 60- 
meter (66-yard) distances, and in all competition in the 
United States, archers shoot at targets 122 centimeters 
(48 inches) in diameter. The 50-and 30-meter (55- and 33- 
yard) distances use a target 80 centimeters (31 inches) in 
diameter. 

Field archery involves walking across a Course set 
out in an open field or wooded area shooting at but- 
tresses from various distances. The basic contest, called 
a field round, consists of a course with 14 buttresses. 
They are covered with black-and-white targets that 
measure 15, 30, 45, or 60 centimeters (6, 12, 18, or 24 
inches) in diameter. Each target has three circular scor- 
ing rings~a black center ring worth 5 points, a white 
middle ring, 4; and a black outer ring, 3. The archers 
shoot two rounds of four arrows each at every target. 


Target point 


Hunting point ——— Ss 


Field point —--—_ > 


Fletching 


Cresting 


Cock feather 





WORLD BOOK diagram by Richard Fickle 
The main parts of an arrow are the point, the shaft, and the 
nock. The nock includes a notch for the bowstring and three or 
four feathers that help provide shooting accuracy. 


Arrow rest 





WORLD BOOK tilustratton by David Cunntngham 
Notching an arrow, a process called mocking, left is the first 
step in drawing the bowstring. The archer grasps the string with 
three fingers. Many archers aim by using a sight, right 








Archery 603 


a 
ror) 
> 
= 
nN 
Nv 
(2) 

3 





WORLD BOOK diagram by Richard Fickle 
The target used in target archery competition in the United 
States has 10 scoring rings and 5 colored circles. An archer 
scores 10 points by hitting the bull’s-eye. 


The distance to the targets ranges from about 6 to 72 
meters (7 to 80 yards). 

Flight archery is competition in which archers try 
only for distance, not accuracy. They use special bows 
with a draw weight of up to 200 pounds (91 kilograms), 
and small, lightweight arrows. In regular flight archery, 
the archers shoot while standing. In freesty/e flight 
archery, they lie on their back with the bow strapped to 
their feet. They use both hands to draw the bow. An 
archer can shoot farther than 700 yards (640 meters). 

Indoor archery involves shooting at a distance of 18 
meters (20 yards). The archer generally shoots 12 rounds 
of five arrows or 10 rounds of six arrows. Many archers 
compete indoors during the winter months to keep in 
shape for outdoor competitions or hunting. 

3-D archery consists of shooting arrows at lifelike 
foam models of game animals, such as deer and elk The 
archer must correctly estimate the distance of the target. 
The model animal has scoring rings that can only be 
seen from a short distance. Because 3-D archery has 
many of the same challenges as hunting, it is a popular 
off-season activity for bow hunters. 


History 


Prehistoric people invented the bow and arrow thou- 
sands of years ago. The weapon revolutionized early 
hunting methods by enabling people to kill animals 
from a distance. The ancient Egyptians were the first 
people known to use the bow and arrow extensively. 
They used the weapon for hunting and in war as early as 
5000 B.C. Other early peoples who used bows and ar- 
rows included the Assyrians and the Persians. 

By the A.D. 900’s, the Turks had developed advanced 
archery equipment They used laminated bows made of 
a combination of wood and animal horns and tendons. 
The tips of their bows curved outward like modern re- 
curve bows. By the 1100's, the crossbow had become a 
popular weapon in Europe (see Crossbow). 

The /ongbow ranked as the chief weapon of the Eng- 
lish Army when the Hundred Years’ War began in 1337. 
In 1346, in the Battle of Crécy, 7,000 English archers 


604 Archery 


© Jason Vaccarello, National Archery Association 
Target archery is the most common type of archery contest. An 
archer tries to score points by shooting arrows from several dis- 
tances at a circular target divided into 10 scoring rings. 


routed a much larger French force that included over 
1,000 armor-clad knights. In 1415, in the Battle of Agin- 
court, about 6,000 English troops with longbows defeat- 
ed a French force of about 20,000 to 30,000. 

By about 1500, tirearms had replaced the bow and ar- 
row as the chief weapon of English infantry. In the 
1540's, English author Roger Ascham wrote Joxophilus, 
the first book to describe the proper way to shoot a bow 
and arrow. The Royal Toxophilite Society was set up in 
England in 1781 to promote archery as a sport. 

The first archery organization in the United States was 
the United Bowmen of Philadelphia, founded in 1828. 
The National Archery Association was established in 
1879 and held its first tournament that year. In 1931, the 
International Archery Federation (FITA) was founded to 
conduct international tournaments. The National Field 
Archery Association was organized in 1939 by a group 
of American hunters. In 1969, FITA added field archery 
to the events in world championship archery competi- 
tion. In 1991, the federation added indoor archery. 

Compound bows came into use during the 1970's. 
They soon gained wide popularity because they are so 
easy to draw and hold. 

National Archery Association of the United States 

See also Arrowhead; Indian, American (Hunting, 
gathering, and fishing; Weapons). 


Critically reviewed by the 


Additional resources 
Bolnick, Helen, and others. Archery Instruction Manual. Ed. by 
Donald W. Campbell. 4th ed. National Archery Assn. of the 
United States, 1993. 
McKinney, Wayne C and Mike W. Archen. 81h ed. Brown & 
Benchmark, 1997. 








Arches National Park lies near Moab in southeast- 
ern Utah (see Utah [physical map)). Its unusual sandstone 
rock formations look like huge arches, windows, and 
towers. Landscape Arch is one of the world’s longest 
natural arches. It has a 291-foot (89-meter) span. The park 
became a national monument in 1929 and a national 
park in 1971. See National Park System (table: National 
par ks). Critically reviewed by the National Park Service 
Archimedean screw, 448 kuh MEE dee uhn, is a de- 
vice for raising water. It consists of a screw or an 
arrangement of blades sealed to the inside of a cylinder. 
The lower end is placed in the water. The upper end has 
a crank that turns the cylinder. The threads of the screw 
or the blades slowly raise the water until it flows out the 
upper end. This device was used in the Nile Valley for 
draining and irrigating land. Some scholars believe it 
was invented by the ancient Greek mathematician 
Archimedes. 

See also Invention (Ancient Greece). 
Archimedean solid, 44 kuh MEE dee uhn, is any of 
13 solid figures. These figures were first described by 
the ancient Greek mathematician Archimedes. 

Archimedean solids are semiregular convex polyhe- 
drons (see Polyhedron). The faces (surfaces) of any 
Archimedean solid represent more than one kind of 
regular polygon. However, all the po/yhedral angles are 
identical. A polyhedral angle is a figure formed at a ver- 
tex (point) where three or more faces meet. 

One example of an Archimedean solid is the truncat- 
ed cube. This figure is formed when each corner of a 
cube is truncated (cut off) at the same angle. An equilat- 


Delmar D. Fangmeter 


Equilateral 
triangle 


Venrtices are cut 


Regular 
octagon 


Truncated 
cube 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Zorica Dabich 


A truncated cube is a type of Archimedean solid. It is formed 
when the eight vertices of a cube are cut off at the same angle, 
leaving an equilateral triangle in place of each vertex Each 
square face of the original cube becomes a regular octagon. 


eral triangle then replaces each corner and an octagon 
replaces each square face of the cube. Thus, a truncated 
cube has six faces that are octagons, and eight faces that 
are equilateral triangles. Each vertex is the corner of one 
triangle and two octagons. John K Beem 
Archimedes, 4H kuh MEE deez (287?-212 B.C), was 
the most original and profound mathematician of an- 
cient times. Archimedes, a Greek, was also a physicist 
and a mechanical engineer. In the ancient world, he was 
best known as an inventor. His surviving writings rank 
among the masterpieces of scientific literature, especial- 
ly On the Sphere and Cylinder. 





= elt path. ae, a re 
WORLD BOOK illustration by Oxford Illistrators Limited 


The Archimedean screw raises water as the handle is turned. 
The water is carried upward within the spiral chambers as the 
screw revolves. The water comes out of the screws upper end. 


His life. Archimedes was born in Syracuse, the larg- 
est Greek settlement in Sicily. He probably went to study 
in Alexandria, Egypt, then the chief center of Greek 
learning. There, Archimedes studied with disciples of 
Euclid, a famous Greek mathematician. Archimedes 
spent the rest of his life in Syracuse. When the Romans 
captured Syracuse, the Roman commander Marcellus 
ordered that citizens of Syracuse be left unharmed. 
However, according to one story, Archimedes was 
killed by a soldier while working on a geometry prob- 
lem. 

His discoveries. Archimedes proved the law of the 
lever and invented the compound pulley. With these 
machines, it is possible to move a great weight with a 
small force. Archimedes reportedly once boasted to 
Hiero, king of Syracuse: “Give me a place to stand on, 
and | will move the entire earth.” He was referring to the 
way levers and pulleys can help people move objects 
many times their own size. The king challenged him to 
prove his boast. Archimedes is said to have used a sys- 
tem of pulleys to move a ship fully loaded with passen- 
gers and freight (see Lever; Pulley). In his investigations 
of force and motion, Archimedes also discovered that 
every object has a center of gravity. This is a single point 
at which the force of gravity appears to act on the object 
(see Gravity, Center of). 

Archimedes did much of his work for King Hiero. In 
one famous story, the king suspected that a goldsmith 
had not made a new crown of pure gold, but had mixed 
in some less costly silver. The king asked Archimedes to 
find out if the goldsmith had cheated. 

Archimedes found the answer to this problem while 
taking a bath. His solution rested on vo/ume (the amount 
of space occupied by an object). Archimedes noticed 
that water spilled out of the bath as he placed his body 
into it. By measuring the amount of water his body dis- 
placed, he could measure its volume. Archimedes was 
so excited when he found the answer that he ran into 
the street without dressing, shouting “Eureka!” (I have 
found it!). Archimedes compared the amount of water 
displaced by the crown to the amount of water dis- 
placed by an equal weight of pure gold. The crown dis- 


Archipenko, Alexander 605 


placed more water, and so it was not pure gold. The 
goldsmith had cheated. 

Archimedes discovered other basic laws of Aydrostat- 
ics, the branch of physics that deals with liquids at rest. 
One of the major laws, called Archimedes‘ principle, de- 
scribes buoyancy. Buoyancy is the loss in weight an ob- 
ject seems to undergo when placed in a liquid, as com- 
pared to its weight in air. Archimedes principle states 
that an object fully or partly immersed in a liquid is 
buoyed upward by a force equal to the weight of the liq- 
uid displaced by that object. From this principle, he con- 
cluded that a floating object displaces an amount of lig- 
uid equal to its own weight. 

His inventions. Archimedes is credited with invent- 
ing a device used in ancient Egypt to drain and irrigate 
the land in the Nile Valley. This device, known as the Ar- 
chimedean screw, is still used today. Archimedes also 
invented devices used to defend Syracuse against 
Roman attacks. These devices included cranes that 
could pull Roman ships out of the water and twirl them 
around, and catapults, weapons that shot heavy rocks at 
the enemy. Some writers of ancient times reported that 
Archimedes designed a system of mirrors that reflected 
the sun’s rays to set Roman ships on fire. However, his- 
torians doubt if the fire mirrors ever existed. 

His mathematics. Archimedes made significant con- 
tributions to theoretical mathematics. He extended the 
method of exhaustion, a way of determining the area of 
figures bounded by curved lines or surfaces. The 
method of exhaustion foreshadowed a form of higher 
mathematics called ca/cu/us. Archimedes used this 
method to make more precise estimates than any before 
of the value of pi, the ratio of a circle’s circumference to 
its diameter. He showed that the value of pi is greater 
than 342 but less than 34. Archimedes felt that his great- 
est discoveries were the formulas for the surface and 
volume of a sphere. He also devised a system of nota- 
tion for expressing numbers far larger than those repre- 
sented in the alphabetic numeration system then used. 

Ronald S. Calinger 

See also Archimedean screw; Archimedean solid; 
Calculus; Hydraulics. 

Archipelago, Aur kuh PEHL uh goh, is a Greek word 
that means chief sea. It now applies to any broad ex- 
panse of water containing islands, and is often used for 
the islands themselves. The best-known examples are 
the Malay and Lofoten archipelagos. See also Island; Pa- 
cific Islands. Peter P. Sakalowsky 

Archipenko, ane kuh PEHNG koh, Alexander (1887- 
1964), was a pioneer cubist sculptor. He was one of the 
first sculptors to show that spaces can be as important 
to a work as the solids. This view was a basic element in 
Archipenko’'s style throughout his career. His use of sol- 
ids and hollows influenced many modern sculptors. Ar- 
chipenko’s forms are concave (curving inward) and con- 
vex (curving outward) with angular shapes and 
openings. Typical examples include Seated Woman 
(1916) and Dua/ (1955). He was also one of the first artists 
to adapt the new technique of co//age to sculpture, mix- 
ing a wide variety of materials (see Collage). 

Archipenko was born in Kiev, in the Ukraine. He 
moved to the United States in 1923 and became a citizen 
in 1928. He founded art schools in Europe and America, 


and taught at several U.S. universities. Joseph F. Lamb 


606 Architecture 








. betty 
PH FP ‘ 


/ : a 

ee 
sido i Ny a 
2: = aeer fi Th ! 
TAA HI Hii 
— i SLA 


oi } ~ 











IDS Center (1975), Minneapolis, Minn., designed Tokyo Cathedral (1965). designed 


by Philip Johnson, ¢ Dennis Brack, Black Star by Kenzo Tange; Onon Press 
An office building encloses an indoor plaza The Tokyo Cathedral in Japan shows the influence of modern Western archi- 
where workers and shoppers can relax. tecture in the structure's streamlined design and white concrete walls. 


Archite ctu re dedicated to the memory of important events and peo- 


ple. The beauty of a city or town is largely determined 
by the quality of its architecture. 


Architecture is a term with several meanings, all re- Although architecture has artistic qualities, it must 
lated to buildings. It may refer to the art and science of also satisfy a number of important practical require- 
building, practiced by artists called architects. Or, archi- | ments. For example, an architect may design an office 
fecture may mean the buildings themselves. The term building that looks beautiful. But if people cannot work 
also has a historical meaning referring either to the comfortably and efficiently in it, the building fails archi- 
building style of a particular culture or to an artistic tecturally. 
movement. For example, we speak of Greek architecture There are unique features of architecture that set it 
or Gothic architecture. apart from other arts. In most cases, painters, writers, 
Architects create many kinds of structures. For in- composers, and other artists create their works and then 
stance, they design houses, schools, hotels, hospitals, try to sell them. But a building may cost thousands or 
stadiums, factories, office buildings, theaters, and millions of dollars to construct. In nearly all instances, 
houses of worship. Architects also design monuments architects must have a buyer for their work before they 


create it. For example, rarely can an architect design an 
a office building, afford to have it constructed, and then 
G. L. Hersey, the contributor of this article, is Professor of the try to find someone who will buy it. 


History of Art at Yale University. Marvin Trachtenberg, the criti- Unlike some other artists, architects must work with 
cal reviewer of this article, is Edith Kitzmiller Professor at the In- th l d th e desi N lists, for ex- 
stitute of Fine Arts at New York University. ee ied bes Me [leh oL ho MS os ihe cS ob ey - 


ample, can create their stories alone from their own in- 


rays hema’ “B) 


oe! 


Villa Kokkonen 11969}, designed by Alvar Aalto, 
® Kari Hakli, Dow Press Agency 


A country house in Finland has wooden ceilings and walls. 
Specially made furniture harmonizes with the interior architec- 
ture. 








Simon Fraser University (1965), Burnaby, BC, designed 
by Arthur Erickson; € Koos Dykstra, Image Finders 


A university campus in Canada has covered walkways and at- 
tractively landscaped courtyards between the various buildings. 


spiration. But almost all architects design a building for 
a client and must observe the client's wishes and needs. 
Within the limits of those wishes and needs, architects 
can make their personal artistic contributions. 
Architects work closely with the client throughout the 
development of a building. They decide now best to ful- 
fill the client's requirements and give advice on proba- 
ble costs. They make drawings and models that show 
how the building will look after it is completed. They 
also work with the many different types of contractors 
who actually build the structure. Architects supervise 
the construction and, in many cases, receive a percent- 
age of the construction budget as their fee. 
Architecture is one of the oldest art forms. It dates 
from prehistoric times and is found in almost all socie- 
ties. A society's architecture reflects the values and ide- 
als of its people. For example, the ancient Greeks 
stressed discipline and harmony in life, and so they cre- 
ated an architectural style that was balanced and or- 
derly. The beautifully proportioned Greek temple re- 
flects this emphasis on harmony. The Middle Ages was 





Architecture 607 


Lhe 5 7 


q 
: ‘ 
S 
ci 
oii aiaae 
Lelong 
U 


350 
unui hasnt ioe tthe 


- 








Trans World Airlines terminal |1962l at Kennedy International Airport, 
designed by Eero Saarinen; Marvin B Winter. Photo Researchers 


An airline terminal in New York City consists of a series of 
dramatic curved forms that reflect a feeling of flight. 








Little Sports Palace (1957), a 


by Pier Luigi Nervi and Annibale Vitellozzi: © Robert Frerck 


A sports arena in Rome features a lacelike, curved concrete 
ceiling supported by a row of graceful concrete columns. 


a period of deep religious faith in Europe. Architects de- 
signed majestic cathedrals with vau/ts (arched ceilings) 
and towers that seemed to soar toward heaven. Like the 
Greek temple, the medieval cathedral was intended to 
inspire a mood of reverence among worshipers. 

Architects rank among the greatest figures in the his- 
tory of art. But many architectural masterpieces were 
created by skilled builders who probably did not con- 
sider themselves artists and had no idea that they had 
created buildings which critics later would praise as im- 
portant works of architecture. During the 1600's, for ex- 
ample, colonists in New England built houses that were 
not primarily designed to be beautiful. Some of these 
houses have been preserved and are admired today for 
their skilled carpentry and handsome outlines. 

This article describes the basic elements of architec- 
ture and discusses the history of architecture through- 
out the world from its beginnings to the present. The ar- 
ticle also surveys the education and training needed to 
become an architect as well as the various careers avail- 
able in architecture. 


608 Architecture 


Architectural terms 


Ambulatory is a continuous aisle in a circular building. Ina Cantilever is a horizontal projection, such as a balcony or a 
church, the ambulatory serves as a semicircular aisle that en- beam, which is supported only at one end. 
closes the apse. 





Apse is a semicircular area. In most churches, the apse is at 
the far end of the building and contains the main altar. 


ui \ 
Cantilevers 


Capital, in an order, forms the upper part of a column. It sep- 





arates the shaft from the entablature. 
Ambulatary 


Arcade refers to a series of 
arches supported by columns 
or piers. A passageway 
formed by the arches is also 
called an arcade. 





Arch is a curved structure 
used to support the weight of 
the material above it. The 
stone at the top of an arch is 
called the keystone. 


Daric lonic Carinthian 





Arcade . 
Colonnade means a row of columns, usually set an equal dis- 


tance from each other. 


Column is a vertical support. In an order, it consists of a shaft 


Architrave makes up the lowest part of an entablature. It and a capital and often rests ona base. 


rests on the capital of a column. For a drawing of an architrave, 
see Entablature on the opposite page. 


Buttress is a support built against an outside wall of a build- Column: 
ing. A flying buttress is an arched support that extends troma Capito! — 
column or pier to the wall. E 

Shaft —— 
Base — @ 








Composite order is a 
Roman order. It resembles the 
Corinthian order but has a 
capital that combines the Co- 
rinthian acanthus leaf decora- 
tion with volutes from the 
lonic order. 


Corinthian order became 
the last of the three Greek or- 
ders. It resembles the lonic 
order but has an elaborate 
capital that is decorated with 


: carvings of leaves of the acan- Compasite Carinthian 
Buttress Flying Buttress thus plant. Order Order 





Cornice forms the upper part of an entablature and extends 
beyond the frieze. 






i 


rr 
—— 








Doric order was the first and 
simplest of the three Greek 
orders. The Doric is the only 
order that normally has no 
base. 




















Daric 
Order 
Entablature refers to the 
upper horizontal part of an 
order betweer a capital and Enablattte 
the roof. It consists of three 
major parts— the architrave, Cornice 





frieze, and cornice. 


Facade is the front ofa 
building. Most facades con- 
tain an entrance. 


Architrove 


Frieze forms the middle 
part of an entablature and is 
often decorated with a hori- 
zontal band of relief sculp- 
ture. 


SCSRRPSESCOSEECECED SUES ARRe 


lonic order was the sec- 
ond of the three Greek or- 
ders. It has a capital deco- 
rated with carved spiral 
scrolls called vo/utes. 


Module is a measurement, 
such as the diameter of a col- 
umn, which architects use to 
establish the proportions of 
an entire structure. 





Nave is the chief area 
within a church. It extends 
froin the main entrance to the 
transept. 








ee 





Order, in classical architecture, consisted of a type of column 
and entablature. Orders served as the basic elements of Greek 
and Roman architecture and influenced many later styles. 








Architecture 609 


Pediment is a triangular area between the horizontal entabla- 
ture and the sloping roof at the front of a classical-style building. 







Pas 


Pediment 





Pendentive is a curved 
support shaped like an in- 
verted triangle. Pendentives 
hold up a dome. 


Pier refers to a supporting 
element other than a wall or 
column. 


Post and lintel is a method 
of construction in which verti- 
cal beams (posts) support a 
horizontal beam (lintel). 


Lintel 


=~ 
Post —————_- 
oe ~ 


Shaft is the main part of a 
column below the capital. 
Many shafts have shallow ver- 
tical grooves called futing. 


Tuscan order, a Roman 
order, resembles the Doric 
order, but the shaft has no 
fluting. 


Vault is an arched ceiling 
commonly made of brick, 
concrete, or stone. A barrel 
vault, the simplest form of 
vault, is a single continuous 
arch. A groined vault is 
formed by joining two barrel 
vaults at right angles. A 
ribbed vault has diagonal 


Transept forms the arms — 
arches that project from the 
inner surface. 


in a T- or cross-shaped 


church. 
WORLD BOOK illustrations by Robert Keys 
Groined Vault Ribbed Vault 


Tuscan 


Order 


) 


Barrel Vault 


610 Architecture 


In designing a building, architects think in terms of 
space, planes, and openings. They consider a building 
as space enclosed by planes—that is, by the surface of 
walls, floors, and ceilings. Openings include doorways, 
windows, and archways. An architect's basic task is to 
“shape” space into appropriate and practical forms 
through the arrangement of openings and planes. At 
various times in history, architects have considered cer- 
tain shapes more beautiful than others and have empha- 
sized them in their designs. The most popular shapes 
have included the square, rectangle, and sphere. Archi- 
tects often combine two or more shapes in one design. 

A building should be pleasing to look at, but it should 
also enable people to live or work in it comfortably and 
efficiently. In addition, the structure should be well built 
so that it can stand a long time without expensive main- 
tenance. To create an attractive and efficient building, an 
architect must balance three major elements: (1) func- 
tion, (2) appearance, and (3) durability. 

Function. Every building is designed for certain pur- 
poses. A functional building—whether a small house or 
a giganiic office building—fulfills those purposes by 
serving the needs of its users in a pleasant and conven- 
ient way. The building is also designed to provide ade- 
quate heating, lighting, sources of power, and, in some 
cases, air conditioning. 

Today, energy conservation has become an important 
consideration in architectural planning. For example, ar- 
chitects may use large windows or even entire walls 
made of glass to help heat a building with solar energy. 

Many activities may take place within a building. Ina 
house, common activities include eating, sleeping, bath- 
ing, and entertaining. Each activity has different require- 
ments in regard to the location, size, lighting, and acces- 
sibility of the rooms in which the activity occurs. For 
example, a bedroom is a private room and should be set 
off from the rest of the living spaces. But everyone ina 
house uses the dining room, and so it should be more 
centrally located. 

An office building involves a much more complex ar- 
rangement of space than a house. The architect must 
make sure that hundreds or perhaps thousands of work- 


Flements of architecture 


ers can move quickly through the various parts of the 
building. In addition, visitors should be able to enter 
and leave the building easily. Parts of the structure may 
have to house special equipment, and a large amount of 
storage space may be required. The architect must also 
consider the activities that take place outside the build- 
ing. For example, the building may require parking facil- 
ities. In addition, the architect may have to plan traffic 
patterns so that automobiles and other vehicles can ap- 
proach and leave the building without crossing many 
lanes of traffic. Driveways must be wide enough for fire 
trucks to enter, and loading docks must be the proper 
height for delivery trucks. 

Appearance. An architect determines the exterior 
appearance of the building not only by its shape but 
also by the choice of materials. The natural colors of 
stone, brick, and wood have always been popular, alone 
or in combinations. During the 1900s, tinted glass has 
played an important role in exterior building design. 
Many architects give special attention to texture in their 
designs. Some architects choose rough-textured wood 
or stone. Others prefer the sleek, elegant quality of 
highly polished glass and metal. 

Many architects have created dramatic or pleasing 
patterns through the skillful arrangement of materials. 
For example, architects have used glass and concrete, 
various combinations of brickwork, or contrasting kinds 
of stone. 

Proportion is vital to a building's appearance. All the 
parts of a building should be in proper relation to one 
another, neither too large nor too small. In addition, the 
size and shape of the building should blend with its site 
and surroundings. A tall glass-and-metal building would 
be appropriate in the downtown area of a large city, but 
it would be out of place in a neighborhood of single- 
family houses. 

Durability. Most architecture is intended to stand a 
long time. To last many years without costly mainte- 
nance, a building must have a strong foundation. In ad- 
dition, the exterior must be able to resist wear from the 
weather, and high-quality materials must be used in the 
interior. 


Geodesic dome (1967), designed by Buckminster Fuller; Eric Hayes, Image Finders 





A geodesic dome is a 
strong, lightweight dome that 
has no internal supports. Geo- 
desic domes are made of 
standardized parts and so can 
be assembled and taken 
down quickly. The domes 
have been used for many pur- 
poses. The one at the left 
served as the United States 
pavilion at Expo 67, a world’s 
fair held in 1967 in Montreal, 
Canada. 


Early architecture 


The first significant architecture appeared in two re- 
gions of the Middle East more than 5,000 years ago. One 
region was Mesopotamia, which lay between and 
around the Tigris and Euphrates rivers in what is now 
eastern Iraq, northeastern Syria, and southeastern Tur- 
key. The other region was Egypt. 

Mesopotamian architecture. Four major culture 
groups dominated Mesopotamian history. They were 
the Sumerians, Assyrians, Babylonians, and Persians. 
The history of the region was marked by numerous wars 
and invasions. Thus, the various cultures constructed 
many fortified buildings. 

Most Mesopotamian buildings were made of brick 
and clay, which are not highly durable materials. As a re- 
sult, no complete example of Mesopotamian architec- 
ture has survived. However, archaeologists have been 
able to reconstruct the plans of some buildings. 

A Sumerian civilization developed in Mesopotamia 
sometime during the 3000s B.C. The first important Su- 
merian structures were temples. An early example was 
the White Temple (late 3000's B.C) in the city of Uruk. 
The temple was made of whitewashed brick. Architects 
built the temple on a platform at the top of a pyramidlike 
tower. Such towers are called ziggurats. 

During the mid-700's B.C., the Assyrians conquered 
the region. They built palaces and temples influenced by 
Sumerian architecture but on a larger and more magnif- 
icent scale. The citadel of King Sargon Il, which was 
built in the city of Khorsabad during the late 700s B.C, 
was one of the greatest achievements of Assyrian archi- 
tecture. The citadel stood in the northwest corner of the 
city and included palaces, temples, public buildings, 
and a ziggurat. A fortified watl enclosed the city. 

After the Assyrians fell in the 600s B.C., the Babylo- 
nians rose to power. They built a famous ziggurat re- 


TL A \ 





Architecture’ 611 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Kevin Maddison 


The citadel of King Sargon Il was built in the Assyrian capital 
of Khorsabad during the late 700s B.C. The citadel included pal- 
aces, temples, public buildings, and a stepped pyramid called a 
ziggurat, which rose above the other structures. 


ferred to in the Bible as the Tower of Babel (early 500s 
B.C). Their capital city of Babylon also included the fa- 
mous Hanging Gardens and the Ishtar Gate, which was 
decorated with colored glazed brick. The gate is now 
preserved in the State Museums in Berlin, Germany. 

In 539 B.C, the Persians conquered Mesopotamia. 
The Persian religion, Zoroastrianism, did not require 
temples. But the Persians built many palaces, most nota- 
bly a palace complex in the religious capital of Persepo- 
lis. This group of adjoining buildings, which was com- 
pleted in the mid-400s B.C, consisted of several palaces, 
halls, chambers, and courtyards. The Persian king re- 


r—sa\ 


ma) 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Kevin Maddison 


The Temple of Khons was built in Karnak, Egypt, during the 1100's B.C. Two large towers called 
pylons, left, guarded the entrance. This cutaway drawing shows the columns within the temple 
thal supported the roof. A sacred chamber at the right was dedicated to the moon god Khons. 








612 Architecture 


Fae 
ASSLT 


om sce 
Ihe ea 

=H, 
“’ TG ie 
a | 


€ Ronald Shendan 


Queen Hatshepsut's temple was built about 1480 B.C at Deir 
el-Bahri, Egypt. The Egyptians erected the temple at the foot of a 
huge cliff. Rows of columns supported a series of limestone ter- 
races. Aramp provided access to each terrace. 


ceived visitors in a huge room known as the Hall of One 
Hundred Columns. This room was 250 feet (76 meters) 
square with a vast beamed ceiling supported by col- 
umns perhaps 60 feet (18 meters) high. 

For illustrations of Mesopotamian architecture, see 
Babylon; Babylonia; Persia, Ancient. 

Egyptian architecture centered on the king, who 
was the religious as well as the political ruler of ancient 
Egypt. The Egyptians considered their kings to be gods, 
and they built stone tombs, temples, and palaces as 
monuments to them. 

The best-known Egyptian tombs are huge pyramids in 
which the kings were buried. The ruins of 35 major pyr- 
amids still stand along the Nile River. Each pyramid was 
part of a group of structures that commonly included a 
large temple on the eastern side of the pyramid and a 
smaller temple near the Nile. A long passageway linked 
the two temples. The Egyptians probably considered the 
king's burial chamber the most sacred part of a pyramid. 
They blocked off and concealed the entrances to the 
pyramid and the chamber after the burial. 

The first known Egyptian pyramid was built for King 
Zoser about 2650 B.C. at Saqqarah. It rises in a series of 
six giant steps. Three large and well-preserved pyramids 
were built from about 2600 to 2500 B.C. at Giza for Kings 
Khufu, Khafre, and Menkaure. These massive works 
originally had smooth sides. 

A great period of Egyptian architecture began in the 
1500's B.C. and lasted for about 500 years. Architects dur- 
ing this time mainly designed temples rather than pyra- 
mids. The temples were huge structures supported by 
columns. Ramps and halls connected the various rooms. 
People entered most temples through gateways formed 
by two huge towers called py/ons. One unusual master- 
piece of the period is the temple built for Queen 
Hatshepsut at Deir el-Bahri about 1480 B.C. Her subjects 
erected it along the foot of a huge cliff, vividly uniting 
architecture with nature. 

For illustrations of Egyptian architecture, see Egypt, 
Ancient; Pyramids. 





Asian and pre-Columbian architecture 


Asian architecture has four main branches—Chinese, 
Japanese, Indian, and Islamic. Indian and Islamic archi- 
tecture have had especially widespread influence. In- 
dian architecture includes the architecture of Bangla- 
desh, Burma, Cambodia, Indonesia, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri 
Lanka, Thailand, and Tibet as well as that of India. Is- 
lamic architecture refers to buildings designed by Mus- 
lims. Muslims are followers of Islam, the religion based 
on the life and teaching of the Prophet Muhammad. Is- 
lamic architecture can be found in the Middle East, 
northern Africa, Spain, and Asia. 

Thousands of years ago, the ancestors of American 
Indians migrated from Asia to the Americas. By 100 B.C, 
several Indian groups, particularly in what is now Latin 
America, had developed brilliant cultures and produced 
magnificent architecture. American Indian art and archi- 
tecture created before A.D. 1492 is called pre- 
Columbian because it was produced before Christopher 
Columbus arrived in the New World. 

Chinese architecture. Chinese architecture began 
to develop in ancient times. The Chinese constructed a 
variety of buildings, but the chief structures were Bud- 
dhist temples and many-storied towers called pagodas. 

Chinese temples consisted of rectangular wooden 
halls that featured an elaborate and beautiful arrange- 
ment of timber beams in the ceiling. Walls did not sup- 


J j ( 


ee ee i 
bs ae BEd as y (ea) 
a ) _ er FF 


E 


Section of the Forbidden City, begun in the 
AD 1400s, © Bruno Barbey, Magnum 


Traditional Chinese architecture featured roofs that curved 
upward at the end. The roofs were supported by wooden col- 

umns connected to the ceiling beams by wooden brackets. The 
courtyard above is part of the famous Forbidden City in Beijing. 








SEGRE P I= 


We 
od 
ith 


BRRES 


Guest House (AD. 1629), Imperial Villa, 
Kyoto, Japan: Werner Forman Archive 


Japanese architecture became noted for its simplicity, ele- 
gance, and sense of proportion. In a traditional house, above, 
thin walls are used to provide privacy rather than support. Parti- 
tions can be moved to change the room size. 


port the roof but served simply as screens for privacy 
and for protection against the weather. The roof support 
came from posts connected to the ceiling beams by 
wooden brackets, many of which were carved, painted 
red, and coated with gold. The Chinese covered many of 
the roofs with blue, green, or yellow glazed tiles. The 
edges of the roofs curved gracefully upward. 

For illustrations of Chinese architecture, see Beijing; 
Korea; Pagoda. 

Japanese architecture has been strongly influenced 
by Chinese architecture. Thus, traditional Japanese ar- 
chitecture is based mainly on the use of wooden beams 
and posts. Shinto shrines, which are found throughout 
Japan, provide an excellent example. Shinto is the native 
religion of Japan. Shinto shrines are wooden frame 











Architecture 613 


structures built on posts that raise the shrine above the 
ground. Ceiling beams project beyond the walls and 
give the roofs a deep overhang. 

Traditional Japanese houses, whether large or small, 
have the same design. Upright posts support the roof. 
Sliding doors are built into the lightweight walls. The in- 
terior walls provide privacy rather than support. Many 
of the houses are set within walled gardens. For a pic- 
ture of a traditional house, see Japan (Way of life). 

Indian architecture had developed by the 200s B.C. 
The first great influence on Indian architecture was Bud- 
dhism, a major religion in India. Buddhism inspired the 
building of temples called chaj/tyas, monasteries, and 
stupas. A stupa is a dome-shaped monument that 
houses relics of Buddha, who founded the religion in 
the 500's B.C. Many of the temples were carved from 
solid rock. | 

Hinduism and Islam also influenced Indian architec- 
ture. Hindu temples have rows of sculptured columns 
and richly carved exteriors, open porches, and spires. 
The Muslims conquered India during the 1500's and in- 
troduced their style of architecture. The outstanding Is- 
lamic building in India is the beautiful Taj Mahal (about 
1630-1650) in Agra. Angkor (1100's), a group of temples 
in Cambodia, shows the Hindu influence on architecture 
outside India. 

For illustrations of Indian architecture, see India (The 
arts); Sculpture (As part of architecture). 

Islamic architecture. The most important Islamic 
building is the house of worship called a mosque. The 
styles of mosques vary among Islamic countries, but 
most mosques have a large courtyard surrounded by 
colonnades or arcades. A colonnade is a row of col- 
umns, and an arcade is a row of arches built on col- 
umns. The mosque walls are faced (covered) with col- 
ored brick, tiles, and stucco. Domes top many mosques. 
Mosques also have one or more towers known as mina- 
Frets. 

In addition to mosques, Muslim architects have de- 
signed palaces, tombs, and religious schools called ma- 


© George Holton, Photo Researchers 


Angkor is a group of temples 
in Cambodia. The temples, 
built of richly carved sand- 
stone, were begun in the AD. 
1100's and show the Hindu in- 
fluence on architecture out- 
side India. The main entrance, 
pictured at the left, is along 
ceremonial gateway topped 
by three towers. 


614 Architecture 


“ame 


=F 
7 > E= 
Fas A FS 
pi FP) EL 


7 


drasahs. The typical madrasah is a four-sided building 
surrounding a courtyard. In most cases, a large arched 
hall called an /wan is in the middle of each side of the 
building. Students hear lectures held in the iwans. 

For illustrations of Islamic architecture, see Islamic 
art; Jerusalem (Islamic sites); Spain (The arts). 

Pre-Columbian architecture. The Aztec, Toltec, 
Maya, and Inca developed the most important American 
Indian cultures in what is now Latin America. The Aztec 
and Toltec flourished in central Mexico. The Maya lived 
in Mexico and Central America, and the Inca built a huge 
empire in western South America. 

Nearly all the surviving Aztec, Toltec, and Maya struc- 
tures had a religious purpose. The most impressive of 
these structures were stone pyramids topped by small 
temples. The pyramids were part of ceremonial centers 
that also included altars, palaces, and plazas. The Inca 





eae 
" Fay 


: RS 
+ ye 


5 a 

oN BA fo 
! AN fer ford) PA 
74) U PAA 
| APA ta I 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Trevor Hill, Venner Artists Ltd 





bom 


reyT im = 
Sa a SS noted for magnificent stone 


islamic architecture has 
produced many beautiful 
houses of worship called 
mosques. The drawing at the 
left shows the Imperial 
Mosque in Isfahan, Iran. The 
domed sanctuary appears at 
the top. Four /wans (halls) with 
arched entrances surround 
the main courtyard. The slen- 
der towers are called 
minarets. 


built large temples, fortresses, and public buildings on 
mountainsides. Some of the best-known Inca ruins are at 
Machu Picchu, a site that lies in the Andes Mountains 
about 8,000 feet (2,400 meters) above sea level. 

A number of Indian cultures developed in North 
America. The cliff dwellers of what is now the South- 
western United States created the most significant archi- 
tecture. Their architecture consisted primarily of hous- 
ing. The buildings rose next to cliffs like apartment 
houses. The Indians built their cliff dwellings of stone, 
adobe, or timber. Religious ceremonies were held in cir- 
cular chambers called kivas. Most kivas were construct- 
ed underground. 

For illustrations of pre-Columbian architecture, see 
Aztec; City (Ancient cities); Colorado (Visitor's guide); In- 
dian, American (Indians of Middle America); Maya; 
Mexico (Arts); Pyramids. 


© George Hulton, Photo Researchers 


Maya architecture was 


pyramids. Most of the pyra- 
mids had a flat top on which 
one or more small temples 
stood. Additional temples 
were also built on platforms 
on the sides of the pyramids. 
This picture shows the ruins 
of pyramids in the Maya city 
of Tikal in the jungles of Gua- 
temala. Construction of the 
pyramids began in the 300's 
B.C. and continued for several 
centuries. 





Classical architecture 





€ Robert Frerck 





Architecture 615 


— oe : 
= 


Se 
—— 
— 
= 
a 2 oe 


Margot Woltke. SCALA EPA 


Greek architecture can be traced back to palaces built on the island of Crete by a people known 
as the Minoans. Short wooden columns supported the Palace of Minos, /ef, built about 1500 B.C 
in Knossos, Crete. By the mid-400's B.C, classical Greek architecture featured rows of beautifully 
proportioned stone columns in such structures as the Temple of Hephaestus, right, in Athens. 


The term classical architecture refers to the building 
styles developed by the ancient Greeks and Romans. 
However, the roots of classical architecture can be 
traced to buildings created by two early Greek 
peoples—the Minoans and the Mycenaeans. Classical 
Greek architecture, in turn, greatly influenced Roman ar- 
chitecture. 

Minoan architecture. The Minoans developed the 
first important European civilization. The Minoans lived 
on the island of Crete in the Mediterranean Sea. The 
great age of Minoan architecture lasted from about 2000 
to 1450 B.C 

The finest Minoan architectural achievement was the 
Palace of Minos (about 1500 B.C) in the town of Knossos. 
This complex and sprawling structure had dozens of 
rooms built around a courtyard. Wooden columns sup- 
ported the beams of the ceiling. Architects divided 
these beams into three horizontal sections. They were 
the architrave on the bottom, the /rieze in the middle, 
and the cornice on top. The three sections together are 
called the entab/ature. The entablature became a vital 
part of later Greek architecture. 

The Minoans also built palaces in the towns of Kato 
Zakro, Mallia, and Phaistos. All Minoan palaces served 
as administrative and commercial centers as well as 
royal residences. 

Mycenaean architecture. The main center of the 
Mycenaeans was the city of Mycenae in southern 
Greece. After about 1600 B.C, they built beautifully cut 
stone tombs that resemble the shape of beehives. The 
finest example of a beehive tomb is called the Treasury 
of Atreus (about 1300-1250 B.C). 

The Mycenaeans constructed fortresslike palaces of 
huge stone blocks. The heart of the palace was a rectan- 
gular royal audience hall known as the megaron. A 
porch, which was supported by two columns, and a ves- 
tibule led to the megaron. The megaron had a hearth in 
the middle for an open fire. A hole in the ceiling allowed 
the smoke to escape. Four columns around the hearth 
supported the roof. 





Classical Greek architecture has been imitated 
down to the present day. The best-known Greek contri- 
bution to architecture was a set of styles, called orders, 
of columns and their accompanying entablature. The 
Greeks used three basic orders— Doric, lonic, and Co- 
rinthian. Each of the three orders had its own distinctive 
decoration. 

The principal type of classical Greek building was the 
temple. Its design followed the plan of the Mycenaean 
megaron. A Greek temple generally included arrange- 


a 


: Sn x 


oo 
a Pes ay 


- 


_ 


& 
or 


te 


Ruins ot the basihca ‘early AD 300s! en the Roman Forum: SCALA An Resource 
A vault is an arched ceiling that can cover a large space or 
building. The Romans invented the vault. The Basilica of Con- 
stantine in Rome, above, had a vaulted ceiling. 





616 Architecture 





WORLD BOO:k illustration by Trevor Hill, Venner Artists Ltd. 


The Pantheon, built as a temple in Rome about A.D. 126, still 
stands. This cutaway drawing shows the interior of the domed, 
circular building. Corinthian columns support the porch roof. 


ments of columns that surrounded a long chamber for a 
statue of the god or goddess to whom the temple was 
dedicated. Many Greek temples were built on a hill that 
overlooked a city. Such a hill was known as an acropolis. 
The Greeks developed formulas for the various styles 
of temples. The formulas set forth the order; the num- 
ber, height, width, and spacing of the columns; and 
even the details of the smallest carvings. A typical for- 
mula was Doric peripteral hexastyle. Doric meant that 
the building would be erected in the Doric order with 
standard Doric ornamentation. Peripteral indicated that 
the building would be surrounded by a single row of 
columns. Hexasty/e meant that the front entrance, or 
portico, would be six columns wide. Greek architects 
used the diameter of the column at its base as the unit 
of measurement for determining the proportions of the 





entire building. This unit is called the module. 

In spite of the use of formulas, Greek temple designs 
had great flexibility and variety. A temple could be low 
and long or high and short. It might be simple or highly 
decorative. The number of columns could vary from 2 to 
more than 100. 

For illustrations of Greek architecture, see Athens; 
Column; Drama (Greek drama); Greece; Greece, An- 
cient. 

Roman architecture. The Romans ruled the largest 
empire of ancient times. At its peak, the Roman Empire 
included all the lands bordering the Mediterranean Sea. 
It also extended as far north as the British Isles and as far 
east as the Persian Gulf. Numerous architectural styles 
were used throughout the empire because many re- 
gions had developed their own building traditions. Nev- 
ertheless, Roman architecture had a great deal of stylis- 
tic unity. The Romans built more kinds of structures than 
did the people of any earlier civilization. In addition to 
houses, temples, and palaces, the Romans constructed 
such projects as aqueducts, public baths, shops, the- 
aters, and gigantic outdoor arenas. Most of these struc- 
tures were built during the period from about 100 B.C. 
to the A.D. 300s. 

The Romans were the first to fully utilize two struc- 
tural forms, the arch and the vault. A vault is an arched 
ceiling. The dome was a common form of vault in 
Roman architecture. The use of the arch and vault re- 
duced or eliminated the need for columns to support 
the roof. Instead, the roof could rest solely on the outer 
walls. The Romans often used columns simply as sculp- 
tural decoration attached to walls. 

A splendid example of Roman vault design are the 
Baths of Caracalla (A.D. 217) in Rome. The ruins of the 
building still stand. The baths had a system of vaults that 
covered vast areas of interior space. This space was so 
high and so deep that the Romans admired it as an ex- 
traordinary new form of architectural beauty. 

For illustrations of Roman architecture, see Rome; 
Rome, Ancient, Forum, Roman; Spain (History); Colos- 
seum. 


SCALA EPA 


Country houses built by aris- 
tocrats in ancient Rome often 
featured a courtyard called a 
peristyle. A covered walkway 
enclosed the peristyle, which 
included a garden, fountains, 
and statues. The peristyle at 
the left was part of a resi- 
dence called the House of the 
Vettii. It was excavated and re- 
stored at Pompeii, which was 
buried by the eruption of 
Mount Vesuvius in A.D. 79. 


Medieval architecture 


Medieval architecture refers to structures built in Eu- 
rope during the Middle Ages. This historical period 
lasted from the A.D. 400's to the 1500s. The intellectual 
and spiritual life of medieval Europe centered on the 
Christian church, and so nearly all architects designed 
churches, monasteries, and other religious buildings. 
Castles, fortresses, and other nonreligious structures 
were also built. 

Medieval architects developed a number of styles. 
The Byzantine style became dominant in eastern Europe. 
In western Europe, the leading styles were the Carolin- 
gian, the Romanesque, and the Gothic. All four styles 
were preceded by early Christian architecture, which 
flourished from the 300s to the 500s. 

Early Christian architecture. During the early cen- 
turies of Christianity, a number of regional cultures— 
and regional architectural styles—developed in Europe 
and the Middle East. But almost all early Christian archi- 
tects borrowed heavily from the Romans. They based 
their chief type of church design, the basilica, on large 
Roman halls that were used for public meetings. 

Old St. Peter's Church (begun about 330) was proba- 
bly the first important early Christian basilica. It stood on 
the site of the present St. Peter's Basilica in Rome. Wor- 
shipers entered Old St. Peter's through a large open 
courtyard called the atrium and a vestibule called the 
narthex. The atrium and narthex separated the noisy city 
from the quiet church. The plan of the interior resem- 
bled the shape of a T. The long part of the T was the 
nave. Two aisles ran along each side of the nave. The 
transept formed the arms of the T. A semicircular space 
called the apse opened from the center of the transept 
at the far end of the church. The apse, which was cov- 
ered by a half dome, contained the main altar. 

In many basilicas, colonnades and arcades separated 
the interior into a nave and side aisles. The exteriors of 
most basilicas were plain brick or stone, but the interi- 





Architecture 617 


ors glowed with brilliant mosaics and frescoes. Mosaics 
consist of small pieces of glass, marble, or stone fitted 
together to form a picture or design. Frescoes are wall- 
paintings created on plaster. 

Byzantine architecture. In 330, the Roman emperor 
Constantine the Great moved the capital of the empire 
from Rome to the city of Byzantium in what is now Tur- 
key. Byzantium was renamed Constantinople. \n 395, the 
Roman Empire split into two parts—the East Roman Em- 
pire, which had its capital in Constantinople, and the 
West Roman Empire, which had its capital in Rome. The 
West Roman Empire fell to Germanic tribes in the 400s. 
But the East Roman Empire thrived. It was called the Byz- 
antine Empire. 

By the 500s, a distinct Byzantine style of art had devel- 
oped. The finest achievement of Byzantine architecture 
was the great domed cathedral Hagia Sophia (532-537) in 
Constantinople. It was designed by Anthemius of Tralles 
and Isidorus of Miletus. The Turks captured Constanti- 
nople in 1453 and later renamed the city /stanbul. They 
converted Hagia Sophia into a mosque. But the only 
change they made to the exterior of the building was to 
add four minarets. 

Hagia Sophia has a huge central dome that tops a 
square space. This arrangement became a common fea- 
ture of Byzantine architecture. Four curved and inverted 
triangles made of brick support the dome. These sup- 
ports are called pendentives. By using pendentives, the 
architects could build a dome over a large square space. 
Inside Hagia Sophia, two-story arcades border the nave. 
Beautiful mosaics decorate the interior of the building. 
Mosaics were an important decoration in most Byzan- 
tine churches. 

Other examples of Byzantine architecture include the 
Church of San Vitale {mid-500's) in Ravenna, Italy, the Ba- 
silica of St. Mark (begun in the mid-1000s) in Venice, 
Italy, and St. Basil's Cathedral (1555-1560) in Moscow. For 





WORLD BOOK iustrations by Trevor Hill. Venner Artists Ltd 


Early churches were built, in most cases, on the oblong basilica plan or the round or many-sided 
centralized plan. Old St. Peter's, /ef, which stood on the site of the present St. Peter's in Rome, was 
the best-known early Christian basilica. tt was begun about 330. San Vitale, right is a centralized 
church in the Byzantine style. it was built in Ravenna, italy, in the mid-500s. 





618 Architecture 


pictures of these churches, see Moscow; Venice. See 
also Byzantine art 

Carolingian architecture takes its name from Char- 
lemagne, who was the king of the Franks from 768 to 
814. From his capital at what is now Aachen, in western 
Germany, Charlemagne ruled a vast territory that in- 
cluded most of western Europe. 

Charlemagne and his family wanted to revive the cul- 
ture of early Christian Rome. Carolingian architects 
claimed that they copied early Christian architecture, 
but they changed the models to suit their needs. !n par- 
ticular, they made outstanding contributions to church 
and monastery design. The architects followed the plan 
of the basilica but added chapels, elaborate tombs, and 
high towers. They also invented an entrance known as a 
westwork, which included a porch, chapels, and small 
towers called turrets. Carolingian monks developed a 
monastery plan in which c/o/sters (covered walks) joined 
the church, library, kitchen, and other facilities. 

Romanesque architecture began in the late 800s 
and achieved its greatest importance during the 1000's 
and 1100s. The most significant Romanesque buildings 
were churches designed in Italy, France, Germany, 
Spain, and England. 

Scholars of the 1800's originated the term Roman- 
esque, which means /ike the Roman. These scholars be- 
lieved that Romanesque architecture chiefly reflected 
Roman designs. However, Romanesque architecture ac- 
tually combined Roman with Byzantine styles and many 
new features. 

Romanesque churches differed from country to coun- 
try, but many of the churches shared certain features. 
The typical Romanesque church had thick walls, col- 
umns built close together, and heavy curved arches. A 
tower rose from the roof over the point where the tran- 
sept crossed the nave. Four large supports called piers 
held up the tower. An arcade separated the nave from 
the side aisles. A gallery was built above the arcade. The 
clerestory, made up of a row of windows set in arches, 
topped the gallery. 

During the Romanesque period, many people made 
pilgrimages—that is, journeys to sacred places. Groups 
of pilgrims traveled throughout Europe and Palestine to 
visit pilgrimage churches, which housed the bones or 
possessions of certain saints. Important pilgrimage 
churches were extremely large to accommodate the 
many visitors. An example is the huge Church of St 
Sernin (about 1080-1120) in Toulouse, France. The 
church has two aisles on each side of the nave. Small 
chapels open into the ambulatory, a semicircular aisle 
enclosing the apse. This plan permitted pilgrims to 
move along the aisles without disturbing services at the 
main altar. See Romanesque architecture. 

Gothic architecture flourished from the mid-1100's 
to as late as the 1600's in some parts of Europe. The 
word Gothic originated as a term of disapproval. It was 
used by artists and writers of the 1500's who wanted to 
revive the classical architecture of ancient Greece and 
Rome in Europe. They associated the Gothic style with 
the Goths, a Germanic people who had invaded Rome 
during the 400s. The artists end writers objected to the 
complicated Gothic designs, which differed so greatly 





Raymond V. Schoder 
Hagia Sophia is the finest example of Byzantine architecture. It 
was built from 532 to 537 as a cathedral in Constantinople (now 
Istanbul), Turkey. It is noted for its great interior space. 





¢ Gian Berto Vanni, Art Resource 


Aachen Cathedral in Germany, dedicated in 805, is an example 
of Carolingian architecture. In the octagon-shaped interior, 
small chapels open into an aisle called the ambulatory. 


EE 





© Gian Berto Vanni, Art Resource 
Romanesque architecture flourished in the 1000's and 1100's. Maria 
Laach Abbey Church in Germany, above, is dominated by a square tower 
and two turrets. The interior of Worms Cathedral, right, in Germany has 


rounded arches typical of the Romanesque Style. 


from the harmonious classical style. 

A new system of construction enabled Gothic archi- 
tects to design churches with thinner walls and lighter 
piers than was possible in Romanesque churches. Many 
piers consisted of clusters of columns several stories 
high. Gothic architects extended the piers into the roof 
area and then curved out the individual columns like the 
ribs of an open umbrella. The space between the ribs 
was filled in with masonry. These ribbed vaults were 
among the most distinctive characteristics of Gothic ar- 
chitecture. Other common features of the style included 


Raymond V. Schoder 


a “gs ¥. 
a —. 
. 


ae _ 
ane Pf wn ¥ 


Gothic cathedrals dominated French architecture from about 1150 to 
1500, Arched supports called fying buttresses brace the exterior of the 
cathedral at Bourges, above. An arched ceiling called a ribbed vault cov- 


ers the nave of the cathedral at Amiens, right. 





ELL Deere Sita 





E ~ he oad 


Architecture 619 








pointed arches and the substitution of stained-glass win- 
dows for large portions of the walls. Many churches 
also had flying buttresses, which were brick or stone 
arched supports built against the outside walls. 

Sculptors carved the figures of saints and heroes of 
Christianity on church doorways. Medieval! Christians 
believed that, in a symbolic sense, these saints and he- 
roes inhabited and strengthened the church building. 

For illustrations of Gothic churches, see Cathedral; 
Chartres; Gothic art; Notre Dame, Cathedral! of; Reims; 
Rouen; Strasbourg. 


Michael Holford 








620 Architecture 


4 
Se 


ig : 


The dome of the Cathedral of Florence was an early achievement of Ital- 
ian Renaissance architecture. Filippo Brunelleschi designed the dome, 
which was completed in 1436, partly on the principles of Roman vaults. 


The word renaissance means rebirth. In European his- 
tory, it refers to the great rebirth of interest in classical 
culture, especially that of ancient Rome. 

Renaissance architecture started in Italy in the early 
1400's and spread throughout Europe during the 1500s. 
A group Of Italian scholars, some of whom were ama- 
teur architects, influenced Renaissance architecture. 
These scholars knew classical culture well and consid- 
ered it superior to the culture of their time. Architects 
studied Roman ruins and tried to model their designs 
on classical buildings. They adopted the classical orders 
as well as Roman and Byzantine vaults, especially 
domes. 

Early Renaissance architecture began during the 
early 1400s. The originator of the new Renaissance style 
was Filippo Brunelleschi of Florence. Brunelleschi's first 








Renaissance architecture 


The Church of Sant Andrea in Mantua, Italy, was 
designed by Leon Battista Alberti in the mid-1400s. 
The front resembles a Roman temple with an arch. 


great project was the dome (1420-1436) for the Cathedral 
of Florence. The cathedral was begun in 1296 in the 
Gothic style of the late Middle Ages. Brunelleschi fol- 
lowed this style in designing the octagonal dome, but 
he also used a vault technique inspired by the Romans. 
Italians considered the Brunelleschi dome to be the 
greatest engineering accomplishment of their time. 
Brunelleschi also designed other notable structures 
in Florence. They include the Foundling Hospital (begun 
in 1421), the Church of San Lorenzo (begun in 1421), and 
the Church of Santo Spirito (begun in 1436). The two 
churches were not completed until the second half of 
the 1400s, after Brunelleschi's death. In all of these 
buildings, the architect revived the classical forms that 
became basic elements of the Italian Renaissance style. 
For example, he used Corinthian columns in the Church 


SCALA'EPA 





v.  OARS 


, SG St. Peter's Basilica stands in 

‘ya | Rome on the site of Old St 
Peter's. Construction began in 
1506 and took about 150 
years. Ten architects worked 
on the project. The view at the 
left looks down the nave to- 
ward the main altar, which 
was designed by Gian Lo- 
renzo Bernini, one of the 
church's most important ar- 
chitects. 





of San Lorenzo. The church has a geometric balance and 
harmony typical of Renaissance architecture. 

Leon Battista Alberti was another leading Italian Ren- 
aissance architect. Alberti also wrote an influential book 
about classical architecture titled On Architecture 
(begun in the 1440's). The book stimulated scholars to 
discuss architectural theory for its own sake apart from 
its application in actual buildings. 

Alberti completed only a few designs, but they had 
great impact on later architects. He designed the facade 
(front) of the Church of Santa Maria Novella (about 1456- 
1470) in Florence. He decorated the facade with black 
and white marble, arranging a pattern of circles, 
squares, and rectangles in the upper stories. These pat- 
terns were taken from classical decorations and gave an 
impression of mathematical proportion and harmony. 
Alberti also designed the Church of Sant’ Andrea (begun 
in 1470) in Mantua. The church's exterior has none of the 
sculptured Christian figures and other features typical of 
Gothic architecture. Alberti designed the facade to re- 
semble a classical temple with a large arch in the center. 

Later Renaissance architecture. The greatest build- 
ing project of the later Renaissance was the reconstruc- 
tion of St. Peter's Basilica in Rome. The project began in 
1506, when Pope Julius ff decided to demolish Old St. 
Peter's Church and build a new church on the site. The 
rebuilding was completed in the late 1600's. Altogether, 
10 Italian architects worked on the church during that 
time. The project's leading architects included Donato 
Bramante, Michelangelo, and Gian Lorenzo Bernini. 

Bramante was the original architect of St. Peter's. He 
designed the structure as a combination of square, cir- 
cular, and Greek cross forms. A Greek cross has four 
arms of equal length. Michelangelo designed the great 
ribbed dome (completed in 1591, after his death) as a 
Renaissance version of Brunelleschi’s Gothic-style dome 
on the Cathedral of Florence. 

Another great Italian Renaissance architect was An- 
drea Palladio. During the middle and late 1500s, Palladio 


Architecture 621 


The Villa Rotonda, designed 
by Andrea Palladio in the mid- 
1500's, stands on a hill near 
Vicenza, Italy. A porch based 
on classical Roman temple 
designs extends from each of 
the building's four sides. A 
low dome covers the circular 
central hall. 


SEF/EPA 


designed Roman-inspired villas and palaces, which he 
published in a book that made him one of the most in- 
fluential architects in history. His Villa Rotonda (begun 
about 1567) near Vicenza particularly influenced English 
and American architects of the 1700s. 

From Italy, Renaissance architecture spread to France 
in the early 1500's and then to other European countries. 
At first, architects in these countries followed Italian 
models. However, they rapidly developed distinct na- 
tional styles. 

The finest French Renaissance buildings are magnifi- 
cent chateaux (castles), such as those built at Fontaine- 
bleau, Chambord, and Azay-le-Rideau mainly during the 
early 1500's. In Spain, Juan de Herrera designed much of 
the Escorial (1563-1584) near Madrid. This enormous 
building consists of a church, a monastery, a palace, and 


" 
PONT TEV 


Sa = 3 ee — Sia 8 





—— ~ 


¢ De Sazo, Photo Researchers 
The chateau of Fontainebleau is an early example of Renais- 
sance architecture in France. A horseshoe-shaped staircase, 
completed in the early 1500's, dominates the building's entrance. 





622 Architecture 


a college. Inigo Jones produced the most notable early 
examples of Renaissance architecture in England during 
the early 1600's. He based his superb Banqueting House 
(1622) in London on Palladio’s designs. 

For illustrations of Renaissance architecture, see Bra- 
mante, Donato; Jones, Inigo; Vatican City. 


Baroque architecture 


Baroque architecture began in Rome during the early 
1600's. It soon spread throughout Italy and to other parts 
of Europe. Baroque architects sought to produce highly 
dramatic effects in their works. The typical baroque 
building featured curved forms, an extravagant and intri- 
cate use of columns, and ornate sculptures and paint- 
ings for decoration. 

The leading supporters of baroque architecture were 
the Roman Catholic Church and powerful European 
monarchs. Church support resulted from the Counter 
Reformation of the 1500's and 1600's. This movement of 
renewal within the church stimulated a great outpour- 
ing of religious enthusiasm in Catholic countries. Archi- 
tects designed elaborate baroque churches and monas- 
teries that reflected the drama and emotion of this 
religious spirit. At the same time, strong monarchs want- 
ed architecture that would glorify their reigns. Magnifi- 
cent baroque palaces expressed the authority of these 
rulers. 

The most spectacular examples of the baroque style 
appeared in Italy, Austria, Spain, and southern Germany. 
Gian Lorenzo Bernini, Francesco Borromini, and Guari- 
no Guarini rank as the outstanding baroque architects in 
Italy. The baroque fascination with columns is reflected 





in the keyhole-shaped colonnade (begun 1657) that 
Bernini designed to enclose the courtyard of St. Peter's 
Basilica. Borromini’s curves and twisted shapes charac- 
terize the famous Church of Sant Agnese in Piazza 
Navona (1666) in Rome. The Church of San Lorenzo 
(1668-1687), located in Turin, is one of Guarini finest de- 
signs. 

Johann Bernhard Fischer von Erlach of Austria and 
Balthasar Neumann of Germany designed many fine 
baroque churches and palaces in their countries. The ex- 
tremely elaborate Spanish baroque style is often called 
Churrigueresque. The name comes from three broth- 
ers—Alberto, Joaquin, and José Churriguera—who were 
early leaders of the style. 

In France and England, the baroque style was far less 
extreme than it was in other European countries. French 
and English architects retained the Renaissance square, 
rectangle, and circle as basic forms of decoration. They 
designed enormous buildings with simple lines and 
row after row of columns or windows. 

Perhaps the greatest French baroque building is the 
magnificent Palace of Versailles (begun about 1661). Its 
major architects were Louis Le Vau and Jules Hardouin- 
Mansart. The palace is more than } mile (0.4 kilometer) 
long and has about 1,300 rooms. 

Sir John Vanbrugh designed the most extravagant 
English baroque palace, Blenheim Palace (1705-1724) in 
Oxfordshire. However, the leading English architect of 
the baroque style was Sir Christopher Wren. His design 
for St. Paul's Cathedral (1675-1710) in London is a master- 
piece of the style. 

For pictures of St. Paul's Cathedral, see London. For 
other pictures of baroque architecture, see Versailles, 
Palace of; Wren, Sir Christopher. 


Michael Holford 


im | 
[a 


St. Paul's Cathedral in Lon- 
don is a masterpiece of Eng- 
lish baroque architecture. Sir 
Christopher Wren designed 
the church in the late 1600's. 
He included columns and oth- 
er elements of classical Greek 
and Roman architecture. 


The 1700's 





During the 1700s, three major architectural styles ap- 
peared in Europe: (1) rococo architecture, (2) the Palla- 
dian Revival, and (3) neoclassical architecture. In addi- 
tion, colonial architecture in America began to flourish 
in the 1700s. Colonial architecture was heavily influ- 
enced by European styles. 

Rococo architecture was the final phase of the ba- 
roque Style. It developed in France about 1720 and 
spread to other countries during the next 60 years. Com- 
pared with the monumental baroque style, rococo archi- 
tecture was light and delicate. However, rococo build- 
ings had even more elaborate decorations than did 
baroque structures. In France, the outstanding rococo 
buildings were elegant houses built in Paris for the no- 
bility. But the most impressive rococo structures were 
palaces, churches, and monasteries erected in southern 
Germany and Austria. Dominikus Zimmermann created 
a rococo masterpiece in his design for Die Wies pil- 
grimage church (1754) in southern Germany. For a pic- 
ture of the church, see Germany (Arts). 

The Paliadian Revival mainly reflected the classical 
designs of the Renaissance architect Andrea Palladio. 
The style began in the early 1700's and was most impor- 
tant in England, though it also appeared in northern Italy 
and North America. Most Palladian Revival buildings 
were country houses. 

Colen Campbell, a Scottish architect, introduced the 
Palladian Revival style. However, the leader of the move- 
ment was Lord Burlington, an English amateur architect. 
Burlington and his friend William Kent designed the first 
great Palladian Revival building, Chiswick House (1726) 
in London. Burlington and Kent modeled their design on 
Palladio’s Villa Rotonda. The architects set the house in a 
large garden based on what they believed a Roman gar- 
den looked like. Such gardens became a common fea- 
ture of Palladian Revival architecture. 

Neociassicai architecture reflected a renewed in- 
terest in the architecture of ancient Greece and Rome. 


Architecture 623 


Rococo architecture was 
highly decorative. The re- 
fined, ornamental character of 
the rococo style can be seen 
at the left in the Hall of Mir- 
rors in the Amalienburg Pavil- 
ion, in southern Germany, 
near Munich. The Flemish- 
born architect Francois 
Cuvilliés designed the grace- 
ful building in the 1730's. 


Michael Holford 


The prefix neo means new. Neoclassical architecture 
was inspired by buildings discovered in the ancient 
Roman cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum. The cities 
had been buried by an eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 
A.D. 79. Archaeologists began excavating the cities in the 
mid-1700s. 

Neoclassical architects followed Greek and Roman 
styles more closely than Renaissance architects had 
done. Like baroque architects, the neoclassicists de- 
signed colonnades and large structures, especially pub- 
lic buildings. But in their designs, they used simpler 
geometric forms, such as the square and sphere, rather 
than the baroque swirls and curves. 

The most important neoclassical architects in England 
were Sir William Chambers and Robert Adam. Cham- 
bers designed many public buildings, notably Somer- 





AF Kersting 


The Palladian Revival was based on Roman architecture and 
the works of Andrea Palladio. Chiswick House, above, in London 
was the first important English Palladian Revival building. Lord 
Burlington and William Kent designed it in the mid-1720s. 


624 Architecture 





His Grace the Duke of Northumberland 
Neoclassical architecture followed Greek and Roman de- 


signs. Robert Adam used lonic columns and classical-style 
sculpture in Syon House (1769), above, built in London. 





set House (1780) in London. Adam became an influential 
interior designer and furniture designer as well as a 
leading architect. He made Roman designs fashionable 
in such country houses as Osterley Park House (1763- 
1780} in London. 

Pietro Bianchi, an Italian architect, designed one of 
the major neoclassical buildings of the early 1800s, the 
Church of San Francesco di Paola (begun about 1816) in 
Naples. The design of the church is based on that of the 
Pantheon, an ancient Roman temple. However, the 
curved exterior colonnade shows the influence of Berni- 
nis colonnade for St. Peter's Basilica. 

French architects designed many neoclassical build- 
ings. One of the most famous is the Panthéon (about 
1757-1790) in Paris. Jacques Soufflot designed it. The 
Panthéon was originally a church named after Sainte 
Genevieve, but the building is now a public monument. 





Early American architecture reflected European styles. The 
timber frame design of the Parson Capen House, above, shows 
the influence of medieval English architecture. Colonial settlers 
in Topsfield, Mass., built the house in 1683. The State House in 
Boston, right, resembles an English neoclassical building. It was 
designed by Charles Bulfinch and completed in 1798. 


In the United States, neoclassical architecture became 
known as the Federa/ style. The leading Federal style ar- 
chitects were Benjamin Latrobe and Charles Bulfinch. 
Latrobe is best known for his designs for the United 
States Capitol in Washington, D.C. Bulfinch's most im- 
portant projects included the statehouses of Maine and 
Massachusetts. 

For illustrations of neoclassical architecture, see 
Adams, John; Furniture (English styles); Maine; Wash- 
ington, D.C; (Government). 

Colonial architecture in America developed 
mainly from European styles of the Middle Ages and the 
Renaissance. In Latin America, the baroque and Spanish 
Renaissance styles dominated in the Spanish and Portu- 
guese colonies. In the Spanish colonies in what is now 
the Southwestern United States, missionaries built 
adobe churches that combined American Indian and 
Spanish architectural styles. In time, however, the colo- 
nists adapted European influences to suit regional tastes 
and needs. 

In the Northern Colonies, the colonists built wooden 
houses designed to withstand the cold winters. Most of 
the houses were small, with one or two rooms that 
could be heated easily. The houses had sloping roofs to 
shed snow. Architecture in the Middle Colonies showed 
the influence of a number of European styles. In New 
York, for example, many Dutch colonists followed archi- 
tectural styles in the Netherlands and built houses of 
brick with wooden shutters. In the Southern Colonies, 
wealthy planters constructed the largest colonial resi- 
dences, modeling some of these buildings on English 
country houses. Thomas Jefferson designed several 
buildings in Virginia that reflected neoclassicism and 
the Palladian Revival. 

For pictures of colonial architecture, see the Visitors 
guide section in the articles Arizona; New Mexico; Vir- 
ginia. See also Colonial life in America; Jefferson, 
Thomas; Williamsburg. 


Mike Mazzaschi, Stock. Boston 





| 


i= 
f 
’ 
ie 
fas 


\ 
’ 


oak 
i pore 
E 


Pe Sa 8. 
TE owes. | 
BY = 


hs : 


i 
Bs 





Sl SSS = “Se Ge ee ese 


The 1800s 


By the early 1800's the development of architecture 
was greatly affected by the rapid growth of industrializa- 
tion in western Europe and eastern North America. This 
Industrial Revolution created a demand for architects to 
plan new types of buildings and to devise new construc- 
tion techniques. At the same time, many architects re- 
vived various styles of the past. The most important re- 
vivals were the Greek Revival and the Gothic Revival. A 
number of architects combined two or more earlier 
styles into one design. 

The {ndustrial Revolution began in Britain during 
the 1700's and spread to other European countries and 
to North America by the early 1800s. For centuries, ar- 
chitects had concentrated on designing religious build- 
ings, castles and palaces, and country houses. The In- 
dustrial Revolution required such structures as 
factories, railroad stations, warehouses, and office 
buildings. Architects used new materials and new meth- 
ods to design the new structures. 

The Industrial Revolution led to the first commercial 
and industrial world’s fair, the Great Exhibition of 1851 in 
London. The fair was housed in the Crystal Palace (1851), 
a revolutionary glass and iron structure designed by Sir 
Joseph Paxton. The building covered almost 19 acres (8 
hectares) and looked much like a giant greenhouse. Pax- 
ton’s Crystal Palace was also the first important prefabri- 
cated structure. The iron frame and glass panels were 
manufactured in a factory and then assembled at the site 
of the exhibition. 

The success of the Great Exhibition brought about 
similar fairs in other cities in Europe and in the United 
States. These exhibitions required special facilities and 
gave architects an opportunity to test new ideas. The 
Crystal Palace and later glass and iron exhibition halls in- 
fluenced the development of the glass and metal sky- 
scrapers of the 1900's. 

The Crystal Palace did not resemble any earlier style 
of architecture. However, many structures built with the 






Architecture 625 


ot” ~- 


a 
PPE ne see eae 


tity 


sf 


Lael 

aN 
aby ' \ \) 
vias \\ 


yan ma et ey eee ee 


Peter Jackson/Fotomas Index 


The Crystal Palace was designed by Sir Joseph Paxton for a 
London exhibition in 1851. The iron frame and glass panels were 
made in a factory and assembled at the building site. 


new technology preserved associations with historical 
styles. For example, the English architects John Dobson 
and Philip Hardwick designed a number of railroad sta- 
tions with neoclassical facades. Hardwick also used cast- 
iron Doric columns to support his St. Katherine's Dock 
warehouses (1828) in London. The French architect 
Henri Labrouste combined new building techniques 
with the Renaissance style in the library of Sainte 
Geneviéve (1850) in Paris. The library has walls of tradi- 
tional masonry, but the vaults and columns are made of 
iron. Labrouste allowed the iron to show, making the li- 
brary the first major public building to use iron as part 
of the architectural style. 

The Greek Revival began in the late 1700. It ended 
as a distinct movement in the mid-1800's, though build- 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Trevor Hill, Venner Antists Ltd. 


WY. 
JNWN2 
M4 1. We 


x) 


VSS 
BSS ON 
ay, 


eke A 
rT PTT ey) 


Wik Saar 


Ld {i her, |) Se GE 


a Hl? 








The machine hall at a Paris 
exhibition in 1889 was de- 
signed by Ferdinand Dutert. 
The arches of steel girders 
and glass panels enclosed a 
vast amount of space used for 
a machinery exhibit. 


=i 


Cama 


626 Architecture 





ings in the Greek style are still being built. The Greek Re- 
vival style was considered especially appropriate for 
such buildings as museums, stock exchanges, banks, 
and government offices. Advances in classical scholar- 
ship enabled architects to re-create Greek designs with 
great accuracy. 

A leading Greek Revival architect in England was Sir 
Robert Smirke. He designed the British Museum (1823- 
1847) in London to resemble a huge Greek temple of the 
lonic order. William Strickland designed the first impor- 





‘Lessing Magnum 
The Palais Gamier features a number of architectural styles. 
The Grand Staircase, pictured here, shows strong baroque influ- 
ences. Charles Garnier designed the building in 146) 


The Gothic Revival of the 
1800's reflected a renewed in- 
terest in medieval Gothic ar- 
chitecture. In the 1860's, 
William Butterfield designed 
these buildings at Oxford Uni- 
versity in Oxford, England, in 
the revival style. Butterfield’s 
use of stone and colored 
brick shows his interpretation 
of the Gothic architectural 


style. 


AF Kersting 


tant Greek Revival building in the United States, the Sec- 
ond Bank of the United States (1824) in Philadelphia. The 
front of the structure resembles a Greek temple of the 
Doric order. 

The Gothic Revival. The Gothic style never went 
completely out of fashion. In the centuries after the Mid- 
dle Ages, various architects used elements of the Gothic 
style. But the revival of Gothic as a deliberate architec- 
tural movement began in the 1700's and reached its 
peak during the mid-1800's. The movement declined by 
the 1880s. 

During the early and mid-1800's, the English architect 
A. W.N. Pugin wrote several influential books support- 
ing the Gothic style. Pugin urged architects especially to 
design churches in the Gothic style because it best ex- 
pressed the Christian faith. The most ambitious project 
of the Gothic Revival was the Houses of Parliament 
(1840-1860) in London, designed by Pugin and Sir 
Charles Barry. William Butterfield, another English archi- 
tect, created a number of highly individual designs in 
the Gothic style. One of his best-known Gothic buildings 
is All Saints’: Church, Margaret Street (1849-1859) in Lon- 
don. Among Butterfield’s most important projects was 
his design for Keble College (1860's) at Oxford University 
in Oxford, England. Butterfield designed the entire col- 
lege, including the library, chapel, and residence halls, 
in the Gothic Revival style. 

For a picture of the Gothic Revival, see Parliament. 

Combined styles. Some architects of the 1800's com- 
bined what they considered to be the best features of 
two or more historical styles. The former home of the 
Paris Opera, the Palais Garnier (1861-1875), is a master- 
piece of this approach, called the ec/ectic approach. The 
buildings designer, Charles Garnier, planned the huge 
structure chiefly in the elaborate baroque style. For ex- 
ample, the spectacular Grand Staircase features a lavish 
use of colored marble. However, Garnier also included 
classical orders and elements from the designs of 
French and Italian Renaissance palaces. 


Modern architecture 


The period from the late 1800's to the present has 
been one of the most creative and productive times in 
the history of architecture. Architects have used new 
materials and new building methods to develop the first 
completely new styles in centuries. 

During the modern era, American architects made an 
international impact on architecture for the first time. 
For example, the skyscraper, perhaps the best-known 
symbol of modern architecture, was first developed in 
the United States. 

The remarkable changes in architecture since the late 
1800's have emerged from the theories and works of a 
few individuals and small groups. Many masterpieces of 
modern architecture were designed or influenced by 
four men—Frank Lloyd Wright of the United States; Wal- 
ter Gropius and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe of Germany; 
and Charles Jeanneret-Gris, generally known as Le Cor- 
busier, of France. 

Early modern architecture in Europe. Modern ar- 
chitecture in Europe originated as a reaction against the 
historical revivals and combined styles of the 1800s. 
Young architects tried to find fresh approaches that 
would reflect their time. 

One of the first important influences on modern ar- 
chitecture was the Arts and Crafts Movement, founded 
in the mid-1800's by William Morris in England. Morris 
had studied to be an architect, but he gave up the pro- 
fession to concentrate on interior design. Morris criti- 
cized the poor artistic quality that he saw in the 
machine-made products of the Industrial Revolution. 
With other artists in the Arts and Crafts Movement, 
Morris created original and high-quality designs for fur- 
niture, stained glass, textiles, and wallpaper. Although 
Morris did not design buildings, his influence encour- 








Architecture 627 


~ 


Ernst Heyer, Burkhard-Verlag 
The Amsterdam Stock Exchange in Amsterdam, the Nether- 
lands, is noted for its simple lines and an extensive use of brick. 
Hendrik Petrus Berlage designed the building in 1896. 


Pressebilddienst Votava 


The Secession Building in 
Vienna, Austria, was designed 
in 1898 by Josef Olbrich as an 
exhibition gallery for a group 
of artists and architects called 
the Vienna Secession. The 
building's simple, cubelike 
form and flat, undecorated 
walls became common char- 
acteristics of modern archi- 
tecture. 








628 Architecture 


i 


ts j at 
- ir +4 : a3 i fh 1A fn une HH r 
. Ry. : " +e W I i ae it aimaua yen ra 


eee 





— ie | 


Ernst Heyer. Burkhard: Verlag 


The Palais Stoclet, a mansion completed in 1911 in Brussels, Belgium, was designed by Josef 
Hoffmann of Austria. It features a geometric shape, plain white walls, and a dramatic tower. 


aged a new artistic freedom and spirit of experimenta- 
tion that played an important part in modern European 
architecture. 

Most of the first modern architects worked in the 
Netherlands, Austria, and Germany. In the Netherlands, 
Hendrik Petrus Berlage used an unusual red brick de- 
sign for his masterpiece, the Amsterdam Stock Ex- 
change (1903). The building's simple, spare design 
marked a departure from the highly decorative revival 
structures and pointed toward more modern styles. 

Otto Wagner founded modern architecture in Austria 
during the 1890's. Wagner was a teacher and theorist as 
well as an architect. His most important designs were 
houses with horizontal lines and little ornamentation. 


Osterrerchische Nationalbibliothek. Vienna. Austna 
Steiner House in Vienna has a cubelike shape and no decora 
tion. Adolf Loos, who designed the building in 1910, fiercely op 
posed any ornamentation in architecture 





The structures had flat, slablike roofs that projected be- 
yond the walls. These features characterized much ar- 
chitecture of the 1900s. 

Josef Olbrich and Josef Hoffmann, two of Wagner's 
students, joined with other Austrian artists and archi- 
tects to found a group known as the Vienna Secession. 
The group was united by its rebellion against the revival 
styles. Olbrich designed the Secession Building (1898), 
an exhibition gallery in Vienna for the group. He took 
the Renaissance and neoclassical style of the domed 
villa and redesigned it in modern terms. Wagner's influ- 
ence appears in the building's projecting slab roof and 
undecorated walls. Hoffmann designed a house called 
the Palais Stoclet (1911) in Brussels, Belgium. The 





Ernst Heyer. Burkhard: Verlag 


The AEG Turbine Factory, with simple lines and glass walls, 
was one of the first factories to reflect modern design princi- 
ples. It was designed in 1909 in Berlin by Peter Behrens. 


plain white walls and cubelike geometric outlines of the 
house made it one of the most advanced architectural 
works of the early 1900's. 

Adolf Loos, another Austrian, fiercely opposed deco- 
ration in architecture. He believed that the decorative 
qualities of a building would emerge naturally from the 
structure's materials and form. Loos designed Steiner 
House (1910) in Vienna and other buildings with cube- 
like shapes and no ornamentation. 

In Germany, Peter Behrens designed some of the first 
factories to reflect modern architectural ideas. His most 
significant design was the AEG Turbine Factory (1909), a 
glass, steel, and concrete building in Berlin. Behrens 
also influenced the theories of Mies van der Rohe, Gro- 
pius, and Le Corbusier, all of whom worked in his office 
during the early 1900s. 

Early modern architecture in America. Henry 
Hobson Richardson became the first important architect 
in the United States to include modern elements in his 
designs. Richardson was a leading American architect 
from about 1870 to his death in 1886. He worked in a va- 
riety of medieval styles, especially Romanesque. How- 
ever, he often used features of modern design in the 
simplified geometric forms and absence of exterior or- 
namentation in his later works. Richardson designed a 
number of buildings with both Romanesque and mod- 
ern elements, including the Glessner House (1887) and 
the Marshall Field Wholesale Store (1887), both in Chi- 
cago. 

Chicago became the center of modern architecture in 
the United States during the late 1800's and early 1900's. 
The Great Chicago Fire destroyed much of the city in 
1871, giving architects an opportunity to test new ideas 
as the city was rebuilt. 

William Le Baron Jenney designed the 10-story Home 
Insurance Building (1885) in downtown Chicago. The 
building is often considered the world’s first metal- 
framed skyscraper. Instead of thick walls, a steel frame 
supported the building. The walls provided no support 
but hung like curtains on the frame. The steel frame and 
curtain wall became basic to modern design. 

Jenney trained a number of architects in his Chicago 
office. They included Louis Sullivan and Daniel Burn- 
ham. Sullivan became the leader of a style of architec- 
ture called the Chicago School. Other Chicago School 
architects included Burnham, Dankmar Adler, and John 
Wellborn Root. These architects gained fame for their 
steel-frame stores and office buildings. Sullivan de- 
signed the Carson Pirie Scott & Company Building 
(1906), a Chicago department store that is famous for its 
horizontat bands of windows and skillful use of light- 
colored brick. Sullivan also designed skyscraper office 
buildings, such as the Wainwright Building (1891) in St. 
Louis and the Guaranty Building (1895) in Buffalo, N.Y. 

Burnham became even better known as a city planner 
than as an architect. However, he designed several sig- 
nificant commercial buildings. His Railway Exchange 
Building (1904) in Chicago is noted especially for its 
many windows. 

For pictures of early modern architecture in America, 
see Burnham, Daniel Hudson; Richardson, Henry Hob- 
son; Sullivan, Louis Henri. 


Architecture 629 


i 


Q 


\) 


fp Ee eT RS pes se Sees. 2S ee 2 eee 
L\ aT a¥ SJ oy 
LY) 
S 


‘a 


or fa SN ged a. (EES #2 ea 7 > MO YOAV ON 
at. 7 . 
iv/ 
ya 


y/ 


¥, 
‘A's 


Ht JH I/it 


MW 


Ai | 
IN] ANA 
WW 
\ 


—— yi} 


AN 
AA | 
wv 


A\ | 


HN 
aa 
Hada, 


ry 


KN 
= 
jim 


i 


i=: 


, 
A 


if 


A 


asi 


ee 


Sate 7 waaases Srrg lee Ceo Pose OB ae oe ee 
¥ 


iN _ RIA 
=~" 
TY 


a, 
I 


LY 
aq 


ih 


HH OA OA OA INA 
(ma in Ott) [itp pees 


ial 


Ul 


me 





7c 


LZ 
- i 
: 
a = 
pas om 
{ 
t . 
ST Pte 
oe 
| 
rn : 
| a 


aim 
LU 


Le) eee 
= iz 
22 $$} 
Ld = 


all bs 


@itceca 


SHUN EEE RACH: 


a 

NS] 

timo 

if 
i] 
| 


1m 
. a 
SWE AT 


Soce 
roi 


Bh 


= cs 
= = s 
retire 1 
= . = ry 


i | 





{J 


= as a 
‘gga 


om 
ry 


= 





= 


= 
zi 


1s 


My 
l 


esa 





WORLD BOOK tllustratron by Trevor Hill, Venner Artists Ltd 
The Reliance Building in Chicago was one of the first modern 
skyscrapers. The firm of Daniel Burnham and Company de- 
signed the building, which was completed in 1894. This cutaway 
drawing shows the building's steel-frame construction. 


Frank Lloyd Wright was the greatest figure in mod- 
ern American architecture. Wright worked in Chicago 
for the firm of Adler and Sullivan from 1887 to 1893, 
when he began his own practice. Wright gained interna- 
tional attention for a series of houses he designed from 
about 1900 to 1910 in the prairie style. The houses had 
low, horizontal shapes because Wright believed that 
such a design blended with the open Midwestern prai- 
ries. He said that a building should “grow’ from its site. 
Wright selected materials in earth colors and empha- 
sized the natural appearance of those materials. 

Wright revolutionized the arrangement of interior 
space in his prairie houses. tn traditional American 
houses of the late 1800's, walls divided the interior into 
boxlike rooms. In his houses, however, Wright reduced 





630 Architecture 


the number of walls so that one room flowed into an- 
other. This flexible use of interior space and the horizon- 
tal outlines of the houses greatly influenced European 
architects. Wrights best-known prairie house is Robie 
House (1910) in Chicago. Wright also designed large 
projects, such as the Larkin Building (1906) in Buffalo, 
N.Y., and Unity Temple (1908) in Oak Park, ill. His bold 
and imaginative use of concrete in these buildings 
helped popularize the use of the material in modern ar- 
chitecture. 

Wright's most impressive later project was perhaps 
the buildings he designed for the Johnson Wax Com- 
pany in Racine, Wis. The main administration building 
(1939) has a smooth exterior of brick and glass. Inside 
the building, the chief office area is a large windowless 
room lined with balconies. Soft light enters the area 
through strips of glass tubing located at the edges of 
the ceiling. Thin concrete columns rise from the floor of 
the building and support large concrete disks at the 
ceiling level. 

For other pictures of Wrights work, see Wright, 
Frank Lloyd; Furniture (The 1900's); United States (The 
arts). 

Walter Gropius influenced modern architecture 
both as an architect and as a teacher. In 1919, he 
founded the Bauhaus, a school of design in Weimar, 







/ 


Sole NN 
ed 


ESnonee 
3 


a7 


aa 
Ci) EL PE me 













a TT 








| Ebb 


Germany. The school was dedicated to uniting the arts 
and architecture with modern industrial technology. In 
1925, the Bauhaus moved to Dessau. Gropius designed 
the buildings for the Dessau campus. The geometric 
concrete and glass structures rank among the finest de- 
signs of the period. 

Gropius came to the United States in 1937. The next 
year, he became chairman of the Department of Archi- 
tecture at Harvard University. Gropius architectural the- 
ories spread throughout the United States as a result of 
his work as an architect and teacher. In 1946, Gropius 
and some of his former students along with other young 
architects formed the Architects Collaborative. The 
group designed many projects in the United States and 
other countries, beginning with the Graduate Center 
(1950) at Harvard. 

The International Style dominated architecture until 
about 1950. The name came from the title of a book, 7he 
International Style (1932). The book was written by two 
Americans— Philip Johnson, an architect, and Henry- 
Russell Hitchcock, an architectural historian. In the 
book, the authors reviewed architecture of the previous 
10 years and stated that a new and distinct “interna- 
tional” style had developed in many countries. 

The International Style actually summarized many of 
the ideas of such pioneer modern architects as Hoff- 


Hedrich- Blessing 


The Carson Pirie Scott & 
Company Bullding, a Chi- 
cago department store, is a 
masterpiece of the Chicago 
School of architecture. The 
Chicago Schoo! was a pio- 

neering group of modern 





































Ny 
AA BR. 
Bay hy “GF American architects based in 
Ri es Udy Yy = Chicago. The store was de- 

he, way signed by Louis Sullivan and 
Rhy a ty eta completed in 1906. It features 
atl a horizontal bands of windows 
wa Pat iy Int separated by light-colored 
ile. ay TY 8 stone. Sullivan decorated the 
EE a iy ty 83 first two stories with orna- 

a SRL CTS ey mental black cast iron. 
BLOCTTE 
Bink | 
PP 
| Tsun! fn: lo neo bt 





LLL 
vet sual 
ati ee. : 


= 


— 


Y ‘foe 


Architecture 631 





Hednich-Blessing 


The prairie style created by Frank Lloyd Wright revolutionized American domestic architecture. 
The houses he designed in the prairie style emphasized horizontal lines and natural materials that 
harmonized with the landscape. Wright designed the prairie house above in 1902 in Oak Park, IIl. 


mann, Loos, Wright, and Gropius. Typical buildings in 
the style have geometric shapes, white walls, and a flat 
roof with a garden. Most are constructed of reinforced 
concrete. Such concrete has embedded metal rods for 
added strength. Typical International Style buildings 
also have large windows to create a light, airy feeling. 
The exteriors, of buildings in this style have little or no 
ornamentation. 

Le Corbusier was probably the greatest architect to 
work in the International Style. Most of his early works 
were houses that resembled white boxes. The houses 
were built of white reinforced concrete and stood 
above the ground on pillars called pé/otis. One of Le 
Corbusier's most important houses in this style was the 
Villa Savoye (1931) in Poissy, France (see picture on fol- 
lowing page). 

Le Corbusier's later works showed more variety than 
his cubelike houses. One of his most famous later proj- 
ects is the Unité d'Habitation (1952), a 337-unit apartment 
building in Marseille, France. As in his earlier works, Le 
Corbusier had this building constructed of reinforced 
concrete and raised on pilotis. But he honeycombed the 
exterior with balconies to shield the apartments from 
the strong sun. The balconies created a lively pattern of 
dark and light rectangles in the sunlight. Le Corbusier 
had the walls at the sides of the balconies painted in 
bright colors to provide vivid contrasts with the white 
concrete. 

Ludwig Mies van der Rohe was the master of glass 
and steel architecture. He designed skyscrapers that had 
a steel frame and thin metal and glass walls. The style 





became popular for commercial buildings after World 
War I (1939-1945). 

Mies, as he was generally called, became director of 
the Bauhaus in 1930 and served in that position until the 
school closed in 1933. In 1937, he immigrated to the 
United States. The next year, he became head of the ar- 
chitecture department at the Armour Institute (now the 
Illinois Institute of Technology) in Chicago. In 1939, 


oul 
Pity ty 
™ene of me. na 


« ARR. cP. 2.. 
Tt, 


¢ Leonard Freed Magnum 
The Bauhaus was a German art school that greatly influenced 
modern architecture. Walter Gropius designed the Dessau cam- 
pus in 1925, including the building above. 








632 Architecture 





Mies began to design the buildings for a new Armour 
Institute campus. His designs stressed rectangular, cu- 
belike structures of brick, exposed steel] columns, and 
huge windows. 

Mies designed several apartment and office building 
skyscrapers in the United States. His Lake Shore Drive 
apartment complex (1951) in Chicago resembles two gi- 
gantic glass rectangles. Perhaps his most praised proj- 
ect is the Seagram Building (1958), an office skyscraper 
in New York City. Mies designed it with Philip Johnson. 
The building has walls of bronze and bronze-tinted 
glass. 


a 
— — 
.= “ 

_ 


; ae Sea Ree 4 
IGT es 
Oe Ae ee 


The International Style be- 
came one of the dominant ar- 
chitectural movements of the 
1900's. Le Corbusier, the 
leader of the movement, de- 
signed the Villa Savoye, /ef, 
in Poissy, France. The resi- 
dence, completed in 1931, in- 
cludes the major elements of 
the International Style. The 
structure has a geometric 
shape, white concrete walls, a 
flat roof, and a continuous 
band of windows. It stands on 
pillars called pilotis. 


Gerard Mathieu, AF.I.P 


Architecture today. The International Style re- 
mained the most popular style for major architectural 
projects throughout the world until] about 1950. By that 
time, younger architects were reacting against it. These 
architects believed that the style lacked variety in design 
because of the emphasis on simple geometric shapes 
and the lack of decoration. 

The attack against the International Style was first led 
by a group of architects often called the brutalists. The 
brutalists based their designs on the later work of Le 
Corbusier. They created plain, massive buildings with 
rough reinforced concrete exteriors. Leading members 





Artstreet 


The works of Ludwig Mles van der Rohe are noted for his skillful use of steel and glass. In 
1939, Mies began designing the campus for what became the Illinois Institute of Technology in 
Chicago. The large areas of tinted glass in Crown Hall (1956), above, are typical of his style. 





of this movement included Kenzo Tange of Japan, the 
partnership of James Stirling and James Gowan of Eng- 
land, and Paul Rudolph of the United States. Like the 
brutalists, the American architect Louis Kahn made 
imaginative use of concrete. Kahn's major designs in- 
clude the Salk Institute for Biological Studies (1965) in La 
Jolla, California, and the Kimbell Art Museum (1972) in 
Fort Worth, Texas. 

Perhaps the best-known architectural movement of 
the late 1900’s was Postmodernism, which began during 
the 1960's. The Postmodernists had no style or theories 
in common. They were united only in their rejection of 
the International Style. One of the leading Postmodern 
theorists and designers was Robert Venturi. Other 
American architects generally grouped as Postmod- 
ernists included Peter Eisenman, Frank Gehry, Michael 
Graves, Charles Moore, and Stanley Tigerman. 

Many Postmodernists revived historical styles that had 
been ignored by earlier modern architects. For example, 
Venturi often used traditional styles, borrowing from the 
Italian Renaissance and other periods. Venturi became 
one of the first Postmodern architects to add ornamenta- 
tion to building exteriors. A number of Postmodernists 
incorporated arches, columns, domes, and other classi- 
cal elements into their designs. 

In 1978, Philip Johnson, the coauthor of 7he /nterna- 
tional Style, unveiled the design he created with John 
Burgee for the first Postmodern skyscraper. This build- 
ing, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company 
(now AT&T Corp.) headquarters in New York City, has a 
base resembling the Pazzi Chapel of the Renaissance. 

This interest in historical styles was accompanied by 
concern for preserving old buildings and adapting them 
to new uses. Many government agencies were created 
to preserve buildings of architectural value. These agen- 





Architecture 633 


| 





© David Falconer, West Stock 


Postmodernism used elements from earlier architectural 
styles. Michael Graves featured color and sculpture in his Port- 
land Building, completed in Portland, Oregon, in 1982. 


cies have the power to grant /andmark status to such 
buildings. Buildings with landmark status may not be 
destroyed or significantly altered. 

In the late 1900's and early 2000's, such architects as 
Frank Gehry of the United States and John Outram of the 
United Kingdom explored the possibilities of tilting 
walls, other antigeometric forms, and brilliant color. 
Gehry's most famous building was the Guggenheim Mu- 
seum (1997) in Bilbao, Spain. Outram’s major designs in- 
cluded the Judge Institute of Management Studies (1995) 
at Cambridge University in England and the Anne and 
Charles Duncan Hall (1997) at Rice University in Houston. 


Tom Brown 





The British Art Center at 
Yale University was the last 
major work by Louis Kahn, a 
leading American architect of 
the mid-1900's. The center, 
which opened in 1977, shows 
Kahn's creative use of con- 
crete walls, simple geometric 
shapes, and natural light. 





634 Architecture 


Young people who want to become architects face a 
long and difficult training period. The following discus- 
sion deals with the training and licensing of architects in 
the United States. 

Education and training. High school students inter- 
ested in becoming architects should take courses in art, 
history, foreign languages, mechanical drawing, social 
studies, and especially mathematics. Students are also 
encouraged to take courses in computer science if such 
courses are available. In addition, students able to ob- 
tain a part-time job in an architect's office can gain valu- 
able experience. 

After graduating from high school, future architects 
must attend college. There are about 90 accredited 
schools of architecture in the United States. In addition, 
several hundred colleges and trade schools offer some 
technical courses in architecture. However, a person can 
become a licensed architect faster by attending an ac- 
credited school. 

Accredited schools offer a five-year program that 
leads to an undergraduate professional degree. Stu- 
dents with a bachelor's degree in architecture may take 
one or two years of additional courses to receive a mas- 
ters degree or do still further advanced work to earn a 
doctorate. Most architectural schools stress practical de- 
sign and the case method, in which the class solves ar- 
chitectural problems related to an actual building. 

College graduates must pass a design test, which is 
given annually in June. Then they must work as an /ntern 
in the office of a licensed architect or in the office of an 
engineer or contractor. However, an internship in an ar- 
chitects office can be completed in a shorter time. 

Upon completing the internship, architects take a li- 
censing examination supervised by a state board. The 
examination, called the Architect Registration Exam, is 
given in june of each year. It consists of nine divisions 
that cover design, construction, materials, and safety. 

The United States has about 65,000 licensed archi- 





| 


WORLD BOOK photo by Dan Milles 


Careers 


tects. Only a small number of them are women, but the 
number of women architects has risen rapidly. 

Information about architectural schools can be ob- 
tained from the American Institute of Architects (AIA) in 
Washington, D.C. The institute also publishes literature 
on architecture, holds meetings, and awards prizes for 
excellence in architectural design. 

Employment opportunities. Licensed architects may 
open their own office or join an architectural firm. Vari- 
ous city, state, and federal agencies also employ archi- 
tects. The great majority of architects work for a firm. 
Most young architects specialize in a certain phase of 
the profession, such as designing houses, schools, or 
office buildings. 

People with training in architecture can also work in 
related fields. These fields include city planning, furni- 
ture design, industrial design, and interior design. There 
also is an increasing demand for architects who can re- 
condition existing buildings of artistic or historical value, 
and for specialists in laws governing architectural 
preservation. G. L Hersey 


Critically reviewed by Marvin Trachtenberg 


Study aids 


Related articles in World Book Many city, state, country, 
and continent articles show notable structures. See also: 


American architects 


Adler, Dankmar 
Bulfinch, Charles 
Bunshaft, Gordon 
Burnham, Daniel Hudson 
Fuller, Buckminster 
Gehry, Frank 

Graves, Michael 

Hunt, Richard Morris 
Jahn, Helmut 

Jefferson, Thomas 


Jenney, William Le Baron 
Johnson, Philip Cortelyou 
Kahn, Louis Isadore 
Latrobe, Benjamin 

Meier, Richard 

Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig 
Mills, Robert 

Morgan, Julia 

Neutra, Richard Joseph 





Skidmore Owings & Mem! \WORLD BOOK photo by Dan Miller! 


Architects develop detailed plans of their ideas for building projects. The architect at the left is 
making a drawing, which will be translated into a model of the building. Architects may also study 
a model of a city, mght to evaluate the types of buildings that would be appropriate to the area. 


Pei, |. M. 

Richardson, Henry Hobson 
Root, John Wellborn 
Rudolph, Paul 

Saarinen, Eero 

Saarinen, Eliel 


Stone, Edward Durell 
Sullivan, Louis Heriri 
Venturi, Robert 
Walter, Thomas Ustick 
White, Stanford 
Wright, Frank Lloyd 


Italian architects 


Alberti, Leon Battista 
Bernini, Gian Lorenzo 
Borromini, Francesco 
Bramante, Donato 
Brunelleschi, Filippo 


Giotto 
Michelangelo 
Nervi, Pier Luigi 
Palladio, Andrea 
Soleri, Paolo 


Other architects 


Aalto, Alvar 

Adam (Robert; James) 
Behrens, Peter 

Breuer, Marcel Lajos 
Erickson, Arthur Charles 
Gaudi, Antonio 

Gropius, Walter 

Jones, Inigo 


Le Corbusier 

L'Enfant, Pierre Charles 
Lutyens, Sir Edwin Landseer 
Mendelsohn, Eric 
Niemeyer, Oscar 

Safdie, Moshe 

Vanbrugh, Sir John 

Wren, Sir Christopher 


Famous structures 


Abu Simbel, Temples of 
Alhambra 

Arc de Triomphe 
Capitol, United States 
Colosseum 

Eiffel Tower 

Empire State Building 
Escorial 

Federal Hall 
Guggenheim Museum 
Hagia Sophia 
Independence Hall 
Jefferson Memorial 
Kremlin 

Leaning Tower of Pisa 
Lincoln Memorial 
Louvre 

Milan Cathedral 
Monte Cassino 
Montserrat 

National Gallery of Art 
National Gallery of Canada 


Notre Dame, Cathedral of 

Old North Church 

Pantheon 

Parthenon 

Petronas Towers 

Pyramids 

Saint Mark, Basilica of 

Saint Patricks Cathedral 

Saint Peter's Basilica 

Sainte-Anne-de-Beaupreé 

Sears Tower 

Seven Wonders of the An- 
cient World 

Statue of Liberty 

Taj Mahal 

Tower of London 

Tuileries 

Versailles, Palace of 

Washington Cathedral 

White House 

Windsor Castle 


Kinds of buildings 


Basilica Hospital Mosque Skyscraper 
Campanile Hotel Motel Synagogue 
Castle House Museum Temple 
Cathedral Library Pagoda Tomb 
Church Monument Pyramids Tower 
Parts of buildings 

Arch Pier 
Atrium Roof 
Cantilever Spire 
Clerestory Stained glass 
Cloister Tracery 
Column Vault 
Gargoyle Window 
Minaret 

Styles of architecture 
Baroque Norman architecture 
Byzantine art Postmodernism 
Classicism Renaissance 


Georgian architecture 
Gothic art 
Islamic art 


ROCOCO 
Romanesque architecture 


Other related articles 


Acropolis 





Bauhaus 


Arcology 635 


Building construction 
Building trade 


Housing 
Interior design 


City Landscape architecture 
City planning Sculpture 
Furniture Shelter 
Outline 
I. Elements of architecture 
A. Function C. Durability 


B. Appearance 
I. Early architecture 
il. Asian and pre-Columbian architecture 
IV. Classical architecture 
V. Medieval architecture 
VI. Renaissance architecture 
Vil. Baroque architecture 
VII. The 1700's 
IX. The 1800's 
X. Modern architecture 
XI. Careers 
A. Education and training 
B. Employment opportunities 


Questions 


What three elements must an architect balance to create an at- 
tractive and efficient building? 

How can high school students prepare themselves for a career 
in architecture? 

In Greek architecture, what was an order 

What was the prairie style of architecture? The /nternational 
Style? 

How did the Industrial Revolution influence the development of 
architecture? 

Who were the two leading patrons of baroque architecture? 

How did the discovery of Pompeii and Herculaneum influence 
architecture of the 1700's? 

What was a pilgrimage church? 

What is perhaps the best-known symbol of modern architec- 
ture? 

Many masterpieces of modern architecture were designed or 
influenced by four men. Who were they? 


Additional resources 

Level I 

Adam, Robert. Buildings: How They Work. Sterling Pub., 1995. 

Corbishley, Mike. The World of Architectural Wonders. Bedrick, 
1997, 

Milo, Francesco. The Story of Architecture. Bedrick, 1999. 

Visual Dictionary of Buildings. Dorling Kindersley, 1992. 

Level Il 

Ching, Francis D. A Visual Dictionary of Architecture. Van Nos- 
trand, 1995. 

Fleming, John, and others. The Penguin Dictionary of Architec- 
ture and Landscape Architecture. Penguin, 1998. 

Fletcher, Banister. Sir Banister Fletchers A History of Architec- 
ture. 20th ed. Ed. by Dan Cruickshank. Architectural Pr., 1996. 

Roth, Leland M. Understanding Architecture. HarperPerennial, 
ere} 

Trachtenberg, Marvin, and Hyman, Isabelle. Architecture, from 
Prehistory to Postmodernity. Abrams, 2001. 


Archives, National. See National Archives. 
Archon, AHR kahn, was the title of certain high- 
ranking administrators in many of the city-states of an- 
cient Greece. Archons handled various executive and ju- 
dicial duties. In Athens, three archons originally were 
chosen from prominent families to serve life terms. Be- 
ginning in 682 B.C, the people of Athens elected nine 
archons from the population at large to serve one-year 
terms. Archons were chosen by lot after 487 B.C. 

Jennifer Tolben Roberts 

See also Areopagus; Athens (Earliest times). 
Arcology. See Soleri, Paolo. 


636 Arctic 





fred Bruemmer 





Robert Davis, Artstreet 


The Arctic landscape changes dramatically with the seasons. Winter snow piles up around a hut 
built by Inuit (sometimes called Eskimos), and provides a bed for sled dogs, /eft. In summer, flow- 
ers blanket the tundra region, right. Most of the Arctic has no snow during July and August. 


Arctic, AHRK tihk or AHR tihk, is the region of continu- 
ous cold around the North Pole. It includes the Arctic 
Ocean, thousands of islands, and the northern parts of 
the continents of Europe, Asia, and North America. Peo- 
ple long believed that the Arctic was a cold, barren 
place where human beings could not live. But explorers 
and scientists found that, except for Greenland, nine- 
tenths of all arctic lands have no snow and ice in sum- 
mer. Berries, vegetables, and flowers grow ina few 
places. The sun never shines on much of the Arctic dur- 
ing the winter months. However, it shines on the entire 
region for at least part of the day from March to Sep- 
tember. 

The Arctic has great importance to human beings. In- 
formation from arctic weather stations helps scientists 
predict the weather farther south—in Europe, Asia, Can- 
ada, and the United States. The airplanes that fly over the 
Arctic daily from Europe to such Pacific Coast cities as 
Los Angeles and Seattle are doing what people had 
dreamed of doing for hundreds of years. They are fol- 
lowing a short route between Europe and the Pacific 
Ocean. 

Northern nations such as Canada and the United 
States have built military installations in the Arctic to 
protect their frontiers and trade routes. To build these 
military installations, people have had to learn many 
things about this harsh region of the world. Engineers 
have learned how to construct houses on the perma- 
nently frozen soil, and scientists have studied the plant 
and animal life to find ways that people can survive in 
the Arctic. 


Arctic lands 


Scientists define the boundaries of the Arctic in dif- 
ferent ways. To an astronomer, the Arctic Circle forms 


the limits of the region (see Arctic Circle; Arctic Ocean 
(color map]). Other scientists consider the Arctic as the 
region surrounded by a fine drawn through all northern 
locations with an average summer temperature of 50 °F 
(10 °C). This line is known as the 50° summer isotherm 
(see Isotherm). It closely follows the tree /ine, the line 
north of which forests do not grow. Many animals and 
birds that live in the forests cannot survive in the Arctic. 
As a result, the 50° summer isotherm and the tree line 
mark an important geographic boundary. Generally 
speaking, the Arctic includes the northern parts of 
Alaska, Canada, Norway, Sweden, Finland, and Russia. 
The Arctic also includes ail of Greenland and most of 
Iceland. 

The true Arctic. The 50° summer isotherm passes 
south of the southern tip of Greenland. In Canada, it 
runs from Happy Valley-Goose Bay, Labrador, through 
Churchill on Hudson Bay, to Liverpool Bay in the Beau- 
fort Sea. The isotherm parallels the southern edge of the 
Brooks Range in Alaska. It then swings south along the 
Bering Sea to the Aleutian Islands. The line turns north- 
ward again from the tip of the Aleutians to the Gulf of 
Anadyr in Siberia, where it turns to follow the Arctic Cir- 
cle. In the western part of Russia, it swerves northward, 
barely touching the northern coast of Norway. Then the 
line turns southward and runs south of all but the south- 
ern coast of Iceland. 

The subarctic. South of the true Arctic lies a region 
that is almost as cold in winter, but which has much 
warmer summers. This region is commonly called the 
subarctic. It consists of all areas north of a line where 
the average temperature is not higher than 50 °F (10 °C) 
for more than four months of the year. Subarctic areas 
include parts of central Asia and Siberia, central Alaska 
and Canada, and parts of northern Europe. Most geo- 


graphers consider the subarctic a part of the Arctic in 
terms of economic and military importance. 


Natural resources 


The Arctic has served as an important source of food 
since prehistoric times. Over 10,000 years ago, during 
the last period of the Ice Age in Europe, people who 
made tools like those of the modern Inuit (sometimes 
called Eskimos) hunted in the Arctic. Today, the world’s 
best fishing grounds lie along the Arctic’s edge, particu- 
larly off the coasts of Greenland and Iceland. Rich min- 
eral deposits have also drawn people to the region. 

Soil forms slowly in the Arctic. The severe cold and 
heavy snow slow the action of forces that break rock 
into soil in temperate climates (see Soil [How soil is 
formed]). Almost anywhere that a person digs in the Arc- 
tic or subarctic, the shovel soon hits a layer of soil that is 
permanently frozen. This soil, called permafrost, con- 
sists mostly of gravel in some places. In others, it may 
be composed of finer materials. The permafrost some- 
times reaches depths of 5,000 feet {1,500 meters). The 
warmth of spring thaws the soil near the surface, but the 
deeper layers remain frozen. 

Minerals. Valuable deposits of coal are found in 
Alaska, Canada and its northern islands, Greenland, and 
Siberia. There are also coal mines in Svalbard, a group 
of Norwegian islands in the Arctic Ocean. Subarctic 
areas of Canada have deposits of radioactive minerals, 


The Arctic 


North Pacific 
; ; Ocean 
Scientists define the bounda- 


ries of the Arctic in several 
ways. The tree /ine is the 
northern limit of tree growth. 
It separates the Arctic from 
the northern forests. The cli- 
matic boundary of the Arctic 
lies on the summer isotherm 
(50 °F or 10 °C). These lines are 
shown on the map at the 
right. 


Gulf of A®’aske 


| ey Palor ice 


7 a) 
50°F (10°C) summer isotherm : ye 4 
9° x 
Tree line Godthay, 
Inlemationol boundary Labradh 
Sea 
City or town = F 


wtoundiand 


*St. John's 


0 1.000 Miles North Atlantit 


1.000 Kilomatars Of&ean 


WORLD BOOK map 





Kodisk |. 


Anchoragt 
cS 


. Beaufom 


. f- 


Arctic 637 


including thorium and uranium. Iron, lead, nickel, and 
petroleum occur in widespread parts of northern Can- 
ada and Russia. Petroleum also comes from Alaska. 
Northern Norway, Sweden, and Finland have iron de- 
posits. Mines in Alaska, Canada, and Russia produce 
gold and copper. Tin mines operate in northern Russia. 
The only known large natural deposits of cryolite (used 
to make aluminum and glass) lie in Greenland. 

Plant life. Swampy plains with low shrubs, mosses, 
and lichens (simple, plantlike organisms) cover most 
lands north of the tree line. These areas are called the 
tundra (see Tundra). Other common arctic plants in- 
clude grasses, sedges, and flowers such as saxifrages. 
Sphagnum moss and related plants thrive in ponds, and 
sometimes form muskeg. Willows and similar trees 
grow in some areas, but none grows larger than shrubs. 
Nearly 1,700 kinds of plants grow in the Arctic and sub- 
arctic. These include about 900 varieties of flowers. Pop- 
pies, bluebells, and other flowering plants bloom even 
in northern Greenland during the summer. 

Dark evergreen forests thrive south of the tree line. 
They consist mainly of cedars, firs, pines, and spruces, 
mingled with birches. These subarctic forests are called 
taiga (TY guh). A transitional zone lies between the taiga 
and the tundra. In this zone, the trees are sparse and sel- 
dom grow over 40 feet (12 meters) tall. Dwarf willows, 
birches, and alders mix with evergreens, and reindeer 
moss sometimes forms a thick carpet. 


Bering Sea 


_ a Beriag 
Strait 
vl wht 


¥ ” Anadyr 
Chukeh: ; S 
Sea “ 


~ Wrangel I. 
e Point Barrow 9 


Prudhoe Bay 


East ¢ 
Sibeman ~ 
Sea Sea — 
New | m* 
Siberian \- Tiksi 
Islands _ 


aatev 
Sea 
Arctic Ocean 


North Megnetic 
+Pola Severneya 


Zemlya 
North Pole - 


Cepa Columbie 


Franz Josaf — 
ar | La nd 


on 


e a v7 


o 
Svalbard & 
valbar 2 


Greenland Longyeerbyen’ — 4, 
(Denmark) @ ai— 


a e les 
Deosien 
4 F. Sea 


~ Jan 
Mayan 


North Capa. 


Tromsa 


“Cape Farewell 


Reykjeyik 





638 Arctic 


Animal life. The most common animals in the Arctic 
and subarctic are reindeer and caribou. Vast herds roam 
the arctic pastures. Trappers prize ermine, martens, and 
sables for their furs. Other animals that provide food 
and furs include bears, foxes, hares, and squirrels. 

Lemmings and voles compete with the caribou and 
reindeer for the arctic grass. A single pair of these 
mouselike creatures may have more than a hundred de- 
scendants a year. Their number reaches a high point 
every three or four years. This cycle in the lemming and 
vole population affects other animals and people. 
Snowy owls and other birds, together with foxes, eat the 
creatures. The birds fly north in great numbers when 
there are many lemmings and voles to eat. The foxes 
raise large families because of the abundant food sup- 
plies. Then the Inuit can trap more foxes and sell their 
furs. However, the lemmings and voles deplete the 
grasses as their numbers increase. This forces the cari- 
bou to move away. Without large herds of Caribou, the 
Inuit have less food and fewer skins with which to make 
their traditional clothing. The whole cycle begins again 
as the grasses grow once again, and the lemmings and 
voles increase. 

Most arctic birds live on or near the water, where 
they find their food. The most common arctic bird is the 
old squaw duck. Eider ducks and willow ptarmigans 
also may be found almost everywhere in the Arctic. Oth- 
er birds that nest in the region include falcons, geese, 
loons, ravens, sandpipers, and snowbirds. Auks, petrels, 
puffins, and terns live on the coastal lowlands and is- 
lands. Gulls, dovekies, murres, and sea pigeons nest on 
the arctic cliffs. For a discussion of marine mammals and 
fishes in the Arctic, see Arctic Ocean. 

Climate. Winter temperatures average about — 30° F 
(—34 C) throughout most of the true Arctic, including 
the area around the North Pole. The coldest weather oc- 
curs in northeastern Siberia, in the region around Verk- 
hoyansk. There, January temperatures average —40° F 
{(—40° C), and have reached —93° F {—69° C), which is 


Some people of the Arctic 


probably colder than it has ever been at the pole. Most 
other parts of Siberia and the subarctic sections of cen- 
tral Asia, Canada, and central Alaska have average win- 
ter temperatures of about —20 °F (—29° C). The mildest 
winters occur in coastal regions of the Atlantic and Pacif- 
ic oceans, where January temperatures average about 
30° F (—1° ©). These same regions have mild summers, 
with average July temperatures of around 45° F (7° C). 
The warmest summers occur in the inland regions of 
Siberia, Alaska, and Canada. July temperatures there av- 
erage around 60° F (16° C). Weather stations have 
recorded temperatures of 90° F (32° C) and higher in 
these regions. 

Winter storms in the Arctic develop chiefly in two ar- 
eas where the barometric pressure remains low. One of 
these areas, called the Aleutian low, extends from east- 
ern Siberia to the Gulf of Alaska. The other, the /celandic 
low, covers central Canada, half of the Arctic Ocean, and 
parts of the North Atlantic Ocean and northern Europe. 
Storms that begin in these areas tend to travel from 
northwest to southeast. Weather stations in Alaska can 
warn of storms approaching Canada and the continental 
United States. Reports from Greenland and Iceland help 
forecasters predict storms in Europe. 

Rainfall in many arctic regions totals 6 to 10 inches (15 
to 25 centimeters) a year, including melted snow. This is 
less rain than falls on some of the world’s great deserts. 
Much of the Arctic has rain and fog in summer. In spite 
of the low annual rainfall, arctic lands may be very wet 
underfoot because the moisture evaporates slowly and 
drainage conditions are poor. 


Arctic peoples 


A number of peoples live in the Arctic. They come 
from a variety of backgrounds, but all have adapted to 
the Arctic in similar ways. For example, all arctic peoples 
make their clothing from animal skins. Their chief food 
is meat and fish. People along the arctic coasts depend 
mostly on fishing and on seal and whale hunting for a 


Many Arctic peoples use modern conveniences. An Inuit (Eskimo) girl of Greenland wears a zip- 
pered jacket instead of a traditional hand-sewn parka. A Yakut man of Siberia lives in a modern 
home where he makes carvings of an ancient style. A Sami couple use a snowmobile, rather than 
reindeer, to pull their sleigh. Most Inuit also use snowmobiles, but some have dog sleds. 





De Wys Inc 
Yakut man 


Inuit girl 





=a *, 
Howard Sochurek, Woodfin Camp Inc 





Leif: Erik Nygards, Artstreet 
Sami couple 


livelihood. Those living inland hunt wild caribou or herd 
reindeer. 

Inuit (sometimes called Eskimos) are the most wide- 
spread Arctic people. Their villages spread from north- 
eastern Greenland to the Siberian coast of the Bering 
Sea. About 47,000 Inuit live in Greenland, 44,000 in Alas- 
ka, 35,000 in Canada, and 1,700 in Siberia. The Inuit lan- 
guage is very similar throughout the Arctic. 

Americanoids. Several tribes in northeastern Siberia 
resemble the Indians of the Pacific Northwest so strong- 
ly in physical characteristics that scientists sometimes 
call them Americanoids. But their way of life is more like 
that of the Inuit. These people are also called Pa/eo- 
Siberians, because they have lived in Siberia so long. 
Americanoid tribes include the Chukchi, the Koryaks, 
and the Kamchadals. 

The Chukchi live on the Chukchi Peninsula and west- 
ward to the Indigirka River. About 3,000 of them live on 
the coast, where they fish and hunt for seals. Another 
9,000 have domesticated reindeer and lead a nomadic 
life. About 8,000 Koryaks live south of the Chukchi on the 
Kamchatka Peninsula. Some fish and hunt, and others 
herd reindeer. The Kamchadals live in southern Kam- 
chatka. Many have married Russians. Fishing provides 
their main livelihood. They do not herd reindeer. 

In the Siberian Arctic. A number of Asian peoples 
live in the north-central area of Siberia. They include the 


Arctic Ocean 
explorations 
North Pacef 

Europeans began to learn Ocean 
about the Arctic during the 
1500's. This map shows the 
routes taken by the chief ex- . if at dewewt 
plorers of the Arctic since 5 
then. 
—_—— Frabisher (8ritain) 1576 
-~——— Barents (Netherlands) 1596-97 
uaaawe Bering (Netherlands) 1728-29 
——— Franklin (Britain) 1845-47 
~~~ — McClure (Britain) 1850-54 

Nardenskjald (Sweden) 
ae 1878-79 
-.—-.- Nansen (Narway) 1893-96 
—— Amundsen (Narway) 1903-06 | 
-~——- Peary (U.S.) 1908-09 
oe. socn Nabile (Italy) 1926 
eit U.S.S. Nautilus 1958 

1.000 Milas 
Were Arlee 

0 1,000 Kilometars 


ree 
WORLD BOOK map 








Arctic 639 


Yakuts, the Tungus, and the Samoyeds. About 328,000 
Yakuts occupy the area west of the Paleo-Siberians. 
Yakuts in the extreme north own most of the 2 million 
Asian reindeer. They breed reindeer and dogs for a 
livelihood. About 60,000 of the total of 75,000 Tungus live 
along the eastern branches of the Yenisey River. Many of 
them raise reindeer. About 16,000 Samoyeds, or Nenetz, 
dwell on the tundra between the Taymyr and Kola penin- 
sulas. They depend largely on reindeer herds for a liveli- 
hood, but fishing is also important 

In the European Arctic. A number of Finnic groups 
live in the Arctic sections of European Russia. They are 
related to the modern Finlanders, or Suomi. The 250,000 
Zyrians form the largest of these groups. In the far north, 
they lead nomadic lives as reindeer herders. Others 
hunt, fish, or trade. 

About 70,000 Sami {also called Lapps) inhabit northern 
Norway, Sweden, Finland, and Russia. Sami are often 
considered reindeer herders because they have had do- 
mestic reindeer for perhaps 1,000 years. But only about a 
tenth make their living from reindeer today. The rest 
work in fishing, lumbering, or other occupations. Sami 
speak a language related to Finnish. 


Arctic exploration 


Pytheas, a Greek, was the first explorer to describe the 
Far North. In the late 300’s B.C., Pytheas claimed he had 


Amundsan 
4906 


Kodiak |}. 


Anchorage 


oS t 
Islands aN 


7. 
¢ : BS Ocean 
“Gis 
eo 


en +Magnatic Pola ak 
=i PO, North P. 


Greenland 
(Denmark) 


640 Arctic 


sailed to an island six days’ journey north of Scotland. 
For hundreds of years, no one believed him. Europeans 
thought that ice covered everything in the Far North. 

Furopeans began to learn about the Arctic during the 
late 1500's. At that time, explorers were trying to find a 
northeast or northwest passage to Asia (see Northwest 
Passage). In the 1570's, the English explorer Martin Fro- 
bisher thought he had found a northwest passage, but 
he was mistaken. Many other explorers added to the 
knowledge of the Arctic while seeking a passage, but no 
one found a successful commercial route. In the early 
1770's, Samuel] Hearne, an English explorer, became the 
first white person to reach the Arctic Ocean overland 
from Hudson Bay. In 1845, an expedition led by Sir John 
Franklin of Britain disappeared during an attempt to find 
a commercial route north of North America. Nils A. E. 
Nordenskjold of Sweden made the first all-water pas- 
sage around Europe and Asia in 1878-1879. Roald 
Amundsen of Norway sailed through the Northwest Pas- 
sage between 1903 and 1906. But easier commercial 
routes to Asia had been found long before this. 

In the late 1800's, explorers of many nations began to 
go to the Arctic. Their chief aim was to become the first 
to reach the North Pole. United States Navy Commander 
Robert E. Peary; his aide, Matthew A. Henson; and four 
Inuit are usually credited with winning the race. Peary 
claimed that he reached the North Pole on April 6, 1909. 
In 1926, Lieutenant Commander Richard E. Byrd and his 
pilot, Floyd Bennett, claimed that they flew the first 
plane over the pole. That same year, Roald Amundsen, 
Lincoln Ellsworth of the United States, and Umberto No- 
bile of Italy crossed the Arctic in an airship. 

Since 1920, scientists have learned much about the 
north polar region. For example, Danish and Norwegian 
expeditions studied Greenland and the Arctic Ocean. 
Cambridge and Oxford universities, in England, sent 
many student expeditions to the Arctic. The Arctic Insti- 
tute of North America, at Montreal, and the Scott Polar 





William Crome 


An Arctic research station operated by United States scientists 
stands on this drifting mass of sea ice. The man in the fore- 
ground is untangling wire to build a radio antenna. 


Institute at Cambridge University have libraries and pub- 
lish periodicals dealing with Arctic discoveries. 

The U.S. atomic submarine Nautilus traveled 1,830 
miles (2,945 kilometers) under the Arctic ice in 1958. This 
journey opened a possible undersea route for world 
commerce across the North Pole, between the Atlantic 
and Pacific oceans. In 1978, Naomi Uemura, a Japanese 
explorer, became the first person to reach the North 
Pole alone. He traveled by dog sled. 

In 1984, the Congress of the United States passed the 
Arctic Research and Policy Act. The act includes plans to 
organize and fund scientific research, and conservation 
and development programs. lan W. D. Dalziel 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Animal (pictures: Exploration (Arctic Musk ox 
Animals of the exploration) North Pole 
polar regions) Greenland Peary, Robert E. 

Arctic Circle Henson, Matthew Permafrost 

Arctic Ocean Alexander Sami 

Bird (pictures: Inuit Reindeer 
Birds Lapland Tundra 
of the Arctic) Lichen Uranium 

Outline 


I. Arctic lands 
A. The true Arctic 
B. The subarctic 
ll. Natural resources 
A. Soil 
B. Minerals 
C Plant life 
Ill. Arctic peoples 
A. Eskimos 
B. Americanoids 
C. In the Siberian Arctic 
D. In the European Arctic 
IV. Arctic exploration 


D. Animal life 
E: Climate 


Questions 


How do most Arctic peoples make a living? 

How does the Arctic differ from the subarctic? 

How do lemmings and voles affect the life of other animals and 
people in the Arctic? 

What are two ways of defining the Arctic’s geographic limits? 

Who are Americanoids, and where do they live? 

What arctic area has the coldest weather? Which areas have the 
warmest weather? 

Where do the greatest numbers of Inuit live? 

What is permafrost? Taiga? The Aleutian low? 

What valuable minerals are found in the Arctic? 

When and by whom was the far north first described? 


Additional resources 


Curlee, Lynn. /nto the Ice: The Story of Arctic Exploration. 
Houghton, 1998. Younger readers. 

Mulvaney, Kieran. At the Ends of the Earth: A History of the Polar 
Regions. \sland Pr., 2001. 

Young, Steven B. Jo the Arctic: An Introduction to the Far North- 
ern World. 1989. Reprint. Wiley, 1994. 


Arctic Circle, AHRK tihk or AHR tihk, is an imaginary 
line that runs through the northern parts of Canada, 
Alaska, Russia, and Scandinavia. All points on the Arctic 
Circle lie at 66°30’ north latitude, 1,624 miles (2,613 kilo- 
meters) from the north geographic pole (see Arctic 
Ocean [map)). 

The Arctic Circle marks the edge of an area where the 
sun stays above the horizon one or more days each year. 
The sun never sets there on the longest day of summer, 
about June 21. The sun never rises on the Arctic Circle 
during the shortest day of winter, about December 21. 





At the North Pole itself, the sun is visible 90 days be- 
fore and 90 days after June 21 if the sky is clear. It stays 
below the horizon for the same amount of time before 
and after December 21. See Midnight sun. 

Stephen S. Birdsall 
Arctic fox is a small fox that lives on the treeless 
coastal areas and islands of the Arctic Ocean. It grows 
approximately 20 inches (50 centimeters) long, not in- 
cluding its tail, and weighs from 2 to 20 pounds (1 to 9 
kilograms). 

Arctic foxes have long, thick winter fur to protect 
them from the extreme cold. Their relatively small ears 
also keep them from losing too much body heat. Most 
Arctic foxes change color from brown or gray in sum- 
mer to white in winter. This color change camouflages 
the foxes in every season, enabling them to sneak up on 
prey. One kind of Arctic fox has a light gray or blue win- 
ter coat. 

Arctic foxes feed mainly on birds, birds’ eggs, and 
such small mammals as lemmings. When food becomes 
scarce in winter, the foxes often travel great distances to 
find animal remains left behind by polar bears or 
wolves. Arctic foxes usually mate for life. During the fe- 
male's pregnancy, the breeding pair return to their fami- 
ly den, where many generations of foxes have lived be- 
fore. Females usually give birth to 5 to 10 young each 
summer. 

Scientific classification. The Arctic fox belongs to the family 
Canidae. Its scientific name is Alopex lagopus. 

See also Animal (picture: Animals of the polar re- 
gions), Fox (picture). 

Arctic Ocean, AHRK tihk or AHR tihk, is the smallest of 
the world’s oceans. It lies north of most of Asia, Europe, 
and North America. The North Pole is near the center of 
the Arctic Ocean, and ice covers much of the ocean the 
year around. 

The Greek explorer Pytheas sailed near the Arctic Cir- 
cle in the late 300’s B.C. He reported that a frozen sea lay 
a six-day voyage north of Britain. The ancient Greeks 


Thomas L Poulson 





Arctic Ocean 641 


named the Arctic region for a constellation that they 
called Arktos (the bear). Today, this group of stars, which 
includes the Big Dipper, is known as Ursa Major or the 
Great Bear. It appears in the northern sky. 

Location and size. The Arctic Ocean lies at the north- 
ernmost part of the Earth, above the Arctic Circle. How- 
ever, not all the seas north of the Arctic Circle are con- 
sidered part of the Arctic Ocean. 

Far northern lands extend into the ocean. They in- 
clude most of Greenland and parts of Norway, Russia, 
Alaska, and Canada. For more information on the lands 
and peoples of the Arctic region, see the World Book 
article on Arctic. 

Groups of islands divide the coastal waters of the Arc- 
tic Ocean into seven seas. These seas, from Greenland 
eastward, are the Greenland Sea, the Barents, the Kara, 
the Laptev, the East Siberian, the Chukchi, and the Beau- 
fort. The channels among the northern Canadian islands 
also form part of the Arctic Ocean. The ocean merges 
with the Atlantic Ocean south of the Davis Strait, the 
Greenland Sea, and the Norwegian Sea. The Bering 
Strait connects the Arctic Ocean and the Pacific Ocean. 

The Arctic Ocean covers approximately 4,600,000 
square miles (12,000,000 square kilometers). Its widest 
part lies between Alaska and Norway, a distance of 
about 2,630 miles (4,235 kilometers). The narrowest 
stretch is between Greenland and the Taymyr Peninsula 
of Russia. These areas lie about 1,200 miles (1,930 kilo- 
meters) apart. 


Facts in brief 


Area: About 4,600,000 mi? (12,000,000 km/?). 

Greatest distance: About 2,630 mi (4,235 km), between Alaska 
and Norway. 

Average depth: 3,950 ft (1,205 m). 

Greatest depth: 15,305 ft (4,605 m), north of Svalbard. 

Surface temperature: Lowest, 28 F(—2 ©), in January. Highest, 
29°F 5"C) in July 





Wilham Cronne 


Ice on the Arctic Ocean breaks up in summer, forming areas of open water called /eads. Hills of 
ice, shown in the center rear, form when currents and winds push pieces of ice on top of one an- 
other. The leads freeze over in fall, and the ice may be 10 teet (3 meters) thick by spring. 





642 Arctic Ocean 


Depth and the ocean floor. The Arctic Ocean has an __ nents. Most of the continental shelf in the Arctic Ocean 


average depth of 3,950 feet (1,205 meters) below the lies less than 500 feet (152 meters) below the surface of 

surface of the water. Its deepest known spot—about the water. North of Greenland and North America, the 

15,305 feet (4,605 meters)—is just north of the Norwegian continental shelf extends about 45 to 120 miles (70 to 200 

islands of Svalbard. kilometers) from shore. It stretches as far as 1,000 miles 
The floor of the Arctic Ocean includes the continental —_ (1,609 kilometers) from the Russian coast 

shelfand the central basin. The continental shelf is the The central basin is divided into two main basins. The 


gently sloping submerged land at the edge of the conti- | Canadian Basin has an average depth of 12,500 feet 


4 


North Paerfie O ea 
a 


1 























Arctic Ocean 


Water depth 


0 to 656 ft. (0 to 200 m) 


656 to 6.550 ft. 

/ (200 to 2.000 mi 
6.550 to 13.100 ft. 
(2,000 to 4,000 m) 
Deeper than 13,100 ft. 
14,000 m) 


«= Cold current 
international boundary 


Vv Depth below sea level 


WORLD BOOK map 


NORTH AMERICA 


oMictora bs, 2 ity 









Canada - 





. ha era 1. ete 


Sr = 


E 3 E 
oo | 
ery | 
S ssite Greenlan: 
oS Denmark! J 
F F 
G G 








Chukchi Sea B 4 Greenland Basin F 8 Makarov Basin D4 Zemlya | 
pri index , st ~- Greenland Sea Fut Mendeleyev ) £ 6 
rrert £ F Ri Cc 4 Queen Elizabeth 

Amundsen Gulf C 2 East Siberian Kara Sea D6 Atohne Ridge Fo4 Islands cans 
Barents £ 6 Sea B 5 Laptey Sea Cc 6 Basin D5 Zemlya 

Beaufort Sea B 3 Fram Basin D Lena Trough £ 4 Ridge D5 oe ees D 3 
Canada Basin C 3 Franz joset Land Lincoln Sea DS4 North Cape Svalbard (island! £5 
Chukchi Plateau Cc 4 ! E 5 Lomonosoy Ridge D4 Current F 5 White Sea F 6 


oe 








(3,800 meters). The Eurasian Basin has an average depth 
of 13,800 feet (4,200 meters). The central basin has a 
number of submerged ridges. The Lomonosov Ridge, 
the tallest, rises about 10,000 feet (3,000 meters) from the 
deep ocean floor. It extends about 1,100 miles (1,800 kil- 
ometers) between a point near Ellesmere Island and an 
area north of the New Siberian Islands. Two other 
ridges run parallel to the Lomonosov Ridge. The Alpha 
Ridge rises on the Canadian side of the Lomonosov. The 
Nansen Ridge lies on the European side. 

The ocean also has a deep trench called the Lena 
Trough. The trench has a depth of 11,500 feet (3,500 me- 
ters) and runs about midway between Svalbard and 
Greenland. 

Climate of the Arctic region is bitterly cold. Surface 
water temperatures drop to as low as about 28 °F 
(—2 °C) in January and reach only about 29 °F (—1.5 °C) in 
July. The sun stays above the horizon for weeks in sum- 
mer, but winter brings weeks when the sun never rises. 
The winter sky is often brightened by the flickering or 
glowing lights of the aurora borealis, or northern lights. 

A high-pressure dome of cold, dry air covers the Arc- 
tic. It helps prevent the moist, warmer air of the westerly 
wind from reaching the Arctic Circle. As a result, rain 
and snowfall over the Arctic Ocean are light. However, 
fog is common over coastal waters in summer when 
humid warm air from the land blows out over the 
coastal ocean. In winter, violent storms called Arctic 
hurricanes form rapidly and unexpectedly in some 
areas. 

Ice covers much of the surface of the Arctic Ocean 
most of the year. Most of the ice is sea ice (frozen sea- 
water), though some g/acier ice (frozen fresh water) also 
floats in the ocean. Some sea ice, called pack ice, forms 
in the winter when surface temperatures drop. Seawater 
forms ice at 29 °F (—2 °C) rather than the 32 °F (0 °C) of 
fresh water because of its salt content. By March, pack 
ice covers the entire Arctic Ocean except for the area 
along the coast of Norway and western Russia to the 
White Sea. This area is influenced by the warm current 
called the Gulf Stream. By the end of summer, most of 
the coastal waters of Russia and mainland North Amer- 
ica are ice-free. Most pack ice is less than 64 feet (2 me- 
ters) thick. 

Some sea ice remains throughout the year. This po/ar 
ice mass forms a somewhat jagged circle that has the 
North Pole as its center and covers about 70 percent of 
the Arctic Ocean. It rotates in a clockwise direction, 
driven by the polar easterly wind and ocean currents. 
The permanent polar ice mass is as thick as 164 feet (50 
meters) in some places. In summer, the edges of the 
polar ice mass sometimes break into sections. These 
sections are separated by areas of water known as /eads. 

A sheet of glacier ice covers more than 672,000 
square miles (1,740,500 square kilometers) of Greenland. 
This sheet is the largest glacier in the Northern Hemi- 
sphere. It reaches a maximum thickness of about 9,800 
feet (3,000 meters) near the center of the island, where it 
lies on land surface. Near the coast, large masses of the 
glacier break off to form icebergs. Some icebergs float 
into the North Atlantic Ocean. There, they meet the 
warm waters of the Gulf Stream and melt. Icebergs so 
large that they are called ice islands come from Elles- 
mere Island and northern Greenland. Some ice islands 


Arctic Ocean 643 


are so large and thick that scientists have been able to 
set up research stations on them. 

Currents, water masses, and tides. The North At- 
lantic Current, which flows north between Iceland and 
Norway, brings Atlantic water into the Arctic Ocean. It 
accounts for about 60 percent of the water that enters 
the icy sea. About 35 percent of the water is supplied by 
a current that carries water from the Pacific Ocean north 
through the Bering Strait. 

The East Greenland Current carries about 60 percent 
of the water that leaves the Arctic Ocean. This current 
flows through the Greenland Sea and passes along the 
coast of Greenland to the Davis Strait. About 35 percent 
of the outflow from the Arctic Ocean moves southeast- 
ward among the northern Canadian islands. This water 
joins the West Greenland Current in the Davis Strait, 
forming the Labrador Current of the northwest Atlantic 
Ocean. 

The Arctic Ocean has four layers of water: (1) Arctic 
surface, (2) Pacific, (3) Atlantic, and (4) Arctic bottom. 
These water masses differ in saltiness, temperature, or 
both. 

The Arctic surface water extends to a depth of about 
150 feet (46 meters) and is less salty than the water 
below it. It has a temperature of about 29 °F (—1.5 °C) in 
summer and of about 28 °F (—2 °C) in winter. 

The Pacific water occurs only on the Pacific side of 
the Lomonosov Ridge beneath the surface water. It ex- 
tends to a depth of 410 feet (125 meters) and has a tem- 
perature of about 30 °F (—1 °C). 

The Atlantic water lies on both sides of the Lomono- 
sov Ridge. On the Atlantic side, it is just beneath the sur- 
face water. On the Pacific side, it is found beneath the 
Pacific water, which is slightly less salty. The Atlantic 
water extends to a depth of about 2,800 feet (853 me- 
ters). Its temperature is about 35 °F (2 °C). 

The Arctic bottom water is the saltiest of the Arctic 
water masses. It extends from the base of the Atlantic 
water to the seabed and has a temperature of about 
35 iB 2eG): 

The Arctic Ocean has relatively smaller tides overall 
than the other oceans do. The ocean's small size and al- 
most landlocked nature probably account for its slight 
tidal variations. Most of the tides in the Arctic Ocean 
rise and fall less than 1 foot (0.3 meter). 

Ocean life. Animals of the Arctic include seals, 
whales, fish, and polar bears. The seals and whales feed 
on fish and tiny floating plantlike organisms and animals 
called plankton. The plantlike organisms of the plankton 
are known as phytop/ankton, and the animals are called 
zooplankton. Large numbers of diatoms, a type of phyto- 
plankton, thrive near the surface of waters near the 
edge of the sea ice. Some whales eat huge amounts of 
shrimplike zooplankton called Ari//, Shellfish form an im- 
portant food of walruses (a kind of seal), bearded seals, 
and sperm whales. Polar bears hunt seals. Such bottom- 
dwelling fish as cod and halibut are plentiful in the shal- 
low seas along the continental shelf. 

The Arctic Ocean has relatively little plant life. Cold 
temperatures and lack of the sunlight needed for 
photosynthesis—particularly under the polar ice mass— 
hinder the growth of plants. 

Importance of the ocean. Russian fishing crews 
catch such fish as cod and halibut in the Barents and 





644 Arctic tern 


Kara seas. Arctic people of several nations also hunt 
whales in the Arctic Ocean. 

Major deposits of petroleum have been discovered 
off the north coast of Alaska, and oil wells now operate 
in this area. The continental shelf near Canada and Rus- 
sia is also believed to have large reserves of oil and nat- 
ural gas. Many Arctic islands have deposits of coal. 

The Arctic Ocean provides a water route to distant 
Arctic ports. The ships deliver manufactured goods and 
other needed products and carry back such goods as 
fish, fur, and lumber. The ships are accompanied by ice- 
breakers and guided by planes that point out the easiest 
route through the ice. 

Pollution is not a widespread problem in the Arctic 
Ocean because of the limited development in the re- 
gion. However, the disposal of wastes from military 
bases in the Arctic has resulted in some pollution. Oil 
production on the Alaskan shelf has also produced 
some pollution. In addition, air pollution from factories 
in Russia and other northern countries sometimes drifts 
over the region. Harold V. Thurman 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Amundsen, Roald Nansen, Fridtjof 
Exploration (Arctic explo- Nordenskjaéld, Nils A. E. 


ration) North Pole 
Henson, Matthew A Northwest Passage 
Iceberg Peary, Robert E. 
Labrador Current 


Arctic tern, AHRK tihk or AHR tihk, is a sea bird often 
called the migration champion of the world. It migrates 
over a greater distance than any other bird. The Arctic 
tern grows about 17 inches (43 centimeters) long; has 
bluish-gray, black, and white feathers; and has red feet 
and a red bill. Arctic terns breed on Atlantic seacoasts 
from New England to Greenland and the northernmost 
islands of the Arctic Ocean, and on the coasts of the 
northern North Pacific Ocean and Bering Sea. Late in 
August, the birds and their young begin a long journey 
to the shores of Antarctica and nearby islands. Later, the 
birds fly north once more, arriving in the Arctic about 
mid-June. 

Scientific classification. The Arctic tern belongs to the gull 
and tern family, Laridae. It is Sterna paradisaea. 

See also Bird (Interesting facts about birds |Greatest 
traveler]; picture: Birds of the Arctic); Tern. 


George L Hunt, Jr. 





An Arctic tern has bluish-gray, black, and white feathers, along 
with red feet and a red bill. This far-ranging tern migrates over a 
greater distance than any other species of bird. 


GA jones Photo Researchers 


Ardennes Mountains and Forest, ar DEHN, ex- 
tend from northern France into Belgium and Luxem- 
bourg. They contain some of the largest oak and beech 
forests in Europe. The Ardennes Mountains average 
about 1,600 feet (488 meters) in height. Coal, iron, and 
slate have been produced in the northern part of the Ar- 
dennes region. The Ardennes Forest was known in Ro- 
man times as the Arduenna. Fighting occurred in the 
Belgian and French Ardennes in World War | (1914- 
1918). In May 1940, the Germans broke through the Ar- 
dennes in their invasion of Belgium, during World War 
I]. The Battle of the Bulge took place in the Ardennes in 
December 1944, during the late stages of the war. See 
also Belgium (The Ardennes). Hugh D. Clout 
Ardizzone, 448 diht ZOH nee, Edward (1900-1979), 
was a British author and illustrator of award-winning 
books for children. He wrote many adventure stories 
that include lively, often humorous drawings. Ardizzone 
also illustrated over 100 books by other authors. 

Ardizzone s most popular books tell about Little Tim, 
a young boy who lives in a seaside town. Little Tim and 
the Brave Sea Captain (1936) was the first book Ardiz- 
zone wrote and illustrated. Other works in the series in- 
clude 7im to the Rescue (1949), Tim All Alone (1956), and 
Tim s Last Voyage (1973). 

Edward Jeffrey Irving Ardizzone was born on Oct. 16, 
1900, in Haiphong, Indochina (now Vietnam). He moved 
to England with his family when he was 5. Many scenes 
in the Little Tim books take place on the southeastern 
coast of England, where he grew up. Ardizzone wrote 
and illustrated 7he Young Ardizzone: An Autobiographi- 
cal Fragment (1970). He also gained recognition as a fine 
painter. Marilyn Fain Apseloft 
Area, in plane geometry, is the amount of surface con- 
tained within the boundaries of a plane figure. It is gen- 
erally expressed in square units. For example, a square 
inch is a square whose sides are each 1 inch long. Other 
units of area include square feet, square miles, and 
Square meters. The area of most common plane figures 
can be calculated from certain of their dimensions. 
Thus, a rectangle’s area can be determined by multiply- 
ing the lengths of two adjoining sides. The word area 
may also refer to the measure of a curved surface or the 
measure of the surface ofa solid figure. See also Calcu- 
lus (Finding areas); Metric system (Use of related units; 
Non-S] metric units); Square measure; Weights and 
measures (table: Surface or area). Thomas P. Carpenter 
Arecibo Observatory, 4% uh SEE boh, is an astro- 
nomical observatory in Puerto Rico, 50 miles (80 kilome- 
ters) west of San Juan. It has the world’s most powerful 
radio telescope (a telescope that collects and measures 
radio waves given off by objects in space). The tele- 
scope opened in 1963. Cornell University manages the 
observatory for the National Science Foundation. 

Arecibo s radio telescope has the largest dish (bowl- 
shaped reflector) in the world. The dish is built into a 
basin-shaped valley and is 1,000 feet (305 meters) in di- 
ameter. The dish focuses radio waves onto receivers 
that hang above it. The waves come from such distant 
objects as pulsars (rapidly spinning stars whose waves 
arrive On earth as regular pulses). The size of the Areci- 
bo telescope enables astronomers to observe objects 
that other telescopes cannot detect. Arecibo astrono- 
mers discovered the first binary pulsar(a pulsar in orbit 








around a companion star) in 1974. In the early 1990's, as- 
tronomers at the observatory discovered planets be- 
yond the solar system and ice at the poles of Mercury. 

In 1996, special mirrors were added to sharpen the 
telescope’s focus. These additional mirrors hang with 
the radio receivers inside a helmetlike dome above the 
dish. Astronomers can track an object for several hours 
by continually repositioning the hanging mirrors. The 
telescope is also used as a giant radar system to map 
the surfaces of planets, comets, and asteroids. 

In addition, scientists use the telescope to study the 
regions of the earth’s atmosphere that make up the 
ionosphere. These regions have many /ons (electrically 
charged atoms and groups of atoms). B. M. Lewis 

See also Telescope (Radio telescopes). 

Arena was the area used for combat with beasts or be- 
tween gladiators in an ancient Roman amphitheater. Ris- 
ing rows of stone seats enclosed the space, which was 
usually oval. The name arena, which means sand in Lat- 
in, came from the practice of spreading sand on the 
floor to absorb blood. The floor of a Roman arena had 
passageways underneath for animals or for storage. Are- 
nas today are used for bullfights, concerts, and other 
events. Arthur M. Eckstein 

See also Colosseum. 

Areopagus, 4% ee AHP wh guhs, was the oldest and 
most respected council of ancient Athens. Prominent cit- 
izens who held the office of archon, one of the highest 
offices in the Athenian city-state, were members of the 
Areopagus for life. 

In early Athenian history, the Areopagus had adminis- 
trative and constitutional powers. About 600 B.C, a new 
group, the Council of the Four Hundred, took over many 
duties of the Areopagus. About 450 B.C, most of the re- 
maining duties and privileges of the Areopagus were 
transferred to large people's courts. But the Areopagus 
continued to try murder cases and retained the power 
to fine citizens found guilty of extravagance, insolence, 
or intemperance. The council was named for the Are- 
opagus, or Hill of Ares, where it held meetings. 

jenniter Tolbert Roberts 

See also Solon. 


Arethusa 645 


Arecibo Observatory in 
Puerto Rico has the world’s 
largest reflecting dish. The 
bowl-shaped surface meas- 
ures 1,000 feet (305 meters) 
across and consists of 38,778 
aluminum panels. Astrono- 
mers use the dish to gather 
and focus radio waves that ar- 
rive from outer space and to 
transmit and receive radar 
signals. 


David Parker, Science Photo Library 


Arequipa, 48 wh KEE pah (pop. 619,156), is the com- 
mercial center of southern Peru and one of Peru's 
largest cities. It lies 8,100 feet (2,470 meters) above sea 
level in southern Peru (see Peru [mapl). Ancient ruins 
and Indian villages around Arequipa attract many tour- 
ists. The Spaniards began settlements at Arequipa in 
1540. The city has some of the best examples of Spanish 
colonial architecture in Peru. Jerry R. Williams 

Ares, A/R eez, was a god of war in Greek mythology. 
He was the son of Zeus and Hera, the king and queen of 
the gods. Ares fathered many children, most of whom 
were warlike or were associated with war. The Romans 
identified Mars, their god of war, with Ares. See Mars. 

Ares probably originated as a fertility god. He was not 
widely worshiped in Greece, and there are few myths 
that concern him. He was associated with the Greek 
goddess Aphrodite. Aphrodite was married to the Greek 
god Hephaestus, but she had a love affair with Ares. Ac- 
cording to some myths, Aphrodite bore some of Ares’s 
children, including Eros, the god of love. In the Odyssey, 
an epic poem attributed to the Greek poet Homer, He- 
phaestus uses a net to catch Ares and Aphrodite togeth- 
er, embarrassing them in front of other gods. 

In poetry, Ares’s name has often been used as a syn- 
onym for war. However, he was often portrayed as an in- 
competent warrior. The epic poem the //ad., also attrib- 
uted to Homer, mocks Ares for being wounded in battle 
by the mortal hero Diomedes with the help of the god- 
dess Athena F. Carter Philips 
Arethusa, 4&8 uh THOO zuh, was a beautiful nymph in 
Greek mythology. Her father was the sea god Nereus, 
and she was an attendant of the goddess Artemis. The 
river god Alpheus fell in love with Arethusa as she 
bathed in the sea. He pursued her in the form of a swift 
torrent all the way to an island off the coast of Sicily. Out 
of pity for the fleeing girl, Artemis transformed her into 
a spring. Even so, Alpheus overcame her and mingled 
his waters with hers. The Greeks used this myth to ex- 
plain the disappearance of the Alpheus River as it flows 
toward the lonian Sea. This story is retold in Metamor- 
Phoses by the Roman author Ovid and in Arethusa by 
the English poet Percy Bysshe Shelley. 


Nancy Felson 








Stockphotos 
Rural life and city life contrast vividly in Argentina, as shown here. Cowboys, called gauchos, 
drive cattle across the open plains of Argentina's fertile Pampa. Modern office and apartment 
buildings line busy boulevards in downtown Buenos Aires, the nation's capital and largest city. 


Argentina 


Argentina, 48 juhn TEE nuh, is the second largest 
country in South America in area and the third largest 
in population. Only Brazil covers a greater area, and only 
Brazil and Colombia have more people. Argentina has a 
long, tapered shape and occupies most of the southern 
part of South America. 

The landscape varies dramatically throughout Ar- 
gentina. The rugged Andes Mountains stretch along the 
country’s western border. A bare, windswept plateau 
called Patagonia extends across the south. The Pampa, 

a fertile, grassy plain, lies near the middle of the country. 
Scrub forests spread across much of the northern part 
of Argentina. 

Buenos Aires, Argentinas capital and largest city, is 
the nation’s leading center of industry, trade, and cul- 
ture. About a third of all Argentines live in the Buenos 
Aires metropolitan area. Large parts of the country are 
thinly settled. Most Argentines are of Italian or Spanish 
ancestry. Indians—the original inhabitants of what is 
now Argentina— make up only a small part of the coun- 
trys population. Nearly all the Argentine people speak 
Spanish and are Roman Catholics. 

Argentinas name comes from the Latin word for sil- 
ver, argentum. The first Spanish settlers came to Ar- 
gentina in search of silver and gold during the 1500s. 
The country lacked such riches, but the Pampa’s fertile 
soil later proved to be far more valuable than precious 
metals. During the late 1800's, Argentina grew wealthy 





Richard W. Wilkie, the contributor of this article. is Professor 
of Geography at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst 





oo ee 





Ennque Limbrunner. Piessner international 


from the export of meat and grain to Europe. By the late 
1920's, it had become one of the wealthiest nations in 
the world. Today, Argentina remains rich in natural re- 
sources. However, it no longer ranks among the eco- 
nomic giants. 

Manufacturing has become increasingly important to 
Argentinas economy. Much of the manufacturing in- 
volves processing farm products. Argentina is a leading 
producer and exporter of beef, corn, and flaxseed. It 
also produces and exports huge quantities of wheat 
The country lacks the large supplies of coal, iron ore, 
and most other minerals needed for heavy industry. 
However, Argentinas petroleum industry produces 
nearly all the nations oil needs. 

For nearly 300 years, Argentina was a Spanish colony. 


Facts in brief 


Capital: Buenos Aires. 

Official language: Spanish. 

Official name: Republica Argentina (Argentine Republic). 

Area: 1,073,519 mi? (2,780,400 km’). Greatest distances—north- 
south, 2,300 mi (3,700 km); east-west, 980 mi (1,577 km). Coast- 
line—2,940 mi (4,731 km). 

Elevation: Highest—Aconcagua, 22,831 ft |6,959 m) above sea 
level. Lowest—Valdes Peninsula, 131 ft (40 m) below sea level. 

Population: Fstimated 2002 population—37 919,000; population 
density, 35 per mi: (14 per km); distribution, 90 percent urban, 
10 percent rural. 1997 census —32,615,528. 

Chief products: Agricu/ture—beef, corn, cotton, flaxseed, 
grapes, milk, sorghum, soybeans, sugar cane, sunflower 
seeds, wheat, wool. Afanufacturing— chemicals, electrical 
equipment, meat and other food products, motor vehicles, 
textiles. Mining—petroleum, natural gas. 

Money: Basic unit—peso. One hundred centavos equal one 
peso. 








Argentina gained its independence in the early 1800's 
and became a republic in 1853. Most of the time since 
1930, military dictators have ruled the country. 


Government 


National government. Argentina's Constitution, 
which was adopted in 1853, established the country as a 
republic. The Constitution provides for an elected presi- 
dent and Congress. It places the Roman Catholic Church 
under government protection and requires that both the 
president and the vice president be Catholics. 

In 1976, a military government took control of Argenti- 
na and suspended parts of the Constitution. The military 
leaders removed the president from office, dissolved 
Congress, and restricted many civil rights. Political and 
economic unrest finally forced the military government 
to call for free elections in 1983. The new civilian gov- 
ernment, headed by a president and a Congress, took 
office in December 1983. 

Argentina's president is elected to a four-year term 
and cannot serve more than two terms. The president 
appoints members of a Cabinet, who head the executive 
departments of the government. Argentina's Congress is 
made up of two houses—the Chamber of Deputies and 
the Senate. The Chamber of Deputies has 259 members, 
who are elected by the people. The Senate has 72 mem- 
bers. The provincial legislatures choose the senators. 








Symbols of Argentina. The state flag of the government, adopt- 
ed in 1818, and the coat of arms bear a sun, which represents Ar- 
gentina’s freedom from Spain. The blue and white of the flag are 
the colors worn by patriots who fought off British invaders in 
1806 and 1807. The coat of arms also bears a liberty cap. 


north 





Chile’ 


fic 5 
cl oan Ocean 


( ( ARGENTINA 







south PS 
ocean 


; h : . ‘ & 
; "WORLD BOOK map 


Argentina occupies most of the southern part of South Ameri- 
ca. It borders five other countries and the South Atlantic Ocean. 


Falkland Is 
“ (GB) 








Argentina 647 





Enrique Limbrunner, Plessner International 


The Casa Rosada (Pink House) contains the office of Argenti- 
na’s president and other government offices. The building faces 
the Plaza de Mayo in the heart of Buenos Aires. 


Local government Argentina is divided into 22 
provinces, 1 island territory, and 1 federal district for 
purposes of local government. Each province is headed 
by a governor who is elected by the people. The presi- 
dent appoints the governor of the island territory, Tierra 
del Fuego, which lies off the southern tip of South 
America. An elected mayor heads the federal district, 
which includes the capital city of Buenos Aires. 

Politics. Argentina's political parties include the Radi- 
cal Civic Union and the Justicialist Party. The Radical 
Civic Union, also known as the Radical Party, attracts 
many middle-class Argentines. The Justicialist Party, also 
called the Peronist Party, traditionally supported the pol- 
icies of former President Juan Peron. These policies 
called for heavy government spending and strong na- 
tionalistic feeling. But in the 1990's, the party's policies 
changed to include support for cutting government 
spending, expanding trade, and selling state property to 
private owners. Argentina also has several small parties. 

Courts. The president appoints the members of Ar- 
gentina’s Supreme Court, the nation’s highest court. The 
president also appoints judges of the federal courts of 
appeals. Each province has its own supreme court and 
lower court system. Provincial governors appoint 
provincial court judges. 

Armed forces. Argentina's president is commander 
in chief of the country's armed forces. About 65,000 men 
serve in Argentinas armed forces, which consist of an 
air force, army and navy. A small number of women 
serve in noncombat jobs. About 375,000 men serve in 
Argentina's military reserves. 


People 


Population. Argentinas population is growing slow- 
ly, mainly because of a low birth rate. Immigration con- 
tributed greatly to Argentina's population growth in the 
past. The country had about a million people in the mid- 
1800's. Huge waves of European settlers helped increase 
the population to nearly 8 million by 1914. immigration 
to Argentina dropped sharply during the 1930's but 





648 Argentina 


picked up again after World War !] ended in 1945. Since 
the 1970's, most newcomers have been political and 
economic refugees from neighboring countries, espe- 


cially Bolivia, Chile, and Paraguay. 


The population of Argentina is distributed extremely 
unevenly. About a third of the people live in Buenos 
Aires and its suburbs. About a fourth of the people live 
in the Pampa of central Argentina. Large regions of the 
country have few people because the climate and ter- 
rain are unfavorable. These regions include the rugged 
Andes in the west, the dry Patagonian plateau in the 
south, and a wooded region in the north called the Gran 


Chaco. 


Ancestry. About 85 percent of Argentinas people 
are of European ancestry. Mestizos (people of mixed !n- 
dian and white ancestry) make up most of the remaining 
15 percent. Unlike most other Latin American countries, 
Argentina has few !ndians. 

About 250,000 Indians may have lived in what is now 
Argentina when the first Europeans arrived in the 1500s. 
By the late 1800's, however, many Indians had died of 
European diseases or had been killed by Europeans. 
Many others intermarried with the Europeans, produc- 
ing a Mestizo population. Today, Argentina has only 


Argentina map index 


Provinces 


Name 


a8 


Buenos Aires 


hiswdinza 
Misiones 

Neuquen 

Rio Negro 
Saha 


San Juan 
San Luis 
Santa Cruz 
Santa Fe 
Santiago del 
Estero 
Tucuman 


SB BNATOOarnDAaoOn ™ypponocawgam 
Wo dU dN es dd a 
g 


Area 
Insg.mi.  inkn® 
118.733 wT =s4 
38 984 100 967 
$8 469 79 637 


Other political units 


D5 Federal District 


es Tierra del Fuego 


(territory! 


Cities and towns 


Aquilares 26,79 
en’ § 82 

Alta Gracia 
Anatuya +9 
Arrecites” 20 858 
Azul $8 B3é 
Bahia 

Blanca 25: 
Balcarce * 
Baradero’ 23.09 
Beil Ville 2 
Beila Vista’ 21.29 
Bolivar’ 2) 
Bragado 2 
Buenos 

Aires 2.963 4 


Calata 

Olivia 27 De 
Campana’ 67 26 
Canada de 

Gomez 27 1€ 
Canuelas’ 18.658 


Joes nol apo 
} 


Casilda‘* 
Catamarca 
Caucete 
~ Chac abu oO’ 
5 Chayan’ 
Chascomus 
Chilicate 
Chirmbas* 
¢ hiv coy 
H : Ginco § abt ss 
} 4 Gpollet 
Oonnda 
Colon’ 


4 


D Comodoro 


Rivadavia 
Concepoor 
} 5 Concepcion 
tei UTUQuay 
oncordia 


( 
D 35 Cordoba 


C« < 


i , 
) 5 P 


Population 


Coronel Ros- 


ales Punta 

Alta 
Coronel 

Suarez* 
Cornentes 
Cruz 

dei Eye 
Curuzu 

Cuatia 
Cutra/-Co 
Dean Funes 
Dolores 
Eidorado 
Fsperanza* 
Esquel 
Famiailla’ 
Firmar’ 
Formosa 
Frias 


Gahez’ 


General Acha 


General 
Ah ear 

General 
Guemes’® 


Roca 
Godoy Cruz 
Gova 
Gualequay 
Guale- 

quay chu 
huzaingo" 
Jesus 

Mana’ 
purr 
La Banda 
La Paz 

Plata 


Ne edes 





dian and white ancestry). The gauchos above wear their tradi- 
tiona! costume and keep alive their old songs and dances. 


R 
e] 


Mercedes 24 
Metan 23,067 
Miramar’ 19 
Monte 

Caseros 19.49 
Monteros’ 
Necochea 
Neuquen 18 
Nogova’ ] 
Nueve de 

julio 28 299 
Obera 40.333 
QOlavarria 72 B2 
Palpala’ 39.922 
Parana 276 166 
Paso de los 

Libres $$ 00; 
Pehuayo 28 48 
Pergamino 34.592 
Posadas 72131 297 
Presidencia 

Rogue Saenz 

Pena 
Puerto 

Deseado 7.09 
Puerto 

Madnn $4895 
Puerto San 

Julian >.12€ 
Puerto 

Santa 

Cruz 2B 
Punta Alta. see 

Coronel Rasales 
Rataela 67 OB 
Rawson 9214 
Reconquista 63,353 
Resisencia 291 08 
Rio Cuarto 1 38 99E 
Rio 

Gallegos 64.628 
Rio 

Tercero 
Rojas’ 
Rosano 


64 476 


Rufino 43% 
Saladillo” 312 
Salta 23 302 
San Antonio 

Oeste € 
San Carlos de 

Bariloche 77 7x 
San 

Cristobal 13.93 
San Fran- 

cisco 35 
San juan > 


San fusto’ 8 
San Luis 


Ty Yi de O 


at 1 de do 


Arroyos 
Tucuman 
San Miguel 
de Tu 
cuman 


Tunuyan’ 
Ushuaia 
Vemticinco 

de.Mtayo’ 
Venado 

Tuerto 
Victorna 
Viedma 
Villa 


Villaguay” 


a=2 37) 


=P he] o)~) 
iw deo VII Le 


Dn MOR» >} 


¥YRMRBOAA O 


m OW 


Leal 


—om 


Leal 


Stockphotos 
Argentina's gauchos are typically mestizos (people of mixed In- 


ad io 


de tt 


tw 


Vile ly 


oe 


—— 


‘ 





“Amotagas 











la Serena = ph — ’ - y 
<—— ; y , ee - Chiquita, st 
, (Cordoba 
Oo u t h oo ¢ =e a P JS 
S ine “gan Fran ag Concordia 
Paci fie ry 
a} * , mn Sw °S Lagoon 
Ocean 
Vina del pile - Vector i Rio ede 















Mr 
Cuategfa iin 


O1dS 


Valparaiso. 


ry Wercods = * 
gia TChivitcoy, as lata” ar 
enas =~" Nueve de sung 


” “Trenque Lauquen 










ee 
aa 





CHI 


Talcahuand, 











Diavarria 






*Tandil 
Balcarce® 


































{ 4 
—— Necochea 
Valdivi amos Mexia Res a 
aidiwid — _—__ a =f 
¢ | Rio Negro C 
= ¢ = 8 
i { ; o. er | : 
Q . San Antonio-De ViedmaNt 2 
Puerto = o t 1 San Matias Guif Outh A fla \tie¢ 
= & + > Valdes O 
4 .  &§ Puerto Madryn, Peninsula cea 
Chiloe - 
Los Chonos 7. 
archipelago” 
modoro Rivadavia 
+ San Jorge Guif 
Caleta Dina 
Lake 
Buenos hikes : ‘ F ’ 
penas Gul peRsTO) MORENO NP —— Argentina 
Naor = eg? 
5 political map 
kK es 
wettingtor a l = Natianol park (N.P.) 
 Pybno Santa Cruz 


— 









- 
gtr} poe! 
= 2 Sable Grande FALKLAND ISLANDS 
Yacimiento i; (Great Britain) 


: q : 
f= nn Turbio =| Rio Gallegos ‘ SO SSranley 
aries <= fs a est 


International boundary 






Province ar territary 
boundary 


Road 






a er 







. = Strait of Magellan 
Raitlraad 


Naticnal capital 
— Staten Island 





J 


i c_the Beagle Channel Isiands are claimed and 
accupied by Chile Argentina also claims them 


Pravince ar terntory 
copital 


am age a " “Cape Horn » Other city or town 





200 400 600 800 1.000 Miles 


200 400 600 800 1,000 1.200 1.400 1,600 Kilometers WORLD 800K map 



















aN 3. ee, oe ee ey De Se 











J 


— 


650 Argentina 





Loren Mcintyre. CHER Agency 


An outdoor lunch in the countryside provides a pleasant 
change for this Argentine city family. Like most other Argen- 
tines, they enjoy large amounts of meat, especially beef. 


about 50,000 Indians of unmixed ancestry. Most of them 
live in isolated areas, such as the Andes, the Gran 
Chaco, and Patagonia. 

People from many European nations settled Argen- 
tina. Some Argentines trace their ancestry to the Span- 
iards who arrived during the 1500s. Others are de- 
scended from the millions of Europeans who poured 
into the country after the mid-1800s. From 1860 to 1930, 
about 45 percent of Argentinas immigrants came from 
Italy and about 30 percent came from Spain. Argentina 
also attracted immigrants from such countries as Aus- 
tria, Britain, France, Germany, Portugal, Russia, and 
Switzerland. After 1930, many immigrants came from 
Eastern Europe, especially Poland, and from the Middle 
East 

Language. Nearly all Argentines speak Spanish, the 
country’s official language. Many Argentines also speak 
a second European language and read one of the for- 
eign-language newspapers published daily in Buenos 
Aires. Some of Argentinas Indians still speak their tradi- 
tional languages. 


Way of life 


City life. About 88 percent of Argentina's people live 
in cities and towns. About 3 million people live in Bue- 
nos Aires. About 11 million reside in Greater Buenos 
Aires, making it one of the largest metropolitan areas in 
the world. Buenos Aires is the country’s chief center of 
government, commerce, manufacturing, and culture. It 
lies along the Rio de la Plata, a funnel-shaped bay. Ar- 
gentines call residents of Buenos Aires porterios, which 
means peop/e of the port. The nation’s next largest cities 
have fewer than a million people each. 

Many European immigrants to Argentina settled in 
the cities, especially Buenos Aires. The cities offered 
jobs, education, and other opportunities that enabled 
newcomers to enter the middle class. Argentina today 
has a larger middle class than do most other Latin- 
American countries. Many members of the middle class 
work in industry, own small businesses, or have govern- 
ment or professional jobs. Some live in tall, modern 
apartment buildings. Others live in bungalows that have 
small yards or gardens. Business executives and other 
wealthy Argentines live in mansions and luxurious apart- 


ments in the cities or in fashionable suburhs 

Since the 1930's, many rural workers have flocked to 
Argentina's big cities to seek work. Today. these cities 
suffer severe housing shortages, and slums have 
sprouted on their outskirts. Many slum dwellers live in 
shacks. Most of them can find only part-time work. 

Argentina's urban areas have a European look. reflect- 
ing the influence of their European settlers. Many towns 
and cities are built like Spanish cities around a main 
square called a p/aza. A cathedral and important govern- 
ment buildings face the plaza. Buenos Aires resembles a 
European capital, with its wide boulevards, balconied 
apartment houses, attractive parks, and impressive gov- 
ernment buildings. The citys many cafes, restaurants 
and elegant shops draw large crowds. In late afternoon, 
many portenos stroll along the downtown streets to 
window-shop and watch other strollers. 

Rural life. Only about 12 percent of the Argentine 
people live in rural areas. Huge ranches, called estan- 
cias, cover much of the Pampa and Patagonia. Some 
rural people work on estancias. Others own smal! farms. 
In general, country people do not live as well as city 
people. For this reason, the rural population is declining 
as farmworkers seek a better life in the cities. 

Many rural houses are built of adobe. Poorer people 
live in huts with adobe walls, dirt floors, and roofs of 
straw and mud. Larger houses may be built in the Span- 
ish style with the rooms arranged around a patio. 
Wealthy landowners have elegant country estates and 
luxurious city homes. 

During the 1800s, some of Argentina's mestizos be- 
came cowboys, known as gauchos. Gauchos caught 
wild cattle and horses on the Pampa for their hides. The 
romantic figure of the gaucho became part of Argentine 
folklore. Today, the country’s few remaining gauchos 
chiefly work as ranch hands on estancias. 

Clothing. Argentine city dwellers dress much like 
people in the United States and Canada. Some rural 
people wear distinctive clothing. For example, workers 
on estancias wear at least part of the traditional gaucho 
costume. This costume includes a wide-brimmed hat; a 
poncho (blanket with a slit in the middle for the head); 





Ennque Limbrunner Plessner International 


Hard-riding horsemen play the popular Argentine game of 
pato. Two teams of riders try to grab a six-handled ball, carry it 
down the field, and toss it into the opposing team’s basket. 


Enrique Limbrunner, Plessner International 


Argentine schoolchildren in most elementary schools wear 
uniforms, such as the white smocks worn above. Argentina pro- 
vides free public elementary and high school education. 


and loose trousers tucked into low boots. In northwest- 
ern Argentina, Indians wear ponchos, colorful shirts, 
and derbies. 

Food and drink. Most Argentines eat well. Their diet 
emphasizes meat, especially beef. Argentines prefer 
beef to fish, chicken, or lamb. Some Argentines eat beef 
at all meals. The people especially enjoy barbecues, 
such as asado con cuero, in which beef is roasted in its 
hide over an open fire. Other popular dishes include 
pucheros (stews of chicken or other meat with vegeta- 
bles) and empanadas (pastries stutfed with meat or 
seafood, eggs, vegetables, and fruit). Italian settlers in- 
troduced spaghetti and other pastas into Argentina. The 
English introduced tea time, which many Argentines ob- 
serve as they pause for a cup of tea and a snack in the af- 
ternoon. Argentina's national beverage is mate, a tea 
brewed from the dried leaves of a native holly tree. 
Mate is traditionally sipped through a straw from a 
gourd. Soft drinks have become increasingly popular. 
Argentines also enjoy the many fine local wines. 

Recreation. Great stretches of white, sandy beaches 
line Argentina's Atlantic Cuast south of Buenos Aires. 
Many Argentines enjoy seaside vacations there each 
year. The southern Aides attract skiers in winter and 
hikers and hunters in summer. The hill country around 
Cordoba is also a major vacation area. 

Soccer is Argentina's most popular sport. It draws 
thousands of fans. Another favorite is pato, in which 
horseback riders try to toss a six-handled ball into a high 
basket. Other popular sports include basketball, boat- 
ing, polo, rugby, automobile racing, and horse racing. 

Plays and motion pictures draw large crowds in 
Buenos Aires. The city’s famed Colon Theater presents 
concerts, ballets, atid operas. Portenos also enjoy meet- 
ing triends in a cate of restaurant Argentines celebrate 
religious festivals with colorful processions and fire- 
works. During carnival, a festival held before Lent, cos- 
tumed Argentines dance in the streets. 

Education. Most Argentines aged 15 or older can 
read and write. tor Argentina's literacy rate, see Literacy 
(table: Literacy rates). Argentina provides free public ele- 
mentary and high school education. The country also 
has many private schuols, which charge tuition. Children 
from 6 to 14 years old inust attend school. However, 








Argentina 651 


only a small percentage finish high school. 

Argentina has about 45 universities. The University of 
Buenos Aires is the largest university in South America. 
It has more than 200,000 students. 

Religion. Spanish colonists brought the Roman 
Catholic religion to Argentina. Many later immigrants, 
suchas Italians, were also Catholics. Today, about 70 
percent of Argentina's people belong to the Roman 
Catholic Church. However, many of them do not actively 
practice their religion. Protestants make up about 8 per- 
cent of the population. Less than 1 percent of the people 
are Jews, most of whom live in Buenos Aires. Argenti- 
na’s Jewish population is the largest in Latin America. 

The arts. During the 1800's, the Argentine cowboy— 
the free-spirited gaucho—became a symbol of the na- 
tion and its values. Gaucho legends inspired many writ- 
ers. Martin Fierro (1872, 1879), an epic poem by José 
Hernandez, became a classic of Argentine literature. It 
tells of a gaucho who rebels against society in defense 
of his liberty. Some years earlier, Domingo Faustino 
Sarmiento attacked the legend of the rebel gaucho in 
Civilization and Barbarism: Life of Juan Facundo Quiroga 
(1845). Sarmiento argued in favor of education rather 
than rebellion to shape his country’s future. During the 
early 1900's, Benito Lynch and Ricardo Giiraldes wrote 
imaginative novels about gaucho life. 

The gaucho also influenced other Argentine arts. The 
country’s first important painter, Prilidiano Pueyrred6n, 
created popular gaucho scenes during the 1800's. Dur- 
ing the early 1900's, the internationally famous classical 
composer Alberto Ginastera drew upon gaucho songs 
and dances in his early works, though he gained world- 
wide recognition for his later experimental operas. Gau- 
chos created many of Argentina's folk dances. But the 
tango, which the Argentine people regard as their na- 
tional dance, is based on the dances of a number of 


a ~ 
" 


ned 
om ee 
-_ = 
== 
_ = 
== 
-_— = 
— 


me Ban 


Ennque imbrunner Plessner Internanonal 


An enormous crowd of Roman Catholics gathers for a reli- 
gious ceremony outside the Cathedral of Our Lady of Lujan near 
Buenos Aires. About 70 percent of all Argentines are Catholics. 


652 Argentina 





countries. 

During the 1900s, Argentina's arts have dealt with 
many subjects besides folklore. Numerous Argentine 
writers, painters, and composers turned to Europe for 
new ideas and new forms of expression. They included 
the poet Leopoldo Lugones, the painter Emilio Pettoruti, 
and the composer Juan Carlos Paz. 

Several Argentine writers became internationally 
known in the mid-1900's. Jorge Luis Borges, an essayist, 
poet, and short-story writer, won wide praise for his 
brilliant use of language and original observations on 
the meaning of human existence. The novelists Ernesto 
Sabato and Julio Cortazar explored the difficulties of 


modern life. A number of Argentine sculptors and paint- 


ers also gained international recognition during the 
1900's. They included the sculptors Julio le Parc and Ali- 
cia Penalba and the painter Romolo Maccio. 


The land 


Argentina covers 1,073,519 square miles (2,780,400 
square kilometers). It stretches about 2,300 miles (3,700 





The elegant Colon theater 
in downtown Buenos Aires 
ranks as one of the world’s 
finest opera houses. It pres- 
ents concerts and ballets as 
well as operas and attracts 
large, enthusiastic audiences. 


Milt and Joan Mann 


kilometers) from north to south. The southernmost tip of 
Argentina lies only about 600 miles (970 kilometers) 
from Antarctica. The northernmost part has a nearly 
tropical climate. Argentina's landscape includes lofty 
mountains, arid deserts, vast plains, and swampy forests. 

Argentina can be divided into four main land regions. 
They are (1) Northern Argentina; (2) the Pampa; (3) the 
Andine; and (4) Patagonia. 

Northern Argentina is a lowland plain that lies east 
of the Andes Mountains and north of the Cordoba 
Mountains. It consists of two subregions: (1) the Gran 
Chaco and (2) Mesopotamia. 

The Gran Chaco, also called simply Chaco, lies be- 
tween the Parana River on the east and the lower ranges 
of the Andes on the west. It spreads northward across 
Paraguay and into Bolivia. Scrub forests cover much of 
the Chaco, and few people live in the region. The 
ground is parched by drought most of the year. But 
heavy rains fall in summer, causing riverbeds to over- 
flow. Farmers plant corn, wheat, cotton, and other crops 
in the watered land after the summer floods. 


Ennque limbrunner, Plessner International 


= PT 


Iguacu Falls, one of the most 
spectacular waterfalls in 
South America, forms part of 
the border between Argen- 
tina and Brazil. Itis about 2 
miles (3 kilometers) wide and 
plunges 237 feet (72 meters). 


Quebracho trees grow in the Chaco, and harvesting 
the trees is the area's major economic activity. Quebra- 
cho means ax breaker in Spanish. The name comes from 
the tree's very hard wood, which is used to make tele- 
phone poles and railroad ties. The tree is also a source 
of tannin, a chemical used in the leather industry. 

Mesopotamia, like its ancient Middle Eastern name- 
sake, is a fertile region between two rivers. The Argen- 
tine Mesopotamia, also called Entre Rios, lies between 
the Parana and Uruguay rivers. Along the region’s north- 
ern border, the Iguacu River empties into the Parana. 
Near the junction of the two rivers, 275 waterfalls form 
the spectacular Iguacu Falls. 

Mesopotamia has a hot, humid climate. Rolling, 
grass-covered plains spread across parts of the region. 
Farmers graze cattle, sheep, and horses on the plains 
and grow corn, flax, citrus fruits, tea, and rice. Swampy 
forests cover the extreme northeast. The holly tree 
whose leaves are used to make the tea called mate 
grows wild in the region. 

The Pampa is a fertile plain that fans out around Bue- 
nos Aires. It extends from the Atlantic Ocean to the 
Andes and covers about a fifth of Argentina. The coun- 
trys wealth comes mainly from the Pampa, which has 
some of the world’s richest topsoil. Fields of wheat, 
corn, and alfalfa cover much of the land. Great herds of 
cattle graze on the drier western Pampa. Farmers also 
raise flax and hogs on the Pampa. 

The Pampa has more than two-thirds of Argentina's 
people and most of its urban centers, industries, and 
transportation facilities. In addition to Buenos Aires, sev- 
eral other large cities stand at the edge of the Pampa. 
Beyond these cities, plains stretch as far as the eye can 
see. Large estates owned by wealthy ranchers cover 
much of the thinly settled rural Pampa. 

The Andine is the mountainous western region of 
Argentina. It consists of two subregions: (1) the Andes 
Mountains and (2) the Piedmont. 

The Andes Mountains separate Argentina from Chile. 
Their highest peaks include the tallest mountain in the 
Western Hemisphere, Aconcagua. It towers 22,831 feet 
(6,959 meters) above sea level just inside the Argentine 
border. A small Indian population raises sheep in an 





Enrique Limbrunner. Plessner International 


Opening a clearing in the Gran Chaco, a region in northern 
Argentina, requires a bulldozer. Hardwood scrub forests cover 
much of the Chaco, and few people live there. 


Argentina 653 






BRAZIL — 







Atacama 
Desert 


Chatto 
Cus, 
ex, 


NORTHERN \ 






















B3/t0 Grand 


’ 4 A aS ~ 3 4 nal 
Valparaiso A 4 Rosario” URUGUAY 


4 ES 
Buenos Airese > 


wt “ oy Montevideo 
Ss 


‘'S L, 
of “lar 
“hag, en *f9 


Bane San 
Tandil dla 




















"Mar del Plata 


Rasa Point 
1” Matias Gaul? 
Valdes Peninsula 


7131 ft. (40 m) 
below sea level 


South Atlantic 
Ocean 

~ Comodoro Rivadavia 

z Sa San J ge Sull 

Jud ‘ Cape Tres Puntas 
N. 


i 


Argentina 
terrain map 


Cape Virgenes | Internotionol boundory 


Strait of 
vd 7 ie Lond region boundory 
South oad | Tierra del Fuego 
Pacific een Solt loke | 


8 ag 
Ocean - Staten |. 


Elevation obove | 











Cape Horn seo level H 
| : 
| om City | 
t 
| oO 200 400 Miles 
er ee ] 
ce) 200 400 Kilometers i WORLD BOOK map | 
Physical features 
Aconcagua Ojos del Salado 
(mountainl .....6seccereeeecereees Cc 1 (mroutitain) .....006 cecscscccceeees 8 1 
Alto Parana Rivero... cccesc eee eeeeees 8 3 Pampa iplainl.......ccsccccscecccceces D 2 
Andes Mountalns ........0.c0ccee enone D 1 PECAGUAY RIVET... cecccncuscessee scene: A 3 
PIA. Siaiielerecivie sieictelsiciersiersiereiersie's E 1 POTARE RIVET oc. ccc scsccccccccssecese 8 3 
Bahia Blanca (bay) .........0..eceeeeee E 2 Patagonia (plateau) . 2.0.66. cece ences F 1 
Bahia Grande (bay) .............000008 G 1 Phonon 250 ttes ssckahaecemeesch: D 2 
Berrein Riven cece: « since s ciignimeriecrcts B 3 Pilcomayo River .......0cccceeeeeeeees A 2 
Berme]o River ...... cc cceeccseetecenes Cc 1 Puna (plateau) .... 0. cece cece eeeeeces 8 1 
Calalaste Rio de la Plata 
MOUMRARIOE: cccaccncsesssre nee ce tin 8 1 KEV le Bencnosonoocnonocnonn ooee D 3 
tel sferetetetetetoteistetetstetetetetet=ts c 2 we ee  JUOBTOOU DUC O IMEC OO CCUACTOR 2 
CAPCOM re fone cccsvisceseccsccisesis H 2 Salado RiVEr Wisk. vccccceeccccrvesuses D 2 
Cape San Antonlo .........0ecceeeeees D 3 Salas Meties <a veces ce'eice sisisien ss D 3 
Cape TresPuntas ....cccccccucccccuces F 2 Salinas Grandes (lakes) ..........00.. Cc 2 
ChibutQieetce.<ccceccuesceseceess E 1 San jorge Gulf; disse. .....0.0 cee eeeee F 2 
COOTHEG RIVER ens ces ccccucvesceeeses E 2 San Mattas'Gulliin os cress voccccecsess £ 2 
Cordoba Mountains ..........055.0005 Cc 2 Sarata) Cruz RiVOr soe sn ccc ec cece: G 1 
Deseado River .........cccccceeeeees F 2 Staten island) 20. . -..ccccecoceccscs H 1 
Domuyo Volcano ........6...0ccee cess o J Strait of Magellan .........0.cccccee es G 1 
os oe Gpbbien erciemieielele'si sic cs ecicss’ 8 2 Tandtl Mountains 2.0.6... ccc cece eens D 3 
APCLIT MUM eats ais ose se elsieiosis + en(ninivix «cs B 3 Tierra del F 
Lake Buenos Alres .........0.00ccecees F 1 ee Mpa ctasn ooaocodcdons0ceeene H 2 
Mar Chiquita (lake! 0.0.20. ccc cece ees Cc 2 eo Os gon coger enoscasasedne 8 3 
Mesopotamia Iplain) ............0 05006 Cc 3 MM EAPASE 6a. «cies sc sieiienixis oss Cc 1 
N@GrO RIVET 22... cc cc cccsccsccencecces E 2 Vv Perdue «oc ccccccccccescccs E 2 
Argentina... 26... ccc ccceeees 8 2 Ventana Mountains .......66660005: D 2 


Sa 


654 Argentina 





area of broad plateaus called the Puna in the northern 
part of the Argentine Andes. In the south, snow-capped 
peaks and mirrorlike lakes attract crowds of vacationers 
who come to ski and hike. 

The Piedmont is a region of low mountains and de- 
sert valleys east of the Andes. Mountain streams provide 
water for irrigation and make the Piedmont a productive 
farming area. Farmers grow sugar cane and corn hear 
Tucuman and alfalfa and cotton near Cordoba. Vine- 
yards near Mendoza and San Juan produce grapes for 
most Argentine wines. The cities of the Piedmont are the 
oldest Spanish settlements in Argentina. 

Patagonia is a dry, windswept plateau in southern 
Argentina. It occupies more than a quarter of Argentina 
but has less than 3 percent of the nation’s people. Poor 
soil and little rainfall make most of Patagonia unsuitable 
for crop farming. Sheep raising is the region's major 
economic activity. The sheep ranches are located in can- 
yons that cut across the plateau. The canyons shelter the 
ranches from windstorms. 

Most of Patagonia’s people live near its two northern 
rivers—the Colorado and the Negro. Farmers grow al- 
falfa, pears, and apples in the river valleys. Wildlife en- 





john N Yaeger. West Stock 


Ushuaia, one of the southernmost towns In the worid, is 
on Argentina's island territory of Tierra de! Fuego. This wind- 
swept island lies al Ihe extreme southern tip of South America 


| | The Andes Mountains run 
along the western border of 
Argentina. The rugged Andes 
have few settlers. However, 
small! quaniities of iron ore 
and other metals are mined in 
the region. 


Ennque Limbrunner, Plessner International 


thusiasts visit Patagonias rugged coast to see dolphins, 
penguins, sea lions, and other animals. 

The island of Tierra del Fuego lies at the southern tip 
of South America. The Strait of Magellan separates it 
from the mainland. The island is divided between Ar- 
gentina and Chile. Ushuaia, one of the southernmost 
towns in the world, is in Argentina's part of the island. 


Climate 


Argentina has a mild climate. The north has the high- 
est temperatures, and the south the lowest. Argentina 
lies south of the equator, and so its seasons are oppo- 
site those in the Northern Hemisphere. Summer lasts 
from late December to late March, and winter from late 
June to late September. January temperatures average 
about 80 °F (27 °C) in the north and about 60 °F (16 °C) in 
the far south. Average July temperatures range from 
60 °F (16 °C) in the north to 32 °F (0 °C) in the south. 

Rainfall is plentiful in northeastern Argentina but de- 
creases toward the west and south. Mesopotamia may 
receive more than 60 inches (150 centimeters) of rain a 
year, but the Piedmont and most of Patagonia generally 
receive less than 10 inches (25 centimeters). 

Winds from the Atlantic and Pacific oceans affect Ar- 
gentina’s climate. Moist air from the Atlantic can make 
summers uncomfortably humid in Mesopotamia and the 
Pampa. Winds from the Pacific lose most of their mois- 
ture over the Andes, leaving the Piedmont and Patago- 
nia dry. Winds from both oceans howl continuously 
over Patagonia. They warm the plateau in winter and 
cool it in summer. In winter, air from Antarctica some- 
times sweeps northward, bringing cold weather and 
light snow to Patagonia and the Pampa. 


Economy 


Service industries and manufacturing account for 
most of Argentina's gross domestic product (GDP} that 
is, the total value of goods and services produced within 
a country in a year. However, fertile farmland is the 
country’s most important natural resource and the basis 
of its economy. Many Argentine factories process farm 
products, such as beef, wool, and hides. And many of 
the nation’s service industries, such as transportation 
and banking, depend heavily on agriculture. 


Argentinas factories produce most of the nation’s 
consumer goods, including food, clothing, and house- 
hold equipment. But the country must import much of 
the heavy machinery and other goods it needs for pro- 
duction. 

Service industries. Government agencies have the 
greatest number of service industries workers. Schools, 
hospitals, and other institutions that provide community 
services also employ numerous Argentines. Many other 
Argentines work for businesses that engage in trade, 
such as stores, restaurants, and hotels. Other service in- 
dustries in Argentina include financial institutions and 
companies in the fields of transportation and communi- 
cations. 

Manufacturing. Buenos Aires and its suburbs have 
most of the nation’s factories. These factories include 
meat-packing plants, other food-processing establish- 
ments, and leather-making companies. Factories in the 
Buenos Aires area also include plants that manufacture 
electrical equipment, printed materials, and textiles. Fac- 
tories located in Cordoba manufacture automobiles, 
railroad cars, and other transportation equipment. The 
city of Rosario has oil refineries and plants that produce 
metal products and chemicals. 

Agriculture. The Pampa and Mesopotamia produce 
most of Argentina's leading farm products. These prod- 
ucts are beef, corn, and wheat. Sheep are raised mainly 
for their wool in dry areas throughout the country. Ar- 
gentine farms also produce other goods, including cit- 
rus fruits, cotton, flax, grapes, milk, potatoes, sorghum, 
sugar cane, sunflower seeds, and tea. 

Argentinas farms vary greatly in size. Huge estates 
spread over much of the Pampa. Owners of these es- 
tates rent land to tenant farmers and hire workers to 
tend livestock or to help with planting and harvesting. In 
the north, many families farm small plots and raise only 
enough to feed themselves. Large landholders own 
modern equipment. Other farmers rent machinery or 
use horse-drawn equipment. 

Mining. Petroleum is Argentina's most important min- 
eral resource. Oil fields that are located in Patagonia and 
the Piedmont produce almost all the country’s oil needs. 





Enrique Limbrunner Plessner Internationa! 


Meat-packing plants like this one near Buenos Aires contribute 
heavily to Argentinas industrial output. The country is a leading 
producer and exporter of beef. 





Argentina 655 


These fields also yield natural gas. Argentina produces 
small quantities of other minerals. Most of the country’s 
metal deposits lie in the Andes and the Piedmont. These 
deposits include iron ore, lead, zinc, and uranium. 

Energy. Hydroelectric plants supply more than a third 
of Argentinas electricity. Petroleum, coal, and natural 
gas also provide electric power. Argentina has two nu- 
clear power plants. 

Foreign trade. Argentinas main trading partners in- 
clude Brazil, the United States, and the countries of 
Western Europe. The development of refrigerator ships 
in the late 1800's helped Argentina become a leading 
supplier of food to Europe. Today, farm products make 
up about two-thirds of the country’s total export income. 
The chief exports include corn, iron and steel, meat, pe- 
troleum products, vegetable oils, and wheat. Argentina's 


Argentina's gross domestic product 


_ Industry 29% 


Services 65% — 


~ Agriculture 6% 


Argentinas gross domestic product (GDP) was $323,548,000,000 
in United States dollars in 1997. The GDP is the total value of 
goods and services produced within a country in a year. Services 
include community, government, and personal services; finance, 
insurance, real estate, and business services; trade, restaurants, 
and hotels; transportation and communication; and utilities. /n- 
dustry includes construction, manufacturing, and mining. Agri- 
culture includes agriculture, forestry, and fishing. 


Production and workers by economic activities 


Employed workers 


Percent 

of GDP Number Percent 
Economic activities produced ofpeople of total 
Community, government, 

& personal services 26 3,965,900 34 
Manufacturing 22 1,637,800 14 
Finance, insurance, real estate, 

& business services i7 870,700 Z 
Trade, restaurants, & hotels 15 2,141,700 
Agriculture, forestry, & fishing 6 1,471,000 
Construction 2 852,300 7 
Transportation & 

communication 3 753,600 6 
Utilities 2 106,100 in 
Mining Z 51,100 i 
Total 100 11,850,200 100 
*Less than one-half uf 1 percent 
Figures are for 199 
Suurces International Monetary Fund Internatunal Labour Office bWeorld Book estimates 
based on United Nations data 





656 Argentina 





Enrique timbrunner, Plessner International 


Argentina's petroleum industry supplies nearly all the oil the 
country needs. This oil refinery in La Plata is linked to Buenos 
Aires by a 45-mile (72-kilometer) pipeline. 


leading imports include chemicals and machinery. 

Transportation and communication. Railroads, 
highways, and air routes spread out from Buenos Aires, 
linking most of Argentina's cities and towns with the 
capital. The country’s roads carry far more people and 
freight than do the railroads. 

Air transportation has grown in importance because 
of the long distances between Argentine cities. Buenos 
Aires has two major airports. More than 50 Argentine 
cities have regularly scheduled passenger flights. 

Argentina publishes about 190 daily newspapers. 
Clarin, a privately owned newspaper published in Bue- 
nos Aires, has the largest circulation. Almost all Argen- 
tine families own one or more radios, and most families 
own a television set. 


History 


Early inhabitants. Several groups of Indians lived in 
what is now Argentina long before the first Europeans 
arrived in the 1500's. However, the region had relatively 
few Indians compared with the rest of South America. 
Tribes in the Pampa and Patagonia roamed the land in 
search of food. Farming communities developed only in 
the highlands of the northwest and the tropical forests 
of the northeast. 

European discovery and settlement. In 1516, the 
Spanish explorer Juan Diaz de Solis became the first Eu- 
ropean to reach Argentina. He landed on the shores of 
the Rio de la Plata. In 1536, Spaniards founded a short- 
lived settlement on the bay. The earliest permanent 
Spanish settlements in Argentina were made by colo- 
nists who came over the Andes Mountains from Peru. 
During the mid-1500's, they founded Santiago del Es- 
tero, Tucuman, and other northwestern mountain 
towns. Spaniards established Buenos Aires in 1580. 

Colonial days. Spain ruled Argentina for nearly 300 
years. The earliest Spanish settlers came in search of 
gold and silver. But after Spain discovered that Argen- 
tina lacked such wealth, it largely ignored the colony for 
years. At first, settlements in the northwest grew more 
rapidly than Buenos Aires and other coastal towns. The 
Spanish settlers forced many Indians in the northwest to 
work for them by farming the land and weaving wool 


into cloth. The Spaniards brought horses, sheep, and 
cattle from Spain. Soon, the settlements in northwestern 
Argentina began to supply mining towns in Peru with 
food, cloth, and animals. 

For many years, the Spanish government limited 
trade through Buenos Aires, and the city grew slowly. 
But in 1680, Portuguese settlers established a trading 
post across the Rio de la Plata from Buenos Aires. The 
Spanish government then encouraged the growth of 
Buenos Aires in order to protect its colony from Portu- 
guese expansion. 

In 1776, Spain created one large colony out of its ter- 
ritories in southeastern South America. This colony was 
called the Viceroyalty of the Rio de la Plata, or simply 
Viceroyalty of La Plata. It consisted of what are now Ar- 
gentina, Paraguay, Uruguay, and part of Bolivia, Brazil, 
and Chile. Buenos Aires became the capital of the vice- 
royalty and began to thrive as a center of trade. 

The Indian population in northern Argentina gradu- 
ally declined. Many Indians died of European diseases 
or were killed by Europeans. Others intermarried with 
the Spaniards, creating a mixed white and Indian popu- 
lation. Indians in the south, however, kept control of Pat- 
agonia and most of the Pampa. 

Independence. During the early 1800's, the people 
of Buenos Aires grew more and more dissatisfied with 
Spanish rule. In 1806 and 1807, British troops tried to 
seize Buenos Aires to establish a foothold in the region 
for British trade. The city’s residents fought them off 
without help from Spain, which increased their confi- 
dence in gaining freedom from the mother country. In 
1807 and 1808, France invaded Spain. The invasions kept 
the Spanish government busy and gave Buenos Aires a 
chance to fight for independence. 

On May 25, 1810, Buenos Aires set up an independ- 
ent government to administer the Viceroyalty of La Plata. 
But the provinces outside Argentina opposed this action 
and eventually broke away. 

Beginning in 1812, José de San Martin, an Argentine 
general, led the fight against Spain. Under his urging, 
representatives of the Argentine provinces officially de- 
clared the country's independence at the Congress of 
Tucuman on July 9, 1816. The new country became 


Important dates in Argentina 





1580 Spaniards established Buenos Aires. 
1776 Spain created the Viceroyatty of La Plata. 

1810 Buenos Aires formed an independent government. 
1816 Argentina declared its independence from Spain. 
1853 Argentina adopted a federal Constitution. 

1912 The Saenz Pena Law reformed national elections. 
1930 Army officers overthrew the elected government. 
1943 Juan Peron began his rise to power. 


1955 A mititary revolt overthrew the Peron dictatorship. Peron 
fled the country. 


1973 Peron returned to Argentina and was elected president. 
1974 Peron died. His third wife, Isabel, became president. 
1976 Military leaders removed tsabel Peron from office. 


1982. Argentina lost a war with Britain over control of the Falk- 
land Islands. 


1983 Civilian rule was restored following free elections. 








oe 





Argentina 657 


*uma ~ Peru Peru 
= Brazit Bolivia Brazil << Bolivia Brazil 
razi fazi 
Viceroyalty ee 
of Peru 
{Spain) Paraguay or Paraguay 
ray, a th > 
i i ae re | Jy 
Past United 2 P, ! 
a Provinces 4 ‘4 
fl . of, 
of La Plata 7 Argentina 7 
Uruguay ; Eraayey 
Chile ——y Chile = 
Buenos Aires Suenos Aires 
Sua Aviom 7 S A 7 a Smuath Alay 
Icea , [ 2 4 Patagonia 3 
a q Lr ( 
Islas Malvinas y J 
(Spain) a Islas Malvinas 7 Fatktand Is. 
oo va 3 (U.K) 
Boundary of present- S34 at Vy By 
day Argentina re > - re 





In 1776, Spain created a colony, the Vice- 
royalty of ia Plata, made up of what are 
now Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay, and 
part of Bolivia, Brazil, and Chile. 


known as the United Provinces of La Plata. San Martin 
wanted to expel the Spanish from all South America to 
prevent future attacks on Argentina. In 1817, he led an 
expedition across the Andes and surprised the Spanish 
troops in Chile. After their victory in Chile, his forces 
helped win independence for Peru. Argentines today 
honor San Martin as their greatest hero. 

Forming a national government. Independence 
did not bring unity to Argentina. Conflicts arose be- 
tween the people of Buenos Aires and the large rural 
landowners. Buenos Aires residents wanted a strong 
central government, which would be located in their 
city. But the landowners favored more local authority. 

In 1826, a national assembly drew up a Constitution 
for Argentina. The assembly named Bernardino de Riva- 
davia, an official in earlier governments, as the nation’s 
first president. Rivadavia resigned in 1827, however, 
after failing to create a strong national government. Juan 
Manuel de Rosas, a landowner from the Pampa, ruled 
Argentina as a dictator from 1829 to 1852. Rosas created 


In 1816, the provinces that now form 

much of Argentina declared independ- 
ence from Spain. The new country was 
called the United Provinces of La Plata. 


WORLD BOOK maps 


In 1860, Argentina took its present name. 
It gained territory in the north in 1874 
after a war with Paraguay. Patagonia be- 
came part of Argentina in 1881. 


a network of secret police to spy on his enemies and led 
violent campaigns against the Indians of the Pampa. He 
quarreled in his dealings with other nations. In 1852, 
General Justo José de Urquiza led an army revolt that 
overthrew Rosas. 

The Constitution of 1853. Delegates from all the Ar- 
gentine provinces except the province of Buenos Aires 
met in Santa Fe in 1852 to organize a national govern- 
ment. They drew up a Constitution based largely on that 
of the United States. The Constitution was proclaimed in 
1853 and established a confederation of the provinces. 
Urquiza was elected confederation president in 1853. 

The province of Buenos Aires refused to join the con- 
federation. It prospered as an independent state, helped 
by good government, large numbers of immigrants, and 
investment money from Europe. But the provinces of the 
confederation fared less well. Urquiza tried to force 
Buenos Aires to join the confederation. In 1859, he de- 
feated a Buenos Aires army led by General Bartolome 
Mitre. But in 1861, Mitre defeated Urquiza in another 


The Embrace at Mapu \1908), an oil painting by Pedro Subercaseaux Enrique Lsmbrunner, Plessner International 





José de San Martin became 
the hero of Argentina's fight 
for independence from Spain. 
The great Argentine general 
also helped win independ- 
ence for Chile and Peru. In 
this painting, San Martin, cen- 
ter right, is greeted by Chil- 
ean General Bernardo 
O'Higgins after their victory 
over Spanish forces at the 
Maipo River in Chile in 1818. 


658 Argentina 


war. The province of Buenos Aires then agreed to enter 
the confederation on its own terms in 1862. The city of 
Buenos Aires became the nation’s capital, and Mitre was 
elected president. In 1860, the country had taken the 
name Argentina. 

With the election of Mitre, Argentina began a period 
of stable government that lasted nearly 70 years. Do- 
mingo Faustino Sarmiento succeeded Mitre in 1868 and 
served until 1874. Both men tried to attract European im- 
migrants and investment to speed Argentinas growth. 
Sarmiento worked to spread public education. 

By the late 1800's, the Pampa had become the heart of 
Argentina. The last Indians had been driven from the re- 
gion, and thousands of farm workers from Europe 
worked the land. British money helped build railroads to 
carry farm products from the Pampa to Buenos Aires. 
The first refrigerator ship loaded with fresh Argentine 
meat sailed from Buenos Aires to Europe in 1877. 

Reform movements. During the late 1800s, wealthy 
Argentines controlled the government and prevented 
candidates who opposed their conservative views from 
winning elections. In 1889, dissatisfied Argentines 
formed the Union Civica, an organization that de- 
manded election reform. The Union Civica, which later 
became the Radical Party, appealed to many immigrants 
and middle-class business people. 

In 1910, Roque Saenz Pena became president. Al- 
though Saenz Pena was a conservative, he pushed elec- 
tion reforms through Congress. The legislation, known 
as the Saenz Pena Law, provided for the secret ballot 
and required every Argentine man 18 and over to vote 
and to register for army service. The law prevented the 
large landholders from controlling elections. In 1916, 
Hipolito Irigoyen, leader of the Radical Party, was 
elected president in the first honest election under the 
new law. 

Argentina's economy flourished during and after 
World War | (1914-1918). European countries increased 
their purchases of Argentine farm products. Immigrants 
and foreign investment poured into the country. Argen- 
tina ranked among the world’s wealthy nations in the 
years before the Great Depression, the worldwide busi- 
ness slump that began in 1929. 

Military dictatorships. lrigoyen was again elected 
president of Argentina in 1928, but he was too ill to gov- 
ern effectively. The next year, the Great Depression 
began to shatter the nation’s economy. Army leaders re- 
moved Irigoyen from office in 1930. Since then, military 
dictatorships have often ruled the country. 

Throughout nearly all of World War II (1939-1945), the 
Argentine government openly sympathized with the 
major Axis powers— Germany, Italy, and Japan. However, 
it declared war on the Axis nations in March 1945, 
shortly before their defeat. 

In 1943, army officers again overthrew the Argentine 
government. Colonel Juan Peron rose to power while a 
series of generals served as president. As minister of 
labor, Peron strengthened the unions. He won the sup- 
port of urban workers by giving them higher wages, 
more paid holidays, and other benefits. 

Peron was elected president of Argentina in 1946. 
Peron second wife, Eva, served as his chief assistant 
until her death in 1952. Government spending greatly in- 
creased under Peron. The government took over many 





Unned Press Int. 


Juan Peron rode in triumph with his second wife, Eva, after 
being reelected president of Argentina in 1952. He was over- 
thrown in 1955 but was again president in 1973 and 1974. 


of the nation’s industries and discouraged foreign in- 
vestment. It raised money to try to strengthen manufac- 
turing industries rapidly by taxing farm products. As a 
result, farm production dropped, and the nation’s in- 
come fell. But wages continued to rise. Peron sus- 
pended freedom of the press and freedom of speech. 
He had Argentina's Constitution changed to increase his 
powers and allow him a second term of office. 

Peron’s power declined during his second term, 
which began in 1952. He had already made many ene- 
mies. Finally, he lost the support of the Roman Catholic 
Church, after limiting its authority. In 1955, the army and 
navy revolted, and Peron fled the country. He eventually 
went into exile in Spain. 

Peron’'s attempt to strengthen manufacturing indus- 
tries rapidly at the expense of the rural economy caused 
Argentina to sufter economically. Economic problems of 
large debts, high intlation, and little growth in produc- 
tivity developed in the mid-1950's. However, support for 
Peron’s policies continued, especially among labor un- 
ions. 

New political problems. Military leaders took over 
the Argentine government after Peron’s overthrow. In 
1956, they restored the Constitution of 1853. Elections 
were held in 1958. Arturo Frondizi, leader of the Intran- 
sigent Radical Party, became president. Frondizi cut gov- 
ernment spending, limited wage hikes, and introduced 
other measures to curb inflation and reduce the nations 
debt. But the people disliked these actions, which called 
for financial sacrifices. 

Army leaders feared Frondizi would yield to pressure 
from the Peronistas {supporters of Peron) and restore 
Peron’s economic policies. They removed Frondizi from 
office in 1962. A series of civilian presidents and military 
dictators then ruled until 1972. 

During the late 1960's and early 1970s, Argentinas 
economy worsened due to poor management in gov- 
ernment and corruption in the military. The economic 
decline led to strikes, violence, and antigovernment pro- 


I OE EE 





tests. Military leaders finally allowed Peron’s supporters 
to return to power in the hope that they could restore 
order. Héctor José Campora, a Peronista, was elected 
president in 1973. Later that year, Peron returned to Ar- 
gentina, and Campora resigned. Peron was elected pres- 
ident by a wide margin, and his third wife, Isabel, be- 
came vice president. Peron died in 1974. Isabel became 
the first woman president in the Western Hemisphere. 

Problems increased after Isabel Peron took office. The 
inflation rate soared. Terrorism by both conservative 
and liberal extremists became widespread. In early 1976, 
military leaders arrested Isabel Peron, took control of 
the government, and dissolved Congress. They began a 
campaign to end leftist opposition and terrorism. In the 
process, thousands were jailed without a trial, tortured, 
and killed. Many victims have never been found. They 
are called /os desaparecidos (the disappeared ones). 

Recent developments. In the early 1980's, high infla- 
tion, declining production, and heavy government 
spending all contributed to a deepening economic cri- 
sis. The economy was further damaged by a war with 
the United Kingdom in 1982 over the Falkland Islands. 
Argentina has long claimed ownership of the Falklands, 
which lie about 310 miles (499 kilometers) east of the 
Strait of Magellan. But since 1833, the British have ruled 
the islands, which Argentines call the Islas Malvinas. !n 
April 1982, Argentine troops seized the Falklands. Ar- 
gentine and British forces fought air, sea, and land bat- 
tles for control of the territory. Argentina surrendered in 
June but did not abandon its claim to the Falklands. 

Defeat in the Falklands and mounting economic and 
political unrest forced Argentina's military rulers to call 
for free elections in October 1983. Raul Alfonsin, leader 
of the Radical Party, was elected president. Alfonsin 
promised an investigation into the actions of previous 
governments in the campaign against terrorism. In 1985 
and 1986, three former presidents and several high- 
ranking military officers were convicted and sentenced 
to prison for their involvement in murders and torture. 

Inflation worsened early in 1989. In May 1989, Carlos 
Sati] Menem, head of the Justicialist Party, was elected 
president. He introduced an emergency economic pro- 
gram designeo to solve the inflation problem. In 1991, 
his government linked the Argentine peso to the U.S. 
dollar at a rate of one peso to one dollar. This fixed ex- 
change rate, along with other measures, helped stabilize 
Argentina's economy and reduce the rate of inflation. 

In 1989 and 1990, Menem granted pardons to some 
people convicted in the mid-1980's for their involvement 
in murders and torture. Among those pardoned were 
the three former presidents who had been convicted. 

From the 1940‘s through the 1980's, Argentina's gov- 
ernment controlled such key industries as the steel mills 
and public utilities. During the 1990's, it sold many gov- 
ernment-owned businesses to private investors. 

Menem was reelected president in 1995. In his sec- 
ond term, the government borrowed heavily, and its 
debts increased. Domestic interest rates rose, and it be- 
came more expensive to do business. As a result, many 
companies had to close. Many workers lost their jobs. 
Privatization of businesses also put people out of work. 

By the late 1990's, Argentina was in a recession. Tax 
revenues dropped, and government debt increased. Ar- 
gentina’s exports and foreign investment declined. The 


Argentina 659 


fixed peso-dollar rate meant investors and buyers could 
get more for the same price in other countries. 
Fernando de la Rua, leader of the Radical Civic Union, 
was elected president in 1999. He headed an alliance of 
nis party and the smaller Frepaso Party. In 2000, his gov- 
ernment raised taxes and made massive spending cuts. 
In late 2001, many people feared that the government 
would reduce the peso’s value. They rushed to banks to 
withdraw money and convert pesos to dollars. In re- 
sponse, the government limited what people could 
withdraw each month from their bank accounts. Violent 
protests broke out, and over 25 people were killed. De 
la Rua soon resigned. An unsettled period followed, in 
which three others served temporarily as president. In 
January 2002, Congress chose Eduardo Duhalde of the 
Justicialist Party as president. He suspended payments 
on Argentina's foreign debt and ended the one-to-one 
peso-dollar link. The peso’s value fell sharply, and prices 
began to rise. Protests continued. Richard W. Wilkie 
Related articles in World Book include: 


Biographies 


Peron, Eva Duarte de 
Peron, Juan D. 
San Martin, José de 


Borges, Jorge Luis 
Drago, Luis M. 
Ginastera, Alberto 


Cities 

Buenos Aires Mar del Plata Rosario 
Cordoba Parana Santa Fe 

Physical features 
Aconcagua Ojos del Salado Patagonia 
Andes Mountains Pampa Rio de la Plata 
Gran Chaco Paraguay River Tierra del Fuego 
Iguacu Falls Parana River Uruguay River 


Magellan, Strait of 


Other related articles 


Gaucho 
Latin America 


National park (Argentina) 
South America 


Outline 


I. Government 
A. National government 
B. Local government 
C. Politics 
ll. People 
A. Population 
Ill. Way of life 
A. City life 
B. Rural life 
C. Clothing 
IV. The land 
A. Northern Argentina 
B. The Pampa 
. Climate 
. Economy 
A. Service industries 
B. Manufacturing 
C. Agriculture 
D. Mining 
Vil. History 


D. Courts 
E. Armed forces 


B. Ancestry C. Language 
D.Food and drink 
E. Recreation 
F. Education 


G. Religion 
H. The arts 


C. The Andine 
D. Patagonia 


Se 


E. Energy 

F. Foreign trade 

G. Transportation and com- 
munication 


Questions 


What is the ancestry of most Argentines? 

How did the gaucho influence Argentina’s arts? 

What is the major economic activity in Patagonia? 

How did Juan Peron s dictatorship affect Argentina? 

What are Argentina's chief exports? 

Why did the earliest Spanish settlers come to Argentina? 
What is Argentina's most important natural resource? 
Which land region has most of the industry and population? 


660 Argon 


Whom do the Argentines honor as their greatest hero? 
What caused a war between Argentina and Britain in 1982? 


Additional resources 


Fox, Geoffrey. The Land and People of Argentina Lippincott, 
1990. 
Liebowitz, Sol. Argentina Chelsea Hse., 1999. Younger readers. 


Argon, AHR gah, is a chemical element that forms 
0.94 percent of the earth's atmosphere. Most ordinary 
light bulbs are filled with argon and a little nitrogen. Ar- 
gon is also used as a shielding gas in arc welding to 
protect the metal from oxygen in the air. Lord Rayleigh 
and Sir William Ramsay discovered it in 1894. 

Argon is a colorless, odorless, tasteless gas. It does 
not react readily with other chemicals. Argon is classed 
as a noble gas (see Noble gas). Its symbol is Ar. It has the 
atomic number 18, and an atomic weight of 39.948. Its 
freezing point is — 189.2 C, and its boiling point is 
— 185.7 °C The density is .00166 gram per cubic centime- 
ter at 20 °C at sea level. Argon is continuously released 
into the atmosphere through the decay of radioactive 
potassium in the earth's crust. Frank C Andrews 
Argonaut, AHR guh naw, is an eight-armed animal 
that lives near the surface of warm seas worldwide. It 
feeds on such animals as small fish. The argonaut swims 
slowly by forcing a jet of water through its siphon, a 
tube-shaped organ under its head. Female argonauts 
may reach more than 18 inches (45 centimeters) long. 





WORLD BOOK illustration by James Teason 


The argonaut is an eight-armed animal that lives in warm sea 
waters. The male, shown here, is much smaller than the female. 


Males rarely grow more than 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) 
long. The female argonaut builds a fragile, paper-thin 
shell. Two of the female's arms have broad flaps of skin 
that release liquid shell material. The shell quickly hard- 
ens and is covered by the flaps. Female argonauts reside 
in the shell and store their eggs there. The name paper 
nautilus, often used for the argonaut, comes from this 
shell. Male argonauts make no shell. 

People once believed that the argonaut sailed on wa- 
ter by using two enlarged arms as sails. It was named af- 
ter the sailors on the Argo, a ship described in the 
Greek myth of the Golden Fleece. Brian Hartwick 


Scientific classification. Argonauts are in the family Ar- 
gonautidae. The scientific name of the greater argonaut, a com- 
mon species, is Argonauta argo. 


Argonauts, AHR guh nawts, in Greek mythology, 
were the companions of Jason, a famous hero. They 
sailed with Jason on a voyage to capture the Golden 
Fleece, the golden wool of a flying ram. About 50 of the 
greatest Greek heroes took part, including Castor and 





Pollux, Hercules, Orpheus, Peleus, and Telamon. 

The Argonauts took their name from their ship, the 
Argo. The ship had been named for its builder, Argos, 

a famous craftsman. The Argo was the longest ship built 
until that time. The goddess Athena helped in the ship’s 
construction. 

After many adventures, the Argonauts found the 
Golden Fleece in the far-off land of Kolchis. They 
brought the fleece back to Greece after surviving many 
dangers on the return voyage. Because of their success- 
ful quest, the Argonauts were honored above all other 
men. In ancient times, it was a mark of great honor to be 








WORLD BOOK map 


The voyage of the Argonauts began at lolcus. They sailed to 
Kolchis, where they captured the Golden Fleece. On the return 
trip, they traveled through much of the Mediterranean area 


able to claim that an ancestor had sailed with Jason to 
find the Golden Fleece. John Hamilton 

See also Golden Fleece; Jason; Medea. 

Argonne National Laboratory, AHR gahn, is one 
of the largest centers in the United States for research 
and development in energy technologies. It is located 27 
miles (43 kilometers) southwest of Chicago. Argonne has 
contributed greatly to the development of nuclear reac- 
tors (see Nuclear energy). 

The laboratory is also a center for high-temperature 
superconductivity materials research. This research 
deals with ceramics that become superconducting —that 
is, able to conduct electric current without resistance. 
Other fields studied at Argonne include artificial intelli- 
gence (computer programs that imitate human thinking) 
and the effects of energy production on people and the 
environment 

Argonne began as the University of Chicago's Metal- 
lurgical Laboratory, established in 1942 as part of the 
World War II Manhattan Project to produce the first 
atomic bomb. In 1946, the laboratory was moved to its 
present location and renamed Argonne National Labora- 
tory. The University of Chicago operates Argonne for 
the United States Department of Energy. Argonne also 
maintains a second site, Argonne-\West, at the Idaho Na- 
tional Engineering and Environmental Laboratory near 
Idaho Falls, Idaho. Toni Grayson Joseph 
Argus, AHR guhs, was a gigantic monster in Greek 
mythology. He had 100 eyes and was called Panoptes, 
which means a//-seeing. The goddess Hera assigned 
Argus to guard her hated rival, the beautiful Princess lo, 
a mistress of her husband Zeus (see lo). For this reason, 
the term argus is sometimes used to describe a watchful 








guardian. Acting on orders from Zeus, the god Hermes 
killed Argus, thus winning the title Argeiphontes (the 
Slayer of Argus). According to one story, Hera used Ar- 
gus 100 eyes to decorate the tail of her peacock. 

Argus or Argos was also the name of the faithful hunt- 
ing dog of the hero Ulysses in the epic poem the 
Odyssey. The dog recognized his master when Ulysses 
returned home after an absence of 20 years. Argus or 
Argos was also the builder of the Argo, the ship com- 
manded by the hero Jason. Justin M. Glenn 
Arhus, AWR hoos, also spelled Aarhus (pop. 204,139), 
is Denmark's second largest city. Only Copenhagen has 
more people. Arhus lies on the east coast of the penin- 
sula of Jutland (see Denmark [map)). Arhus is a busy sea- 
port and a center of industry and commerce. Its major 
industries include the production of iron, machines, 
clothing, chemicals, and timber. 

Arhus developed from a settlement founded in the 
A.D. 800’s. The Cathedral of St. Clemens, built in the 
1100's, is a major landmark. An open-air museum on the 
outskirts of Arhus—called Den Gamle By, or The Old 
Town—displays Danish town houses dating from the 
Middle Ages. Other sites in Arhus include a marble city 
hall and Arhus University. The city also has schools of 
art, music, dentistry, and journalism. M. Donald Hancock 
Arianism, A/R ee uh Nnz uhm, was an early Christian 
theological view taught by Arius, a priest of Alexandria, 
Egypt. About A.D. 318, Arius and his followers rejected 
the doctrine that the three Persons of the Christian Trini- 
ty—the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit—were equal. 
Arius denied that Jesus Christ, the Son and second Per- 
son of the Trinity, was completely divine. Arius taught 
that the Son was created by God the Father and was in- 
ferior to Him. According to Arius, Jesus was not eternal 
but was a superior being created by God to redeem the 
human race. Arius believed that both the Father and the 
Son were superior to the Holy Spirit. 

In 325, the Council of Nicaea condemned Arius's 
teachings as heresy and affirmed that Jesus was com- 
pletely divine (see Nicene councils). However, the view 
that Jesus Christ was not truly God continued to be 
taught in the eastern Roman Empire during the 300's. 

The Council of Constantinople condemned Arianism 
as heresy in 381, and it quickly disappeared within the 
Roman Empire. But its followers remained active outside 
the empire. Arian missionaries converted the German 
tribes of northern Europe to Christianity in the 300's and 
400's. After these tribes invaded the Roman Empire, they 
reintroduced Arianism. Arian teachings received sup- 
port until the 600’s, when the last German tribes were 
converted to orthodox Christianity. William J. Courtenay 

See also Arius; Constantine the Great; Trinity. 

Arias Sanchez, AH rahs SAHN chehz, Oscar (1941- 

), served as president of Costa Rica from 1986 to 
1990. He became best known for his work for peace in 
Central America. 

During the 1980's, widespread fighting took place be- 
tween rebel forces and the governments of Nicaragua 
and El Salvador. Arias negotiated with other Central 
American presidents on a plan to promote peace in the 
region. Their 1987 plan, which was known as the Arias 
Peace Initiative, called for an end to the fighting in Cen- 
tral America. Arias won the 1987 Nobel! Peace Prize for 
his leadership in developing the plan. However, some 





Arikaralndians 661 


Costa Ricans accused him of paying too much attention 
to foreign affairs while neglecting his own country. 

Arias was born in Heredia. He attended the University 
of Costa Rica, and he taught there from 1969 to 1972. 
Arias served in the legislature of Costa Rica from 1978 to 
1981. He belongs to the National Liberation Party. 

Steve C Ropp 
Aries, A/R eez, is the first sign of the zodiac. It is sym- 
bolized by a ram. Astrologers believe that Aries is ruled 
by the planet Mars, which is named for the ancient Ro- 
man god of war. Aries is a fire sign. 

Astrologers regard people born under the sign of 
Aries, from March 21 to April 19, as active, strong, and 
fierce-tempered. Arians often seem to be in a hurry. 
They like excitement and variety, and they tend to lose 
interest in tasks that require much time. Arians also like 
to compete and are excellent athletes. In addition, they 
do well as fire fighters, soldiers, and surgeons and in 
other occupations that require physical skill. 

Christopher McIntosh 

See also Astrology; Horoscope; Zodiac. 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Robert Keys 


Signs of 

the Zodiac 
Aries 

March 21-April 19 
Taurus 

April 20-May 20 
Gemini 

May 21-June 20 


Cancer 
June 21-July 22 


Aries-The Ram 


Leo 

July 23-Aug. 22 
Virgo 

Aug. 23-Sept 22 
Libra 

Sept 23-Oct 22 


Scorpio 

Oct. 23-Nov. 21 
Sagittarius 

Nov. 22-Dec. 21 
Capricom 

Dec. 22-Jan. 19 
Aquarius 

Jan. 20-Feb. 18 
Pisces 

Feb. 19-March 20 


Birth dates: March 21-April 19. 
Group: Fire. 

Characteristics: Bold, courageous, 
determined, energetic, hot- = 
tempered, impatient 


Arikara Indians, uh RIHK uh ruh, are a tribe that 
once lived in villages along the Missouri River. They 
were farmers and buffalo hunters. Today, about 3,000 
descendants of the Arikara, the Mandan, and the Hidatsa 
live on the Fort Berthold Reservation in North Dakota. 
The three tribes have intermarried so much that they 
now Call themselves the Three Affiliated Tribes. 

The name Arikara comes from an Indian word mean- 
ing horns. The term refers to the Arikara’s custom of 
wrapping their hair around two pieces of bone so that it 
stood up like horns. The tribe's name in sign language 
was corn eaters. The Arikara grew corn and traded it to 
neighboring tribes for buffalo robes and furs. 

Corn played an important role in the Arikara religion. 
The tribe held ceremonies throughout the growing sea- 
son to ensure a plentiful harvest. They preserved some 
of the finest ears of corn for many years and honored 
them as sacred objects. The Arikara lived in earth- 
covered lodges, each of which housed several families. 


662 Ariosto, Ludovico 


In the mid-1700's, French explorers became the first 
white people to encounter the Arikara. The Arikara were 
numerous and powerful. They fought frequently with 
French and American traders and settlers. During the 
late 1700's, many Arikara died in battles with the Sioux, 
who finally drove them from their home. Smallpox killed 
many more members of the tribe in 1837. In 1862, the re- 
maining Arikara settled with the Mandan and the Hidat- 
sa near Fort Berthold in what is now North Dakota. The 
United States government established the area as a res- 
ervation for the three tribes in 1870. Douglas H. Ubelaker 

See also Mandan Indians. 

Ariosto, 4H ree AWS toh, Ludovico, 100 doh VEE 
koh (1474-1533), was a poet of the Italian Renaissance. 
His masterpiece, Orlando Furioso (published in 1516, re- 
vised in 1521 and 1532), is a long narrative poem depict- 
ing the struggle between the Christians and Arab- 
Muslim tribes called the Saracens. Its complicated plot 
tells stories of knights who travel the world seeking ad- 
venture, defending their religious faith, and aiding vic- 
tims in distress. !n the poem, Ariosto perfected the strict 
eight-line stanza called ottava rima. He also perfected 
the chivalric romance that combines stories about the 
knights of Charlemagne with those about the knights of 
King Arthur. He wrote with a robust humor that is pres- 
ent even in the most serious episodes. It influenced the 
works of such English authors as John Milton, William 
Shakespeare, and Edmund Spenser. 

Ariosto was born in Reggio. In addition to poetry, he 
wrote satire and scholarly plays. Richard H. Lansing 
Aristarchus, af (h STARR kuhs, of Samos, was a 
Greek astronomer who lived in the 200s B.C. He was the 
first to state that the earth revolves around the sun. How 
he justified this claim is unknown. His writings on the 
subject have not come down to us, but his idea was 
quoted by Archimedes, the Greek mathematician. In 
Aristarchuss surviving treatise, On the Magnitudes and 
Distances of the Sun and Moon, he said nothing about 
his theory of the earth's motion. A. Mark Smith 
Aristide, 4R uh STEED, Jean-Bertrand, zhahn behr 
TRAHN(1953- _), became the first democratically 
elected president of Haiti. He was elected president in 
December 1990. He took office in February 1991 but was 
overthrown by military leaders in September. Aristide 
then fled the country. Despite international pressure, 
Haitis military leaders refused to allow Aristide to re- 
turn. Then, in September 1994, the United States began 
sending troops to Haiti as part of an operation backed 
by the United Nations (UN). The operation was designed 
to force the Haitian military leaders to restore a demo- 
cratic government on the island. The military leaders 
soon gave up control of the government, and in Octo- 
ber, Aristide returned to Haiti as president. 

Haiti's Constitution bans presidents from serving two 
terms in a row, and Aristide left office at the end of his 
term in February 1996. But he remained active in politics. 
He was elected to the presidency again in 2000. 

Aristide was born in poverty in Port-Salut, Haiti. He 
became a Roman Catholic priest in the Salesian Order in 
1982. He rose to prominence by speaking out against 
the dictatorship of President Jean-Claude Duvalier, par- 
ticularly the oppression of the poor. Aristide’s rising 
popularity made him the target of several assassination 
attempts by the government. In 1988, the Salesians 


banned Aristide from preaching, claiming that his teach- 
ings advocated violence. Aristide resigned from the 
priesthood in 1994. Patrick Bellegarde-Smith 

Aristides, 4r th STY deez (530?-468? B.C), called the 
“Just,” was an Athenian statesman and military leader. He 
was a rival of Themistocles, who wanted to make Athens 
a naval power. Aristides thought it best to maintain a 
powerful land force because the army, rather than the 
naval forces, had defeated the Persians at the battle of 
Marathon in 490 B.C. The issue between them was de- 
cided by the people about 483 B.C According to cus- 
tom, the Athenians voted on whether Aristides or 
Themistocles should be ostracized (banished). Each vot- 
er wrote one of the names on an ostracon (piece of pot- 
tery). Because of Themistocles's great influence with the 
people, Aristides lost the vote, and was exiled. 

Aristides remained loyal to Athens. In 480 B.C, he 
warned the city that the armies of Xerxes, king of Persia, 
were coming. He joined Themistocles at the battle of 
Salamis, and helped the Greek victory there by forcing 
the Persians off Psyttalea, an island near Salamis, with 
troops he had raised (see Salamis). He was called back 
from exile and appointed general in 479. From then on, 
Aristides was the most powerful leader in Athens. In 477 
B.C, the Delian League was formed to free and protect 
Greek colonies in Asia Minor from Persian rule. Aris- 
tides decided the amount of money and number of 
ships each city should give the league. He decided that 
each should give according to its ability to pay. Aristides 
himself served without pay. When Aristides died, the 
state paid for his burial. Jennifer Tolbert Roberts 

See also Themistocles. 

Aristocracy, 4k uh STAHK ruh see, is a high social 
class that often used to include the government leaders 
of a state or nation. Its members claim to be, or are con- 
sidered by others to be, superior to other people in the 
society because of family ties, social rank, wealth, or 
ability. Historically, the word aristocracy referred to a 
form of government controlled by a few wealthy or so- 
cially prominent citizens. The word comes from the 
Greek term meaning rule by the best 

Many aristocrats have inherited titles of nobility, such 
as duke or baron. These titles were usually given to their 
ancestors by monarchs because of their wealth or serv- 
ice to the state. In most cases, people were accepted 
into aristocracy because they owned much land. 

In ancient times, aristocracies controlled the govern- 
ments of Greece and Rome. In modern times, they ruled 
Britain, Japan, Russia, and Germany. By the time of 
World War | (1914-1918), the idea that all people are 
equal had gained influence in many nations through de- 
mocracy and socialism. As a result, the role of aristocra- 
cies in government declined sharply. Alexander J. Groth 
Aristophanes, ar ih STAHF uh neez(445?-385? B.C), 
was the greatest ancient Greek writer of comedy. His 
plays combine fantasy, rollicking wit, and graceful lyrics 
with serious criticism of politics, manners, education, 
music, and literature. He was a master of song and 
rhythm, and he had a rich imagination. 

Aristophanes's comedies provide the best picture we 
have of Athenian life during its most interesting period. 
They also provide some of the earliest and best exam- 
ples of political and social satire. Aristophanes began to 
produce comedies before he was 20. He wrote more 





a aoe 


than 40 plays, and 11 have survived. They are Acharnians 
(425 B.C), Knights (424), Clouds (423), Wasps (422), Peace 
(421), Birds (414), Lysistrata (411), Thesmophoriazusae 
(411), Frogs (405), Ecclesiazusae (393 or 392?), and Plutus 
(388). 

Aristophanes most popular plays are Frogs, which 
criticized Euripides; Clouds, which satirized Socrates; 
Birds, a fantasy about a city in the sky; and Lysistrata, a 
partly farcical play in which the women of Greece force 
their husbands to stop warring against each other. 

Luci Berkowitz 

See also Drama (Old comedy); Euripides; Socrates. 
Aristotle, AR ih stant ul (384-322 B.C), a Greek phi- 
losopher, educator, and scientist, was one of the great- 
est and most influential thinkers in Western culture. Ar- 
istotle was probably the most scholarly and learned of 
the classical or ancient Greek philosophers. He familiar- 
ized himself with the entire development of Greek 
thought preceding him. In his own writings, Aristotle 
considered, summarized, criticized, and further devel- 
oped all the intellectual tradition that he had inherited. 
Aristotle and his teacher Plato are usually considered to 
be the most important ancient Greek philosophers. 


Aristotle’s life 


Aristotle was born in Stagira, a smal! town in northern 
Greece. His father, Nichomachus, was the personal phy- 
sician of Amyntas Il, the king of nearby Macedonia. 
Amyntas was the father of Philip of Macedonia and the 
grandfather of Alexander the Great. Aristotle's parents 
died when he was a boy, and he was then raised by a 
guardian named Proxenus. 

When Aristotle was about 18 years old, he entered 
Plato's school in Athens, known as the Academy. He re- 
mained there for about 20 years. Plato recognized Aris- 
totle as the Academy's brightest and most learned stu- 
dent, and called him the “intelligence of the school” and 
the “reader.” 

When Plato died in 347 B.C, Aristotle left the Acad- 
emy to join a group of Plato's disciples living with Her- 
meias, a former student at the Academy. Hermeias had 
become ruler of the towns of Atarneus and Assos in 
Asia Minor. Avistotle stayed with Hermeias for about 
three years and married the ruler’s adopted daughter, 
Pithias. 

In 343 or 342 B.C, Philip Il, king of Macedonia, invited 
Aristotle to supervise the education of his young son AlI- 
exander. Alexander later conquered al! of Greece, over- 
threw the Persian Empire, and became known as Alexan- 
der the Great. Alexander studied under Aristotle until 
336 B.C,, when the youth became ruler of Macedonia 
after his father was assassinated (see Alexander the 
Great [His youth)). 

About 334 B.C, Aristotle returned to Athens and 
founded a school called the Lyceum. Aristotle's school, 
his philosophy, and his followers were called peripa- 
tetic, taken from the Greek word meaning wa/king 
around, because Aristotle taught while walking with his 
students. See Lyceum; Peripatetic philosophy. 

Soon after Alexander died in 323 B.C, Aristotle was 
charged with /mpiety (lack of reverence for the gods) by 
the Athenians. They probably resented his friendship 
with Alexander, the man who had conquered them. Aris- 
totle had not forgotten the fate of the philosopher Soc- 


Aristotle 663 





Aristotle Contemplating the Bust of Homer (16533), an oil painting 
on canvas; the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City 


Aristotle, a Greek philosopher, gazes at a statue of the Greek 
poet Homer in this painting by the Dutch artist Rembrandt. 


rates, condemned to death on a similar charge by the 
Athenians in 399 B.C. He fled to the city of Chalcis so the 
Athenians would not, as he said, “sin twice against phi- 
losophy.” He died in Chalcis a year later. 


Aristotle's writings 


Aristotle's writings are usually divided into three 
groups: {1) popular writings, {2) memoranda, and (3) trea- 
tises. 

The popular writings were mostly dialogues modeled 
on Plato's dialogues and produced while Aristotle was 
still at Plato’s Academy. These works were intended for a 
general audience outside the school, rather than for phi- 
losophers at the school. For this reason, Aristotle re- 
ferred to them as his exoteric writings (evo- means out- 
side in Greek). These writings have not survived, but the 
works of later writers include many references to them 
and quotations from them. 

The memoranda were largely collections of research 
materials and historical records. Prepared by Aristotle 
and his students, they were intended as sources of in- 
formation for scholars. With few exceptions, the memo- 
randa, like the popular writings, were lost. 

The treatises make up nearly all of Aristotle's surviv- 
ing writings. They were probably written for use either 
as lecture notes or as textbooks at the Lyceum. Unlike 
the popular works, the treatises were intended only for 
students /n the school. Thus, the treatises are called Ar- 
istotle’s esoteric works (eso- means inside in Greek). 


Aristotle’s philosophy 


Logic. Aristotle's works on logic are collectively 
called the Organon, which means instrument, because 
they investigate thought, which is the instrument of 
knowledge. The Organon includes The Categories, The 
Prior and Posterior Analytics, The Topics, and On Inter- 
pretation. Aristotle was the first philosopher to analyze 


664 Aristotle 


the process whereby certain propositions can be logi- 
cally inferred to be true from the fact that certain other 
propositions are true. He believed that this process of 
logical inference was based on a form of argument he 
called the sy//ogism. in a syllogism, a proposition is ar- 
gued or logically inferred to be true from the fact that 
two other propositions are true. For example, from the 
facts that (1) all people are mortal and (2) Socrates is a 
person, it can be logically argued that (3) Socrates is 
mortal. The syllogism continued to play an important 
role in Jater philosophy. See Logic. 

Philosophy of nature. For Aristotle, the most striking 
aspect of nature was change. He even defined the phi- 
losophy of nature in his Physics as the study of things 
that change. Aristotle argued that to understand change, 
a distinction must be mace between the formand mat- 
ter of a thing. For example, a sculpture might have the 
form of a human being, and bronze as its matter. Aristo- 
tle believed that change essentially consists of the same 
matter acquiring new form. In our example, change oc- 
curs if the bronze sculpture is molded into a new form. 

To better understand change, Aristotle studied its 
causes. He distinguished four kinds of causes: (1) materi- 
al, (2) efficient, (3) formal, and (4) final. The material cause 
of the sculpture is the material of which it is made. Its ef- 
ficient cause is the activity of the sculptor who made it. 
Its formal cause is the form in which the bronze is mold- 
ed. Its final cause is the plan or design in the sculptors 
mind. 

Aristotle studied movement as a kind of change and 
wrote about the movement of the heavenly bodies in On 
the Heavens. \n On Coming-to-be and Passing-away, he 
investigated the changes that occur when something 
seems to be created or destroyed. 

Aristotle's philosophy of nature includes psychology 
and biology. In On the Soul, he investigated the various 
functions of the soul and the relationship between the 
soul and the body. Aristotle was the world’s first great 
biologist. He gathered vast amounts of information 
about the variety, structure, and behavior of animals and 
plants. Aristotle analyzed the parts of living organisms 
teleologically, that is, in terms of the purposes they 
serve. 

Metaphysics. In his Metaphysics, Aristotle tried to 
develop a science of things that never change and inves- 
tigate the most general and basic principles of reality 
and knowledge. Since the most important of these un- 
changing things is God, Aristotle sometimes called this 
science theology, the study of God. He also called this 
branch of his philosophy first philosophy, because of its 
fundamental importance. Aristotle himself never used 
the name metaphysics, which literally means after the 
physics. This name was given to the work centuries later 
simply because it followed the Physics in the written edi- 
tion of Aristotle's works. But the word metaphvsics has 
now come to mean any philosophic study of the basic 
principles of reality and knowledge. 

Ethics and politics. For Aristotle, ethics and politics 
both study practical knowledge, that is, knowledge that 
enables people to act properly and live happily. Aristo- 
tle’s works on this subject include the Nicomachean 
Ethics and the Politics. 

Aristotle argued that the goal of human beings is hap- 
piness, and that we achieve happiness when we fulfill 


our function. Therefore, it is necessary to determine 
what our function is. The function of a thing is what it 
alone can do, or what it can do best. For example, the 
function of the eye is to see, and the function of a knife 
is to cut. Aristotle declared that a human being is “the ra- 
tional animal” whose function is to reason. Thus, accord- 
ing to Aristotle, a happy life for human beings is a life 
governed by reason. 

Aristotle believed that a person who has difficulty be- 
having ethically is morally imperfect. His ideal person 
practices behaving reasonably and properly until he or 
she can do so naturally and without effort. Aristotle be- 
lieved that moral virtue is a matter of avoiding extremes 
in behavior and finding instead the mean between the 
extremes. For example, the virtue of courage is the mean 
between the vices of cowardice at one extreme and 
foolhardiness at the other. Similarly, the virtue of gen- 
erosity is the mean between stinginess and wasteful- 
ness. 

Literary criticism. Aristotle's Poetics has probably 
been the single most influential work in all literary criti- 
cism. The Poetics examines the nature of tragedy, and 
takes as its prime example Sophocles tragedy Oedipus 
Rex Aristotle believed that tragedy affects the spectator 
by arousing the emotions of pity and fear, and then puri- 
fying and cleansing the spectator of these emotions. He 
called this process of purifying and cleansing catharsis. 


Aristotle's place in Western thought 


After Aristotle's death, his philosophy continued to be 
taught at the Peripatetic school by a long line of succes- 
sors. One of these philosophers, Critolaus, went to 
Rome in 155 B.C. and gave the Romans their first contact 
with Greek philosophy. About 50 B.C, Andronicus of 
Rhodes edited Aristotle's works. This edition stimulated 
much scholarly analysis of Aristotle's philosophy, partic- 
ularly in Alexandria. From about A.D. 500 to 1100, knowl- 
edge of his philosophy was almost completely lost in 
the West. During this period, it was preserved by Arab 
and Syrian scholars who reintroduced it to the Christian 
culture of Western Europe in the 1100's and 1200's. 

Aristotle enjoyed tremendous prestige during this 
time. To some leading Christian, Jewish, and Arab schol- 
ars of the Middle Ages, his writings seemed to contain 
the sum total of human knowledge. Saint Thomas 
Aquinas, one of the most influential philosophers of the 
Middle Ages, considered Aristotle “the philosopher.” 
Dante Alighieri, perhaps the greatest poet of the Middle 
Ages, called Aristotle the “master of those who know.” 

Aristotle authority has declined since the Middle 
Ages, but many philosophers of the modern period owe 
much to him. The extent of Aristotle's influence is diffi- 
cult to judge, because many of his ideas have been ab- 
sorbed into the language of science and philosophy. 

Ivan Soll 

See also Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus; Ency- 
clopedia (The first reference works); Ethics (Plato); Phi- 
losophy (Ancient philosophy); Scholasticism. 


Additional resources 


Adler, Mortimer J. Aristotle for Everybody. 1978. Reprint Simon 
& Schuster, 1997. 

Barnes, Jonathan. Aristotle. 1982. Reprint Oxford, 1996. 

Barnes, Jonathan, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle. 
Cambridge, 1995. 





ee EE EO ele = 


eee —————_— eR te 
ere eee = eee el 





WORLD BOOK photo by Steven Spicer 


A calculator can help us with such difficult tasks as filling out a 
tax return. It is especially helpful in the addition of long strings of 
numbers and in such operations as multiplication and division. 


Arithmetic is the process of calculating by means of 
symbols called numerals. It is the part of mathematics 
that concerns how to get answers to addition, subtrac- 
tion, multiplication, and division problems. The word 
arithmetic comes from the Greek word arithmos, which 
means number. 

Mathematicians use the term number to mean an idea 
having to do with the amount or quantity of a thing or 
things. They use numera/to mean a symbol that repre- 
sents a number. For example, the numerals 6 and VI 
stand for the number also represented by the word six. 
But in everyday language, numberis also used to mean 
numeral. The rest of this article uses number in the 
everyday way. 

Many people use computers and calculators to do 
most of their arithmetic, but much arithmetic is still 
done with pencil and paper. Both methods of calculat- 
ing rely On a numeration system (a system of counting 
and naming numbers) that determines the value of a dig- 
it by its position in a number. 

The numeration system used by most people is called 
the decimal system, or base 10 system. In this system, a 
digitis any one of the symbols 0, 1, 2, 3, 4,5, 6, 7, 8, and 
9. Each position in a number with two or more digits has 
a value 10 times greater than the position to its right. 
And each position has a name that corresponds to its 
value. The positions, from right to left, are called the 
ones position, the tens’ position, the hundreds’ position, 
the thousands position, and so on. Each position has 
only one digit. 

A computer or calculator does the actual arithmetic 
with another numeration system, the binary system. 
However, in this approach, the user enters the problem 
in the decimal system, and the results are shown in the 
decimal system. This article describes various pencil- 
and-paper procedures for calculating with the decimal 
system. 


Arithmetic 665 





WORLD BOOK photo by Steven Spicer 
A pen or pencil remains the instrument of choice for many peo- 
ple when it comes to simple arithmetic, such as the addition and 
subtraction operations that keep a checkbook up to date. 


Addition 


Several methods of addition are in use today. Meth- 
ods A through C shown here work from right to left. In 
the United States and Japan, many people use method A. 
When a column of numerals adds up to 10 or more, 
write the digit in the tens’ place above the column to the 
left. In the example. in the ones’ column, 7 + 6 = 13. 
Take one 10 from the 13 and write it as 1 above the tens’ 
column. In the hundreds’ column, when you add 8 hun- 
dreds and 6 hundreds, you get 14 hundreds. Because 10 
hundreds equals 1 thousand, take 10 from the 14 hun- 
dreds and add 1 above the thousands column. 

Method B is similar to method A except that you add 
the 1 to the top number instead of just writing the 1 
above the column. Then you have to add only two num- 
bers, which for most people is much easier than adding 
three. In the tens’ column, the 4 becomes a5 when you 
add the one 10 from the ones’ column. 

In method C, all the answer is kept together on or be- 
low the line instead of part of it moving above the 
columns. If the sum of a column is 10 or more, write 1 
on the line and then add it to the sum of the next col- 
umn. In this example, you move one 10 from the 13 in 
the ones’ column into the tens’ column on the line. In 
the tens column, after adding 4 and 3 for a sum of 7, 


Addition methods (A to C) 


| 1 


3 5 
|A. B. 2847 C264 


| 

2847 7 
+3636 +3636 +3636 

6483 6483 a8 | 

— | 


666 Arithmetic 


you add the 1 to the 7 for a total of 8. Method C is easier 
than method A because you add the two numbers you 
see above the line and than just increase the sum by 1. 

Method D does not require working from right to left 
First, add each column. Write the sum at the bottom of 
each column. In the next step, modify any two-digit an- 
swer by adding the number in the tens’ position into the 
position to the left For example, take 1 thousand—that 
is, 10 hundreds—from the 14 hundreds and add it to the 
thousands’ column. The total in the thousands column 
then becomes 6. 

In method E, you add from left to right without writing 
the numbers carried to the next column. Many Euro- 
peans learn method E. Before they write a sum ina col- 
umn, they look at the next column to the right to see 
whether it adds up to 10 or more. If it does, they in- 
crease the sum of the column on which they are work- 
ing by 1. 

Methods F through H are commonly used by people 
who have not learned formal calculation techniques. 
Many people use these methods without writing down 
any of the steps. In method F, you first add the values in 
each position—the ones, tens, and so on. Then add the 
sums for all the positions to get the final answer. 

Method G breaks down the process further. You add 
the numbers in the position of highest value first. In this 
case, add the 40 from the 47 and the 30 from the 35: 

40 + 30 = 70. Then add the 7 from the 47 for a total of 
77. Finally, count on the remaining 5 from the 35. 

In method H, you adjust numbers to make them easi- 
er to add. Increase the 47 by 3 to 50. To balance the in- 
crease, decrease the 35 by 3 to 32. Then add 50 to 32. 


Subtraction 


In method A shown here, you change top numbers to 
make them larger than bottom numbers. Then you can 
easily subtract all the bottom numbers from the top 
numbers. In the example shown, the bottom number in 
the ones column, 7, cannot be subtracted from the top 
number, 3. So you take one 10 from the top number in 
the tens’ column and add it to the ones’ position in that 
number. This addition changes the number in the ones’ 
position from 3 to 13. In the hundreds’ column, you can- 
not subtract 8 hundreds from 4 hundreds. So you make 
the 4 hundreds bigger by adding to it one of the thou- 
sands, or 10 hundreds, to make 14 hundreds. 

Method A can be used in two ways. In the easier way, 
you adjust top numbers so that every top number is 
larger than the number below it. Then you do all the 
subtraction. You can work from left to right or from right 
to left. In a more difficult technique, you work one col- 
umn at a time, starting at the right. You adjust the top 
number if necessary, then subtract. Schools in the Unit- 
ed States commonly teach this technique. 

A comparison of subtraction method A and addition 
method D shows how addition and subtraction are op- 
posite procedures. When doing addition, you can get 
too many digits in one position and therefore have to 
add one 10 of the quantity corresponding to that posi- 
tion to the place to the left. When doing subtraction, if 
you do not have a large enough number from which to 
subtract, you have to take one 10 of the quantity corre- 
sponding to that position from the place to the left 

Method B is similar to method A, but when you take 


Addition methods (D to H) 


D. 2847 E.2847 
“rsh lo Ble +3636 
514713 6483 

6 4 8 3 












h. 47+ 35 = 70 + [Zee 
G. 47 + 35 = 40 + 30—970—977-%78, 79, 80, 81, 82 
H. 47 39'= "90 fo2 2 


10 from the left position, you write it as 10. There are 
two ways to use method B. In the example shown, if you 
split the 7 in the ones’ column into 3 and 4, you can easi- 
ly subtract 3 from the 3 to get 0. Then you can subtract 
the 4 from the 10, which leaves 6. Another approach is 
to take the entire bottom number from the 10: 10 —7 = 
3. Then add the difference from that subtraction to the 
top number: 3 + 3 = 6. Method B comes from Korea. 

Method C uses equal additions. You add the same 
amount to the top and bottom numbers so the differ- 
ence between them stays the same. Schools in Latin 
America and many European countries teach method C 
However, students in some countries do not write the 
1's in the top number. 

In this method, you add 10 ones to the ones’ position 
in the top number to make 13. Then you subtract 7 from 
13 to get 6. To balance the 10 ones that you added, you 
add one 10 to the bottom number in the tens’ column. 
Write a 1 representing the 10 beside the 4 in the tens’ 
position. In the tens’ column, first subtract 4 from 8:8 —4 
= 4. Then subtract the 1:4 — 1 = 3. Inthe hundreds  col- 
umn, add 10 hundreds to the 4 hundreds in the top 
number to get 14 hundreds. Then add 1 thousand to the 
2 thousands in the thousands’ column. 

Methods D and E involve working with numbers that 
have the same value positions. In method D, you sub- 
tract the 200 of the 278 from the 600 of the 634 to get 
400. Then, you subtract the remaining 78 from 400 to get 
322. Finally, you add to the 322 the 34 left over from the 
634 for an answer of 356. 

Method E is similar to addition method H. You adjust 
the numbers to make them easier to use. Adding the 
same amount to both numbers does not change the dif- 
ference between them. By adding 2 to both numbers, 


Subtraction methods (A to E) 













544 713 5 10 710 1 1 

A. 6483 B. 6483 £€6483 
yes wea 2847 
Bike Bits 3636 





D. 634—278 = 400-78 = 322 + 34 = 356 
E. 634-278 =, 636— 280 20) +3 00='S6 S306 





you get 636 and 280. The number 280 is easier to work 
with than 278. To count up from 280 to 636, you first 
count 20 to get to 300, then 300 to get to 600, and then 
36 to get to 636. Then add the numbers 20, 300, and 36 
for the total difference. 


Multiplication 


You can multiply by adding repeated copies of a num- 
ber. Method A requires only that you multiply by 10, 
100, or 1,000, and so on, and then add the resulting mul- 
tiples. Multiplying by 10 moves a number one value po- 
sition to the left. So 10 times 486 is 4,860. Multiplying by 
100 moves each number two value places to the left So 
100 times 486 is 48,600. So 324 X 486 is just four copies 
of 486, two copies of 4,860, and three copies of 48,600. 
Add all of these copies together to find the final answer, 
called the product 

In method B, you multiply each digit in the top num- 
ber, called the mu/tiplicand, by each digit in the bottom 
number, called the mu/tip/ier. In this example, 486 is the 
multiplicand and 324 is the multiplier. 

Method C is a shortcut of method B in which you mul- 
tiply the entire multiplicand by each number in the mul- 
tiplier. You begin on the right. In the example shown, 
first multiply 486 by 4. Then multiply 486 by the number 
in the tens position in the multiplier 20 < 486. And then 
multiply 486 by the number in the hundreds’ position in 
the multiplier: 300 x 486. Schools in the United States 
teach method C 


Multiplication methods 























A. 486 
x324 


B. 486 
X324 





4. 284"-O9 


486 24 (4x6) 1944 
486 ,320 (4x80) 972 
486 1600 (4X400) 1458 
486 120 (20x6) sae 
4860 1600 (20X80) 
4860 8000 (20400) 324 X486= 
48600 /1800 (300X6) 124,416 
48600 24000 (300X80) a gaa 
157464 157464 


Arithmetic 667 


Egyptians used method D more than 2,000 years ago. 
To use this doubling method, sketch a table with two 
columns. In the right column, write the multiplicand on 
top, double it, and write the doubled figure below it 
Double this second number and write it as the third 
number in the column. In the left column, write 1 on 
top, double it to 2, and write the 2 below the 1. Then 
double the 2 to 4 and write the 4 below the 2. Continue 
in this manner until the next number you would write in 
the left column is bigger than the multiplier. 

Then, choose the numbers in the left column that add 
up to the multiplier. Finally, add the corresponding val- 
ues from the right column. For example, to multiply 486 
by 324, add the values for 256, 64, and 4 because 256 + 
64 + 4 = 324. The result is the following: 124,416 + 
31,104 + 1,944 = 157,464. 

Method E has been used in Arab nations, China, India, 
Japan, and Western Europe. First, draw a rectangle and 
divide it into rows and columns. Divide each resulting 
square by a diagonal line running from top right to bot- 
tom left. Write the multiplicand, 486, across the top, and 
the multiplier, 324, down the right side. Write the prod- 
uct of each row and column in the square for that row 
and column. Place the tens part of the product in the top 
triangle and the ones part in the bottom triangle. 

Then add from right to left Begin by writing below 
the square the number in the lower right triangle—in 
this case, a 4. Then, add the numbers in the diagonally 
arranged group of triangles that are above and to the 





668 Arithmetic 


left—in the example, the three 2's. You continue in this 
manner. If a sum has two digits, write the tens’ digit 
above the top triangle of the next group. Include that 
digit when you calculate the sum for that next group. 

In the example, the shaded 2 + 2 + 2 = 6 consists of 
the first group of triangles and its sum. The shaded 2 + 
1+4+1+8+1=7consists of the tens digit from 
the second group (the 2), the numbers in the entire third 
group (the 1, 4, 1,8, and 1), and the ones’ digit of the 
sum of those six numbers (the 7). The answer to the 
problem runs from the square’s top left side to its bot- 
tom right. 

Division 

Method A shows the basic method of division. In this 
method, you take away copies of the divisor {the num- 
ber by which you are dividing) in multiples of 1, 10, 100, 
and so on. You continue taking away copies until you 
use up the dividend (the number you are dividing) and 
therefore cannot take away any more copies. The an- 
swer is called the quotient There is also usually an 
amount left over called the remainder. Method A for di- 
vision is the opposite of method A for multiplication. 


Division methods 









A. 486/157467 B. 486/157467 




































































































48600 100 97200 200 
108867 60267 
48600 100 48600 100 
60267 11667 
48600 100 9720 20 
11667 1947 
4860 10 972 zZ 
6807 975 
4860 10 972 2 
1947 remainder 3 324 
486 ] 
1451 
486 | E, First T 
2B 1Z6 
ae ; 486 XB7A64 3 
186 1 KAKBB 
remainder 3 324 
Second 1 
Te a 
C. 486/157467 x9 
1458 XZ BA 
1166 486 VE7HB4 32 
Te NA BBL 
1947 a7 
1944 
3 remainder 
Third X 
D. 157464 (486 ae 
1166 324 YZBA 
1944 486 X27 ABA 324 
0 NA BBELZH 
SAR 
AZ 





Method B resembles division method A, but you take 
away more than one set of each multiple at a time. You 
do not need to take away all the sets of a given size in 
the first try. In the example shown, 3 sets of 100 copies 
of the divisor could have been taken away in the first try. 
But actually, 2 sets of 100 copies, then 1 set of 100 
copies, were taken away. 

In method C, you must take away all the sets of a giv- 
en size in the first try. In the example, you must begin by 
taking away 3 sets of 100 copies of the divisor. Schools 
in the United States usually teach method C 

Method D is an abbreviation of method C. It comes 
from Argentina and other Latin American countries. 
Write the divisor on the right, the dividend on the left, 
and the quotient below the divisor. When you subtract 
from the dividend, write down only the answer to that 
subtraction. 

Method E became widespread in Europe in the 
1400's. It began in India, where the calculations were 
written in sand. Method E resembles method C, except 
that you write the results of subtraction above the divi- 
dend instead of below. This method is shown in three 
steps to show how it works. The work for each step is 
shaded. Each number is scratched out as it is used. 

In the first step, multiply 486 by 3. Write the first part 
of the quotient—3—to the right and the answer—1,458— 
below the dividend. Then subtract 1,458 from 1,574. 
Work from left to right {5 — 4 =1 and 7 —5 = 2), writing 
the remainder above the dividend. To make a subtrac- 
tion in the hundreds’ column, you need to change the 
thousands column. Take 1 from the 2, crossing out the 2 
and writing the resulting 1 above it. The 1 that you took 
away from the thousands’ column becomes a 10 in the 
hundreds’ column. Mentally add the 10 to the 4 inthe 
hundreds’ column, then subtract 8 from 14. 


Arithmetic of small fractions 


The addition and subtraction of fractions that are 
smaller than 1 is similar to the addition and subtraction 
of whole numbers {numbers that are not fractions). 
There is a major difference, however, between the mul- 
tiplication and division of fractions less than 1 and the 
multiplication and division of whole numbers. 

In multiplication, when the multiplier is a whole num- 
ber larger than 1, the product is larger than the multipli- 
cand. For example, 2 X 3 = 6. However, when the multi- 
plier is a fraction less than 1, the product is smaller than 
the multiplicand. This result occurs because multiplying 
a number by a fraction less than 1 means taking a part of 
that number. For example, + X 3 means taking one-half 
of 3, which is smaller than 3. 

In division, when the divisor is a whole number larger 
than 1, the quotient is smaller than the dividend. For ex- 
ample, 6 + 3 = 2. However, when the divisor is a frac- 
tion less than 1, the quotient is larger than the dividend. 
This result occurs because dividing a number by a frac- 
tion less than 1 means finding out how many of that frac- 
tion are in the number. For example, 3 + + means, “How 
many One-halves are in 3?" There are 6, and 6 is a bigger 
number than 3. 


Arithmetic of negative numbers 


Negative numbers help describe things that have op- 
posite values, such as wins and losses or income and ex- 


i — 


a i te 
di 


—w 


penses. Negative numbers also help describe measure- 
ments whose amounts are opposite in direction—tem- 
peratures above and below zero degrees or heights 
above and below sea level. One value or direction is 
considered to be positive and the opposite value or di- 
rection negative. Positive numbers have a plus sign; neg- 
ative numbers, a minus sign. 

Because negative numbers are the opposite of posi- 
tive numbers, the arithmetic of negative numbers differs 
from that of positive numbers. Adding two positive 
numbers makes a bigger positive number, and adding 
two negative numbers makes a bigger negative number. 
But when a positive number and a negative number are 
added, the smaller number cancels that much of the big- 
ger number. Whether the sum is positive or negative 
depends on the sign of the bigger number. If the bigger 
number is positive, the sum is positive. If the bigger 
number is negative, the sum is negative. Adding a nega- 
tive number is equivalent to subtracting a positive num- 
ber of the same size. 

Subtracting a negative or a positive number from a 
number of opposite sign is the same as adding the op- 


posite kind of number. For example, 10 — (—5) = 15 just 
ast — 15, And —10 — (+5) = —15 just as —10 + 
(—5) = —15. Therefore, subtraction does not always re- 


sult in a smaller number. If you subtract a negative num- 
ber from a positive number, you will get a larger num- 
ber because taking away the negative value provides 
that much more of the positive value. 

Multiplying by a positive number can be thought of as 
repeated addition. Repeatedly adding a negative num- 
ber results in a larger negative number: 8 X (—3) = —24. 
Multiplying by a negative number can be thought of as 
repeated subtraction. Repeatedly subtracting a positive 
number also gives a larger negative number —3 X (+8) 
= —24. However, repeatedly subtracting a negative 
number gives a positive number. Thus, when the signs 
of the numbers are opposite, a negative number results. 
When the signs are the same, a positive number results. 

Divisicn is the opposite of multiplication. Therefore, 
to determine the sign of a quotient, you can convert the 
division problem to a multiplication problem. For exam- 
ple, you can convert —24 + 8 = ?to 8 X ? = —24. You 
know that multiplying a positive number by a negative 
number results in a negative number. Thus, the number 
represented by the question mark in the multiplication 
problem—and the division problem—must be negative. 

General rules for division are: Dividing opposite kinds 
of numbers, one positive and one negative, results in a 
negative quotient. Dividing like kinds of numbers, both 
positive or both negative, yields a positive quotient 


History 


Calculation tools. During most of human history, 
few people used written numbers to calculate. Many nu- 
meration systems were difficult to use, especially for 
multiplication and division. Writing materials were also 
expensive until the mid-1800’s, when machine-made 
wood pulp paper became available. 

Most ancient people used calculating objects, such as 
pebbles and sticks. An individual manipulated the ob- 
jects on a board, a cloth, or some other surface. Lines 
drawn on the surface helped the individual distinguish 
columns or rows that had different numerical values. 


Arius 669 


People living in western Africa used a type of small 
seashell called a cowrie shell for their calculations. The 
Inca of South America calculated with kernels of wheat 
on a board. The ancient Greeks and Romans used 
stones on wood or marble tables. The Chinese and 
Japanese used small bamboo or wooden reckoning 
sticks on a board divided into columns. Later, the use of 
an abacus, a counting device with beads fastened on 
rods, became widespread in Asia and Russia. 

Mechanical calculators that used gears began to ap- 
pear in Europe in the 1600's. In the 1940's, scientists and 
engineers built electronic calculators using vacuum 
tubes. As smaller electronic components were devel- 
oped, electronic calculators became smaller, faster, and 
cheaper. By the early 1990's, inexpensive handheld cal- 
culators were available throughout the world. 

Written arithmetic methods. The decimal system of 
numeration made written calculations easy to perform. 
This system evolved in India sometime between A.D. 600 
and 900. Indian and Arabic scientists and mathemati- 
cians devised a variety of arithmetic methods based on 
the decimal system. By 1000, the Arabs had spread these 
methods throughout their empire, and the methods had 
begun to filter into Europe. 

The development of the printing press in Europe in 
the mid-1400’s enabled printers to produce inexpensive 
books. As a result, arithmetic books written in the lan- 
guages of the common people soon became available. 
Prior to that time, arithmetic was taught mostly in univer- 
sities, which used the Latin language. By the 1800's, 
young children were learning arithmetic in school in 
their own language. 

Today, the availability of calculators makes it seem un- 
necessary for older students to memorize and practice 
complicated arithmetic procedures. But it is important 
to know how to determine whether an answer obtained 
on a calculator is reasonable. Karen Connors Fuson 


Related articles in World Book. See Mathematics and its list 
of Related articles. See also: 


Abacus Decimal system Numeration sys- 
Addition Division tems 
Cancellation Fraction Subtraction 
Cuisenaire Multiplication Zero 

Method 


Arithmetic progression. See Progression (Arith- 
metic progression); Series. 

Arius, AIR ee uhs or uh RY uhs (A.D. 2562-336), was a 
priest of Alexandria, Egypt, who founded an early Chris- 
tian theological view called Arianism. About A.D. 318, 
Arius challenged the doctrine that the three Persons of 
the Christian Trinity—the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Spirit—were equal. Arius taught that God the Father 
ranks above the Son, who is Jesus Christ, and that both 
rank higher than the Holy Spirit. 

In about 318, Bishop Alexander of Alexandria con- 
demned Ariusss teachings as heresy and excommunicat- 
ed him. But Arius continued to teach and attracted many 
followers. To settle the dispute, the Roman emperor 
Constantine the Great called a general church council in 
Nicaea (in what is now Turkey) in 325. The council also 
condemned Ariuss views. It issued the Nicene Creed, 
which states that the Son is fully divine and is equal to 
the Father. William J. Courtenay 

See also Arianism; Nicene Councils; Trinity. 





670 Arizona 


hd ere AN 


ee 
le “2 eg CS 
WY ert wa 
Bill Ross, West Light 





Orgarrpipe cactus, right foreground, grows in a desert in southern Arizona The desert, part of 
Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument, has plant and animal life found nowhere else in the 
United States. Arizona's natural beauty is preserved in numerous nationa! parks and monuments. 


Arizona Zhe Grand Canyon State 


Arizona, once thought to be an almost worthless des- sun while winter chills other parts of the United States. 
ert, has become a prosperous state of the United States. Arizona's climate attracts so many people that the 
Itis rich in farm and mineral! products, and itis growing state has become one of the nation’s fastest-growing 
rapidly in manufacturing and population. Vast irrigation areas. Between 1950 and 2000, Arizona's population 


systems transform the desert soil into rich farmland. grew by almost seven times. 

Dams built by the government or with federal funds Most of Arizona's people live in desert areas, but 

provide water to irrigate large areas of land. These dams _ _more than half the state is mountain and plateau coun- 

also generate electric power for the state’s cities and in- try. These higher, cooler areas have the largest pon- 

dustries. derosa pine forest in the United States. Large herds of 
Although the desert summers are very hot, Arizonans _ cattle graze in these regions. 

stay comfortable. They live in air-cooled homes, work in The northwestern part of the state has one of the 

air-conditioned factories, and travel in air-conditioned greatest scenic attractions in the United States—the 

automobiles. mighty Grand Canyon of the Colorado River. Arizona's 
The desert winters are warm and pleasant Arizonans, — other scenic wonders include the Painted Desert, the 

along with thousands of vacationers, enjoy the desert Petrified Forest, and numerous national parklands. 

These areas attract millions of tourists to the state each 

The contributors otf this article are Lay James Gibson, Protes- year. 

sor of Geography and Regional Development and Director of the Arizona has the third-largest Indian population in the 

Pre pe ens ll Wisse a ogt eee : paiiel hg . United States. Only Oklahoma and California have more 

We ee A, org ofOry al Ne" Indians. Indian reservations cover more than a fourth of 


Arizona's land. About 256,000 !ndians live in Arizona. 


Interesting facts about Arizona 


Arizona 671 





The planet Pluto was discovered from the Lowell Observatory 
in Flagstaff. There, Clyde W. Tombaugh discovered Pluto in 1930. 


Tucson is known as the Astronomy Capital of the World. 
No other place has as many telescopes concentrated in one area. 
About 30 are placed on mountain peaks near the city. Most are 
operated by three major observatories. Kitt Peak has the McMath 
telescope, the largest solar telescope in the world. It produces 
an image of the sun that has a diameter of about 30 inches (75 
centimeters). 





ae 
= wee 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Kevin Chadwick 
Astronomy Capital of the World 


Casa Grande, an an- 

cient ‘skyscraper’ dat- 

ing from about A.D. = 
1350, represents an 
engineering achieve- 
ment in adobe con- 
struction. The four- 
story tower, in Cool- 
idge, contains an 
11-room house. It is 

38 feet (11.6 meters) 
high. The Hohokam 
Indians built the struc- 
ture by gradually ta- 
pering it toward the top. 


Four states meet at Four Corners, the junction of Arizona, New 
Mexico, Colorado, and Utah. Highway U.S. 160 in Arizona leads 
directly to the site, which is marked by alow concrete monu- 
ment that bears the seals of the four states. 


The first organized rodeo to charge admission and award 
prizes was held at Prescott on July 4, 1888. Called a “Cowboy 
Tournament at that time, the competition marked the beginning 
of the modern rodeo as an organized spectator sport. The Pres- 
cott Rodeo has been held each year since then. 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Stephen Brayfield 
Casa Grande 








About three-tifths of them live on 21 reservations in the 
state. 

Indians have contributed much to Arizonass history. 
Some Indians still live in communities built more than 
800 years ago. Hundreds of years before Europeans ar- 
rived on the continent, Hohokam Indians in what is now 
central Arizona built the largest irrigation system in 
North America. After Europeans arrived in Arizona, the 
Indians fought to keep their rugged, beautiful land. 
Cochise and Geronimo, leaders of the Chiricahua 
Apache Indians, led war parties in Arizona long after 
most other Indians had surrendered. 

Arizonas history also includes many years of rule by 
Spanish conquerors, and by Mexicans who freed the re- 
gion from Spanish control. Today, a large number of 
Americans of Mexican ancestry live in Arizona. Their in- 
fluence is apparent in the customs, foods, and place 
names found in the state. 

Arizona derives its nickname, the Grand Canyon State, 
from its most famous physical feature. Phoenix is the 
state's capital and largest city. 


naw Cheah et ays 
i bX i Phoenix is the capital and 
pus  §=—_ largest city of Arizona. It lies 
in a desert valley surrounded 
by mountains. A corridor of 
high-rise buildings, shown 
here, extends along Central 
Avenue in the city’s business 
district 


eh 


Tom Campbell, West Ught 





John Running. Hillstrom Stock Photos 


The snow-covered San Francisco mountains rise near Flag- 


staff. Arizona's landscape provides vivid contrasts of rugged 
mountains, barren deserts, broad valleys, and deep canyons. 


Arizona in brief 





Symbols of Arizona 


On the state flag, adopted in 1917, red and 
yellow rays represent the setting sun. These 
are the colors of Spain, carried by Coronado’s 
expedition into the region in 1540. A copper- 
colored star represents the state's chief miner- 
al product The state seal, adopted in 1911, has 
symbols relating to important economic activi- 
ties, including mining, cattle-raising, and farm- 
ing. A dam and reservoir in the background : 
show the importance of water resources. State flag Staseiscad 


ee re eee 








MME loves” 





Arizona (brown) ranks sixth in size among all the states and 
third in size among the Southwestern States (yellow). 


General information 


Statehood: Feb. 14, 1912, the 48th state. 

State abbreviations: Ariz (traditional), AZ (postal). 
State motto: Ditat Deus (God Enriches.. | 

State songs: “Arizona March Song. Words by Margaret | The State Capitol is in Phoenix, the capital of Arizona since 





Rowe Clifford; music by Maurice Blumenthal. “Arizona” 1889. Earlier capitals were Fort Whipple (1864), Prescott 


Words and music by Rex Allen, Jr. (1864-1867 and 1877-1889), and Tucson (1867-1877). 


- Land and climate 


Area: 114,007 mi? (295,276 km’), including 364 mi? (943 km?) 
of inland water. 

Elevation: Highest—Humphreys Peak, 12,633 ft (3,851 m) 
above sea level. Lowest—70 ft (21 m above sea level 
along the Colorado River in Yuma County. 

Record high temperature: 128 F (53 °C) at Lake Havasu 
City on June 29, 1994. 

Record low temperature: — 40 °F (— 40 ‘© at Hawley Lake, 
near McNary, on Jan. 7, 1971. 

Average July temperature: 80 F (27 ©. 

Average January temperature: 41 ‘F (5 ©. 

Average yearly precipitation: 13 in (33 cm. 





Important dates Spaniards established a 
military outpost at Tucson. 






Coronado led a Spanish expedition Mexico ceded most of present-day Arizona to 
into the Arizona region the United States following the Mexican War. 


| 
| 
t 








State bird 
Cactus wren 


People 


Population: 5,130,632 (2000 census) 

Rank among the states: 20th 

Density: 45 per mi? (17 per km’), U.S. 
average 78 per mi? (30 per km’) 

Distribution’: 87 percent urban, 13 
percent rural 

Largest cities in Arizona 


Phoenix 1,321,045 
Tucson 486,699 
Mesa 396,375 


Glendale 218,812 
Scottsdale 202,705 
Chandler 176,581 


Source: 2000 census, except for °, where figures are for 1990. 


Economy 
Chief products 


Agriculture: beef cattle, cotton, 
lettuce, melons, milk. 

Manufacturing: computer compo- 
nents, transportation equipment, 
chemicals, fabricated metal 
products. 

Mining: copper, gold. 


Government 


State government 


Governor. 4-year term 

State senators: 30; 2-year terms 

State representatives: 60; 2-year terms 
Counties: 15 


Federal government 


United States senators: 2 
United States representatives”: 6 (8) 
Electoral votes*: 8 (10) 


‘Figures in parentheses are for January 2003 and beyond. 


Arizona became the 48th 
"a state on February 14. 





Construction began on the Central Arizona Project, 
arabe to Poe water to bar areas of the state. 


Arizona 673 





State flower State tree 
Saguaro cactus blossom Paloverde 
Population trend Year Population 


ae 2000 5,130,632 
Millions 1990 3,677,985 

: 1980 2,718,425 
1970 1,775,399 
1960 1,302,161 
1950 749,587 
1940 499,261 
1930 435,573 
1920 334,162 
1910 204,354 
1900 122,931 


1890 88,243 
1880 40,440 
1870 9,658 

1800 1820 1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 2020 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 

Gross state product appanage 


Value of goods and services pro- 
duced in 1998: $133,800,000,000. 
Services include community, busi- 
ness, and personal services; finance; 
government; trade; and transporta- 
tion, communication, and utilities. 
Industry includes construction, man- 
ufacturing, and mining. Agricu/ture 
includes agriculture, fishing, and 
forestry. 





Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 


\ 
Agriculture 2% Industry 22% 


Sources of information 


For information about tourism, write to: Arizona Office of 
Tourism: 2702 N. 3rd Street, Suite 4015, Phoenix, AZ 85004. The 
Web site at www.arizonaguide.com also provides information. 

For information on the economy, write to: Arizona Department of 
Commerce, 3800 N. Central Avenue, Suite 1500, Phoenix, AZ 
85012. 

The state's official Web site at www-.state.az.us also provides a 
gateway to much information on Arizona's economy, government, 
and history. 


Central Arizona 
Project jails 





United States and Mexico “inci the Gads- 
n Purchase, which added more land to Arizona. completed. 


Hoover Dam was Arizona judge Sandra Day O'Connor became the first 


woman appointed to serve on the U.S. Supreme Court. 





674 Arizona 


Population. The 2000 United States census reported 
that Arizona had 5,130,632 people. The population had 
increased 40 percent over the 1990 figure, 3,665,228. Ac- 
cording to the 2000 census, Arizona ranks 20th in popu- 
lation among the 50 states. 

About 88 percent of Arizona people live in metropol- 
itan areas. Over 60 percent live in the Phoenix-Mesa 
metropolitan area. Another sixth of the population lives 
in the Tucson metropolitan area (see Metropolitan 
area). For the populations of the state's metropolitan ar- 
eas, see the /ndex to the political map of Arizona. 

Phoenix, the largest city in Arizona, is a trading and 
shipping center for a rich agricultural district. Tucson is 
the second-largest city in the state. Both of these cities 
are important manufacturing centers and vacation areas. 
Arizona's other large cities include Mesa, Glendale, 
Scottsdale, Chandler, and Tempe. 

About 5 out of 100 Arizonans are American Indians. 
Arizona has the third-largest Indian population in the na- 
tion. Only Oklahoma and California have more Indians. 
The Navajo are the largest tribe in Arizona. The Indian 
settlement of Oraibi, in northern Arizena, is one of the 
oldest continuously inhabited places in the United 
States. Hopi Indians built the settlement in the 1100's. 
Arizona has 16 tribal councils. These councils help gov- 
ern the various tribes and supervise their property. 

About 25 percent of Arizona's people are Hispanics. 
People of Mexican ancestry account for 82 percent of 
the state’s Hispanic population. Many families in these 
groups speak Spanish at home, but the children in the 
families learn English at school. Mexican foods and cus- 
toms are very popular among Arizonans. The state also 
has many people of German, English, and Irish descent. 

Schools. The first schools in Arizona were estab- 


Population density 


Most of the people live in ile fail heb a aa 
southern Arizona—especially 
in and around Phoenix and 
Tucson, the state's largest 
cities. The northern areas are 


thinly populated. 


More than 50 More than 20 
10 to 50 4to 20 
5to 10 2to4 


Less than 5 | Less than 2 


u Ci 
é 


_=—@ 





\VORLD BOOK map. based on US Census Bureau data 





People 


Universities and colleges 





This table lists the universities and colleges in Arizona that grant 
bachelor’s or advanced degrees and are accredited by the North 
Central Association of Colleges and Schools. 


Name Mailing address 
American Indian College of the 

Assemblies of God Phoenix 
Argosy Universi Phoenix 
Arizona, University of Tucson 
Arizona State University x 


DeVry Institute of Peano coy Phoenix 
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University Prescott 
Frank Lloyd Wright School 
of Architecture Scottsdale 
Grand Canyon University Phoenix 
Midwestern University Glendale 
Northern Arizona University Flagstaff 
Phoenix, University of Phoenix 
Prescott College Prescott 
Southwestern College Phoenix 
Thunderbird, The American 

Graduate School of International 

Management Glendale 
Western International University Phoenix 


° For campuses, see Arizona State University. 


lished in the 1700's by Spanish missionary priests. These 
schools taught little except religion. In the late 1820's, 
the Mexican government expelled Spanish-born priests. 
By the 1840's, missions were abandoned. The first public 
school in Arizona opened in Tucson in 1871. 

The state's school system is headed by an elected su- 
perintendent of public instruction. This official is a mem- 
ber of and carries out policy made by the State Board of 
Education. Other members of the board are appointed 
by the governor. They include a classroom teacher, a 
president of a state university, a representative of the 
state Community colleges, a county school superinten- 
dent, a high school district superintendent, and three 
private citizens. Schools are financed chiefly by taxes. 

Children are required to attend school from the ages 
of 6 through 15. For the number of students and teach- 
ers in Arizona, see Education (table). 

Navajo Community College in Tsaile, Arizona, was the 
first U.S. college located on an Indian reservation. It 
opened in 1969. 

Libraries and museums. Mission libraries were the 
first libraries in Arizona. In the 1860's, Samuel Colt, the 
famous pistol maker, had a mine located in Arivaca, and 
he provided books for his workers. Tucson had a rental 
library in the 1870's. By 1878, both Phoenix and Prescott 
had small libraries. The Arizona Territorial Library, 
founded in 1864, became the Department of Library, 
Archives, and Public Records. 

Arizona museums feature art, science, history, and 
American Indian cultures. The Arizona State Museum at 
the University of Arizona in Tucson and the Arizona His- 
torical Societys Tucson museum are among the oldest 
in the state. The Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum, the In- 
ternational Wildlife Museum, and the Pima Air and 
Space Museum are near Tucson. The Museum of North- 
ern Arizona, near Flagstaff, has exhibits of American In- 
dian arts and crafts. Museums in the Phoenix area in- 
clude the Phoenix Art Museum: the Heard Museum, 
which features American Indian art; Pueblo Grande Mu- 
seum, with the remains of a prehistoric Indian village; 
the Arizona State Capitol Museum, with exhibits on the 
history of state government; and the Champlin Fighter 
Museum, which has fighter aircraft from many wars. 


Arizona 675 


Arizona map index 


“Does not appear on map; key shows general location. 
tCensus designated place = unincorporated, but recognized as a significant settled community by the U.5. Census 8ureau. 


County seat. 


Source; 2000 census. Places without population figures are unincorporated areas. 





; ene Valle 7 BSSeee ees Hackberry. .. rE, 3 Oatman . ‘be Sedona mono ZeF 7 
Metropolitan areas Christmas tS ~ J 9 Hannagan Meadow H 1] Olberg . .... 4 oe Seligmant wotsGer 5 
Chuichut ......... 339 eee Harcuvar . sda! 3) Old Columbine .......... J} 10 SellSta, s..eteame7oo LOG 
Las Vegas (Nev.|.....1,563,282 Cibecuet .......1,331..H 9 Harris ... : Gos Oraclet.........3,563.) 8 Sentinel 7 856 0 Re ee 
{1,408,250 in Nev.; Cibolat .... ....... 17/72 4 Hassayampa : “at eM) Oracle Junction ......... K 8 Sheldoniten- tn mete) meal 
155,032 in Ariz.) Clarkdale... aac 6 Havasupai Indian Coe i eer O19 Shongopovit . ...632..D 9 
Rloastali..,.....0...... 122,366 Claypoolt ........ 1,794.1 8 Reservation. ...503..C 5 Gro Blanco ..... .......: M 8 Shentof,,:-- 5... 066..B 9 
(116,320 in Ariz; Clifton® . 2,590... 1) Hayden... caret: 892.) 8 Oro Valley... 29,700.K 8 ShowLow... ....7,695..G 10 
6,046 in Utah.) Clints Well .............. G 8 He = “sf ees. Se Page 5.0m ce. 6,809 B 7 Sierra Vista. .37,775..M 9 
Phoenix-Mesa...... 3,251,876 Cochise vmmoi «60.0.0: L 10 AD Sagal ens ess K 5 Page Springs ...... ..... F 6 Sierra Vista 
ucson ....... oe 843,746 Cocopah Indian igley ... age: -ba de. i 2 PaloVerde... .........1 5 Southeast*t ..14,348 ..M10 
NLT. es ok ca... 160,026 Reservation . 1,025 J 1 cide”. [ae ‘ae.. G 5 Palominas ....... .. M10 Sil ae ReoPbasens & ee 
Colorado City ....3,334.A 5 Holbrook® TEER ade &! Pantano... foots. Silver Bell mK 7 
Counties Colorado River Indian Hope ........ eee: ie Papago (Tohono Simmons. BEY 5 
Reservation ...7,466..H 2 Hopi Indian Oodham) Indian Skull Valley ....... G 5 
Apache . . 69,423 ..G 11 Congresst ....... alps Gio eservation ...6,815..D 9 Reservation. 10.483.K 6 Snowflake .. ..4,460 .F 10 
Cochise . rliz7op.L J Continental .............. L 8 enh ogeeoahe AMMBcbos J 4 Paradise? 2; ..8e%....0 14 Solomon eee) 11 
Coconino... ... 116,320. 7 Coolidge .......7,786.J 7 HotasonVo.. ......... K 5 Paradise Somerton . . 7266.) 2 
Gilaray.. F fass>. 4 8 Coolidge Dam .......... J. Hotevillat os.) Preaek: D 8 Valley’ ....... 13,664..1 6 South Tucson .. 5,490. K 8 
Grabamic ....u... 33,489 ..1 10 Morues Bei. jive G 6 HOUEKS ence 1,087 ..E 11 Parle... 2. ...3,140 .G 2 Springerville .. 1,972 G11 
Greenlee 8,547 1 11 Cornvillet . .....3,335..F 6 House Rock ............ B 6 Parker Strip"t .. ahr, (6 7 5tanfieldt Paros || eG 
LaiPaze... Goo 6. cian 3 COMBNO) cmesrr ars tres scat K 8 Huachuca City ...1,751 ..M 9 Parkst — .... ...1,137..E 6 Stargocija JE... s:. | on 
Maricopa . ..3,072,149..1 5 CottonCenter.........J 5 Hualapai Indian Pascua Yaqul Indian Strawberryt .....1,028..G 7 
Mohave ... 155,032 73 Cottonwood ..... 9179..F 6 Reservation ...1,353..D 4 Reservation’ . 3, a JK 8 Sun Cityt .......38,309..H 6 
Navajo ......... 97,470..— 9 Cottonwood-Verde MO MEO owe. cens G26 Patagonia.... ..... 881..M 9 Sun City 
Fama ......4)...043,746.K 7 Village*t ..... 10,610..F 6 Hunt . WME occ csone 10 RauRSour: «0 ..¢omds aeons M10 Westt ...b....26,344..H 6 
7 ea oJ] te! Courtland wo... .2-..4.-. L 10 Inspiration | bl Ascscce: I 8 Pauldent........ 24208) Ge > SunLakest ....11,936.1 7 
Santa Cruz ..... 38,381..M 8 CrOoOKION cen: icc enh E 5 Iron Springs . ........ 4s Paysonm.....0.). 13,620.G 8 SUGUZOS IE voice ces es EBL 
Yavapai ..... .. 167,017)..F 5 Cross Canyon ........... D011 leech lake... .B 6 Payson Community Sunrise a@im............ ..D 10 
Yuma ......... 160,026.) 3 CUMTISS deere creer in L 10 Jerome . 9 eek a6 ndian Reservation ..G 8 Sunsetiq; mc LIMe ... hos K 10 
Cutter Ma. :.....0de es J € jeutsens a nn Ae L 10 Peach SErngst ...600..D 4 Supality ates... ome: Ce 5 
at) Date\Creeki) 2. eG 5 osephiGityeper. 1.4 -8.: Foes. Pearce ma - eon 10 Superior myo 204). 8 
Cities, towns, and Dateland ... aloe Kachina — *+2,664.E 7 PEOlia, game 2. 108,364 1 6 SORgasa ...  . 30,848 H 6 
other populated Davis-Monthan AFB ..... L 8 Kaibabtitee 2... (REY 13} 3) Peridott ......... 1,266.1. 59 Swanseaoenc........-aeG 3 
pop Dennehotsot ...... 734 ..B 10 Kaibab Indian Perkinsville . Ms 15 Swift Trail 
laces Desert Hills*t ....2,183..G 2 Reservation ..... 196). G7 Phoenix®..... a 321, 045.1 6 Poot (IS) =) Ue 
p Dewey Kaibitot.. ......1,607..B 8 Pitarasccs erence —E 4 NacGat ere che. 55.) 3 
Algtne... 0s 5 l-Humboldtit ..6.295..G 6 Kayentat. ....4,922..B 9 PIGGENO..jvee «ert te Lied Tanque 
PCG . “Aime... 669.) 6 Dolan 5pringst ..1,867..D 3 Keams Canyont ...260..D 9 Picture Rocks*t ..8,139.K 8 Verdet...... 16,195.K 9 
FADING ie. meta 2s... as H 11 DOMmer ies dan crest ee Kearny APEC) I) bE Pimagl a. SS 1989/10 UES ae ar 3,176 ..G 10 
Amadot ei 2t ee, 8 [OX UTS, 5 gecvoussog snd M10 Kelvins..c0-@8. 0.03 -aps. les RING re cca : Ce, Teec Nos Post ..... 799. B11 
Apache . bag cing L 11 Douglas ........ 14.312..M11 Kingman?.. 20,069..£ 3 Pine Springs Ranch ye 78 WEES OMe a: |. om.’ D,9 
Apache Grove. ......... et Dragoon: os; woe. 10 RPRRIAUTC «<...pecen Sees ss G 5 Pinetop- Tempe......... 158,625..1 6 
Apache Drake® yee eo F 6 Kirkland Junction...... ‘Gas Lakeside . 3,582 ..G 10 Temple.Bar,...........C 2 
Junction . 31,814. dl 7 Dudleyvillet ....1,323.J 9 Klagetoh —_........... D 10 Pifiont ~1,190..C 9 Thatcher . pene sd) ue 
AINAGA RTE vi osc oe M 7 Duncan eee: 812.) 11 Ko Vaya .. pea oo ae FLUE eee i Berean gete E 10 Theba....... coe | ies 
Arivaca Junction....... Le DUGUGSNG enccasceea ess! M 9 Kom Vo ge ey Pirtlevillet .. 1,550 ..M11 Three Pointst ....5,273 L 8 
Arizona Cityt ....4,385.J 7 ERGOIS res ere cek 4,033 ..G 11 Komatke ... conedl #6 PISINIMOT . aye... 237 . LelG Tolleson” ... .... 4,974.1 6 
Arlington ....... 15 ...... lS Eden. Wares sneer mt seeped Plants). . Gee. ....- 11 Toltec we. ee eee 
ACM cae... EEE. } 10 Ehrenberg? . Neotpas 13a7 HH 2 Villaget .. .776..D 9 PolacCag yy’. sutiem:.-. 3 D 9 Tombstone .....1,504.L 10 
Ash Forkt .........457..€ 5 Elfrida . re aa?) ETE” Wan eo AaaAenae ez Poland Junction G 6 Tonaleat .. ......562 C 8 
Avondale. ..... 35,883 1 6 MAINT nent: 309.1 9 Lake Havasu Pomerene.. .. ......L 9 Tonopaty.. 9.8..-.26007-19 5 
Avra Valley*t . . 5,038 ..K 8 El Mirage . 7,609 ..H 6 Gityp: -.5...... 41,938 .C 2 Postont ... oo SOO El <2 Tonto Basint .....840 H 8 
Ce = Se } 4 EV teh eos IOS7S. J Lake Monte- Prescott? .......33,938.G 5 Topawa..... yn 
Bagdad? 1,578..F 4 Estrella et icc scsaseces Jes ZUMAT 5 uscccees g44..F 7 Prescott Valley 23,535.F 6 Topock.. . Fee 
Bapchule ...):........... er FQlari ches ere L 10 Lakeside, see Quartzsite........ 3,334..H 2 Tortilla Flat. v! 7 
Beardsley ... 0om...-.. H 6 Flagstan® ...... 52,694 Eu? Pinetop-Lakeside PON sax: Aceaee Ee ies Ieuxtones +4... atk 3 
Bellemont ............... ae fe Florence®....... 17,054.) 7 LaPalma.... . . ii QueenCreek 4,316...) 7 Tsailet 95.2 ...1,078) .C 11 
Benen "4 —..4,711.L 9 Florence Junction ....... | 7 Lees Ferry. ae Quota tecaueee. 6... /. Ls Tuba Cityt . . 8,225..C 7 
Big Park*t ys Rees Flowing Wells’t 15,050..K 8 Leuppt ... r7Ome 8 Quivero ets Tubact =: .0e...949..M 8 
Bisbee’ .... . 6,090 ..M10 Forbing/Park -3.;-. 257.2 E 3 Lewis Springs So IC Randolph a) ieee Tucson? . 486,699 K 8 
Black Canyon ForApache..--c.n..2-)- H 10 Ligurta .. Sagi Al) %- Ray .. 7s Tucson 
Cite .c-....- 2,697..G 6 Fort Apache Indian Litchfield Park’. .3,810 1 6 Red Lake mee 3S Estates*t JJ ieee 6 
Blackwatert .. 504.) 7 Reservation ..12,429..H 9 Littlefield -.....867 3 Red Rock K 8 Tumacacori. .......... M 8 
Bluewater’+ ....... 720.G 2 Fort Defiancet ...4,061..D0 11 BeChIGN ts ..5.+...... M 9 Redington Kk 49 Tusayant . . 562..D 6 
Borree Corner | FortGrant .............. J} 10 Lower Miami .........1. 8 ice £ 10 Tuweep ; ms oS 
BesGueE 6. y.........5. | ee: Fort McDowell... ...... H 7 Lukachukait .....1,565..C 11 Rillito neue Two Guns ‘mee 8 
Roueet ..2.......: Sy ie iealalere! Fort McDowell Indian PUKE AFB)... cc ec eeee [<3 Rimrock oe ae, Utting........ Bea & 
20.0) 2 i i K 1] Reservation..... 824 H 7 MGOMM §-jeny- -.--...).1 7 Rio Rico East” .M 8 Vailt 2,484.1 9 
Brenddain.......-.0c...: H 3 Fort Mohave Indian Mammoth ... ..1,762.) 9 Riveira, see Vaiva Vow.) 0.00.) J 6 
Brcemid...........0.. } 10 Reservation. ...773..F 2 Many Farmst ... 1,548. C 10 Bullhead aye REI Valincia fF. Ge.....5.. | § 
Buckeye ere. 6537.1 5 Fort Thomas.... ... elo Marana ......... .13,556..K 8 Rock Pointt . ..724..B 10 Valencia 
Bullhead tee Fortuna Marble Canyon.......... B 7 Rock Springs . Berne H 6 West*t . 2,380.1 8 
l-Riveira)......33,769..£ 2 Foothills*t ....20,478.J 3 Maricopat . 1,040.) 6 Rolle... sss, 3 Valentine .. ee 4 
Bumble Bee ........... CG 6 Fountain Hills ...20,235..H 7 Maricopa-Ak Chin Roosevelt ..... ot 6 Valle... . aD6 
LOPE rn 1 10 Fecricitte en. .< 5. 0 J} 11 Indian Rough Rockt ._ ...469..C 10 Valley Farms le 
Cactus Flat............... J 10 Fredonia ......... 1,036..B 5 Reservation ..... 74227 |6 Round Rockt . . ..601..8 11 Vamori...... 1s 
cre sees 1 9 Freeman “a.......8..,.a) 6 Mavert ....,.....1,408...G) 6 Rub Se ete... Mi8 Vaya Chin K 6 
Cameront .. ...... 978..D 7 Gadsden as”. . Sw eK 1 McConnico aa eS Sacatont...... .. 1584.) 7 Vernon G 10 
Camp Verde . 9451 G 7 Ganadot. .....1,505..D 10 McGuireville Poe ee cee Safford 025240 10 Vicksburg . H 3 
Camp Verde Indian Gap RE Pe. ccs wes Ga McNa ead Gal0 Sahuarita .. .3,242.1L 8 Wahak Hotrontk K 6 
Reservation . cod@e 7 Geronimo ............. J 10 McNeal... .. . M11 5t Davidt.. ~—«.«.1,744..L 9 Walker G 6 
Cane Beds..... Seo. Fo GilaBend .. .....1,980.] 5 Mesa ....... ..396,373..1 7 St Johns ..... 43,269%. .G 11 Washington Camp M9 
Cane Springs... ..... F 3 GilaCenter..... ....... (hy: Mescal . Uk St Michaelst . 1,295..D 11 Webb .. lL 10 
Canyon Diablo .......£ 8 Gila River Indian Mexican Water ......... A 10 Salome . a la Wellton 1829 J 3 
Canyon Day*t ....1,092 ..H 10 Reservation ..11,257.G 7 Miami. .. 98621 8 Salt River Indian Wendent wF.o56..HH 4 
Caretree ......... 2927 eter Gilbert ....... 109,697...) 7 Midland City ............ ! 8 Reservation” 6405.1 7 West Yuma............ Jo] 
CO) M 8 Gillespie 2. ........... 1 4 for population, see SanCarlost .... 3,716.1 9 Whetstone*t 2,354 M 9 
(Canto) eee gene eae F 10 GIGGSOM*. cpee ns. se- + ne iL 10 Central Heights San Carlos Indian Whiterivert ...5,220 .H 10 
CasaGrande.. 25,224.) 7 Clenbar (o.0.8-..2..... J 10 |-Midland City) Reservation . 9,385.1) 9 Why ra 
Gascabel .......%......... K 9 Glendale sone aM [) fe Miracle Valley M10 SaniOS@i ete eras. ow Wickenburg Se OG 2am eS 
Castle Butte ............. Eg Globe® .7,486..1 8 Mobile ... =: J 6 San Luis Pe DOL2. Ke | Wide Ruins . ete |) 
Catalinat .. ...7,025.K 8 Golden Valley*t . 43515.E 3 Moceasin ——.. . t... B 5 San luis, %.--. s--.-.L 6 Wikieup . eps 
Catalina Goodyear’ ..... S591r-s0e 5 Moenkopit Slo eG San Manuelt+ 4,375.K 9 Willcox . Shee) SSG 
Foothills*t . ..53,794 K 8 Grand Canyon Mohave aren eee 2 SaniMiquel -pas....%2.. M 7 Williams .. ..2,842..— 6 
Cave Creek ...... 3,728 H 6 Villaget ......1460..C 6 Mohawk .3.47.:........-- 4) 3 San Pedro . Prac | (ley Willow Valley*t ....585 — 2 
Cedar Creek. ........... H 9 GRANVING eae sess ones 111 Morencit .. ..1,879.1 11 San Xavier . She ee Window Rockt . 3,059 D 11 
CedarRidge .. .....C 7 Grasshopper Mormon Lake as 7 San Xavier Indian Winkelman ....... 443.) 8 
Central . Tee J ae Junction <A Pv? Morristown tH 5 Reservation . Lee Winona . wE 7 
Central Heights Gray Mountain ..........D 7 Nacot . .., 833° .M10 Sanders =. Eee Winslow » aley—lp 
| |-Midlan Greasewoodt ..... 581..D 10 Gavdpy. wre s.......9.£ 11 Santa Claus meee Witch Well ’ fe 1) 
Citylt «... ana. 2964.1 8 Greaterville ............ L 9 Navajo Indian Santa Cruz hae 6 Wittmann . H 5 
ChamHers .. .°...-0-%: E 1] Green Nene 17,203 —-L a6 Reservation .104,532..B 10 Santa Rosat 438.K 6 Yampai ... a= Das 
Chandler... 176,581 | 6 Greer ee 11 New Kingman- Santan’t SSime 6 Yarnellt — 645 G 5 
Chandler Heights 1 7 Griffith . 3 Butlert . 14,810 3 Sasabe .. ee er Yavapai Indian 
= Natasa . M10 Growler... .. . a New Rivert 10,740 .H 6 Sawmill ...........612..D11 Reservation angi > 
erry. a 666 Growler Pass 5 Le pede .. 20,878 M 8 Sawmill. H 9 Youngtown 3.010 H 6 
Chiapuk .. . ate 6 Gu Oidak 6 ar ee 6 5chuchk Ll 7 Yucca . Pa eS 
Chlawuli Tak L 7 GuVo. . eee Noe Komelik 6 Schuchuli Sse de E Yuma? . 77,315 Jj 2 
Childs . .. sg, ae) Guadalupe S260) 6 North Rim 6 Scottsdale 202,725 | 6 Zuni Indian 
Chinlet .. 5,366 .C 10 Guthrie — 11 Nutrioso . I Second Mesat 814 D 9 Reservation Fo 











© INaWaKoOW IWNOLLWN amg Netege 


nol\ Ay 





uns 



















































































































10x 
_ Mumes , ‘I o SIN i , 
=, aes, jspueag* 
{09} YA S00 -NOILVAH3S3H NVION ulejunoy afies IAN 13 a Dry } m@ ado 
=. WOOD LHOd | af yiding Fy Ag uns ' v i igtbient Biccouen 
~~ > VS omy cM yaa19 mee PUM aS NOWW AW aS3H 
= ~ — ; 109} moisiuoyy pee eS NVIGNI H Ate H 
1999 Jee uiseg oluo!® = —-9asj9Ie9 aAe) (0 \ : DWHOTOD 
| JOnly Man) Binquaysi~\. Ue 
fIVdV LYO4 isijv¥O4 Jv MOILYVN OLNOL (1) e ‘ 
e yausiod sayer® se | ¢ Bua ll sBulids 1044 
anoog! ‘ 5 aj)se9 
Ql | Guno, 16 | 
seser-d bi Ayig uodueg 49e)¢ 
SapispyHe]-dojauld NOLLVAH3S3Y NVIONI oeq cau Sul eso} 
ALINNWIWO3 NOSAVd d g aIQuing’ | umolD sevobeyy J6el / 
0} moys CLNJIO VN e 
uosAe aN¥1 Jo nvaune ious 
d Ht AG G3H3LSININGY) 901e3|9 AB\IeA %4 ap! 
@lepaull LN3WNNOW AWNOUYN Ihe. 55105 sada, weal cs c) 
JHIVdY shqpidg Aejguts 1uOs IWNOWVN SpAvauDIS, . Quid F*spiud™ 69] lon einen) puep 39434 3411011 O4d!I1V9 
auidiiy® uchoupff puejod “s i wwe 
. pISIIIH TVNOLLVN NSVAVH 
@ououoD vaqay NOILVANaS a4 NV ICT! ah do, es shee Gotta fhe eU6iS . 
i 
IM SIL ye PsaA wey Aamag 2 Poued ulqio4 pepfie + an Ag NSeaeH aye] 
jjiuaz BUNZaUOWA) BYl7 |. wise Aajliea *sBulids uos . ~ Ye6 
JINNNOW IWNOTTON 311S¥9 VWNZALNOW oe Spank Me 
x YPOILUIE =nAgnDoW HoIsalg Nouvawas3y NVIONI IWdVAVA a NCUNEEIIS TOY 
NOILVAW3S3Y JYOd IVOILVN ONINOQO9 PHIAWOQ© © poomuonoy | Aayjen ouryg dnaixi\a 490 
NVIONI INNZ e . ®awolor : ; 
yoer Addey . Rounds abeye ce POCA, dues ; 4 
iNawnnow yNUOOSIZNL PBIEPHAR]D LAVAVA , : SU 66) ye UIPSON 
wuvd WWNOlWAN = NN one al \ | SUOLULUIS e29NA 
1S3804 G341HL3d 9019/0} E aye] uoWWOW, BUD bas® : y rapifie ae nm wees 
HOM YW euewepy we NG = O[SUIAA fh SIWASUIEd = igayhy engiive 1409834 cen mee eee SS 
Ov 1 
+ ¥3LVHD HOTA | NOANYD + i uewieo 
ae 43349 WD ——7 
PRS.QM We. 183404 WwNolivN | (68 adie: ANY 
Za == avai \ | suleh 6 peayyng 
piqeig uoAuesy*-—# = ert 3 us eee PUA aye 
jaquieu9 OrWAVN LOUIAY = sBuuds de rai — ae = AO —_y,. 1 3 J ¥ . 
e ~ ce - 
NDILWAYSS3Y NVIGNI OFVAVN 2Hngenses | Ganoy® INSWINNOW IvNOLIWN Te SL es ee | a 
vox “ig BOS A 3u ne|D elues . 
SBM uetput ° AN3WANOW WNoLWN exe) pay” ae Li 7 pelea {56} 
ine et Suds sepa iV LISNNS tw NOW aaa EN VdV IV Ol r ° jOuUNns 4 
oe | i a Se eee a | anna os Ca | | 
ra Ee =~ “ol S99] : O1BAIND® \PUUER ley } 
asliuns ‘ TWNOILYAN DLVaN AA Si asad BBuUdSEP eG (56) ( | 
al *auod ail ONINOI09 sbuidsuaog® * 
ale > 
Spjoy eseyy puooes . 1835S3G IEA laNA BSOY NOLLVAYSS 84 NVION IvdvIVNH \ 
mnodobudyg —s: GALNIVd * Yel : ly: \ gq 
abejllA IAOWUSIOxAY ONA su@reesg” NX \ | 
umes . uorewe nad, € 
., 1IzeN” i, ( an i) | 
i ueAesn| ; 2 BMS ard 
: vaHy 420 OvaW INV if 
JHOVAV NOANYOD # VSONIG - afieyjiA uoAuey puesy pe oe sya WRN awa} 
e , ud FVNOLLWN NOLVANISay NvION| OVW IVI NOANVI.GNVEHD | Wv0 H3A00H 
LN3WANOW Hels NO raese8 "y muoANea aNv¥9 id SVAVH 
eROLIVN {G3NMO AILNIOS) 4 wig ed on ledng 
OFVAVN IdOH Be elt . ene 
; i TE 
—_ LN3WNNOW IVNOUYN 
79] deomnye LNVHSVHVd - NOANVD ONVHO 


MWAY3S3Y NVIGNI OPVAVN 
wWHYd IVNO! 


1S3HCH TWNOLLYN avaly> ) 









































OUqIEY — NOANVI ONAE JAVHOW 
OiNINY Npiviviaa) —° eae ya even j 
IN3WONOW IWNOLWN OPVAVN 40H © / 
“win 9338 1339) sae 2 —_ LN3WOANOW IWNOLLYN 
TWNOILWN OF VAVN av uoAue? ajqueyy ROU VAU3S ai NitdS 3dld 
SOg SON 299), abeg 26°04 00 , 
ye Bien ueoixay ea YO NOANVS N19 Alig) Opesojos 
; > { 
> suaNvog aivis unos A ¢ Ny 5 ~ » \aiee afiioay VS 
: womoy aye7// . 
HL NY LNIOd AINO err ure a ys ae (68) 
f" aN moe YD 
vauv NOILVY3H034 48d IWNOLVN 
ngs NOANW9 N3179 | HVLN NOIZ 
PS t WHVd IVNOLLVN 
EN NOANV2 3DAN@ 
\ 
— ———— = = 
él LL OL 6 8 L 9 G v 










Payoltys 4 Jf OINDSOYY 



































2 acetamt 





SJB OWUIOIIY GZS 00S SLy 0S? S2p 00v SLE OSE GZE 00€ G22 052 G22 002 SZL OSL S2L ool 08 09 Ov 0z Ol O 





SallW SZE OOE€ S2z 0SZ2 Gee 002 GZL OSL 
cL LL OL 6 8 L 9 
601 apny6uo7 isan LLL St] =e See, 
It wiweluag 


vol}aloud aiU09 jewWwsOjU09 PaquP | 






pnpanby ——_ Auepunog AjuncjZ ~=——— 
Vv Hy O N O S Weals jeUOSeRS AJEPUNO BIE1S eeeees 
| Asepunog 
O YYON 4 seyi9—{é8) uodile soley x jevoneuou, 
| \ euajepbew sn 8 Pe Ri EIS pt voneniosa velpul [Ty 


spue| 
ByeySJe}uUF @) jesepaj 19410 egJe jesepay 


JBYIO 10 Ase Wl 

pedssoyiO —__— UMO}] JO AID 
ease VOIEASESUOD 
Aemsseidx 3 jeas AfUNSA 48410 JO ySA104 


ease voneasoas 
sSAeAAY Bly jeidesayeig =p JOYIO 40 eg 


U0 


nN | WAHVNHIHO 


ce eaueue) 


peosjley e@weu Ajunoy eae veg 


341011 wiOlivh 
NOANW2 #11S37 ONV ead WivOWw3IW 


ONIGYNY38 NYS enby oN NOlIYN 





dew jeonyod euozis 


< 












































































































Mi 
B = LL 
i, a \ BRHOL HED (OWS) ( W 
ojeud) znuo “MeUSIEH \gouelg 010° be { 
wisi * WINS eevodee4 Syogofour | _— | 
uausje —~\ . 
one WHVd WWOIHOLSIH” D ~ woeauiy AS dm ely es J $ 
Cen. | 39N43y 3411001. - fae: 
° TWNOILYN x AL 
ee he NOUS opewy sauiv SON3N a Reet - \ ane ie 
0} 9? UOS8R{9 AIATOICO!9) @ qyNOlIVN Fa LOHOUNE : } oT . <==. 
ree ge ieee AUV NIN OdVNOWOD pew) PUNY Iwo om S| 
ogvNOwO Aajjea 9919 + tie pe =o gy va 
1 euoziunse + WNOILYI — > a 
dg sang UM) swag G - 
W WNOlLY WAWI|NIS 
YNHVOIHI Sesuey, 
sezoge) so ule Y aif : ; S2, bie 
GASIH IWNOLLYNO a : AWN Lu 3$3 la’ ny: Sg 
“,3IMO8 1NOS i, _ _ 4 VYONCS ak ° nu a. inp 
fe NVY ONISWOA 9 : : = L \ 
AYO XOITIM ZAOTIUM /1S34O4 TwNOLWN a 39N43y 34N101M 
. fy OGYNOHOD = O1ENIN WNOLLWN Vi3lud ¥Z38V9 
x SW 153404 IWNOLLWN oul Aiea 010 yi 
OdvNOHOD th, i 5 
ud yreysouswuns® f 
JesuNns, 
eyluog NOLLWAWIS3Y NVIONI H¥d0309 — 
° JONVY IBHOS HIV NOILVLS Hiv SduO3 JNINVW VAA uovewas 
efit } a ' , HALVMGIO9 W AYYVS ~ =] 
’ snpandDe’ De > ———— 
ate = j *auiquinio> PIO jo wey BUOZ YY PNGLO” - : e, >) = j LD 
en ueount) Lol ie] 4 SNIOBD ; : 
eae vophpys"\ eSeog soyreyp OVP, Op aton r 
} ° Puig 1s3404 Wwnotwn FI}AAB{PAG Ke 7 ~ 
( @A0I9 Plbedy™. OGYNOHO) q ~. 12 Ro lvATvtanviodl . ; - ONNOYSD ONIAOUd VAN ’ 
; oN) BBORNQUOINIHD AY PdOIHWH avila W YOHOH | VINMA 399334 34 OM \ 
peIeG St Se wauyn u NVionl ——— eX 
HO ¢ 
08h, - " ep UNOW 'TEVI “Wid WYXOHOH od 
iWAWIS3Y NVIONI may /s 
- 0 = n~ | ) N¥SIS3A NOWINO “fou, vougutl : | 1 ‘ ’ e - f EP plem ha} Bt 
\ } { souadnge Adniepena. >. | TWNOLLWN Eilts posse sano 
, NS: /NOLLWN 3HDvdv 9 ul a1 i Wo * Seta cH | vsOw 


aj00'> ( NOLLWN W108! 


“7 








\ 33 1N3349 NS | eit" | ayoedy. E 


li 18} ElUO] , 
| ’ : PYPIPIA WH 3H VY “OTep: 





13}. os 3uOdB 





678 Arizona 


Arizona attracts visitors throughout the year. But its 
winter season has become nationally famous. Thou- 
sands of vacationers flock to the sunny desert play- 
grounds when other parts of the country are cold. At the 
same time, ski resorts in the mountains of northern Ari- 
zona lure winter sports lovers. Dude ranches, historic 
sites, and magnificent scenery draw other travelers to 
the state. The outstanding scenic feature is the world- 
famous Grand Canyon, one of the seven natural won- 
ders of the world. This giant gorge, 277 miles (446 kilo- 
meters) long and 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) deep, cuts 
through the rock of northwestern Arizona. Every year, 


Places to visit 





Visitor's guide 


millions of visitors gaze at its splendor. The Petrified For- 
est in northeastern Arizona is made up of ancient logs 
that were buried in mud, sand, or volcanic ash years ago 
and have turned to stone. Grand Canyon National Park 
and Petrified Forest National Park are among Arizona's 
many national parklands. 

Arizona’s popular annual events include rodeos, 
county fairs, and Indian ceremonials. These events are 
held throughout the year. On May 5, Arizona communi- 
ties celebrate Cinco de Mayo. This Mexican holiday hon- 
ors the victory of a Mexican army over an invading 
French force at Puebla, Mexico, in 1862. 





Following are brief descriptions of some of Arizona’s many 
interesting places to visit 


Apache Trail, a scenic mountain highway, passes Indian ruins 
in the rugged Tonto National Forest. 


Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum, west of Tucson, features ex- 
hibits on desert animals and plants. 


Canyon de Chelly National Monument, in Chinle, features col- 
orful, steep-walled canyons that house the ancient ruins of In- 
dian villages, including White House and Standing Rock. 


Kitt Peak National Observatory, southwest of Tucson on the 
Tohono O'odham Indian reservation, has telescopes mounted 
on the 6,875-foot (2,096-meter) peak. 


London Bridge, at Lake Havasu City, is a stone bridge first built 
in London in the early 1800's. The bridge opened at Lake Hava- 
su City in 1971 after its stones were disassembled, shipped to 
the United States, and reassembled in their original form. 


Meteor Crater, in Coconino County, is a large hole that meas- 
ures 4,180 feet (1,275 meters) wide and 570 feet (175 meters) 
deep. The crater was created when a huge object from space 
struck the earth. Fragments of meteorite material have been 
found nearby. See Meteor (picture). 


Monument Valley Navajo Tribal Park is on the Navajo reser- 
vation in northeastern Arizona. The tribal council has a tourist 
center there. 


Oak Creek Canyon, near Sedona, has red-rock formations that 
some people consider second in beauty and coloring only to 
those of the Grand Canyon. 


Painted Desert, with colorful rock and sand, extends about 200 
miles (320 kilometers) along the Little Colorado River in north- 
ern Arizona. 


San Xavier del Bac Mission, near Tucson, is the best preserved 
of Arizona's early missions. It features numerous beautiful and 
unusual carvings and paintings. 


Tombstone, a famous Western boom town, is in Cochise Coun- 
ty. Many tourists visit the area, where Wyatt Earp won fame as 
a gunfighter. 


National parklands are among Arizona's chief attractions. 
Grand Canyon National Park is a famous scenic wonder. The 
state's other national parks are Petrified Forest, site of the 
world’s greatest concentration of petrified wood, and Sagua- 
ro, noted for giant cactuses. Arizona has seven national for- 
ests. Coconino, Kaibab, Prescott, Sitgreaves, and Tonto lie 
completely in Arizona Apache and Coronado lie partly in 
New Mexico. Six national forest areas are national wilderness- 
es. Arizona 13 national monuments are Canyon de Chelly, 
Casa Grande Ruins, Chiricahua, Hohokam Pima, Montezuma 
Castle, Navajo, Organ Pipe Cactus, Pipe Spring, Sunset Crater 
Volcano, Tonto, Tuzigoot, Walnut Canyon, and Wupatki. 
Other parklands in the state include Coronado National 
Memorial, Fort Bowie National Historic Site, Hubbell Trading 
Post National Historic Site, and Tumacacori National Historical 
Park. Glen Canyon National Recreation Area lies partly in Ari- 
Zona and partly in Utah. Lake Mead National Recreation Area 
is partly in Arizona and partly in Nevada 

State parks. Arizona has a number of state parks. For informa- 


tion, write State Parks Director, Arizona State Parks, 1300 W. 
Washington Street, Suite 415, Phoenix, AZ 85007. 


Eddie Goldbaum Rios, Metropolitan Tucson Convention & Visitors Bureau 





La Fiesta de los Vaqueros 
rodeo in Tucson 





Arizona 679 


World-famous Grand 
Canyon National Park 








Edward Cooper, Shostal 


pitt HLT 


Ah ES 


Te 


ree eR 














< = ~ William D. McKinney, Shastal Navajo Nation Fair Office 
San Xavier del Bac Mission near Tucson Navajo Tribal Fair parade in Window Rock 
Annual events 
= = — 
January-April in Dewey (June); Frontier Days in Prescott (first week in July); 
Arizona National Livestock Show in Phoenix (January); La Fi- Festival in the Pines in Flagstaff (August). 
esta de los Vaqueros rodeo in Meer eas = in or September-December 
ary); Easter Sunrise Service at the Shrine o : e Ages on the Navajo Tribal Fair in Window Rock (September); London 
South Rim of the Grand Canyon (Easter Sunday) Bridge Days at Lake Havasu City (mid-October); Annual Thun- 
May-August derbird Invitational Hot-Air Balloon Races in Scottsdale (early 
Festival of Hispanic Arts and Crafts in Flagstaff (May); Wyatt November); Fiesta Bowl Sports Festival in Phoenix, Scottsdale, 


Earp Days in Tombstone (May); Arizona's Own Garlic Festival and Tempe (December January). 


680 Arizona 





é 


David A Barnes, Stock Market 


¥, 





Land and climate 


Land regions. Arizona has three main land regions: 
(1) the Colorado Plateau, (2) the Transition Zone, and (3) 
the Basin and Range Region. 

The Colorado Plateau, in northern Arizona, covers 
about two-fifths of the state. The region consists of a se- 
ries of plateaus with fairly level surfaces. This pattern is 
broken here and there by a few mountains and canyons. 
Humphreys Peak, the highest mountain in the state, rises 
12,633 feet (3,851 meters) near Flagstaff. The deepest 
canyon is the famous Grand Canyon on the Colorado 
River. Tributaries of the Colorado have cut other beauti- 
ful canyons into the flatland. These include Canyon de 
Chelly and Oak Creek Canyon. 

Many of the mountains are forested, but the region 
also has dry deserts with little vegetation. Along the Ari- 
zona-Utah border in the northeast, strange and beautiful 
rock formations rise from the floor of a broad valley. 
They gave the valley the name Monument Valley. The 
colorful Painted Desert and the Petrified Forest are two 
well-known parts of the region. The series of level pla- 
teaus that makes up the region ends in the Mogollon 


TRANSITION ZON 





ye 


BASIN AND RANGE REGION 





Monument Valley in Arizona's Colorado Plateau has beauti- . 
ful rock formations. The Colorado Plateau, in northern Arizona, 


also includes the Grand Canyon and the Painted Desert. 


Map index 
Aqua Fria River ......... E 
Apache Lake ............ E 
Baboquivari Mts. ........ H 
Baker Butte ............. D 
Baldy Peak .............. E 
Bartlett Reservoir ....... E 
Big Sandy River .........D 
Bill Williams 
Mountain......... ... C 
Black Mesa ............. A 
Black Mountain .........G 
Black Mountains ...._...€ 
Black Peak ...... E 


Canyon de Chelly oy 


Natl Monument. so’ 
Canyon Diablo .......... D 
Carizo Mountains ...,..A 
Casa Grande Ruins 

Natl, Monument ......f 
Castle Dome Mts. .......F 
Cerbat Mountains .._....C 
Chinle Valley ........ A 
Chiricahua 

Natl Monument ......H 
Chiricahua Peak ........H 
Chuska Mountains ......B 
Cimarron Mountains ....G 
Clear Creek —.......... .D 
Cochise Head 

(mountain}............G 
Coconino Plateau ....... B 


Ne Ye Ue 


eel | —— UI) & 


Olam = yt 


Ul de I 


~ 


Colorado Plateau ... 
Colorado River...... 
Cottonwood Cliffs ... 
Crossman Peak ..... 
DavisDam..... . 


Dome Rock Mis. ....... 


Dragoon Mountains .... 


Galiuro Mountains .. 
Gila Bend Mountains 


Gila Mountains .......... 


Gila River ........... 


Glen Canyon Dam.... 


Glen Canyon National 
Recreation Area .. 

Grand Canyon . 

Grand Canyon 
National Park ..... 


Grand Wash Cliffs... . 


Greens Peak 
Harcuvar Mountains 
Harquahala Mts. 
Hassavampa River 
Hohokam Pima 
Natl..Mionument . 
Hoover Dam 
Hopi Buttes 
Horseshoe 
Reservoir 


Huachuca Mountains ... 


Hualapai Mountains 
Hualapai Peak .. 


UNOWwWAD aaa Nw— Ul 


“ib oe iw 


ta PS Pd 


+ be 


Land regions of Arizona 


WORLD BOOK map 

Humphreys Peak Mountlogan ...... ...B 3 Santa Maria River ....... D 3 

{highest point in Mount Tipton .... .....C 2 Santa Rita Mountains ....H 3 

PTIZORA ene orton: C4 Mount Trumbull ........ B 3 Santa Rosa Valley ....... G 4 
Hurricane Cliffs ........ A 3 Mount Turnbull ......... F 6 Sauceda Mountains ..... G 3 
Hutch Mountain ........ D 5 Mount Wrightson ....... H 5 Sheep Mountain .......- G 1 
Imperial Dam ........... F 1 Natanes Plateau ......... E 6 Shivwits Plateau ......... B 2 
Juniper Mountains ......C 3 Navajo Natl. Mon. ...... A 6 Sierra Ancha (mts) ...... E 5 
Kaibab Plateau ..... A. ae. Oak Creek Canyon ...... D 4 Sierrita Mountains ...... H 5 
Kanab Creek ............ A 3 Organ Pipe Cactus Sulphur Spring 
Kitt Peak ........... H 4 atl. Monument ...... G 3 Valley . ssce cacti 2 H 7? 
Kofa Mountains .........F 2 Painted Desert .......... B 4 Sunset Crater 
LagunaDam ............F 1 Parker Dam............. D1 Natl, Monument ...... (2 oS 
Lake Havasu ..... .D 1 Pastora Peak ........... A 7 Superstition Mts. ........ F 4 
Lake Mead... a. Bm | Peloncillo Mountains ...G 7 Table Mountain ......... G 6 
Lake Mead National Petrified Forest Table Top 

Recreation Area ......B | Natl. Patki..2.6.c.00s0! C 6 {mountain} ......... .G 4 
Lake Mohave ...........C 1 Pinaleno Mountains ..... G 6 Theodore 
Lake Pleasant .. TT —E 4 Pipe Spring Roosevelt Lake ....... E 5 
Little Colorado River ....B 5 Natl Monument ..... A 3 Tonto Natl. Mon. ........ Es 
Marble Canyon .........B 4 Puerco River ............ Cm? Trigo Mountains ........ Fo 
Mazatzal Mountains. ...£ 3 Roof Butte .............. B 7? Turret Peak ...........-. E 4 
Mazatzal Peak....... ~E 5 Rose Peak=, ...952-0%..... F 7 Fuzigoot Natl Mon. ..... D 4 
Meteor Crater er sour) Saguaro Natl. Park ...... G 35 Verde River ............. D4 
Mogollon Rim ..........D 6 SMORiver Ceres. ..... F 4 Virgin Mountains ...... A 2 
Mohawk Mountains .....G 2 San Carlos Lake ......... F 6 Virgin River ............ A 2 
Montezuma Castle San Francisco Mts.......C 4 Walnut Canyon 

Natl Monument ......D 4 San Francisco River .....F 7 Natl Monument ...... C 5 
Mount Bangs ...........A 2 San Pedro River......... G 5 Weaver Mountains ..... E 3 
Mount Floyd ........... Cars Santa Catalina Mts. ......G 5 White Mountains ....... EY? 
Mount Graham .... G 6 Santa Cruz River ........ G 4 Woolsey Peak .... fear F 3 
MountLemmon.... G 5S Santa Maria Mts. ........ D 3 Wupatki Natl. Mon....... G5 


Arizona 681 
7 


Arizona physical map 


National park boundary ® State capital 


Guif of 


California 
Boundary e City or town 


Dam Elevation above sea level 
WORLD BOOK map 


250 Miles 


400 Kilometers 





682 Arizona 


Rim on the south. The Mogollon Rim is a steep rock wall 
almost 2,000 feet (610 meters) high. It extends from cen- 
tral Arizona to the Mogollon Mountains in southwestern 
New Mexico. The principal industries of Arizona's Col- 
orado Plateau are livestock raising, lumbering, and 
tourism. 

The Transition Zone is a narrow strip of land that lies 
just south of the Colorado Plateau. This region has a 
number of mountain ranges. The ranges are close to- 
gether in an area of rugged peaks and narrow valleys. 
This rough country in Arizona includes the Mazatzal, 
Santa Maria, Sierra Ancha, and White mountain ranges. 

The Basin and Range Region includes most of the 
southern part of the state and a narrow strip in the west 
Mountain ranges run through the Basin and Range Re- 
gion from northwest to southeast. The most important 
mountain ranges are the Chiricahua, Gila, Huachuca, 
Hualapai, Pinaleno, Santa Catalina, Santa Rita, and Su- 
perstition ranges. The mountain valleys are broad and 
fertile. This part of the Basin and Range Region pro- 
duces excellent crops when the soi! is irrigated. The 
state's largest cities developed in this area. 

In the extreme west and south of the Basin and Range 
Region, the mountains are low and barren. Broad desert 
basins lie between the ranges. This area of the state gets 
little rain, and it has almost no vegetation. Along the 
western border of Arizona, water from the Colorado 
River is used to irrigate the dry land. The irrigated land 
produces excellent crops. 

Rivers, waterfalls, and lakes. Arizona's most impor- 
tant river is the Colorado. In Arizona, the river is 688 
miles (1,107 ki!ometers) long. It enters the state from 
Utah almost in the middle of the northern border. Then 
it winds west through the Grand Canyon and turns 
south. The river forms almost the entire western bound- 
ary of Arizona. 


Average January temperatures 

In winter, southern Arizona has a mild cli- 
mate. Mountain areas of central and 
northern Arizona are much colder. 











Degrees Degrees Degrees 
Fahrenheit Celsius Fahrenheit 
Above 48 Above 9 Above 90 
40 to 48 4109 82 10 90 
32 to 40 0104 74 to 82 
Below 32 | Below 0 
== 
4) 
Kingman Flagstatt 
Prescott 


| \ 





— a ~ 


7 
a — a = 


. ] & 








Average July temperatures 


In summer, Arizona's southern deserts 
have extremely hot, dry weather. Higher 
elevations are considerably cooler. 


Below 74 | i Below 23 





The Colorado and its tributaries drain most of the 
state. Before 1935, the muddy Colorado carried about a 
million tons of rich soil to the Gulf of California every 
day. Irrigation and power dams on the great river and its 
branches have helped control the flow, and the river is 
much clearer today. 

Few small streams in Arizona flow all year. Some 
mountain creeks have a steady flow, but most streams 
often seem dry. Rushing water fills the riverbeds of the 
Bill Williams, Litthe Colorado, San Pedro, and Santa Cruz 
rivers after a rain. At other times, these rivers appear to 
be dry. However, water always flows beneath their 
sandy beds. Many mountain streams tumble down cliffs 
and canyon walls in waterfalls and cascades. The best- 
known falls include Beaver, Bridal Veil, Havasu, 
Mooney, and Navajo. All of these falls are on Havasu 
Creek in the Supai Canyon area of the Grand Canyon. 


Average monthly weather 


Phoenix Yuma 


Days of 
rain or 


F 
High Low HighLow °"°W 


Temperatures 0275 9% 
F (ex rain or 


High Low HighLow °"°” 


Temperatures 


18 6? «43 3 
21 ) 47 
24 52 - 
29 : ; 58 
34 65 
39 73 

82 

81 

75 

63 

51 
46 


Average yearly precipitation 

Little rain falls in desert areas. The moun- 
tains receive much heavier rainfall. Snow 
is abundant in some mountain areas. 


WORLD BOOK maps 


Degrees 


Celsius Inches Centimeters 
Above 32 
28 to 32 


23 to 28 


More thon 16 More thon 4} 
12 to 16 1 30 to 41 


81012] | 20 t0 30 


Less thon 8 La Less than 20 





~~ es 


Arizona 683 





Manley Features from Shostal 


Saguaro National Park in southern Arizona's Basin and Range Region is named for its giant 
saguaro cactuses. Many kinds of cactuses thrive in the broad desert areas of the region. 


Several small natural lakes lie in the mountain areas of 
the state, but all the largest lakes are artificially created. 
Many artificial lakes have been made by damming 
streams for irrigation and for water conservation. The 
largest of these lakes include Theodore Roosevelt Lake 
and San Carlos Lake. Lake Mead, behind Hoover Dam, 
lies partly in Nevada. Part of Lake Havasu, formed by 
Parker Dam, is in California. Lake Powell, which was cre- 
ated by Glen Canyon Dam, lies partly in Arizona and 
partly in Utah. 

Plant and animal life. Forests cover more than a 
fourth of Arizona's land. The mountain regions of the 
state have the largest area of ponderosa pine in the 
United States. Other trees in the state include aspen, 
blue spruce, cottonwood, Douglas-fir, juniper, pinon, 
walnut, and white fir. 

Arizona is famous for its cactus plants. The sharp- 
spined cholla cactus is common in the hot desert areas. 
Creosote bushes and prickly pear cactuses also grow in 
the desert. The organ-pipe cactus is found in desert 
areas near sea level. The saguaro, which is common in 
southern Arizona, grows larger than any other cactus in 
the United States. The saguaro blossom is the state 
flower. 

Other unusual plants that grow in Arizona include the 
night-blooming cereus and several varieties of the yucca 
plant Arizona wildflowers include the geranium, golden 
columbine, paintbrush, phlox, pink, poppy, and sand 
verbena. 

Animal life in Arizona includes large numbers of mule 
deer and white-tailed deer. Other big-game animals in- 
clude black bears, elk, bighorn sheep, and pronghorns. 


Several members of the cat family, including bobcats 
and mountain lions, prowl in the forested areas. Jaguars 
are occasionally sighted in southern Arizona. 

Other Arizona animals include badgers, beavers, fox- 
es, raccoons, skunks, squirrels, and weasels. The state is 
also home to the collared peccary or javelina, an animal 
distantly related to the wild hog. 

Arizona has over 40 kinds of lizards, including the poi- 
sonous Gila monster. Rattlesnakes live in most parts of 
the state, and the rare, poisonous coral snake is found in 
the desert. The state's hotter areas have scorpions and 
tarantulas. 

Arizonas game birds include doves, grouse, quail, 
wild turkeys, and various waterfowl. Trout swim in the 
Colorado River and in the mountain streams. Other fish- 
es include bass, bluegills, and crappies. 

Climate. Temperatures vary greatly in Arizona. Moun- 
tain areas often have winter temperatures below 0 °F 
(—18 °C). The southern deserts may not have freezing 
weather for years. The dry air in the deserts makes cold 
or heat seem more comfortable there than in humid re- 
gions. 

The state's highest temperature, 128 °F (53 °C), was 
recorded at Lake Havasu City on June 29, 1994, Hawley 
Lake, near McNary, had the record low, —40 °F (—40 °C), 
On jan. 7, 1971. In Phoenix, temperatures average about 
91 °F (33 °C) in July, and about 51 °F (11 °C) in January. 

Precipitation varies greatly throughout the state. The 
deserts of the southwest get only 2 to 5 inches (5 to 13 
centimeters) of moisture a year. Arizona's high mountain 
areas may receive as much as 30 inches (76 centimeters) 
a year. 


684 Arizona 


Service industries provide the vast majority of jobs for 
residents of this rapidly growing state. Arizonas service 
industries include such activities as education, health 
care, real estate, and retail trade. Many service indus- 
tries benefit from spending by tourists and by retired 
people who live in the state all or part of the year. 

Manufacturing in Arizona is based on high-technolo- 
gy products, such as computers, electronic equipment, 
and aerospace vehicles. Agriculture and mining are also 
important in Arizona. The state has many cattle ranches 
and is the nation’s leading copper producer. 

Natural resources. Arizona's leading natural re- 
sources are its warm climate and its mineral deposits. 

Water is a scarce resource in Arizona. Expanding ur- 
ban areas require more water. Farmers must bring wa- 
ter to their land to make crops grow. A system of canals 
supplies the water. The canals follow ancient canals built 
by the Hohokam Indians hundreds of years before Euro- 
peans came to the area. The water comes from moun- 
tain reservoirs fed by winter snow and spring rain. But 
Arizona uses more water than it can get from its streams 
and storage reservoirs. The states underground water 
supply is being used up faster than nature can replace it. 

In 1968, the United States Congress approved funding 
for the Central Arizona Project, a system of canals, tun- 
nels, and pipelines. The system, completed in 1991, pro- 
vides for pumping large quantities of water from the 
Colorado River to the Phoenix and Tucson areas for agri- 
cultural and other purposes. Arizona has also put in 
place a statewide water management and water recla- 
mation program to meet current water needs while re- 
plenishing the state's supply of underground water. 

Minerals. Arizona’ mountains and plains contain 
large deposits of minerals and other materials, the most 
valuable of which is copper. Sand and gravel come from 
all 15 counties in the state. Other mined products in Ari- 
zona include coal, gold, petroleum, pumice, silver, 
stone, and uranium. Molybdenum and vanadium, which 
are used in hardening steel, are also present. Arizona's 
less important mined resources include clay, bentonite, 


Production and workers by economic activities 





Percerh Employed workers 
, ; of GSP” Number Percent 
Economic activities produced ofpeople of total 
Community, business, 

& personal services 21 846,300 32 
Finance, insurance, 

& real estate 19 238,700 3 
Wholesale & retail trade 17 579,400 22 
Manufacturing 15 227.100 =, 
Government 12 343,300 3 
Transportation, communi- 

cation, & utilities ? 115,500 4 
Construction 6 179,700 ri 
Agriculture 2 68,300 3 
Mining 1 15.700 } 
Total 100 2,614 900 100 
“GSP = gross state product the total valee = 4 oot veesses eles ed W a vee 
Figures are tor 1998. 

Sources ‘Vorid Book estimates based on dau \ Fu at Areas 


and US Bureau of Labor Statisnes 


Economy 


feldspar, gypsum, lead, natural gas, quartz, and salt 

Soil. Only about an eighth of Arizonass soil is suitable 
for farming because of the limited amount of water 
available for irrigation. Soils of the plateau region in 
northern and eastern Arizona are thin and gray. The 
mountain soils also are thin and are brown or gray. The 
lowlands of southwestern Arizona have red soils. In 
some parts of this region, the soil lies over another layer 
of soil called caliche. This concretelike soil may be so 
hard that power tools may be needed to dig holes. 

Service industries in Arizona account for the largest 
portion of the gross state product—the total value of 
goods and services produced in a state in a year. Most 
of the service industries in the state are concentrated in 
the Phoenix and Tucson areas. 

Community, business, and personal services contrib- 
ute more to the gross state product and employ more 
people than any other economic activity in Arizona. This 
industry group consists of a variety of businesses, in- 
cluding private health care, hotels and resorts, law 
firms, and repair shops. Arizona’s hotels and resorts re- 
ceive much business from tourists during the winter. 

Finance, insurance, and real estate ranks second 
among Arizona's service industries in terms of contribu- 
tions to the gross state product. Real estate is the most 
important part of this industry group. The state's rapidly 
growing population has created a strong demand for 
new housing. A large number of office buildings and re- 
sorts are being developed. Phoenix is Arizona's major fi- 
nancial center. Several large banks are based in the city. 

Wholesale and retail trade ranks third among Ari- 
zonas service industries. The wholesale trade of farm 
products, mined products, and motor vehicles is impor- 
tant in the state. Major types of retail businesses include 
automobile dealerships, department stores, and food 
stores. Circle K, a large chain of convenience stores that 
also provides gasoline service, has its corporate head- 
quarters in Phoenix. 

Government ranks next among Arizonas service in- 
dustries. Government services include the operation of 
public schools and hospitals, military establishments, 
and Indian reservations. Arizona State University in Tem- 
pe and Phoenix and the University of Arizona in Tucson, 
two of the nation’s largest universities, are among the 
state's leading employers. Military bases in Arizona in- 
clude Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, Fort Huachuca 
Military Reservation, Luke Air Force Base, and the Yuma 
Proving Ground. The state has several large Indian reser- 
vations. The Navajo reservation, the nation’s largest res- 
ervation, covers most of northeastern Arizona. 

Transportation, communication, and utilities ranks 
fifth among Arizona's service industries. America West 
Airlines, a major U.S. transportation company, is based 
in Phoenix. Phoenix is also the home of Pinnacle West, a 
major electric power company. Telephone companies 
are the most important part of the communications sec- 
tor. More information about transportation and commu- 
nication appears later in this section. 

Manufacturing. Products made in Arizona have a val- 
ue added by manufacture of about $28 billion a year. 
This figure represents the increase in value of raw mate- 
rials after they become finished products. 

Arizona's leading manufactured products, in terms of 
value added by manufacture, are computer and elec- 





tronic equipment, transportation equipment, and chemi- 
cals. Factories in Phoenix or nearby cities produce most 
of the state's electronic equipment. Plants in Chandler, 
Mesa, Phoenix, and Tempe make computer microchips 
and other electronic components. Electronic communi- 
cation systems are manufactured in Scottsdale. 

Both the Phoenix and Tucson areas turn out large 
amounts of transportation equipment A factory just out- 
side Phoenix makes space vehicles. Helicopters are pro- 
duced in Mesa. Turbine engines are produced in Phoe- 
nix. Plants in Phoenix and Tempe make aircraft parts. 
Guided missiles are produced in Tucson. 

Other types of manufactured products made in Ari- 
zona include fabricated metal products, food products, 
machinery, and primary metals. Important fabricated 
metal products include structural metals, including 
sheet metal and frames for windows and doors. Food 
products include soft drinks, baked goods, animal feed, 
and dairy products. Arizona's factories turn out machin- 
ery for use in the metalworking, electronics, and agricul- 
ture industries. Copper is, by far, the leading type of pri- 
mary metal produced in the state. 

Agriculture. Arizona has about 7,400 ranches and 
farms. Grazing land covers about three-fourths of the 
state. Less than 5 percent of Arizonass land is used for 
growing crops. Yet nearly two-thirds of the state's total 
farm income comes from crops. All of Arizona's 15 coun- 
ties have some irrigated land. Maricopa, Pinal, and Yuma 
counties have the most productive irrigated areas in the 
State. 

Crops account for about 65 percent of Arizona’s total 
farm income. Lettuce is the most valuable crop. Iceberg, 
leaf, and romaine lettuce are grown by Arizona's farm- 
ers. Cotton is the second most valuable crop, and Ari- 
zona ranks among the leading cotton-producing states. 
Cotton production is concentrated in south-central Ari- 
zona, between Phoenix and Tucson. Arizona is also 
among the leading producers of citrus fruits and mel- 
ons. Other important crops include barley, hay, pota- 
toes, and wheat. 

Livestock accounts for about 35 percent of Arizona's 
farm income, Beef cattle are the single leading source of 
farm income in the state. The primary region for raising 





Chuck O'Rear 


An electronics plant in Chandler is one of Arizona's many 
high-technology industries. The operators above are being 
trained to inspect semiconductors. 


Arizona 685 


Economy of Arizona 


This map shows the economic uses of land in Arizona and 
where the state's leading farm and mineral products are pro- 
duced. Major manufacturing centers are shown in red. 


[| Irrigated land 
[| Mostly grazing land 


i Desert shrubland with e 
grazing a 





Manufacturing center 
Mineral deposit 


Petroleurn® 
ek 


\, 


‘Pumice 
R SS 
' \ oN Beef cattl 
<" : 
Dsysion 


preea \ ‘p 
. Sheep, 5 
vedétables 2 4 \ 
; i” 


Cottdn aay Beef f gattle > <—s —— 
7 Beef cattle roca Sand, / ~Coppe is 
“#Gravel © * Molybdenum, Gold 





Vege be \ 





\ 
Hay 4 wai 
as. Milk ae \% 

arley _ 


f 2 

= “Con; per on! ‘a 

&, » Potatoes _ y j “ia \ Catton ‘si 
+" Sond ({ ~ \ 

Vegetables, iG, , \ Sheep Y} 


Ni C 





oC Citrus fy eee lil Ca 


@ 
m \ 
_ Send, Grevale ®. 
[NS U/ ~ Copper, Gold, 
Molybdenum, Silver — 


A 
Stone Beef cattle)) , 
7 fy 


Li} 
Beef cattle A y 


’ 








WORLD BOOK map 


beef cattle lies just south of the central mountains. The 
northeastern part of the state and the valleys in the 
mountain region also have many cattle ranches. North- 
east Arizona also has many sheep pastures. Most of the 
State's dairy farms lie southwest of Phoenix. 

Mining. Copper provides most of Arizona's mining in- 
come. Greenlee, Pima, and Pinal counties in the south- 
ern part of the state supply most of the copper. Gila and 
Yavapai counties also have major copper mines. Large 
amounts of gold, molybdenum, and silver are recovered 
as by-products of mining copper ore. Phelps Dodge, a 
major mining company, is headquartered in Phoenix. 

Coal, sand and gravel, and crushed stone are also im- 
portant mined products in Arizona. Coal is obtained 
from surface mines in Navajo County. Maricopa and 
Pima counties produce the most sand and gravel. Pima 
and Yavapai counties have large stone quarries. 

Electric power. Power plants that burn coal supply 
about 45 percent of the electric power generated in Ari- 
zona. Nuclear plants generate about 35 percent of the 
State's power. Hydroelectric plants produce most of the 
rest of the remaining power. 

Transportation. Arizona has about 56,000 miles 
(90,000 kilometers) of roads and highways. Interstate 10 


686 Arizona 





connects Tucson, Phoenix, and Los Angeles. The part of 
Arizona north of the Colorado River is isolated from the 
rest of the state by the Grand Canyon. No roads cross 
the canyon. 

Sky Harbor International Airport in Phoenix is the 
state’s busiest commercial airport. Tucson has the state's 
second busiest airport. In 1919, Tucson became the first 
U.S. city to have its own municipal airport. 

Several railroads provide freight service, and passen- 
ger trains serve several cities in the state. The Southern 
Pacific (now part of the Union Pacific) became the first 
railroad to enter the region, reaching Yuma in 1877. 

Communication. Arizona’s first newspaper, the 


Glen Canyon Dam, on the 
Colorado River in northern 
Arizona, was completed in 
1964. It helps regulate the 
river flow, and its huge gener- 
ators produce hydroelectric 
power. 


Manley Features from Shostal 


Weekly Arizonian, began publication in Tubac in 1859. 
Today, about 95 newspapers, including about 20 dailies, 
are published in the state. Arizona's leading papers in- 
clude The Arizona Republic of Phoenix, The Arizona Dai- 
ly Star of Tucson, and The Tribune of Mesa. Arizona's 
publishers also print about 110 magazines. 

The state has about 120 radio stations and 25 televi- 
sion stations. KTAR, then called KFAD, was Arizonas first 
commercial radio station. It began broadcasting in Phoe- 
nix in 1922. The state's first television station, KPHO-TV, 
began broadcasting from Phoenix in 1949. Today, cable 
television systems and Internet providers serve many 
Arizona communities. 


Government 


Constitution. Arizona is governed under its original 
Constitution, which was adopted in 1911. The Constitu- 
tion has been amended (changed) about 120 times. 

All amendments must be approved by a majority of 
the voters in an election. Amendments may be pro- 
posed by a majority of both houses of the state Legisla- 
ture, by petition from the voters, or by a constitutional 
convention. A convention may be called if approved by 
a majority vote of both houses, and then by a majority of 
the people voting on the question in an election. 

Executive. The governor of Arizona is elected to a 
four-year term. The governor may serve any number of 
terms, but no more than two terms in a row. 

Arizona has no lieutenant governor. A governor who 
dies or resigns is succeeded by one of the other four 
state officials elected by the voters. These are, in order 
of succession, the secretary of state, attorney general, 
state treasurer, and superintendent of public instruction. 
All serve four-year terms. They may serve any number of 
terms, but no more than two in a row. 

Legislature consists of a 30-member Senate and a 60- 
member House of Representatives. Each of Arizona’s 30 
legislative districts elects one senator and two repre- 
sentatives to two-year terms. These officials may serve 


any number of terms, but no more than four in a row. 
The Legislature meets each year on the second Monday 
in January. Rules have been adopted to end the sessions 
no later than the Saturday after the 100th day. But the 
president of the Senate and the speaker of the House of 
Representatives may extend a session for no longer than 
seven days. After that, the session can be extended only 
by a majority vote of the Legislature. The governor may 
call a special session, which has no time limit. 

Courts. The highest court in Arizona is the state 
Supreme Court. Its five justices are appointed to six-year 
terms by the governor from a list of candidates submit- 
ted by a Commission on Appellate Court Appointments. 
At the end of each justice's term, the judge runs unop- 
posed as a nonpartisan candidate and the voters decide 
if the judge should be retained. The justices elect one of 
their members as chief justice for a five-year term. 

A state Court of Appeals was created in 1965. This 
court has two divisions, one centered in Phoenix and the 
other in Tucson. The Phoenix division has 15 judges, and 
the Tucson division has 6 judges. These judges serve 
six-year terms and are selected and retained in the same 
way as are Arizona Supreme Court justices. Superior 
Courts in each county handle most major criminal and 


civil cases. Superior Court judges in Maricopa and Pima 
counties are appointed by the governor to four-year 


governments general revenue (income). Four taxes pro- 


The governors of Arizona 


Arizona _ 687 


terms. In other counties, Superior Court judges are Party Term 
elected to four-year terms. After that, voters decide George W. P. Hunt Democratic 1912-1917 
whether they are retained. Justice-of-the-peace courts Thomas E. Campbell Republican 1917 
and municipal courts deal with less important cases. Some. Caeintien sated taba 
Local government in Arizona is carried on through George W. P. Hunt Detnneratic 1923-1929 
15 counties and over 80 incorporated cities and towns. John C. Phillips Republican 1929-1931 
Counties are governed by a three- or five-member George W. P. Hunt Democratic 1931-1933 
board of supervisors. Supervisors are elected to four- Benjamin B. Moeur Democratic § =—-1933-1937 
year terms. Counties have either a county-manager or newoue C. Stanford Democratic 1937-1939 
ae : obert T. Jones Democratic 1939-1941 
an administrator who conducts the daily business of the Sidney P. Osborn ee 1941-1948 
county and is guided by the board of supervisors. Dan E. Garvey Danacraic 1948-1951 
Communities with over 1,500 people may vote to in- J. Howard Pyle Republican 1951-1955 
corporate their community as a city or town. Towns in Ernest W. McFarland Democratic 1955-1959 
Arizona are governed by councils of five or seven mem- Paul eee qiene Republican 1959-1965 
; bers, depending on the size of the community. The . pa tae ahaa pa Retin pac 
| council elects one of its members as mayor. Some Ari- Raul H. Castro Denieeratic 1975-1977 
f zona cities also use this same system. However, a city Wesley Bolin Democratic 1977-1978 
: may adopt a Aome rule charter, which allows it to Bruce E. Babbitt Democratic 1978-1987 
| change the form of its government. More than 60 cities, Evan Mecham Republican 1987-1988 
including most of the largest ones, have city managers. Rose Mofiord Democrate 1988-1991 
! Revenue. Taxes provide about 60 percent of the state Fite Syauesian Repu ear Pe! 
| ; Jane Dee Hull Republican 199M 
| 


duce almost all the tax money. These are (1) a sales tax, 
(2) income taxes on corporations and individuals, (3) a 


tax on motor fuels, and (4) property taxes. Federal grants 
and U.S. and local government programs provide about 
| a fourth of the general revenue. Most of the rest of the 


government's revenue comes from taxes on licenses. 
Politics. For many years, Democrats controlled Ari- 
zona politics, particularly on the local level. Since 1950, 








Betsy Fernald-Maiter, Hillstrom Stock Photos 


The Arizona House of Representatives meets in Phoenix, the state capital. Arizona's legislature 
consists of a 60-member House of Representatives and a 30-member Senate. Both senators and 
representatives are elected by Arizona's voters to serve two-year terms. 


HI 
>» 


688 Arizona 


however, Republicans have won the support of many 
voters in Arizona's rapidly growing cities. The state's 
largest city, Phoenix, usually produces a Republican ma- 
jority. Democratic strength is greater in rural areas and 
small towns. 

Maricopa County, in which Phoenix is located, has a 
majority of the state's voters. As a result, that county is 
extremely important in elections. Among the Republican 


leaders who helped make Arizona a two-party state was 
U.S. Senator Barry M. Goldwater, the Republican candi- 
date for president in 1964. 

In presidential elections, Arizona has voted for Re- 
publican candidates about two-thirds of the time, in- 
cluding most of the presidential elections since 1952. 
For Arizona's electoral votes and voting record in presi- 
dential elections, see Electoral College (table). 


History 


Early days. Indians have lived in Arizona for at least 
12,000 years. Over the centuries, many of them built 
large settlements and developed civilizations known as 
the Anasazi, also called Ancestral Pueblo; Hohokam; and 
Mogollon. The Anasazi, who lived in the north, were the 
ancestors of the present-day Pueblo Indians. The Ho- 
hokam, who settled in the Gila and Salt river valleys, 
constructed the largest irrigation systems in North 
America before Europeans arrived. Their descendants 
are the Pima Indians and the Tohono O odham, also 
known as the Papago Indians. The Mogollon lived in 
what are now eastern Arizona and western New Mexico. 
Apache and Navajo Indians moved into the Arizona area 
shortly before the Spaniards arrived. 

Spanish exploration. During the 1530s, stories 
reached the Spaniards in Mexico telling about the great 
wealth of the Seven Cities of Cibola. Spanish authorities 
sent a small group headed by Franciscan priest Marcos 
de Niza to find the cities. Niza, in 1539, became the first 
European known to enter the Arizona region. He report- 
ed seeing one of the seven cities from a distance. In 
1540, a much larger expedition led by explorer Francis- 
co Vasquez de Coronado traveled to Zuni pueblos and 
other Pueblo Indian settlements in what is now northern 
New Mexico. Lieutenants of Coronado visited Hopi 





pueblos and the Grand Canyon in what is now northern 
Arizona. The expedition found neither gold nor silver 
and returned to Mexico disappointed. 

Spanish settlement of Arizona began in 1629, when 
Franciscan priests established missions among the Hopi. 
In 1680, however, the Hopi killed their missionaries and 
threw off Spanish rule. In the late 1600's and early 1700s, 
Jesuit missionary Eusebio Kino founded a number of 
missions among the O'odham Indians in what are now 
northern Mexico and southern Arizona 

Because Spanish and mission Indian settlements had 
cattle, horses, sheep, and goats, they became targets of 
raids by Apache Indians. The threat of Apache attacks 
limited permanent Spanish settlement to the Santa Cruz 
river valley. There, in 1752, Spanish troops established 
the state s first white settlement, a military post at Tubac. 
During 1775 and 1776, the soldiers moved to Tucson. 
They built a fort there with high, thick adobe walls to 
protect themselves and the settlers from Apache attacks. 

Mexico won its independence from Spain in 1821, 
and the land that is now Arizona became part of the new 
country. In 1846, the United States went to war with 
Mexico. U.S. forces took control of the region. Under the 
terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which ended 
the war in 1848, the United States took possession of 


Ancient rock carvings offer 
evidence of Arizona’s early In- 
dian inhabitants. The carvings 
shown here, on Newspaper 
Rock in Petrified Forest Na- 
tional Park, have never been 
translated. 





Arizona 689 


Historic Arizona 






Oraibi is one of the oldest 
continuously inhabited settle- 
ments in the United States. It 

was built by Hopi Indians diyy* 
ing the 1100's. 


Father Eusebio Kino, a Jesuit, did 
missionary work in southern Arizona 
and northern Sonora, Mexico, from ci! 
1687 until his death in 1711. He start- . ‘ 

ed many grain and stock farms. ga" 











Tucson, originally a walled city, was 
established by Spaniards in 1776 as a 
military outpost for defense against 
hostile Indians. —s 





Geronimo, a leader of 
the Chiricahua Apache 
Indians, led attacks on 
soldiers and settlers in 
Arizona and New Mexi- 
co during the 1870's 


and 1880's. He finally Hoover Dam, completed in 1936, provides 
surrendered to federal water for generating power and irrigating land. 
troops in 1886. The state's other large dams include Coolidge, 





Glen Canyon, Parker, and Roosevelt. 


important dates in Arizona WORLD BOOK illustrations by Kevin Chadwick 


1539 = Marcos de Niza, a Franciscan priest, entered what is 1974 Construction began on the Centra! Arizona Project to 


now Arizona. provide water from the Colorado River to the state's 
1540 ‘Francisco Coronado led a Spanish expedition into needy areas. The project was completed in 1991. 
the region. 1975 — Raul H. Castro became the first Mexican American 
1776 ~—s Tucson was established as a military outpost. governor of Arizona. 
- 1821. Arizona became part of Mexico. 1981 = Arizona Judge Sandra Day O'Connor became the 
1848 ~— Following the Mexican War, Mexico ceded to the first woman appointed to the U.S. Supreme Court. 
| United States most of what is now Arizona. 1988 Governor Evan Mecham was removed from office. 
- 1853. The United States and Mexico signed the Gadsden He was replaced by Secretary of State Rose Mofford, 
Purchase, which added territory to Arizona. the first woman to serve as Arizona's governor. 
1863 Congress created the Arizona Territory. 1997. = Arizona Governor Fife Symington resigned. 
1912. = Arizona became the 48th state on February 14. 1998 jane Dee Hull, who had replaced Symington, was 
1936 Hoover Dam was completed. elected to a full term. She became the first woman to 


| 1948 = Arizona Indians received the right to vote. be elected governor of Arizona. 


690 Arizona 





Arizona Historical Society Library 


Tombstone, shown above in 1882, sprang up because of a silver-mining boom nearby. Gold and 
silver discoveries brought many people to the Arizona Territory. Lawlessness was widespread in 
Tombstone. The famous gunfight at the O.K. Corral took place there in 1881. 


New Mexico. At that time, New Mexico included Ari- 
zona as far south as the Gila River. Many Easterners op- 
posed the treaty because they feared that slavery would 
be established in the newly acquired land. But the U.S. 
Senate approved the treaty. 

In 1853, the United States and Mexico signed the 
Gadsden Purchase. Through this treaty, the United 
States acquired the region south of the Gila River that 
forms the present boundary between the United States 
and Mexico. 

Territorial days. The Civil War (1861-1865) brought 
great political changes to Arizona. In the 1850's, the set- 
tlers had asked Congress to create an Arizona Territory, 
but their requests were ignored. After the Confederacy 
was formed, many Arizona settlers wanted to join it be- 
cause they had come from the South. They chose a dele- 
gate to the Confederate Congress. 

In 1862, the Confederacy sent troops to occupy the 
New Mexico and Arizona areas. Union forces defeated 
the Southerners. In 1863, the Confederate government 
created the Confederate Territory of Arizona. The action 
had little meaning because of the earlier military defeat. 

The Confederate activity led to action by the United 
States. Congress created the Arizona Territory with 
boundaries about the same as those of the present state. 
On Dec. 27, 1863, John N. Goodwin officially took control 
of the area as territorial governor. Goodwin established 
his headquarters at Fort Whipple. A log house was built 
for him not far from the fort. The town of Prescott grew 
up around this house. 

Indian fighting. Arizona's few settlers lived in fear of 
hostile Indians. The Navajo were defeated in 1864 ina 
campaign led by the famous scout Kit Carson. But the 
Apache continued to fight. Small bands of warriors 


made hundreds of raids on lonely ranches and outposts 
throughout the Southwest. Under such leaders as 
Cochise, Geronimo, and Mangas Coloradas, the Apache 
even attacked forts and towns. The last raiding party un- 
der Geronimo finally surrendered on Sept. 4, 1886. 

Territorial progress. In spite of almost constant In- 
dian fighting, Arizona made great progress. Gold and 
silver discoveries brought many miners to the territory. 
As early as 1867, farmers in the Salt River Valley near 
present-day Phoenix began irrigating their fields. Ranch- 
ing became a large-scale business during the 1880's. The 
rich copper mines of Arizona became highly developed 
in the 1880's and 1890's. The Southern Pacific Railroad 
entered Arizona from California on Sept. 30, 1877. 

Statehood. Strong movements began about 1890 to 
make the territory a state. But Congress refused to act. In 
1910, Congress permitted Arizona to draw up a constitu- 
tion and apply for statehood. But again there was a de- 
lay. President William Howard Taft vetoed the bill be- 
cause the proposed state constitution would have per- 
mitted the voters to remove judges from office by a 
process known as reca//(see Recall). This clause was 
taken out of the Constitution, and statehood was ap- 
proved. Arizona became the 48th state on Feb. 14, 1912. 
The people soon changed their Constitution to allow the 
recall of judges. 

Progress as a state. George W. P. Hunt, a Democrat, 
greatly influenced Arizonas early history. He became 
the state's first governor and served seven terms. Hunt 
supported the development of dams and irrigation sys- 
tems, and he worked for laws favorable to the ranching 
and mining industries. 

Federal projects helped the new state in water devel- 
opment and tourism. The first big dam providing irriga- 





tion water was the Theodore Roosevelt Dam, completed 
in 1911 on the Salt River above Phoenix. More dams 
were built during the next 25 years. Coolidge Dam on 
the Gila River, Bartlett Dam on the Verde River, and 
three more dams on the Salt River added greatly to the 
State's irrigated area. The biggest dam, Hoover Dam on 
the Colorado River, was completed in 1936. The U.S. 
government helped increase tourism by developing 
scenic and historic spots. The warm, dry climate attract- 
ed health seekers and winter visitors. 

During World War | (1914-1918), cotton became an 
important crop. The amount of irrigated land expanded 
rapidly, and agricultural production increased. Farmers 
became reliant on water pumped from the ground. Ari- 
zonas copper production increased through the 1920s. 
The Great Depression of the 1930's forced workers in 
many parts of the nation to seek new jobs. Some of 
them settled in Arizona. Between 1920 and 1940, the 
population grew from 334,162 to 499,261. 

The mid-1900’s. During World War II (1939-1945), the 
government built many air bases in Arizona because the 
large number of sunny days provided ideal flying weath- 
er. The demand for Arizonas chief products—cattle, 
copper, and cotton—increased rapidly during the war- 
time boom. Phoenix doubled in size. 

The boom continued into the 1950's. Thousands of 
veterans who had been stationed in Arizona returned 
with their families to live there. Air conditioning became 
widespread and made life pleasant in the desert region. 
As aresult, many people, including large numbers of re- 
tired persons, moved to Arizona from the East. The 
States population rose by about 50 percent during the 
1940's and by about 74 percent in the 1950's. 

In 1948, Arizona's Indians won the right to vote. The 


Arizona 691 


Arizona Supreme Court struck down parts of the state 
Constitution that had kept Indians from voting. 

Arizona shifted from an agricultural to a manufactur- 
ing economy during the 1950's and 1960's. By 1967, the 
value of industrial production had reached $1 billion, 
compared with about $600 million for agricultural prod- 
ucts. New factories produced a wide variety of electrical 
and electronic goods, including appliances, computers, 
and refrigeration equipment. Arizonas warm winters at- 
tracted an increasing number of vacationers, and tour- 
ism became an even larger industry. 

Growth in agriculture, manufacturing, and population 
during the 1940's and 1950's strained Arizona’s water re- 
sources. By the 1960's, the state was pumping more wa- 
ter from its underground supply than it was getting 
from rainfall. In 1963, the Supreme Court of the United 
States gave Arizona rights to 2,800,000 acre-feet (3.5 bil- 
lion cubic meters) of water a year from the Colorado 
River. One acre-foot (1,233 cubic meters) is equal to 1 
acre (0.4 hectare) of water 1 foot (30 centimeters) deep 
and will supply about five city dwellers for one year. 

In 1965, Judge Lorna Lockwood was elected chief jus- 
tice of the Arizona Supreme Court. Her election by her 
fellow judges made her the first woman in the United 
States to head a state supreme court. 

Arizonas Indians made economic gains during the 
1960's. Several tribes started to operate business compa- 
nies, factories, and industrial and recreational areas on 
their reservations. Navajo Community College, the first 
college ever built on an Indian reservation, opened at 
Many Farms, on the Navajo reservation in northeastern 
Arizona, in 1969. The college moved to Tsaile in 1973. 

The late 1900's. In 1974, construction began on the 
Central Arizona Project, a system of canals, tunnels, and 





Museum of New Menxice 


Geronimo and his band of Apache surrendered to U.S. troops at Skeleton Canyon in 1886. 
Geronimo was captured several times and placed on reservations, but he escaped and returned to 
fight again and again. Apache fought throughout the Southwest from the late 1600's until 1886. 


692 Arizona 


pipelines designed to ensure the state a sufficient sup- 
ply of water. The project was completed in 1991. The 
system covers 336 miles (541 kilometers) and extends 
from Lake Havasu on the Colorado River to the San 
Xavier Indian Reservation southwest of Tucson. 

In 1975, Raul H. Castro became governor. He was the 
first Mexican American to be elected to the office. 

In 1981, President Ronald Reagan appointed Arizona 
Judge Sandra Day O Connor to the Supreme Court of 
the United States. She became its first woman member. 

In the late 1900's, casino gambling became an impor- 
tant source of revenue for many Arizona Indian tribes, 
funding health, education, and housing programs on 
reservations. Tribes also used their allotments of Central 
Arizona Project water to create new agricultural projects 
or to sell to cities. 

In 1988, Governor Evan Mecham was removed from 
office by the state legislature. He had been charged with 
illegally lending state money to his automobile dealer- 
ship and trying to block an investigation into charges 
that one of his aides had made a death threat against a 
grand jury witness. The state House of Representatives 
impeached him. The Senate convicted Mecham on the 
charges, resulting in his removal from office. Secretary 
of State Rose Mofford finished Mecham’'s term, becom- 
ing the first woman to serve as Arizonas governor. 

In 1997, Governor Fife Symington resigned after be- 
ing convicted of fraud for filing false financial statements 
to banks. The actions occurred while he was a real es- 
tate developer, and before he was governor. Symington 
appealed his conviction in 1998. In 1999, the federal ap- 
peals court overturned the conviction. Secretary of State 
Jane Dee Hull, who had replaced Symington, ran in 1998 
for a full term as governor. Her election victory made 
her the first woman to be elected governor of the state. 

The early 2000's. The state’s economy remained 
strong through the late 1900's and into the 2000's. But 
declining copper prices and long labor disputes had led 
to severe economic problems in several mining areas. 

Arizona continued to be one of the nation’s fastest- 
growing states. Its population increased by 35 percent 
between 1980 and 1990 and by 40 percent between 1990 
and 2000. The population growth shifted to cities and 
away from rural areas. 

Lay James Gibson and Thomas E. Sheridan 
Related articles in World Book include: 


Biographies 


Castro, Raul H. Hayden, Carl T. 


Cochise Kino, Eusebio F. 
Coronado, Francisco ¥. de Lowell, Percival 
Earp, Wyatt vicCain_ John Sidney, III 


Geronimo 
Goldwater, Barry M. 
Greenway, John C 


©) Connor, Sandra D. 
Rhodes. John J 


Mesa Scottsdale Tucson 

Phoenix Tombstone Yiima 
Histon 

Anasazi Men'cain W 

Cibola, Seven Cities of M ert 

Gadsden Purchase Mogatlo 


Guadalupe Hidalgo, Treaty ot Westels teontie: in 
Indian, American \ 
Indian wars 


Physical features * 


Petrified Forest 
Salt River 


Lake Powell 
Meteor Crater 
Painted Desert 


Colorado River 
Gila River 
Grand Canyon 


Other related articles 


Hopi Indians 
Navajo Indians 
Pima Indians 


Cactus 

Glen Canyon Dam 

Grand Canyon National Park 
Hoover Dam 


Outline 
1. People 
A. Population C. Libraries and museums 
B. Schools 


ll. Visitor’s guide 
A. Places to visit 

il. Land and climate 
A. Land regions 
B. Rivers, waterfalls, and lakes 
C. Plant and animal life 
D. Climate 

IV. Economy 
A. Natural resources 
B. Service industries 
C Mining 
D. Manufacturing 

V. Government 
A. Constitution 


B. Annual events 


E. Agriculture 

F. Electric power 
G. Transportation 
H. Communication 


E. Local government 


B. Executive F. Revenue 
C. Legislature G. Politics 
D. Courts 
Vi. History 
Questions 


What Arizonan was the Republican candidate for president in 
1964? 

Who built Oraibi, one of the oldest continuously inhabited set- 
tlements in the United States? 

What natural wonder accounts for Arizona's nickname? 

What is the purpose of the Central Arizona Project ? 

Where is the largest area of ponderosa pine in the United 
States? 

How has air conditioning helped Arizona's population growth? 

When did Arizona’s Indians receive the right to vote? 

Who was George W. P. Hunt and how did he influence Arizona's 
early history? 

What are Arizona's most valuable crops? 

Why were air bases set up in Arizona during World War II? 


Additional resources 


Levell 

Filbin, Dan. Arizona. Lerner, 1991. 

Fradin, Dennis B. Arizona. Childrens Pr., 1993. 
Heinrichs, Ann. Arizona. Childrens Pr., 1991. 
Mell, Jan. Grand Canyon. Crestwood Hse., 1988. 


Level II 

Arizona Atlas and Gazetteer. DeLorme Mapping, 1993. 

Epple, Anne O. A Field Guide to the Plants of Arizona. Falcon Pr. 
Pub. Co., 1995. 

Frazier, Donald S. Blood & Treasure: Contederate Empire in the 
Southwest. Tex. A & M Univ. Pr., 1995. History of Arizona and 
New Mexico during the Civil War. 

Leshy, John D. The Arizona State Constitution. Greenwood, 1993. 

Luckingham, Bradford. Phoenix Univ. of Ariz Pr., 1989. 

Miller, Tom, ed. Arizona. Univ. of Ariz. Pr., 1986. 

Otticer, James E. Hispanic Arizona: 1536-18356. Univ. of Ariz. Pr., 
1987. 

Sheridan, Thomas E. Arizona. Univ. of Ariz Pr., 1995. 

Weaver, Thomas, ed. Indians of Arizona. Univ. of Ariz. Pr., 1974. 

Weir, Bill, and Blake, Robert. Arizona Travelers Handbook 6th 
ed. Moon Travel, 1996. 

Weisiger, Marsha L. Land of Plenty: Oklahomans in the Cotton 
Fields of Arizona, 1933-1942, Univ. of Okla. Pr., 1995. 





Arizona (ship). See Pearl Harbor (The war memorial). 
Arizona, University of, is a state-supported coedu- 
cational institution in Tucson, Arizona. It has colleges of 
agriculture, architecture, arts and sciences, business 
and public administration, education, engineering and 
mines, law, medicine, nursing, and pharmacy. It also has 
a graduate college; a graduate library school; and 
schools of family and consumer resources, health- 
related professions, and music. Courses at the University 
of Arizona lead to bachelor's, master’s, and doctor's de- 
grees. 

The university's Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, Stew- 
ard Observatory, and astronomy department operate 
several observatories. The University Museum of Art in- 
cludes the Samuel H. Kress Collection of Renaissance 
paintings and the C. Leonard Pfeiffer Collection of con- 
temporary American art. 

The University of Arizona was chartered in 1885. The 
university opened in 1891. 

Critically reviewed by the University of Arizona 
Arizona State University is a coeducational state- 
supported university with campuses in Tempe, Phoenix, 
and Mesa. The university offers programs in architec- 
ture, business, education, engineering, fine arts, law, lib- 
eral arts and sciences, nursing, and social work. Arizona 
State University grants bachelor’s, master’s, and doctor's 
degrees. The Center for Meteorite Studies, which is in 
Tempe, houses one of the world’s largest collections of 
meteorites. 

The school was founded in 1885. It became a universi- 
ty in 1958. Critically reviewed by Arizona State University 
Ark usually refers to the vessel that sheltered Noah and 
his family during the De/uge (great flood) described in 
the Bible (Gen. 6). In addition, the word applies to the 
basket in which Moses's mother hid him. In Jewish syna- 
gogues, the ark is the cabinet that holds the scrolls of 
the 7orah, the first five books of the Old Testament. Ark 
comes from the Latin word arca, meaning chest, box, or 
coffer. In Europe, ark used to mean a chest or closed 
basket for storing valuables or other goods. In the 
United States, ark referred to a large flatboat used on 
western rivers during the expansion of the country. 

H. Darrell Lance 

See also Ark of the Covenant; Deluge; Noah. 


Ark of the Covenant 693 





Josh Young, Untversity of Arizona 


The University of Arizona campus in Tucson includes Bear 
Down Gymnasium, /eft_ and the main library, right 


Ark of the Covenant was a sacred wooden chest de- 
scribed in the Bible as representing God's presence. It 
was called the Ark of the Covenant because it symbol- 
ized the covenant a special agreement that the Israelites 
made with God at Mount Sinai. 

Descriptions of the Ark appear in chapters 25 and 37 
of the Book of Exodus. A craftworker named Bezalel 
built the Ark in the wilderness while the Israelites wan- 
dered from Egypt toward the Promised Land (present- 
day Israel). The Ark was kept in a tent and equipped with 
poles for carrying. It enclosed the tablets inscribed with 
the Ten Commandments. See Tabernacle. 

The Israelite leader Moses communicated with God 
before the Ark, and the Israelites carried it into battle to 
ensure victory. When the Israelites entered the land of 
Israel, their priests carried the Ark before them over the 
Jordan River. The Philistines captured the Ark during a 
battle, but returned it seven months later. King David 
eventually brought the Ark to Jerusalem in a great pro- 
cession. His son, King Solomon, installed it permanently 
in his new Temple in Jerusalem. By the time the Babylo- 
nians destroyed the Temple in 587 or 586 B.C, the Ark 
had disappeared and was no longer mentioned in the 
Bible. The Ark does appear in later legends. Some peo- 
ple assume the Ark was destroyed by a conquering 


army. Others claim it is hidden. Lawrence H. Schiffman 


Detat about AD 239) trom the west wall of the Second Synagogue, Dura Europas, Syna; National Museum of Damascus (Art Resource! 





: ta 
ee 


Ge ge 
et wenn 8 4 


<r ot p= 


The Ark of the Covenant 
held the tablets inscribed with 
the Ten Commandments. The 
Israelites carried it during 
their wanderings. The Philis- 
tines captured the Ark atter 
the Israelites entered the land 
ot Israel. This tresco shows 
the Philistines returning the 
Ark. 


694 Arkansas 








——— 


National Park 


The Buffalo National River flows past massive limestone bluffs in the Ozark Mountains in north- 
ern Arkansas. The state’s natural beauty and recreational facilities attract large numbers of visitors. 


Arkansas The Natural State 


Arkansas, AHR kuhn saw, one of the Southern States 
of the United States, is almost evenly divided between 
the Highlands and the Lowlands. The Highlands area, in 
northern and western Arkansas, has scenic mountains, 
forests, free-flowing streams, and land suitable for rais- 
ing livestock. The Lowlands area includes a plain along 
the Mississippi River in eastern Arkansas, sometimes 
called the Delta, and a plain in southern Arkansas. The 
Delta has some of the richest farmland in the United 
States, and the southern plain has extensive pine for- 
ests. Arkansas is knov he Natural State because of 


its natural beauty and abundant wildlife. 

Little Rock is the capital and largest city of Arkansas. 
The name Arkansas cc Indian term for the 
Quapaw tribe, know e downstream people. 

Millions of tourists vis ansas y year. Its clear 
lakes and streams at icationers who enjoy 
boating and fishing. Arkansas is famous for its spring 
waters, which many peo; Velp cure certain 

The contributors ot this a Vichael 8. Dougan, Profes 
sor of History at Arkansas State sitv¥ and auth Arkat 
sas Odyssey. The Saga of Arkansas frum Prehisto es to 
Present: and John G. Hehr, Protessor a ssociate Dea 
William Fulbright College ot Arts and Scie rt 


ot Arkansas. 


ailments. Mammoth Spring is one of the largest springs 
in the United States. Hot Springs is a famous health cen- 
ter and a national park. Crater of Diamonds State Park, 
near Murfreesboro, has a diamond mine open to the 
public. Tourists sometimes find valuable diamonds 
there and are permitted to keep their finds. 

Food processing is the leading manufacturing indus- 
try in the state. The production of paper and chemical 
products is also important. The Fort Smith and the Little 
Rock areas are the leading manufacturing centers. Ser- 
vice industries employ most of the state's workers. 
These industries include such activities as education, 
health care, real estate, retail trade, and transportation. 
Several large store chains and two leading trucking 
firms are headquartered in the state. 

Farming and mining are also important parts of the 
economy. Arkansas produces more rice than any other 
State. It is one of the leading states in raising chickens. 
Among Arkansas’ mineral products, natural gas and 
petroleum bring in the most income. 

Arkansas belonged first to France, then to Spain, and 
then to France again. The United States acquired the re- 
gion in 1803. Arkansas was part of the Louisiana Territo- 
ry until 1812. Then, it belonged to the Missouri Territory 
intil 1819, when the Arkansaw Territory was estab- 

shed. In 1836, Arkansas became the 25th state of the 
ion. 


Service 


Arkansas 695 


Interesting facts about Arkansas 


Pivot Rock. near Eureka WORLD BOOK illustrations by Kevin Chadwick 
< / 
m ae . Springs, balances on a base 
a only one-fifteenth as large as 
its top. 
1 : 
(angen Hay | The Basin Park Hotel in Eu- 
tal = reka Springs is seven stories 


tall, but every floor is a 
“ground floor. The hotel is 
built against a hillside, and 
each story opens onto the hill 
at a different height. 


+ Sea 





J al © ae. iga 
(BGGn RR eee “The Hanging Judge,” Isaac 
. Parker, brought law and order 
to the frontier from his court- Pivot Rock 


room in Fort Smith. He served 
from 1875 until his death in 


) re, 1896 as judge of the federal courts Western District of Arkansas. 
bis shai ) pt. ee Parker was widely known for his harshness. He sentenced 160 

| = Bee = ae men to death, 79 of whom were hanged. 

| ) suaueaeine = The city of Texarkana is di- 


vided by the Arkansas-Texas 
state line. Texarkana has two 
city governments—one for the 
Arkansas side and one for the 
Texas side. The Texarkana post 
office building stands in both 
states. Its address is “Texar- 
kana, Arkansas-Texas.” 


The largest federal trout 
hatchery in the United States 
is the Norfork National Fish 
Hatchery in Mountain Home. 
Each year, this hatchery raises 
over 2 million trout from eggs 
until they are about 9 inches Texarkana post office 
(23 centimeters) long. The fish 

are placed in streams in Arkansas, Missouri, and Oklahoma. 





. 7 i Matt Bradley = The first jockey to win 100 stakes races worth $100,000 or 
Little Rock, the capital and largest city of Arkansas, ranks as the more was Bill Shoemaker. He won his 100th stakes race at Oak- 
state's main center of transportation and trade. It lies on the lawn Park in Hot Springs on March 30, 1974. 


south bank of the Arkansas River. 


Matt Bradley 


Rice is harvested on many 
Arkansas farms. The state pro- 
duces about one-third of the 
nation’s rice. Rice ranks as 
Arkansas’s leading crop, and 
soybeans rank second. 





Arkansas in brief 





Symbols of Arkansas 


On the state flag, adopted in 1924, the dia- 
mond-shaped design represents Arkansas as 
a major diamond-producing state. On the 
state seal, adopted in 1907, a shield against 
the breast of an American eagle displays a 
steamboat, a beehive, a plow, and a sheaf of 
wheat—all symbols of industrial and agricul- 
tural wealth. The Goddess of Liberty stands 
above the eagle. The Angel of Mercy and the 
Sword of Justice stand on the sides. 





State seal 


a ed # = 


| ‘wa 
ae, f ve 
a ge 





VEU, 


Arkansas (brown) ranks 27th in size among all the states 
and 3rd in size among the Southern States (yellow). 


General information 


Statehood: June 15, 1836, the 25th state. 
State abbreviations: Ark (traditional); AR (postal). 
State motto: Regnat Populus (The People Rule). 
State anthem: “Arkansas.” Words and music by Mrs. Eva The State Capitol is in Little Rock, the capital of Arkansas 
Ware Barnett. since 1821. It is modeled after the U.S. Capitol. Arkansas 
Post was the capital from 1819 to 1821. 





Land and climate 


Area: 53,183 mi: (137,742 km‘), including 1,107 mi? (2,867 
km} of inland water. 

Elevation: Highest—Magazine Mountain, 2,753 ft (839 m) 
above sea level. Lowest—Quachita River in Ashley and 
Union counties, 55 ft (17 m) above sea level. 

Record high temperature: 120 °F (49 °C) at Ozark on 
Aug. !0. 1936. 

Record low temperature: - 29 “F (-34 °C) in Benton 
County on Feb. 13, 1905. 

Average juty temperature: 81 F (27°C). 

Average January temperature: 40 “F (4 “C). 

Average yeaily precipitation: 49 in (124 cm). 










Impertant dates Rene-Robert Cavalier. Sieur de La Salle, Arkansas becar 
claimed the Mississippi Valley for France. 25th state on 





= a 
= 82 a all 3 ee 
The United States acquired Arkansas 
as part of the Louisiana Purchase. 


Hernando de Sotc 
explored the regi 






) 
| 
q 
\ 








State bird State flower State tree 
Mockingbird Apple blossom Pine tree 
People Population trend Year Population 
. 2000 2,673,400 
Population: 2,673,400 (2000 census) Millions 1990 2.362239 
Rank among the states: 33rd 4 1980 2,286,419 


Density: 50 per mi? (19 per km’), U.S. 
average 78 per mi? (30 per km’) 


Distribution*: 53 percent urban, 47 
percent rural 


Arkansas 






1970 123,322 
1960 1,786,272 
1950 1,909,511 
1940 1,949,387 
1930 1,854,482 
1920 1,752,204 
1910 1,574,449 


Largest cities in Arkansas 2 1900 ‘1,311,564 
Little Rock 183,133 es seria se 
Fort Smith 80,268 1870 484,471 
North Little Rock 60,433 1860 435,450 
Fayetteville 58,047 Es come 
Jonesboro 95,915 9 == —— 1830 30,388 
Pine Bluff 55,085 1800 1820 1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 2020 1820 14,273 


Source: 2000 census, except for *, where figures are for1990. 


Economy 


Chief products 

Agriculture: broilers, rice, soybeans, 
cotton, beef cattle, eggs. 

Manufacturing: food products, pa- 
per products, electrical equip- 
ment, fabricated metal products, 
chemicals, machinery. 

Mining: natural gas, petroleum, 
bromine, crushed stone. 


Government 
State government 


Governor: 4-year term 

State senators: 35; 4-year terms 

State representatives: 100; 2-year terms 
Counties: 75 


Federal government 


United States senators: 2 
United States representatives: 4 
Electoral votes: 6 


Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 


Gross state product Services 68% 


Value of goods and services pro- 
duced in 1998: $61,628,000,000. 
Services include community, 
business, and personal services; 
finance; government; trade; and 
transportation, communication, 
and utilities. /ndustry includes 
construction, manufacturing, and 
mining. Agriculture includes 
agriculture, fishing, and forestry. 





/ \ 
Agriculture 4% Industry 28% 


Source: U S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 


Sources of information 


For information about tourism, write to: Department of 
Parks and Tourism: One Capitol Mall, Little Rock, AR 
72201. The Web site at www.arkansas.com also provides 
information. 

For information on the economy, write to: Arkansas 
Department of Economic Development, One Capitol 
Mall, Little Rock, AR 72201. 

The state's official Web site at www.state.ar.us also pro- 
vides a gateway to much information on Arkansas's 
economy, government, and history. 


697 


Former Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton 
was president of the United States. 


‘state adopted its The National Guard helped enforce a court order 
constitution. to integrate Little Rock's Central High School. 








1993-2001 


= = eae — 


The Arkansas River Development program opened the river 
to navigation from the Mississippi River to Oklahoma. 





698 Arkansas People 


Population. The 2000 United States census reported Population density 


that Arkansas had 2,673,400 people. The state’s popula- About half of the people in Poe ae eile 
tion had increased about 14 percent over the 1990 cen- Arkansas live in one of the More than 100 More than 40 
sus figure, 2,350,725. According to the 2000 United state's seven metropolitan ar- 50 to 100 20 to 40 
States census, Arkansas ranks 33rd in populationamong 3° Little Rock is the largest 25 to 50 10 to 20 
fs Settities. city and the state capital. teen eer 


About half of the people of Arkansas live in metropoli- 
tan areas (see Metropolitan area). Four metropolitan ar- 
eas lie entirely in Arkansas—Fayetteville-S pringdale- 
Rogers, Little Rock-North Little Rock, Jonesboro, and Brayettevitie 
Pine Bluff. The Fort Smith metropolitan area lies mainly : 
in Arkansas and extends into Oklahoma. The Memphis , 
(Tennessee) and Texarkana (Texas)-Texarkana areas lie . 
mainly in Tennessee and Texas, respectively. For the er Smith 
populations of the state's metropolitan areas, see the /n- a 
dex to the political map of Arkansas. 

Little Rock, the state capital, is the largest city in 
Arkansas. It has a population of about 183,000. Arkansas Hot Spungen 
has nine other cities with a population of more than . 4 
30,000. These cities, in order of population, are Fort 
Smith, North Little Rock, Fayetteville, Jonesboro, Pine 
Bluff, Springdale, Conway, Rogers, and Hot Springs. 

About 16 percent of the people in Arkansas are 
African Americans. Other large population groups in- 
clude people of Irish, German, English, and American 
Indian descent. 


onesboro ; 


Conway 
fi i 


North Little ROMAIN) | 
Pliftle Rock / = 





~*~ ‘ 
ve. ~ . h 
=i H —_ +l 


1 tof Parks and Tounsm Matt Bradley 
A fisherman on the Ww hite Re Nn northern Arkansas displays Woodcarvers work in a home craft shop near Mountain View. 
his catch. The state's rivers and lakes attract many people who Woodcarving is a traditional craft among people of the Ozark 


enjoy fishing, boating, canoeing, and water skiing Plateau region of northern Arkansas. 


a 





Schools. When Arkansas became a territory in 1819, 
Congress set aside land in each county for a general 
school system. In 1820, the Reverend Cephas Washburn 
established Dwight Mission, the territory's first school, 
in Russellville. Washburn and other missionaries taught 
Cherokee Indian children in Russellville. In 1829, the ter- 
ritorial legislature provided for the construction of 
schools. 

In 1843, seven years after Arkansas became a state, 
the legislature provided for a public school system. The 
1868 Constitution provided for a system of schools for 
those between the ages of 5 and 21. A law passed in 
1909 required all children between 8 and 16 to attend 
school. This law now affects children from 5 through 16. 
Voters in 1948 approved a plan to consolidate the state's 
school districts. As a result, the number of districts was 


Universities and colleges 


- 


This table lists the universities and colleges in Arkansas that 














Mailing address 
University of : 
Baptist College Little Rock 
State University State University 
sas Tech University Russellville 
Arkansas, University of Conway 
ral Baptist College Conway 
g Universit Searcy 
erson State University Arkadelphia 
ollege Conway 
n Brown University Siloam Springs 
Batesville 
ac Baptist University Arkadelphia 
‘ks, University of the Clarksville 
lander Smith College Little Rack 
thern Arkansas University Magnolia 
tark College Fort Smith 
iams Baptist College Walnut Ridge 





is oak 


“Fores mpuses, see Arkansas, University of. 


Arkansas 699 


The University of Arkansas 
has several campuses 
throughout the state. The 
main campus, in Fayetteville, 
includes Vol Walker Hall, 
shown here, the headquar- 
ters for the Department of 
Architecture. 


University of Arkansas at Fayetteville 


reduced from about 1,600 to a little more than 300. 

The state department of education administers Arkan- 
sass public school system. The department is governed 
by the board of education. The board’s nine members 
are appointed by the governor. Their appointments are 
subject to the approval of the state Senate. 

The board of education appoints two directors. One 
of the directors serves as head of the general education 
division. The other director serves as head of the voca- 
tional technical division. The directors appointments by 
the board are subject to the approval of the governor. 
For information on the number of students and teachers 
in the state of Arkansas, see Education (table). 

Libraries. In 1843, William Woodruff founded the 
state's first subscription library in Little Rock. Members 
of this library contributed money to buy books, which 
they could then use without charge. The Helena Public 
Library, founded in 1888, became the first tax-supported 
library in the state. Jefferson County established the 
State's first countywide library service in 1926. In 1935, 
the Arkansas Library Commission was created by the 
state legislature. In 1979, the legislature changed the 
name of the commission to the Arkansas State Library. 

Today, Arkansas’s public library system includes 
county libraries and regional libraries. A number of 
Arkansas Cities also operate their own public libraries. 
The University of Arkansas in Fayetteville has a large col- 
lection of materials on Arkansas and the Civil War. 

Museums. A number of fine museums are located in 
Little Rock. They include the Aerospace Education Cen- 
ter, the Arkansas Arts Center, the Historic Arkansas Mu- 
seum, the Museum of Discovery, the Museum of Sci- 
ence and History, and the Old State House Museum. 

Other museums in the state are the Arkansas State 
University Museum in Jonesboro, Mid-America Science 
Museum in Hot Springs, Arts and Science Center for 
Southeast Arkansas in Pine Bluff, Shiloh Museum of 
Ozark History in Springdale, and University of Arkansas 
Museum in Fayetteville. 


3 4 5 6 7 8 










/ 






\ 
Perace. 
¥-xei6) AL a 





ae ct i 4 
cans Dee CYE 
Paa Ridge, ° Satiec } Bae CY 





























“ is Gragwwewe—. .. Pax ell °. . Lo? ale Sturkie, ¢ 
A a ve occ fl Eurek Boe gs sh Gace 1 on F } eWierte,. 
‘y ceterax rm: BENE pnville CARROLL shpeyaa 4 ' SOs ; 
Oecatury BENTON ’ 










F 
Waugis e Green ‘oe Farmetie 
as . on -e en Fepo 


: Lee ee Buford Roor 
Siloam Spring 5 e 



























































































































“yordar e%, 
+t Tor . | AS eo e ~ 1. Be § 
OZARK NATIONAC FOREST ze ay Wat ot iid *.,: C Violet Hille 
wake Fra i ie ag TCO Rock. ¢ Brocksvell 
B A irgie: +Fayettevil 3 ST irra ; ‘ ae Prestige G * OZARK WATIO Newburg tee ea 
Farmington ACHINGTON|  —n- = 1gskas . FOREST Sy, Melbourne iZARO a 
Suet (a ASHE e Pauley MAQISON 2 Ss * ry ONA ) a i « ae one ARD Soars Eve ae 
= ° ulora EA SPRINGS — Give” 4 
62 pear hs EO etovel® * meathen Gia: ' GAVERNS &) ee Pleasant, : 
= Be arres| Japtar e ° mo p< *MERMPS = rySivgt ‘er 

Witter ‘ “Babs DONO, Bae, Oma, ‘ec SF NGuION Seadtown , 
Payer Calle mq Dewey ’ Shows ersnen STONE [Mountain View: <Cushrvan 
Pi i Om Olen Timbo Moorefie 

| ) ¥ Oe vee 52 James ofasant Grove 

Ozank NATION@L FOREST, _ OZARK NATIO NA 
@ | , Oat, Salus og pete 
i re nates! Dar — For Dougias® = Bothinoury 
CRAWFORO SOS y Ruper, gard 
Mountal Boe § VAN BUREN eg 
ici Clinton’ 


> tet 

ScotSn e 

Culipeppe: ® 
Formosae 



















Svc | le i al oa 5 _ CLEBURNE Pangburf 
e S TEST He Pas ce ove Center R:age® ewutman 


ce, is livill Bota v 

= api jer = As yaa RB daint Vincert 
e@enny 3 2 gee “Dr "OOF, ane td Moway shea % ; gS rs & @ Ha: fe oqo 
Greenwood — wv LOGAN a ae 2 


















oue Mow “3 
>4ga" Croveg oe 


tas 


PERRY Perryville 






‘a 
Sates 
Vv nheie SCOTT 





ee. 
Harver, _}. sravetty & 
er aks —* Seve 
ic Gg 
e-edar Rex AN, 


QUACHITA NATIONAL FOREST 






AIR FORCE #1 ' ‘= 





Giacs Fork 
eo 8 O 














s, MONTGOMERY - 
Biac« Spr om ghtomman 






cone ly 


HOT SPRING J 









idehel . — *Pairnyta LINCOLN . 
OUACHITA : vs, r 
NATIONAL FORES Vai £ i = i ' i Garrett Brages 
. f 6 € 
emane _ ao =? , 
e e 


ragle Mills : ice 
i Camden fA ree =: — 

bs 795 =z) reooaDera, 
elrust Baye 






os 


coticitapat ~ 


° al nt Har, 


_pwepblDorado”) 


33 
" m=sier | 














e ‘ jie Wesson, oy. 
: —— “veg Creexs® ~o 
! — | Junction city, 
K | J a 
; Haynesvilia 
a \ 
a: | se at ’ HAL | 
1 2 a 4 6 z= ; < 
Main map spa‘ 
0 10 


160 


9 10 1 12 14 15 16 







MARK a NATIONAL 
FOREST 





j visa} 4 


Arkansas political map 


eWarm Springs 4 ; 41 g ° 
S Middlebrook” a 














ee Maynara® p 
cee ark or other 
Armstrong Attica, Urban-arga © recreation area 
“aos sain MS iggetsy / F ; 
9S ; - 7 Park or other + Point of interest 


L ] recreation area 


x Major airport 
Forest or other 
conservation area Waterway B 










federal area 
Gosnall, 


© Blythevilte 
Manila. ,  MISSISSIPPF 
{Oak | 

ee ae © Roseiano 
Milligan Ridge 4 


\ 
st a 
osgSmitiitlé © 1 Hoxi 
2] yeotvnne So WRy 






State boundary Highways: 









a Military or other ———- Railroad 
; a mares) 







County boundary ===: Expressway 








CLAY County name — Other road 


&e) State capital Interstate 


b & rh > E on i wy _ 
Harrisbur poss ert Ted : ison @ County seat U.S. 
7] 








City or town 












Lambert conformal conic projection 
WORLD BOOK map 
Morton 
“"WOOORUFF 
Brit rinkley Gilly 
eHoluty 
F 






Bayou Mefo 
Wi DLIFE REP UGE 





@ ouston r, 
Bigelow, J H 
Aplin PERRY > "te, . Pi Lake Cc 
: f =< LITTLE ROCK 
1a ¢ 2" S AIR FORCE BASE 


fre es \ 
Thornburg melle © \ Macon® 


Nh (Lake | e : 
QUACHITA ag — is cy, 


NATIONAL FOREST “7 Su? Gravet Ridge® 
a mamelie pyLask! ‘| | 


Lake Winona ae 
‘ine fAentine 
a \ 


Vimy 
Ridge East 
ennd 


Sardis 
K 
Star HOT SPRING 

Magnet C 





11 
225 Miles 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 Miles 





350 Ktlameters 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 += 50 60 70 Kilometers 


702 Arkansas 


Arkansas Map index 


° Alleene 
Metropolitan areas nook 
Fayetteville: Alma 

Springdale” Almyra 
Rogers 311,121 Alpena 
smith 307,290 Alpine . 
(168,318 in Ark; Altheimer 
38,972 10 Dkial Altus 
onesboro : 82,148 
Little Rock: Amagon 
No h Little ROCK - 583,845 Amity 
Memphis (Ten 4,133,614 Amy 
(977,949 in Tenn. Antome 
59,866 in At Aplin 
107,199 1" Miss.) Appleton 
Pine Bluff. 94,278 Arden 
Texarkana (Tex. Arkadelphia” 
Texarkana 129,749 Arkansas 
(99,306 in Tex.; City® 
40,443 in Ark) Arkinda 
etal 
2 Ash Flat 
Counties Aehdown 
Arkansas 20,749 Gop Athens 
Ashley 24.209 4} 8 Atkins 
Baxter 48, AGE Atlanta 
Benton 153,406 A 2 Aubrey 
Boone 33948 A > Augusta® 
Bradley 2600 1 7 Aurora 
Calhoun . 5744 | 6 Austin 
Carroll 3.357 A 4 Auvergne 
Chicot 14,117 K 9 Avoca 
Clark 73,346 5 alch 
a 17.09 A 11 Bald Knob 
Cleburne 24,046 fe Banks 
Cleveland ~ g571 4H 7 Banner 
Columbia 25,603 . 1 5 Barber 
Conway 70,336 D 6 Bartiel 
Craighead 92,148 C 10 Barling 
Craword 53,247 C 2 Barton 
crittenden 50,866 -D 1 Bassett 
cross 19,526 pw Batavia 
Dallas 210 6 Bates -- 
Desha 15341 4 9 Bate sville® 
Drew 18,723 et Bauxite . 
Faulkner a6.014 ise - 
Franklin 7771 D 3 Bay Village 
Fuhon ..- 11.642.A 8 Bear Cree 
Garland 98,068 3 Springs 
Grant . 16464 G 6 Bearden 
Greene 37331 8B 11 Beaver 
Hem stead 43,587.41 3 Bee Branch 
Hot S$pnng 30,353 -G 5 Beebe 
Howard 14.300 +H 3 Beech Grove 
independ Beedeville 
ence 34.233. 9 Beime 
Ward 13,249 8 8 ast 
jackson 19.418 ..C 9 Bella Vistat 
efferson 94,278 G 7 Belletonte 
johnson 22781 © 4 Belleville 
Laiayette 9359 J 3 Ben Hur 
Lawrence 17,774, 8 10 Ben Lomond 
Lee 12,380 F 10 Benton? . 
tincoln 14.492.H 8 Bentonville® 
Little River 13628 1 2 Bergman 
Logan 27,486 D 3 Berryville® - 
Lonoke 37928 F 8 Bethel 
Madison 14243 B ? Bethel Heights 
Maron 1,140 A © Bethesda 
Miller 49.443 3 3 Beulah 
MississipP! 51979 C 12 Bexar 
Monroe 16.25 F 9 Big Flat 
Montgomery 9745 G 3 Big Fork 
Nevada 9955 | 3 Bigelow 
Newton agos Cc 4 Bigaers 
Duachita 28,799 1” 5 Biltstown 
Perry 19.209 5 Birdeye 
Phillips 6.449 G10 Birdsong 
pike 1 H Birta 
Poinset 25614 .U ! Bismarck 
Polk 9229 G -« Black Dak 
Pope 54.469 D 5 Black Rock 
praine 9539 F 8 Black Spmngs 
Pulaski caviar, © Blackton 
Randnip 19195 A Blackwell 
5t Francis 79329 + Blakely 
Saline a3529 Ff ¢ Blevins 
Scott 19,996 |! Bloomet 
Searcy g.261 °® Blue Ball 
Sebastian 115,071 Blue Fye 
Sevier 15,757 piue Mountain 
sharp 7.119 D Blue Springs 
Stone 11.499 4 Blut City 
Union a5 62° i Bluthon 
Van Buren 16,192 f aiytheville 
Washingt 157 pio eos — Board Camp 
white 67.\« l Bodca“ 
Wrndrutt o 74} t Boies 
Yell 77139 +! Bonanza 
Bonnerdate 
Cities, towns. and Bonn ay 
Rotkinouls 
ther populated ap 
Bnydsville 
places F radtord 
Abbott € 2 Bradley 
Aberdee"™ F 9 Bragg City 
Ada H 13 Branch 
Adnna ya7 (OH 13 Brastield 
A ns B 8 Brentwood 
Alabam Bp 3 Brackeys 
Alco (ot Brgqgsvitl 
Alexander CVA ua) 2 Bright Sta! 
Algoa p 10 Brightan 
Alicia 145 ©. 10 Brightsta! 
Alis Dp 3 Brinkley 


aK) 


Anmbos> =o 


— 
we ao 


yuh 


—~ 
= 


SVU 


Ter aruria se wi 


Brockwell 
Brookland esse 
Brownsville 
Bruno 
Bryant ; 9,764 
Buckner 396 
Buena Vista 
Buford 
Bull Shoals 2,000 . 
Burdette 129 
Burlington 
Busch 
Bussey 
Butlerville 
Byron 
Cabot 15,261 
Caddo Gap Pk 
Caddn Va ley” 363 
Calamine se: 
Caldwell 463 
Cale ‘ ey ey: 
Calhoun |. : 
Calico Rock 991 
Calion 516. 
Calmer .-: 
Camden? 13,144 
Cammack 
village 831 . 
Camp 
Campbell 
Station 228 
Canehill 
Caney 
Canfield 
Caraway 1,349 
Canisle 2,304 
Carrollton 
va ilie 
Carthage 442 
Casa - - 209 
c 294 
Caulksville 233 
Cauthron ae 
Cave City 1346 
Cave Springs 1,103 
Cecil --- 
Cedar Creek Par. 
Cedarville 1,133 
Center Point - - i 
Center Ridge 
Centerton . 2,146 
Centerville 
Central . 
Central —_® 
Central City’: 331 . 
Charleston® 2,965 
Charlotte 
Chatfield 
Cherokee 
vitiagt 4 6A8 
Cherry ill 
Cherry Valley 704 
Chester 99 
Chicot ae 
Chidester 335. 
Chismville 
Chnctaw -- 
Clarendon? 1 960 
Clarkedale_ - » 
Clarksvill e® 7,719 
Clay ; : 
Cleveland 
Cliftty .-- 
Clinton® 2,283 
Clover Bend 
Clow 
Coal Hill . 1,001 
College City 269 
college Heights 
Collins 
t 58 
Columbus 
mbs 
Compton 
Conco 255 
Conwa 43,\67 
Cord ? 
Cornnth’ 69 
Cornerstone 
Comerville 
Coming 3,679 
Corer 921 
Cotton Plant 960 
Cove - 383 
116 
Cozahome 
“rawtords Ve 514 
Crockets Bluff 
Cross Roads 
Cross Roads 
Cross Roads 
Crossett 6,097 
Crumrod 
Cry stal Springs 
Culler 
Curtts 
Cushman 461 
Cypert 
Datsy 418 
{ shark 
D rilas 
Daitn 
yarmnads* us 306 
tL) ynsby 
nville 2.392 
Nardanene 4 228 
Dato 97 


De Ann 
Deans Market 
Decatur 1,314 
Deckerville 
Deer 
Delaney - eS 
Delaplaine eee 
Delaware - A; 
Delight 311 
Dell . 251. 
Dennard =. 
Denning _ 270 
Denver ate 
De Queen 5,765 
Dermot 3,292 
Des Arco... 1,933 
Desha : ee 
De Valls Bluff 783 - 
De Wi ae: 3,552 
Diamond 
City 730 
Diaz 1,284 . 
Dierks 1,230 
Dixie -. 
Dixie 
Doddridge 
Doon 
ph 
Donaldson 326 
Dora a2 
Dover 1,329 
Dowdy Pea 
Drasco Wane 
Driggs 
Driver 
Dryden 
Dumas 5,238 
urham 
Dutch Mills Wear 
Dyer 585 
Dyess. ; 515 
gaale Mills a 
Earle . 3,036 
ast Camden . 902 
Edgemont - .s 
Edmondson 513. 
E t a. 161 . 
elaine . 5° 865 
a] Dorado® ; 21,530 
Elkins ee. 251 
Elm Springs = 1,044 
£1) Paso oe. 
Emerson Sele: 
Emmet _, 506 . 
England 2972 
Ennla 188 
Ethel 
Ftowa 36 . 
guclid Heights og 
fudora 2,319 
Eureka 
Springs 2,278 
Evansvil e 
Evening Shade 465 
Everton . 170 
Excelsior 
Fair Daks : 
Fairfield Bay 2,460 
Fairview 
Falcon 
Fargo 118 
Farmington 3,605 
a etteville 38,047 
Fe senthal 152 
Felton 
Fender 
Ferndale 
Fi Six 163 
Figure Five 
Fisher 265 
Fitzhug 
Flippin 1.354 
Floral 
Florence 
Floyd 
Fontaine 
Fordyce 4799 . 
Foreman 1,125 
Formosa__-- : 
rrest City 14,774 
Fort Doug>° 
Fort Smit ie 80,268 
Forum : 
uke . B14 
Fountain Hill 159 
Fountain 
Fourche 59 
Fourche junction 
Fox 
Franklin 184 
Fredonia 476 
Frenchmans 
Bayou . 
Fresno ; 
frendship 206 
Fulton 245 
Furlow . 
Gamaliel 
Gardner 
Garfield 490 . 
Garland 352 
Garnet 284 
Garret Grove 
Garrett 
Bridge , 
Gassville 1,706 
Gateway 116 


Genevia 
Genoa 
Gentry. 2,165 
eorgetown beer 
eorgetown 
Gethsemane Sore: 
Gibson’t 4,678 
Gilbert .- me 3S 
Gillett - 819 
Gillham . 188 
Gilmore . 292 
Gin City 
Glencoe 
Glendale 751. 
Glenwoo Wie 
Gold Cree\ aa |e 
Goodwin ae: 
Goshen tie 
Gosnell 3,968 
Gould 1,305 . 
Grady .--- 523 
Grand Giaise ee 
Grandview 
Grange eee 
Grannis SID - 
Gravel Ridget 34,232 
Grave —, ae 
Gravette 1810 
Gra onde cos aage 
Green Fore 2717 
Greenbrier 34042 
Greenfield Es 
Greenland 907 
Greenway 244 
G nwood? 7,112 
Greers Ferry 930 
Gregory a 
Grider «= *562- 
Griffithville 262 
Grubbs 438 
Guion . 90 
Gum Spnngs 194 
Gurdon 2276 
! 202 
Hackett 694 
Ha arville 
Ha ae 
Halliday ..- 
Ham urg? 3,039 
a 3 = 
ampton VS 
Canty Pi -, 518 
Harmony as 
Harrell 293 
Harriet oe 
Harrisburg 2,192 
Harrison® 12,152 
Hartiord 7Ti2 
Hartman 596 
Harve een: 
Haskell 2,645 
Hasty ae 
Hatfield 402 
Hattieville pat Oe 
Hatton 
Havana 392 
Haynes 214 
Hazen 1637 
Heber 
Springs® 6,432 
Hector. > 3 
Helena? r 6323 
Hem wallace ; 
Henderson 
Hensteyt 150 
Hermitage 769 
eth 
Hickory Flat 
Hickory Plains 
Hickory Ridge 384 
Higden 101 
Higginion 378 
Hig fill _379 
Highlan 986 
Hillemann 
Hindsville 715 
Hiwasse 
Holland 577 
Hollis 
olly Grove 722 
Holly Springs 
Hollywood 
Holub 
Hon . 
Hope® 10,616 
Hopper 
Horatio 997 
Horseshoe 
Bend 2,278 
Hnrseshoe pake . 321 
Hnt spring 35,750 
Hot 9 rings 
Village * 8,397 
Houston 159 
Howell 
Hoxie 2,817 
uff 
Hufiman 
Hughes 1,867 
Hulbert 
Humnoke 280 
Humph 806 
Hunt 
Hunter 152 
Huntin on 
Hunts! ye? 1931 


Huttig meee DD 





-pmoxrre 
wernt 


gad 


ngnexTOm® 


ama 


yer ® 


=~ am 


—_ = 
DHEOAAO™ 





oe ee EY SS & ~thEE* 


Arkansas 703 


Ida D 8 Marmaduke 1.158) 4B 11 Oppelo 725.H 13 Rosa ens Tollette 324-1 «3 
Imboden 684.B 9 Marshall® . ‘ote: 6 Osage ...- MB 4 Rose Bud 429 D 7 Tomato é "GAS 
Indian Bay G 10 Marvell .. . 1 395"F 10 Osceola 8,875 ..C 12 Roseland ~......: 1G ir Tontitown . ) 94288 2 
Ingalls .... a 7 Masonville  —s......... I 9 Owell . see ai 10 Rosston 265.1 4 Traskwood 548. K 14 
iron Springs, see Maumelle LOSS7e le 15 Ouachita oe. HW OS Round Pond £11 TRENTON Gell. B... G 10 
Parkers |-Iron Springs! Mayflower . Goon 15 Owensville i. J 13 Rover... . qe 4 Trumann 6,889 ..C 11 
Ivan. a 1G Maynard .. .. 381.A 10 Oxfo .642.B 8 Rowell . al oz, Tucker a. G § 
jacksonport ....235 C 3 Maysville |... moe. Ozan 8 leas Royal ... a4 Tuckerman ist 9 
Jacksonville.. 29.916 .1 16 McArthur Aa.l 9 Ozark° 33523 —0—S Rudy 126 Diez Tullis. ee ..358 K 14 
Jamestown .......... .C 8 McCaskill . 84.H 3 Ozone Cc 4 Rushin . Gane Tumbling Shoals D7 
FADIONE Bee ee |S McCrory . 1850.D 9 Palestine 741 E 10 Russell... .. .228.D 9 Tupelo 177 D 9 
Jasper?.......----496 B 5 McDougal ...195.A11 Palmyra .H 8 Russellville® .. 23682.D 5 Turner . wl 
jellesson ae G 7 McGehee 457 Ole leo Pangburn 64_D 8 Rye .. a D7 Turrell . 957 ..D 12 
Jennette 124 E 11 McKamie  —_........... } 4 Fansvan reget A er Saffell LC Twist. D1 
Jennie . J) 9 McNab __. eyed & Paragould® S22 Oli7ze bell Sage . ; eB 8 Tyronza 918..D11 
Jenny Lind D 2 McNeil . 662.) 4 Paraioma irektioe e ot? St. Charles 2261. G 9 Ulm 205. 9 
Jericho .. 184..D 12 McRae «i... 661..E 8 Paris® hie 3,70AeD 3 St Francis eee MARL e Unpite=t ee Gee 
Jerome 46.) 9 Melbourne® . . 1.673.B 8 Parkdale 377. K 8 St James ... re. Core Union .B 8 
ersey | @ Mellwood ...... ..... G 10 Parkers |-lron StJoe.... 63-6 6 Uniontown G2 
Jerusalem D 6 Mena®,. ....,-, 5.637 fF 2 Springsit 3499...) 16 St Paul... 163..C 3 Urbana K 6 
Jessieville a la Mendee..........311 .E 6 Parkin... .. . 1,602..D11 St Vincent. . aq OD 6 Urbanette =e /\ é 
Johnson . 2319.B 2 Middlebrook ...... .A 10 Parks. a ee Salado .. PAM of Valley Springs ..167.B 5 
Joiner... .. 540 D112 Midland 253g 2 Parnell ae Salem° .. m),59".A 6 Van Buren® 18,986 D 2 
Jones Mills 2 .........G 5 Midway. MTR ones. Paron . 14 Salemt. . ..2,789..G 4 Vandervoo;t .. 120 G 2 
Jonesboro® .. . 55,515. C 11 Midway .... eo 4 Parthenon -am.-pB 4 Salesville* ety hedel 7 Vanndale . eee 10 
Jordan. .... B 7 Milligan Ridge . nee 1Z Patmos .. ap pel alent Samples eG 7 Vatghtiaae a>... A 2 
Judsonia.. ... ...1,982..D 8 Mineral Patterson... ..467.E 9 Sand Gap a 65 Vesta . D 3 
Junction City 72) 4K 6 Springs. . .1,264.H 3 Payneway .. aD Vt Saratoga oo Ps! Vick — 04) ee 
Keiser ....... 808 ..C 12 Minturn... ..114. B 10 PeaRidge. ...2,346.A 2 Scotland a 6 Victoria s&s) 2S 174 
KelGo" 4...:--08.-3. 19 Mist) ar i 8 Peach Orchard ...195. A 11 Scottt ... 94..—£ 7 Village e| 5 
Kensett 1,791 D 8 Mitchellville NA97 HH aS Pearcy G 4 Scott Valley F 10 Vilonia .. 2.106 H 16 
Keo ... 235.F 7 Moark ee a Ae Pearson . D7 Scottsville .. oir 4! Mee Vimy Ridge . eee) Bis 
Kerr... . eu Moko . A 8 Peel : A 6 Scranton s..222.D 4 Viola Ny .381.A 8 
Kibler . 69 sz Monette 1,179", Call Pencil Bluff . aehsrteey St guabe | Searcy? . ..18,928..D 8 Violet Hill. eye, § 
Kingre foe... H 2 Monroe ..... _..........F 10 Perla .. iv Pills ..G 16 Sedgwick... ....112...B 10 Wabash G 10 
Kingsland 449 H 7 Monticello®... 9.146. 1 8 Perry . ..314 H 13 Selma coll 8 Wabbaseka 323 G 8 
Kingston. ———t... B 4 Montrose. ....... 526.) 9 Perrytown 255 1 4 Shady Grove ...... .J 15 Walcott eS il 
Kirby fe G 3 Moorefield. .....160.C 8 Perryville® .. 1458 E 6 Shannon Hills. .2,005.| 15 Waldenburg .. 80 .D 10 
Knobel . 358 All Moreland ay D 5 Pettigrew Te cA Shearerville Wien -at 1! Waldo ...... 1,594.] 4 
Knoxville 311 D 4 Morgan .. .. 415 Pettyview G5 Sheridan®. . ....3,872 G 6 Waldron® 3,508 E 2 
La Crosse . 6 8 Morganton .. =D 7 Pickens .D 8 Shernill oo ll4Se LG 7 Walker E 8 
Ladetllc) mem. ....... ji8 Morning Star. . B 6 Pickens ees elle Sherwood .— 21,511.1 16 Wallace .............1 2 
Laren... ee 385 4 11 Morning Star ) Beak 12 Paget 3,894. A 12 Shirley Be Pe OO Wainut Ridge® . 4,925 B 10 
La Grange 122 ..F 10 Moro lead. >" 241 F 10 Pike City . vicosscmmbt A Shives . Tee Elk Waltreak —...._... —E 4 
Lake City 956...C 11 Moro Bay . ee | Pindall 995 4B 5 Shoffner . sm Ward .......2580.E 8 
Lake Oick eG 8 Mornilton® . ..6,550.E 6 Pine Bluff? . =. 55,085 H 7 Sidney . 275.B 8 Warm Springs faci 10 
Lake Frances . Bal Morrison Bluff .....74..D 4 Pine Ci , aoe 12) Sidon iene Ot: Warren 6442.1 7 
Lake Morriston — . a, 7 5 Pine Ridge _. ee Siloam Washburn 74 
Hamiltont. 1609 G 5 Marton E 10 Pineville 246. B 7 Springs ..10,843.B 1 Washington .....148.1 3 
Lake View ... ...531.G 10 Moscow ... ..H 8 Piney’t eon eG Sims... t-te mG 3 Waterloo I 4 
Lake Village® ... 2,823.) 9 Mount Holly . . 1 5 Pinnacle ecm eS Slovak. ioe 8 Watson ...... .288 H 9 
Lakeport IN 55 9-4 } 10 Mount Ida° 981 F 3 Plainview. a/3a- Ee 4 Smackover. ..2,005.J 6 Watson Chapel. ... . H 7 
Lakeview ....... 763.A 6 Mount Judea . . mec 5 Pleasant Hill ....... .H 4 Smale ese - F 10 Waveland —E 4 
Lamar -=-1,415..D 4 Mount Olive . aes 7 Pleasant Plains 267 D 8 Smithton se HS Weathers B 4 
Lamartine eee © ee Mount Pleasant...401 B 8 Pleasant Valley wa. @H 14 Smithville... .....73.B 9 Webb City D 3 
iC 2 re B 6 Mount Vernon ....144..£ 7 Plumerville .. 854 £— 6 Smithville aimaK 3 Weber . H 9 
Laneburg al 4 Mountain Pocahontas® .... 6,518 B 10 Snow Hill . sl i6 Wedington iB 2 
Langley G 3 Home® 11012aA 7 PointCedar ...........G 4 Snow Lake 1H 10 Weiner 760. C 10 
Lapile .. ae Mountain Pine ..... 7720aF 5 Pollard ’ 240.A 12 Snowball C 6 Welcome amg Kl 4 
Lavaca . 1825.D 2 Mountain van ee. . sera 3 Ponca ..._.... B 4 Snyder ... ns Weldon 100 D 93 
Lawson... __........ J 6 Mountain Valley... .. .F 5 Poplar Grove... ...... G10 Social Hill. G5 Weona Dl 
Leachville . . 1,981 ..C 11 Mountain Portia ... 483 B10 Solgohachia....... D 6 Wesley B 3 
Lead Hill 1.267 .A 5 View? .. - 20760C 7 Portland . 552 Fj) -$ South Lead Hill’ B8.A 5 Wesson % K 5 
Leola . 515.H 6 Mountainburg ....682 C 2 Postelle . ee 10 Southside ........... D 7 West Crossettt.. 1,664. K 7 
Leonard 9 SUC Mulberry .... 1,627 D 3 Potter Bye Sparkman ...  5386.H 5 WestEnd  ........... G 7 
Lepanto 2 leoe onl Murtrees- Pottsville ee 271 me) 5 SpringHill ... ...... | 3 West Fork. . ..2,042.B 2 
Leslie .. abi. & boro® ..... ..1,764 H 3 pevghi etal ree B 9 Spring Valley . 8 3 West Helena. .. 8,689 G11 
Letona . ia. 201D 6 Nail a C 4 Powhatan .. 50 AB F9 Springdale 45,798 B 2 West 
Levesque .. At 10 Nance .... ee ake Poyen... . 212 PSs 6 Springfield 7 40) 1h Memphis . ..27,666.E 12 
Lewisville? 1,285 J 3 Nashville?. ... .4,878.H 3 PrairieCreekt ..1,849.A 3 Springhill “4 —E 7 West Point. ......164 E 8 
Lexa J317.F 10 Nathan “a seo. PrairieGrove .. 2,340 B 2 Springtown . NMEA 2 West Ridge . ie lz 
Ue a ee B 10 Natural Steps... ais Prairie View . £ D 4 Stamps .. mm ey P| Western Grove .407.B 5 
Lincoln 7527. Gore Naylor .. .. es Me Prattsville .. 282-—0G 6 Stanford “amet Wheatley 372_E 9 
Little Flock* 2585 A 2 Nelsonville BF 9 Presco 3,686.1 4 Starke © oo seeeres te ton H 9 Wheeler... ne ae 
Little Italy. 114 New Blaine D4 Prim {i 7 Star City? ....2471 H 8 Whelen Springs 84 | 5 
Little Rock®. 183.133. F 7 New Edinburg or ae Princeton H 6 Staves... nage 7 White . a K 7 
Lockesburg .... .711 H 2 New London Marke a fo Pas Proctor El Stephens....._ 1,152 | 5 White Hall AT 32eeG 7 
LocustBayou.......... leon G Newark 1Z19FE 3 Provo H 2 Stonewall _. . (omy vl Whitehall oe .D 10 
LocustGrove.. ........C 8 Newburg ps...5...---—8 8 Pruitt Bas Story . . Scr. ee Wickes 675 G 2 
Fondon.....=. «.’.. 925 D 4 Newell j 6 Pyatt 253 B 5 Strawberry. 283.B 9 Wideman ees 
Lonoke® . . 4287 F 8 Newhope imaG 3 Quinn Cet 96 Strong... . ...651 K 6 Widener . SE OS 5egt) 1) 
Lonsdale ... 118 K 13 Newport? . 7ottec 9 Quitman 714 4D 7 Stuttgart? . 79:2457 Ged Wiederkehr 
Lorado ; B 10 Nimmons 100 A 12 Ragtown . oom 10 Subiaco . 439 D 4 Village’... .46..D 3 
Louann . 15 9)° 3 Noble Lake H 8 Ralph .. B 6 Success . . ...180.A 10 Wilburn rae.D 8 
Lowell. ova S013.A 2 Nola .. Es 3 Randall H 7 Sugar Grove = 6) Wild Cherry B 7 
Luber ... Cc 7 Noriork 484 B 7 Ratcliff 19] wD 3 Sugar Loaf... A 5 Wilkins . E 10 
Ludwig . D 4 Norman - A23°SG eS Ravana am 2 Sulphur Rock 421 C 39 Williford < 63 B 9 
Lumber . mm): 4 Norphlet . 822.) 6 Ravenden Sil. 93 Sulphur Springs 671 A 2 Wibllisville 188 «| 64 
Lundell . .H 10 North Ravenden Sulphur Springs H 7 Willow . H 6 
Lurton t Oe Crossettt 3581.) 8 Springs 137 4A 9 Summers an 2 Wilmar . SIlg.| 98 
Luxora Wr kG ye North Little Reader 82,.! 5 Summit 586 B 6 Wilmot 786 K 8 
Lynn ~ 5. 315.B 9 Rock 60,433 1 16 Readland kK 3 Sunset’ 348 £ 12 Wilson 939. D 12 
Mabelvale J 15 Nunley Mee Ue Rector 2017.B 11 Swain .. Cc 4 Wilton .. asoel 2 
Macedonia .J 4 Oak Grove 376 A 4 Redfield 1,157, .K 16 Swan Lake SS) Winchester Wii 9 
cks . =a.c 9 Oak Grove D $3 Reed .. 275 1° #9 Sweet Homet. .1.070..| 16 Winslow 399 C 2 
Madison 5987 £ 10 Oak Grove Ewes Republican - O86 Swifton 871.C 9 Winthrop 186 H 2 
Magazine Sip £3 Oak Grove 14 Reydell . H 8 Tafton |-Wrights- Wiseman B 8 
Magness cam I9:.C 9 Oak Grove Reyno .. 484 A 10 villeP+ J 16 Witter . B 4 
Magnet Cove K 13 Heights” Peds) al) Rhea faaedB 2 Tamo H 8 Witts Springs C 5 
Magnolia® 10,858 | 4 Oakhaven 41 3 Rich F 9 Tarry , faa 8 Wiville E 9 
Maivern® . 9021 G 5 Oark C 4 Rich Mountain EF ee Taylor 366 K 4 Woodberry IH 16 
Mammoth Oden 220 F 3 Richmond I 2 Temple... I 3 Woodsont 445K 16 
Sprin 1,147 A 9 Ogden 2148I 2 Rison? H 7 Texarkana® 26.448 J 2 Wooster 516 E 6 
Mandeville : jae Ogemaw me je Rivervale (ih Thebes J 8 Worden ; D 9 
Manila 3,055 C 12 Oil Trough 218.0 9 Rockhouse A 4 Thida Des Wright Ay 
Mannin H 5 Okay i 3 Rockport G5 Thompson Grove E 11 Wrightsville 1.368 J 16 
Mansfield POE E 2 OKean 201_.B 10 Rockwell*+ G5 Thornburg 1 13 hi lta 8,615 ..E 10 
Marble B 4 Okolona 160 H 4 Roe F 9 Thornton sige 6 Y City (ep 
Marcella Cc 8 Ola 1.204.£ 5 Rogers A 3 Tichnor H 9 Yarbro B 12 
Marianna? 53,181 F 10 Olv B 5 Ro c I 9 Tillar 240 1 9 Yellville® 1 3IZ IB 6 
Marie 108 C 12 Omaha 165 A 5 Roland J 15 Tilton D 10 Yorktown H 8 
Marion® 8,901 _.£ 12 Oneida G 10 Rolla G 6 Timbo ciheeiG 6 7 Zent E 3 
Marked Onia Ce Romance D 7 Tinsman 751 7 Zinc 768 5 
Tree 2,800 .D 11 Onyx F 4 Rondo 237 F 10 Tokio H 3 Zion B 8 
“Does not appear on map. key shows general locatinn County seat. 


tCensus designated place unincorporated but recognized as a significam settled cammunity by the 


Places without population fiqures are unincorporated areas 
U5. Census Bureau 


Source 2000 census 





704 Arkansas 


Millions of tourists visit Arkansas every year. They en- 
joy the state's natural beauty, its many recreational facili- 
ties, and its historic sites. Nature lovers are drawn to 
beautiful caverns, limestone cliffs, forests, mountains, 
and streams. The state’s mineral and hot spring waters 
are considered helpful in treating persons with certain 
illnesses. Hot Springs has the most famous of these 
springs. The lakes and streams of Arkansas attract peo- 
ple who like fishing, boating, canoeing, and water- 





Places to visit 


Following are brief descriptions of some of Arkansas’s many 
interesting places to visit: 

Blanchard Springs Caverns, near Mountain View, have many 
beautiful formations. Camping, picnicking, and swimming are 
available nearby. , 

Crater of Diamonds State Park, near Murfreesboro, has a dia- 
mond mine open to the public. Visitors may hunt for dia- 
monds in the mine and can keep what they find. Thousands of 
diamonds have been found in the Crater of Diamonds, some 
of great value. 

Delta Cultural Center, in downtown Helena, offers exhibits ina 
Visitors Center and in a restored 1912 train depot on the cul- 
ture and heritage of the Arkansas Delta 

Eureka Springs, a Victorian resort town high in the Ozarks. isa 
favorite spot for tourists. Attractions include a Passion Play 
Beaver Lake, a botanical garden 
ment, and a steam-powered trai 

MacArthur Park, in Little Rock, hono 


nuseums, Musical entertain 


Ss Douglas MacArthur 


commander of Allied forces in the Southwest Pacific during 
World War Il. MacArth iplace, in the park, is now the 
Museum of Science and Histe he Arkansas Arts Center is 
also located in \ | 

Ozark Folk Cente: ft demonstra 
tions and musica ts. TI 7 


Visitors guide 


skiing. Hunters track black bears, deer, opossum, and 
raccoons in the southeastern lowlands and elk in the 
Ozarks. They stalk game birds and waterfowl in the rice 
marshes near Stuttgart. The Ouachita and Ozark moun- 
tain ranges are popular tourist attractions. 

The states most popular annual events are folk festi- 
vals and county fairs. One of the best-known events is 
the Arkansas State Fair and Livestock Show held in Little 
Rock in early October. 


Fishing on Lake Conway in 
central Arkansas 


Matt Bradley 


ET SE EE 


plex has a 1,043-seat auditorium, craft shops, a restaurant, a 
lodge, and a conference center. 

National forests and parklands. Arkansas has three national 
forests: Quachita in western Arkansas, which the state shares 
with Oklahoma; Ozark in northern Arkansas; and St. Francis in 
eastern Arkansas. Next to Ozark National Forest, the Buffalo 
National River preserves one of the last free-flowing streams 
in mid-America. Hot Springs National Park, in Hot Springs, in- 
cludes the famous Hot Springs resort. In addition to its 47 dif- 
ferent thermal springs, the park features many hiking trails 
through the Ouachita Mountains, scenic driving tours, and a 
variety of recreational activities. Pea Ridge National Military 
Park in the northwest was the site of a major Civil War battle. 
Union troops won an important victory there in March 1862. 
Arkansas Post National Memorial near Gillett marks the first 
permanent white settlement in Arkansas. Fort Smith National 
Historic Site in western Arkansas honors one of the first mili- 
tary posts in the American West. Central High School National 
Historic Site, in Little Rock, is an important civil rights land- 
mark. It was the site of a 1957 confrontation in the struggle to 
integrate U.S. public schools. 

State parks. Arkansas has 51 state parks and museums. For in- 
formation on the parks, write to Parks Director, Department of 
Parks and Tourism, One Capitol Mall, Little Rock, AR 72201. 


eS 





+ ee >... ? Lae 
BEEP SEI Qt ee NEO 
Arkansas Department of Parks and Tourism 


Crater of Diamonds State Park near Murfreesboro 


... Vea 


ha 
-| a 


Fs 
Matt Bradley 


Turkey Trot Festival in Yellville 


ee Ty 


oma @ q 
7: ] 
m=: (| . 
‘eo 
q 
fh)’ | 
i 
. 


- 2 


, lI 
ies Sa 
IG ae 
: a 


‘ 
J 


SO hed CD ny 79 


2 7 Eo 


Matt Bradley 


Oaklawn Park in Hot Springs 





Arkansas 705 
Annual events 


January-April 
Thoroughbred racing at Oaklawn Park in Hot Springs (late Jan- 
uary-April); Jonquil Festival in Old Washington State Park 
(March); Easter Sunrise Service in Hot Springs (Easter Sunday); 
Arkansas Folk Festival and Arkansas Craft Guild Spring Show 
in Mountain View (April); Springfest in Fayetteville (April). 

May-June 
Back-in-the-Hills Antique Show and Crafts Fair in War Eagle 
(May); Quapaw Quarter Tour in Little Rock (May); Rivertest in 
Little Rock (May); Arkansas-Oklahoma Rodeo in Fort Smith 
(June); Miss Arkansas Pageant in Hot Springs {June); Pink 
Tomato Festival in Warren (June). 

July-September 
Peach Festival in Clarksville (July). Rodeo of the Ozarks in 
Springdale (July); White River Water Carnival in Batesville (Au- 
gust); Greers Ferry Lake Water Festival in Heber Springs (Au- 
gust); Hope Watermelon Festival (August); Arkansas State Fid- 
dler's Championship in Mountain View (September); Antique 
Car Festival in Eureka Springs (September); Four States Fair 
and Rodeo in Texarkana (September); Wine Festival in Altus 
(September). 

October-December 
King Biscuit Blues Festival in Helena (October); Ozark Folk 
Center Family Harvest Festival in Mountain View (Octoben); 
National Wild Turkey Calling Contest and Turkey Trot Festival 
in Yellville (October); Ozark Trout Festival in Heber Springs 
(October); Rice Festival in Weiner (October); Ozarks Arts and 
Crafts Fair in War Eagle (October); Original Ozark Folk Festival 
in Eureka Springs {late October or early November); Arts, 
Crafts, and Design Fair in Little Rock (November); World's 
Championship Duck Calling Contest in Stuttgart (November); 
Arkansas Territorial Restoration Christmas Open House in Lit- 
tle Rock (December). 


Blanchard Springs Caverns near Mountain View 


706 Arkansas 


Land regions. Arkansas has five main land regions: (1) 
the Ozark Plateau, (2) the Ouachita Mountains, (3) the 
Arkansas Valley, (4) the Mississippi Alluvial Plain, and (5) 
the West Gulf Coastal Plain. The Ozark Plateau and the 
Ouachita Mountains make up the portion of Arkansas 
known as the Highlands. The Arkansas Valley divides 
these two highland regions. The Mississippi Alluvial 
Plain and the West Gulf Coastal Plain make up the Low- 
lands portion of the state. 

The Ozark Plateau is a \and region that covers parts of 
Arkansas, Illinois, Missouri, and Oklahoma. This region 
is often called the Ozark Mountains. In Arkansas, it ex- 
tends across the northwestern and north-central parts of 
the state. Rugged hills, deep valleys, and swift streams 
give the region great beauty. Thick forests and under- 
brush cover much of the region. Many fruit, livestock, 
and poultry farms are located in the northeast and 
northwest sections of the Ozarks. The southern edge of 
the region has a series of steep, wooded hills called the 
Boston Mountains. River gorges, 500 to 1,500 feet (150 to 
457 meters) deep, wind through these hills. 

The Ouachita Mountains region stretches from east- 
ern Oklahoma to central Arkansas. In Arkansas, it con- 
sists of a series of parallel ridges and valleys. Blue 
Mountain rises 2,623 feet (799 meters). Farmers cultivate 
some of the land. But the Ouachita region is best known 
for its timber and mineral resources, and for its hot 
springs. The Ouachita River flows through the central 
part of the region before curving south to Louisiana. 
Dams built along the river have created a chain of !akes. 

The Arkansas Valley, a broad, rolling valley region, 
lies between the Ozark Plateau and the Ouachita Moun- 





& BW Parsons 


Fertile farmland lies at the foot of Petit Jean Mountain, one of 
several peaks in the Arkansas Valley region. 


Land and climate 


tains. The Arkansas Valley is lower than the highland re- 
gions to the north and south, but it has several mountain 
peaks of its own. Magazine Mountain, the highest point 
in the state, rises 2,753 feet (839 meters) in the Arkansas 
Valley. The Arkansas River flows through the center of 
the region southeast into the Mississippi River. Deposits 
of coal and natural gas lie beneath the region’s fertile 
fields and pastures. 

The Mississippi Alluvial Plain \ies along the Mississip- 
pi River. This region extends from Missouri south to 
Louisiana, and it is sometimes called the Delta. It covers 
the eastern third of Arkansas. Much of the plain is low, 
level land, covered with rich deposits of soils carried to 
the region by the Mississippi River and its tributaries. 
Most of Arkansas $ major crops are grown in this re- 
gion. An excellent system of levees and drainage ditches 
protects the plain from flooding (see Levee). A narrow 
strip of hills called Crowleys Ridge stretches from north 
to south through the central part of the Mississippi Allu- 
vial Plain. The ridge is formed of gravel deposits and of 
wind-blown, yellow mineral particles called /oess. 

The West Gulf Coastal Plain covers sizable parts of 
Arkansas, Louisiana, and Texas. In Arkansas, it is a large, 
low region in the southwestern and south-central parts 
of the state. The coastal plain has pine forests, natural 
gas and petroleum deposits, and beds of bromine salts. 
Farmers raise livestock and poultry, and grow fruits and 
vegetables. The lowest point in the state—55 feet (17 me- 
ters) above sea level—is near the Ouachita River at the 
Arkansas-Louisiana border. 

Rivers and lakes. The Mississippi River forms the 
eastern border of Arkansas. The Arkansas River, the 


Land regions of Arkansas 





\ 


t 
| 
} 
| 


WORLD BOOK map 
Map index 

Arkansas R X 4 Cossatot Mts ) Lake Chicot ‘ee Moro Creek E 5 St Francis R Ci 
Bartholomew, Bayou E Cossatot R. ) Lake Eniin F 3 Moss Mtn. ‘Cand Saline R — 5 
Beaver Lake A 3 Cowan Knob (mtn B Lake Fort Smith 8 2 Muddy Creek Nitn. ‘Dis Sharp Top Mtn. jo) 3 
Big Bayou _ hh Cross Nits 3) Lake Greeson D 3 Mulberry Mtn. B 4 Sherman Mtn. B 3 
Big Corney Creek F 4 Crowleys Ridge B Lake Hamilton D 3 Mulberry R. B 3 Skylight Mtn. B 2 
Big Creek O07 Cypress Bayou { Lake Quachita D 3 Nimrod Lake Cc 3 Spring R 

Big Maumetle Lake & 4) Dardanelle Lake { t Anguille R. TO Nortork Lake A 3D South Fork A 6 
Black R. B 6 De Gray Lake D Litthe Missoun R B 3 Osage Creek A 3 Stevenson Mtn. B 2 
Biue Min. ae Oe View, Bayou C Little Red & B 35 Ouachita Mts. Cae Strawberry R A 6 
Blue Mountain Lake i 3 Dorcheai 8 ayOr F Middle Fork R 35 Quachita R (oh) Sulphur R. F BZ 
Bodcau Creek F 3 Fleven Point R A Little R B 7 Ozark Escarpment B 6 SwainMtmn. Ae 
coat A Ss Fourche La Fave Ro Little R f" 2 Ozark Plateau . A 2 Table Rock Lake A 3 
Boston Mts B 2 Greers Ferry Lake 8 Long Creek A 3 Peckerwood Lake D 6 Wabbaseka Bayou D 5 
Buffalo R B 4 Hat Springs Nati Park Macon, Bayou D 5 Petit jean Mtn. . Cc 4 War Eagle Creek A 3 
Bull Shoals Lake 2 i Hurncane Creek Magazine Mttn Poteau Mtn. C2 Wattensaw Bayou C5 
Cache R. ( 6 Illinois Bayou i highest point in Poteau R eo White Oak Lake & 3 
Caddo Mts. D 2 IHinors R A Arkansas C4 Raspberry Peak p 2 White Oak Mtn. B 4 
Caddo R D3 Irons wtin B Meto, Bayou D 6 Red R F 3 White Oak Mtn. c 4 
paral ae ie ‘ Millwood Lake b-.2 Rich Min. D2 White R. ' B 5 
Conway Lake © 5 Lake Catherine Mississippi R F 6 St Francis Basin . BO? Woods Mtn... “—B 3 





SJaJBWOl! OSS 








oor OSE oor 0Sé 002 
Sal'W OSE 


Ost 001 0s 
OO0E 




















OSt 00t 0S 0 
& y $ % vy ) a ; % ; “— Tio 
dew YOOs GTIOM ‘ P ws — a oe! : SAUld 84) CO ayo} 
Te se " oF - nn 
p ! & & 8a} yooer © ry . 
4 jeued 2 g + 3 aye} °. 43, y “O ssaidAD O18 = 
$ 8 “4 re) Buysz ss = eye] 
a r S mney f uewjey 16 
weg iea3 a | S r ey 4 Cia 13 o . A & es +, Og MpBryy S Ad xX =) a 
|@Aa| eas aAOGe VONeAT|RZ + i ry 4 ¢ 2 ) wale eoubeyy $ g ie Moy Au ‘ 
& - 7 \ e ir.) < ~~, 
a \ < " mee 12 400, g ep IK 4 “Vey, 
x > Oo) “Ue, Ve, g 9 YS eueyexa & 
UMO} 40 AI Ss s _ os pe : £ { pueyexas vs 
» ¢ h 
ejided aje = e ¢ . € N = 
vers bP | rr eer ar 
' . Ps > @, \ 
AIPPUNOG = eae eV plgeQuow é 3° \ ps ik ° g 
o % 
Jj sed jeudl - : 
e D a S eye} S| 
4 | nen A ge, y 2 8 MMos. poomyiy 
rey 70 £ 4y “ 
‘y B ) o % “4 
we % \ 9 ue. yout bY p 
C ete a \ he “ TA. % 
4 a rs 
SeSUBIY ~ * | 2 ag ae, 
04 | d ° z an ' Bis ‘J obny 
(‘Ao BIydape yay, aye} < - 75201 > 
| > \% L “Sup = una Suld % = Asin eg voseesy j eye} 7 
: = > =F Yip A a 9 ‘ Mog 4OOs} Oulg 
we ‘j © er vy Y \ » WwW, ueyorg \. 
Jey ® > o \ S E wianjey) on. |W 224) «up? 
ee | a ® 2 = (W vis)" 589'1 SSso, worst S1W 
SIP 9S ago + % \ © » th ‘UI doy dieys +44 Auaqdsey 
a y’ o a ©, { 2 ' “Vo voynvey 7 + & Sly o @| 
a t o= 4 \ % oe edad *sbuuds 10H “peg mee 2 >» 
a e bl 
pebums” @ 3 e@  YHVd IWNOlLYN? we 
bddis ais scliw > 4 <3) cs % } hit SONIWS LOH — pra (W 662) ulw 14?! yer 
| \ ny a2 ey poctimtbes “4 « yI0Y 2117 enyoeng ss WEIZ wy oat 
yuon gis f Pay ah of pt ~® (WSSE) HOt = yy edu nt ey Salp Patt UW Figs ovipyr™ 
| F is," dN) ol YoY aM YON “WINS a OW Palupeng 
epngexy | eC . % —_ } = 4 , 180 eum 20° grr? 
} vane Bye] tC) ( p19) giod 
| yo ¢.. < \s Tay no? a hemuo5 ne \eirewuneyy big Saar: yoaed o fiery 6997, up 9104 Bias 4 
Gy } : tn 
J9AY 0, ~~ 3 “Ag en i 43 zy OAC Sy : / UW ie "4 0092 yas =m > 
e) j 4 go ss &{ « =m 4049——sKemuoy® ‘ae ‘i veri es veer Iay t oyey i393 
t 4 ¢< AY P &>d 2 “e, eee | een ang Vv W O H vy 7 >| O 
; siyduie siydweyy sey 5 % © ID Sees 2 ‘Gibeoea - (a 18¢) f 
Ide, ! os 4 & ver Oy, esueyy (w 6£8) 4 £52 “y OSz" 6d 
| | Poel ho (eede ane WESLE + 4.052’! ot 
/ if f y @ ea hs s |! S ig ° Ss ' ° AILAASSNY | a) muyreDe iy so ; 9487 winejng 
L ig 1 ane 3 g IS ~ ° owe j yy UI : 
N ¥ aryoyeyoso?! IS dog” . § — =, e ‘ 49° oyouepseg ‘ wed weyd” erg (HWS 04 f) ~ § QUeD. 
; a Fy @ AS wo e, eye} Ay) i aye? , e 
»h s% 5 OFS . 2 & Og Aisa4 $0019 (529) 4 0soz , oO a eye] ry 
3.4 S SANNGIUL | v i209 a : E Do 4 ont) UN ¥80 oan * & trey pa y Rh, 48% § uegoy 
= fe \ ss x ih. | & 
{ JOALy % ) XN ~~ yt } (ec } Les UW Spoon ] @ | 3 z, ais 
a " % Derestty " 2 ~“S Ui ft B81} U ‘5 Oo WW u"o 3 s_o} oye] 5I1e 4 
vosyoer ¥ i ee A a . es i: Anoy 4eqqoy 
‘6, i i (wav ¥9) uy dziz+ | ‘BAuediny » Wns ay 7 Jonpyue; 
q Wy ey Pan pe pes Muy pa . 569) 'Y 18Zz + } _ eefoysny! 
ae “1 ayiasaregy ODI Ay Ue gouy vemoy _ Ht 926) 4 068" ‘ =_ 
yl. ri ji 4 m *(u gBp) 34 009 1 u | hey a UIA) BANS + ere 
h, 4% ae r . fs 690) 0szz | fiw sss) vee vA : a. 
&Y Se om ayn beh UN UCUHENS 2\ snug vosdaote oye] Zn 
gt ve Soe \ a yo + 7 ‘ s = Yvosgin. 8 
ee } BingsseAq os son sf el ~ ! ie” » 
“Ne Jealy Auig, ? ¥ y oye © “ayaa Aes | 
4 \ s0neag” ) we | 
~ Ps A uosivey ) G 3 t 0 pe ) 
s~\| _Lge aan Pees peso” 7% & he 
eet jo” E Male * f f = rede Sy 
— _ Yio e j oe §Buisd 8 y= dagen ) Wien 
Vv —= ah 00, foe? f , butd I "p rth / ' oe | oy * Ny * > il V 
jy uON 100} » $s ArthegA oe eye} Us8 ? 1) 
es | pldabeate de ie SBAS oy agers — as , oe, — 
- 7 = - Ze . . E f 
. = : , oe z ; d 
6 v £ ‘A L 





708 Arkansas 


largest river within the state, flows southeast across 
Arkansas. The McClellan-Kerr Arkansas River Navigation 
System was completed in 1970. The system allows boats 
to travel up the Arkansas River from its mouth at the 
Mississippi River to Tulsa, Oklahoma. Other important 
rivers in the state include the Ouachita River in south- 
central Arkansas, the St. Francis River in the east, the 
Red River in the southwest, and the White River in 
northern and eastern Arkansas. The unpolluted, free- 
flowing Buffalo National River is in the Ozarks. 

Lake Chicot, the largest natural lake in the state, is an 
oxbow lake, formed by a river's changing its course (see 
Oxbow lake). Several smaller Arkansas lakes were also 
formed inthis manner. A number of large lakes have 
been created by dams built on Arkansas rivers and 
streams. A chain of artificially created lakes nestles in the 
Ouachita Mountains. These include Lakes Catherine, 
Hamilton, and Ouachita. Lakes along the White River in 
northern Arkansas include Beaver, Bull Shoals, Norfork, 
and Table Rock. Big Maumelle Lake and Nimrod Lake lie 
west of Little Rock. 

Springs in Arkansas are especially plentiful around 
the foothills of the Ouachita and Ozark mountains. Every 
year, thousands of people visit the state’s springs in 
hope that the waters will relieve certain illnesses. Some 
of the springs contain minerals. Many, however, are 
known for their purity and their lack of minerals. Eureka 
Springs in the Ozarks has nearly 65 springs. Mammoth 
Spring, also in the Ozarks, is one of the largest springs 
in the United States. About 235 million gallons (890 mil- 
lion liters} of cold water gush from the earth each day. 
The state's famous Hot Springs consists of 47 different 
springs that together yield about 1 million gallons (3.8 
million liters) of water a day. The temperature of the wa- 
ter remains constant at about 143 °F (62 °C). 

Plant and animal life. Forests cover about half of 
Arkansas. The state's most common trees include ashes, 
basswoods, buckeyes, elms, hackberries, hawthorns, 


Average January temperatures 
Arkansas has cool winters. The northern 
area has the coolest temperatures, which 
rise steadily to the south. 








7 a 





Average July temperatures 

The state has warm to hot summers, with 
most of Arkansas averaging above 80 F 
(27 ‘C). The far north is cooler. 


hickories, hollies, maples, oaks, plums, wild cherries, 
and willows. Flowering trees include the dogwood, lo- 
cust, magnolia, red haw, and redbud. 

Arkansas has many kinds of wildflowers, including 
American bellflowers, orchids, passionflowers, water 
lilies, wild verbenas, and yellow jasmines. Ferns and 
herbs are plentiful. The fern Woodsia scopulina, which 
grows on Magazine Mountain, is found nowhere else 
between the Allegheny and Rocky mountains. 

Animal life in Arkansas‘s fields and forests includes 
black bears, bobcats, deer, foxes, gray and red squirrels, 
and rabbits. Mountainous regions have minks, muskrats, 
opossums, raccoons, skunks, weasels, and woodchucks. 
Arkansas has many varieties of game birds, including 
pheasants, quail, wild ducks, wild geese, wild turkeys, 
and woodcocks. Common songbirds include the blue 
jay, brown-headed nuthatch, brown thrasher, cardinal, 
goldfinch, mockingbird, painted bunting, phoebe, rob- 
in, warbler, and whippoorwill. Reptiles include lizards, 


Average monthly weather 


Fort Smith Little Rock 


Days of Temperatures Days of 
rain or F rag rain or 
High Low HighLow snow High Low HighLow snow 


Temperatures 
F Cc 


11 jana 11 
13 Feb. 5 13 
18 Mar. 63 - 7 
23 Apr.| 73 52 | 23 
27 May © 399 | 27 

June 

July 

Aug. 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 


Average yearly precipitation 

Arkansas has a rainy climate. The heaviest 
precipitation generally falls in the south- 
ern section of the state. 


WORLD BOOK maps 





| Degrees Degrees Degrees 
Fahrenheit Celsius Fohrenheit 

Above 42 Above 6 Above 82 

38 to 42 3106 80 to 82 


34 to 38 
Below 34 





1 to 3 78 to 80 


Below | 





Below 78 













Degrees 
Celsius 





Inches Centimeters 









Above 28 
27 to 28 


More thon 52 
| 48 to 52 


sat 8} | 


| More than 132 
| 1122 to 192 
1112 to 122 






26 to 27 
Below 26 




















turtles, and many kinds of snakes. The lakes, rivers, and 
streams are filled with bass, bream, catfish, crappies, 
drum, perch, pickerel, sturgeon, and trout. 

Climate. Arkansas has a warm, moist climate with 
warm to hot summers and cool winters. The highlands 
of northern and western Arkansas are cooler than the 
lower regions to the south and east. 

July temperatures average 78 to 80 °F (26 to 27 °C) in 
northwestern Arkansas and 82 to 84 °F (28 to 29 °C) in the 
lowlands. Even in summer, the highland regions are 
cool at night. In January, temperatures average from 36 
to 42 °F (2 to 6 °C) in the northwest and from 42 to 48 °F 


Arkansas 709 


(6 to 9 ‘C) in the south and east. The lowlands often have 
warm, sunny days, even in winter. The state's highest 
recorded temperature, 120 °F (49 ‘C), was at Ozark on 
Aug. 10, 1936, and the lowest recorded temperature, 
—29 °F (—34 °C), was in Benton County on Feb. 13, 1905. 

Yearly precipitation averages about 49 inches (124 
centimeters). It ranges from about 42 inches (107 cen- 
timeters) in the far north-central region to about 54 inch- 
es (137 centimeters) in the core of the Ouachita moun- 
tain region. Snowfall in Arkansas averages about 6 inch- 
es (15 centimeters) a year. The snow occurs mostly in the 
highlands. 


Economy 


Service industries of Arkansas, taken together, ac- 
count for the largest portion of the gross state product— 
the total value of all goods and services produced ina 
state in a year. However, manufacturing is the single 
most important economic activity in Arkansas. Food 
processing is the state's leading manufacturing activity. 
Wholesale and retail trade form the leading service in- 
dustry in the state. 

Natural resources of Arkansas include fertile soils 
and rich mineral deposits. The state also has thick for- 
ests and abundant water. 

Soil. Much of Arkansas has fertile soil. The best farm- 
land is in the Mississippi Alluvial Plain and in the valleys 
of the Arkansas and Red rivers. The northern part of the 
Ozark Plateau has good loamy soils. The southern 
Ozarks and the Ouachita region have silty and sandy 
soils. Clay loams mixed with gravel are found in south- 
west Arkansas. The Crowleys Ridge section of eastern 
Arkansas has wind-deposited loess soils (see Loess). 

Minerals. The West Gulf Coastal Plain has petroleum 
deposits. Bituminous (soft) coal and a harder coal called 
semianthracite come from the Arkansas Valley. Natural 
gas is also found in parts of the valley. Other mined 
products include bauxite, bromine, clays, gemstones, 
granite, gypsum, lignite, limestone, marble, quartz, sand 
and gravel, soapstone, tripoli, and vanadium. 

Forests cover more than half of the state. Northwest 
Arkansas has shortleaf pine and hardwood forests. The 
southwest has forests of loblolly and shortleaf pines. 
Most of the eastern forests are hardwood. 

Service industries account for the largest portion of 
the gross state product of Arkansas. Most of the service 
industries are concentrated in the metropolitan areas. 

Wholesale and retail trade form the leading service 
industry. The wholesale trade of automobiles, farm 
products, and mined products is important. Major retail 
businesses in the state include department stores, dis- 
count stores, and food stores. Wal-Mart, the nation’s 
largest discount-store chain, is based in Bentonville. Dil- 
lard Department Stores is based in Little Rock. 

The community, business, and personal services 
group ranks second among the service industries of 
Arkansas. Community, business, and personal services 
include private health care, nursing and rest homes, law 
firms, motels, and repair shops. 

Both (1) government and (2) finance, insurance, and 
real estate contribute about the same amount to the 
Arkansas economy. Government services include the 


operation of public schools and hospitals, and military 
bases. Little Rock Air Force Base is the largest military 
installation in Arkansas. Little Rock is the state's chief fi- 
nancial center. 

Transportation, communication, and utilities rank fifth 
among Arkansas service industries. Two leading U.S. 
trucking companies are headquartered in the state. They 
are J. B. Hunt, located in Lowell, and ABF Freight System, 
in Fort Smith. Several railroads and many other trucking 
companies operate in Arkansas. Telecommunications 
companies are the most important part of the communi- 
cations sector. Alltel, a major telecommunications firm, 
is based in Little Rock. Utilities provide electric, gas, and 
water service. More information about transportation 
and communication appears later in this section. 

Manufacturing. Goods manufactured in the state 
have a value added by manufacture of about $21 billion 
yearly. This figure represents the increase in value of 
raw materials after they become finished products. 

Food products are the state's leading kind of manufac- 
tured items in terms of value added by manufacture. 
They include animal feeds, bakery goods, canned veg- 
etables, cottonseed oil, meats, milk, poultry, rice, and 
soft drinks. Key food processing locations include Fort 


Production and workers by economic activities 


Employed workers 





Percent 

of GSP” Number Percent 
Economic activities produced ofpeople of total 
Manufacturing 23 263,600 18 
Wholesale & retail trade 17 306,900 21 
Community, business, 

& personal services 16 361,800 25 
Government 12 198,400 14 
Finance, insurance, 

& real estate 12 76,700 5 
Transportation, communi- 

cation, & utilities 11 80,400 5 
Agriculture - 84,700 6 
Construction 4 84,400 6 
Mining 1 6,300 t 
Total 100 ~=—-:1,463,200 ~—-_ 100 


“GSP = gross state product, the total value nf goods and services produced in a vear 
tLess than one half of 1 percent 

Figures are for 1998 

Sources lord Book estimates based on data from US Bureau of Economic Analysis and 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 


710 Arkansas 


Smith, Jonesboro, Little Rock, North Little Rock, and 
Springdale. Tyson Foods, based in Springdale, is the 
world’s largest poultry producer and processor. Other 
large food-processing plants operate in Batesville, Fay- 
etteville, Hope, Nashville, Pine Bluff, Russellville, Stutt- 
gart, Van Buren, and several other cities. 

Paper products rank second among manufactured 
products in Arkansas. The state's paper products include 
paperboard boxes and paper. Paper and paperboard 
mills are located in Ashdown, Crossett, Morrilton, Pine 
Bluff, and many other towns throughout the state. 

Other types of products manufactured in Arkansas in- 
clude chemicals, electrical equipment, fabricated metal 
products, machinery, plastics and rubber products, 
transportation equipment, and wood products. Industri- 
al and agricultural chemicals are the state's most valu- 
able chemical products. Leading kinds of electrical 
equipment include electric motors, household appli- 
ances, measuring devices, and lighting devices. Valves 
and pipe fittings are the most valuable types of fabricat- 
ed metal products manufactured in Arkansas. Heating 
and cooling equipment and machinery for use in the 
metalworking industry are the major types of machinery. 
A large tire factory operates near Texarkana. The state's 
transportation products include motor vehicle parts and 
aerospace parts. Lumber, plywood, and pulp paper are 
the leading types of wood products made in the state. 

Agriculture. Arkansas has about 50,000 farms. Farm- 
land covers about half of the state's land area. 

Livestock products provide about 60 percent of farm 
income. Broilers (chickens from 5 to 12 weeks old) are 
the leading farm product. Arkansas is one of the leading 
states in the production of broilers. The chief broiler- 
raising regions include the northwestern part of the 
state, the Arkansas Valley in the southwest, and the 
west-central area of Independence County. 

Beef cattle are the second most valuable livestock 
product, followed by eggs, turkeys, hogs, and milk. Beef 


Economy of Arkansas 


This map shows the econom- 
ic uses of land in Arkansas 
and where the state's leading 
farm, mineral, and forest 
products are produced. Ma- 
jor manufacturing centers are 
shown in red. 


Fort Smith 


Mostly cropland 


| Woodland mixed with 


J} cropland and grazing 


® Manufacturing center 


© Mineral deposit 


WORLD BOOK map 


cattle are raised in most parts of the state. Dairy farming 
is centered in the Ozark Plateau and near Little Rock and 
Fort Smith. Farmers also raise catfish on fish farms. 

Crops account for approximately 40 percent of the in- 
come from farm products. Rice is the most valuable 
crop grown in Arkansas. The state is the leading U.S. 
producer of rice. Rice is grown mainly in the Mississippi 
Alluvial Plain region in eastern Arkansas. Some farmers 
flood their rice fields and raise fish in them. 

Soybeans are the second most valuable crop. Arkan- 
sas ranks among the leading soybean-producing states. 
Soybeans are grown throughout the state, especially in 
the east. 

Other leading crops in Arkansas include cotton and 
wheat. These crops are grown in many parts of the state. 
Hay is an important crop in the northwestern part of the 
state. Arkansas farmers grow corn, which is used pri- 
marily as food for livestock. Grain sorghum and veg- 
etable crops are also important. 

Mining. Natural gas is the leading mined product of 
Arkansas. Petroleum ranks second. Johnson and Sebas- 
tian counties in northwest Arkansas produce the most 
natural gas. The state’s largest oil fields lie near the 
southern border. 

Bromine and crushed stone are also major mined 
products in Arkansas. Bromine is obtained from under- 
ground brines in the south-central part of the state. Sev- 
eral areas in Arkansas have stone quarries. The state's 
other mined products include cement, clays, coal, gyp- 
sum, limestone, novaculite, quartz, sand and gravel, 
soapstone, tripoli, and vanadium. 

Electric power. Plants that burn coal generate about 
55 percent of the state’s electric power. Nuclear plants 
produce about 30 percent of the power. Hydroelectric 
plants and plants that burn natural gas produce most of 
the rest of the state's electric power. 

Transportation. The earliest settlements in Arkansas 
were built along rivers. Flatboats and keelboats provid- 








ed early transportation to New Orleans, St. Louis, and 
other market centers. Steamboats began to appear in 
the 1820's. Paths and trails were built from the river set- 
tlements to other parts of the region. Stagecoach lines 
were established in the state in the 1830s. The main 
early road in Arkansas ran from Memphis to Little Rock 
and Van Buren. Railroad building in Arkansas began in 
the 1850's. The earliest railroads were the Memphis and 
Little Rock, and the Mississippi, Ouachita & Red River. 
Water transportation in Arkansas declined in the late 
1800's, but railroad construction increased. A state high- 
way commission was Created in 1913. 

Today, Arkansas has about 94,000 miles (151,000 kilo- 
meters) of roads and highways. Interstate 40, which links 
Little Rock with Fort Smith and Memphis, and Interstate 
30, which runs from Little Rock to Texas, are the busiest 
highways. Several railroads provide freight service, and 
passenger trains serve Little Rock, Texarkana, and Wal- 
nut Ridge. Little Rock has the state's largest airport. 

Waterways connect Arkansas with cities in neighbor- 
ing states. In 1970, a federal navigation project opened 


Arkansas 711 


the Arkansas River to barge traffic from the Mississippi 
River to Oklahoma. Fort Smith, Little Rock, and Pine Bluff 
became river ports. 

Communication. The Arkansas Gazette, the state's 
first newspaper, was founded in Arkansas Post in 1819. It 
was moved to Little Rock in 1821. In 1991, the Gazette 
was sold to the Arkansas Democrat of Little Rock, which 
became known as the Arkansas Democrat Gazette. The 
Arkansas Democrat Gazette is the state's leading paper. 
Other major papers in Arkansas include the (Fort Smith) 
Southwest Times Record, the (Rogers) Morning News of 
Northwest Arkansas, and the Jonesboro Sun. Arkansas 
has about 130 newspapers, including about 25 dailies. 
The state's publishers also produce about 40 periodicals. 

The state’s first radio station, WOK, began broadcast- 
ing in Pine Bluff in 1920. The first television station, 
KATV, opened in Little Rock in 1953. Today, Arkansas 
has about 160 radio stations and 20 television stations. 
Cable TV systems and Internet providers serve many 
Arkansas communities. Residents in some rural areas 
rely on satellite services. 


Government 


Constitution. The present Constitution of Arkansas 
was adopted in 1874, after the Reconstruction period 
ended in the state. Earlier constitutions had been adopt- 
ed in 1836, 1861, 1864, and 1868. 

Amendments (changes) to the Constitution may be 
proposed in three ways. Legis/ative amendments are in- 
troduced by members of the state legislature. They must 
be approved by a majority of each house of the legisla- 
ture. /nitiative amendments are introduced through peti- 
tions signed by a specified number of voters. Amend- 
ments can also be proposed by constitutional conven- 
tions. Before a constitutional convention can meet, it 
must be approved by the voters. Every amendment must 
be approved in an election by a majority of the voters 
who cast ballots on the amendment. 

Executive. The governor of Arkansas serves a four- 
year term and may serve no more than two terms. 

Other elected state officers are the lieutenant gover- 
nor, secretary of state, attorney general, treasurer, audi- 
tor, and jand commissioner. These officials are also 
elected to four-year terms and may serve no more than 
two terms. The governor appoints the adjutant general, 
controller, and the heads and members of various de- 
partments and commissions. Many of these appoint- 
ments must be approved by the state Senate. 

Legislature, called the General Assembly, consists of 
a 35-member Senate and a 100-member House of Rep- 
resentatives. Each of the state's 35 senatorial districts 
elects one senator. Each of the 100 representative dis- 
tricts elects one representative. Senators are elected to 
four-year terms and may serve no more than two terms. 
Representatives are elected to two-year terms and may 
serve no more than three terms. 

Legislative sessions begin on the second Monday in 
January of odd-numbered years. Legislative sessions last 
up to 60 calendar days. Sessions may be extended by a 
two-thirds vote of both houses of the legislature for an 
unlimited period of time. The governor may call the leg- 
islature into special session, which has no time limit. 


In 1965, a federal district court ordered the state 
board of apportionment to reapportion (redivide) the 
legislature to provide equal representation based on 
population. The governor, secretary of state, and attor- 
ney general make up the board of apportionment. The 
board drew reapportionment plans for the House and 
Senate. The federal district court and the Supreme Court 
of the United States approved the plans. The state board 
of apportionment has reapportioned the Arkansas legis- 
lature after every federal census since 1970. 

Courts. The highest court in Arkansas is the state 
Supreme Court. It consists of a chief justice and six asso- 
ciate justices, all elected to eight-year terms. The state is 
divided into 23 circuit court districts. Voters from these 
districts elect circuit court judges to six-year terms. 

Each county in Arkansas has a county court. County 
court judges are elected to two-year terms. Municipal 
court judges are elected to either two- or four-year 
terms, according to local law. Justices of the peace and 
common pleas court judges serve two-year terms. 

Local government. Each of the state's 75 counties is 
administered by the county judge. The judge approves 
county expenditures and presides over the quorum 
court, a legislative group whose duties include approv- 
ing the county budget. The county judge and members 
of the quorum court are elected to two-year terms. 
Other county officials include the assessor, clerk, med- 
ical examiner or coroner, sheriff, surveyor, treasurer, 
and the collector, who is the sheriff in smaller counties. 

Most Arkansas cities have the mayor-council form of 
government. Some cities use the council-manager form. 

Revenue. Taxes are the largest source of the state 
governments genera/ revenue (income). They account 
for more than half of the state's revenue. They include a 
general sales tax, income taxes, license fees, and taxes 
on alcoholic beverages, horse racing, insurance, motor 
fuels, and tobacco products. Federal grants are the sec- 
ond largest source of revenue. They account for nearly a 
third of the state government's revenue. 


712 Arkansas 


In the 1968 presidential election, American Independ- 
ent Party candidate George C Wallace carried Arkansas. 
It was the first time in a hundred years that the state did 
not support a Democratic presidential candidate. In 
1972, Richard M. Nixon became the first Republican 
presidential candidate since 1868 to win Arkansass elec- 
toral votes. For Arkansas's voting record in presidential 
elections, see Electoral College (table). 


Politics. The Democratic Party controlled Arkansas 
politics from the late 1800's until the 1960's. From 1874 
until 1966, no Republican was elected governor of the 
state nor elected to a seat in the U.S. House of Repre- 
sentatives. In addition, from the 1870's until 1996, no Re- 
publican was elected to the U.S. Senate from Arkansas. 
However, the Republican Party has gained strength in 
the state since the 1960's. 


The governors of Arkansas 





Party Term Party Term 

James Sevier Conway Democratic 1836-1840 joseph Taylor Robinson Democratic 1913 a! 
Archibald Yell Democratic 1840-1844 George Washington Hays Democratic 1913-1917 7 
Thomas S. Drew Democratic 1844-1849 Charles Hillman Brough Democratic 1917-1921 
John Seldon Roane Democratic 1849-1852 Thomas Chipman McRae Democratic 1921-1925 
Elias Nelson Conway Democratic 1852-1860 Thomas J. Terral Democratic 1925-1927. 
Henry Massey Rector Democratic: 1860-1862 John Ellis Martineau Democratic 1927-1928 
Harris Flanagin Harvey Parnell Democratic 1928-1933 

(Confederate governor) Democratic 1862-1863" Junius Marion Futrell Democratic 19353-1937 
Isaac Murphy Carl E. Bailey Democratic 1937-1941 

{Union governor) Union 1864-1868" Homer Martin Adkins Democratic 1941-1945 
Powell Clayton Republican 1868-1871 Benjamin T. Laney Democratic 1945-1949 
Ozra A. Hadley Republican 1871-1873 Sidney Sanders McMath Democratic 1949-1953 
Elisha Baxter Republican 1873-1874 Francis Cherry Democratic 1953-1955 
Augustus Hill Garland Democratic 1874-1877 Orval E. Faubus Democratic 1955-1967 
William R. Miller Democratic 1877-1881 Winthrop Rockefeller Republican 1967-1971 
Thomas J. Churchill Democratic 1881-1883 Dale L. Bumpers Democratic 1971-1975 
James Henderson Berry Democratic 1883-1885 David H. Pryor Democratic 1975-1979 
Simon P. Hughes Democratic 1885-1889 Bill Clinton Democratic 1979-1981 
James Philip Eagle Democratic 1889-1893 Frank D. White Republican 1981-1983 
William Meade Fishback = Democratic 1893-1895 Bill Clinton Democratic 1983-1992 
James P. Clarke Democratic 1895-1897 Jim Guy Tucker Democratic 1992-1996 
Daniel Webster Jones Democratic 1897-1901 Mike Huckabee Republican 1986; 
Jeff Davis Democratic 1901-1907 
John Sebastian Little Democratic 1907-1909 
George Washington 

Donaghey Democratic 1909-1913 


*In 1864 and 1865. Arkansas had two governors—one for the Confederate State of Arkansas, one for the Union State of Arkansas. 


History 


Early days. Indians lived in the Arkansas region 
about 12,000 years ago. Early European explorers found 
three principal tribes—the Caddo, Osage, and Qua- 
paw—in the region. 

Exploration and settlement. In 1541, Hernando de 
Soto, a Spanish explorer, led an expedition that reached 
Arkansas. The Europeans failed to find the gold they 
were searching for, but historians believe the expedition 
introduced diseases that killed much of the population. 
In 1673, Father Jacques Marquette and Louis Jolliet of 
France traveled down the Mississippi to the mouth of 
the Arkansas River, where they met Quapavw Indians. In 
1682, Rene-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, claimed 
the Mississippi Valley for France. La Salle made a grant 
of land to Henri de Tonty, who built a trading station 
called the Post of Arkansas (also known as Arkansas 
Post), near the mouth of the Arkansas River in 1686. 

In 1717, France gave exclusive trading rights in Louisi- 
ana to Scottish banker John Law. To finance his compa- 
ny, Law developed a plan called the Mississippi 
Scheme’ (see Mississippi Scheme). Laws company 
eventually collapsed in a financial disaster called the 
“Mississippi Bubble. But the scheme brought many set- 


tlers to Louisiana. About 100 Europeans and a few Afri- 
can slaves settled near the Post. Most of the settlers left, 
but some farmers remained. 

In 1762, during the French and Indian War, France 
ceded Spain the land west of the Mississippi River. This 
land included the Louisiana Territory. In 1800, Spain 
transferred the Louisiana Territory back to France. In 
1803, the United States bought the Louisiana Territory 
from France. See Louisiana Purchase. 

Territorial years. In 1812, the southern part of the 
Louisiana Territory was made the state of Louisiana. The 
northern part, including Arkansas, became the Missouri 
Territory. In 1817, the U.S. government established Fort 
Smith in what is now northwestern Arkansas to keep 
peace among Indian tribes in the region. In 1819, the 
government created the Arkansaw Territory. It included 
present-day Arkansas and part of what is now Okla- 
homa. The town of Fort Smith grew up around the fort 
Van Buren developed nearby. The town of Washington 
(now a state park) became an important stopping point 
on the route to Texas. 

In the early 1800's, northwestern Arkansas became a 
temporary home to large numbers of Cherokee Indians. 


Arkansas 713 


CHistoric cArkansas 


Louis Jolliet and Jacques Marquette explored the Missis- 
sippi River in 1673 as far south as the mouth of the Arkansas 
River. Jolliet, a French-Canadian fur trader, and Marquette, a 
French missionary, traveled in birchbark canoes. 







Fort Smith became an important supply base for ws 2 
goldseekers during the California gold rush of 1849. ! —= 


‘> agg ee = 
SS 





The Union Army defeated the Con- 
federates in an important Civil War 
battle at Pea Ridge in March 1862 


Hattle Caraway of Arkansas in 1932 
became the first woman elected to 


the United States Senate. Douglas MacArthur, a famous U.S. 


Army general, was born at the “Old 
Arsenal” in Little Rock in 1880. 





WORLD BOOK illustrations by Kevin Chadwick 


1541 Hernando de Soto of Spain led an expedition to the 1868 Arkansas was readmitted to the Union. 


region. 1874 Arkansas adopted its present constitution. 
1673 Father Jacques Marquette and Louis Jolliet of France 1921 The first oil well was drilled in the El Dorado field. 


: oP aed the Bos River in the le 1957 National Guard units and federal troops helped en- 
1682 René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, claimed the force a court order to integrate Little Rock’s Central 


Mississippi Valley for France. High School. 
1686 Henri de Tonty, a friend of La Salle, established a 1964 Orval E. Faubus became the first Arkansas governor 
trading station at the mouth of the Arkansas River. tobe elected to a sixth consecutive term. 
1803 The United States acquired Arkansas as part of the 1970 The Arkansas River Development Program opened 
. Louisiana Purchase. the river to navigation from the Mississippi River to 
1819 The Arkansaw Territory was formed from the Mis- Oklahoma. 
souri Territory. 93-2001 Former Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton served 





36. Arkansas became the 25th state on June 15. as the 42nd president of the United States. 
1061 Arkansas seceded from the Union. 








714 Arkansas 


But the Cherokee and other eastern tribes were forcibly 
moved to Indian Territory (present-day Oklahoma) dur- 
ing the 1830's (see Trail of Tears). 

Statehood and the Civil War. On June 15, 1836, 
Arkansas was admitted to the Union as the 25th state. 
The nation was then engaged in a great debate over the 
question of slavery. By 1860, Arkansas had a white popu- 
lation of 435,450 and about 110,000 slaves. Many slaves 
worked on cotton plantations in the Arkansas lowlands. 

Abraham Lincoln, who opposed slavery, was elected 
president in 1860. Several Southern slave states then se- 
ceded (withdrew) from the Union and formed the Con- 
federacy. Arkansas voters at first rejected secession, but 
the state joined the Confederacy soon after the Civil War 
began on April 12, 1861. 

Arkansas sent troops to fight in Mississippi at the Bat- 
tle of Wilson’s Creek in August 1861. The Confederates 
won the battle. The Union Army entered the state and 
defeated the Confederates at the Battle of Pea Ridge in 
March 1862. In November 1862, Union soldiers defeated 
the Confederates at the Battle of Prairie Grove. 

On Sept. 10, 1863, the Union Army took Little Rock. 
The Confederates then moved their capital to Washing- 
ton in southwestern Arkansas. In 1864, Arkansans loyal 
to the Union wrote a new state constitution, establishing 
a Union government in Little Rock and abolishing slav- 
ery. But much of the state was not controlled by either 
the Union or the Confederacy. Lawless bushwhackers 
robbed and murdered many people. 

Reconstruction. During the Reconstruction period 
that followed the war, ex-Confederates dominating the 
Arkansas legislature refused to rejoin the Union. The 
U.S. Congress put Arkansas under military control. Fed- 
eral troops occupied the state from 1867 to 1874. 

Arkansas was readmitted to the Union in 1868. In that 
year, the state adopted a new constitution, giving black 
men the right to vote but denying it to ex-Confederates. 
The Republican government tried to speed economic 
development, establish schools, and protect the civil 
rights of ex-slaves. Violence broke out between Repubili- 
cans and Democrats and between whites and blacks. 





Arkansas Gazette 


Conflict over school integration occurred at Central High 
School in Little Rock in 1957. President Dwight D. Eisenhower 
sent United States Army troops to the school to enforce a federal! 
court order to integrate the school. 


Antiblack groups such as the Ku Klux Klan spread terror. 

In 1872, two Republicans clashed in the contest for 
governor. Elisha Baxter defeated Joseph Brooks, but 
Brooks charged fraud and claimed that he had won. On 
April 15, 1874, Brooks forced Baxter to leave the State- 
house at gunpoint Rival supporters of the men clashed 
in what was called the Brooks-Baxter War. On May 15, 
1874, President Ulysses S. Grant proclaimed Baxter the 
governor. Later in 1874, the state adopted a new consti- 
tution, which, though much amended, is still in use. 

The late 1800's. New railroads crisscrossed Arkansas 
in the late 1800's. Timber companies moved to the state 
to harvest the rich forest resources. New levees along 
the rivers and drainage ditches produced a land boom 
in the Delta. Bauxite was discovered near Little Rock in 
1887, and mines opened. 

The early 1900's brought continued development. 
Improved schools, medical care, and other government 
services were available at least in the towns. Rice grow- 
ing was introduced in eastern Arkansas and began to re- 
place cotton. In 1921, oil was found near El Dorado. The 
state's first large hydroelectric dam was built in 1924. 

However, agricultural prices fell after 1920, and many 
Arkansans lost their farms. The state was also affected by 
a destructive Mississippi flood in 1927, by a drought in 
1930, and by the Great Depression of the 1930's. In 1934, 
after the price of cotton fell below the cost of produc- 
tion, some rebellious Arkansas farmers organized the 
short-lived Southern Tenant Farmers Union at Tyronza. 
But conditions remained poor for tenant farmers and 
sharecroppers. 

In 1932, an Arkansas woman, Hattie Caraway, became 
the first woman elected to the United States Senate. She 
won a special election held shortly after the death of her 
husband, U.S. Senator Thaddeus Caraway. 

The mid-1900's. Farming and mining expanded in 
Arkansas during World War Il (1939-1945). Soon after 
the war, the state began to shift from an agricultural to 
an industrial economy. Many farmworkers were re- 
placed by the increased use of farm machinery. Manu- 
facturing grew, but not fast enough to provide jobs for 
all these unskilled workers. Many left Arkansas to find 
jobs in other states. In spite of these problems, the num- 
ber of Arkansas manufacturing plants more than dou- 
bled during the 1940's and 1950's. A number of plants 
were attracted to the state by the Arkansas Industrial De- 
velopment Commission, which was established in 1955. 

In 1957, Arkansas became a center of the controversy 
over school integration. The Supreme Court of the 
United States had ruled in 1954 that compulsory segre- 
gation in public schools is unconstitutional. In 1957, a 
federal court ordered Central High School in Little Rock 
to integrate. Governor Orval E. Faubus sent the Arkansas 
National Guard to block integration. President Dwight D. 
Eisenhower then put the National Guard under federal 
control and sent U.S. Army troops to enforce the court 
order. By 1970, most Arkansas schools and other public 
facilities were integrated to a degree. 

In the early 1960's, Arkansas's manufacturing income 
passed its farm income for the first time. Faubus was re- 
elected governor in 1964 to a sixth consecutive term. No 
other Arkansas governor had served more than three 
terms. In 1967, Winthrop Rockefeller became Arkansas s 
first Republican governor since Reconstruction days. 





The late 1900's. The Arkansas River Development 
Program was completed in 1970. The development, re- 
named the McClellan-Kerr Arkansas River Navigation 
System, opened the river to navigation across the state 
from the Mississippi River into Oklahoma. 

Bill Clinton, a Democrat who had been elected gover- 
nor of Arkansas five times, was elected president of the 
United States in 1992 and reelected in 1996. 

In May 1996, Governor Jim Guy Tucker of Arkansas 
was convicted of conspiring to defraud financial institu- 
tions and win illegal loans. He resigned from office. He 
was sentenced to probation and community service. 

The early 2000's. Arkansas faces such problems as 
reducing air and water pollution, providing enough en- 
ergy for the state, improving its public education, and 
strengthening its unstable farm economy. State officials 
have succeeded in some attempts to promote foreign 
trade and attract new industry. The northwest section 
has thrived, and retirees have found this region attrac- 


tive. However, many Delta counties have lost population. 


Arkansas has made repeated attempts to bring its 
schools up to the national average, but problems of 
funding remain. Private schools and home-schooling 
have increased in popularity. New junior colleges and 
new branches of existing colleges have expanded edu- 
cational opportunities. Michael B. Dougan and John G. Hehr 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Biographies 


La Salle, Sieur de 
MacArthur, Douglas 
Marquette, Jacques 
Robinson, Joseph T. 


Caraway, Hattie O. W. 
Clinton, Bill 

De Soto, Hernando 
Fulbright, J. William 


Hunt, H.b 
Cities 
Fort Smith Hot Springs Little Rock 
History 
Caddo Indians Civil War Mound builders 
Carpetbaggers Louisiana Pur- Osage Indians 
Cherokee Indians chase Reconstruction 


Physical features 


Arkansas River Lake Ouachita Ozark Mountains 


Hot Springs Mississippi River Red River 
National Park Quachita River 
Outline 
I. People 

A. Population C. Libraries 
B. Schools D. Museums 

ll. Visitor's guide 
A. Places to visit 
B. Annual events 

Ill. Land and climate 
A. Land regions D. Plant and animal life 
B. Rivers and lakes E. Climate 
C Springs 


IV. Economy 
A. Natural resources 
B. Service industries 
C Manufacturing 
D. Agriculture 

V. Government 


Mining 
Electric power 
. Transportation 
. Communication 


aly Coney 


A. Constitution E. Local government 
B. Executive F. Revenue 
C Legislature G. Politics 
D. Courts 
VI. History 


Arkansas River 715 


Questions 


What is the leading service industry in Arkansas? 

To what territories did the Arkansas region belong before be- 
coming a state? 

Why is Hot Springs of such wide interest? 

Who was the first woman elected to the U.S. Senate? 

Where is rice grown in Arkansas? 

Why was Arkansas a center of controversy in 1957? 

What is the largest natural lake in Arkansas? 

Who led an expedition to Arkansas in 1541? 

What Arkansas governor became a U.S. president? 

When was the state's first newspaper founded? 


Additional resources 


Level I 

Di Piazza, Domenica. Arkansas. Lerner, 1994. 

Fradin, Dennis B. Arkansas. Childrens Pr., 1994. 
Heinrichs, Ann. Arkansas. Rev. ed. Childrens Pr., 1994. 


Level Il 

DeLano, Patti. Arkansas: Off the Beaten Path. 3rd ed. Globe Pe- 
quot, 1997. A travel guide. 

Donovan, Timothy P., and others, eds. The Governors of 
Arkansas. 2nd ed. Univ. of Ark. Pr., 1995. 

Goss, Kay C. The Arkansas State Constitution: A Reference Guide. 
Greenwood, 1993. 

Hanson, Gerald T., and Moneyhon, CH. Historical Atlas of 
Arkansas. Univ. of Okla. Pr., 1989. 

Moneyhon, Carl H. 7he /mpact of the Civil War and Reconstruc- 
tion on Arkansas. La. State Univ. Pr., 1994. 


Arkansas, University of, is a coeducational land- 
grant school with campuses in Fayetteville, Little Rock, 
Monticello, and Pine Bluff, Arkansas. It is supported 
chiefly by state and federal funds. 

The main campus is at Fayetteville. It has the J. William 
Fulbright College of Arts and Sciences and colleges of 
agriculture and home economics, business administra- 
tion, education, and engineering. It also has a graduate 
school, school of law, school of architecture, main agri- 
cultural experiment station, biomass research center, 
bureau of business and economic research, and engi- 
neering experiment station. Also at Fayetteville are the 
University of Arkansas Press, the Fulbright Institute of In- 
ternational Relations, and the Center for Arkansas and 
Regional Studies. 

The campus of the University of Arkansas at Little 
Rock has colleges of arts, humanities, and social sci- 
ences; business administration; education; professional 
and public affairs; and science and engineering technol- 
ogy. It also has a graduate school, a school of law, and 
the Center for Research and Public Service. The Univer- 
sity of Arkansas for Medical Sciences is also in Little 
Rock. Education and liberal arts courses are offered in 
Monticello and Pine Bluff. 

The University of Arkansas was founded in 1871 in 
Fayetteville. The university offers bachelor’s, master's, 
and doctor's degrees. 

Critically reviewed by the University of Arkansas 
Arkansas River, AHR kuhn saw or ahr KAN zuhs, is a 
stream of the south-central United States. It is the long- 
est river that flows into the Mississippi-Missouri river 
system. The total length of the Arkansas is 1,459 miles 
(2,348 kilometers). The waters from an area of about 
160,500 square miles (415,690 square kilometers) drain 
into it. The river rises on the east slope of the Rocky 
Mountains, in the central part of Colorado near Lead- 
ville. It flows southeast through Kansas, Oklahoma, and 
Arkansas. The Cimarron, Canadian, and White rivers 


716 Arkhangelsk 


Denver 
Leadville 
a celnipee 
oyal Gorge ARK AW 


RivesAs 


Kansas Kansas 


Missour 


200 Mites 
200 [Kilometers ? 
WORLD BOOK map 


Location of the Arkansas River 


flow into the Arkansas, and drain parts of New Mexico, 
Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Missouri. 

The Arkansas has a rapid current as it flows through 
mountain valleys and canyons. One of the rocky canyons 
worn by the Arkansas is the Royal Gorge. !ts walls rise 
more than 1,000 feet (300 meters). Cities that are located 
on the banks of the river include Pueblo, Colorado; Wi- 
chita, Kansas; Tulsa, Oklahoma; Muskogee, Oklahoma; 
Fort Smith, Arkansas; and Little Rock, Arkansas. The river 
is named for the Arkansas Indians. 

The flow of water on most of the Arkansas River is 
controlled by 11 dam and reservoir projects. These proj- 
ects are intended primarily for flood control. They also 
make it possible to improve navigation and generate 
water power. John G: Hehr 

See also Oklahoma (Rivers and lakes); Royal Gorge. 
Arkhangelsk, ahr KHAHN gehlsk (pop. 367,200), is 
one of the largest far-northern cities in the world. It is 
also called Archangel (pronounced AHRK ayn juAl! 
Arkhangelsk lies about 100 miles (160 kilometers) below 
the Arctic Circle in Russia, where the Dvina River flows 
into the White Sea. The city extends about 25 miles (40 
kilometers) along the shores of the islands in the river's 
delta. For the location of Arkhangelsk, see Russia (polliti- 
cal map). 

Arkhangelsk is a center for the lumber industry and a 
major port, though the harbor is frozen from November 
through May, and icebreakers must be used. The city ex- 
ports lumber, resin, turpentine, and furs. A railroad con- 
nects Arkhangelsk with Russian cities in the south. 

Arkhangelsk was founded in 1583 as Novo-Kholmogo- 
ry. Its Cathedral of the Archangel Michael was built be- 
tween 1685 and 1699. The city declined during the 1700's 
and 1800's, but regained importance after the railroad 
was built in 1897. During World War II (1939-1945), 
Arkhangelsk was an important northern port for receiv- 
ing supplies from the Allies. Zvi Gitelmat 
Arkwright, Sir Richard (1732-1792), was a British in- 
ventor and manufacturer. In 1769, he patented a spin- 
ning machine, which was called the water frame be- 
cause water powered it. Sets of rollers turning at 
different speeds drew cotton from the carding machine, 
which straightened out the fibers. Spindles then twisted 
the cotton into thread. The water frame made hard, firm, 
anc rather coarse thread. 

wright and two manufacturers started cotton mills 
that combined the various manufacturing processes of 
machine carding, drawing, roving, and spinning in one 
operation. Such organization of manufacturing process- 





es contributed to the development of modern factories. 

In 1781, Arkwright's patent was challenged and finally 
canceled on the grounds of previous invention and de- 
liberately vague and confusing specifications. It is now 
generally agreed that while Arkwright knew of earlier 
work on the machine, he added mechanical details that 
made it work. But his prosperity did not suffer seriously 
when he lost his patent His experience and business 
ability helped him keep his advantage. He was knighted 
in 1786 and died a wealthy man on Aug. 3, 1792. 

Arkwright was born on Dec. 23, 1732, in Preston. He 
became a barber's apprentice and developed a method 
of dyeing hair, which he sold to wigmakers. Arkwright 
then spent the money that he gained from this on his in- 
vention. Richard F. Hirsh 

See also Industrial Revolution (Spinning machines); 
Spinning. 
Arlington National Cemetery is one of the largest 
and most famous national cemeteries in the United 
States. It covers 624 acres (253 hectares) in Arlington, 
Virginia, across the Potomac River from Washington, 
D.C. The cemetery surrounds Arlington House, The 
Robert E. Lee Memorial, which was the home of General 
Robert E. Lee of the Confederate Army. It occupies land 
that was once a part of the estate of Lee's wife, Mary 
Custis Lee. The United States government made Arling- 
ton a national cemetery in 1864. The Department of the 
Army administers it 

Space in the cemetery is available for honorably dis- 
charged winners of the Air Force Cross, Distinguished 
Service Cross, Distinguished Service Medal, Medal of 
Honor, Navy Cross, Purple Heart, or Silver Star; mem- 
bers of the armed services who die on active duty; cer- 
tain disabled veterans; members of the armed forces 
who have served long enough to be officially retired; 
and honorably discharged veterans who have held a 
federal elective office or a Cabinet-level position, or 
who have served on the Supreme Court. Their wives or 
husbands and their minor children are also eligible. Un- 
til 1967, all honorably discharged veterans could be 
buried in the cemetery. 

The Tomb of the Unknowns of World Wars | and II, 





© Peter Gridley, FPC 
Arlington National Cemetery contains the graves of thousands 
of men and women who served in the U.S. armed forces. It is 
one of the largest national cemeteries in the country. 





the Korean War, and the Vietnam War is located in Ar- 
lington {see Unknown soldier). Wreaths are placed at 
this tomb on national holidays and during visits of digni- 
taries. The grave of President John F. Kennedy, marked 
by an eternal flame, lies on a hillside near Arlington 
House, The Robert E. Lee Memorial. Kennedy and Wil- 
liam Howard Taft are the only Presidents buried in Ar- 
lington. Critically reviewed by Arlington National Cemetery 

See also National cemetery; Washington, D.C. (pic- 
ture). 

Arm is the upper limb of a human being. Properly, the 
arm is only the part between the shoulder and the 
elbow. The portion of the arm below the elbow is the 
forearm. 

The arm contains one large bone, the Aumerus. 
Shoulder muscles are attached to its upper portion. Two 
flexor muscles bend the upper limb at the elbow. These 
are the biceps brachii and the brachialis. Two extensor 
muscles, the triceps brachii and the anconeus, straight- 
en the upper limb. The forearm contains two bones, the 
radius and the u/na. Attached to these are 19 muscles 
that move the wrist and fingers. 


Triceps 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Leonard Morgan 


The arm contains three bones—the humerus, the radius, and 
the ulna. It also contains the biceps and triceps muscles. 


Scientists sometimes call the forelimbs of animals 
arms. Each kind of animal has arms specially suited to its 
own needs. However, all arms follow the same basic 
pattern. The wings of birds and bats, the flippers of seals 
and whales, and the fins of some fish are all variations of 
the arm. Because of the complex functional capabilities 
of their hands, human beings can use their arms for 
many more purposes than can any other animal. 

Leslie S. Matthews 

See also the Trans-Vision three-dimensional color 
picture with Human body; also Bone; Elbow. 

Armada. See Spanish Armada. 

Armadillo, ar muh DIHL ob, is any of several small 
American mammals with bony plates in their upper 
body skin. They usually eat insects, earthworms, spiders, 
and land snails. Armadillos are found from Argentina 
northward to the south-central and southeastern parts 
of the United States. The animal has strong claws, which 
it uses to dig tunnels and burrows in the ground. It uses 





Armageddon 717 





Francisco Entze, Bruce Coleman Ltd 


The nine-banded armadillo has a protective shell of nine nar- 
row bands of bony plates that slide upon one another. 


its long, narrow tongue to lick up insects. Because the 
armadillo has only small teeth well back in its mouth, it 
cannot bite in self-defense. 

The armadillo’s shell is its best protection. The shell is 
made up of many small plates of bony armor fitted 
closely together. It is hard and stiff, but is jointed across 
the animal's back. This jointing allows armadillos of one 
genus to curl themselves up into a hard tight ball with 
the shell on the outside and the head and feet tucked in 
out of harm's way. Few animals are then able to get a 
grip on the armadillo with their teeth or claws. But the 
armadillo hides in its shell only as a last resort. It usually 
hurries into its burrow at the first sign of danger. When 
an armadillo is too far from its burrow to hide there, it 
may dig itself rapidly into the ground if it has time. 

The nine-banded armadillo is the only species found 
in the United States. The hinges of its shell consist of 
nine narrow bands of armor that slide upon one an- 
other. This armadillo is about 2 feet {61 centimeters) 
long, including its tail, and weighs up to 15 pounds (6.8 
kilograms). The female gives birth to four babies at a 
time, always of the same sex. 

Other armadillos, found in countries farther south, 
have three or six bands across the back instead of nine. 
Armadillos are the only known animal host for the bac- 
terium that causes leprosy in human beings. For this rea- 
son, armadillos are important in leprosy research. 


Scientific classification. Armadillos make up the family 
Dasypodidae. The scientific name for the nine-banded armadillo 
is Dasypus novemcinctus. Frank B. Golley 


See also Animal (How animals protect themselves 
[picture]); Edentate; Shell (picture). 

Armageddon, 4H#R muh GEHD uhn, is a Greek word 
taken from the Hebrew Har-Megiddo, which probably 
means Mount Megiddo. \n the Bible, the Book of Reve- 
lation names Armageddon as the place where the rulers 
of the world will fight the last great battle between good 
and evil. 

No Mount Megiddo has been identified. However, an 
ancient city called Megiddo was located in the moun- 
tains of northern Israel, across the Plain of Esdraelon 
from Nazareth. Many battles were fought on this plain in 
Biblical times. Archaeologists from the Oriental Institute 
in Chicago have found temples, jewelry, art objects, and 
many other valuable archaeological items at Megiddo. 

Joseph M. Hallman 





718 Armaments 


Armaments. See Weapon. 

Armani, ahr MAH nee, Giorgio /AWR jee oh 

(1934- ), is a leading Italian fashion designer. He de- 
signs for both men and women. Armaniss clothes have a 
soft, fluid silhouette that became his signature and one 
of the most important fashion trends of the late 1900's. 
Armani uses beautiful textiles to give special distinction 
to his clothes. 

Armani was born in Piacenza, Italy. He began his ca- 
reer as an assistant buyer for a major Italian department 
store. He then worked with Italian designer Nino Cerruti 
in 1961. After free-lancing for a number of manufactur- 
ers, Armani introduced his first menswear collection in 
1974. The collection created a sensation with a style 
known as the unconstructed jacket—a loose-fitting jack- 
et with no lining or shoulder pads. Armani adapted his 
style for a line of women's clothes in 1975 when he 
formed his own company with Italian businessman Ser- 
gio Galeotti. To ready-to-wear clothing, Armani's compa- 
ny brought exceptional fabric quality, elegance, and a 
revolutionary emphasis on comfort and informality in 
tailoring. Jean L Druesedow 
Armature, AHR muh chuhr, is the coil of wire in 
which electric current is produced in an electric genera- 
tor. The rotating coil in an electric motor also is called 
an armature. See Electric generator; Electric motor. 

Ina direct current generator, the armature is wound 
On an iron core. Electric current is produced in the coil 
when it is rotated in a magnetic field created by station- 
ary electromagnets. In most alternating current genera- 
tors, the armature coil remains stationary. Electric cur- 
rent is produced as a result of the changing magnetic 
field created by a set of rotating electromagnets. 

In an electric motor, a current is passed through the 
armature coil, making it an electromagnet. The attraction 
and repulsion (pushing away) between the magnetized 
armature and stationary electromagnets in the motor 
cause the armature to rotate. Douglas M. Lapp 
Armed forces. See Air force; Air Force, U.S.; Army; 
Army, U.S.; Canada, Armed Forces of; Coast Guard, 
U.S.; Marine; Marine Corps, U.S.; Navy; Navy, U.S. 
Armed Forces Day honors all branches of the armed 
forces of the United States. It is celebrated on the third 
Saturday of May with military exercises on land, at sea, 
and in the air. Military installations are usually open to 
the public on Armed Forces Day. President Harry S. Tru- 
man proclaimed Armed Forces Day, and it was first cele- 
brated in May 1950. It replaced three separate celebra- 
tions for the Air Force, Army, and Navy. James V. For- 
restal, the first secretary of defense, helped unite the 
armed services under the Department of Defense after 
World War tI ended in 1945. Jack Santino 
Armed Forces Staff College is part of the United 
States Department of Defense's National Defense Uni- 
versity. The school is in Norfolk, Virginia. It provides mil- 
itary education for selected officers of the Army, Navy, 
Air Force, and Marine Corps. A few officers from other 
nations also attend the school. 

The college prepares officers to serve on multiservice 
staffs and on military staffs of the United States and oth- 
er nations. Its curriculum includes the study of national 
military strategy; strategic planning; command and con- 
trol of combat operations under a unified command; 
and use of land, sea, and air forces in war. The Armed 


Forces Staff College was founded in 1946 by General 
Dwight D. Eisenhower and Admiral Chester W. Nimitz. 

Critically reviewed by the Armed Forces Staff College 
Armenia is a country in southwestern Asia. It is a 
rugged, mountainous land that lies in the Caucasus 
Mountain region. Yerevan is the country's capital and 
largest city. 

Present-day Armenia and what is now eastern Turkey 
make up historic Armenia, the original homeland of the 
Armenian people. This land was conquered many times 
in its long history. By 1915, the Turks had driven most 
Armenians out of western Armenia, which became east- 
ern Turkey. 

in 1920, Russian Communists took control of eastern 
Armenia. This area became part of the Transcaucasian 
Republic of the Soviet Union in 1922. In 1936, it became 
a separate Soviet republic called the Armenian Soviet 
Socialist Republic. Armenia remained under Soviet con- 
tro] until 1991, when the people voted to become an in- 
dependent nation. 

Several million Armenians live outside Armenia. The 
strong national identity of Armenians worldwide helped 
keep the Armenian culture alive during the years of So- 
viet centrol. 

Government. In 1995, the Armenian people voted to 
adopt a new constitution. The most powerful official in 


Armenia 










= | International boundary 
Road 


{Railroad 


| 
: 


® } National capital 
Other city or town 


Elevation above sea level 





a 
———— el = i — ——— £ aS = — ed 


| 0 50 100 150 Miles 
in ee 
0 50 100 150 200 Kilometers 


WORLD BOOK maps 





—————————E—_————— = 


eee 


= ue Sr we a ey 


rr 





© Hirokawa. Orion from Sipa Press 
Armenian shoppers examine produce at a local market in 
Yerevan, shown here. The country's farmers raise a variety of 
fruits and vegetables for such markets. 


Armenias national government is the president, who is 
elected by the people to a five-year term. The president 
appoints a prime minister. The prime minister heads a 
cabinet, which helps carry out government functions. 
Cabinet members are appointed by the president. A 
one-house legislature called the National Assembly 
makes Armenia's laws. 

Armenia's main units of local government are regions, 
cities, and city regions {regions within cities). Each of 
these political units has a governing council, whose 
members are elected by the people. All Armenians 18 
years old or older may vote. 

Armenia's highest court is called the Court of Cassa- 
tion. There are also courts of appeal for criminal, mili- 
tary, civil, and economic cases. 

About 60,000 people serve in Armenia's armed forces. 
All young men must serve an 18-month term, starting at 
the age of 18. 


Facts in brief 


Capital: Yerevan. 

Official language: Armenian. 

Official name: Haikakan Hanrapetoutioun (Republic of Armenia). 

Area: 11,506 mi? (29,800 km’). Greatest distances—north-south, 
170 mi (275 km); east-west, 130 mi (210 km). 

Elevation: Highest—Mount Aragats, 13,419 ft (4,090 m) above sea 
level. Lowest—Aras River at the southeastern border, 1,475 ft 
(450 m) above sea level. 

Population: Estimated 2002 population—3,543,000; density, 308 
per mi? (119 per km); distribution, 67 percent urban, 33 per- 
cent rural. 1989 census— 3,304,776. 

Chiet products: Agricu/ture—apricots, barley, cattle, peaches, 
quinces, sheep, walnuts, wheat, wine grapes. Manufactur- 
ing—chemicals, electronics, machinery, processed food, syn- 
thetic rubber, textiles. Mining —copper, gold, lead, zinc. 

Flag: Armenia's flag has three horizontal stripes. From top to bot- 
tom, the stripes are red, blue, and orange. See Flag (picture: 
Flags of Asia and the Pacific). 

Money. Basic unit— dram. One hundred luma equal one dram. 


Armenia 718a 


People. About 90 percent of Armenia's people are 
Armenians. Kurds and Russians make up the country’s 
largest minority ethnic groups. 

Most of Armenia’s people live in urban areas, in apart- 
ment buildings. Many people in smaller cities and vil- 
lages live in single-family houses. Armenians place great 
importance on hospitality and on close family ties. Of- 
ten, more than two generations of a family live together. 
In the cities, many women hold jobs outside the home, 
but they still do most of the housework and shopping. 

Most people in Armenia speak the Armenian lan- 
guage. Armenian is unlike any other language and has 
its own alphabet. 

Armenia was the first country in the world to make 
Christianity its official religion. It did so in the early 300's. 
Today, most Armenians belong to the Armenian Church, 
an Eastern Orthodox Church. 

Armenians enjoy such foods as barbecued shish ke- 
bab, bean salads, a thin bread called /avash, and do/ma 
(cabbage or grape leaves stuffed with rice and meat. 
Fruit juices, wine and cognac, and fan (a mixture of wa- 
ter, yogurt, and salt) are popular beverages. 

Chess and backgammon are popular forms of recre- 
ation in Armenia. Yerevan has many theaters for motion 
pictures, concerts, and drama. It also has an opera 
house and a symphony hall. 

Armenians enjoy such sports as basketball, tennis, 
and soccer. During the summer, many Armenians vaca- 
tion at Lake Sevan—a popular resort area—or at summer 
homes in the countryside. 

Armenia has a rich artistic tradition. Its people have 
excelled at such crafts as rug weaving and metalwork. 
The making of decorative carved stone monuments 
called Khatchkars is a purely Armenian art form. Armen- 
ian architecture through the ages has produced beauti- 
ful stone churches, many with domed roofs. Armenia 
also has a highly developed tradition of religious music 
dating to the Middle Ages. Many Armenian craftwork- 
ers and artists carry on old traditions today. 

Nearly all adults in Armenia can read and write. The 
government requires children to attend school from the 
ages of 6 to 16.A student may then attend a technical 
school or go on to higher education at a university or 
specialized institute. Armenia has a number of schools 
of higher education. 

Land and climate. Armenia lies on the Armenian 
Plateau, a rugged highland that extends from the Little 
Caucasus Mountains southwest into Turkey. The land is 
broken by mountains and deep gorges. Armenia has an 
average altitude of 5,000 feet {1,500 meters) above sea 
level. The highest mountain ranges stand in central Ar- 
menia. The country's highest point, Mount Aragats, rises 
13,419 feet (4,090 meters). The lowest altitudes are in the 
northeast and southeast. 

Much of the Armenian Plateau was formed millions of 
years ago by volcanic activity. For this reason, most of 
Armenia is covered with volcanic stones. Fau/ts—frac- 
tures in the earth's rocky outer shell—crisscross the 
plateau, and earthquakes sometimes occur in Armenia. 

Armenia has about 100 mountain lakes. Lake Sevan, in 
the east, is the largest. It covers about 5 percent of Ar- 
menia. The country also has many small, fast-flowing 
rivers and streams. The longest river, the Aras, separates 
Armenia from Turkey on the west and from iran on the 


718b Armenia 





5 am iWMaetin- Se ead Liter. 
R er Han q Picture Library 


Armenia's rugged land includes mountains and gorges. The 
country lies on the Armenian Plateau and has an average alti- 
tude of 5,000 feet 1,500 meters! above sea level. 


south. The streams and rivers serve as a source for irri- 
gation and energy. A chain of hydroelectric power sta- 
tions stands along the Razdan River, between Lake Se- 
van and Yerevan. 

Most of Armenia s vegetation consists of grasses and 
shrubs. Some forests of beech, hornbeam, juniper, and 
oak are found in the northeast and southeast 

The country s climate is dry, with long cold winters 
and short hot summers. January temperatures usually 
range from 10 to 23 F (-12 to -5 ‘© and can fall below 
-22 “F (-30 -©). July temperatures average about 50 F (10 

© in the mountains and about 77 F (25 ‘© elsewhere. 

Armenia receives a yearly rainfall of about 8 to 31 
inches (20 to 80 centimeters), rising with elevation. The 
highest peaks are snow-covered all year. 

Economy. Manufacturing and mining account for 
about two-thirds of the value of Armenia s economic 
production. The chief industries make chemicals, elec- 
tronic products, machinery, processed food, synthetic 
rubber, and textiles. Armenia is a leading distiller of co- 
gnac. The countrys main industrial centers are Alaverdi 
Kapan, Kirovakan, Gvumri, and Yerevan. Copper is Ar- 
meni mportant mineral. Armenian mines also 

ead. and zinc 


nenia S MOSI 


Service industries account for about a fourth of Arme- 


nia Ss econor production. These industries include ed- 
ucation. nealtn care. and government activities 

Agriculture accou about 10 percent of the pro- 
duction. Farm products ude apricots, barley, peach- 
es, potatoes. quinces. walnuts, wheat, and wine grapes. 
Crop production benefits t Armenia s manv areas of 
tertile black topsoils ca G chermozem soils. Tne Aras 
River \ alley S tne { ' Ta ng region. Herders False 
Caitie and sneep or tain slopes 

Armenia nas several railwavs and an extensive road 


and nigqnway Syste B it relatively few VveOopie OWT) Cals 
Buses and trolleys are the main forms of transportation 


in most cities and towns. Yerevai nas a subway. An In 


ternational airport also operates at Yerevan. 

About 90 newspapers are published in Armenia. The 
country s radio and television studios are located in 
Yerevan. 

History. People lived in historic Armenia by 6000 B.C 
The earliest societies in the region were probably tribal 
groups that lived by farming or raising cattle. In the 800's 
B.C., a coalition of several tribes formed the kingdom of 
Urartu. The Urartians introduced irrigation and built 
fortresses, palaces, and temples. In the 600's B.C, ances- 
tors of the Armenians migrated—probably from the 
west—to the Armenian Plateau. They settled with the na- 
tive population. In the 500s B.C, Urartu was conquered 
by the Medes, a people from what is now Iran. 

Soon after Urartu fell to the Medes, the Medes were 
conquered by the Persians. Armenia was under Persian 
and then Greek rule for hundreds of years. But it main- 
tained a degree of independence. 

King Tigran Il, who came to power in 95 B.C, built an 
independent Armenian empire that reached from the 
Caspian Sea to the Mediterranean Sea The Romans de- 
feated Tigran in 55 B.C, and Armenia became part of the 
Roman Empire. 

In the early AD. 300s, Armenia became the first na- 
tion to adopt Christianity as its state religion. The Ar- 
menian alphabet was developed in the early 400's by an 
Armenian cleric. In 451, Armenians under Vartan 
Mamikonian defended their religion against the Per- 
sians in the Battle of Avarair. 

Arabs conquered Armenia in the 600 s. In 884, Arme- 
nians created an independent kingdom in the northerm 
part of the region. Seljuk Turks conquered Armenia in 
the mid-1000 s, but Armenians established a new state in 
Cilicia on the Mediterranean coast This last Armenian 
kingdom fell to Mameluke invaders in 1375. 

Ottoman rule. By 1514, the Ottoman Empire had 
gained control of Armenia. The Ottomans ruled western 
Armenia until their defeat in World War | in 1918. Per- 
sians gained control of eastern Armenia in 1639. They 
ruled it until 1828, when it was annexed by Russia. Dur- 
ing the 1800s, the growth of nationalism among Turks, 
Armenians, and other peoples caused conflicts. 

During the late 1800 s, Armenians under Ottoman rule 
suffered increasingly trom discrimination, heavy taxa- 
tion, and armed attacks. From 1894 through 1896, the Ot- 
tomans and Kurds, under Sultan Abdilhamit Il, carried 
out a Campaign to wipe out Armenians. Hundreds of 
thousands of Armenians were killed. 

Armenia became a battleground between the Ot- 
toman Empire and Russia during World War 1 (1914- 
19181. The Ottomans feared that the Armenians would 
support the Russians. In 1915, the Ottoman government 
deported Armenians who were living in western Arme- 
nia into the deserts of what is now Syria. About 1 million 
Armenians died from lack of water and starvation or 
were killed by Ottoman soldiers or Arabs and Kurds. A 
large number of survivors fled to Russian Armenia, 
where, in 1918, an Armenian republic was established. 

Soviet rule. Conflicts resurfaced between the Ar- 
menian republic and the Ottoman Empire. Armenia s 
leaders reluctantly turned to Communist Russia for pro- 
tection. In December 1920, eastern Armenia became a 
Communist republic. The Ottomans kept the rest of 
Armenia. In early 1922, Armenia joined Azerbaijan and 


Georgia to form the Transcaucasian Republic. This re- 
public was one of four that joined to form the Soviet 
Union in late 1922. In 1936, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and 
Georgia became separate republics of the Soviet Union. 

Joseph Stalin became dictator of the Soviet Union in 
1929. He ruled by terror, allowed little expression by na- 
tionalist groups, and had many political and cultural 
leaders killed. After Stalin's death in 1953, the Soviet 
Union became more tolerant of national differences. Ar- 
menia began to develop into a more modern, European- 
style society while preserving its ethnic culture. 

Before the beginning of Soviet rule in the 1920's, most 
Armenians had lived in rural areas and worked as farm- 
ers or herders. Also, because the region lies on ancient 
trade routes, many Armenians had become merchants 
or traders. Under Soviet rule, Armenia became industri- 
alized. The Soviet government built many factories and 
modern apartment buildings in Armenia's cities. Many 
rural people moved to the cities. 

Nagorno-Karabakh, an autonomous (self-governing) 
region in neighboring Azerbaijan, has long been a 
source of dispute between Armenia and Azerbaijan. 
Until the late 1980's, a large majority of the people of 
Nagorno-Karabakh were Armenians. In 1988, large num- 
bers of Armenians demonstrated in Yerevan and other 
cities, demanding that Nagorno-Karabakh be made part 
of Armenia. The protests soon led to fighting between 
Armenians and Azerbaijanis. After the fighting began, 
about 400,000 Armenians fled to Armenia from Azerbai- 
jan. About 200,000 Azerbaijanis—almost all those who 
lived in Armenia—fled to Azerbaijan. 

On Dec. 7, 1988, a severe earthquake struck Armenia. 
It killed about 25,000 people and destroyed much prop- 
erty. The destruction caused by the earthquake, along 
with the large number of refugees from Azerbaijan, led 
to a severe shortage of housing and jobs in Armenia. 

Independence. |n 1990, non-Communists won control 
of Armenia's government. The republic's legislature 
then declared that Armenia's laws took precedence over 
those of the Soviet Union. In early 1991, the Armenian 
legislature scheduled a referendum on independence 
to be held in September. 

In August 1991, conservative Communist officials 
failed in an attempt to overthrow the Soviet Union's 
president, Mikhail S. Gorbachev. In the upheaval that fol- 
lowed, several republics declared their independence. 
In September, the Armenian people voted for inde- 
pendence from the Soviet Union. In October, Levon Ter- 
Petrosyan was elected president. In December, Armenia 
joined other former republics in an association called 
the Commonwealth of Independent States. The Soviet 
Union was formally dissolved on December 25. 

During the Soviet era, the government owned most of 
Armenia's businesses, factories, and farmland. But in 
1991, the government began to introduce elements of a 
free-enterprise system. By the time the Soviet Union 
broke up, the government had sold about three-fourths 
of the farmland to private owners. Through the 1990's, 
the government converted many other businesses to 
private ownership, and capitalism took root in Armenia. 

Recent developments. |n 1994, Armenia and Azerbai- 
jan declared a cease-fire in the fighting over Nagorno- 
Karabakh. However, sporadic fighting continued, and 
the conflict over the territory remained unresolved. 


Armor 719 


In 1996, Levon Ter-Petrosyan was reelected president 
of Armenia. However, many Armenians protested that 
the election had been marred by fraud. In February 
1998, Ter-Petrosyan resigned, and Armenias prime min- 
ister, Robert Kocharian, became acting president. In 
March 1998, Kocharian was elected president. 

In October 1999, gunmen entered the parliament 
building and assassinated Prime Minister Vazgen Sark- 
isyan and several other government officials. The gun- 
men were arrested, and Kocharian appointed replace- 
ments for the slain officials. Nancy Lubin 

See also Azerbaijan; Caucasus; Commonwealth of In- 
dependent States; Yerevan. 

Armey, Dick (1940- ), a Republican from Texas, be- 
came majority leader of the United States House of Rep- 
resentatives in 1995. In 1993 and 1994, he served as 
chairman of the House Republican Conference, the Re- 
publicans’ main policymaking body in the House. 

Before Armey became majority leader, he helped 
wage an aggressive campaign against policies of the 
Democratic Party. This campaign helped the Republi- 
cans win control of both houses of Congress from the 
Democrats in the elections of 1994. Armey became a 
strong supporter of free-market capitalism and an oppo- 
nent of many government social programs. 

Richard Keith Armey was born on July 7, 1940, in Can- 
do, North Dakota. He earned a B.A. degree from 
Jamestown College in 1963 and a Ph.D. in economics 
from the University of Oklahoma in 1968. He was a pro- 
fessor of economics at North Texas State University from 
1972 to 1983. Armey first won election to the House in 
1984. Jackie Koszczuk 
Arminius, ahr MIHN ee uhs, Jacobus, juh KOH buhs 
(1560-1609), was a Dutch theologian. He tried to liberal- 
ize severe Calvinist views on predestination, which stat- 
ed that God unconditionally chooses some people to be 
saved and others to be damned (see Predestination). 
Arminius denied absolute predestination. He taught that 
predestination was based on God's knowing in advance 
who would believe in Jesus. But people can still resist 
the Holy Spirit's call to grace and even lose salvation. 
Thus, complete assurance of final salvation is impossi- 
ble. Arminius’s doctrines were called Arminianism. 

Arminius'’s followers published a Remonstrance in 
1610 that summarized his views. Orthodox Calvinists 
claimed that Arminianism would weaken Dutch national 
unity by dividing Calvinism, the national religion. A 
council called the Reformed Synod of Dort (1618-1619) 
condemned Arminianism. The doctrines still spread to 
England and the English colonies in America. Arminian- 
ism influenced other Protestant denominations, espe- 
cially Methodism. Arminius was born on Oct. 10, 1560, 
in Oudewater, South Holland. Ralph W. Quere 
Armistice. See Truce. 

Armistice Day. See Veterans Day. 

Armor is a covering used primarily for protection in 
battle. Through the centuries, such materials as animal 
skins, bronze, and steel have been used to make armor. 
Until the invention of firearms, increasingly effective ar- 
mor was designed to match advances in weapons. How- 
ever, the use of individual armor declined when it be- 
came so heavy in order to be bulletproof that it could 
not be worn. Today, armor is used mainly on ships, 
tanks, and other military vehicles. 


720 Armor 





| Armor parts 


Helmet 


L 






















Visar i) Callar 
Crinel (neckpiece} — Ais - 
?* , Ve. 
proniiay . Breastplate NG ) B anil 
| \eaqdpiece} y , . 7 r ge | 
7 eo » Gauntlet fi Elbow plate | 


Tasses (skirt) 


Crupper (hindpiece) 





Loin guard 





Stone Age 


Cuisse (thighpiece) 


Kneepiece 


Peytral 
horse’s breastplate} 


Greek 


Salleret (shae) — ‘, 
P Flank plate 






Greqve (shin guard) 





European 


1600's 


WORLD 800k illustrations by Robern Addison 


People have used armor to protect themselves in battle since prehistoric times. The armor worn 
through the centuries, /eft, was made from such materials as animal skins, bronze, and steel. In the 





French horse, above. 


1800's 


In early times, primitive people wore layers of ani- 
mal hides to soften blows from clubs and axes. The As- 
syrians and people of other early civilizations carried 
shields and wore helmets and body armor made chiefly 
of leather strengthened with bronze. The Greeks and 
later the Romans wore helmets, cu/rasses (short body 
armor), and greaves (leg armor), and they carried large 
shields. Greek and Roman armor was constructed 
mainly of bronze or steel, and it served as protection 
against arrows, spears, and swords. 

During the Middle Ages, the use of armor reached 
its peak. During the 1200s, chain mail (tiny rings of metal 
linked together) served as the major form of protection. 
Suits of chain mail covered a knight's body from head to 
foot and provided protection against arrows, lances, 
and swords. The crusaders and many other knights also 
wore metal helmets that covered the face. 

By the 1300s, foot soldiers fought with such weapons 
as crossbows, longbows, maces, and axes. Arrows fired 
from a longbow or crossbow could pierce chain mail, 
and blows from an axe or a mace would crush it. As a re- 
sult, armorers (armor makers) began to produce plate 
armor consisting of large pieces of steel. By the 1400s, 
suits of plate armor were designed to cover the entire 
body. Helmets, gaunt/ets (gloves), and shoes—all of 
steel— completed the outfit. Horses wore armor as well 


1400's—during the late Middle Ages—metal armor covered a soldier's entire body, as well as his 


Plate armor was highly effective, but it was extremely 
heavy and hot to wear. A suit of armor was also expen- 
sive, costing as much as a small farm. 

Armorers were highly skilled craftsmen. Their job 
was to preserve lives, particularly those of leaders. After 
armor became a safe defense, armorers concentrated 
on decorating armor for tournaments and parades. 
Gothic armor produced in northern Italy and southern 
Germany became especially well known for its graceful- 
ness and elegance. German Maximilian armor of the 
early 1500's was fluted (grooved) to give it extra strength 
and a glancing surface. By the mid-1500's, armor was 
etched or engraved with designs or scenes, and was 
often gilded or silvered. Later examples imitated current 
fashions in dress, or were exaggerated and grotesque. 

Guns changed the ways of waging war and therefore 
the protection needed. Armor, made ever thicker and 
heavier to be bulletproof, became too heavy to wear. By 
the mid-1600's, only helmets and breastplates continued 
to be used. 

Later developments. By the 1900s, the only armor 
soldiers wore was a helmet. Engineers began to work 
on group protection, armoring trains, ships, and other 
vehicles. During World War 1 (1914-1918), the British de- 
veloped the tank. The tank became one of the most im- 
portant weapons in World War II (1939-1945) and later 





nt 


© Peter Chartrand, Liaison Agency 
Police officers use armor in situations that involve armed sus- 
pects. These police officers, equipped with riot shields and bul- 
letproof vests and helmets, are performing a training exercise. 


conflicts. During the Korean War (1950-1953) and the 
Vietnam War (1957-1975), soldiers wore bulletproof 
body armor made of light, strong synthetic material. 

Today, besides its use in warfare, armor is also worn 
by some people in their jobs. For example, police offi- 
cers sometimes wear bulletproof vests and helmets and 
carry riot shields. Helmets are part of hockey and foot- 
ball players’ uniforms. Karin N. Mango 

See also Aramid; Knights and knighthood (Armor); 
Gauntlet; Helmet; Shield. 

Armour, Philip Danforth (1832-1901), an American 
businessman, was the principal founder of Armour and 
Company, one of the world’s largest meat-packing firms. 
Armour pioneered the use of all parts of the slaugh- 
tered animal for commercial purposes. He later expand- 
ed his firm’s operations to include household products 
and food processing. He also gained control of private 
railroad-car lines and banks. In 1892, he donated money 
to establish the Armour Institute of Technology in Chica- 
go, which later merged with Lewis Institute to form the 
Illinois Institute of Technology. Armour was born in 
Stockbridge, New York. William R. Childs 

Arms control is the limiting, regulating, reducing, or 
eliminating of a nation’s armed forces and weapons. 
Most arms-control agreements are treaties approved by 
many nations. 

Arms-control proposals have ranged from general 
and complete disarmament to forms of limited arms 
control. General and complete disarmament would al- 
low nations to keep only those weapons and forces nec- 
essary to provide police services and support interna- 
tional peacekeeping units. No such plan has ever been 
adopted. Limited arms-control measures Call for restric- 
tions on the testing, production, distribution, or posses- 
sion of certain types of weapons. The restrictions may 
ban the weapons entirely or only forbid their presence 
in certain areas. Nations may also limit or ban the distri- 
bution of equipment or scientific information that can 
be used to produce certain kinds of weapons. Some lim- 
ited arms-control agreements have been approved. 

Working out an arms-control agreement is a difficult 
process, especially if relations between the negotiating 
countries are unstable. Countries negotiating an agree- 


Arms control 721 


ment may be critical and suspicious of each other and 
therefore may tend to disagree over proposals. In addi- 
tion, it is often hard to compare the military strength of 
powerful nations because of differences in the types 
and numbers of weapons. The combined strength of al- 
lied nations also makes comparisons difficult. 


The current arms-control debate 


The argument for arms control. Today, many na- 
tions have the ability to make “weapons of mass destruc- 
tion,” including chemical, biological, and nuclear weap- 
ons. The existence of such weapons has helped 
encourage support for arms control. People who favor 
arms control use the following arguments: 

The overwhelming power of modern weapons ex- 
ceeds any reasonable purpose. Today, one submarine 
can carry missiles and nuclear warheads that contain 
more destructive power than all the weapons used dur- 
ing World War Il (1939-1945). The use of all existing nu- 
clear warheads in an attack would almost certainly de- 
stroy the countries attacked. Similarly, the use of 
chemical or biological weapons against troops or civil- 
ian populations would cause large numbers of deaths. 

The threat to use such weapons against a country 
might itself cause a war. A threatened country might 
question its ability to survive an attack. As a result, it 
might attack first if it feared that it was about to be at- 
tacked. Arms control is intended to reduce such fears. 

Arms control reduces the need for countries to ac- 
quire nuclear weapons or increase their supply of other 
weapons. Arms control thus eases world tension and 
limits other conditions that might lead to nuclear war. 

The argument against arms control. Some nations 
want to build or acquire sophisticated weapons be- 
cause they regard them as a symbol of technological 
achievement, prestige, and modernness. Also, many 
people feel more secure if their country is militarily 
strong. Opponents of arms control use the following ar- 
guments: 

Armed forces and weapons by themselves do not 
cause international disputes or tension. They merely re- 
flect political, economic, and other kinds of disputes. 
These disputes must be settled before nations can agree 
on arms control. Nations that first try to agree on arms 
control raise false hopes that may cause people to op- 
pose spending the money necessary for defense. 

Arms-control agreements between an open, free soci- 
ety anda secret, totalitarian society are risky. The totali- 
tarian nation often will not permit adequate inspection 
to assure that it is keeping its part of the agreement. 

Arms control may damage a nation’s military defense. 
Agreements may Call for the destruction of some need- 
ed weapons and may also prevent the replacement or 
improvement of other necessary weapons systems. 


History of arms control 


Until the 1900's, there were only a few limited arms- 
control agreements. One was the Rush-Bagot Agree- 
ment of 1817 between the United States and the United 
Kingdom. This agreement limited each nation’s armed 
forces along the Great Lakes. The peace treaty signed af- 
ter World War | (1914-1918) disarmed Germany and lim- 
ited the size of its army. In 1922, the Washington Confer- 
ence led to an arms-control agreement among France, 


722 Arms control 


Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. 
These nations agreed to destroy some of their battle- 
ships and ban construction of others for 10 years. At the 
London Naval Conference in 1930, japan, the United 
Kingdom, and the United States consented to limit the 
size and guns of their cruisers, destroyers, and sub- 
marines. This agreement lasted only until 1936. 

Agreements at the end of World War II (1939-1945) 
provided for the disarmament of Germany and Japan. Af- 
ter the war, the United Nations (UN) tried to obtain an 
agreement limiting arms for all nations. 

In 1952, a 12-nation Disarmament Commission set up 
by the UN General Assembly began to meet. In 1959, it 
took in all UN members. In 1961, a treaty to keep Antarc- 
tica free of military weapons took effect. In 1963, the 
Limited Test Ban Treaty was ratified by the United States, 
the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom. It prohibited 
testing of nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, in outer 
space, or underwater. A treaty often called the Outer 
Space Treaty, which took effect in 1967, limited military 
activity in outer space. That same year, 21 Latin Amer- 
ican states signed the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which banned 
nuclear weapons in Latin America. Today, most Latin 
American countries participate in the treaty. In 1968, the 
UN approved the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nu- 
clear Weapons, which prohibited countries from giving 
nuclear weapons to other nations. It took effect in 1970. 

Several more UN arms-control treaties won approval 
during the early 1970's. The Seabed Arms Control 
Treaty, which took effect in 1972, prohibited countries 
from putting nuclear weapons on the ocean floor more 
than 12 nautical miles (23 kilometers) from their coast- 
lines. The Biological Weapons Convention, a UN treaty 
signed in 1972, banned the production and stockpiling 
of biological weapons. It went into effect in 1975. 

Meetings between the Soviet Union and the United 
States to discuss the possibility of limiting strategic 
(long-range offensive) nuclear weapons led to two 
agreements in 1972. The first agreement limited each na- 
tion's defensive missile strength. The other agreement 
restricted U.S. and Soviet production of certain kinds of 
offensive nuclear weapons. Both agreements went into 
force in 1972. See Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. 

Beginning in the late 1980's, improved relations be- 
tween the United States and the Soviet Union led to a 
number of arms-control agreements. A U.S.-Soviet treaty 
that went into effect in 1988 eliminated all of the two 
countries ground-launched nuclear missiles with 
ranges of 500 to 5,500 kilometers (310 to 3,420 miles). It 
also provided for the first inspection procedures on na- 
tional territory to support verification. 

In 1990, the United States, the Soviet Union, and 20 
other nations signed a treaty to destroy large numbers 
of their tanks and other nonnuclear weapons in Europe. 
This agreement, called the Treaty on Conventional 
Armed Forces in Europe, went into effect in 1992. 

In july 1991, U.S. President George H. W. Bush and So- 
viet President Mikhail Gorbachev signed the Strategic 
Arms Reduction Treaty, or START. This treaty, now 
known as START I, was designed to reduce U.S. and So- 
viet long-range nuclear missiles and bombers by about 
a third. Later in 1991, the United States and the Soviet 
Union stated that they would destroy many of their 
short-range nuclear weapons. 


The collapse of the Soviet Union in late 1991 raised 
questions about who would be responsible for ratifying 
and carrying out agreements entered into by the Soviet 
Union. But in 1992, officials of Belarus, Kazakhstan, Rus- 
sia, and Ukraine—the four former Soviet states that pos- 
sessed nuclear weapons—signed an agreement uphold- 
ing START I. The agreement also committed Belarus, 
Kazakhstan, and Ukraine to eliminating their nuclear 
weapons. The United States and the four former Soviet 
states ratified the agreement. It went into effect in 1994. 

In 1993, Bush and Russian President Boris Yeltsin 
signed START Il, a treaty to supplement START I. START 
Il called for cutting the number of U.S. and former Sovi- 
et long-range nuclear weapons to less than half the 
number proposed by START I. However, START II never 
went into effect, due to disputes over later amendments 
to the agreement. In 2001, U.S. President George W. 
Bush and Russian President Vladimir Putin agreed to 
pursue further reductions in their countries’ nuclear 
forces. The following year, they signed a treaty to re- 
duce the U.S. and Russian nuclear forces by about two- 
thirds over 10 years. 

In 1993, over 120 nations signed a UN-sponsored 
treaty banning the making, use, transfer, and stockpiling 
of chemical weapons. The treaty took effect in 1997. 

In 1996, the UN approved the Comprehensive Nuclear 
Test Ban Treaty, which was designed to end the testing 
of nuclear weapons. To go into effect, the pact must be 
ratified by all countries that have nuclear reactors (de- 
vices for producing nuclear energy). Three of these 
countries—India, Pakistan, and North Korea—have not 
signed the treaty, and many other countries have not rat- 
ified it. However, the countries that have approved the 
pact are expected to abide by it even if India, Pakistan, 
North Korea, and other countries do not ratify it. 

Since 1997, over 130 countries have signed a treaty 
banning the use of land mines that are designed to kill 
or injure soldiers. The treaty went into effect in 1999. 
However, some countries consider land mines to be im- 
portant defensive weapons and refuse to sign the treaty. 

William B. Vogele 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Biological Weapons Convention 
Chemical Weapons Convention 
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty 
Organization tor Security and Cooperation in Europe 
Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty 
United Nations (Arms control) 
Washington Conference 


Additional resources 


Burns, Richard D., ed. Encyclopedia of Arms Control and Disar- 
mament 3 vols. Scribner, 1993. 
Gold, Susan D. Arms Control. 21st Century Bks., 1997. 


Armstrong, Edwin Howard (1890-1954), an Ameri- 
can electrical engineer and inventor, made important 
contributions to electronics and radio communication. 
In 1933, he introduced the frequency modulation (FM) 
broadcasting system that is still in use today. This system 
provided better sound reproduction and less static in- 
terference than the older amplitude modulation (AM) 
system (see Frequency modulation). Earlier, in 1918, 
Armstrong developed the superheterodyne radio re- 
ceiver, which became widely used. In 1921, he devel- 
oped the superregenerative receiver that came into use 


in mobile radio and other systems. Armstrong was born 
on Dec. 18, 1890, in New York City. 
Armstrong, Lance (1971- ), an American cyclist, 
gained international fame in 1999 when he won the Tour 
de France, the world’s most prestigious bicycle race. He 
won the race again in 2000, 2001, and 2002. Greg 
LeMond is the only other American cyclist to win the 
event. Armstrong raced as a member of the United 
States Postal Service team. His victories capped a coura- 
geous comeback ina fight against cancer. 

Armstrong was born on Sept. 18, 1971, in Plano, Texas. 
He began his professional cycling career in 1992 as a 
member of the Motorola team. In 1993, Armstrong won 
the World Cycling Championships, held in Oslo, Nor- 
way. He captured the Tour DuPont, the best-known bicy- 
cle race in the United States, in 1995 and 1996. 

In 1996, Armstrong learned that he had testicular can- 
cer and that the disease had spread to his abdomen, 
lungs, and brain. After 18 months of medical treatment 
that included chemotherapy and surgery, he returned to 
competitive cycling in 1998. Armstrong wrote a memoir 
called /t's Not About the Bike (2000). Dave Nightingale 
Armstrong, Louis (1901-1971), was one of the most 
famous and influential performers in the history of jazz. 
Armstrong gained recognition as the world’s greatest 
jazz cornet and trumpet player in the 1920's and early 
1930's. He also became famous as a singer with his dis- 
tinctive gravelly voice. 

Armstrong was born on Aug. 4, 1901, in New Orleans. 
He learned to play the cornet while serving a sentence 
for delinquency in the Home for Colored Waifs. In 1922, 
Armstrong left New Orleans to join King Oliver's Creole 
Jazz Band in Chicago. His first recorded solo appears on 
the band’s recording of “Chimes Blues” (1923). Arm- 
strong was coached by Lil Hardin, the band’s classically 
trained pianist. Armstrong and Hardin were married in 
1924. In that year, with Hardin’s encouragement, Arm- 
strong left Oliver to join the Fletcher Henderson band in 
New York City. 

In 1925, Armstrong returned to Chicago. There, dur- 
ing the next three years, he made a series of small band 
recordings that rank among the masterpieces of jazz. 
Many of these recordings were issued under the names 
Hot Five and Hot Seven. They showed Armstrong's bril- 
liant tone and tremendous range. 

In the Hot Five recording of “Heebie Jeebies” (1926), 
Armstrong first employed scat singing, a form of rhyth- 
mic wordless singing. Many singers adopted the style. 
During this period, Armstrong switched from the cornet 
to the trumpet. 

Starting in 1929, Arm- 
strong appeared in musi- 
cal shows, often as fea- 
tured soloist with a big 
band. By the mid-1930s, 
he had become less of a 
jazz artist and more ofa 
popular entertainer, on 
the advice of his man- 
agers. However, he re: 
tained his brilliance as a 
trumpeter. In 1947, Arm- 
strong formed the first in a 
series of small bands 


James E. Brittain 


Wide World 
Louis Armstrong 





Armstrong, Neil Alden 723 


called the All-Stars. As he grew older and his health de- 
clined, he played less and sang more. A new generation 
of fans in the 1950's and 1960's knew Armstrong mainly 
as an Outgoing singer and entertainer. He made several 
hit vocal recordings, including “Hello, Dolly!” (1963) and 
“What a Wonderful World” (1967). Armstrong wrote an 
autobiography, Satchmo: My Life in New Orleans (1954). 
A selection of his writings was published as Louis Arm- 
strong: In His Own Words (1999). Eddie Cook 
See also Jazz (picture: Louis Armstrong). 


Additional resources 


Armstrong, Louis. Louis Armstrong in His Own Words. Ed. by 

Thomas Brothers. Oxford, 1999. 

Bergreen, Laurence. Louis Armstrong. 1997. Reprint. Broadway 

Bks., 1998. 

Boujut, Michel. Louis Armstrong. Rizzoli, 1998. 

Armstrong, Neil Alden (1930- ), a United States 
astronaut, was the first person to set foot on the moon. 
On July 20, 1969, Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin landed the 
Apollo 11 lunar module Fag/e on the moon. Armstrong 
left the module and explored the surface of the moon. 
Upon taking his first step onto the moon, Armstrong 
said: “That's one small step for a man, one giant leap for 
mankind.” But the word a was lost in radio transmission. 

Armstrong was born on his grandparents farm in 
Auglaize County, Ohio, on Aug. 5, 1930. His family set- 
tled in Wapakoneta, Ohio, when Neil was 13 years old. A 
love of airplanes grew when he went for his first plane 
ride in a Ford Tri-Motor, a “Tin Goose,’ at the age of 6. 
From then on, he was fascinated by aviation. 

In 1947, Armstrong entered Purdue University. He be- 
gan studies in aeronautical engineering. But in 1949, the 
United States Navy called him to active duty. Armstrong 
became a Naw pilot and was sent to Korea in 1950, near 
the start of the Korean War. In Korea, he flew 78 combat 
missions in Navy Panther jets. In 1952, Armstrong re- 
turned to Purdue. He earned a bachelor's degree in 
aeronautical engineering there in 1955. 

Armstrong was a civilian test pilot assigned to test the 
X-15 rocket airplane before becoming an astronaut in 
1962. He made his first space flight in 1966 on Gemini 8 
with David R. Scott. The two men performed the first 
successful docking of two vehicles in space—the Gemini 
8 and an uninhabited Agena rocket 

Armstrong resigned from the United States astronaut 
program in 1970. Also in 1970, he earned a master's de- 
gree in aerospace engineering at the University of 
Southern California. From 1971 to 1979, Armstrong was 
a professor of aerospace engineering at the University 
of Cincinnati. In 1986, he 
was named vice chairman 
of a presidential commis- 
sion investigating the 
breakup of the space shut- 
tle Challenger. From 1982 
to 1992, he was chairman 
of the board of Computing 
Technologies for Aviation, 
a company that develops 
software for flight sched- 
uling. 

See also Space explo- 
ration (Apollo: Mission to NASA 
the moon). 


James R. Hansen 





Neil A. Armstrong 





6 Brash Crown copngnt Manisery of Detence 


Tanks and soldiers from the British Army travel across the desert in Saudi Arabia during the Per- 


sian Gulf War in 1991. The armies of 29 countries fought in this war. 


Army 


Army is the branch of a nation’s armed forces that is 
trained to fight on land. An army consists of ground 
troops, their weapons and equipment, and military 
bases. It includes infantry, armored vehicles, and ar- 
tillery, plus support troops who handle transportation, 
medical care, and other responsibilities. 

Almost every nation has an army. Armies vary greatly 
in size and strength, depending on several factors. The 


economy of a nation plays a major role because wealthy 


nations can afford to buy expensive weapons and pay 
large numbers of soldiers. Nearly all developed nations 
maintain armies with large numbers of tanks, armored 
personnel carriers. helicopters. and even ships. Less de- 
veloped nations that cannot afford advanced weapons 
often depend on specially trained light infantry, small 
ground attack aircraft, and armored cars. 

Potential threats also shape a nation s army. For exam- 
ple, Switzeriand, which has few potential enemies, does 
not have a standing army of professional soldiers. It in- 
stead maintains a large national militia of men who can 
be called into service at any time. Nations with extensive 
foreign commitments, such as France, the United King- 
dom, and the United States, need a large standing army 


to Meet their needs outside the country 
Countnes also differ ir “) they raise and maintain 
their army. Some nations use a military draft, in which 


Robert R Mackey 1/ : i 
of Military History at the States Militarw A 
Point and a major in the ed St 


certain individuals are selected for duty. Others have 
universal military service, which requires all qualified 
men and women in a certain age range to serve. Still 
other nations have a completely volunteer army. Today. 
almost all armies include women. 

Most nations divide their army into a regu/ar army 
and an army reserve. The regular army consists of pro- 
fessional soldiers. They continually receive training and 
are always on active duty and ready for combat No na- 
tion, however, can afford to support a regular army 
large enough to meet any crisis. Even nations that rely 
on large regular forces generally maintain an extensive 
army reserve. Such a reserve, also called a national 
guard or militia, trains citizens for immediate active duty 
in an emergency. Except during training, reservists re- 
main on inactive duty, living as civilians but prepared to 
respond to a call to duty. 

For thousands of years, warfare consisted almost en- 
tirely of battles between armies. Often, a single land bat- 
tle would decide the fate of nations and empires. Begin- 
ning in the 1600 s, the importance of navies rose to 
equal that of land forces. In the early 1900 s, military air- 
craft first appeared and changed warfare forever. 
Armies still formed the largest part of the military power 
of most nations. But nations began to use their armies in 
combination with air and naval units in joint operations, 
which involve more than one branch of the armed 
forces. The rise of military alliances beginning in the 
1700 s led to the growth of combined or coalition war- 
fare, which involves the military forces of several na- 
tions. 

Every army has a specific set of ideas, plans, and train- 
ing practices that determines how it fights. For example. 
a nation in a mountainous or jungle region will have 


rao 


—— 


substantially different plans and practices than an indus- 
trialized nation with an advanced highway system. 


The organization of armies 


How a country organizes its army depends on the na- 
tion's customs, its history, and the tasks it expects the 
army to accomplish. But there is a general similarity in 
the organization of armies throughout the world. 

The largest units of some armies are called army 
groups and may have several hundred thousand sol- 
diers. Army groups usually consist of several organiza- 
tions themselves known as armies. Each army is made 
up of several corps(pronounced kawrzor kohrz) A 
corps (pronounced kawr or kohr)/normally has from 
50,000 to 100,000 soldiers. A corps consists of two or 
more divisions and any necessary support troops. 

The division is the basic fighting unit of many armies. 
Divisions include such combat troops as infantry, ar- 
mored forces, and artillery; and engineers, who are 
sometimes considered as combat troops. Divisions also 
have support troops who handle transportation, medical 
care, and other responsibilities. Divisions usually are 
identified according to their equipment, training, and 
function. Types of divisions include infantry, mecha- 
nized, armored, and airborne divisions. 

The size of a division varies from about 10,000 to 
18,000 soldiers. Most divisions have three or more 
brigades of roughly equal size, and each brigade has 
three to five battalions. The battalion, a combat unit of 
500 to 800 soldiers, is further divided into groups of 100 
to 200 soldiers. Infantry and armored units of this size 
are called companies. Artillery groups are known as bat- 
teries, and groups of cavalry (highly mobile forces used 
for scouting and surprise attacks) are called troops. 


The role of armies 


In war, a nation uses its army to conquer enemy terri- 
tory and to defend itself from attack. In peacetime, an 
army can help prevent war. It also aids civilians in cer- 
tain emergencies. 

Attack. A nation may seek to take over territory held 
by an enemy by conducting offensive operations. The at- 
tacker’s tanks and other armored vehicles invade the en- 
emy's territory, with planes and artillery supporting the 
advance. Other planes drop airborne troops behind en- 
emy lines, and helicopters carry in specially trained sol- 
diers, sometimes called special forces or commandos, 
to seize certain key positions. Later, mechanized infantry 
sweeps in and occupies the conquered territory. 

Defense. An army is trained for both offensive and 
defensive combat operations. But some units may be as- 
signed to fight only in case of an enemy attack. In the 
past, fortifications along borders formed the main line 
of defense for many countries. But modern armies do 
not rely nearly as much on fortifications, which can often 
be bypassed with airborne assaults or by the combined 
action of land, sea, and air forces. 

Prevention of war. A powerful nation may some- 
times station troops in politically troubled regions or in 
areas threatened by attack. Such a show of military 
strength may help prevent war. In 1991, for example, 
French and Belgian troops went to Zaire—now Congo 
(Kinshasa)—to restore order after Zairian soldiers rioted. 

The development of tactical nuclear weapons in the 





aba of Paks ae 
Soldiers from Pakistan’‘s army aim a mortar before firing. 
Mortars, which fire shells in a high arc, can reach targets that are 


protected by hills or other obstacles. 





Thierry Campion, Gamma.‘Liaison 
Armies wear protective clothing to prevent injury from chem- 
ical, biological, or radiological weapons. These soldiers from the 
French Army are outfitted for a chemical attack. 


1950's gave armies an important defensive strategy. 
These weapons are designed to be used in areas where 
a conventional war is being fought. An army that massed 
its men and equipment was vulnerable to a nuclear at- 
tack. The fear of such an attack could prevent a nation 
from invading an enemy. This idea, known as deter- 
rence, was used by the Soviet Union and Western na- 
tions from the end of World War II in 1945 to the late 
1980's, a period of hostility known as the Cold War. 
Internal security and civilian aid. Armies may be 
used by a nation for roles other than combat. In some 
countries, armies serve as an internal police force. In 
others, regular or reserve forces may serve in a multi- 
tude of roles that include disaster relief, humanitarian 


726 Army 





Ricki Rosen SABA 


A country may use its army to maintain order within its own 
borders during periods of internal unrest This Israeli soldier is 
checking the identification of civilians in Jerusalem. 


aid to foreign nations, and peacekeeping functions. 
They may respond to major disasters, such as forest 
fires or hurricanes, to provide emergency medical aid 
and food and water distribution, or to prevent looting. 


The world’s major armies 


Anarmys ranking among the armies of the world is 
based on its overall fighting strength. In general, fight- 
ing strength depends on the number of troops on active 
duty. However, an army's size does not necessarily re- 
flect its actual strength. Well-trained soldiers and mod- 
ern weapons are also important A small army with tacti- 
cal nuclear weapons may have greater striking power 
than a large army with outdated weapons. 

The world’s major armies include those of China, In- 
dia, North Korea, Russia, the United States, France, and 
the United Kingdom. All of these armies except India’s 
and North Korea s have tactical nuclear weapons. How- 
ever, both India and North Korea have the capability to 
produce such weapons. 

The Chinese Army has about i } million troops on 
active duty. Many of the forces are assigned to defen- 
sive positions near the Russian border in northeastern 
China. The Chinese Army has about i million people in 
its reserve and armed militia. China uses a military draft. 

The Indian Army has about 1,100,000 men on active 
duty, about 300,000 in the reserve, and about 40,000 in 
the Territorial Army. Only a few hundred women serve 
in the Indian Army. many as doctors and nurses. All 
members of India s Army are volunteers. 

The North Korean Army has about 950,000 troops 
on active duty and about 600,000 in the reserve. Men 
from the ages of 20 to 25 are drafted to serve for five to 
eight years. After service, they serve part-time in local 
militias until the age of 40 and then in the Red Guard un- 


til the age of 60. Women may join the army ona volun- 
teer basis. 

The Russian army, officially called the Ground 
Forces of the Russian Federation has about 320,000 
troops On active duty. M ps are posted along 
Russia s border with China. Russia began orqganizina 


army in 1992, following the breakup of the Soviet Union 
in 1991. The Russian army has small forces in the former 
Soviet republics of Georgia, Moldova, and Tajikistan. 
The army has both volunteers and draftees. After 18 
months of active duty, Russian soldiers serve in the re- 
serve until the age of 50. 

The United States Army has about 480,000 troops 
on active duty and about 560,000 in the reserve and Na- 
tional Guard. Army troops are stationed in the United 
States, Western Europe, Japan, South Korea, and parts 
of Latin America. All members of the United States Army 
are volunteers. See Army, United States; National 
Guard. 

The French Army has about 150,000 members on ac- 
tive duty and 240,000 in the reserve. French troops are 
stationed in Western Europe, several African countries, 
and in Frances overseas territories. The French Army 
has both volunteers and draftees. 

The British Army has about 115,000 troops on active 
duty, about 175,000 people in the reserve, and about 
40,000 members of the territorial defense force. British 
troops are stationed in Germany, Northern Ireland, and 
many other parts of the world. All members of the 
British Army are volunteers. 

Other major armies include those of Egypt, Iran, 
Iraq, Myanmar, Pakistan, South Korea, Turkey, and Viet- 
nam. Each of these armies has 300,000 or more troops 
On active duty. The armies have purchased weapons and 
equipment from the world’s major powers. None has 
tactical nuclear weapons, though Pakistan has the capa- 
bility to produce them. 


History 


Ancient armies developed as civilizations grew in 
the valleys of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers in Asia, and 
in the Nile Valley of Africa. As early as 3200 B.C, the 
Babylonians had built a regular army of spear throwers 
and archers. About 2500 B.C, the Sumerians used the 
first war chariots. Small wild asses and, later, horses 
drew these chariots. By the 700's B.C, the Assyrians had 
organized armies that were equipped with spears and 
battering rams. 

In the 600's B.C, the ancient Greeks introduced the 
Phalanx, which was probably the first important tactical 
formation in history. In this formation, soldiers with 
spears and heavy armor stood from 4 to 50 rows deep in 
a solid rectangle. The phalanx was primarily a defensive 
formation. It could withstand the shock of a cavalry 
charge, but it could neither move rapidly nor attack 
across rough ground. 

The mightiest conqueror of the period was Cyrus the 
Great of Persia. During the mid-500 s B.C, Cyrus extend- 
ed the Persian Empire to include most of southwestern 
Asia. In the 300s B.C, Alexander the Great of Macedo- 
nia, the next world conqueror, organized the first known 
military supply system. 

The ancient Romans developed the next great tactical 
formation. During the early 300s B.C, they devised the 
legion. This rectangular formation had greater flexibility 
than the phalanx It consisted of three lines of small pha- 
lanxes called maniples or, later, cohorts. The Romans 
conquered Carthage in 146 B.C and built a great empire 
overseas. They were also skilled military engineers. The 
armies of the Roman general Julius Caesar built roads, 


bridges, and forts in much of Europe. See Legion. 

China's civilization grew up in isolation from the em- 
pires of Europe and western Asia. The Chinese had 
knowledge of gunpowder long before the A.D. 1300's, 
when Europeans began to use it in guns. But gunpow- 
der did not become an important weapon of war for the 
Chinese because they did not use it in artillery, except 
possibly in rockets. 

Armies in the Middle Ages. After the Roman Empire 
collapsed in the A.D. 400’s, Europe had no large regular 
armies for several centuries. All able-bodied free men in 
the tribes that overran the empire were warriors. The 
tradition of a militia developed at this time (see Militia). 

During the Middle Ages, the basis of Western Eu- 
ropes society was a military relationship. A king ruled 
this society and was, in turn, supported by nobles. 
These nobles, who were trained as knights, ruled their 
own estates through a form of government called feu- 
dalism. Under this system, the nobles had political, eco- 
nomic, judicial, and military power. The lower classes, 
known as serfs or peasants, labored on the estates. The 
knights used the wealth provided by the serfs’ labor to 
arm and equip themselves and their loyal soldiers, who 
were called men-at-arms. A knight's equipment included 
broadswords, lances, and armor, and it was expensive. 
The entire agricultural output of a knight's holdings for 
several years could only pay for a single warrior’s ar- 
mor, horses, and weapons. Due to this expense, the 

armies of the Middle Ages were small. 

The cost of medieval armies led some rulers to turn to 
mercenaries (hired soldiers) to fight for their nations. 
Some mercenaries specialized in siege weaponry, such 
as the stone-throwing weapons called catapults, while 
others used crossbows or long spears known as pikes. 
Among the best-known mercenaries of the late Middle 
Ages were the Swiss pikemen. They would form large 
phalanxes to prevent heavily armored, mounted knights 
from overrunning them. The Swiss mercenaries, along 
with hired soldiers from England, Germany, and Italy, 
formed groups called companies. The company still 
forms the basic unit of most armies. 

During the 1300's, the Ottoman Empire, which ruled 





Army 727 


what are now Turkey, the Middle East, Greece, and most 
of southeastern Europe, established the first full-time 
professional national army since the Roman Empire. 
These soldiers, known as Janissaries, were mostly slave 
soldiers taken from the Balkan provinces. They were 
much feared on the battlefield because they were loyal 
only to the sultan, who ruled the Ottoman Empire, and 
to their fellow Janissaries. 

Western European nations copied the Ottoman exam- 
ple of a permanent army. By 1500, most major European 
nations had a permanent army, usually called the Royal 
Army or King’s Army. Some nations, such as the inde- 
pendent states in Germany, developed the first perma- 
nent quartermaster organizations to find quarters and 
food for their armies. 

Gunpowder had a dramatic impact on the organiza- 
tion and tactics of armies, and it played a major role in 
ending feudalism. Castles built by nobles could not 
stand up to bombardment by cannons. Rulers who 
could afford gunpowder-based artillery became much 
more powerful. The nobles lost their military function 
because armies of commoners with muskets could 
shoot them off their horses. 

The rise of modern armies. By the late 1600's, in- 
fantry armed with bayonets mounted on muskets could 
defend themselves against cavalry charges. They did not 
have to rely on troops armed with pikes. Three rows of 
soldiers stood in ranks, shoulder to shoulder, in a for- 
mation called the line. A line of infantry could fire many 
shots at the same time at close range. 

The obligation of all men to serve in wartime had dis- 
appeared almost everywhere by the early 1600's. But 
Sweden kept this custom throughout the Middle Ages, 
and King Gustavus Adolphus used a military draft to re- 
cruit troops for the Thirty Years War (1618-1648). He 
gave his army greater mobility by equipping it with 
lighter weapons and increased firepower. His force is 
sometimes called the first modern army. See Gustavus 
Adolphus; Thirty Years’ War. 

During the 1700's, most governments continued to 
build their armies by recruiting volunteers, especially 
among the poor and unemployed. Armies became pro- 


Napoleon on the Battlefield at Eyfau (1808), an oil painting on canvas by Antoine-Jean Gros; Louvre, Pans (SCALA/Ant Resource} 


Napoleon ! was one of histo- 
ry's greatest military leaders. 
This painting depicts Napo- 
leon commanding French 
cavalry and infantry troops in 
1807 during the Battle of Eylau 
near what is now the Russian 
city of Kaliningrad. 


728 Army 


fessional groups of well-trained foot soldiers supported 
by artillery and cavalry. Most countries followed certain 
rules in warfare. Campaigns took place only in good 
weather. The troops went into quarters in winter and 

did not fight again until spring. They tried to gain a fa- 
vorable position before they attacked the enemy. Com- 
manders who were caught in a poor position often with- 
drew instead of fighting to the finish. 

In the mid-1700's, Frederick the Great of Prussia intro- 
duced greater mobility to warfare. When his enemies 
outnumbered him, he struck quickly and unexpectedly. 
Frederick was forced to fight wars on several fronts at 
the same time. He moved rapidly to attack a single army 
before it could unite with others and attack his forces. 

The French government adopted a military draft sys- 
tem in 1793. Napoleon | drafted huge armies for his con- 
quests. He divided his armies into divisions that 
marched separately but joined to fight. Napoleon often 
massed all his heavy guns together into a grande bat- 
terie (big battery). He poured a tremendous amount of 
fire into one point in the enemy's lines, then sent for- 
ward his heavy formations of cavalry and infantry at that 
point. To defeat him, Napoleon's enemies had to adopt 
draft systems and develop national armies. 

The growth in the size of armies made necessary an 
Organization to control troops from a distance. Only a 
military genius such as Napoleon could personally di- 
rect so many military units in the field. From 1840 on, 
railroads began to spread across Europe. The Prussians 
realized that they could move armies much more quick- 
ly by rail, and that this made possible more accurate 
long-range planning. Gerhard von Scharnhorst of the 
Prussian Army developed the modern general staff that 
planned military operations. 

During the 1800's, the Industrial Revolution, a period 
of rapid industrialization and technological advances, 
dramatically changed the size and strength of armies. 
Mass production enabled armies to equip more sol- 
diers than ever before. Technology improved weapons 
and helped provide such supplies as canned food and 
rifles. As technology changed, so did the way armies 
were organized and how they fought. 

Armies in the two world wars. When World War | 
began in 1914, the machine gun and artillery became 
the dominant weapons on the battlefield. The use of 
these weapons made free movement impossible on the 
Western Front, where the United Kingdom and France 
battled Germany. Both sides adopted trench warfare. In- 
fantry dug in to hold their positions when they could not 
advance against the enemy. Railroads carried millions of 
soldiers to the fighting fronts. Motor trucks hauled su p- 
plies from railroads to the front lines. See World War L. 

Field commanders tried to end trench warfare and re- 
gain tactical mobility. They shelled and bombed enemy 
lines, and followed with mass bayonet attacks. Some- 


times they used poison gas against enemy lines. But 
most assaults—even those that used poison gas—failed 
to break through enemy lines during more than three 
years of intense fighting. The trenches of the Western 
Front repelled almost all attacks. Army commanders 
found a solution, but they used it improperly and too 
late. The United Kingdom built an armored tracked vehi- 
cle with a gasoline engine and created the first military 
tank. Tanks soon replaced horse cavairy During World 


War |, airplanes were used for the first time in support 
of ground fighting. See Tank; Air force (World War I). 

In World War II (1939-1945), tanks and airplanes re- 
stored mobility to warfare. In the war, the Allies, who in- 
cluded Canada, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, 
and the United States, fought the Axis powers, who in- 
cluded Germany and Japan. The Germans developed a 
type of warfare called b/itzkrieg (lightning war). Tanks 
and bombers blasted great holes in enemy defenses. 
Then infantry poured through the gaps and carried the 
war deep into enemy territory. See World War Il (The 
invasion of Poland). 

World War II also saw the first use of armies in large- 
scale airborne operations. The Germans launched the 
first successful paratroop invasion in May 1941, when 
they seized the island of Crete. The largest airborne op- 
eration took place in September 1944, when three divi- 
sions of Allied paratroops dropped behind the German 
lines in an unsuccessful attempt to capture bridges 
across the Rhine River. The largest combined land, sea, 
and air attack in history occurred on June 6, 1944, when 
Allied armies landed in Normandy, in northern France. 

During World War II, armies brought the military art 
of /ogistics (supply and services) to a high point of devel- 
opment. They organized huge commands that provided 
food, clothing, fuel, ammunition, weapons, supplies, 
and transportation for combat troops. The Allied victory 
in World War Il resulted partly from superiority in logis- 
tics and in civilian industrial production. See Logistics. 

Armies in the nuclear age. World War II ended 
shortly after United States warplanes dropped atomic 
bombs on two Japanese cities, Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 
Development of the atomic bomb marked the begin- 
ning of the nuclear age. 

The earliest nuclear warheads could be delivered 
only by bomber planes flying at high altitudes. Such a 
delivery could not be used on the battlefield and could 
be considered only for strategic targets—that is, facilities 
that supported the war effort, such as weapons factories 
and transportation systems. By the 1950's, armies had de- 
veloped nuclear cannons and missiles. These weapons 
changed the thinking of many experts about the tactical 
use of nuclear weapons. They could launch nuclear war- 
heads at a large body of troops, a supply dump, or any 
other target within the weapons range. 

Since World War II, the fear of starting a nuclear war 
has helped prevent major armies from using nuclear 
weapons. As a result, only conventional weapons have 
been used in wars fought during the nuclear age. The 
first major conflict was the Korean War, which began in 
1950. Large armies did most of the fighting in this war. 
See Korean War. 

Armies have continued to use conventional tactics 
and weapons in war. For example, the U.S. Army relied 
heavily on conventional warfare tactics during its in- 
volvement in the Vietnam War, from 1965 to 1973. At the 
time, these tactics were considered the most effective 
way to fight Communist guerrillas in the jungles of Viet- 
nam. However, Vietnamese guerrillas avoided major 
battles in the open, where heavy U.S. firepower could 
be decisive. They relied on surprise and mobility instead 
(see Vietnam War). Arab and Israeli forces fought wars 
with conventional weapons in 1956, 1967, and 1973. The 
tactics used by both sides resembled those of World 








War I, in which aircraft and tanks spearheaded attacks 
and were followed into battle by infantry. 

Since the mid-1970's, armies of developed nations 
have tended to fight brief, intense wars that usually de- 
cide a conflict quickly. Advances in computer technolo- 
gy and other electronics have had a massive impact on 
armies. Today, many armies have access to instant satel- 
lite photographs, real-time images of battlefields, and 
worldwide communications with political and military 
leaders. Armies have begun to concentrate on strategic 
mobility, the ability to quickly move troops, supplies, 
and equipment anywhere on short notice. This can be 
done using fast troop transport ships and large, troop- 
carrying jet airplanes. For example, during Operation 
Desert Storm in 1990, the United States deployed nearly 
200,000 troops and their equipment to Saudi Arabia in 
only two months. Technology will continue to advance 
as time passes, and armies will likely change with each 


new development 


Robert R. Mackey 


Related articles in Wor/d Book See War and its list of Re/at- 


ed articles. See also: 


Agincourt, 

Battle of 
Austerlitz, Battle of 
Balaklava, Battle of 
Bannockburn, Bat- 

tle of 
Bataan Peninsula 
Blenheim, Battle of 
Boyne, Battle 

of the 


Archery 
Battering ram 
Blockhouse 
Blunderbuss 
Boomerang 
Catapult 
Commando 
Flintlock 


Airborne troops 

Armor 

Artillery 

Cavalry 

Engineers, 
Corps of 


Ammunition 
Bayonet 
Bazooka 
Bullet 
Cannon 
Carbine 
Cartridge 
Explosive 


Army, U.S. 

Camouflage 

Canada, Armed 
Forces of 

Chemical-biologi- 
cal-radiological 
wartare 

Court martial 


Battles 


Bunker Hill, 
Battle of 
Corregidor 
Crécy, Battle of 
Dunkerque 
Gettysburg, 
Battle of 
Hastings, Battle of 
lwo Jima 
Louisbourg 
Marathon 


History 


Foreign Legion 
Greek fire 
Gunpowder 
Harquebus 
Hussars 
Janissaries 
Legion 
Mercenary 


Organization 


Infantry 

Inspector general 

Intelligence 
service 


Weapons 


Firearm 

Flame thrower 
Garand rifle 
Grenade 
Guided missile 
Gun 

Handgun 
Machine gun 


Other related articles 


Desertion 

Helmet 

Insignia 

Logistics 

Medals, decora- 
tions, and 
orders 


Okinawa 
Poitiers, Battle of 
Quebec, Battle of 
Saipan 
Stalingrad, 

Battle of 
Thermopylae 
Verdun, Battles of 
Vimy Ridge, 

Battle of 
Waterloo, Battle of 


Musket 
Powder horn 
Shot tower 
Sling 

Spear 

Swiss Guard 
Tomahawk 
Zouaves 


judge advocate 
general 

Military police 

Ordnance 


Mortar 

Night vision 
systems 

Nuclear weapon 

Rifle 

Rocket 

Tank 


Military school 
Military training 
Militia 

Mine wartare 
National Guard 


Army, Department of the 729 


Outline 
l. The organization of armies 
ll. The role of armies 
A. Attack 
B. Defense 
C. Prevention of war 
ill. The world’s major armies 
A. The Chinese Army E. The United States Army 
B. The Indian Army F. The French Army 
C. The North Korean Army G. The British Army 
D. The Russian army H. Other major armies 
IV. History 


D. internal security and 
civilian aid 


Questions 


What country first used a military draft? 

Who organized the first modern regular army? 

How does a regular army differ from an army reserve? 

What was history's largest combined land, sea, and air attack? 

Why did rulers begin hiring mercenaries in the 1000's? 

What was probably history's first important tactical formation? 

What is the basic fighting unit of many armies? 

How did armies get food before quartermaster offices were es- 
tablished? 

What are the four chief roles of armies? 

What are some of the ways in which the development of nuclear 
weapons changed the role of armies? 


Additional resources 


Cowley, Robert, and Parker, Geoffrey, eds. The Reader's Com- 
panion to Military History. Houghton, 1996. 

Dupuy, R. Ernest and T. N. 7he Harper Encyclopedia of Military 
History: From 3500 BC to the Present. 4th ed. HarperCollins, 
oD: 

Luttwak, Edward N., and Koehl, S. L The Dictionary of Modern 
War. HarperCollins, 1991. 

Military Balance. |nternational Inst. for Strategic Studies, pub- 
lished annually. A standard source for figures on the world’s 
armed forces, including the armies. 


Army, Department of the, is one of the three mili- 
tary departments within the Department of Defense of 
the United States government. It serves as headquarters 
of the U.S. Army, and is located in Washington, D.C It 
organizes, trains, and equips land forces to support the 
national and international policies of the United States. 

The secretary of the Army heads the department, un- 
der the supervision of the secretary of defense, and 
ranks equally with the secretaries of the Air Force and 
the Navy. This official's principal civilian aides include an 
undersecretary and five assistant secretaries. 

The chief of staff of the United States Army serves as 
the main military adviser of the secretary and supervises 
all members and organizations of the Army. The chief of 
staff is assisted by the vice chief of staff and the Army 
General Staff. This staff includes the director of the Army 
staff and deputy chiefs of staff for intelligence, logistics, 
military operations and plans, and personnel. 

Congress established the Department of War in 1789 
as an executive agency. In 1903, Congress approved the 
adoption of a general staff system for the Army. Con- 
gress set up the National Military Establishment (NME) 
with a secretary of defense in 1947. At that time, the De- 
partment of War was renamed the Department of the 
Army and made part of the NME. In 1949, Congress re- 
placed the NME with the Department of Defense. The 
Department of the Army came under the authority of the 
Department of Defense. 

Critically reviewed by the Department of Defense 

See also Army, United States; Defense, Department 
of. 


730 Army, United States 


The United States Army is the oldest branch of the nation’s armed services. The soldiers pic- 
tured above wear uniforms representing major wars fought by the Army. Those in back repre- 
sent, right to left, the Revolutionary War, the War of 1812, the Civil War (Union Army), the 
Spanish-American War, World War t, World War tl, and the Korean War. The soldier in front 
represents the Vietnam War. Army personnel also played an important role in the Persian Gulf 
War. The insigne worn on officers caps, right is patterned after the United States coat of arms. 


United States Army 


Army, United States, is the branch of the armed 
services responsible for military land operations. The 
Army must be prepared to use swift, forceful action to 
overcome any enemy that might threaten the United 
States or its interests in other parts of the world. It also 
helps train the military forces of many friendly countries 
and supplies them with equipment. 

The Army is often called upon to help in disasters 
such as epidemics, floods, forest fires, and storms. It co 
ordinates the disaster-relief activities of the armed ser 


vices. It locates and marks civil defense shelters. In addi 
tion, the Army constructs and operates a large number 
of public works, including flood control projects. It also 
improves inland waterways and harbors. 

The Army is the oldest branch of the nation s armed 
services. It dates back to June 14, 1775, when the Conti 


nental Congress created the Continental Army. ¢ 
history includes the deeds of such military leade: 








George Washington, Ulysses S. Grant, John J. Pershing, 
George C. Marshall, and Douglas MacArthur, as well as 
the heroism of countless soldiers. It is also a story of 
changes brought about by science, inventions, and dis- 
coveries. Its weapons have grown from muzzle-loading 
muskets to atomic bursts delivered by guns and mis- 
siles. Army transport has changed from horses and wag- 
ons to trucks and aircraft. The radio, telegraph, and tele- 
vision revolutionized communications. The use of 
aircraft and airborne troops added new strength on the 
battlefield. 

The U.S. Army operates under the Department of the 
Army. Army strength may vary according to the nation’s 
worldwide and domestic needs. Today, the Army has 
bout 480,000 men and women on active duty through- 
out the world. About 560,000 people serve in the U.S. 
\1my Reserve and National Guard. About 220,000 U.S. 
citizens serve as civilian employees in the U.S. Army. 


ne eee Oe ee ee See il 


el 


Pye | — = — ee eee — “E 





—————— 


Army, United States 731 


The official Army flag colors are blue, white, and red, 
with yellow fringes. The flag carries 172 streamers. Each 
streamer represents a battle or campaign fought by the 
Army. In all wars that have involved the United States, 
about 500,000 soldiers have died in battle. About 
1,200,000 soldiers have been wounded in battle. 


Life in the Army 


Training a soldier. After entering the Army, trainees 
undergo basic training at various Army training centers. 
There, trainees learn a number of fundamental military 
skills, such as marksmanship, drill and ceremony, first 
aid, and land navigation. Trainees also undergo inten- 
sive physical training and are taught to act as part of a 
disciplined team. 

After basic training, most soldiers attend a school to 
learn the techniques of the military occupational specia!- 
ty (line of work) that they agreed to perform when they 
enlisted. These schools are located on military posts 
throughout the country. In school, soldiers may learn to 
repair a truck, rifle, or missile. They may learn to pro- 
gram a computer or to be a military police officer. Some 
schools require only a few weeks of training. Other 
schools give technical training that requires several 
months. 






Enlisted women receive basic training at Fort Jackson, ed 

S.C. Then they attend specialized Army schools or re- fewer ie 

ceive on-the-job training at various Army posts. She ae ES 
Soldiers may become eligible for other schools US. Army 


: oe : Hand-to-hand fighting i tic ainees, USI 
throughout their term of service. Noncommissioned offi- ancl to Rene Wego t> Pig uaea gy ihainees/ Using 


; padded sticks in place of rifles with bayonets. Helmets and other 
cers (corporals and sergeants) who are making a ca- gear protect the soldiers from injury. 


i 


O 
a 
y, 
¥ 
"a 


rs 
0 . 


a 





US Army US. Anis 


A “practice war’ exposes recruits to representations of battle- Physical training, such as climbing a rope ladder, builds a re 
field conditions. In the photo above, a recruit in combat gear cruits strength and endurance. Intense physical conditioning is 
lights’ a dummy made of used tires. an essential part of basic training in the Army 


732 Army, United States 


Uniforms and insignia of the 


United States Army 


The Army blue 

uniform is worn by 
officers and enlisted 
personnel on formal 
occasions and when 
ordered by the com- 
manding officer. 






U.S 


insignia 


The Army green 
uniform is for eve 
ryday dress use for 
both enlisted ps 

sonnel and officers 





Branch af 
service insignia 


Organizatian 


insignia 


Badges and 
decaratians 


Grade insignia 


far 
enlisted 
persannel 


Service 


stripes 


Grade insignia for officers 


: ell 


fox Calanel : 
» ‘es Captain 


ve 
General D4 
af the Army Nia 
AN | 
eS i 
FR VAL VL Lieutenant fae 


General Colanel Lieutenant 





4. 
KOK 
Lieutenant a 
General Second 
Lieutenant 
Sok 
Major | i = 
General a || 
x* - 8 : 5 
» | t. me Li 
Brigadier (W1) (W2) (W3) (W4) (MW4) 
General : 
Warrant Chief Warrant Officer Master 
Officer Warrant 
Officer 


Grade insignia for enlisted men and women 


Sergeant Majar Cammand 
af the Army Sergeant Majar 
(E-9) (E-9) 











Sergeant Majar Master 
(E-9) Sergeant 
(E-8) 
Sergeant 
First Class (E-5) 
(E-7) 
Specialist Private 
Faur (E-4) First Class 
(E-3) 





Private 


(E-2) 


Army, United States 733 


Branch of service insignia‘ 











Artillery Artillery Engineers Carps Carps Carps 
i } % 
Army Tronsportatian Quortermoster Military Palice Medical Judge Advacate Finance 
Aviation Corps Corps Corps Corps General's Carps Carps 
yr @ es *« WT >< 
|_| } \ il ep 
Chaplain Chaplain Civil Inspectar General Adjutont General's Special Military 
(Christian) (Jewish) Affairs General Stoff Carps Farces Intelligence 
Badges’ 





Explasive 


Ordnance Disposol Master Diver 





i? J 
Driver and Mechanic 
{driver} 








av] ] @s 

: “SEL Ts Se 1 : 
Seniar Canibat TOY ee Senior 
Parachutist Infantryman Cambat Medical Army Aviatar 


Organization insignia’ 





First Secand i Seventh 
Army Army Army Army Army Army Army 
{inactive} {inactive} {inactive} 


(7/4 








Third Infantry Faurth Infantry Eighth Infantry Ninth Infantry 
Division Divisian Divisian Divisian 
First Infantry Second Infantry linactive} 
Divisian Divisian 





25th Infantry Secand Armared Third Armared First Covalry 82nd Airborne 10st Airborne 
Divisian Divisian Divisian Dwisian Division Divisian 
{inactive} 


(Air Assault} 


“Some branch of service insignia badges and organization insignia are not shown. 


734 Army, United States 


reer of Army service receive continued training through 
a special educational system. 

Training an officer. To become a United States 
Army officer, men and women may follow one of sev- 
eral paths: (1) the United States Military Academy at 
West Point, (2) Reserve Officers Training Corps (ROTC) at 
many universities and colleges, (3) officer candidate 
schools conducted by the United States Army and by 
state national guards, and (4) direct commissions to civil- 
ians with special skills in such professions as law and 
medicine. 

All Army officers receive basic and advanced training 
in their assigned branches. They then attend the Com- 
bined Arms and Services Staff School at Fort Leaven- 
worth, Kansas. There they learn to be staff officers, able 
to administer the day-to-day operations of the Army. The 
United States Army Command and General Staff Col- 
lege, also at Fort Leavenworth, teaches officers how to 
use the various units of the Army as a team. The Army 
War College at Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania, prepares 
officers for senior command and staff positions. 

Warrant officers rank higher than noncommissioned 
officers and lower than commissioned officers. They 
work in such specialized fields as data processing, elec- 
tronics, and law enforcement. Most warrant officers are 
former enlisted men and women who became experts 
in their specialty and applied for a warrant from the sec- 
retary of the Army. 

A typical day for soldiers depends on their assign- 
ments. Soldiers assigned to a unit develop the skills that 
they learned in basic and advanced training. They train 
with their unit and function as team members. They also 
share in tasks of maintaining the military community, 
such as housekeeping details and guard duty. They may 
participate in a sports program and use educational fa- 
cilities provided by the Army. The squad leader, a non- 
commissioned officer, guides soldiers in their normal 
routine. The food service manager supervises the cook- 
ing. The supply sergeant cares for and issues clothing 
and equipment. The unit commander is responsible for 
formulating and supervising unit training. 

The normal daily routine begins early on weekdays 
and ends by 5 p.m. Soldiers evenings and weekends are 
their own, except when they are on field training exer- 
cises. During these exercises, or ‘practice wars,” soldiers 
sometimes cannot eat a normal meal because of maneu- 
ver requirements. Then they receive packets of highly 
concentrated food that provides the nourishment they 
need in easy-to-carry form. 

Careers in the Army offer security, honor, and op- 
portunities for travel to many parts of the world. But sol- 
diers must make sacrifices, because they must go wher- 
ever the Army assigns them. The Army has more than 
600 jobs that require special skill or experience. A man 
or woman who enlists has a choice of careers, and can 
often use skill or training gained in civilian life. Profes- 
sional men and women, such as doctors and lawyers, 
may receive direct commissions. Soldiers who have 
leadership abilities usually become noncommissioned 
officers. Soldiers who demonstrate high technical ability 
may become warrant officers. Army training often pre- 
pares a person for a civilian job later. 

Applicants for enlistment must be at least 17 years of 
age and not older than 35. In addition, applicants must 


be able to pass the Army's physical examination and 
written examinations. Enlistments range from two to six 
years. 

Enlisted personnel receive pay increases with each 
promotion, and extra pay according to /ongevity (length 
of service) and for some overseas duty. The Army pays 
extra amounts for quarters (housing) and subsistence 
(food). Soldiers earn 30 days’ /eave (vacation) every year. 
They also are entitled to free medical care. In certain 
areas overseas, soldiers receive station allowances to 
cover the increased cost of living. The Army also grants 
extra pay to various specialists and to soldiers who 
serve in combat or perform hazardous duty, such as 
demolition work. Army personnel may retire with half 
pay after 20 years’ service, or with higher pay after 21 to 
30 years. 

More than 90 percent of the Army's occupational spe- 
cialties are open to women. Women may serve in all 
units and positions except those whose mission is to en- 
gage in direct combat. These units and positions include 
infantry, armor, cannon artillery, short-range air de- 
fense, combat engineering, and combat aviation. 
Women soldiers now make up 11 percent of the Regu- 
lar Army, 20 percent of the Army Reserve, and 7 percent 
of the Army National Guard. 


Weapons and equipment of the Army 


Combat units of the Army consist of soldiers trained 
and equipped to fight enemy forces. Infantry, artillery, 
armored units, Army aviation, and various specialized 
units are called the combat arms because they do the di- 
rect fighting. Other units, called the combat support and 
combat service support, aid the combat arms. 

Infantry is the Army's largest arm. Infantrymen must 
seize, occupy, and defend land areas. They bear the 
heaviest share of close combat. Infantrymen throw gre- 
nades and fire rifles, machine guns, mortars, pistols, 
flame throwers, and various types of rockets and mis- 
siles. They enter battle on foot or by helicopter, para- 
chute, or infantry fighting vehicle. 

Artillery provides the firepower necessary for a 
heavy and successful attack by infantry or armored units. 
It protects troops holding defensive positions, and can 
neutralize enemy fire. Artillery units include field artil- 
lery, support artillery, and air defense artillery. 

Artillery travels by heavy trucks, helicopters, or other 
means. Its weapons include the Army's heaviest howit- 
zers and guns. The highly mobile howitzers can fire to a 
maximum range of about 68,200 feet (20,800 meters). 
Certain rocket-fired weapons have an even greater 
range. Some artillery weapons can fire both nuclear and 
conventional shells. See Artillery. 

Armor in the Army usually means tanks and other ar- 
mored vehicles. The Army uses M-60 Main Battle tanks 
and M-! Main Battle tanks. The M-60 tank has a 105-mm 
gun. The M-1 tank has either a 105-mm gun or a 120mm 
gun. The M-551 Armored Reconnaissance Airborne As- 
sault Vehicle (Sheridan) is a light, air-transportable, mis- 
sile-firing vehicle. The Army's armored units can move 
swiftly and advance deep into enemy territory. They also 
have strong firepower. See Tank. 

Army aviation bolsters the Army's battlefield mobil- 
ity. Army aircraft can spot enemy targets for artillery 
units. They provide rapid transportation to and from the 


— ee ee ee 


front lines. They lay communication wires and take aeri- 
al photographs. In addition, Army aircraft transport 
troops and supplies, and rush wounded soldiers to hos- 
pitals that are located in the rear areas. 

Army aviators fly airplanes and helicopters. Airplanes 
are used for surveillance, observation, and command 
transport. Helicopters are classified as scout, utility, lift, 
or attack types. Attack helicopters are more mobile than 
airplanes and can rapidly attack targets throughout an 
area of operations. 

The Army classifies its aircraft by letters and numbers. 
Thus, the UH-1H is a utility aircraft (U), a helicopter (H), 
first model (1), and eighth series (H). Other symbols used 
to indicate the type or purpose of the aircraft include: V, 
short take-off and landing; C, cargo transport; O, obser- 
vation; 7, training; and X, research. The Army traditional- 
ly names its aircraft after Indian tribes. 

Special units. The Army has several kinds of special- 
ized units. These include Special Forces and Rangers. 

Special Forces, popularly known as Green Berets, are 
trained in various specialized operations. An important 
peacetime activity is helping other governments train 
forces that can oppose guerrillas and other rebel 
groups. Special forces are also trained to take part in 
raiding operations, antiterrorist actions, and reconnais- 
sance (information gathering). 

Special Forces personnel are organized into groups. 
Each group has responsibility for a specific region of the 
world. The group's members learn about the languages, 
customs, and cultures of the region. This training en- 
ables them to operate deep behind enemy lines. 

Rangers are specialized units that can move quickly to 
any area of the world and that are prepared to strike by 
land, sea, or air. Ranger units are trained to make sur- 
prise raids behind enemy lines and to participate in oth- 
er similarly daring operations. The Army has three 
Ranger Battalions. 

Missiles. The Army's arsenal includes both free rock- 
ets and guided missiles. Rockets provide fire support for 





Army, United States 735 


troops on the battlefield. Some rockets can be equipped 
with nuclear warheads. Guided missiles may be fired 
from ground to ground in support of troops. These mis- 
siles also can be fired from ground to air to destroy ene- 
my aircraft. Surface-to-surface missiles include the Per- 
shing Il, which has a range of 1,100 miles (1,800 
kilometers). The Army's air defense guided missiles, 
such as the Patriot, the Hawk, and the Chaparral, can 
track down and destroy enemy aircraft. See Guided mis- 
sile; Rocket. 

Communications and observation. Various types 
of electronic equipment are used to send and receive 
messages. Electronic “eyes and ears’ enable the Army to 
survey the battlefield day and night in all kinds of weath- 
er. The Army uses portable radar sets to detect troop 
movements in darkness. Remote-controlled drone air- 
craft carry cameras, infrared devices, and radar to spot 
enemy positions. Electronic computers prepare weather 
reports, using information radioed from balloon-borne 
instruments. 

Transportation by various types of vehicles gives the 
Army mobility. These include passenger and cargo vehi- 
cles, helicopters, rail equipment, watercraft, amphibious 
vehicles, and air cushion vehicles. 

Engineers of the Army build bridges, repair roads, 
and construct landing strips, mine fields, and fortifica- 
tions. These units must often work under direct enemy 
fire. Their equipment includes bulldozers, mine-clearing 
vehicles, and a scissors-type bridge, which is pushed 
into place by a tank or other tracked vehicle and extend- 
ed to cross a stream or ravine. To cross rivers, the engi- 
neers also use floating bridges, inflatable assault boats, 
and aluminum rafts. 

Equipment can be delivered to Army engineers by air- 
craft, or it can be dropped by parachute. Air-dropped 
equipment includes cranes, tractors, air compressors, 
and dump trucks. 

Logistic units package and move supplies by air, 
bulk containers, and pipelines. To save time and space, 


U.S. Army 


The U.S. Army Special 
Forces is an elite unit trained 
to carry out daring operations. 
Members of the Special 
Forces are popularly known 
as Green Berets, though their 
berets may be other colors. In 
this picture, a Special Forces 
staff sergeant, /eft, provides 
mortar training to troops. 





U S. Army 
Video screens and computers are used at an Army training 
center to study the action of a military exercise. 





US Army 


An Army Chinook helicopter can transport jeeps, trucks, artil- 
lery, and supplies to remote military outposts. 





food for combat troops is dehydrated (dried) and pre- 
packaged in airtight containers, then pasteurized by irra- 
diation to kill organisms that might cause spoilage. Sol- 
diers can add hot water to these foods to make them 
edible. Special clothing developed by the Army includes 
protective armored vests, rubber-coated fabric clothing 
for handlers of missile fuels, and cold-weather clothing 
and boots for arctic wear. Soldiers also have special uni- 
forms for use in desert and jungle regions. 

Chemical equipment provides defense against chem/- 
cal agents (gas), biological agents (germs), and the ef- 
fects of radiation. Other chemical equipment includes 
smoke-generating devices to conceal troop movements 
and flame throwers to attack fortifications. Special 
chemical instruments detect contamination. The Army 
uses such equipment as protective gas masks, airtight 
clothing, and first-aid kits to counteract the effects of 
chemical, biological, or radiological warfare. 


Organization of the Army 


In peacetime, the U.S. Army is made up of men and 
women who have volunteered for service in the Regular 
Army, the Army Reserve, and the National Guard. Regu- 
lar Army personnel are professional soldiers and are al- 
ways on active duty. The Army Reserve and National 
Guard train citizens for immediate active duty in an 
emergency. Except during training, however, most 
members of these reserve forces remain on inactive 
duty. The Active Army consists of the Regular Army, as 
well as any personnel in the National Guard and the 
Army Reserve on active duty. In time of war or emer- 
gency, Congress may draft civilians, and the President 
may call to active duty members of the Army Reserve 
and the National Guard. 

The United States Army operates under the Depart- 
ment of the Army, which is a part of the Department of 
Defense. The Army consists of a headquarters and sev- 
eral commands. 


Photn 


M-2 Bradley infantry fight- 
ing vehicles, such as the one 
shown here, transport sol- 
diers onto battlefields. 


| 


= 





Army levels of command 


Unit and Rank Organizational 
approximate of elements of 
strength leader each unit 
Theater General Headquarters, two or more 
operations corps, support troops. 
Corps Lieutenant Headquarters, two or more 
a general divisions, support troops. 
Division Major All divisions: headquarters 
Airborne general and headquarters com- 
13,250 pany, military police 
Air Assault company, aviation brigade, 
15,700 engineer brigade (except in 
Armored light divisions), division ar- 
17,300 tillery, two or more brigade 
Infantry (Mech.) headquarters, cavalry ele- 
17,900 ment, signal battalion, and 
Light infantry support command. May 
11,500 have up to 15 combat bat- 
talions (air assault, airborne 
infantry, armor infantry, 
light infantry, and mecha- 
nized infantry). 
Brigade Colonel Headquarters, varying 
3,000-4,000 numbers of battalions 
and support troops. 
Battalion lieutenant Headquarters, two or more 
300-1,000 colonel companies or detachments. 


Company and _ Captain 
battery 60-190 


Headquarters, two or more 
platoons. 


Platoon 16-44 Lieutenant Three or four squads. 
Squad 10 Staff Smallest unit. 
sergeant 


“Strength varies to meet situation. 


Army headquarters are in Washington, D.C. The 
secretary of the Army, a civilian appointed by the presi- 
dent, heads the Army organization. The chief of staff of 
the U.S. Army serves as the principal military adviser to 
the secretary. The Army chief of staff also represents the 
Army on the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 

The Army headquarters include the Army Secretariat 
and the Army Staff. The secretariat consists of agencies 
that report directly to the secretary of the Army. The 
Army Staff consists of agencies that report to the secre- 
tary of the Army through the chief of staff. The secretari- 
at and the Army Staff provide professional advice and 
administrative and technical assistance to the Office of 
the Secretary of the Army. See Army, Department of 
the; Joint Chiefs of Staff. 

The Forces Command, with headquarters at Fort 
McPherson, Georgia, is responsible for the combat 
readiness of the Army's active and reserve forces in the 
United States, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. 
The command directs these forces and supervises their 
combat training. In addition, it commands the Third U.S. 
Army, which has responsibilities in Southwest Asia and 
parts of Africa. 

Forces Command executes its responsibilities for the 
Army National Guard and the Army Reserve, and for the 
land defense of the continental United States, through 
two armies. These armies are called the CONUS Armies, 
because they are headquartered in the continental Unit- 
ed States. The two armies and their headquarters are 
the First U.S. Army, Fort Gillem, Georgia; and the Fifth 
U.S. Army, Fort Sam Houston, Texas. The Second, 
Fourth, and Sixth U.S. armies were formerly in the conti- 


Army, United States 737 


nental United States but are now inactive. 

The U.S. Army, Europe, has headquarters in Heidel- 
berg, Germany. The command directs the Army's largest 
permanently based overseas training unit, the Seventh 
U.S. Army, in Germany. It also directs the Army's largest 
overseas combat units. The U.S. Army, Europe, com- 
mands the U.S. Army Southern European Task Force in 
Italy. Itis part of the U.S. European Command, which co- 
ordinates the activities of all American armed forces in 
Europe. 

The U.S. Army, Pacific, commands units and person- 
nel in Hawaii, Alaska, Japan, and the Pacific. It has head- 
quarters at Fort Shafter, Hawaii. It is part of the U.S. Pacif- 
ic Command, which coordinates the activities of United 
States armed forces stationed in Hawaii and the eastern 
Pacific. 

The U.S. Army, South, has headquarters at Fort Clay- 
ton, Panama. It directs Army forces and personnel in 
Central America and South America. 

The Eighth U.S. Army, Korea, commands and di- 
rects forces in South Korea. Headquarters are in Seoul. 

The U.S. Army Special Operations Command 
oversees the operation of Special Forces, Rangers, and 
other units. Its headquarters are at Fort Bragg, North 
Carolina. 

The U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense Com- 
mand has headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. It ensures 
that in a war, the Army will have ready access to space- 
based military and information-gathering equipment. 
The command also has the responsibility for defending 
the United States, and U.S. and allied forces, against mis- 
sile attack. 

The U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, 
with headquarters at Fort Monroe, Virginia, controls all 
Army individual schooling and training. It sets the 
Army's standards and requirements. The command also 
manages the Army ROTC program. In addition, it devel- 
ops plans for organizing Army forces and assists in the 
development of combat equipment. 

The U.S. Army Materiel Command, with headquar- 
ters in Alexandria, Virginia, is responsible for the devel- 
opment, procurement, delivery, supply, and mainte- 
nance of equipment, supplies, and weapons for the 
Army. 

The U.S. Army Intelligence and Security Com- 
mand collects intelligence and performs operations 
that are related to national security. Headquarters are at 
Fort Belvoir, Virginia. 

The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is headquar- 
tered in Washington, D.C. It is responsible for military 
engineering and for many civil engineering projects. 
See Engineers, Corps of. 

The U.S. Army Medical Command, with headquar- 
ters at Fort Sam Houston, Texas, supervises U.S. Army 
hospitals, and the Army's medical and dental activities 
around the world. It includes a veterinary command that 
provides animal care and food inspection services for 
the entire Department of Defense. 

The Military Traffic Management Command han- 
dles commercial transportation for military cargo and 
personnel in the United States. It also operates ocean 
terminals to move military cargo worldwide. The com- 
mand is headquartered in Falls Church, Virginia, near 
Washington, D.C. 





738 Army, United States 


The U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Command 
has its headquarters in Falls Church, Va. It provides 
criminal investigative services for the Army. 

The U.S. Army Military District of Washington 
provides support for Army headquarters and for official 
government activities that are in the Washington, D.C, 
area. 


History 


The Continental Army, which grew into the United 
States Army, had its beginning even before the Revolu- 
tionary War. All 13 English colonies had militia that 
fought in the French and Indian wars. Each colony ex- 
cept Pennsylvania had a standing militia which able- 
bodied men between the ages of 16 and 60 were re- 
quired to join. In addition, every colony had a volunteer 
militia. These forces, along with troops who were re- 
cruited by the British as regu/ars, fought in the French 
and Indian War (1754-1763). 

On June 14, 1775, the Continental Congress voted to 
raise 10 companies of riflemen for service in the Revolu- 
tionary War and to take charge of colonial militias that 
were then besieging the British in Boston. The next day, 
the Congress appointed George Washington “general 
and commander in chief” of the Continental Army. 

In 1776, the Continental Congress established a Board 
of War and Ordnance to administer the Army. It abol- 
ished the board in 1781, and assigned its duties to a sec- 
retary at war, who directed the Army and Navy. The 
United States Congress set up a Department of War in 
1789. 

The Army probably never had more than 30,000 men 
at any time. But by the late 1780's, the regular forces had 
been cut to about 800 men. In 1802, Congress set up the 
U.S. Military Academy at West Point, N.Y., the nation’s 
first military school. 

The War of 1812 (1812-1815). The United States had 
an army of nearly 12,000 men when it went to war 
against Britain in 1812. This force reached a peak 
strength of 38,000 men. Artillery units made important 
contributions to American victories. Military leaders 
who won fame in the war included Jacob Brown, An- 
drew Jackson, and Winfield Scott. 

At various times after the war, Congress authorized 
an army of from 6,000 to 12,000 men. The government 
used this army to fight two wars against the Seminole 
Indians and the Black Hawk War against the Sauk and 
Fox Indians. The Army also forced the Cherokee to 
move to lands west of the Mississippi River. 

The Mexican War (1846-1848) was chiefly a ground 
war. About two-thirds of the soldiers were members of 
militia and volunteer units. The Army had to rely mainly 
on regular army soldiers and 12-month volunteers be- 


cause of the continual turnover of short-term militiamen. 


About 104,000 men served during the war, which saw a 
number of Army ‘firsts.” For the first time, the Army 
fought far beyond the frontiers of the United States. It 
used steam vessels as troop transports. American sol- 
diers fought in unaccustomed climate and terrain, and 
in combat in the streets of Monterrey. Also for the first 
time, the Army administered a military government over 
a conquered area. | 

The Civil War (1861-1865). The United States 
adopted its first military draft law during the Civil War. 


Both the North and the South called for volunteers, but 
not enough men enlisted. On March 3, 1863, Congress 
passed the Enrollment Act. This law required all men in 
the North between the ages of 20 and 45 to register for 
military service. 

The Union Army had about 16,000 men under arms in 
1860 and reached a peak strength of about 1 million in 
1865. Ulysses S. Grant, the Union commander, later be- 
came the first person to hold the rank of General of the 
Army. During the war, the Union Army made wide use 
of railroads, telegraph, photography, observation bal- 
loons, and rifled artillery. 

Within 10 years after the Civil War, the Army had 
been reduced to about 25,000 men. Its soldiers were 
toughened by years of Indian fighting. However, few 
had experience handling problems of war mobilization 
and large-scale command. 

The Spanish-American War (1898). The Regular 
Army had only 28,000 men when war broke out with 
Spain. The National Guard numbered about 100,000. 
Congress authorized a twofold increase in the size of 
the Army, and an initial enlistment of 125,000 volunteers. 
As the war progressed, inadequacies in Army organiza- 
tion and preparedness became apparent. The problems 
of supply, health, and sanitation in the tropics were as 
dangerous as the Spanish troops in Cuba and the Philip- 
pines. More soldiers died from disease than were killed 
in battle. 

After the war, the Army helped establish American 


Important dates in Army history 


1775 The Continental Congress created the Continental Army 


to fight in the Revolutionary War. 

Congress established the Department of War to direct 

military affairs. 

The U.S. Military Academy, first military school in the 

United States, opened at West Point. 

During the Mexican War, the U.S. Army administered a 

military government over an occupied area for the first 

time. 

Congress passed the first draft law in the United States, 

the Enrollment Act. 

The Army adopted the general staff system and set up 

the Office of the Chief of Staff, United States Army. 

The Panama Canal, a project of the Army engineers, was 

completed, linking the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. 

(April 6) The United States declared war on Germany. 

Army troops and other Allied forces stormed Normandy, 

France, in the greatest amphibious attack in history. 

Atomic bombs, developed by U.S. Army and by civilian 

scientists, were dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 

Japan. 

The Army fired the Explorer 1 earth satellite into orbit 

with its Jupiter-C missile. 

The Army's first airmobile division was activated at Fort 

Benning, Ga., and shipped to Vietnam. 

All U.S. combat troops withdrew from Vietnam after a 

cease-fire agreement was signed. 

The Army achieved all-volunteer status at full authorized 

strength. 

Women were admitted to the U.S. Military Academy. 

1991 The Army led a land attack on Iraqi forces in the Persian 
Gulf War, resulting in Iraq's defeat within several days. 


1789 


1802 


1847 











authority in the Philippines. It also fought in the Boxer 
Rebellion in China (see Boxer Rebellion). 

The early 1900's were a period of reorganization for 
the Army. Through the efforts of Secretary of War Elihu 
Root, Congress approved the adoption of the general 
staff system and the appointment of a chief of staff to re- 
place the commanding general of the Army. On Aug. 15, 
1903, Lieutenant General Samuel B. M. Young became 
the first chief of staff. 

On Aug. 1, 1907, the Army set up an aeronautical divi- 
sion within its signal corps. This force of one officer and 
two enlisted men slowly grew until it became an inde- 
pendent military service 40 years later (see Air Force, 
United States). 

World War I (1914-1918). The United States had a 
Regular Army of only 128,000 men when it declared war 
on Germany on April 6, 1917. But the National Guard had 
developed into a military organization far superior to 
the state militias of earlier wars. However, with the need 
for a larger army, Congress passed a Selective Service 
Act that made all able-bodied men between the ages of 
21 and 30 (later, 18 and 45) subject to military service. 
The government sent nearly 2 million soldiers overseas 
in the American Expeditionary Forces. By the summer of 
1918, American manpower and arms had helped turn 
the tide of battle in favor of the Allies. General John J. 
Pershing commanded the American doughboys who 
fought in France. The Meuse-Argonne offensive marked 
the Army's greatest battle up to that time. But, with the 
signing of the armistice in 1918, the Army again faced a 
cutback in strength. Within two years, it had been re- 
duced to about 204,000 men, and it was reduced to even 
fewer in the following postwar years. 

After World War |, U.S. Army troops came to the aid 
of anti-Communist forces in the Russian civil war. How- 
ever, they accomplished little and soon were brought 
home. 

World War Il (1939-1945) witnessed the mobilization 
of the largest American army ever to take the field. The 
Army expanded from about 190,000 men in 1939 to al- 
most 8,270,000 in 1945. The Selective Service Act of 1940 
required all male citizens age 21 through 35 to register 
for a year of military service. Later amendments to the 
law extended the age limits to 18 and 44 and increased 
the length of service to the duration of the war. The first 
drafted men entered the Army on Nov. 18, 1940. The 
Army multiplied its units by means of the cadre system. 
A certain number of key men were removed from a unit 
as it became ready for service. This nucleus of men, or 
cadre, formed the basis of new units. 

General George C. Marshall became Army chief of 
staff on Sept. 1, 1939, the day that Germany attacked Po- 
land. Japan's attack at Pearl Harbor on Dec. 7, 1941, 
plunged the United States into war. 

The Army underwent several reorganizations during 
World War Il to cope with the complexities of fighting 
on many battlefronts. Lieutenant General Lesley J. Mc- 
Nair became commander of U.S. Army Ground Forces. 
General Henry H. Arnold commanded the Army Air 
Forces. 

The Army took part in the greatest amphibious attack 
in history when the Allies landed in Normandy, France, 
in 1944. It organized airborne divisions that added a new 
dimension to warfare (see Airborne troops). Its engi- 


Army, United States 739 


neers cooperated with civilian scientists to develop the 
atomic bomb (see Nuclear weapon). 

In May 1942, the Army established the Women’s 
Army Auxiliary Corps (WAAC). In 1943, the WAAC be- 
came a part of the United States Army, and the name 
was changed to Women's Army Corps (WAC). Women 
in the Army became known as Wacs. More than 17,000 
Wacs served overseas during the war. In 1945, the last 
year of the war, the WAC reached a peak strength of 
about 100,000 enlisted women and officers. The WAC 
was dissolved in 1978. 

At the end of the war, the Army faced the huge prob- 
lem of demobilization (releasing millions of soldiers 
from active duty). By 1948, it had about 554,000 soldiers. 
The government discontinued the draft in 1947, but re- 
sumed it in 1948. 

The Korean War (1950-1953). In response to a 
United Nations (UN) request, President Harry S. Truman 
in June 1950 ordered U.S. Army troops on occupation 
duty in Japan to aid South Korea. General of the Army 
Douglas MacArthur headed the UN Command in Korea. 
Generals Matthew B. Ridgway and Mark W. Clark later 
succeeded MacArthur. 

During the war, the Army gained considerable experi- 
ence in training and outfitting troops of many nationali- 
ties. The Army, which had 593,000 soldiers before war 
broke out, had 1,596,000 by June 1952. But its strength 
was less than 1 million by June 1957. 

The atomic age Army. In 1953, the first atomic artil- 
lery shell was fired in a test at Frenchman Flat, Nev. 

In the early 1960's, the Army completed several reor- 
ganizations. For example, it completed a plan called Re- 
organization Objectives, Army Division (ROAD) to in- 
crease the flexibility of its fighting forces in limited wars. 
In 1962, the reorganization added a mechanized division 
to the three existing types: infantry, airborne, and ar- 
mored. 

In 1965, the Army added an a/rmobile division. This 
division was to use helicopters and airplanes to support 
its ground units in combat. 

The Vietnam War (1957-1975). United States involve- 
ment in the struggle to prevent Communist forces from 
taking control of South Vietnam began in the mid-1950's. 
At first, the Army contributed only advisers to South Vi- 
etnamese government forces. But by 1965, the U.S. com- 
mitment to South Vietnam had grown, and large Army 
units went into action. The airmobile division proved 
very effective in a war that required the ability to strike 
with surprise. The helicopter was a major weapon. It 
was used as an armed attack troop and cargo carrier, as 
well as an ambulance. 

United States Army strength in Vietnam reached a 
peak of about 363,000 in April 1969. In the early 1970's, 
the South Vietnamese assumed increasing responsibil- 
ity for their own defense. By December 1972, about 
14,000 U.S. Army troops remained. An agreement for a 
cease-fire in Vietnam was signed in Paris on Jan. 27, 
1973. All U.S. ground troops left Vietnam shortly after 
the agreement was signed. But the war did not end until 
1975; 

Reorganizations. In 1973, the U.S. government 
ended the military draft, and the armed services began 
recruiting all-volunteer forces. The same year, the Army 
began a reorganization designed to cut personnel and 


Ol  _— eee 








operating costs and improve readiness and efficiency. It 
included the establishment of the Forces Command and 
the Training and Doctrine Command. 

In the mid-1980's, the Army worked to reduce the 
amount of equipment and number of soldiers of its 
heavy divisions while keeping their combat abilities in- 
tact. Light infantry forces were redesigned so they could 
move rapidly anywhere in the world. Army corps were 
provided with more artillery, aviation, and air defense 
capabilities. 

The Persian Gulf War. In August 1990, Iraq invaded 
neighboring Kuwait. The United States, to prevent fur- 
ther aggression in the area by Iraq, began sending 
troops to Saudi Arabia. Troops from Britain, Egypt, and 
other nations soon joined those of the United States. By 
November, over one-third the total forces of the U.S. 
Army, including about 149,000 soldiers of the Army Re- 
serve and National Guard, had been mobilized for war. 

War began on Jan. 16, 1991, U.S. time, which was Janu- 
ary 17 in Iraq. At first, the allied forces bombed military 
targets in Iraq and Kuwait On February 23 US. time 
(February 24 in the war area), allied land forces began 
moving into Kuwait and Iraq. The allies quickly defeated 
the Iraqi forces there, suffering few casualties. Two days 
later, the Iraqi troops began withdrawing from Kuwait. 

Critically reviewed by the United States Army 


Related articles in World Book See Army and its list of Re- 
lated articles. See also the following articles: 


Army installations 


Aberdeen Fort Gordon Fort Mon- United States 
Proving Fort Hood Outh Military 
Ground Fort Knox Fort Monroe Academy 

Fon Belvoir Fort Leaven- Fort Riley Walter Reed 

Fort Benning worth Fort Rucker Army 

Fort Bliss Fort Lee Fort Sam Medical 

Fort Bragg Fort Leonard Houston Center 

Fort Dix Wood Fort Shafter White Sands 

Fort Eustis Fort McClellan — Fort Sill Missile 

Fort George Fort McPher- Redstone Ar Rano¢e 
G. Meade son senal 


© |. Langevin, Sygma 


Buffalo Soldiers 
Civil War 
Indian Wars 
Korean War 
Mexican War 


Armed Forces Day 

Armed Forces 
Staff College 

Army, Department 
of the 

Detense, Depart- 
ment of 

Division 

Draft, Military 


History 
Persian Gulf War 
Revolutionary War 

in America 
Spanish-American 
War 


Other related articles 


Flag (picture: Flags 
of the Armed 
Forces) 

General 

Gl 

Helmet (pictures) 

Medals, decora- 
tions, and 
orders 


Outline 


I, Life in the Army 
A. Training a soldier 
B. Training an officer 


C A typical day 


D. Careers in the Army 
ll. Weapons and equipment of the Army 
G. Communications and ob- 
servation 
H. Transponation 
I. Engineers 
J. Logistic units 


A_Intantry 
B. Artillery 
C Armor 


D. Army aviation 
E. Special units 


F. Missiles 


Ill. Organization of the Army 


IV. History 


Questions 


Combat troops train regu- 
larly to maintain their readi- 
ness to fight Members of the 
82nd Airborne Division prac- 
ticed desert maneuvers in 
1990, shown here. The divi- 
sion fought in the Persian 
Gulf War in 1991. 


Tuskegee Airmen 
Vietnam War 
War of 1812 
World War | 
World War i 


National Guard 

Rank, Military 

Reserve Officers 
Training Corps 

Selective Service 
System 

United States 
Army War 
College 


\Vhat are some of the peacetime duties of the Army? 
\Vhat are the Army overseas commands? 


How can a person become an Army officer? 


What is the Regular Army? The Army National Guard? 

What is the role of missiles in the modern Army? 

How does the Army cooperate with the other armed services in 
providing air defense? 

When did the United States adopt its first draft? 

What is the size of a corps? A battalion? 

How was the helicopter used in the Vietnam War? 





Additional resources 


Emerson, William K. Encyclopedia of United States Army Insignia 

and Uniforms. Univ. of Okla. Pr., 1996. 

Gurney, Gene. A Pictorial History of the United States Army. 1966. 

Reprint. Crown, 1978. 

Hole, Dorothy. The Army and You. Crestwood Hse., 1993. Dis- 
cusses Careers in the Army. Younger readers. 
Tsouras, Peter, and others, eds. The United States Army: A Dic- 

tionary. Garland, 1991. 

Army Day. See Armed Forces Day. 

Army War College. See United States Army War 
College. 

Army worm is a caterpillar especially harmful to corn 
and other grains, and garden crops east of the Rocky 
Mountains in the United States and Canada. It is the /ar- 
va (young) of a night-flying moth (see Larva). Sometimes 
large numbers of these caterpillars march like an army 
across fields. They stick together in dense patches and 
sometimes form processions 12 or 14 feet (3.7 or 4.3 me- 
ters) long and 2 or 3 inches (5 or 8 centimeters) wide. 
They apparently band together to search for new feed- 
ing grounds. 

The army worm is hairless and fleshy. It is about 1 5 
inches (3.8 centimeters) long, and has green and yellow 
stripes. When full grown, it burrows into the soil and 
transfornis into a pupa (see Pupa). The pupa changes 
into a pale brown moth that emerges in the spring. The 
female moth deposits strings of eggs on the lower 
leaves of grasses. The caterpillars hatch from these 
eggs. They usually feed at night and hide during the day. 
There are two or three broods per year. 

Farmers fight army worms with poisoned bran mash 
and with such insecticide sprays as carbaryl and 
methomyl. Dust furrows (narrow grooves) may be dug 
as barriers against them. The natural enemies of the 
army worm include parasitic flies and wasps, and the 
fiery ground beetle. Charles V. Covell, Jr. 


Scientific classification. The army worm is in the family 
Noctuidae. It is Pseudaletia unipuncta. 

See also Moth. 
Arnica, AHR nuh kuh, is the name of about 45 kinds of 
plants of the Northern Hemisphere that yield a juice 
used to drive away the blood that collects in bruises. 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Christabel King 


The mountain arnica bears heads of golden-yellow flowers 
from its stem. The plant grows in northern and central Europe. 


Arnold, Benedict 741 


The common, or mountain, arnica is the source of com- 
mercial arnica. It has a twisted root that lives from year 
to year. Its stem is about 2 feet (61 centimeters) high and 
bears heads of golden-yellow flowers. Every part of the 
plant contains arnicin, which is used to make the medi- 
cine. Mountain arnica is native to the mountain mead- 
ows and moors of northern and central Europe. 

W. Dennis Clark 

Scientific classification. The mountain arnica is in the com- 
posite family, Asteraceae or Compositae. It is Arnica montana. 

See also Composite family. 

Arno River rises in the Etruscan section of the Apen- 
nine Mountains in northwestern Italy. It flows west for 
about 150 miles (241 kilometers) and empties into the 
Ligurian Sea (see Italy [terrain map]). Only about 20 miles 
(32 kilometers) of the Arno can be used for navigation. 
Florence and Pisa lie along the river. The fertile Arno 
Valley has vineyards and olive groves, and is noted for 
its scenic beauty. See also Florence; Pisa. Hugh D. Clout 
Arnold, Benedict (1741-1801), was an American gen- 
eral of the Revolutionary War period. Once trusted and 
admired, he became the most famous traitor in United 
States history. 

Arnold was born on Jan. 14, 1741, in Norwich, Con- 
necticut. He learned the apothecary (pharmacy) trade 
and, in 1762, opened a book and drug store in New 
Haven, Connecticut. Arnold also carried on trade with 
the West Indies. By 1774, he was one of the wealthiest 
citizens in New Haven. In 1767, Arnold married Mar- 
garet Mansfield, who was the daughter of the sheriff of 
New Haven County. She died in 1775. 

A courageous soldier. In 1774, Arnold became a 
captain in the Connecticut militia. Soon after the Revolu- 
tionary War began in 1775, he was commissioned as a 
colonel in the patriot forces. Arnold and Ethan Allen led 
83 men in the attack and capture of Fort Ticonderoga, in 
New York, on May 10, 1775. 

Later that same year, Arnold led 1,100 soldiers into 
Canada. He and General Richard Montgomery worked 
together in an unsuccessful assault on Quebec. Arnold's 
leg was severely wounded in the assault, and his 
courage won him a promotion to brigadier general. In 
October 1776, he distinguished himself during the Battle 
of Valcour Island, a naval battle on Lake Champlain. 

A disappointed officer. Arnold had several disap- 
pointments. He was passed over for promotion in Feb- 
ruary 1777, when Congress appointed five new major 
generals. Arnold, who had more seniority than any of 
the men promoted, was 
talked out of leaving the 
army by General George 
Washington. In May 1777, 
Congress promoted 
Arnold to major general 
as a reward for his brav- 
ery in helping drive a 
British raiding party out of 
Connecticut. 

Later that year, Arnold 
served under General Ho- 
ratio Gates against the 
British general John Bur- 
goyne. In October 1777, in 
the Second Battle of Free- 





Engraving by H B Hall 
Historical Pictures Senice 


Benedict Arnold 


742 Arnold, Eddy 


man’s Farm, Arnold showed courage against Burgoyne 
and was again badly wounded. This battle, won by the 
patriots, is also known as the Battle of Bemis Heights. 
Burgoyne’s defeat led to his surrender at Saratoga days 
later. Gates received credit for the victory. Congress vot- 
ed Arnold the country's thanks and had Washington re- 
store Arnold's seniority over the other generals. 

In 1778, Arnold took command of Philadelphia. There 
he married Margaret Shippen, a young woman from a 
prominent family. Arnold was not a good administrator, 
and he drew criticism for living extravagantly. The exec- 
utive council of Pennsylvania accused him of being too 
gentle with Americans who opposed independence 
from Britain. The council also accused him of using mili- 
tary personnel to do personal favors. A court-martial 
cleared Arnold, but it ordered General Washington to 
reprimand him. 

Turns traitor. Arnold brooded over what he consid- 
ered his country’s ingratitude and injustice, and he be- 
gan corresponding with the enemy. Arnold was in com- 
mand of West Point in 1780, and he worked out a plan to 
surrender that important military base to the British 
commander Sir Henry Clinton. 

The capture of British Major John André, who was 
carrying papers sent by Arnold to Clinton, exposed 
Arnold's treachery (see André, John). Arnold escaped to 
New York City and became a brigadier general in the 
British Army. He demanded 20,000 pounds from the 
British for the losses he incurred in joining them. But he 
received only 6,315 pounds. As a British officer, ne led 
expeditions that burned Richmond, Virginia, and New 
London, Connecticut. 

Scorned in England. Arnold was received warmly by 
King George III when he went to England in 1782, but 
others there scorned him. In 1797, the British govern- 
ment granted him 13,400 acres (5,423 hectares) in Cana- 
da, but the land was of little use to him. He spent most 
of his remaining years as a merchant in the West Indies 
trade. In his last days, Arnold was burdened with debt, 
became discouraged, and was generally distrusted. He 
died on June 14, 1801. James Kirby Martin 

See also Fort Ticonderoga. 


Additional resources 


Martin, James K. Benedict Arnold, Revolutionary Hero: An Ameri- 


can Warrior Reconsidered. N. Y. Univ. Pr., 1997. Mainly exam- 
ines Arnolds career before he changed his loyalties. 

Randall, William S. Benedict Arnold. Morrow, 1990. 

Wade, Mary D. Benedict Arnold, Watts, 1995. Younger readers. 


Arnold, Eddy (1918- }, an American singer, was a 


leading performer in country music from the mid-1940's 
through the 1960's. He was a pioneer in gaining a mass 
audience for country music. His best-known songs in- 


clude “Cattle Cail’ (1944), “| Really Don't Want to Know’ 
(1954), ‘You Dont Know Me /!1956). “Tennessee Stud” 
(1959), and “Make the World Go Away’ (1965). 


Arnold, known as ‘the 1 essee Plowboy, was born 
near Henderson, Tennessee. on May 15, 1918. His moth- 
er taught him to play the quitar in 1936, Arnold became 
a radio performer. H ising popularity as a singer 


on the radio gained Iwi a recordin 
Victor in 1943. Arnold hosted 
shows on television trom 1952 to 1951 
Arnold, Henry Harley (1886-1) 950 
small United States Army Air Corps 


} contract with RCA 
ountry music 
Lee Recto: 
eveloped the 
1 a large, power- 


ful U.S. Air Force. Arnold commanded the Army Air 
Forces during World War II. He was the only person to 
serve as both General of the Army and General of the 
Air Force. 

Arnold was born on June 25, 1886, in Gladwyne, Penn- 
sylvania. He was nicknamed “Hap.” He graduated from 
the United States Military Academy (West Point) in 1907, 
and took flying lessons from the Wright brothers. Dur- 
ing World War | (1914-1918), he organized the air de- 
fense of the Canal Zone. After the war, he transferred to 
the newly formed Air Service. He made many expert- 
mental flights, including 
the first mass flight of B- 
10 bombers. He helped 
start air mail flights, air re- 
fueling, and air forest fire 
patrols. 

Before and during 
World War II (1939-1945), 
Arnold fought for expan- 
sion of U.S. air power. He 
became chief of the Army 
Air Corps in 1938 and U.S. 
deputy chief of staff for air 
in 1940. Arnold was made 
chief of the new Army Air 
Forces in 1941 and com- 
manding general in 1942. 

As a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Arnold suc- 
cessfully asked for daylight precision bombing against 
Germany. Previous bombing raids had been staged at 
night because they were thought to be safer. Daylight 
bombing increased accuracy because the targets could 
be seen. Arnold retired in 1946 and died on Jan. 15, 1950. 

Maurice Matloff 
Arnold, Matthew (1822-1888), was one of the intellec- 
tual leaders of Victorian England. He ranks with Lord 
Tennyson, Robert Browning, and Gerard Manley Hop- 
kins among the greatest Victorian poets. Arnold was 
also the most important English literary critic of his time. 
He was a major social critic, and wrote important works 
on religion and education. 

Arnold's poetry expresses his experience during an 
age when traditional religious beliefs and certainties 
were being questioned without new beliefs to take their 
place. As he wrote in Stanzas from the Grande Char- 
treuse (1855), he felt himself to be 

Wandering between two worlds, one dead, 
The other powerless to be born ... 

Arnold's most famous poem, “Dover Beach, de- 

scribes the “melancholy, long, withdrawing roar’ of the 





U.S. Air Force 
Henry H. Arnold 


“Sea of Faith.” His poetry resembles the poetry of our 


own time in its yearning for peace and its portrayal of 
personal loneliness. Faced with these difficulties, Arnold 
often counseled resignation and endurance. 

Arnold's prose includes the literary criticism in Essays 
in Criticism (1865, second series 1888) and the social crit- 
icism of Culture and Anarchy (1869). Arnold judged both 
literature and Victorian society according to the stand- 
ard of “the best that is known and thought in the world.” 
He found recent writers of his time such as Percy Bysshe 
Shelley, William Wordsworth, or Robert Burns inade- 
quate when measured against Homer, Dante, or William 
Shakespeare. Arnold condemned what he felt was the 








tendency toward anarchy (lawlessness) in Victorian cul- 
ture. Arnold found his society resisting the new ideas 
that come from a “free play of the mind,” which he high- 
ly valued. He hoped that maintaining high standards of 
judgment would aid the return of better literature and a 
better society. 

Arnold was born on Dec. 24, 1822, in Laleham. His fa- 
ther was Thomas Arnold, headmaster of Rugby, the fa- 
mous English secondary school. Arnold attended Rugby 
and Oxford University. 

In 1851, Arnold became an inspector of schools for 
the British government, a post at which he worked hard 
for the next 35 years. Most of his poems were published 
between 1849 and 1855. His prose appeared after 1855. 
Arnold served as professor of poetry at Oxford from 
1857 to 1867. He died on April 15, 1888. K. K. Collins 

See also English literature (Later Victorian literature). 
Arp, 2hrp, Jean, Zhahn (1887-1966), was a French sculp- 
tor. He was also called Hans Arp. He worked with many 
materials, including wood, bronze, and polished stone. 
Arp became famous for his reliefs, free-standing sculp- 
tures, and collages {see Collage). While Arp’s works may 
at first seem abstract, many of them suggest plants, ani- 
mals, and human anatomy. These organic forms capture 
the life, vitality, and sense of growth found in nature, 
rather than specific physical appearances. 

Arp avoided preconceived plans when creating his 
works. He let the sculpture “create itself’ in such works 
as Shepherd of the Clouds (1953). 

Arp was born on Sept. 16, 1887, in Strasbourg. He was 
also a painter, poet, and graphic artist. He exhibited with 
the German Expressionist artists just before World War | 
(1914-1918). In 1916, he helped found Dadaism. He was 
later associated with the Surrealists (see Dadaism; Sur- 
realism). He died on June 7, 1966. 
Arpad. See Hungary (History). 
Arpino, ahr PEEN oh, Gerald (1928- ), is an impor- 
tant American ballet choreographer (dance creator). 
Arpino’s career has been closely identified with the 
American choreographer Robert Joffrey. Arpino and Jof- 
frey cofounded the Joffrey Ballet (now the Joffrey Ballet 
of Chicago) in 1956. Arpino was a principal dancer with 
the company until 1964 and then served as its chief cho- 
reographer. He became the companys artistic director 
after Joffrey died in 1988. 

Gennaro Peter Arpino was born on Jan. 14, 1928, in 
the New York City borough of Staten Island. He made 
his debut as a choreographer in 1961 with Ropes and 
Sea Shadows. His other works include Viva Vivaldi! 
(1965), Trinity(1970), Kettentanz (1971), Celebration (1980), 
Light Rain(1981), Billboards (1993), and Partita for RC 
(2000). Dan Zeft 
Arquebus. See Harquebus. 

Arrest is the act of taking a person into the custody of 
the law and depriving the person of liberty. The term 
comes from the French word arréter, which means fo 
stop. Any police officer may make arrests. Agents of the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation also have the power to 
make some types of arrests. Private citizens have the 
right to make an arrest if a serious crime is committed in 
their presence. People may be arrested after they are ac- 
cused of murder, theft, or other criminal offenses. For 
some crimes, and under certain conditions, a police offi- 
cer must obtain a court order called a warrant before 


Joseph F. Lamb 


Arrowhead 743 


making an arrest. But an officer does not need a warrant 
to arrest a person in the act of committing a crime. Ordi- 
narily police may arrest anyone whom they reasonably 
believe to be guilty of a serious crime. 

Usually only those people accused of such serious 
crimes as murder are forced to stay in jail until they are 
brought to trial. Other people may go free until trial if 
they can provide a sum of money called baé/. This mon- 
ey is a pledge to appear for trial. In 1991, the Supreme 
Court of the United States ruled that a person arrested 
without a warrant has the right to be heard before a 
judge within 48 hours after the arrest. 

See also Bail; Habeas corpus; Warrant. 
Arrhythmia, uh R/IHTH mee uh, is an abnormal heart 
rhythm. Arrhythmias often are extra heartbeats that 
cause no serious problems. However, sometimes the 
heart rhythm can become dangerously slow or fast. 

Abnormally slow heart rhythms often are a sign of 
heart block, in which the electrical impulses started by 
the heart's natural “pacemaker” fail to be conducted to 
the ventricles, the hearts main pumping chambers. The 
heart rate becomes very slow, which may cause loss of 
consciousness, heart failure, or death. A doctor can cor- 
rect the condition by implanting an electronic pacemak- 
erin the body. This device transmits an electric impulse 
to the heart, stimulating it to beat in a normal rhythm. 

Abnormally fast heart rhythms are the chief cause of 
disabling symptoms or death from heart disease. Such 
arrhythmias can occur unexpectedly in the months or 
years after a heart attack. Many can be controlled with 
medication. In serious emergencies, they can be treated 
by applying a strong electric shock, but the shock must 
be administered within minutes to prevent severe heart 
damage or death. In some cases, doctors implant a de- 
vice called a defibrillatorto detect and treat abnormally 
fast heart rhythms. The defibrillator monitors the heart 
and automatically delivers electric shocks before the ar- 
rhythmia causes permanent damage. Toby R. Engel 

See also Defibrillator; Digitalis. 

Arrow. See Archery. 

Arrow, Kenneth Joseph (1921- ), an American 
economist, shared the 1972 Nobel Prize in economics 
with Sir John Hicks of the United Kingdom. They won 
the award for their contributions to general equilibrium 
theory and to welfare economics. General equilibrium 
theory examines the relationship between the processes 
of production, distribution, and consumption in the total 
economy. Welfare economics is a branch of economics 
concerned with how an economic system might achieve 
the greatest possible welfare for its people. 

Arrow is best known for his impossibility theorem, an 
idea that revolutionized welfare economics. The theo- 
rem proves mathematically that a perfect form of gov- 
ernment can never be possible. Arrow also has done pi- 
oneering research on the theory of business risks. 

Arrow was born in New York City on Aug. 23, 1921. He 
taught economics at Stanford University from 1949 to 
1968 and at Harvard University from 1968 to 1979. Arrow 
returned to Stanford in 1979. His books include Essays in 
the Theory of Risk Bearing (1971) and The Limits of Or- 
ganization (1974). Barry W. Poulson 
Arrowhead is the striking end of an arrow. It is usually 
a separate piece attached to the front ot the arrow shaft. 
Prehistoric people tashioned arrowheads of stone or 


George T. Felkenes 


744 Arrowroot 














Jeffrey V Kalin 
Prehistoric arrowheads 
used by Stone Age Europeans 
were chipped into leaf shapes 
and triangular shapes. 


Ronaid Shendan 
jron arrowheads were used 
in the A.D. 800s. 


bone for use in hunting and warfare. No one knows just 
when or where people first used the bow and arrow. 

The American Indians made few stone arrowheads 
before A.D. 500. Earlier Indians commonly used stone- 
headed spears instead. The Indians made arrowheads of 
argillite, chalcedony, jasper, obsidian, quartz, quartzite, 
slate, and flint. The maker first split off pieces from a 
large stone, using a heavy rock as a hammer. Then, the 
maker selected a piece of suitable size and thickness. 
Grasping it between the palm and fingertips of one 
hand, the maker pressed the stone's upperside near one 
edge with an antler, bone, or ivory tool. This process, 
called pressure tlaking, removed a small chip from the 
underside of the arrowhead. The maker repeated this 
process until the stone took the desired shape. 

Indian arrowheads differ in size, shape, thickness, and 
surface finish. They vary in length from more than 2 
inches (5 centimeters’ to less than + inch !13 millime- 
ters). Some arrowheads are roughly triangular, and oth- 
ers are oval or leaf-shaped. Archaeologists can recog- 
nize the various types of arrowheads made by Indians of 
different time periods or geographic regions. Indians 
stopped making stone arrowheads after traders fur- 


nished them with iron. Patrick Culbert 
See also Flint. 
Arrowroot is a plant cultivated in many tropical coun- 


tries. People use the rhizomes ‘underground stems) of 
the arrowroot plant to make a light starch that is used in 
puddings, pie fillings, and other dessert mixtures. The 
starch obtained from the plant is also called arrowroot 
See also Starch. 





An Inuit arrowhead used to 
kill bears was long and ta- 
pered. Inuit (sometimes called 
Eskimos) made arrowheads 
chiefly from bone and stone 
but also used horn and ivory. 


Jetfrey V Kalin 





Quartz Flint 


jefirey \ Aalin 


American Indian arrowheads were fashioned in many shapes and sizes and from a variety of 
materials. The Indians sharpened such minerals as jasper, quartz, and flint into deadly points. 


Scientific classification. The arrowroot plant belongs to the 
arrowroot tamily, Marantaceae. Its scientific name is Maranta ar- 
undinacea. Michael J. Tanabe 


Arroyo. See Desert (Desert land and climate). 
Arsenic, AHR suh nihk or AHRS nihk, is a semimetallic 
chemical element. It is a deadly poison, and prolonged 
low-dose exposure to arsenic causes cancer in human 
beings. Many rat poisons, insecticides, and weedkillers 
contain arsenic. It is also used to manufacture lead gun 
shot and certain types of electrical equipment, and to in- 
crease the strength of certain alloys. 

There are three chief a//otropes\solid forms) of arse- 
nic: (1) gray arsenic, (2) yellow arsenic, and (3) black arse- 
nic. Gray arsenic is the ordinary, stable form of the ele- 
ment. It has a shiny appearance and is a moderately 
good conductor of heat and electricity. But gray arsenic 
is brittle and breaks easily. When heated to 1135 *F 
(613 °C), gray arsenic sub/imes—that is, it passes directly 
into a vapor without melting (see Sublimation). 

Arsenic occasionally occurs in its pure form in nature. 
But it is most commonly found in chemical combination 
with sulfur or oxygen, or with such metals as cobalt, 
copper, iron, nickel, silver, and tin. The principal arse- 
nic-containing mineral is arsenopyrite. The most widely 
used arsenic compound is wAite arsenic, also called ar- 
senic trioxide. \t is usually produced as a by-product of 
the smelting (melting) of copper or lead. 

Compounds of arsenic have been used since ancient 
times for many purposes, including medicines and poi- 
sons. The German scholar Albertus Magnus is often 
credited with first isolating the element about 1250. Ar- 





senic has the chemical symbol As. Its atomic number is 
33, and its atomic weight is 74.9216. 

See also Arsenical; Insecticide. 
Arsenical, ahr SEHN uh kuhl, is one of a group of 
drugs that contain arsenic and have been used as a 
medicine. Carbarsone is an arsenical used in treating 
amebic dysentery. Arsenic is a deadly poison. Arsenicals 
are being replaced by other drugs. 

Christopher A. Rodowskas, Jr. 

See also Arsenic. 

Arson, AHR suhn, is the crime of willfully and mali- 
ciously damaging or destroying a building or other 
property by fire or explosion. In most states of the 
United States, arson includes burning one’s own prop- 
erty to collect insurance payments on it. In some Cases, 
arson is committed for revenge against a building 
owner or occupant. Other fires are set to destroy evi- 
dence of another crime, such as murder or burglary. 
Still other arson cases result from vandalism or pyroma- 
nia, an uncontrollable urge to set fires (see Pyromania). 
Arson is difficult to prove in most cases because fire can 
destroy almost all evidence of the crime. Also, most cit- 
ies lack enough trained arson investigators. 

The police and fire departments of most major cities 
have formed arson squads and are training their mem- 
bers to investigate cases of suspected arson. Insurance 
companies have become increasingly unwilling to pay 
for losses resulting from fire unless a thorough investi- 
gation has been made. Many fire departments have 
called for the adoption of stronger laws against arson. 

Charles F. Wellford 

See also Fire department (Arson investigations). 

Art, Commercial. See Commercial art. 

Art and the arts. In a broad sense, art is skill in mak- 
ing or doing. We can say that someone knows and prac- 
tices the art of basket-weaving, of tuning a piano, or 
even of hitting a home run. In this sense, there are many 
arts—as many as there are kinds of deliberate, special- 
ized activities for human beings to engage in. 

The word artis used in many other ways. Some peo- 
ple speak of the useful arts as the ones that produce 
beautiful objects for everyday use, and the decorative 
arts as those that produce beautiful objects for their 
own sakes. Schools offer /ibera/ arts courses in such 
topics as history and philosophy, and applied arts 
courses in such subjects as architecture and mechanical 
drawing. Teachers use the term /anguage arts to mean 
the related skills of reading, writing, speaking, and 
spelling. Many people speak of the graphic arts as those 
involved in printing and bookmaking. 

The word artis often used in a more specialized way 
to mean fine arts, such as painting pictures, writing nov- 
els, or composing music. Things created as the result of 
such activity are supposed to be different from, and 
more valuable than, things that require mere craftsman- 
ship or technical skill. Some traditional fine arts are po- 
etry, fiction, opera, painting, sculpture, drama, and bal- 
let. Today architecture, motion pictures, photographs, 
pottery, weaving, and some forms of modern dancing 
are also considered art in this special sense. 


Marianna A. Busch 


The reasons for art 


Human beings are makers of many things, and they 
make them for many purposes. Some creations serve 


Artandthearts 745 


obvious practical needs. For example, people have al- 
ways made tools for cutting, digging, killing, and eating. 
But in all cultures, people also seem to have two less 
obvious purposes for some of the objects they make. 
First, they want to make things in forms that give pleas- 
ure when seen or heard. Second, people want to make 
objects that will remind them, and also teach other peo- 
ple, about their most important discoveries regarding 
fundamental realities. We call these reasons for making 
and valuing art forma/ and cognitive interests. 

Formal interest. People have always had an interest 
in order. Most of us enjoy experiencing patterns that 
display balance and contrast. Prehistoric people carved 
the handles of their hunting knives in regular, pleasing 
patterns. In the 1800's, American cowboys liked to have 
guns and saddles decorated with patterns. We experi- 
ence the same delight in form or design when we buy 
clothes or automobiles for their appearance rather than 
their warmth or efficiency. Perceiving works of art has 
long been considered a little like understanding mathe- 
matics because both involve patterns or forms. 

Cognitive interest refers to meaning. Certain events 
and ideas take on the highest importance in our reli- 
gious, social, moral, political, and personal lives. People 
have always used formal symbols or performances to 
make such events meaningful or to signify such ideas so 
they can be transmitted from person to person and from 
generation to generation. Prehistoric people used 
dances and paintings to communicate the idea of suc- 
cess in planting, harvesting, and hunting. The ancient 
Greeks gave their ideas about such ideal human quali- 
ties as wisdom and courage visual form in their beauti- 
ful statues of gods and goddesses. Today, we still give 
occasions like graduations or weddings importance 
through music and song. We also try to understand the 
meaning of important personal events, such as falling in 
love, and important public events, such as wars, by 
composing music, writing novels and poetry, painting 
pictures, or making films about them. 


The work of art 


The aesthetic experience. Works of art result when 
the formal interest and the cognitive interest come to- 
gether in the creative process through which artists 
make art. In general, art presents us with forms we 
enjoy perceiving and invites us to recall or learn some- 
thing important. But we do not feel these interests sepa- 
rately when we appreciate art. Art gives us a special 
kind of experience that unites pleasure in perceiving or- 
derly forms and in learning. Scholars call this the aes- 
thetic experience. 

The Greek epic poem the Odyssey appeals to us ina 
way that joins the two interests. It is a story about basic 
human problems and a study of the resourcefulness and 
adaptability of human nature. It is also a well-formed 
story, with episodes following each other in a way that 
builds toward the climax. The poem's words form im- 
ages in our minds and tell us about the feelings that go 
with the story. As we read or listen to the Odyssey, our 
experiencing of the formal features enriches our under- 
standing of the meaning. In the same way, Vincent van 
Gogh's painting Sunflowers is more than a formal com- 
position of shapes and colors. It has a bright vividness 
that stays in our experience as a symbol of how nature 





james H Pickerell, Black Star 


Children drawing designs ona street 


————_— « —( = 


Caantranco Gorgon 


American painter Frank Stella working in his studio 





Assumption of the Virgin {1577} by El Greco. WORLD BOOK photo 
Students examining a painting by El Greco 


Creating and enjoying art rank among humanity's most important activities. Some people like to 
express themselves through art as a form of recreation, above /eft. Others become professional 
artists, jower /eft. Art masterpieces can be studied, right, for pleasure and to learn how artists 
throughout history have felt about such subjects as love, religion, and social justice. 


bursts with life. For other examples of the way formal 
and cognitive interests come together, see Painting 
What do painters paint? 

Works of art differ widely in how they combine for- 
mal features with meaning. Toward one end of the scale, 
where the cognitive interest is strongest, are such works 
as the tragedies of Shakespeare. These works explore 
fundamental human situations and move us profoundly. 
They reward us with the discovery of more subtle and 
complex meaning as we read them or see them per- 
formed again and again. Similarly, we enjoy experienc- 
ing the religious paintings of the Italian Renaissance, the 
great novels of Charles Dickens, and Johann Sebastian 


Bach's Mass in B minor, These works of art do more 
than convey religious and moral beliefs and attitudes. 
They convey these meanings through delightful desiqn 
and pleasurable patterns of perception. 
Toward the othe O » scale is art that evokes 
strong formal interest weak cognitive interest. This 
is true of the paintings of t 1odern American painter 


Frank Stella. It is also true of Bach's Preludes and Fugues 
and Joseph Haydn's chamber music, where the melody 
and counterpoint emphasize musical form. The formal 
patterns of classical music, as well as ballet and even the 
freer forms of modern dance, produce pleasure by sat- 
isfying our interest in experiencing orderly shapes and 
sequences. Most such works are not vehicles for philo- 
sophical themes. Yet, even here, some critics give inter- 
pretations of highly formal art that show how such 
works are meaningful. They point out that Stella’s paint- 
ings contrast with El Greco's to show how curved 
shapes can define a painting's perceived surface as de- 
picting stillness or motion (see the illustrations with this 
article). The formal patterns of music have qualities like 
joy, sadness, and vitality, which reflect features found in 
human life. 

Beauty. Some people identify the formal interest with 
our desire to make and enjoy beautiful things. But oth- 
ers prefer to use the word beauty in a fuller sense. They 
say that the sheer satisfaction we feel when we perceive 


complex but balanced design, and the profound satis- 
faction we experience in understanding complex but 
clear meaning, both contribute to beauty. 

Even in the fuller sense, whether a thing is beautiful 
does not depend on its being useful. Many paintings, 
poems, and musical compositions have no use apart 
from their value as works of art. Of course, we could use 
van Gogh's Sunflowers as a sign for a florist's shop, or 
we could use a piece of sculpture to hold a door open, 
but their real function is to be art. Such objects as 
chairs, dishes, and vases have useful functions. Yet some 
of these works are considered art and displayed in mu- 
seums because they illustrate something of aesthetic im- 
portance in their design. 


Grouping the arts 


Generally speaking, works of art have certain things 
in common. Each presents something to our sense-per- 
ception, such as the music we hear, or to our imagina- 
tive contemplation, like the story we read. Each one is 
set off from other things in some way. For example, a 
statue stands on a pedestal, and a play takes place ona 
stage. This way of setting the work off helps us grasp it 
as a whole. The work is always more or less compli- 
cated. For instance, the play has several characters, the 
painting consists of several shapes or colors, and the 
music contains a variety of sounds. The work is always 
organized to some degree into a unified whole. 

At the same time, works of art differ in important 
ways. Some, such as operas and novels, can tell a story. 
Others, like chamber music, do not. Some, such as 
music and poetry, take time to unfold. Still others, like 
painting, are presented all at once. But this difference 
should not be stressed too much, because it takes time 
to see a painting fully, just as it does to listen to a sym- 
phony. Some kinds of art, such as sculpture, come to us 
just as they left the hands of their creators. Other kinds 
are performed or interpreted. The orchestra plays music 
or the actors perform the play. 

But perhaps the most fundamental way of classifying 
works of art is in terms of the kinds of elements that 
make them up. Arts that use words differ from those that 





WORLD BOOK photo by Alexander Sobelewsk 


Art and the arts 


747 





Herman Miller Inc. (WORLD BOOK photo) 


The useful arts bring beauty and imaginative design to many 
everyday objects. The chairs shown above are considered works 
of art as well as practical pieces of furniture. 


do not, because words introduce a special sort of refer- 
ence into the arts. 

Verbal art is literature, which can be divided into po- 
etry, fiction, and the essay. Literary critics have sug- 
gested a number of ways by which to distinguish liter- 
ary works from other kinds of writing, such as science 
or history. See Literature. 

Nonverbal arts include two main types: (1) musical 
composition and (2) visual design. Works that consist of 
patterns of sound, pitch, or rhythm are musical compo- 
sitions. Even a simple melody, or a drum solo with no 
melody, can be considered music. Works that consist of 
patterns of line, shape, and color are visual designs. 

The arts can be divided even further. For example, we 
can divide visual designs according to the kinds of ma- 
terials that are used and the way the designs are pro- 
duced. In this way, we can distinguish photographs and 
prints from paintings. In a group of prints, we can sepa- 
rate etchings from lithographs. Pictures may be painted 
with oils or water colors. 


Nonverbal arts communi- 
cate without using words. 
Music is one of the most im- 
portant of these arts. A musi- 
cal composition may express 
emotions or ideas as strongly 
as a work of literature. 


748 Artand the arts 


A third group of nonverbal arts, which some experts 
consider part of the second group, produces three-di- 
mensional objects which we can see from several points 
of view, and also can touch. There is no general name 
for them, but they include sculpture, architecture, ce- 
ramics, weaving, fine glassware, jewelry, and furniture. 

Mixed arts are combinations of the basic arts. For ex- 
ample, songs and oratorios consist of music and poetry. 
Dance is a combination of music and action. Drama 
combines action, words, and stage scenery. Films com- 
bine visual design with storytelling. 

Scholars often wonder whether other senses besides 
sight and hearing might be used for works of art. 
Should a dinner that is made of gourmet dishes be con- 
sidered a work of art? Could a series of different odors 
be considered a work of art? 


Enjoying the arts 


People who love music, who can lose themselves in a 
book, or who can spend hours painting a picture of a 
barn know the deep satisfaction that can be found in art. 
It is not easy to express this satisfaction in words. But, in 
some partly mysterious way, works of art are among the 
things of highest value in our lives. 

A fine piece of music, a masterpiece of painting, or a 
first-rate play has the power to capture and hold our 
fullest and most concentrated attention. We are com- 
pletely wrapped up in it, and everything works out right. 
The music comes to the right close at the right time and 
in the right way. The play ends, not necessarily on a hap- 
py note, but in a way that seems inevitable and appro- 
priate. As we grow more and more aware of the paint- 
ing, its parts seem to belong together and to be made 
for each other. We perceive harmony in the object and 
feel harmony within ourselves. 

When the aesthetic experience has ended, we often 
feel uplifted and refreshed. Our eyes and ears, our in- 
sight into other persons, or our understanding of moral 
values may be sharpened and refined. We may feel 
more at home with ourselves. Works of art have value 
for us in some such ways as these. 

It is this value that marks the difference between great 
art and simple entertainment. A work that is fairly easy to 
understand and appreciate takes little effort on our part. 
It may give us pleasure. But it does not involve our emo- 
tions or our attention at a deep level. It may take our 
minds off our troubles for a time, but it does not give us 
the spiritually enriching experience of vital and orderly 
design. 


Studying the arts 


To enjoy the special value of works of art, we must be 
ready to give a great deal to them. The greatest works of 
music and poetry often present difficulties. We cannot 
expect to master them all at once. And we cannot always 
find what is worthy in them at a glance. It ‘is possible to 
get some satisfaction out of music while reading a 
newspaper or peeling potatoes. But we must listen with 
full attention before we can find the riches in great 
works of music. 

Some of us feel that we cannot find much to enjoy in 
one art or another. But most of us can find aesthetic sat 
isfaction in some of the arts ~if we know how to go 
about it. In addition, many of us find that music, paint 


ing, or poetry provides an inexhaustible source of joy. 

At the same time, we may discover that we ourselves 
have the ability to create art If we do, we have a source 
of satisfaction we do not want to miss. Children take mu- 
sic lessons, learn to sing together, and study drawing. 
Many persons try amateur acting, or write stories and 
poems. Some have great talent and become profession- 
al artists. Even those of us who conclude that we do not 
have much creative ability find that trying to paint or 
write sharpens our perceptions and adds to our enjoy- 
ment of the arts. 

There is also a more theoretical approach to the arts. 
We may begin to think about some of the more complex 
matters connected with appreciating artworks. This is 
the study of aesthetics. It tries to find what makes one 
work of art better than another, and whether there are 
objective standards of criticism. It considers how our in- 
terest in art is connected with our other great philo- 
sophic interests such as science and religion. Philoso- 
phers have studied such questions. In asking and trying 
to answer them, we become philosophers ourselves. 

Anita Silvers 


Related articles in World Book include: 


Kinds of art 
Architecture Interior design Performance art 
Ballet Jewelry Photography 
Bookbinding Landscape archi- Poetry 
Commercial art tecture Pottery 
Dance Literature Printing 
Drama Mosaic Sculpture 
Drawing Motion picture Tapestry 
Graphic arts Music Theater 
Handicraft Painting Weaving 
Styles of art 
Abstract expres- Art deco Baroque 
sionism Art nouveau Byzantine art 
Arabesque Avant-garde Carolingian art 





American Ballet Theatre (Martha Swope! 


Mixed arts blend several art forms. For example, the ballet Cop- 
pélia, shown here, by the French composer Léo Delibes, com- 
bines dancing, drama, music, and costume and scenery design. 


En 


——— 
a 


Classicism Pop art 

Folk art Realism 
Gothic art Rococo 
Islamic art Romanticism 
Naturalism Surrealism 

Elements of art 

Aesthetics Perspective 
Design Rhythm 


Art deco was a style of design that became popular 

during the 1920's and 1930s. It was used chiefly in furni- 
ture, jewelry, pottery, and textiles. Most art deco design- 
ers created objects that could be mass-produced, rather 





Mahogany cabinet with kingwood veneer and tory inlay 
{about 1923! by Emile Jacques Ruhimann; Brooklyn Museum 


Art deco furniture, such as the cabinet shown here, has a look 
of sleek elegance that was characteristic of the style. 


than such individual works as paintings and sculptures. 
The term art deco comes from Exposition Internationale 
des Arts Décoratifs et Industriels Modernes, the title of a 
design exhibition held in Paris in 1925. 

Art deco was characterized by geometric shapes, 
smooth lines, and streamlined forms. It featured a look 
of sleek elegance that was associated with wealth and 
sophistication. Many art deco works were made of 
chrome, plastics, and other industrial materials. Art deco 
designers also used such expensive materials as crystal, 
ivory, and silver. The style was inspired by a variety of 
sources, including cubism and the art of ancient Ameri- 
ca. 

Art deco also influenced architecture. Many buildings 
in New York City have the metal ornamentation and geo- 
metric patterns typical of the style. One such structure is 
the Chrysler Building, with its soaring tower formed by 
bands of stainless steel arches. Radio City Music Hall's 
Curving stairways and round chandeliers also show the 
influence of art deco. Alison McNeil Kettenng 

See also Furniture (Art deco; picture). 

Art Institute of Chicago is a museum of art and a 
cultural and educational center. Collections displayed at 
the Art Institute include paintings and sculpture; prints 


Art nouveau 749 


and drawings; European and American decorative arts; 
Asian and classical art; photography; textiles; and the 
arts and crafts of Africa, Latin America, the Pacific Is- 
lands, and pre-Columbian America. 

The European painting collection, with examples from 
the 1300's to the present, is best known for its works by 
French impressionists and postimpressionists. The large 
collection of prints at the Art Institute contains unique 
examples by masters of the 1400's and important series 
by French artists of the 1800's. The Asian galleries show 
arts of the Far East, with notable collections of bronzes, 
sculpture, and Japanese prints. Furniture, glass, porce- 
lain, and metalwork are displayed in the galleries of the 
museum's Department of European Decorative Arts and 
Sculpture in the Rice Building. The building is also the 
location of one of the largest, most comprehensive col- 
lections of American art from the late 1600's to the pre- 
sent 

The Art Institute was founded in 1866 as the Chicago 
Academy of Design. In 1882, it was incorporated under 
its present name. It is governed by a board of trustees 
and supported mainly by private funds. The School of 
the Art Institute grants degrees in the visual and related 
arts. Critically reviewed by the Art Institute of Chicago 

See also Chicago (map; picture); Illinois (picture). 

Art museum. See Museum (Art museums). 

Art nouveau, noo VOH, was a decorative style of de- 
sign that flourished from the 1890's until about 1910. Art 
nouveau means new artin French. It comes from the 
name of a Paris art gallery, Maison de /Art Nouveau, 
which exhibited works created in this style of design. 

Art nouveau was an ornate style, characterized by 
long, flowing lines and wavelike contours often influ- 
enced by forms in nature. The style developed in part as 





Enamel paintings on crystal vases ‘about 1896: by Alphonse 
Mucha Fh By Nite Gallen) Chicago \WVWORLD BOOK photn 


Art nouveau is characterized by long, flowing lines that twist in 
snakelike fashion. The images on the vases shown here were 
painted in this style, which was popular about 1900. 


750 Artemis 


a protest against the mass production of the industrial 
age. It was used mainly for interior decoration and in the 
design of glassware, jewelry, and other ornamental ob- 
jects. Some artists used the art nouveau style for such 
graphic-design works as book illustrations and posters. 

The drawings of the English artist Aubrey Beardsley 
and the posters of Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec of France 
are outstanding examples of art nouveau graphic de- 
sign. Other leading figures in the art nouveau movement 
included Emile Galle of France and Louis Comfort 
Tiffany of the United States, both of whom created col- 
orful glassware. Such architects as Antonio Gaudi of 
Spain and Victor Horta of Belgium also incorporated el- 
ements of the style in their work. Alison MeNeil Kettering 

See also Beardsley, Aubrey V. (with picture); Furni- 
ture (Art nouveau; picture). 

Artemis, AHR tuh mihs, was a goddess in Greek 
mythology. She was the daughter of Zeus, the king of 
the gods, and the goddess Leto. The god Apollo was her 
twin. Artemis was sometimes identified with the moon 
goddess Selene. The Roman fertility goddess Diana 
closely resembled her. 

Artemis was the goddess of childbirth and female 
maturation. Young girls about to be married prayed to 
her and sometimes dedicated their dolls or a lock of 
hair to her. But Artemis could be cruel and destructive. 
She and Apollo killed the children of Niobe, queen of 
Thebes, after Niobe boasted that she had more children 
than Leto. The Greeks often blamed Artemis for the sud- 
den death of women. 

Artemis was a virgin goddess who demanded that her 
followers dedicate themselves to lives of purity. Accord- 
ing to one myth, Artemis shot one of her followers, the 
nymph Callisto, with an arrow after Callisto became 
pregnant by Zeus. Other sources say she transformed 
her into a bear. Several myths tell of attempts to rape 
Artemis and of her successful defense. 

Artemis was the goddess of wild animals and hunting. 
Artists showed her as a beautiful young huntress carry- 
ing a bow and a quiver of arrows, often with a deer at 
her side. 

See also Diana; Niobe; Arethusa; Iphigenia; Orion; 
Selene. 

Arteriosclerosis, ahr Hr ee oh skluh ROH sihs, is a 
disease of the arteries. It is often called “hardening of the 
arteries because it involves hardening, thickening, and 
loss of elasticity in the artery walls. 

There are several forms of arteriosclerosis. Two types 
are Monckebergs arteriosclerosis, in which the middle 
layer of the arteries becomes stiffened by calcium de- 
posits, and arteriolar sclerosis, which affects the bodys 
smaller arteries. But by far the most widespread form of 
arteriosclerosis is the type called atherosclerosis. Ather- 
osclerosis affects medium and large arteries, especially 
those that carry blood to the heart, brain, kidneys, and 
legs. The effects of the disease appear mainly in middle- 
aged or older people, but they may also strike young 
people. Atherosclerosis ranks as a major health problem 
in the United States and other developed countries. The 
remainder of this article discusses atherosclerosis. 

Causes. Atherosclerosis begins when certain fatty 
substances in the bloodstream~— particularly choles 
terol~ form deposits on the inner lining of the arteries. 
Over a period of years, these deposits, called fattv 


Nancy Felson 


streaks, enlarge and thicken to form plaques. The 
plaques have rough edges that irritate the smooth lining 
of the arteries, causing cells to die and scars to form. 
The build-up of dead cells, calcium, and scar tissue in 
the plaques makes the arteries hard and narrow, de- 
creasing the flow of blood. The rough surface of the ar- 
teries may cause a thrombus (blood clot) to form on the 
arterial wall. A thrombus can block an artery suddenly. 

Certain risk factors are associated with the develop- 
ment of atherosclerosis. Three major risk factors are Ay- 
pertension (high blood pressure), cigarette smoking, 
and high blood levels of cholesterol. Others include 
obesity, physical inactivity, and diabetes mellitus. 

Effects of atherosclerosis result from the decreased 
flow of blood through the diseased arteries. Tissues 
nourished by these arteries do not receive enough oxy- 
gen. A decrease in the blood supply to the brain can 
cause dizziness, numbness, slurred speech, and other 
symptoms. In the heart, decreased blood supply can 
produce severe chest pain called angina pectoris. The 
complete blockage of an artery supplying the heart or 
the brain results in a heart attack or a stroke, respective- 
ly. A reduced flow of blood to the kidneys may cause hy- 
pertension or kidney damage. In the legs, it may cause 
pain while walking, skin sores, or gangrene (death of tis- 
sue). 

Prevention and treatment. Most physicians believe 
that many cases of atherosclerosis can be prevented by 
reducing exposure to risk factors. Therefore, doctors ad- 
vise people to avoid cigarette smoking, to reduce if 
overweight, and to exercise regularly. Detection and 
control of hypertension and diabetes mellitus are espe- 
cially important. Many physicians also recommend a 
diet low in cholesterol and saturated fats. 

Treatment of atherosclerosis, like prevention, centers 
on reducing risk factors. Some patients also get drugs 
that lower the blood levels of cholesterol. If a major 
artery becomes obstructed, surgery may be needed. In 
severe cases, diseased arteries may be replaced or by- 
passed by grafts of natural or artificial vessels. Another 
technique, called angioplasty, involves threading a bal- 
loon-tipped catheter (slender tube) into the blocked 
artery. The balloon is then inflated, flattening the block- 
age against the artery wall. Toby R. Engel 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Aneurysm Chelation therapy 

Angina pectoris Heart (Coronary artery dis- 
Angioplasty ease) 

Artery Hypertension 

Cerebral hemorrhage Stroke 


Artery, AHR tuhr ee, is the name of the tubes or blood 
vessels through which blood is pumped away from the 
heart to the various parts of the body. The blood carried 
by most arteries is bright red because it has picked up 
oxygen while passing through the lungs. However, the 
blood that flows through the arteries connecting the 
right side of the heart with the lungs has not yet picked 
up oxygen. This blood has a brownish color. If an artery 
is cut, blood gushes out in spurts timed with the heart- 
beats. Veins differ from arteries because they carry the 
blood back to the heart instead of away from the heart. If 
a vein is Cut, blood flows from it in an even stream. 
When a large blood vessel has been cut by accident, 
the difference in the color and flow of the blood from 


i ae 





the vessel makes it possible to tell whether an artery or 
a vein has been injured. 

The walls of arteries are made up of three layers. 
The outer layer consists of elastic tissue, and the middle 
layer is muscle. The inner layer, or lining, of the arteries 
is made of thin, smooth cells of the same kind that line 
the other blood vessels and the heart. Each time the 
heart beats, the elastic walls of the arteries swell to 
make room for the blood forced into them. Then their 
muscular tissues slowly contract again. This squeezes 
the blood farther along the length of the arteries and to- 
ward the capillaries. In this way, the arteries do a con- 
siderable share of the work that keeps the blood circu- 
lating through the body. If the arteries had rigid instead 
of elastic walls, the heart would have to pump all the 
blood without the arteries assistance. As a result, the 
heart would work much harder than it does. This is what 
happens to persons who suffer from arteriosclerosis 
(hardening of the arteries). 

Principal arteries. The largest of all the arteries is 
the aorta. It is directly connected with a chamber of the 
heart. The heart pumps oxygenated blood through the 
aorta and its many branches to nearly all parts of the 
body. Two small but important branches of the aorta are 
the coronary arteries. They supply the blood by which 
the heart muscle itself is nourished. The right and left 
carotid arteries carry blood to the two sides of the head 
and neck. Blood flows through the right and left subc/a- 
vian arteries to the shoulders and arms. Numerous other 
branches of the aorta furnish blood to the internal or- 
gans. In the abdominal region the aorta divides into two 
large branches, the right and left i/iac arteries. These ar- 
teries have branches that supply the organs located in 
the pelvis. The iliac arteries then continue downward 
into the legs, where they become known as the femoral 
arteries. 

After the arterial blood has passed through the body 
and has picked up impurities, the veins collect it and re- 
turn it to another chamber of the heart. The heart pumps 
this blood through the pu/monary artery to the lungs. 


Muscular layer 


Internal layer 


Outer layer 


WORLD BOOK tllustration by Robert Demarest 
Cross section of an artery 








Arthritis 751 


Here the blood takes on a new store of oxygen. It then 
returns to the heart, where it is once more pumped out 
through the aorta. joseph V. Simone 

See also Aneurysm; Angioplasty; Aorta; Arterioscle- 
rosis; Blood; Heart; Vein. 

Artesian well, ahr 7EF zhuhn, is a well that taps 
ground water which is under pressure. Such water can 
rise to the surface without the aid of a pump if enough 
pressure exists. The term artesian well also refers to any 
extremely deep water well. 

Most artesian wells tap a layer of porous material 
filled with ground water. This layer, called an aquifer, 
may lie between two layers of clay or some other mate- 
rial that does not let water through. The aquifer may be 
tilted, allowing rainfall to refill it at its upper end. This 
water seeps down in the aquifer, supplying the reser- 
voir of ground water. An artesian well flows naturally 
because of the pressure exerted on water in the aquifer 


Permeable rack 
Impermeable rack 


Water level ar clay 


Aquifer 


Flawing 
artesian well 


WORLD BOOK diagram by Zortca Dabich 


An artesian well, as shown in this cross-section drawing, taps 
a layer of permeable rock filled with ground water. This aquifer, 
which lies between layers of impermeable material, is refilled 
from the rainfall at its upper end. Pressure exerted by the inflow- 
ing water causes the water in the aquifer to rise. 


by water entering at the aquifers upper end. 

Areas where artesian wells can be drilled are called 
artesian basins. The word artesian comes from Artois, a 
province in France, where artesian wells were first 
drilled during the 1100s. Douglas S. Cherkauer 

See also Australia (Underground water); Ground 
water. 

Arthritis, ahr THRY tihs, is any of more than 100 dis- 
eases of the joints. Victims of arthritis suffer pain, stiff- 
ness, and swelling in their joints. Many people are crip- 
pled by arthritis. Jn the United States, more than 31 
million people of all ages and backgrounds suffer from 
the disease. 

The terms arthritis and rheumatism are often used in- 
terchangeably. However, rheumatism is a more general 
term that refers to a variety of disorders of the joints, 
muscles, and connecting tissues. The two chief forms of 
arthritis are osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis. 

Osteoarthritis, also called degenerative joint dis- 
ease, occurs When a joint wears out. Many elderly peo- 
ple have osteoarthritis, and the disease may also occur if 
a joint has been injured many times. The joints most fre- 
quently affected are those of the hands, hips, knees, 
lower back, and neck. Severe disability may result, espe- 





752 Arthritis 
The two main types of arthritis 


Mam forms of arthritis can disable the joints. In a neal joint 
cartilage covers the ends of tre bones. In osteoarrinas, the Cart- 
lage disimegretes and the bones rub against one another. In 
rheumatoid arthritis. inflamed tissue in a joint leads to erosion of 
the cartilage and the bones Joints affected bv severe cases Of 
rheumatoid armnritis may staen in deformed postions. 


Healthy joints 





Certilece 










Disintegreting: 
cortiloge 


inflomed 
tissue — 





WORD S008 Pier steres oy Cranes Wieding 


cially if the hips or knees are badly diseaseo. 

Patients with osteoarthmtis sufer pain in the afflicted 
area and may feel a grating sensation when thev move. 
In osteoarthritis, the cartilage benween bones breaks 
down, causing those bones to rub against each other. 
Knobs of bone and of hardened bits of cartilage may de- 
velop én the jomt, causing swelling and detormim 

Physicians treat patents to relieve pain and prevent 
disability trom osteoarthrit ncludes drugs 
and special programs of exercise Surgeons may repair 
or replace some severely damagec jowtts Betause os- 
teoarthnitis affects millions of peopie. seeking new treat- 
ments IS an active area Of mMecia!l research, A new class 
of drugs called Cox-2 inhibstars, dewrioped m 1999. re 
liewes the pain and inflamma Of OStexarthintis with 
fewer sioe effects than aspini! sn! tther drtaas 

Rheumatoid arthritis is omer c2!'ed the “great crip 
pler. Most of its victims are benweer the ames of 
40, but it can strike children or elderly pexnle 

Joints afflicted by rheumatoid arthiritis ere har pein: 


s Treatment: 


i> = 
aa are 


red, and swollen. The disorder affects chiefly the wrists 
and knuckles, but it may occur in any joint In many cas- 
es. rheumatoid arthritis spreads throughout the body, 
damaging organs and connective tissue. If it remains 
uncheckec. the diseased joints eventually stifien in de- 
tormed positions. The disorder may remain throughout 
the patients life or disappear jor varying periods ot ime. 

In rheumatoid arthriis, inflamed tissue and other sub- 
stances in a joint erode the bone and cartilage. Phvsi- 
cians believe the disease is caused by either microor- 
ganisms or autoimmuniy tthe bodys attack on fis own 
tissues. or both |see Immune system Some people in- 
herit a tendency toward rheumatoid arthriis. 

Doctors try to prevent the disease from disabling its 
victims. Treatment includes rest, a program of exercises, 
and aspirin, Cox-2 inhibitors, or other drugs. In extreme- 
lv severe cases, doctors may give injections of a gold 
compound or prescribe powertul medications, such as 
metnotrexate. A badly damaged joint can be repaired or 
replaced. 

Other forms of arthritis include gout. ankylosing 
spondviris, and septic arthrias. Gout victims suffer re- 
peated flare-ups of paintul swelling, but they feel well 
between attacxs. The bunion joini, which connects the 
big toe and the ioot is afiecied first in most cases. Gout 
is caused by the presence o7 too much unc acid in the 
blood. During an attack, this chemical takes the torm of 
needie-shaped crvstals in the joints. Some people inher- 
it gout Alcoholic bewerages and rich tood can lead to an 
attack in people who have gout. but they do not cause 
the disease. Dociors prescribe drugs to reduce inilam- 
mation and prevent further attacks. See Gout 

Ankylosing spondylitis attacks chieflv voung men. The 
spinal joints become inflamed, and the patient develops 
a rigid. stooped back Most victims of the disease have a 
rare bDlooo pe called HLA B-27. Treatment consists ot 
physical therapy and drugs. 

Sepiic arthritis is infection of a joint by bacteria Its 
most common torms occur after a lung or skin infection, 
surgery on the joini. or anv of several sexually transmit- 
ted diseases. In most cases, earty treatment with antibi- 
otic drugs prevenis crippling. Muchae! D. Lockshae 

See also Rheumatology. 

Additional resources 
Breweron, Derrick All About Artoris Harvard Uni. Pr, 1992 
Coos, Allan 8, ed. Atanas Sourcebook Omnigraphics, 1999. 
Fries, James F. Arthritis. 3th ed. Perseus, 1999. 
Pisetsky David S., and Tren, S. F. The Duke Universay Medical 

Center Book of Arthras Fawcet, 1992. 

Arthropod, AHR thruh pahd. is any animal that be- 
longs to the major division, or phyium. ot the animal 
kingdom called the Arthropoda This term is formed 
trom two Greek words. and means jointed feet Actually, 
the legs. rather than the feet are jointed. All the Arthro- 
poda. or arthropods, have jointed legs. Among the most 
important groups ot arthropods are the following: !1! in- 
sects, including cockroaches, beetles. bees, butterflies. 
and manv others: !2) crustaceans, including such well- 
known animals as crabs. lobsters, shrimps. and barna- 
cles; |3) arachnids, including mites, ticks. spiders. and 
scorpions: }4) chilopods, or centipedes: and (5! diplo- 
pods, or millipedes. The arthropod phyium contains 
more than three-fourths of all the different kinds of ant- 
mals. Insects make up the largest class of arthropods 











OL 
EE 
————_ 








Crustoceon (crob) 














Insect (beetle) 


Chilopod (centipede) 


Arthroscopy 753 





Arachnid (spider) 





WORLD BOOK illustrations by james Teason 


Arthropods form a major division of the animal kingdom. All of these animals have jointed legs. 
Examples of some of the most important groups of arthropods are shown above. 


in terms of the number of species. 

The bodies of arthropods, as well as their legs, are 
made up of sections. Among some primitive arthropods, 
each section of the body has its own pair of legs. Most 
of these legs are used for swimming or walking. In 
some types of arthropods, certain legs have developed 
special shapes and uses. Some serve as sucking organs, 
some are jaws, some serve as weapons of offense and 
defense, and some are sense organs. Insects lack most 
of the pairs of legs found in other arthropods. They have 
only three pair. One pair is attached to each segment of 
an insect's chest or thorax. Insects also may have one or 
two pairs of wings. 

Arthropods have an outside shell, or exoskeleton, that 
contains a stiff, horny material called chitin. Certain ar- 
thropods, such as flies and moths, have only thin, weak 
shells. Others, including crabs and lobsters, have thick, 
strong shells. Nearly all arthropods have a kind of heart 
and blood system and usually a well-organized nervous 
system. Some arthropods have simple eyes, some have 
compound eyes, and some (including many insects) 
have eyes of both types. 

See also Arachnid; Centipede; Crustacean; Insect; 
Millipede. 

Arthroscopy, afr THRAHS kuh pee, is the technique 
of using an arthroscope to examine a joint of the body. 
An arthroscope is a straight, tubelike instrument with a 
series of lenses and optical-fiber bundles. It comes in 
sizes from + to + inch (2 to 5 millimeters) in diameter. It 
can be inserted into a joint through a small incision. A 
light transmitted by the optical fibers to the tip of the ar- 
throscope illuminates the joint. Using an arthroscope, a 
doctor can thoroughly examine a joint and perform cer- 
tain surgical operations. 


Sandra J. Glover 





Preston M. Wolin, M.0,, Rush-Presbylenan-St. Lukes Medical Center, Chicago 


Arthroscopy allows a physician to examine and treat joint 
problems. In the picture above, the tubelike arthroscope has 
been inserted into a patient's knee joint. 


Doctors use arthroscopy mainly on shoulder, elbow, 
hip, and knee joints. The problem most commonly 
treated by arthroscopy is torn cartilage in the knee. The 
doctor diagnoses this problem by looking into the knee 
joint through the arthroscope. Then the cartilage is re- 
moved with other instruments through a second inci- 
sion. 

The main advantage of arthroscopic surgery is that 
the operation can be performed through a small inci- 
sion at the joint. As a result, a patient can sometimes 
have the surgery and leave the hospital the same day. 
Also, the patient experiences a minimum amount of dis- 
comfort, and healing time is much shorter than for other 
methods of surgery. James A. Hill 


754 Arthur, Chester Alan 


21st President of 
the United States 1881-1885 





Garfield Arthur Cleveland 
20th President 21st President 22nd President 
1881 1881-1885 1885-1889 
Republican Republican Democrat 








Od painting on canvas (1884) by GPA Healey, Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington. D.C, gift of William Willson Corcoran 


Arthur, Chester Alan (1829-1886), became President 
after James A. Garfield died from an assassin’‘s bullet. Ar- 
thur was the fourth Vice President to succeed to the 
presidency upon the death of a chief executive. 

Arthur had risen rapidly in the Republican Party ma- 
chine (organization) of New York City. In 1871, he be- 
came collector of the New York Custom House, then the 
largest single federal office in the United States. Wide- 
spread dishonesty in government occurred during this 
period, and Arthur used his office to reward Republi- 
cans and strengthen the party. These actions contrib- 
uted to graft and waste in the custom house and led to 
his removal in 1878. 

As President, however, Arthur surprised the nation by 
the honesty and efficiency shown by his Administration. 
Protests by reformers about the dishonesty of previous 
administrations in the appointment of government offi- 
cials caused Congress to pass the Civil Service Act. Ar- 
thur signed the law and administered it faithfully. 

Arthur enjoyed fashionable surroundings and fine 
clothes. He also liked to entertain friends. Tall, ruddy, 
and handsome, Arthur was sometimes called the “Gen- 
tleman Boss. He traveled widely as President, attending 
the opening of the Brooklyn Bridge in New York City 
and touring Florida and Yellowstone National Park. 


Important dates in Arthur's life 


1829 (Oct. 5) Born in Fairfield, Vt. 
1859 (Oct. 25) Married Ellen Lewis Herndon. 
1871 Named collector of the New York Custom House. 
1880 (Jan. 12) Mrs. Ellen Arthur died. 

Elected Vice President of the Uniled States. 
1881 (Sept. 20) Sworn in as President 
1886 (Nov. 18) Died in New York City 


While Arthur was President, the United States cele- 
brated the 100th anniversary of the British surrender at 
Yorktown. New books included 7he Adventures of 
Huckleberry Finn and Life on the Mississippi by Mark 
Twain. Cities and towns throughout the United States 
and Canada began to adopt standard time after the rail- 
roads devised time zones to aid travelers. 


Early life 


Boyhood. Chester Alan Arthur was born on Oct. 5, 
1829, in Fairfield, Vt. He was the first son in a family of 
six girls and three boys. His father, William, had come to 
the United States from Northern Ireland. The elder Ar- 
thur was a teacher and Baptist minister. Chester's 
mother, Malvina Stone Arthur, grew up on her father's 
Vermont farm. Like many other rural ministers, William 
Arthur seldom stayed long at any one post. The family 
moved to various villages in Vermont and upstate New 
York. 

Chester was a good student and developed an early 
interest in politics. In 1844, at the age of 14, he sup- 
ported Henry Clay, the Whig Party's presidential candi- 
date, and got into a fight with some young opponents of 
Clay. “| have been in many a political battle since then,” 
Arthur later recalled, “but none livelier, or that more 
thoroughly enlisted me.” 

Legal career. At the age of 18, Arthur graduated 
trom Union College in Schenectady, N.Y. He began 
studying law and at the same time taught school. In 
1854, he became a partner in a New York City law firm. 
Arthur soon became known as a defender of the civil 
rights of blacks. The young lawyer won a case in 1855 
that established the right of blacks to ride on any street- 
car in New York City. 


——= 


Ee ee 





Marvels of engineering 
were erected in the 1880s. 
The Brooklyn Bridge, above, 
was the world’s longest sus- 
pension bridge when it open- 
ed in 1883. The Home Insur- 
ance Building in Chicago, /eft, 
was the first metal-frame sky- 
scraper. The structure was 
built in 1884 and 1885. 





Arthur's family. On Oct. 25, 1859, Arthur married 
Ellen Lewis Herndon (Aug. 30, 1837-Jan. 12, 1880), the 
daughter of a naval officer. The couple had two sons 
and a daughter, but the older boy died at the age of 21. 
Mrs. Arthur died a year before Arthur became Vice 


President, leaving him with their children, Chester, Jr., 
and Ellen. 


Political and public career 


Political growth. In 1854, Arthur attended a meeting 
that led to the creation of a Republican Party in New 
York. Edwin D. Morgan, a Republican, became governor 
of New York in 1859, and Republican friends of Arthur's 
got him a position on Morgan's staff. Morgan soon 
named Arthur state engineer-in-chief with the rank of 
brigadier general. After the Civil War began in 1861, 
Morgan put Arthur in charge of outfitting the New York 
militia for federal service. The governor appointed Ar- 
thur inspector general of the militia early in 1862 and 
later that year appointed him state quartermaster-gen- 
eral. 

Custom house collector. During the late 1860s, Ar- 
thur became an associate of Senator Roscoe Conkling of 
New York. Conkling was the leader of the New York Re- 
publican organization. To help this machine, President 
Ulysses S. Grant in 1871 appointed Arthur collector of 
the New York Custom House. The custom house, with 
more than 1,000 employees, was then the largest federal 
office in the nation. Officially, Arthur supervised the col- 
lection of import duties. But politically, he used the posi- 
tion to strengthen the Republican Party, largely by giv- 
ing jobs to party workers. 

Arthur soon became the leader of the party machine 
in New York City, and eventually became chairman of 





Arthur, Chester Alan 755 


The world of President Arthur 


Trade unionists Jed by Samuel Gompers founded the Fed- 
eration of Organized Trades and Labor Unions of the United 
States and Canada in November 1881. The group later reor- 
ganized as the American Federation of Labor. 
The Standard Oil Trust was formed in 1882 by John D. 
Rockefeller and his associates in the oil industry. The trust 
controlled about 90 per cent of the oil refining capacity in the 
United States until it was forced to disband in 1892. 
The germ that causes tuberculosis was discovered by 
German physician Robert Koch in 1882. 
Jesse James, a notorious bank and train robber, was killed 
by one of his own gang members, Robert Ford, in 1882. Ford 
shot James in order to receive a $5,000 reward. 
Popular entertainment took various forms in the early 
1880s. In 1883, William Frederick Cody, known as Buffalo Bill, 
organized his “Wild West Circus’ to tour the United States 
and Europe. That same year, the first vaudeville theater in the 
United States opened in Boston, and the Metropolitan Opera 
House opened in New York City. 
Standard time was adopted by the railroads in 1883. The 
four time zones in the United States replaced about 100 dif- 
ferent “railroad times.” 
The linotype machine was patented by German-born inven- 
tor Ottmar Mergenthaler in 1884. The machine greatly in- 
creased the speed of typesetting. 
The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain was 
published in England in 1884 and in the United States in 1885. 
The nove! became known as an American masterpiece. 


Leslie s Hlustrated Weekly, Newberry Library, Chicago; 
Brown Brothers 


the Republican state committee. All the customs em- 
ployees paid a portion of their salaries into Republican 
campaign funds. Some money collected for customs vi- 
olations also ended up in the treasury of the Republican 
Party. Politicians in all parts of the country took similar 
advantage of this so-called spoils system (see Spoils sys- 
tem). Reformers protested that such appointments re- 
sulted in incompetent and dishonest officials. After 
Rutherford B. Hayes became President of the United 
States in 1877, he issued an order forbidding govern- 


ment employees from taking part in the management of 
a political party. 





_ —— —— 


Vermont Dimsion of Histonc Preservation 
A replica of Arthur's birthplace stands in Fairtield, Vt. The 
state maintains the house and a small park as a memorial. 


756 Arthur, Chester Alan 





Library of Congress; 
© White House Historical Association 
(National Geographic Society! 


Ellen Herndon Arthur, 
above, died the year before 
her husband became Presi- 
dent. Arthur's youngest sister, 
Mary Arthur McElroy, right 
was his White House hostess. 





Hayes appointed a commission to investigate the 
New York Custom House. The commission uncovered 
evidence of corruption, inefficiency, and waste. It also 
found continued involvement by the top custom house 
officials in Republican Party affairs. in 1877, Hayes asked 
Arthur and two chief aides to resign. They replied that 
they would not give up their offices until, as then re- 
quired by law, the Senate had confirmed new appoint- 
ees. Hayes suspended Arthur and one of the aides in 
1878. Senator Conkling temporarily blocked the confir- 
mation of new appointees. The Senate approved the 
new officials early in 1879. 

Eftection of 1880. At the Republican National Conven- 
tion of 1880, Conkling’s machine supported former Pres- 
ident Grant for a third term. However, the convention 
nominated Senator-elect James A. Garfield of Ohio. The 
delegates then nominated Arthur for Vice President in 
hope of receiving support from Grant's followers. Gar- 
field and Arthur defeated their Democratic opponents, 
General Winfield Scott Hancock and former Congress- 
man William H. English of indiana (see Garfield, James 
A. [Election of 1880)). 

Opposition to Garfield. Arthur soon found himself 
in the middle of a quarrel between President Garfield 
and Senator Conkling. Conkling demanded that Garfield 
consult him on all federal appointments in New York. He 
became furious when Garfield named James G. Blaine, 
Conkling’s chief political enemy, as secretary of state 


and another old political opponent as collector of the 
New York Custom House. 

Conkling and Thomas C. Platt, the other New York 
senator, both resigned. They asked the New York Legis- 
lature to show its disapproval of Garfield by reelecting 
them to the Senate. Arthur shocked many political ob- 
servers by campaigning for his friends, but they were 
defeated. 

Assassination of Garfield. Garfield never had a 
chance to enjoy the benefits of his victory over Senator 
Conkling. He was shot by Charles J. Guiteau on July 2, 
1881, and died on September 19. Arthur took the presi- 
dential oath in his home in New York City at 2:15 a.m. the 
next day. 


Arthur's Administration (1881-1885) 


Life in the White House. Arthur thought the White 
House looked like “a badly kept barracks,” and ordered 
it renovated. During his first months as President, he 
lived in the Washington home of Senator John P. Jones 
of Nevada. Arthur moved into the redecorated White 
House on Dec. 7, 1881. The President, whose wife had 
died in 1880, asked his youngest sister, Mrs. Mary A. 
McElroy, to serve as his hostess. She won wide praise 
for her warm hospitality. 

About a year after Arthur became President, he 
learned that he was dying of a kidney disease called g/o- 
merulonephritis, or Bright's disease. Arthur often suf- 
fered great pain but kept his illness a secret. 

Civii service reform. Most Americans regarded Ar- 
thur as a machine politician. They believed he would op- 
pose civil service reform. But the assassination of Gar- 
field led to a great popular demand for a better system 
of filling public offices. In response to this demand, Con- 
gress passed the Pendleton Civil Service Act. Arthur 
signed the bill on Jan. 16, 1883. He named attorney Dor- 
man B. Eaton, the author of the bill, as chairman of the 
first Civil Service Commission. See Civil service (His- 
tory). 

The star route frauds. During Garfield's term, two 
of Arthur's close political allies had been charged with 
fraud. They were accused of obtaining money by giving 
false estimates on the cost of operating postal star 
routes. Arthur renewed the prosecutions, and his Ad- 
ministration worked vigorously for convictions. A jury 
acquitted the accused men after two trials. But the 
postal frauds were halted. 

The fight for lower tariffs. American consumers ex- 
erted pressure on the Arthur Administration to lower 





Arthur’s Cabinet 
Secretary of state ................ Frederick T. Frelinghuysen 
Secretary of the treasury ........ Charles J. Folger 

Walter Q. Gresham (1884) 

Hugh McCulloch (1884) 
Secretary of war ................. ‘Robert Todd Lincoln 
Attorney general ................. Benjamin H. Brewster 
Postmaster general .............. Timothy O. Howe 

Walter Q. Gresham (1883) 

Frank Hatton (1884) 
Secretary of the Navy ............ William H. Hunt 

William £. Chandler (1882) 
Secretary of the Interior ......... “Samuel J. Kirkwood 


Henry M. Teller (1882) 
“Has a separate biography in WORLD BOOK. 





import tariffs. In 1882, the president appointed a com- 
mission to study tariff rates. It urged sharp tariff cuts, but 
Congress ignored the commission and passed a law in 
1883 that lowered rates only slightly. 

Other legislation. In 1882, Congress authorized 
$18,743,875 to be spent on improvements for water- 
ways. Arthur knew many of the improvements were ex- 
travagant, and he vetoed the bill. But Congress passed 
the bill over Arthur's veto. 

The Edmunds Anti-Polygamy Act of 1882, aimed at the 
Mormons of Utah, made it illegal for a man to have 
more than one wife. Congress also passed a bill in 1882 
to prohibit Chinese immigration for 20 years. Arthur ve- 
toed the bill, saying it violated a treaty with China. Con- 
gress amended the bill to limit the suspension of Chi- 
nese immigration to 10 years, and it became law. Arthur 
also fought with some success to modernize the United 
States Navy. 

Election of 1884. Arthur worked hard to avoid major 
involvement in Republican Party affairs during his presi- 
dency. But in 1882, he was blamed for the defeat of 
Charles J. Folger, his secretary of the treasury, in the 
race for governor of New York. Folger lost to Democrat 
Grover Cleveland. High-ranking Republicans in the 
Arthur administration tried to build Republican strength 
in the South but achieved little. 

Because of his illness, Arthur quietly discouraged 
friends from working to help him win the Republican 
presidential nomination in 1884. He received about a 
third of the votes for the nomination at the Republican 
National Convention in Chicago. Former Secretary of 
State James G. Blaine won the nomination, but he lost 
the presidential election to Cleveland. 


Later years 


Arthur returned to New York City after leaving the 
presidency. His health steadily declined, and he died of 
a cerebral hemorrhage on Nov. 18, 1886. Arthur was 
buried beside his wife in the Rural Cemetery at Albany, 
New York. Thomas C. Reeves 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Civil service President of the United States 
Garfield, James A. Vice president of the United 
Oriental exclusion acts States (Tyler takes over) 


Outline 
I. Early life 
A. Boyhood C Arthur's family 


B. Legal career 

ll. Political and public career 
A. Political growth D. Opposition to Garfield 
B. Custom house collector E. Assassination of Garfield 
C Election of 1880 

i. Arthur’s administration (1881-1885) 
A. Life in the White House D. The fight for lower tariffs 
B. Civil service reform E. Other legislation 
C. The star route frauds F. Election of 1884 

IV. Later years 


Questions 


How did Arthur's administration surprise Americans? 

Why did Arthur win the Republican vice presidential nomina- 
tion in 1880? 

What action by Arthur helped give him a reputation as a friend 
of minority groups? 

Why was Arthur removed as custom house collector? 

What two important bills were adopted by Congress over 
Arthur's veto? 


Arthur, King 757 


Additional resources 


Reeves, Thomas C. Gentleman Boss: The Life of Chester Alan 
Arthur. 1975. Reprint. Am. Political Biography Pr., 1991. 

Young, Jeff C Chester A. Arthur. MyReportLinks.com, 2002. 
Younger readers. 


Arthur, King, was a legendary king of medieval 
Britain. He became the main character in some of the 
most popular stories in world literature. For almost 
1,000 years, writers have told of Arthur's brave deeds 
and the adventures of his knights of the Round Table. 

A real Arthur probably existed, but historians know lit- 
tle about him. Storytellers passed on the earliest tales 
about Arthur by word of mouth. These storytellers may 
have based the tales on an actual British leader who 
won minor victories over German invaders in the early 
A.D. 500's. 

The earliest accounts of Arthur were from Celtic, 
Latin, and French sources. In Latin sources, Arthur's fa- 
ther was King Uther Pendragon, who fell in love with 
Igrayne, the wife of the Duke of Cornwall. With the aid 
of Merlin, a Celtic magician, Uther took the form of the 
duke and so conceived Arthur. Arthur was raised with- 
out knowledge of his royal ancestry. But when he pulled 
the magic sword Excalibur from a block of stone, he 
proved himself the rightful heir to the throne of Britain 
and became king. Later, Arthur married Princess Guene- 
vere. Arthur had several residences. His favorite was 
Camelot, a castle in southern England. 

There are two versions of the events that led to 
Arthur's death. Both say he fought a war against the Ro- 
man emperor Lucius and conquered much of western 
Europe. Latin chronicles said he was called home before 
completing his conquest. He had heard that Modred, a 
knight who was either his nephew or his son, had 
seized his kingdom and queen. Arthur killed Modred 
but died from wounds received in the fight. 

Later authors wrote that Arthur had completed his vic- 
tory over the Romans. After he returned to Britain, 
Arthur and his court began the quest for the Holy Grail, 
sometimes depicted as the cup or dish that Jesus used 
at the Last Supper. After the quest ended, a love affair 
developed between Queen Guenevere and Sir Lancelot, 
the greatest knight of the Round Table. While fighting a 
war of revenge against Lancelot, Arthur learned of 
Modreds treachery. Then followed the battle that result- 
ed in the death of Arthur and Modred. Many people be- 
lieved that Arthur had gone to the otherworldly island of 
Avalon to be healed and that someday he would return 
to help his country. 

Sir Thomas Malory compiled his famous prose ro- 
mance Le Morte Darthur (about 1470) from much earlier 
French and English romances about Arthur. Many au- 
thors have based their novels or poems on Malory’s 
work. Edmund Reiss 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Camelot Literature for chil- Merlin 
Excalibur dren (picture: Round Table 
Holy Grail Great illustra- Tristan 

tors of the 

1900's) 


Additional resources 


For fictional accounts for younger readers, see Literature for 
children (Folk literature |Epics, ballads, and fables). 


Crossley-Holland, Kevin. The World of king Arthur and His 


758 Artichoke 


Court Dutton, 1999. Younger readers. 

Day, David. The Search for King Arthur. Facts on File, 1995. 

Fife, Graeme. Arthur the King. 1991. Reprint. Sterling Pub., 1994. 

Kennedy, Edward D., ed. King Arthur. 1996. Reprint. Routledge, 
2002. 

Lacy, Norris J., ed. The New Arthurian Encyclopedia. Rev. ed. Gar- 
land, 1996. 

Lacy, Norris J., and others. The Arthurian Handbook 2nd ed. Gar- 
land, 1997. 








WORLD 800K illustration by fill Coombs 


The artichoke has prickly leaves and an edible bud. 


Artichoke is a large, thistlelike plant that produces ed- 
ible flower buds. The scales and Aearts (centers) of the 
buds are eaten as vegetables. Artichokes provide a num- 
ber of vitamins and minerals. Artichokes are sometimes 
called globe artichokes. They originated in the Mediter- 
ranean region. In the United States, artichokes are 
grown commercially chiefly in California. 

Artichoke plants stand 3 to 5 feet (0.9 to 1.5 meters) tall 
and may spread over an area 5 to 6 feet (1.5 to 1.8 me- 
ters) in diameter. In the spring, the crown (top of the 
root) sprouts stems surrounded by large, coarse leaves. 
Round or oblong buds develop at the tips of the stems 
and branches. The buds are immature flowers and may 
range from light- to dark-green and may have a red or 
purple tint Buds weigh up to 1 pound (0.45 kilogram). 

Artichokes thrive in frost-free climates with cool, fog- 
gy summers. Commercial! growers usually start arti- 
chokes from shoots, though the plants can grow from 
seeds. Artichoke plants may live more than 15 vears. 
However, commercial growers usually replant their 
fields every three or four years to ensure strong. active 
growth. The buds are harvested before they mature. 
Some harvesting takes place in late summer and into the 
fall, but most of it is carried out the fo'lowing spring. 

A plant called /erusalem artichoke is related to the 
sunflower and is not a true artichoke. See Jerusalem ar 
tichoke. George R Hughes 

Scientific classification. The artichoke belomgs to the com 
posite family, Compositae. Its scientific name is Cynara scolv- 
Mus. 

Article, in grammar, is the name given to one ot three 
words —a, an, and the. They are classitied as determiners 


and sometimes considered a separate part of speech. 
Determiners are used before nouns. They place limits 
on the noun rather than adding description. 

The definite article is the word the. Speakers and 
writers use the before a noun when they believe their 
audience knows the identity of the noun that follows. 
The identity of the noun may be known because it refers 
to a unique person, place, object, action, quality, or idea 
For example, in the sentence “She visited the Statue of 
Liberty, the Statue of Liberty refers to a unique object. 
The identity of the noun may also have been stated or 
may somehow have been made clear. From the sen- 
tence ‘Nancy bought two TV sets and a radio but had to 
return the TVs, the TVs clearly refers to the two that 
Nancy bought “Hand me the hammer makes sense only 
if the listener knows which hammer. The definite article 
can also be used with proper names to distinguish one 
person from others that may have the same name: Is 
that the Michael Jordan” 

The indefinite articles are aand an. They are only 
used before singular nouns. Writers and speakers use 
the indefinite article when they believe their audience 
does not know the identity of the following noun. In the 
sentence Mary handed the book to a boy, the writer 
does not believe that the reader knows which boy. 

The article anis used before words beginning with a 
vowel sound, as in an elephant It is also correct to say 
an heir, because the fat the beginning of Aeiris silent 
However, ais used in the expression a one-sided argu- 
ment because one begins with a w sound. 

General use of articles. Sometimes articles refer to 
an entire class of objects instead of particular ones. For 
example, it is possible to talk of elephants in general in 
each of the following ways: The elephant has long 
tusks.” “An elephant has long tusks.” “Elephants have long 
tusks.” However, when the idea of the sentence only ap- 
plies to an entire class, aand an cannot be used. For this 
reason, one cannot say An elephant is in danger of ex- 
tinction.” 

Usage of articles is often inconsistent For example, 
we say to school but to the library. Such nouns as flour 
and milk, which are thought of collectively, do not re- 
quire articles: “Milk is good for you.” 

Using or omitting the article often changes the mean- 
ing of a sentence. The following three sentences are ex- 
amples: “A revolution changed the government The 
revolution changed the government “Revolution 
changed the government The first sentence mentions a 
revolution, but does not specify any particular one. The 
second sentence refers to a particular revolution previ- 
ously mentioned or known to the reader. The third sen- 
tence refers to revolution as a process. Unnecessary arti- 
cles often appear after such expressions as kind ofor 
sort of For example, that kind of hat, not that kind of a 
hat, is standard usage. Susan M. Gass 
Articles of Confederation was the agreement un- 
der which the 13 original states established a federal 
government in 1781. The states called their confedera- 
tion the United States of America, continuing the name 
used in the Declaration of Independence. The Articles of 
Contederation served as the new nations basic charter 
of government until the first government under the Con- 
stitution of the United States was formed in 1789. The 
Congress of the Confederation operated the govern- 


———== 


ment under the Articles of Confederation. 

The Articles attempted to balance the need for an ef- 
fective national government with the traditional inde- 
pendence of each state. The document guaranteed each 
state sovereignty and granted each state one vote in 
Congress. Under the Articles, Congress could not levy 
taxes, regulate trade, or force states to fulfill their obliga- 
tions. However, the Articles did allow Congress to de- 
clare war and peace, manage foreign relations, establish 
and command an army and navy, and issue and borrow 
money. 

The Second Continental Congress drafted the Articles 
of Confederation. Richard Henry Lee of Virginia first pro- 
posed the establishment of a confederation in the Con- 
gress on June 7, 1776. Congress appointed a committee 
to draw up a plan of union. Within a month, John Dickin- 
son of Pennsylvania prepared a first draft. On Nov. 15, 
1777, Congress adopted a final version. By 1779, all the 
states except Maryland had ratified (approved) it. Mary- 
land withheld its approval until Virginia, New York, and 
other states had agreed to give Congress title to lands 
the states had claimed northwest of the Ohio River. The 
states promised to do so, and Maryland approved the 
Articles on March 1, 1781. The Articles went into effect 
on that date. 

Even at the time the Articles of Confederation went 
into effect, many national leaders thought that the agree- 
ment did not give Congress enough power to operate 
effectively. But amendments were difficult to pass be- 
cause all 13 states had to approve them. By 1786, James 
Madison, Alexander Hamilton, and others were con- 
vinced that a general convention was needed to make 
changes in the Articles. In September 1786, delegates 
from five states met at Annapolis, Maryland, and pro- 
posed that such a convention meet in Philadelphia in 
May 1787. Eventually, every state approved the proposal 
except Rhode Island. 

The Constitutional Convention quickly agreed that the 
Articles had to be abandoned. The convention delegates 
wrote an entirely new document to replace the Arti- 
cles—the Constitution of the United States. The Constitu- 
tion greatly increased the power of Congress. It was rati- 
fied in June 1768. Jack N. Rakove 

See also Annapolis Convention; Congress of the 
Confederation; Constitution of the United States; Conti- 
nental Congress. 


Additional resources 


Jensen, Merrill. Articles of Confederation. 1940. Reprint. Univ. of 
Wis. Pr., 1959. The New Nation: A History of the United States 
During the Confederation, 1781-1789. 1950. Reprint. Univ. Pr. of 
New England, 1981. 

Pleasants, Samuel A., Ill. The Articles of Confederation. Merrill, 
1968. 

Rakove, Jack N. The Beginnings of National Politics: An Interpre- 
tative History of the Continental Congress. 1979. Reprint. Johris 
Hopkins, 1982. 


Articles of War governed the conduct of United 
States Army personnel until 1951, when the Uniform 
Code of Military Justice became effective. The Continen- 
tal Congress adopted the articles in 1775 to administer 
justice and enforce discipline in the Continental Army. 
The Articles of War were based on a British Army Code 
adopted in the English Mutiny Act of 1689. They were 
revised in 1776, 1786, 1806, and again in 1916. Congress 


Artificial heart 759 


made other changes after both World Wars | and II, 
chiefly to assure more leniency in the articles. In 1950, it 
established the Uniform Code of Military Justice and ap- 
plied it to all branches of the U.S. armed services. The 
Uniform Code replaced the Articles of War. 

Joel D. Meyerson 

See also Uniform Code of Military Justice. 
Artificial eye is worn by a person who has had an eye 
removed because of disease or injury. When the eye is 
removed, a surgeon cuts free the optic nerve and the 
muscles that move the eye. The surgeon places a plastic, 
metal, or ceramic ball into the cavity and sews the mus- 
cles and conjunctival tissue together in front of the ball. 

The artificial eye itself is a curved shell of lightweight 
plastic or glass that is painted to match the normal eye. 
It fits between the eyelids and the tissue covering the 
ball. Muscle movement causes the artificial eye to move. 
If movement is good, it is hard to notice an artificial eye. 
An artificial eye requires little care. David E. Eifrig 
Artificial heart is a device designed to replace a nat- 
ural heart. Like the natural heart, it has two ventricles 
(chambers) that pump blood through the body. One ven- 
tricle supplies blood to the lungs, and the other pro- 
vides circulation for the rest of the body. Artificial hearts 
are currently used in extremely ill patients awaiting a 
donor heart for transplantation. Artificial hearts are de- 
signed to fit in the space that remains when a diseased 
natural heart is removed. 


An air-powered artificial heart 


Like a natural heart, an air-powered artificial heart has two ventri- 
cles (chambers). Each ventricle has inlet and outlet valves. A disk- 
shaped pumping mechanism in each ventricle expands and con- 
tracts to send blood through the body. Air tubes connect the 
ventricles with a power system that drives the pumps. 

WORLD BOOK illustrations by Leonard Morgan 





Air tubes 





Natural heart 


“AY 


Artificial heart in place 





Valves 





+ 
Pumping 
mechanism 


A 
Ventricles 


Air tubes 








760 Artificial intelligence 


Artificial hearts consist of two pumps, each with sepa- 
rate inlet and outlet valves, and a system to regulate the 
pumping rate. Materials used to make artificial hearts in- 
clude polyurethane and other plastics, and titanium. 

The artificial heart was invented by scientists led by 
Willem Kolff, a Dutch-born physician. He first tested the 
device in an animal in 1957. The first use of an artificial 
heart in a human being occurred in 1969. That year, a 
team of surgeons headed by Denton A. Cooley of the 
Texas Heart Institute used the device to temporarily sup- 
port blood circulation in a patient until a natural heart 
became available for transplantation. 

Scientists have worked to develop an artificial heart 
that can permanently replace a diseased human heart. In 
1982, a surgical team led by William C DeVries of the 
University of Utah implanted an air-powered device as 
the first permanent artificial heart. The device used, an 
air-powered Jarvik-7 heart, was designed by the Ameri- 
can physician Robert K Jarvik. The recipient, Barney B. 
Clark, survived for 112 days. Several other patients also 
received Jarvik hearts as permanent replacements, and 
one survived for 620 days. 

Scientists abandoned air-powered permanent artifi- 
cial hearts, however, in the late 1980's. Some patients 
had suffered strokes caused by blood clots that formed 
in the pumps and then broke off and blocked brain ar- 
teries. Scientists also had become concerned for the pa- 
tients quality of life. The device had a large external 
power unit that hampered movement and air tubes that 
passed through the skin. 

In the 1990's, scientists concentrated on developing 
an artificial heart run by a compact electric motor inside 
the body and a battery pack outside. A process called in- 
ductive coupling transmits power from the batteries to 
the motor without piercing the skin. This new type of ar- 
tificial heart was introduced in 2001. The recipient died 
151 days later from complications unrelated to the func- 
tion of the heart. Other patients have since received the 
device. William S. Pierce 
Artificial Intelligence (AD) is a branch of computer 
science that strives to design systems that process infor- 
mation in a manner similar to the way a person thinks. A 
computer with artificial intelligence could perform such 
tasks as understanding language, planning to accom- 
plish goals, learning from experience, and perceiving 
the world through vision, hearing, and other senses. 

Al as a scientific field began at a workshop at Dart- 
mouth College in 1956. John McCarthy, a Dartmouth 
professor, organized the workshop and coined the 
name of the new discipline. At the meeting, scientists 
presented the first computer programs capable of logi- 
cal reasoning, learning, and playing board games. 

Al is typically divided into six main categories: (1) 
knowledge representation and reasoning, (2) planning 
and problem solving, (3) natural language processing, (4) 
machine learning, '5! computer vision, and (6) robotics. 

Knowledge representation and reasoning are two 
core problems in Al. There are three main approaches 
to these problems. |1) the logical approach. (2) the prob- 
abilistic approach, and 3) the neural network approach. 

In the logical approach. programs reach conclusions 
based on series ot it-then rules. A simple series of such 
rules might be structured as ‘If x is true and y istrue 
then zis true. The logical approach has led to the devel- 





opment of expert systems that solve particular problems. 
Such systems have been used in such fields as chem- 
istry, geology, and medicine. However, each program 
requires many detailed rules and cannot reason effec- 
tively outside a narrow range of expertise. 

In the probabilistic approach, knowledge is repre- 
sented as numerical probabilities. Reasoning involves 
computing the probability of alternative conclusions giv- 
en specific evidence. 

In the neural network approach, knowledge is repre- 
sented as a network of interconnected units that can 
perform certain tasks by exchanging information. This 
approach mimics the behavior of neurons, the cells in 
the brain that process information. 

Planning and problem solving programs may seek 
sequences of actions that accomplish specified goals. 
Such programs search a large number of alternative 
plans guided by /euristics, rules that direct the search 
toward promising solutions. A common type of problem 
solving involves playing board games. Computers have 
been programmed so that they can play many board 
games at the level of the best human players. 

Natural language processing involves computer 
programs that communicate in a human language, such 
as English, instead of a specialized programming lan- 
guage. Scientists have developed logical, probabilistic, 
and neural network systems for understanding natural 
language. Modern systems can successfully carry on 
conversations about a narrow topic, such as making air- 
line reservations. But they can understand and produce 
only a limited range of sentences. 

Machine learning involves computer programs that 
learn from examples and from experience. The 1956 
Dartmouth workshop presented the first program that 
learned to play checkers by competing against a copy of 
itself. Other programs have learned to play backgam- 
mon and to recognize human speech and handwriting. 

Computer vision attempts to build computers that 
Can recognize patterns and objects in visual images. Vi- 
sion systems first extract image features, such as edges 
and textures, then use rules or neural networks to iden- 
tify objects in the scene. For example, systems can iden- 
tify military equipment in aerial images. 

Robotics studies the control of mechanical robots. 
Robots must control their motion to manipulate objects 
and avoid obstacles. Robotics enables machines to per- 
form complicated tasks by combining motion planning, 
interpretation of visual and sound information, and artifi- 
cial speech. Raymond J. Mooney 

See also Robot; Turing, Alan M. 

Artificial limb is a synthetic replacement for an arm 
or leg lost as the result of injury, disease, or a birth de- 
tect. An artificial limb is also called a prosthesis. No artifi- 
cial limb can perform all the functions of a human limb, 
but a well-fitted prosthesis.can help a person participate 
in most everyday activities. 

Preparation of an artificial limb. A prosthesis must 
be custom made for each patient. In most cases involv- 
ing an amputated limb, the remaining stump must heal 
and shrink before it can be fitted with a permanent pros- 
thesis. For several weeks, the stump may be wrapped 
tightly with elastic bandages to help it shrink to a firm, 
smooth surface. In some cases, the person wears a rigid 
plaster cast, to which a temporary prosthesis can be at- 








Artificial 
hand 


Electrodes 


Wrist 


Socket rotator 


Prosthetic 
hook 


Elbow drive 
system 


WORLD BOOK diagram by Bill Anderson 


A myoelectric artificial arm responds to muscle contractions 
in the remaining upper arm or shoulder. The contractions gener- 
ate a tiny electric current, which is picked up by electrodes in 
the socket of the artificial arm. The current controls the output of 
the battery pack, which powers a motor that bends the elbow. 
The arm can be fitted with an artificial hand or a prosthetic hook. 


tached. During this time, the person exercises the re- 
maining limb muscles to preserve their strength and 
movement, and to promote circulation. 

The next step in preparing a prosthesis involves mak- 
ing a plastic socket that will fit over the stump snugly 
and comfortably. A cast for the socket may be obtained 
by wrapping the stump with bandages soaked in wet 
plaster and letting them harden. After the bandages are 
removed, they form a mold. Liquid plaster poured into 
this mold provides a model of the stump. A plastic sock- 
et is then formed over the model. 

An artificial arm or leg is attached to the socket. Mate- 
rials used in making artificial limbs include plastic, fiber- 
glass, metal, and wood. Light metal supports attached to 
the socket may contain an artificial joint to replace an el- 
bow or a knee. The prosthesis ends in a substitute hand 
or foot. Hand substitutes look like a real hand. A foot 
substitute has the same general shape as a normal foot. 
Most prostheses stay on the body with straps or suction. 

Control of artificial limbs. Most artificial arms are 
controlled by a cable that loops around the opposite 
shoulder. Movements of that shoulder produce move- 
ment in the arm prosthesis. Artificial legs are chiefly 
controlled by the body's normal walking movements. 

In the early 1960's, researchers developed a type of 
prosthesis that was controlled by myoelectricity—the 
electric current produced when a muscle contracts. 
Metal disks inside the socket rest against the skin of the 
stump. The disks pick up myoelectric impulses, which 
are then amplified and used to control an electric motor 
in the prosthesis. In most myoelectric arms, impulses 
from one muscle bend the arm, and those from another 
muscle straighten it. Similarly, impulses from one arm 
muscle open a myoelectric hand, and those from anoth- 
er muscle close it. These actions are somewhat like an 
arm's natural muscle contractions. Dudley S. Childress 

See also Disabled (picture: Rehabilitation of a dis- 
abled person); Engineering (picture: Biomedical engi- 
neers); Occupational therapy; Prosthetics. 





Artificial turf 761 


Additional resources 


Kettelkamp, Larry. High Tech for the Handicapped. Enslow, 1991. 
Wilson, A. Bennett, Jr. Limb Prosthetics. 6th ed. Demos Pubns., 

1989. 

Artificial respiration. See First aid (Giving artificial 
respiration). 

Artificial satellite. See Satellite, Artificial. 
Artificial sweetener is a synthetic substance used in 
food and beverages in place of sugar. Artificial sweeten- 
ers are sweeter and have fewer calories than sucrose 
(table sugar). They are widely used by people dieting to 
lose weight and by people with diabetes. 

In the United States, the Food and Drug Administra- 
tion (FDA) regulates the use of artificial sweeteners. The 
FDA has prohibited the use of several of the substances 
because experiments indicated they could cause cancer 
in people. For example, artificial sweeteners called cy- 
clamates were banned in the United States in 1970. 
However, they are still used in other countries. The artifi- 
cial sweeteners approved for use in the United States 
are aspartame, saccharin, acesulfame-K, and sucralose. 

Aspartame is the most widely used artificial sweeten- 
er. Itis derived from aspartic acid and phenylalanine, 
chemicals that occur in some foods. It is about 200 times 
as sweet as sucrose. Aspartame was first produced in 
1965. Early experiments suggested that eating large 
amounts of it might cause brain damage. But in 1981, the 
FDA concluded that aspartame posed no significant 
health risk. The FDA has approved it for use in breakfast 
cereals, soft drinks, chewing gum, and other products. 

Saccharin is about 300 times as sweet as sucrose. It is 
made from toluene and from petroleum. Testing done 
in the mid-1970's indicated that large doses of saccharin 
produced cancer in rats and that it may do so in people 
as well. Several countries have banned the use of sac- 
charin. In 1977, the FDA took steps to ban saccharin use 
in the United States. But Congress postponed the ban. In 
1981, the National Toxicology Program (NTP), a part of 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
added saccharin to its list of known human carcinogens 
(substances that can cause cancer). But in 2000, the NTP 
removed it from the list. The NTP said that the link to 
cancer does not apply to human beings. See Saccharin. 

Acesulfame-K, also called acesulfame-potassium, is 
derived from acetoacetic acid. It is about 200 times as 
sweet as sucrose. The FDA approved the use of acesul- 
fame-K in dry goods in 1988. The sweetener is now used 
in many other products, including yogurt, baked goods, 
and soft drinks, and as a sugar substitute. 

Sucralose is about 600 times as sweet as sucrose. It is 
made from modified sugar molecules. The body does 
not recognize it as a sugar and so does not absorb it. 
Thus, sucralose supplies no calories. The FDA approved 
the sweetener in 1998 for use in the same foods for 
which aspartame has been approved. Canada has also 
approved the use of sucralose. 

See also Food additive. 
Artificial turf is a manufactured product that looks 
like grass. Athletic stadiums and recreation departments 
use it as a playing surface for indoor and outdoor activi- 
ties. Artificial turf is also used in landscaping, patios, 
highway medians, and doormats. Manufacturers have 
developed many varieties of artificial turf since it first 
came into use in the early 1960's. 


Johanna T. Dwyer 


762 Artigas, José Gervasio 


The surface of artificial turf consists of tough nylon 
fibers or similar material woven into a base pad of the 
same material like a household carpet The base pad is 
glued to a rubber pad about 1 inch (2.5 centimeters: 
thick. The rubber pad is glued to a foundation consist- 
ing of a layer of asphalt about 5 inches (12.5 centimeters) 
thick that covers a layer of gravel or other porous mater- 
ial about 18 inches (46 centimeters) thick Modern foun- 
dations have special drainage systems that prevent wa- 
ter from accumulating on the playing surface. 

Unlike grass, artificial turf does not require costly care 
and is not damaged by hard use in sports. Its surface 
stays smooth and even, and weather does not affect it 
Artificial turf also has some disadvantages. Some ath- 
letes and doctors believe that the additional traction and 
the hard subsurface cause knee injuries. The turf also 
becomes hot in warm weather because the asphalt ab- 
sorbs heat John L O'Donnell 
Artigas, ahr TEE gahs, José Gervasio, hoh SAY hehr 
VAH syoh (1764-1850), was a leader in Uruguay's strug- 
gle for independence. In the early 1800's, he raised an 
army to free Uruguay from Spain. In 1814, however, 
troops from Argentina captured Montevideo, Uruguay's 
chief city. In 1815, Artigas gained control of Montevideo 
for Uruguay. For a short time that year, he governed 
most of Uruguay and parts of Argentina. But Portuguese 
troops from Brazil captured Montevideo in 1817, and 
Artigas fled to Paraguay in 1820. Uruguay did not gain its 
independence until 1828. Artigas was born in Montev- 
ideo. See Uruguay (Independence). Michael L Connift 
Artillery, ahr TIHL uhr ee, includes mounted guns or 
rocket launchers that are too large or too heavy to be 
classed as small arms. In the United States, any gun or 
launcher that uses ammunition 1 inch (2.5 centimeters!) 
or more in diameter, and that is not fired from the hand 
or shoulder, is called artillery. 


Parts of a gun 


An artillery piece consists of a barre/‘tube! with two 
Openings. The opening where the shell comes out is the 
muzzle. The breech is the opening where the ammuni- 
tion is inserted. The weapons size is given in terms of its 





S_Anmy 


Antiaircraft artillery protects t nstallations 
from air attack. A Vulcan 20-n shown here. has 


six rotating barrels and car vy $ per minute. 





LS. Army 
Field artillery like this howitzer support infantry and armored 
forces. Light and medium artillery, which range from 75 to 155 
millimeters, can be transported by truck or helicopter. 


caliber(diameter of the bore or ammunition). The 
breechblock closes the breech and usually contains the 
firing pin or firing mechanism. 

Guns may have either a rifled or a smooth bore. Rifled 
bores have spiraled grooves that spin and steady the 
shell, so it will travel nose-first to the target. Smooth- 
bore guns use ammunition with fins that steady shells in 
flight The firing mechanism contains a primer for large 
caliber guns, or a firing pin for smaller weapons. The 
primer ignites the propellant in the ammunition. The 
propellant develops a very high pressure that forces the 
projectile out of the muzzle at high velocity (speed). 


Kinds of artillery 


Artillery is classified according to size as light artillery, 
medium artillery, and heavy artillery. It may also be clas- 
sified by the trajectory (curved path of flight) it imparts to 
the projectile. Guns use a low, flat trajectory at high 
muzzle velocity. Howitzers use a high arc trajectory 
against targets hidden behind obstacles. Mortars, rocket 
launchers, and recoilless rifles are often considered ar- 
tillery. Mortars usually have a smooth bore and are 
loaded from the muzzle. They send projectiles in higher 
arc trajectories than howitzers. Rocket /aunchers start 
the rockets on their flights. Recoilless rifles tire shells the 
size of small caliber artillery shells. They are much 
lighter than other artillery weapons. These rifles may be 
carried by hand or mounted on vehicles. 

Field artillery is used to support infantry and ar- 
mored forces. The weapons may be towed by tractors 
or trucks or mounted on vehicles so they can be 
brought into action quickly. They vary in size from guns 
firing 1-pound (0.5-kilogram) projectiles to those firing 
350-pound (159-kilogram) projectiles. Ammunition trail- 
ers and tractors have replaced the ca/ssons (ammunition 
wagons) that were once used to carry ammunition for 
field artillery. Weapons ranging from 75 to 125 millime- 
ters are mounted on tanks and tank destroyers. Surface- 
to-surface guided missiles supplement field artillery. 

Antiaircraft artillery can fire shells rapidly at high 
angles. The guns are usually aimed at the target by elec- 
tronic automatic fire control systems. Generally, special 
fuses are used to explode the shells in the area of the 


_— ——— ————— 
——EE——————— or -SCCCrrtrS— 


I 


———— 
ey ee ~~ 


———————— 


——_ a 


ee ee Re a 
ee ee 





US Army 


A self-propelled howitzer, shown here, can be driven without 
being towed. This 155-millimeter howitzer can fire 95-pound (43- 
kilogram) shells about 9 miles (14 kilometers). 


target. Antiaircraft guns are often supported by surface- 
to-air missiles. 

Other artillery. Cannon mounted in airplanes and 
helicopters and on naval vessels are sometimes called 
artillery. See Air force; Cannon; Warship. 


How artillery is made 


Until after the American Civil War (1861-1865), almost 
all cannon were cast in brass, bronze, or cast iron. To 
make the cannon stronger, manufacturers added more 
metal to make the barrel walls thicker. 

Later in the 1800's, manufacturers made larger guns 
by forging. \n forging, workers melt the steel in a fur- 
nace, then pour it into a gun or ingot mold to cool. They 
reheat the metal to about 2100 °F (1150 °C) and use hy- 
draulic hammers or presses to forge it into shape. 

The monoblock process. Most gun tubes today are 
made by the mono-block method because of the devel- 
opment of high-strength steels. By this process, manu- 
facturers make the tube stronger by expanding it under 
internal pressure until the interior diameter of the tube 
has been permanently enlarged. The outer layers of 
metal tend to shrink to their original dimensions when 
the pressure is released, but the inner layers tend to 





U.S Army 


Hawk missiles, shown here, can attack aircraft flying as low as 
100 feet (30 meters). The Hawk uses a radar echo from its target 
to locate the target. These missiles are 12 feet (3.7 meters) long. 


Arts, American Federation of 763 


keep their enlarged diameter. This compresses the in- 
ner layers. This process is also called cold working or 
autofrettage. After the tube has been formed, it is an- 
nealed (tempered) by being heated and slowly cooled. 
Workers then machine it to its final specifications. 

Rifling. After final machining, the gun is rifled. in this 
process, workers cut grooves in the finished bore sur- 
face of the gun. Instead of cutting these grooves directly 
into the barrel, workers sometimes cut them into a sepa- 
rate tube called a /iner, which can be inserted into the 
barrel. One advantage of a rifled liner is that it can be re- 
placed with a new liner when it becomes worn. But 
higher construction costs have limited their use. 


History 


Artillery was first used during the 1300's. The French 
used small cannon against the English in 1450, and the 
Ottomans under Mehmet II used artillery in the final 
campaign to capture Constantinople in 1453. From these 
early beginnings, guns have increased enormously in 
size, firepower, and accuracy. Artillery played an ever-in- 
creasing part in battles. Napoleon was the first general 
to collect his artillery in a grande batterie (big battery). 
He concentrated his artillery fire on one point in the en- 
emys line, and then sent troops against that point. 

During World War | (1914-1918), troops on the West- 
ern Front dug great mazes of trenches and fought from 
fairly fixed positions. Much of the fighting consisted of 
exchanges of fire between big-gun batteries. In 1918, the 
Germans shelled Paris with guns known at the time as 
“Big Berthas.” These huge guns hurled shells 15 5 miles 
(24.9 kilometers) above the surface of the earth toward a 
target up to 75 miles (120 kilometers) away. 

Giant guns had little place in World War II (1939-1945). 
They could not move fast enough to keep up with the 
rapid changes in battle lines. Airplanes could easily de- 
stroy fixed batteries of large guns. The greatest artillery 

advances during the war were in the power and mobili- 
ty of smaller weapons. Helicopters now carry artillery 
into battle in a procedure known as airmobility. 

On May 29, 1953, the United States fired the first 
atomic artillery shell from a 280-millimeter cannon. To- 
day, artillery weapons of smaller calibers can fire atomic 
projectiles. Joel D. Meyerson 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Ammunition Civil War (picture: Mortar 
Army Major Civil War Range finder 
Army, United weapons) Shrapnel 
States (Artillery) Firearm Tank 
Ballistics Guided missile World War | 
Cannon Gun World War Il 
Krupp 


Artist. See Advertising (Careers); Commercial art; 
Clothing (Career opportunities); Map (Planning and 
graphic design). See also Drawing; Painting; Sculpture. 
Arts. See Art and the arts. 

Arts, American Federation of (AFA), is a nonprofit 
service organization that aims to broaden public knowl- 
edge and appreciation of historical and contemporary 
art. Each year, the AFA organizes or circulates about 50 
art exhibitions to member museums, university art gal- 
leries, and cultural centers throughout the United States 
and other countries. It also organizes exhibitions of fine 
art, decorative art, architecture and design, photogra- 
phy, and film and video. About 600 art institutions be- 





me: ll itm 


764 Arts and crafts 


long to the organization, which was founded in 1909. 
AFA headquarters are in New York City. 

Cripcally reviewed bv the AFA 
Arts and crafts. See the Arts section in warious coun- 
try and continent articles. See also Handicraft; Hobby; 
Indian, American (Arts and crafts). 

Arts and Sciences, American Academy of, is 
one of the oldest learned societies in the United States. 
It was founded in 1780 to advance research and to pro- 
mote the study of national and international problems. It 
has about 3,300 members. Members are chosen for 
achievements in scholarship, the arts, the professions, 
or public affairs. 

The academy administers funds for research and 
awards prizes for outstanding achievement, including 
the Rumford Medal in the physical and biological sci- 
ences and the Emerson-Thoreau Medal in literature. 
One of the academy s main activities is to appraise cur- 
rent and emerging issues in such areas as arms control, 
education, and economic development The academy 
publishes the journal Daeda/us. Headquarters of the 
academy are in Cambridge, Massachusetts. 

Crincallhy reviewed bv the American Acaderm of Arts and Sciences 
Aruba, ah ROO bah, is an island in the West Indies that 
belongs to the Netherlands. For location, see West In- 
dies (map). Aruba covers 75 square miles (193 square 
kilometers) and has a population of about 112,000. Oran- 
jestad is the capital and largest city. 

Aruba is a hilly, rocky island that supports little agri- 
culture. But it has coral reefs, white sand beaches, and a 
warm, dry climate that attract many tounsts. Aruba s 
population includes American Indians, blacks, whites, 
and people of mixed ancestry. Most of the people work 
in government jobs, in the tourist business, or in a refin- 
ing industry that processes crude oil imported from 
nearby Venezuela 

American Indians were the first inhabitants of Aruba 
The Netherlands gained control of the island in 1634. It 
made Aruba part of its island colony called the Nether- 
lands Antilles see Netherlands Antilles!. In the mid- 
1970s, some Arubans began seeking independence 
from both the Netherlands and the other islands of the 
Netherlands Antilles. An agreement between Aruba and 
the Netherlands resulted in Aruba 's separation from the 
Netherlands Antilles in 1986. Aruba has self-government, 
but the Netherlands is responsible for its defense and 
foreign affairs. 
Arum, AIR uhm, is the name of a large family of plants. 
There are over 2,000 species of arums. Most grow in 


Gar Brana-Shute 





CVT na 





ne 
WORLD BOOK @ucrason by Crisabe! IGng 


The cuckoopint is a type of arum that grows in Europe. It bears 
tiny flowers surrounded by a leaflike spathe. 


tropical and subtropical regions, but some are found in 
temperate areas. Many arums are poisonous. 

The arum plant bears a flower cluster made up of tiny 
blossoms. The blossoms grow at the tip of a slender 
stalk called the spadix and are surrounded by a colorful, 
leaflike spathe. Arums that grow wild in North Amenica 
include the water arum, jack-in-the-pulpit, skunk cab- 
bage, and sweet flag. True arums are native to the East- 
ern Hemisphere and make up a small group in the arum 
family. The cuckoopint also known as /ords-and-ladies, 
is a true arum that grows in Europe. It resembles the 
jack-in-the-pulpit. Kenneth R Robertson 

Scientific classification. Arums make up the arum family, 
Araceae. The cuckoopint is Anum maculatum. 


Related articles in World Book include: 


Caladium Philodendron 
Calla Skunk cabbage 
Elephant s-ear Sweet flag 
Jack-in-the-pulpit Taro 


Aryans, A/R ee uhnz, is a term used both for a group 
of Asian languages and for certain Asian peoples. /ndo- 
Aryan is a group of languages spoken mainly on the In- 
dian subcontinent Some of these languages date back 
to as long ago as about 1500 B.C Indo-Aryan includes 
the ancient Sanskrit language and the modem Hindi. In 
Sanskrit, the term arya referred to a group of people in 
ancient India These Aryans were Brahmans, members 


Arnube Tournst Bureau 


Aruba is a scenic island in 
the \WVest Indies. Tourists en- 
joy its beautiful, white sand 
beaches and warm, dry cli- 
mate. 





of the highest Hindu caste, who followed the traditional- 
ly accepted religious practices and used Sanskrit. In 
Sanskrit, ava means Kinsmen or nobles. 

Other peoples that referred to themselves as Aryans 
were the Iranians, including the Persian family of rulers 
known as the Achaemenids. The Indo-Iranians settled 
about 1500 B.C. in what are now Afghanistan, northern 
India, Iran, and Pakistan. The Achaemenid family ruled 
what is now Iran from about 550 B.C. to 331 B.C. The 
name /ran comes from the word Aryan. 

In the mid-1900's, the rulers of Nazi Germany used the 
term Aryan to refer to Germans and certain other north- 
ern Europeans, whom they considered racially superior 
to all other peoples. This racist use of the term has con- 
tinued among certain white supremacist groups in the 
United States. George Cardona 

See also Asia (The Indus Valley); India (The Aryans); 
Mythology (Comparing myths); Nazism; Races, Human 
(Race and discrimination). 

Asante. See Ashanti. 

Asbestos, as BEHS tuhs, is any of a group of soft, 
threadlike mineral fibers. Asbestos has many properties 
that make it commercially valuable. It does not burn or 
easily conduct heat or electricity. It is also flexible and 
strong and is not affected by most chemicals. Asbestos 
occurs in certain types of rocks, which are mined and 
then processed to remove the asbestos fibers. 

Asbestos can cause health problems if it is inhaled. It 
is thought to present no health hazard so long as it re- 
mains intact. It is believed to become dangerous only af- 
ter it crumbles and releases its tiny fibers into the air. As- 
bestos that is dry and capable of crumbling with the 
slightest pressure is said to be friable. Such asbestos is 
associated with a disease called asbestosis. It is also as- 
sociated with certain types of cancer. 

Asbestos use has declined since the 1970's due to the 
health problems associated with the mineral. Today, 
manufacturers make only a few types of products that 
contain asbestos. These include automobile parts and 
building materials. 

Types of asbestos. Geologists use the word asbestos 
to refer to the fibrous varieties of certain hydrated sili- 





WORLD BOOK photo. courtesy Field Museum 
Asbestos is a soft, threadlike mineral fiber in certain types of 
rock, as shown here. The rock is mined and hauled to a plant 
where a series of machines crush it to free the asbestos fibers. 


Asbestos 765 


cates. Hydrated silicates are minerals that are composed 
of silica and a metallic element, which are chemically 
combined with water. The fibrous hydrated silicates that 
make up asbestos belong to either the serpentine group 
of minerals or to the amphibole group of minerals. 

The serpentine mineral group includes chrysotile, the 


_best known, most abundant, and most widely used type 


of asbestos. Its chemical formula is Mg,Si,(OH),O,. The 
crystal structure of chrysotile consists of alternate sheets 
of magnesia and silica. These sheets are coiled into 
tubes called fibrils that resemble a rolled newspaper. 

The amphibole mineral group consists of several 
types of asbestos. The most abundant types are crocido- 
lite and amosite. Amphibole asbestos has coarser fibers 
than does chrysotile. These types of asbestos also con- 
sist of hydrated silicates plus other elements. The crystal 
structure of amphibole asbestos is made up of a chain 
of silicon and oxygen atoms. Atoms of other elements 
are coordinated with this chain. The strands of amphi- 
bole fibers are parallel to the chain of atoms. 

Uses of asbestos. Each type of asbestos has certain 
qualities, and so each kind is used for different purpos- 
es. For example, most chrysotile has fine, curly fibers 
that are strong and resist heat. Manufacturers use 
chrysotile for such products as roof coatings and roof 
cements, asbestos cement sheets, and siding and shin- 
gles for houses. Chrysotile is also used for asbestos ce- 
ment water pipes and for packings and gaskets used in 
the automotive and petrochemical industries. Short 
chrysotile fibers are used to make materials that can 
withstand heat generated by friction, such as brake lin- 
ings for motor vehicles. 

Amphibole asbestos is noted for its high resistance to 
heat and acids. Crocidolite is used in asbestos cement 
pipes and in diaphragms involved in the production of 
chlorine. 

Sources of asbestos. Most asbestos is found in 
metamorphic rocks (see Metamorphic rock). Chrysotile 
develops mainly as deposits in the cracks and seams of 
such rocks. Amosite and crocidolite, the most abundant 
types of amphibole asbestos, occur chiefly in highly 
folded metamorphic rocks. 

Each year, about 2 5 million tons (2.3 million metric 
tons) of asbestos are produced throughout the world. 
Russia produces about one-third of the world’s as- 
bestos, and Canada produces about one-fourth. Brazil, 
China, Kazakhstan, and Zimbabwe are other leading 
producers. 

How asbestos is mined and processed. Most as- 
bestos is obtained from enormous pits dug in the 
ground. This process is called open-pit mining. But 
some asbestos deposits are mined underground. 

After the rocks have been mined, trucks take them to 
a plant called a milf There, a series of machines crush 
the rocks into progressively smaller pieces with little 
damage to the fibers. In one common method, the loose 
fibers are aspirated (drawn by suction) through screens 
that allow only the asbestos to pass through. Special 
equipment divides the fibers according to length. The 
asbestos is then shipped to manufacturers. 

Hazards of asbestos. People who mine asbestos, 
manufacture asbestos products, install asbestos insula- 
tion, or remove asbestos may inhale the fibers. People 
who hold such jobs in countries that do not limit work- 


766 Asbjornsen, Peter Christen 


ers exposure to asbestos are at high risk of contracting 
a disease related to asbestos. Also at high risk are work- 
ers who held such jobs for many years before exposure 
was limited by law. In addition, asbestos can be a hazard 
to the families of asbestos workers, who may Carry as- 
bestos dust home on their clothing. Asbestos dust may 
also affect people who live near asbestos mines or proc- 
essing plants. 

Asbestosis is a disease that blocks the lungs with 
scarred tissue. This condition causes shortness of 
breath. Another disease associated with asbestos is lung 
cancer. Asbestos workers who smoke are at an even 
higher risk for lung cancer. Asbestos also causes 
mesothelioma, a rare and fatal cancer of the lining of the 
chest or abdomen. 

Scientists do not know exactly how asbestos causes 
disease. Many researchers say that inhaling fibers 
longer than 5 to 10 micrometers (0.0002 to 0.0004 inch) 
and less than 2 micrometers {0.00008 inch) wide increas- 
es the risk of illness. Inhaling fibers for even a short 
amount of time may result in mesothelioma. 

In the United States, government regulations estab- 
lished by the Occupational Safety and Health Adminis- 
tration (OSHA) limit the hazard of asbestos among work- 
ers. Government regulations also protect consumers 
from certain products containing asbestos. 

History. The properties of asbestos have been known 
since ancient times. The Egyptians used asbestos cloth 
to prepare bodies for burial. The Romans collected the 
ashes of the dead by wrapping the bodies in asbestos 
cloth before cremation. 

In 1774, Abraham G. Werner, a German mineralogist, 
wrote the first comprehensive scientific description of 
asbestos. People did not become aware of the health 
hazards of asbestos until the early 1900's. The United 
Kingdom, in 1931, was probably the first country to es- 
tablish health laws regulating exposure to asbestos. In 
1935, the Canadian province of British Columbia passed 
a law requiring asbestos workers to wear protective 
equipment when working with asbestos. The United 
States enacted similar standards into law in 1972. 

In 1973, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) banned the use of sprayed asbestos for insulation 
or fireproofing. In 1975, this ban was expanded to in- 
clude wet applications of asbestos, such as application 
with a trowel, and the use of molded asbestos that 
could become friable. 

In 1986, the EPA began a program to reduce the dan- 
ger of asbestos in all public and private primary and 
secondary school buildings. These structures must be 
inspected to determine the amount of asbestos in them, 
and its location and condition. If a building contains as- 
bestos, the school must develop and implement an as- 
bestos management plan. The EPA also ordered that any 
removal, encapsulation, or enclosure of asbestos be fol- 
lowed by tests to ensure that the amount of asbestos has 
been reduced to a safe level. Synthetic fibers of fiber- 
glass and plastics are being used as a substitute for as- 
bestos fibers. james R. Keamer 
Asbjernsen, AHS byurn suhn, Peter Christen, PAY 
tuhr KRIHS tuhn (1812-1885: was a collector of Nonve- 
gian folk tales and a naturalist. He won fame for his work 
with Jorgen Moe in immortalizing the tales told by the 
people of Norway. Their collection, Nonvegran Folk 





Tales (1842-1843), became a classic of Norwegian and 
world literature. It includes such diverse stories as ‘The 
Three Billy Goats Gruff,” “Mastermaid, and ‘Little Per 
and Big Per. 

Asbjornsen was born on Jan. 15, 1812, in Christiania 
(now Oslo). He explored the coasts of Norway, and made 
important contributions to botany and zoology. 

Niels Ingwersen 
Asbury, AZ buh ree, Francis (1745-1816), was the 
most important Methodist leader in America during the 
late 1700's and early 1800's. Asbury was born in England, 
but he lived in America from 1771 until his death. When 
Asbury arrived in America, there were only a few hun- 
dred Methodists in scattered, disorganized groups. Un- 
der his leadership, the Methodists increased in number 
until they ranked second only to the Baptists as the 
largest Protestant denomination in America. 

Asbury was born on Aug. 20, 1745, near Birmingham, 
England. He became a Methodist while a teen-ager. He 
was a traveling preacher from 1767 to 1771, when he 
volunteered to go to America as a missionary. The other 
Methodist missionaries returned to Britain after the 
colonists rebelled against Britain. But Asbury stayed in 
America. 

In 1784, Asbury became a superintendent, or bishop, 
of the newly founded Methodist Episcopal Church. He 
gained this position by order of the Methodist leader 
John Wesley and by a vote of the Methodist preachers 
in America. The church lacked enough formally educat- 
ed ministers to serve the growing American population, 
and so Asbury expanded the Methodist technique of en- 
listing laymen to lead local congregations. From these 
laymen, he recruited many young preachers to travel on 
horseback among frontier congregations, overseeing 
local meetings and conducting public worship. These 
preachers were called circuit riders. They were super- 
vised by more experienced preachers called presiding 
elders. Asbury supervised the system. 

Asbury traveled almost constantly, riding from 4,000 
to 6,000 miles (6,400 to 9,700 kilometers) a year on horse- 
back. He planned a large number of religious gather- 
ings, especially camp meetings where thousands of 
people gathered outdoors in order to sing hymns and 
hear sermons. Mark A. Noll 

See also Methodists; Circuit rider. 

ASCAP. See American Society of Composers, Authors 
and Publishers. 

Ascension, uh SEHN shuhn, is an island in the South 
Atlantic about 700 miles (1,100 kilometers) northwest of 
Saint Helena and 500 miles (800 kilometers) south of the 
equator. It belongs to the United Kingdom and is under 
the administration of Saint Helena (see Saint Helena. It 
has an area of 34 square miles (88 square kilometers), 
and a population of about 1,000. The island is a breeding 
ground for sea turtles and the sooty tern. For location, 
see Atlantic Ocean (map). Hartmut S. Walter 
Asceticism, uh SEHT uh sihz uhm, is the practice of 
self-denial or self-punishment, often for religious pur- 
poses. Those who practice asceticism are called ascet- 
ics. They may go for long periods without food or sleep, 
\wear rough clothing, expose themselves to extreme 
heat or cold, or refrain from sexual relations. Some even 
whip themselves or stick sharp objects in their skin. 

Ascetics believe a person's physical life conflicts with 





his or her spiritual life. Ascetics strive to become more 
spiritual by denying themselves physical pleasures and 
many necessities. Sometimes, ascetic practices produce 
religious visions, which ascetics regard as a sign of their 
increasing Spirituality. 

Asceticism has been a part of religious traditions for 
thousands of years. Many early Christians gave up physi- 
cal comforts to become closer to God. Asceticism has 
been especially important in Roman Catholicism and 
certain religions of India and Japan. 

See also Hermit. 

Asch, ash, Sholem, SHAW /uhm (1880-1957), a Polish- 
born author, was the first person to achieve internation- 
al recognition writing in Yiddish. Asch’s heroes search 
for faith and yearn for an ideal. A major theme of his 
works is that the individual, no matter how sinful, strives 
for holiness. 

Asch first gained fame for his novel A Shtet/(A Town, 
1904). This work introduced a new romantic tone into 
Yiddish literature. Earlier Yiddish writers had portrayed 
Jewish life in eastern Europe in a largely negative way. In 
A Shtetl, Asch stressed its harmony, strength, and re- 
spect for tradition. 

Asch was fascinated with the relation between Christi- 
anity and Judaism. He wrote three related biographical 
novels about the founders of Christianity— The Nazarene 
(1939), The Apostle (1943), and Mary(1949). He hoped 
that his presentation of Christianity’s Jewish heritage 
would reduce prejudice against Jews. However, many 
Jewish critics attacked Asch for what they believed was 
a move away from Judaism toward Christianity. Asch 
also became known for his plays, most notably God of 
Vengeance (1907). Asch was born in Kutno, Poland, on 
Nov. 1, 1880. He moved to the United States in 1914 and 
became a U.S. citizen in 1920. 
Ascidian. See Sea squirt. 
Asclepius, wh SKLEE pee uhs, was the god of healing 
in Greek mythology. The Romans called him Aesculapi- 
us. The Greeks prayed to Asclepius during plagues and 
in times of illness. His best-known child was Hygeia, the 
goddess of health. Epidaurus in Greece was the special 
site of his followers, the Asclepiads, the first physicians. 
Asclepius's symbol, a snake entwined around a staff, is 
often used as a symbol of the medical profession. 

Asclepius's father was the god Apollo, who taught his 
son the art of health. But Asclepius misused this gift by 
trying to revive a dead man. Zeus, ruler of the gods, 
therefore killed him with a thunderbolt and sent him to 
Hades, god of the underworld. Nancy Felson 

See also Epidaurus; Greece, Ancient (picture: Medi- 
cine). 

Ascorbic acid. See Vitamin (Vitamin C). 

ASEAN. See Association of Southeast Asian Nations. 
Asexual reproduction. See Reproduction (How 
genes are transferred). 

Ash is a group of hardwood trees found in North Amer- 
ica, Europe, and Asia. There are 16 species in the United 
States. Some are commercially valuable. Ashes may be 
planted as shade trees to prevent soil erosion. White ash 
and red ash are common in the eastern United States. 
Black ash is tound in the northeastern United States. 

Ash leaves and branches develop in pairs. Each leaf 
has from 5 to 11 pointed leaflets. Small male and female 
flowers usually grow on separate trees. The Keys 


Nancy E. Auer Falk 


Eugene V. Orenstein 


Ashanti 767 


(winged fruit) look like canoe paddles. They develop late 
in the season and fall to the ground in autumn. 

Ash wood is hard, strong, and stiff. The wood is used 
mainly for shovel, hoe, and rake handles and for base- 
ball bats. Ash is also used for furniture, oars, and skis. 

Norman L Christensen, Jr. 


Scientific classification. Ashes belong to the olive family, 
Oleaceae. White ash is Fraxinus americana. Red ash is F. penn- 
sylvanica. Black ash is F. nigra. 


See also Boxelder bug; Mountain ash; Prickly-ash; 
Tree (Familiar broadleaf and needleleaf trees [picture)). 
Ash is the substance that remains after an organic sub- 
stance has been burned. The word ashes usually refers 
to the minerals obtained from burning coal, wood, or 
other fuels. An analysis of the ashes of burned foods and 
other substances can determine the minerals they con- 
tain. For example, chemical tests of the ashes of burnt 
milk show that they contain calcium. Seaweed ash has a 
high iodine content. Some kinds of ashes can be used 
for various purposes. For example, fly ash, the dust pro- 
duced by power plants that burn coal, is used as a soil 
fertilizer. Clark L Fields 
Ash Wednesday is the first day of Lent. The day marks 
the start of the season of discipline and penitence that 
continues through the Lenten season. The day is ob- 
served by Western Christian churches, especially 
Roman Catholic, Anglican, and Lutheran churches. 

In many churches, the observance of Ash Wednesday 
centers on ashes from burned palms used in the previ- 
ous years Palm Sunday procession. A priest or pastor 
blesses the ashes and uses them to mark the foreheads 
of worshipers. This blessing is based on the Biblical pas- 
sage, for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.” 
(Genesis 3:19). Ashes also serve as a symbol of purifica- 
tion and penitence. David G. Truemper 

See also Easter (The beginning of Lent); Lent; Mardi 
Gras; Palm Sunday; Shrove Tuesday. 

Ashanti, uh SHAN tee or uh SHAHN tee, are the 
largest and most powerful ethnic group in the West 
African country of Ghana. The group's name is also 
spelled Asante. Most of the approximately 1 5 million 
Ashanti live in south-central Ghana in the Ashanti Re- 
gion. The capital of the region, Kumasi, is the second 
largest city in Ghana. 

Most Ashanti make their living as farmers, raising 
cocoa and other crops. Others work in the mining or 
forestry industries or in business. Ashanti weavers are 
famous for producing colorful kente cloth, which has 
complicated patterns full of tiny details. 

The Ashanti language is called Twi, but many Ashanti 
also speak English. A number of Ashanti are Christians, 
and some are Muslims. The traditional Ashanti religion 
involves a supreme god called Nyame, who communi- 
cates with human beings through lesser gods. The 
Ashanti also honor their ancestors at ancestral shrines. 

The Ashanti probably descended from peoples who 
lived in western Africa thousands of years ago. During 
the late 1600's, a leader named Osei Tutu united the 
Ashanti into a single state and became the first Asante- 
hene (king) of the unified nation. He made Kumasi the 
capital of his kingdom. The Ashanti developed a power- 
ful army, which conquered many surrounding states 
during the 1700s. At its height in the early 1800's, the 
Ashanti Empire included much of modern-day Ghana, 











768 Ashbery, John 


eastern Cote dIvoire, and western Togo. 

During the late 1800's, the Ashanti and the British 
fought each other for control of trade in West Africa. In 
1901, the British defeated the Ashanti and made the 
Ashanti lands a British colony. The colony, called Ashan- 
ti, was subject to the authority of another British colony, 
the Gold Coast. In 1957, Ashanti, the Gold Coast, and 
other nearby areas controlled by the United Kingdom 
became the independent country of Ghana. Since then, 
the Ashanti have played a major role in Ghana's eco- 
nomic and political development. 

See also Africa (pictures: The royal emblem; Royal 
music); Mythology (African mythology). 

Ashbery, John (1927- ), is an American poet. His 
poems have no realistic or logical beginning, middle, 
and end, imitating instead the fluidity of thought. Their 
dreamlike structures often consist of melodious frag- 
ments of colloquial speech. Critics have been puzzled 
by Ashbery’s unconventional, obscure works, but they 
have praised his technique and use of lanquage. 

Ashbery served as a magazine and newspaper art 
critic for many years, and art themes appear in his verse. 
He won the 1976 Pulitzer Prize for poetry for Se/fPortrait 
in a Convex Mirror. The title poem in this collection is a 
dreamy reflection on time and space in art inspired by a 
painting by the Renaissance artist Parmigianino. 

Ashbery was born in Rochester, New York, on July 28, 
1927. His first major collection, Some Trees (1956), 
showed his familiarity with Renaissance and modern po- 
etry. The Tennis Court Oath (1962) reflects the influence 
of the Surrealism art movement. His other books include 
Houseboat Days (1977), Shadow Train (1981), A Wave 
(1984), Selected Poems (1985), April Galleons (1987), Flow 
Chart (1991), Hotel Lautreéamont (1993), Can You Hear, 
Bird (1995), Wakefulness (1998), Girls on the Run (1999), 
and Your Name Here (2000). 

See also Postmodernism. 
Ashcan School was a group of American artists of the 
early 1900's known mainly for their realistic paintings of 
city life. The group revolted against the traditional, senti- 
mental subject matter then fashionable in American art. 
It helped establish realism as an acceptable art style in 
the United States. The Ashcan School consisted of Ar- 
thur Bowen Davies, William Glackens, Robert Henri, Er- 
nest Lawson, George Luks, Maurice Prendergast, Everett 
Shinn, and John Sloan. 

The Ashcan School was originally called The Eight It 
was formed by Henri in 1907 in New York City to oppose 
the conservative exhibition policies of many of New 
York City’s art galleries. In 1908, the group held an exhib- 
it that included paintings by Glackens, Henri, Luks, 
Shinn, and Sloan. Their works realistically showed city 
scenes, such as factories, slums, crowded streets, and 
night life. Critics called the group the Ashcan School be- 
cause of the “down-to-earth’ realistic subject matter. 
Three members did not paint in a realistic style. Davies 
painted dreamlike scenes. Lawson was an Impressionist, 
and Prendergast painted in a partially abstract style. 

Sarah Burns 

Each of the artists discussed in this article has a biog- 
raphy in World Book. 

Ashcroft, John David (1942- ), became attorney 
general of the United States in 2001. President George 
W. Bush appointed Ashcroft to the Cabinet post. 


Dennis M. Warren 


Bonnie Costello 





Oil painting on canvas, the Cleveland Museum of Art, Gift of Amelia Elizabeth White 
An Ashcan School painting called Womans Work shows a 
realistic scene of urban life in New York City. John Sloan, one of 
the group's most important artists, painted the scene in 1911. 


Ashcroft was a Republican member of the U.S. Senate, 
representing Missouri, from 1995 to 2001. 

After Sept. 11, 2001, when the United States suffered 
the worst terrorist attack in its history, Ashcroft helped 
to coordinate a massive investigation to find those re- 
sponsible for the attack. He successfully pressed Con- 
gress for broadened powers for the Justice Department 
to prevent future attacks. However, he received criticism 
from people who felt such powers would limit civil lib- 
erties. 

As a senator, Ashcroft worked on legislation designed 
to give states control over more government programs. 
He was a strong advocate for the pro-life cause, which 
opposes abortion. He supported the idea of limits on 
the number of terms members of Congress may serve. 

Ashcroft was born in Chicago on May 9, 1942. He later 
moved with his family to Springfield, Missouri, where 
he graduated from high school. He received a bache- 
lor’s degree from Yale University in 1964 and a law de- 
gree from the University of Chicago in 1967. 

Ashcroft ran for Congress in 1972 but lost. From 1973 
to 1975, he served as Missouri state auditor. Ashcroft 
was Missouri state assistant attorney general in 1975 and 
1976 and state attorney general from 1976 to 1985. He 
served as Missouri's governor from 1985 to 1993. 
Ashcroft won election to the United States Senate in 
1994 but narrowly lost a bid for reelection in 2000. 

Jeremy D. Mayer 
Ashe, ash, Arthur (1943-1993), a tennis player, became 
the first African American to win the U.S. men’s national 
singles championship. He won the title in 1968. In that 
same year, he played on the winning U.S. Davis Cup 





team (see Davis Cup). In 
1975, he became the first 
black man to win the 
Wimbledon singles cham- 
pionship in England. Ashe 
retired from competition 
in 1980. 

Ashe was born in Rich- 
mond, Virginia. His full 
name was Arthur Robert 
Ashe, Jr. In 1966, while a 
student at the University of 
California at Los Angeles, 
he won the National Colle- 
giate Athletic Association 
singles and doubles championships. He wrote a history 
of black athletes in America called A Hard Road to Glory 
(1987). Ashe died from pneumonia brought on by AIDS. 
He probably contracted HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, 
from a blood transfusion. Ashe’s memoir, Days of Grace, 
was published in 1993, after his death. Chris Evert 
Asheville (pop. 68,889; met. area 225,965) is the eco- 
nomic and cultural center of 18 counties in western 
North Carolina. It is set in the midst of recreational areas 
covering more than 1 million acres (400,000 hectares). 
Asheville is next to Pisgah National Forest and serves as 
the eastern gateway to Great Smoky Mountains National 
Park. The scenic Blue Ridge Parkway passes nearby the 
city (see North Carolina [political map)). 

Asheville’s chief manufactured products are electric 
switches, glass, synthetic textiles, tools, and wood prod- 
ucts. The city serves as the agricultural wholesale center 
for the surrounding area. 

Author Thomas Wolfe was born and raised in 
Asheville. The boarding house his mother ran, called 
“Dixieland” in his novel Look Homeward, Angel (1929), is 
open to the public. Asheville-Buncombe Technical Com- 
munity College and a branch of the University of North 
Carolina are in the city. Asheville was incorporated as a 
town in 1797. It is the seat of Buncombe County and has 
a council-manager government. Jerry L Surratt 
Ashgabat, 4s guh BAHT(pop. 407,000), is the capital 
of Turkmenistan. Ashgabat, also called Ashkhabad, lies 
in an oasis in the Karakum desert in southern Turkmeni- 
stan (see Turkmenistan [map]). An earthquake destroyed 
much of Ashgabat in 1948. The city was rebuilt with low 
buildings. The Karakum Canal supplies the city with 
water from the Amu Darya, a river more than 450 miles 
(724 kilometers) away in eastern Turkmenistan. Irrigation 
ditches called aryks line both sides of roads in Ashgabat. 
Economic activities in Ashgabat include carpet, textile, 
metal, and glass manufacturing. 

Ashgabat was founded in 1881 as a military outpost 
for the Russian Empire. It was called Poltoratsk from 
1919 to 1927. Already a regional center, Ashgabat be- 
came the capital of Turkmenistan in 1924, when Turk- 
menistan was made a republic of the Soviet Union. It re- 
mained the capital after Turkmenistan became an 
independent nation in 1991. Nancy Lubin 
Ashkenazy, Vladimir (1937- ), a Soviet-born pi- 
anist and conductor, ranks among the finest piano solo- 
ists of his generation. He gained fame for the warmth 
and delicacy of his style. Ashkenazy has been praised for 
his interpretation of such Russian composers as Sergei 


AP’Wide World 
Arthur Ashe 





Ashurbanipal 769 


Prokofiev, Sergei Rachmaninoff, and Alexander Scriabin. 
He also specializes in the piano music of Ludwig van 
Beethoven, Johannes Brahms, Frédéric Chopin, Franz 
Liszt, Franz Schubert, and Robert Schumann. 

Ashkenazy was music director of the Royal Philhar- 
monic Orchestra in London from 1987 to 1994 and prin- 
cipal guest conductor of the Cleveland Orchestra from 
1987 to 1994. Since 1989, he has been music director of 
the German Symphony Orchestra Berlin (formerly the 
Berlin Radio Symphony Orchestra). In 1998, he became 
director of the Czech Philharmonic. 

Vladimir Davidovich Ashkenazy was born in Gorki in 
the Soviet Union (now Nizhniy Novgorod, Russia). He 
made his performing debut when he was 8 years old 
and attended the Moscow Conservatory. Ashkenazy 
married Thorunn Johannsdottir, an Icelandic pianist, in 
1961. He left the Soviet Union in 1963 and lived in Eng- 
land until 1968, when he settled in Iceland. He became 
an Icelandic citizen in 1972. John H. Baron 
Ashoka, uh SHOH kuh(?-232 B.C), ruled the Mauryan 
Empire from about 272 B.C. until his death. Under his 
rule, the empire covered much of what are now Afghan- 
istan, Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan. 

In 261 B.C, Ashoka conquered Kalinga, a region on 
the east coast of India. After he saw the bloodshed his 
conquest had caused, Ashoka declared that he was 
filled with sorrow and regret. He rejected war as a way 
of gaining political power. Ashoka had many public an- 
nouncements inscribed on rocks, stone pillars, and cave 
walls. His inscriptions recommended Buddhist ideals as 
the highest moral code, but also urged toleration of all 
peoples and beliefs. He instructed his officials to preach 
religion and obedience to his laws. He also sent diplo- 
mats and Buddhist missionaries to Ceylon (now Sri Lan- 
ka), Egypt, Greece, Persia, and Syria. Michael H. Fisher 

See also Mauryan Empire. 

Ashton, Sir Frederick (1904-1988), was an English 
choreographer (creator of dances). His gracious, refined, 
and tasteful dances helped establish today’s English na- 
tional style in classical ballet. 

Ashton was born in Guayaquil, Ecuador. In 1935, he 
joined the Vic-Wells Ballet as a choreographer. In 1963, 
he became director of the company, now known as the 
Royal Ballet. He retired from the position in 1970, but 
continued to choreograph occasionally. Ashton’s major 
works include Fa¢ade (1931), Symphonic Variations 
(1946), Ondine (1958), and A Month in the Country (1976). 
He was knighted in 1962. 
Ashtoreth. See Astarte. 
Ashurbanipal, 4H shoor BAH nee PAH, also spelled 
Assurbanipal, was the last great king of the Assyrians. 
During his reign (668-627 B.C), Assyria became a leading 
world power. His empire included Babylonia, Persia, 
Syria, and Egypt. But it was also during his reign that As- 
syrias power began to decline. In 651 B.C, the Assyrians 
were expelled from Egypt A civil war with Babylonia 
further weakened his empire, even though Assyria won 
the war in 648 B.C. Ashurbanipal was a dreaded warrior 
and a great patron of the arts. At his royal palace, he 
gathered a huge collection of Sumerian, Babylonian, 
and Assyrian writings. This famous library of clay tablets, 
now mainly in the British Museum, is the best guide to 
Mesopotamian history. Norman Yoffee 

See also Assyria (Language and literature). 


Dorothy Lourdou 





Ron Lay ZS0r AQeT 





Asian street scenes offer glimpses of the continents wide variety of cultures. Some Asian 
cultures have preserved many traditional ways as they prosper and progress. At an open-air 
market in Delhi, India, /eft, women dress much as their ancestors did. Other Asian cultures 
have readily adopted Western-style clothing and architecture, as seen in Tokyo, Japan, nght 


Asia 


Asia is the largest continent in both size and popula- 
tion. It covers almost a third of the world’s land area and 
has about three-fifths of its people. Asia extends from 
Atrica and Europe in the west to the Pacific Ocean in the 
east The northernmost part of the continent lies within 
the frozen Arctic. But in the south, Asia ends in the 
steaming tropics near the equator 

Asia has some of the worlds lonqest rivers, larqest 
geserts, and thickest forests and jungles. The highest 


and lowest places on tne earth are in Asia. Mount Ever 


est, the highest, rises 29,035 feet (8,850 meters! above 
level - | the nal-Tihet = Se es py pee en oe 
sea level alono the Ne Dal pet Dorde e Dead Sea 
snore, the world s lowest land. lies about feet (399 
meters) Delow se. etwee srae! ant rdal 
The ~ cou t eS TASC . 4d Same fey th f 4’ < 
largest ang smatiest countries Opulation. t la. tne 
f ; : 
worlds NM st D Ou ate j at} aS more tna r) (OT 
The cont S ( 
fessor of Huma ¢ ersin: Rich 
Louis Edmonds. S$ , f s } 
Editor of The Chir ‘4 <s Director of the 
Cente for Viddie ‘ > ras 
Austin. and Jonathan K thre nNiversil 


or ); Nay 


people. But about one-third of Asia's countries have 
populations of less than 5 million people. 

Asia also contains some of the world’s largest and 
smallest countries in area. Russia, which lies partly in Eu- 
rope but mostly in Asia, is the world’s largest country in 
area. It covers more than 6 5; million square miles (17 
million square kilometers). But three Asian nations— 
Bahrain, the Maldives, and Singapore—each cover less 


Facts in brief 





Area: 16,992,000 mi: (44,008.000 km‘l. Greatest distances—east- 
west, about 6,000 mi {9,700 km); north-south, about 5,400 mi 
8.690 km! Coastline—80,205 mi (129,077 km. 

Population: Estimated 2002 population—3,799,97 1,000; density, 
224 per mi (86 per km}. 

Elevation: Highest—M\ount Everest, 29,035 ft (8,850 m) above sea 
level. Lowest—shore of the Dead Sea, about 1,310 ft [399 m) 
below sea level. 

Physical features: Chief mountain ranges—Altai, Elburz, Him- 
alava. Hindu Kush, Karakoram, Kunlun, Qilian, Qin Ling, 
Stanovoy, Tian Shan, Yablonovyy, Zagros. Chief nvers—Amur, 
Brahmaputra. Euphrates, Ganges, Huang, Indus, Irrawaddy, 
Lena. Mekong. Menam, Ob, Salween, Tigris, Xi, Yangtze, 
Yenisev. Chief deserts—Gobi, Karakum, Kyzylkum, Rub al 
Khali Taklimakan, Thar. 

Number of independent countries: 50. 





ee Oe 


er 


ee 


ee te 


= 


= eae 


than 300 square miles (780 square kilometers). 

The nations of Asia have a variety of political systems. 
Communist governments rule China, North Korea, and 
Vietnam. Such nations as Bhutan and Saudi Arabia have 
kings. Sheiks control Bahrain, Qatar, and the United 
Arab Emirates. Asian nations that operate under demo- 
cratic principles include India, Israel, and Japan. Military 
leaders have taken control of many Asian countries in 
times of trouble. 

The people who inhabit Asia are as varied as every- 
thing else about the continent. The people differ greatly 
in their ancestry, customs, languages, religious beliefs, 
and ways of life. Because of these differences, this arti- 
cle discusses the life of the people of Asia in six sepa- 
rate Way of life sections. 

Civilization in Asia began about 5,500 years ago, long 
betore it began in Europe. During ancient and medieval 
times, Asia moved ahead of Europe in economic, cultur- 
al, and scientific development. Asians founded the first 
cities, set up the first systems of law, and became the 
first farmers and merchants. Asians invented writing and 
created the earliest literatures. All the world’s major reli- 
gions originated in Asia. In addition, Asians invented pa- 
per, the magnetic compass, and movable type. 

About A.D. 1500, Europe entered a period of rapid 
economic and technological progress. As a result, West- 
ern European nations became wealthier than their Asian 
counterparts. What had been European trading outposts 
in Asia gradually turned into colonies. About 1750, 
Western European nations began conquering large 
parts of Asia. 

The economic gap between Asia and the West 
widened during the period of European colonial rule. 
Europeans and North Americans developed the factory 
system of manufacturing, and they began to use farm 
machinery and other aids to agriculture. These develop- 
ments in industry and agriculture helped create new 
jobs and increase production, and living standards im- 
proved. Most countries in Asia, in contrast, developed 
little mechanized industry. They remained largely agri- 





Asia 771 


cultural countries, and their farmers continued to use 
hand tools and old-fashioned farming methods. 

Meanwhile, a population explosion sent the number 
of people in both Asia and the West soaring. The grow- 
ing populations created a need for more food, jobs, 
schools, and other necessities. The West, because of its 
more advanced economic development, was better able 
than Asia to handle the problems caused by the growth 
in population. Today, the population explosion contin- 
ues throughout Asia, though it has slowed dramatically 
in Europe and North America. 

Almost all colonial Asia gained independence during 
the mid-1900's. Ever since, many Asian nations have 
worked to raise living standards by increasing industry, 
improving agriculture, and slowing population growth. 
Political disputes in Asian nations have added to the dif- 
ficulty of this challenge. 

After World War It] (1939-1945), Asia became a center 
of the struggle between Communist and non- 
Communist countries. In many Asian nations, fighting 
broke out between a government supported by West- 
ern allies and Communists trying to replace it. The Com- 
munists succeeded in China and Vietnam, and achieved 
partial success in Korea. 

Tensions remain high between the Communists and 
their democratic rivals in some places. The non- 
Communist Chinese Nationalists escaped to the island 
of Taiwan. Today, China and Taiwan struggle over the is- 
sue of Taiwanese independence. Korea was divided into 
Communist North Korea and democratic South Korea. 
The two sides never signed a formal truce, and a 20-mile 
(32-kilometer) zone of separation still divides them. 

in addition, disputes unrelated to the struggle be- 
tween Communists and non-Communists have brought 
about fighting between many groups of people in Asia. 
Most notably, India and Pakistan have never resolved 
which country controls the territory of Jammu and Kash- 
mir. As a result of such disputes, Asia almost continually 
faces wars and threats of wars while trying to solve all 
its other problems. 


Steve Vidler, De Wys, Inc 


Asian art includes huge Chi- 
nese sculptures of Buddha 
and his attendants. These 
sculptures were carved for a 
cliffside chapel at a cave near 
Luoyang in east-central China. 
Buddhism is one of Asias 
chief religions. 


772 Asia 





People 


About 3 ¢ billion people, or about 60 percent of the 
world’s population, live in Asia. China has more people 
than any other country in the world, and India has the 
second largest population. Nearly two-fifths of all the 
people in the world live in these two countries. 

This section gives a broad overview of the population 
distribution in Asia. It also discusses, in general terms, 
Asia's ethnic (cultural) groups, religions, and languages. 
The article's six Way of life sections provide more de- 
tailed information about Asian peoples who live in vari- 
ous regions of the continent. 

Population distribution. |f Asias people were dis- 
tributed evenly throughout the continent. there would 


be only 224 persons per square mile !86 per square kilo- 


meter). But many areas are so cold. so hot. so dry_or so 


mountainous that few people live there. The vast majori- 


ty of Asians live in river or mountain valleys or near sea- 


Taj Mahal, in Agra, India, is 
the tomb of an Indian ruler 
and his wife. The magnificent 
marble structure is an exam- 
ple of Islamic architecture, 
which is seen in many parts of 
Asia 


© Robern Frerck Woodfin Camp, Inc. 


coasts, where many of them live by farming or fishing. 

Parts of Asia rank among the worlds most thickly pop- 
ulated areas. They include Bangladesh, the Hong Kong 
peninsula in China, Singapore, eastern mainland China, 
the Ganges Valley of India, most of Japan, and the island 
of Java in Indonesia. In these regions, millions of people 
pack the big cities. Even many rural areas in these places 
have hundreds or thousands of people per square mile 
or square kilometer. 

Peoples of Asia. The peoples of Asia have rich and 
varied cultures and ancestries. Asia has dozens of ethnic 
groups—both large and small. A single country may 
have several groups. The largest ethnic groups on the 
continent include the Arabs of Southwest Asia and the 
Chinese of East Asia. 

The members of an ethnic group may be united by 
language, religion, common ancestry, or other charac- 
teristics. Ethnic groups establish rules of conduct for 
their members and preserve artistic, religious, and 





ae 





The land of North Asia is snow covered and frozen for much of the year. The people 
of Siberia, in North Asia, raise reindeer for food, clothing, and transportation. 


other traditions. Many members of ethnic groups feel a 
strong sense of identification or belonging. 

In many parts of Asia, however, neighboring ethnic 
groups dislike and distrust each other. These feelings 
often lead to violence among ethnic groups, both within 
and between countries. During the 1900's, for example, 
ethnic fighting in Asia included wars between Arabs 
and Jews, Greeks and Turks, Hindus and Muslims, Chi- 
nese Malaysians and Malays, and Armenians and Azer- 
baijanis. Fighting between the various ethnic groups in 
Asia strains relations among many countries. Such fight- 
ing also causes a lack of unity within some nations. 

Religions. All the world’s major religions began in 
Asia—Buddhism, Christianity, Confucianism, Hinduism, 
Islam, and Judaism. The history of these religions is 
traced in separate articles and in the Religion article. 

More Asians practice Hinduism than any other reli- 
gion. Hinduism is the major faith in India and Nepal. 

Islam has the second largest number of Asian follow- 
ers. Geographically, it ranks as the most widespread reli- 
gion on the continent. Most of the people of Southwest 
Asia and Central Asia are Muslims (followers of Islam). A 
majority of Indonesians also practice Islam. 

Buddhism is the chief religion of Southeast Asia and 
also has many followers in East Asia. Lamaism, a branch 
of Buddhism, is the chief religion of Mongolia and other 
parts of Central Asia. Confucianism and Taoism also 
have many followers in China, and Shinto is important in 
Japan. Many Asian people combine Buddhism with one 
or more of these other beliefs. 

Christianity, which has more followers throughout the 
world than any other religion, has never been a major 
faith in Asia. Most people in Cyprus and the Philippines 
and many in Lebanon, Armenia, Georgia, and Russia 
practice Christianity. Judaism is the chief religion in only 
one nation—Israel. 

Languages. The many languages and dia/ects (local 
forms of languages) spoken in Asia present a major bar- 
rier to Communication. In some parts of the continent, 
the people of one village cannot speak to their neigh- 
bors in a village a few miles away. For example, in Mad- 
hya Pradesh, one of India’s states, the people speak 
more than 375 languages and dialects. 





Many experts group all languages into nine major lan- 
guage families. Languages of all these groups except 
African have wide use in Asia. 

Arabic and Hebrew, the chief languages of far south- 
western Asia, belong to the Afro-Asiatic family. Russian 
and the chief languages of Afghanistan, northern India, 
Iran, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka are—like English—Indo- 
European languages. The major languages of southern 
India are in the Dravidian family. Languages of the Uralic 
and Altaic families are spoken in Kazakhstan, Mongolia, 
Siberia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. Chinese 
is the major language of the Sino-Tibetan family, which 
also includes Burmese, Lao, Thai, and Tibetan. 

Such southeastern Asian languages as Khmer and 








Sid Latham, Photo Researc hers 
In much of Southwest Asia, the climate is hot and dry, and 
large areas of land are sandy desert. Many Arabs in the region 
use camels to carry them over the shifting sands of the desert. 


774 Asia 


Vietnamese are in the Mon-Khmer family. Most people 
on the islands in Southeast Asia speak Malayo- 
Polynesian languages, including Indonesian, Malay, and 
Filipino. Japanese and Korean make up a language fami- 
ly. See Language (Language families; map). 


Way of life in Southwest Asia 


Southwest Asia covers about 2,700,000 square miles 
(7,000,000 square kilometers), or 16 percent of the conti- 


Where the people of Asia live 


More people live in Asia than on any other continent This map 
shows where they live and where the largest Asian cities are lo- 
cated. The heavily populated areas are shown in the darkest col- 
or. Most of the people live in areas where the climate is favor- 
able and the land is suitable for farming. 


WORLD BOOK map 





EUROPE 


AFRICA 


0 000 KS 
ST 
: 1.900 2 000 & Bometers 


nent. It includes the 7 nations of the Arabian Peninsula 
and 12 nations north and east of the peninsula. 

Saudi Arabia, which is the region's largest nation in 
size, covers about two-thirds of the Arabian Peninsula. 
The other peninsular nations are Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, 
Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, and Yemen. The na- 
tions that lie outside the peninsula include Afghanistan, 
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Cyprus, Georgia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, 
Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, and Turkey. Small parts of Azer- 


Persons per 
mi’ 


More than 250 


Persons per 
km? 


1 
25 to 250 48 to 97 @ More than 10 million 
25 to 125 10 to 48 ae 
®@ 5S million to 10 million 
2t0 25 Tt to 10 inhabitants 
© Less than 5 million 
Less than 2 Less than 1 inkiabitanse 






‘0 Cm Minh Cry 





Independent countries of Asia’ 


Asia 775 

















Map Name Area Populationt Capital Date of 
key In mi? In km’ independence 
G Afghanistan 250,773 652,090 24,977,000 Kabul t 
Ea Armenia 11,506 29,800 3,543,000 Yerevan oot 
ae Azerbaijan (Asian) 27,915 72,300 5,498,000 Baku 1991 
Ga 5 Bahrain 268 694 636,000 Manama 1971 
H 8 Bangladesh 55,598 143,998 133,557,000 Dhaka 1979 
H 8 Bhutan 18,147 47,000 2,238,000 Thimphu $ 
J 11 Brunei 2,226 5,765 340,000 Bandar Seri Begawan = 1984 
1 10 Cambodia 69,898 181,035 12,269,000 Phnom Penh 1953 
G 10 China 3,705,408 9,596,961 1,303,875,000 Beijing + 
F 4 Cyprus 5572 9 251 798,000 Nicosia 1960 
K 13 East Timor 5,706 14,874 911,000 Dili 2002 
Pas Egypt (Asian) 23,442 60,714 354,000 Cairo t 
Ey Georgia (Asian) 21,260 55,063 4,472,000 Thilisi 1991 
ie ey India 1,269,346 3,287,590 1,042,249,000 New Delhi 1947 
K 11 Indonesia (Asian) 572,479 1,482,714 215,141,000 Jakarta 1949 
G5 Iran 630,577 1,633,188 69,049,000 Tehran t 
F 4 Iraq 169,235 438,317 24,451,000 Baghdad t 
F 4 Israel 8,130 21,056 6,425,000 Jerusalem 1948 
Bal Japan 145,881 377,829 127,018,000 Tokyo $ 
F 4 Jordan 37,738 97,740 6,639,000 Amman 1946 
= a; Kazakhstan (Asian) 1,002,553 2,596,600 15,705,000 Astana 1991 
ra | Korea, North 46,540 120,538 24,585,000 Pyongyang 1948 
Fl Korea, South 38,328 99,268 47,521,000 Seoul 1948 
G 5 Kuwait 6,880 17,818 2,062,000 Kuwait 1961 
te 7 Kyrgyzstan 76,641 198,500 4,784,000 Bishkek 1991 
1 10 Laos 91,429 236,800 5,709,000 Vientiane 1953 
F 4 Lebanon 4,015 10,400 3,373,000 Beirut t 
J 10 Malaysia 127,320 329,758 23,002,000 Kuala Lumpur 1963 
J} 6 Maldives 115 298 302,000 Male 1965 
F 9 Mongolia 604,829 1,566,500 2,455,000 Ulan Bator t 
H 9 Myanmar 261,228 676,578 46,648,000 Yangon 1948 
H 8 Nepal 56,827 147,181 25,009,000 Kathmandu t 
H 5 Oman 82,030 212,457 2,711,000 Muscat t 
G 6 Pakistan 307,374 796,095 144,135,000 Islamabad 1947 
il 2 Philippines 1157831 300,000 78,850,000 Manila 1946 
G5 Qatar 4,247 11,000 617,000 Doha 1971 
D 8 Russia (Asian) 4,928,980 12,766,000 38,058,000 Moscow 1991 
G4 Saudi Arabia 830,000 2,149,690 22,910,000 Riyadh t 
K 10 Singapore 239 618 3,641,000 Singapore 1965 
ie 7 Sri Lanka 25,502 65,610 19,415,000 Sri Jayewardene- 

pura Kotte 1948 
F 4 Syria 71,498 185,180 16,928,000 Damascus 1946 
H 11 Taiwan 13,892 35,980 22,735,000 Taipei $ 
on 7 Tajikistan 55,251 143,100 6,347,000 Dushanbe oo 
1 10 Thailand 198,115 513115 62,422,000 Bangkok $ 
E24 Turkey (Asian) 290,038 P1195 60,973,000 Ankara t 
F 6 Turkmenistan 188,456 488,100 4,605,000 Ashgabat 1991 
G 5 United Arab Emirates 32,278 83,600 2,522,000 Abu Dhabi 1971 
F 6 Uzbekistan 172,742 447,400 25,355,000 Tashkent 1991 
1 10 Vietnam 128,066 331,689 79,387,000 Hanoi 1954 
H 4 Yemen 203,850 527,968 19,391,000 Sanaa t 
Dependencies in Asia® 
Map Name Area Populationt Capital Status 
key In mi Inkm | 
F 45 Gaza Strip 146 378 1,215,000 Gaza Transitional# 
F 45 West Bank 2,270 5,879 2,159,000 - Transitional” 
SEAN anuntry and dependency listed has a separate article in World Book i §Not on map kev shows general locanon “Part at the West Bank administered bv the Palestinian Author 
*Populatians are 2002 estimates lor countries and 2002 and earlier estimates tor de Administered hy the Palestinian Author it}. extemal secunty and foreign attairs controlled hy tsraet. other 
pendencies based on figures Irom official government and United Nahons sources. it) external secunty and foreign aftaics parts occ upied by Israel 
See the article on this country tor details of tts history Dates are shown onh lor cootrolled hy Israel 


those countnes that gained independence atter Workd War il 








































































: r ; ICELAND 1 GREENLAND) 
') Gr and Sea {esnmark! heate _y North Po! 
3 WwW = 9) 
North Atlantic Ocean ; qaude 
A - Are 
ts SVALBARD = 
- ‘ - N f\0: VV 
a IRELANO $> (Norway), aN RS | 
- © 
; UNITED a g 
a KINGDOM ao we 
b ~~ L 
: - ~ NORWAY . 
Pron Pe 
usbon® a 
B pa: a SWEOEN NOVAYA 
DENMARK 
py ean en fea 1 oc iholg Barents aad iF Kale 
WESTERN Casablancae ‘ SPAIN FRANCE & a ‘Sea Sa 
+ te ieee Rabat ‘ Berlin FINLANO = 
/ " Ae 2 
MOROCCO ESTONIA — ~~ oS ewe ) 
¥. ~~ _St Petersburg “arkhangelsk 9 
0, i 
C Algiers ® : f°? 45 
A ITALY SLOVAKIA a y 
la? or 
t ae 
Tunis ' < (a 
: _, RUSSIA | 
Moscow Nizhniy Novgorod ’ 
ALGERIA TUNISIA 1 + t 
Zz : ) fi Sel 
ey ane = Oy, oo ii Yekaterinburg . 
8 pe om 
Tripoli s me 5 At The ; “Samara “Chelyabinsk 
ae ® nse @istanbut ~—. ‘ ' 
Pv) ofl ~ . - oe = ° 
-) ° Black Sea Magnitogorsk 
* mir Bursa a =. 
p= S§ qontare c us rt _ Novokuznetsk, 
d ¥ ° 
- =, 5 | CEE, — \Barnaul 
Konya TURKEY F a 
LIBYA : ~ Aral ° , ~ = 
Adana post = Qaraghandy = ~~ 
a SOL! Sea _, 
cYyPRUS ~— a KAZAKHSTAN 
Nicosia® -- - : 
ae <a 
' rr, fhalkhesy 
Caira ' _ 
Suez 
! TURKMENISTAN 
{ ® @ 
mneunra 4, (tke Ghad L Tehran Ashgabat 
Meshed 
,/sfahan a 
<< So AFGHANISTAN | 
a ip: : Kabul ® f 
G Lf 
Khartoum 
& ‘ 


SUOAN . P 
; Delhi 


New Delhi | 








*Luckno v 


& Stabad a 
Karachi. S'YO" Kanpur® Varanasi 

















H Arabian Sea “> Ahmadabad = er 
f i INDIA Kolketas 
Mumbai Nagpur” j a 
® te 
! Pune —— = 
CONGO rs SOCOTRA ‘ + 
(KINSHASA) ~ Hyderabad 
UGANDA ‘ yc Ba 
| re Be 
RY A ; 
BURUNDI : Bangalore 
KENYA Mogadrehu . “Chennai 
| teat © sirott 
, 7’, 
a 
“TANZANIA . SRI LANKA 
J Sri Jayewardenepura Kotte @ ' 
Male : 
Dar es Baldor, *) 
MALOIVES 
ZAMBIA 
AAW 
SEYCHELLES 
Cie 
K COMOROS Indian Ocean 
ZIMBABWE 
* MOZAMBIOVE BRITISH INDIAN 
his OCEAN TERRITORY 
BOTSWANA =o “MADAGASCAR =  & =jiate 
1 2 3 4 5 6 i 8 
= — a 
[ Distance scale 
0 Miles 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 


0 Kilometers 1,000 . 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000 6,000 7,000 











9 10 11 12 a3 











_ 2 ~ ALARKA 
. oe Bele rx ... (United States) 
| - Chukch; Sea . ALEUTIAN H 4° 
ieeio ‘ iSLANOS Asia political map 
_ (United States) 
ie WRANGEL 
a 7 ISLANO 
% 
2 f Ewe: Silber 
Sea ® Capital 
aNAYA => NEW SIBERIAN *e O 
s : ° ther ci 
if TS ISLANDS = - , ; ee Y 
Laptev Sea & 1 o. Mountain 
a Ay %.% 
f- ‘A ae River 


=i « Canal 
KAMCHATKA 


/ | PENINSULA 
oN The Israeli boundaries do not include territory occupied 
~— | by Israel since the Arab-Israeli war of 1967. 


“= 


WORLD BOOK maps Equal-Area Projection 


_ SAKHALIN KURIL 





* ISLANDS ; 
%" ‘NORTH AMER 
A & — + 
y ™ ie os North Pole 
Khabarovsk | J . 
- HOKKAIDO > 


apporo 






Viadivostok 
Seal af 
acan 
ais! Seu 










4 
in NORTH 
7 KOREA 

f Pyongyang Yokohama 
. & 




























usan 
BONIN 
ISLANDS 
‘ ' © MARSHALL 
a ' NORTHERN G 
A | MARIANA Jigen 
prreett North Pacific Ocean 
Taper, - * 
7 
TAIWAN GUAM P 
-¢ *Kaohsiung (U.S) ; s 
OU ' »> 
. Philsppine Sea ' =e H 
Hong Kong FEOERATEO STATES OF MICRONESIA 
voor 
HAINAN 
= SC 46 1 
4 PHILIPPINES 
PALAWAN) MINOANAO F < te, 
BISMARCK — i a 
Pi ARCHIPELAGO” . SOLOMON 
ISLANDS 
o Chi Minh City > 
BRUNEI HALMAHERA ¢ 
Seri Begawan F 
; a J 
a> 
, Coral Sea 


INDONESIA 2. ; . 


- a 
Semarang ae Sr nMOr o on a y 
Jakarta Surabay = 1MOR a “ye ~— : aé : 


BALI 


il 9 10 1 12 13, 14 15 16 










9,000 10.000 11,000 12,000 13,000 14 000 15,000 


} 5.000 6.000 7,000 8.000 9.000 
000 














778 Asia 





Deserts—like this one in Kuwait— 
cover much of Southwest Asia. These 
dry lands are difficult to farm, but 
much oil lies under them. income 
from oil raises living standards and 
helps modernize the region. But many 
nomads still follow traditional ways of 
life, and, like their ancestors, travel 
the deserts with their animals. 


baijan, Georgia, and Turkey are in Europe, but these 
countries lie mainly in Asia. Southwest Asia also in- 
cludes the Sinai Peninsula, which is the northeast corner 
of the African country of Egypt; the disputed region 
known as the Gaza Strip; and the West Bank, a region 
west of the Jordan River and the Dead Sea. The Gaza 
Strip and the West Bank are administered partly by Is- 
rael and partly by the Palestinian Authority. 

Desert covers much of Southwest Asia. Little rain falls, 
and water is scarce in most of the region. Even so, many 
Southwest Asians work on farms. The farmers live 
crowded together along the seacoasts and in river and 
mountain valleys, which have enough water for growing 
crops. The regions deserts are thinly populated. South- 
west Asia has a population density of only 104 persons 
per square mile (40 per square kilometer). 

A shortage of good farmland and a lack of big indus- 
trial cities in most of Southwest Asia have made eco- 
nomic progress difficult. But the land—even the desen— 
holds hope for the future. It yields huge quantities of oil, 
the region's most valuable natural resource. Southwest 
Asian governments use some of the oil income to fight 
poverty. They also work to increase farm production 
and to bring industry to their nations. 

The people. About 282 million people, or 7 percent 
of all Asians, live in Southwest Asia. Members of the 
Arab ethnic group make up the majority of the popuia- 
tion in 11 of the 19 Southwest Asian nations. These 11 
nations are the 7 of the Arabian Peninsula, plus Iraq, Jor- 
dan, Lebanon, and Syria. The millions of Arabs through- 
out Southwest Asia and North Africa are united by lan- 
guage (Arabic), religion (Islam), and cultural and histori- 
cal background. 

The first Arabs lived on the Arabian Peninsula and in 
nearby areas in ancient times. The Islamic prophet 
Muhammad was an Arab who died in A.D. 632. His fol- 
lowers spread Islam, the Arabic lang uage, and the Arab 
way of life to many lands. 

Israel, most of whose people are Jews, lies among the 
Arab nations. Like the Arabs. Jews have lived in South: 


john Lewis Stage. Photo Researchers 


west Asia since ancient times. Through the years, many 
Jews settled in Europe, North America, and other parts 
of the world. In the late 1800's, Jews began a movement 
to reestablish a homeland in Southwest Asia. This move- 
ment led to the founding of Israel in 1948. The Arabs op- 
posed the creation of a Jewish nation in what they con- 
sidered Arab land. Ever since, the Arabs and Israelis 
have quarreled—and fought Conflicts have also erupted 
between various Muslim groups and between Muslims 
and Christians. Southwest Asia remains one of the 
world’s chief trouble spots. 

The Arabs and Jews speak languages in the Semitic 
group of the Afro-Asiatic language family. Arabs speak 
Arabic, and Jews speak Hebrew. People in the countries 
of northern Southwest Asia—Afghanistan, Armenia, 
Azerbaijan, Cyprus, Georgia, Iran, and Turkey—speak 
Indo-European and Turkic languages. The ancestors of 
the Afghans, Azerbaijanis, Iranians, and Turks came 
mainly from Central Asia. The Armenians and Georgians 
are descended from ancient peoples of the Caucasus 
Mountain region. About 80 percent of the people on the 
island of Cyprus are Greeks, and Turks make up the 
other 20 percent of the island's population. 

Religions. Christianity, Islam, and Judaism began in 
Southwest Asia. Today, the majority of people in most of 
the Southwest Asian nations practice Islam. However, 
Christianity is the chief religion of Armenia, Cyprus, and 
Georgia. Judaism is the chief religion of Israel. 

Country life. About a fourth of Southwest Asias peo- 
ple work on farms. Also, thousands of nomads move 
through the deserts and mountains of Asia herding 
camels, goats, and sheep. Most of the farmers and no- 
mads follow ways of life that have roots deep in the past 
Many people wear clothing similar to that of their an- 
cestors. For example, many Arab men wear long, flow- 
ing robes and a draping cloth that covers the head and 
neck (see Arabs [Clothing)). 

Like their ancestors, most of the farmers do not own 
the land they work Instead, they rent it from wealthy 
landlords. They use hand tools, and many raise only 








enough food for their families. Farm families eat foods 
made from such grain crops as barley and wheat. Other 
important foods include dates, olives, and other fruits. 

Some Southwest Asian farmers live on the outskirts of 
urban areas. Many others live in small villages near the 
land they work. A typical village consists of about 50 
houses crowded together along narrow streets. Dried 
mud and adobe are the most common building materi- 
als. Some villages have a public bathhouse, and a tea- 
house where men gather to discuss community affairs. 
But many villages have only one public building—a 
mosque (Islamic house of worship). 

Southwest Asian nomads rely almost entirely on their 
animals for the necessities of life. They live in tents made 
from camel or goat hair. Their food includes cheese, 
meat, and milk, all of which come from their animals. 
Many nomads make their clothing from animal hair and 
skins. The nomads move about, looking for pasture for 
their herds. Occasionally—perhaps once a year—a no- 
mad visits a city or town to sell cheese, meat, skins, and 
wool and to buy supplies. The number of nomads has 
declined as many have settled in villages and towns, 
sometimes under pressure from their governments. 

Many rural Southwest Asian women—especially Arab 
women—remain at home most of the time, as their fe- 
male ancestors did. These women both keep house and 
take part in outdoor chores, such as harvesting crops or 
milking animals. When they appear in public, they cover 
their faces with a veil. 

Social relationships in rural Southwest Asia are also 
based on traditions. Most farm and nomad families live 
according to an ancient arrangement called the extend- 
ed family. Grandparents, parents, unmarried children, 
and married sons and their families all live together. The 
oldest male in the family holds authority over the other 
family members. The oldest male also has the responsi- 
bility for the well-being of the entire group. 

Outside the family, a farmer's strongest ties are to the 
village, and a nomad’s are to the tribe. A chief and a 
council of elders govern most villages. These officials 
settle disputes between families. Most nomad tribes 
consist of many families related on the male side. The 
tribal leader, called a sheik in Arab nations, is usually the 
wealthiest member of the group. The leader settles dis- 
putes between families and often provides aid for needy 
members of the tribe. 

Many farmers and most nomads have little or nothing 
to do with their national government. They view govern- 
ment officials as outsiders without power in village or 
tribal matters. Many Southwest Asian governments are 
working to establish more contact with their rural peo- 
ple. In some areas, the governments teach modern agri- 
cultural techniques to farmers. They have also estab- 
lished schools in a number of rural communities, 
helping to bring in ideas about modern life. 

In rural Southwest Asia, radios and televisions have 
become more common. In these remote corners, how- 
ever, people must use satellite dishes to receive TV sig- 
nals beamed from satellites high above the earth. 

Rural life in Israel differs greatly from that in other na- 
tions of Southwest Asia. Many Israeli farmers live in a 
collective community called a kibbutz, in which the 
farmers share all property and combine their labor. Oth- 
er Israeli farmers belong to a cooperative community 


Asia 779 


called a moshav. On a moshav, the farmers purchase 
equipment and other goods as a group. However, the 
farmers own their own land and homes. See Israel 
(Agriculture). 

City life. Since the 1950's, the cities of Southwest Asia 
have grown tremendously. The three largest cities of 
Southwest Asia are Baghdad, Iraq; Tehran, Iran; and Is- 
tanbul, Turkey. However, most of the city of Istanbul lies 


mc, @ 


BBs : 


bs 


————— 


—— as 
es 


Cy 
me, 
My 





Sammy Abboud, FPG 
Muslims make up the largest religious group in most Southwest 
Asian nations. A Muslim's religious life centers around a house 
of worship called a mosque. Some mosques, including this one 
at Meshed, Iran, are famous for their beautiful decorations. 


780 Asia 


in Europe. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, is the largest city of the 
Arabian Peninsula. There are more urban people than 
rural people in each of the countries of Southwest Asia 
except Afghanistan and Yemen. 

Many Southwest Asian cities present a sharp contrast 
between the old and the new. They include an old sec- 
tion, which dates back hundreds of years, and a modern 
section. The old sections have long been trading centers 
where farmers, nomads, and merchants exchange 
goods and where craftworkers make and sell handcraft- 
ed articles. Much of this activity takes place in crowded 
trading and shopping centers called bazaars or suqs. 
Some of these are open-air markets, while others are 
covered and resemble shopping malls. The covered 
bazaar in Istanbul, which was built in the mid-1400's, 
contains more than 4,000 shops. The houses in the old 
sections are small and jammed tightly together. Old sec- 
tions of Muslim cities feature beautiful houses of wor- 
ship called mosques. 


» 


ee 
: sen 
iy he NY ay te Wy : , % 
Tit et yi x tie { 
4 a. s SMa nay > % 4 he 
} ASR Fd hed Ot Sat 


Wire 





Photographic Library of Austraha 


Skilled craftworkers in Southwest Asia produce a variety of 
goods that are prized by people in many parts of the world. 
These craftworkers in Jordan weave an Oriental rug, a kind of 
rug that is valued for its high quality and beauty. The rug has 
elaborate designs, for which Islamic art is famous. 





The modern sections of Southwest Asian cities re- 
semble modern Western cities in many ways. Tall apart- 
ment and office buildings rise along wide streets. These 
sections also include airports, motion-picture theaters, 
and radio and television stations. Some cities have in- 
dustrial plants, such as factories and oil refineries. 

Social changes have also come to the cities of South- 
west Asia. New jobs have opened up for business peo- 
ple, factory workers, government workers, physicians, 
teachers, and others. Most of the governments have ex- 
panded their school systems to train people for new job 
opportunities. The extended family has become much 
less common in the cities than in rural areas. In addition, 
the city people have stronger ties with their national 
government than do the rural people. 

Women in cities have more freedom than do women 
in rural areas. In most countries, old customs—such as 
wearing a veil in public—have been challenged. In Iran 
and Saudi Arabia, however, conservative Muslims con- 
tinue to enforce old customs. 

Education. The /iteracy rate (percentage of people 
over 15 years old who can read and write) is low in 
niuch of Southwest Asia. Several Southwest Asian na- 
tions have a literacy rate of less than 50 percent. But the 
literacy rate varies widely from country to country. In Ar- 
menia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Israel, almost all adults 
can read and write. 

Throughout history, most Southwest Asian children 
received little or no schooling. Boys learned a craft, 
farming, or herding from their fathers, and girls learned 
housekeeping skills from their mothers. But during the 
mid-1900's, most Southwest Asian nations built many 
new schools, especially in the cities. Today, most city 
children attend school for at least a few years. More 
children than ever go on to a college or technical 
school. Educational progress has been much slower in 
rural Southwest Asia than in the cities. 

The arts. The best-known art of Southwest Asia is Is- 
lamic art. This term refers to an art style developed by 
the Arabs and adopted by the many peoples they con- 
quered. Islamic art flourished from the mid-700's to 
about 1700 and then declined. 

Architectural works—especially mosques—rank as the 
most famous examples of Islamic art. Islamic artists also 
created beautiful bookbindings and illustrations, ceram- 
ics, glassware, metalware, rugs, textiles, and sculptures. 
Islamic religious leaders prohibited artists from depict- 
ing human beings and animals. Instead of drawing peo- 
ple and animals, artists developed a style of decoration 
that consisted of elaborate patterns of winding stems, 
leaves, and other objects. See Islamic art. 

Many Southwest Asian decorative artists, including 
potters and rug makers, still use the traditional Islamic 
style. But authors have modernized Southwest Asian lit- 
erature. In the past, most authors wrote about life 
among the nobility and royalty. Today, however, many 
writers deal with life among the common people of 
Southwest Asia. 


Way of life in South Asia 


South Asia covers about 1,730,000 square miles 
(4,480,000 square kilometers), or 10 percent of the conti- 
nent. India occupies almost three-fourths of this region, 
and Pakistan makes up almost one-sixth. Pakistan bor 





A South Asian farmer gets advice 
from a government farm expert In an 
effort to reduce the widespread 
poverty that exists in their countries, 
South Asian governments try to teach 
farmers about new seeds and fertiliz- 
ers and improved agricultural meth- 
ods. This scene is in India, South 
Asia's largest country. 


ders India to the northwest. South Asia also includes five 
small nations. These nations are Bangladesh, along In- 
dias eastern border; Bhutan and Nepal, high in the 
mountains along Indias northeast border; and Sri Lanka 
and the Maldives, island countries that lie south of India 
in the Indian Ocean. 

South Asia ranks among the world’s most crowded 
places. About 1 + billion people live there—about a third 
of all Asians and a fifth of all the people in the world. 
The region's population density of 790 persons per 
square mile (305 per square kilometer) is more than 7 
times the world average. South Asia's chief farm area, 
the northern plains of India, is as crowded as many 
cities. Kolkata, a city in India, has about 110,000 persons 
per square mile (42,000 per square kilometer). Dhaka, 
the capital of Bangladesh, has about 74,000 persons per 
square mile (29,000 per square kilometer). 

South Asia has much fertile farmland, and there are 
several large cities with thriving economies. Even so, the 
region faces severe poverty. The South Asian nations 
are trying to solve this problem by improving agricultur- 
al techniques and by creating new jobs in the cities. 
However, the rapid growth of population in the over- 
crowded region makes the fight against poverty much 
more difficult. 

The people. Over 75 percent of South Asia's people 
live in India. More than 10 percent live in Pakistan, and 
almost 10 percent in Bangladesh. The four other coun- 
tries of South Asia contain the remaining 3 percent of 
the population. 

India’s two largest groups are the Indo-Aryans and the 
Dravidians. Most of the Indo-Aryans live in northern In- 
dia. The majority of the Dravidians live in the south. The 
ancestors of the Indo-Aryans invaded India from Central 
Asia about 1500 B.C. These people are known as the 
Aryans. The Aryans conquered the Dravidians in north- 
ern India and drove some of them south. 

The many groups that make up Pakistan's population 
include people of Afghan, Arabic, Aryan, Dravidian, Per- 
sian, and Turkish origin. Other South Asian peoples in- 





WORLD BOOK photo 


clude the Sinhalese of Sri Lanka and of the Maldives, 
whose ancestors came from northern India. The Tamils 
of Sri Lanka are descendants of people from southern 
India. The Nepalese have ancestors who include both 
Aryans and people from Tibet and Mongolia. 

The people of South Asia are divided along the lines 
of religion, language, and social class. Differences be- 
tween Hindus and Muslims—the region's two major reli- 
gious groups—have often caused violence. These differ- 
ences even led to the creation in 1947 of a new nation, 
Pakistan. In an attempt to end the bloodshed between 
Hindus and Muslims, the United Kingdom, which then 
controlled India, divided it into two nations—India for 
Hindus and Pakistan for Muslims. East Pakistan became 
the independent nation of Bangladesh in 1971. 

Language differences also have far-reaching effects 
among the people of South Asia. Most states of India, 
for example, consist chiefly of people who speak the 
same language. The Indian government changed state 
boundaries and created new states to give certain lan- 
guage groups their own states. See India (Languages). 

In general, social class divides people throughout 
South Asia. Social standing, however, probably has the 
greatest importance among the Hindus of India, who 
make up a majority of South Asia's population. Each Hin- 
du belongs to a social class called a caste. India has 
about 3,000 castes. Hindus belong to their parents’ caste 
and find it hard to join a higher caste. Each caste in India 
has its own customs. These customs limit social contact 
with members of other castes. Marriage between mem- 
bers of different castes seldom occurs. For more de- 
tailed information about the caste system in India, see 
Caste; India (Religion). 

Religions. About four-fifths of India’s people are Hin- 
dus, and more than a tenth are Muslims. Most of the 
people of Bangladesh, the Maldives, and Pakistan are 
Muslims. Sri Lanka has a mixture of Buddhists, Chris- 
tians, Hindus, and Muslims. In Nepal, about 90 percent 
of the people are Hindus, and most of the others are 
Buddhists. About two-thirds of the people of Bhutan are 


782 Asia 


T S. Satyan, Black Star 
Hindus bathe in the Ganges River at Varanasi, India. Hindus 
consider the Ganges River sacred. They believe they purify 
themselves spiritually by bathing in its waters. 





WORL D BOOK photo 
An Indian schoolroom is used by two groups of children at the 
same time. The teacher instructs older children in writing while 
younger children play with educational toys. 


Buddhists, and a majority of the rest are Hindus. 

As India’s chief religion, Hinduism has the most fol- 
lowers in South Asia. Hinduism—unlike Christianity, Is- 
lam, and Judaism—is not based on the belief in a single, 
personal god. A Hindu may believe in many gods, all of 
whom are different forms of Brahman, the Supreme 
World Soul or Spirit. Hindus believe all living creatures 
have a soul whose goal is to become united with Brah- 
man. After death, a soul in one body passes on to anoth: 
er body. This process continues until the soul becomes 
perfect enough for union with Brahman. 

Country life. About three-fourths of the people of 
South Asia live in villages and work on nearby farms. 
The majority of South Asian farmers own a small piece 
of land, but some rent land from wealthy landlords. 

Some farms in South Asia employ modern agricultur- 
al tools and methods, but many of the farmers still use 
the same kinds of hand tools and farming methods as 
their ancestors used hundreds of years ago. Large num- 
bers of South Asian farmers must struggle just to raise 
enough to feed their own families. Most South Asian 
farm families include not only several children but also 
the other members of an extended family. 

South Asians get most of their food from rice, wheat, 
millet, barley, and other grains, and from such vegeta- 
bles as beans and peas. Many Hindus eat no meat. They 
believe all animals have a soul and must not be killed. 
See India (Food and drink). 

The clothing worn by rural South Asians varies from 
region to region. Many people wear a large piece of 
cloth wrapped around the body. Women’s garments of 
this kind are called saris. Some men cover their heads 
with a turban. See India (Clothing). 

The houses of a typical South Asian village stand 
close together. Most of them are small and made of sun- 
dried bricks or mud. A wall surrounds each house in 
many villages, giving the people extra privacy. 

There is much contact between rural and urban South 
Asia. Government officials from the cities often go to vil- 
lages to teach the people how to use modern fertilizers, 
plows, and seeds. They help villagers set up health clin- 
ics and schools. The government also builds roads and 
irrigation systems in rural areas. 

The struggle to improve the peoples lives faces many 
difficulties. South Asian governments lack great wealth. 
But even if they had much wealth, they would be hard- 
pressed to end poverty as long as the population keeps 
growing so quickly. In addition, many rural South Asians 
are proud of their customs and traditions and feel reluc- 
tant to change the way they live and work. However, the 
economic growth and modernization of urban areas 
holds promise for the future of the region. 

City life. Although South Asia is chiefly a rural region, 
it has many large cities. Delhi, Kolkata, and Mumbai in 
India and Karachi in Pakistan rank as the biggest cities. 
Several other cities in India and Pakistan also have more 
than a million people. 

Few places present so sharp a contrast between old 
and new—and between the wealthy and the poor—as do 
the cities of South Asia. The British built some parts of 
these cities during their reign. The United Kingdom 
ruled most of the region from the late 1700's to the mid- 
1900's. During this colonial period, British citizens occu- 
pied much of the housing in the sections they had built. 








South Asian governments continued to build up the 
cities after the various nations became independent. To- 
day, middle-class and wealthy South Asians, including 
business people, doctors, government officials, and 
lawyers, live primarily in the newest sections. 

South Asia’‘s cities include many terrible slums. Mil- 
lions of people in these slums live in cheap, crowded 
apartments and in shacks made of pieces of metal, 
wood, or cloth. The slums in some cities are so crowded 
and poverty is so widespread that thousands of people 
have nowhere to live at all. They sleep in doorways, on 
sidewalks, or in any other place they can find. 

South Asian governments are trying to improve City 
life as well as rural life. Their efforts include slum clear- 
ance and construction programs to provide more de- 
cent housing. They also sponsor programs to expand in- 
dustry and provide more jobs—and to train unskilled 
workers for those jobs. But the cost of improving any 
city is high, and the problems are many. In South Asian 
cities, as in many cities elsewhere, high birth rates rank 
among the major problems. Also, thousands of rural 
people move to the cities each year in search of a better 
life. Many end up no better off than they were before. 

Education. Over 85 percent of Sri Lanka’s adults can 
read and write. But the other countries in the region 
have low literacy rates. Large numbers of children never 
go to school at all, either because no school is nearby or 
because they must work to help support their families. 

Since the mid-1900's, the South Asian governments 
have built many new schools. More children now attend 
school than ever before, and literacy rates are improv- 
ing. But the governments have found it difficult to build 


TS Satyan Black Star 


Whirling Bhutanese dancers perform in colortul costumes. 
Dance ranks among South Asias major arts. The highly symbolic 
movements in the dances tell stories, usually religious ones. 


Asia 783 


enough schools and to train enough teachers to serve 
their enormous populations. 

The arts. South Asia has a rich and varied artistic tra- 
dition. The Aryans produced outstanding literature long 
before the time of Jesus Christ. Numerous Aryan literary 
works contributed to the development of Hinduism. 
Such writings included the epics the Mahabharata and 
the Ramayana and the philosophical works called the 
Vedas and the Upanishads. The Aryans composed their 
works in Sanskrit, the first Indo-European language with 
a literature. See Sanskrit language; Sanskrit literature. 

Three religions—Buddhism, Islam, and Hinduism— 
had major effects on the arts of South Asia. Major Bud- 
dhist works include many beautiful sculptures of Bud- 
dha, founder of the religion. The Muslims made their 
major contribution in the field of Islamic architecture. A 
giant tomb in this style, the magnificent Taj Mahal, is 
one of the world’s most beautiful buildings. See Taj Ma- 
hal, and the pictures of the building in this article and in 
the India article. The Hindus built stone temples, many 
of which are richly decorated with sculptures of gods. 

Other important arts in South Asia include dance and 
music. The highly symbolic movements in South Asian 
dances tell stories and are included in many dramas. 
South Asian music sounds strange to many Western 
people because it uses a different scale than does music 
of the West. South Asian people play much of their mu- 
sic On stringed instruments, such as the lute, sitar, and 
vina. The flute and the fab/a, a type of drum, are also im- 
portant instruments. 

During the colonial period, the British introduced 
some forms of Western art—including Western archi- 
tecture and the novel—into South Asia. Many South 
Asians came to fear that their own artistic traditions 
were being forgotten. During the 1900's, they began call- 
ing for a return to South Asian art forms. Today, the art 
of the region shows the influence of both traditional 
South Asian art and Western art. 

A reversal of the West's influence on South Asian cul- 
ture occurred during the mid-1900%s. At that time, South 
Asian art and philosophy began to attract many people 
in the West. Sitar music, a physical and mental exercise 
called yoga, and Hindu religious teachers called gurus 
became especially popular. The attraction to South 
Asian Culture was most widespread among young peo- 
ple of the West. 


Way of life in Southeast Asia 


Southeast Asia covers about 1,570,000 square miles 
(4,070,000 square kilometers), or 9 percent of the conti- 
nent. The area has an average of 336 persons per square 
mile (130 per square kilometer)—about three times the 
world average. The region includes the peninsula east 
of India and south of China, and thousands of islands 
south and east of the peninsula. 

Eleven independent nations make up most of South- 
east Asia. Five of these nations—Cambodia, Laos, Myan- 
mar, Thailand, and Vietnam—are located on the penin- 
sula. Malaysia lies partly on the peninsula and partly on 
the island of Borneo. Brunei also lies on Borneo. Jndone- 
sia and the Philippines each consist of thousands of is- 
lands, and Singapore is made up of approximately 50 is- 
lands. East Timor takes up about half of Timor Island, the 
rest of which is part ot Indonesia. Geographers con- 





Fields of rice—like these in Indone- 
sia—cover a large part of the South- 
east Asian countryside. Southeast Asia 
has much fertile soil and plenty of wa- 
ter from rivers and rainfall. The soil 
and water are natural resources that 
help farmers in the region grow large 
amounts of rice and other agricultural 
products. 


sider far eastern Indonesia to be part of Oceania rather 
than part of Asia. 

Southeast Asia has a wealth of natural resources. 
Forests cover much of the land, valuable minerals lie be- 
neath it, and fish are plentiful in the coastal waters. 
Much of the soil is fertile, and the rivers and rainfall pro- 
vide plenty of water. 

Europeans had established trading outposts in South- 
east Asia as early as the 1500s. In the 1700's, Europeans 
began taking control of Southeast Asia. By the late 
1800's, only Thailand remained free of European rule. 
Many Southeast Asians resented colonialism and fought 
for independence. These nations began to win inde- 
pendence after World War II ended in 1945. 

Most of the newly independent Southeast Asian gov- 
ernments faced uprisings by Communists and other 
groups who wanted to take over the countries. Commu- 
nists gained control of North Vietnam in 1954. In 1975— 
after years of bitter fighting—they took over South Viet- 
nam, Cambodia, and Laos. The Vietnamese Communists 
reunited North and South Vietnam into the single nation 
of Vietnam in 1976. For details on the conflict in Viet- 
nam, see Vietnam War. 

The people. More than 525 million people, or 14 per- 
cent of all Asians, live in Southeast Asia. Most live in rur- 
al areas, but millions live in large, crowded cities. 

The ancestors of most Southeast Asians came to the 
region from Central Asia and southern China during 
prehistoric and ancient times. They drove the original in- 
habitants of the region into the mountains and other re- 
mote areas. Today, descendants of the original inhabi- 
tants live in those remote areas. Through the years, 
thousands of people from China and India settled in 
Southeast Asia. These people control much of the re- 
gion’s business activity. 

Fighting has taken place within and between nations 
in Southeast Asia, especially as groups there have bat 
tled over control of the best land. Through much of the 
1900's, political differences caused sharp divisions 
among Southeast Asians. In almost all the countries, 





Herta Newton, Van Cleve Photography 


Communists tried to take political power from non- 
Communists. In some cases, the Communists succeed- 
ed. The fighting in and between Southeast Asian nations 
divided the people and stalled economic progress. 

Beginning in the 1980, relations between Southeast 
Asian nations—both Communist and non-Communist— 
markedly improved. By 2000, all of the nations of the re- 
gion belonged to an economic and political organiza- 
tion known as the Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations (ASEAN). 

Religions. Buddhism is the chief religion on the 
peninsula. It teaches that people can find peace and 
happiness by getting rid of their desires. Many South- 
east Asians, partly because of their religious beliefs, 
seem easygoing to people in the West—and to their Chi- 
nese and Indian neighbors. 

Islam began in Arabia and spread all the way to 
Southeast Asia. Today, it ranks as the chief religion in In- 
donesia, Malaysia, and Brunei. Christianity became the 
major faith of the Philippines during the period of Span- 
ish rule, and it remains so today. 

Many Southeast Asians, especially rural people, mix 
religious beliefs and practices with animism, the belief 
that everything in nature has a spirit. These people be- 
lieve that good and bad spirits cause good and bad for- 
tune. Some farmers offer small sacrifices to the spirits in 
the hope that the spirits will bring good fortune and not 
harm them. Some of these farmers build small boxes re- 
sembling birdhouses on the tops of poles in their rice 
fields. In the boxes, they put cloth, food, incense, paper, 
and other offerings to the spirits. 

Country life. The majority of Southeast Asians live in 
small villages and work on farms. Many Southeast Asian 
farmers, like farmers elsewhere in Asia, use ancient agri- 
cultural methods. They plant by hand and harvest with 
sickles and other hand tools. Many use water buffaloes 
to pull large, rakelike tools that plow the fields. Howev- 
er, the use of farm machines, such as tractors, is becom- 
ing more common. Rice is the major crop and chief 
food throughout most of Southeast Asia. 





f, 





A typical farm village in this region has from 25 to 30 
houses, made mostly of bamboo and wood. Many rural 
Southeast Asians build their houses on raised platforms 
for protection against insects, wild animals, and heavy 
rains. The space under the platforms provides shelter 
for household animals. Almost all villages on the South- 
east Asian peninsula include a pagoda or some other 
Buddhist shrine. 

The clothing of Southeast Asia varies widely. People 
of Western countries are perhaps most familiar with the 
cone-shaped hats worn by many farmers and the color- 
ful sarongs (skirts) of the Indonesians. Many Southeast 
Asians, though, have adopted Western-style clothing. 

Some Southeast Asians, especially islanders, work on 
large plantations owned by the government or wealthy 
landowners. The plantations produce large quantities of 
coffee, copra, fruits and vegetables, palm oil, rubber, 
sugar Cane, tea, and tobacco. Most of these products go 
for export. 

Most of the mainland farmers own a small plot of 
land. Much of the land is fertile and, in good times, al- 
most all the farmers can raise enough food to feed their 
families. Many have food left over that they sell. Some 
have begun raising cash crops, such as cashews, cotton, 
and jute. 

In general, farmers on the peninsula are better off 
than those on the islands. Good farmland is scarce on 
the islands, and a large number of farmers work on land 
that is owned by others. 

Rural Southeast Asians maintain the custom of extend- 
ed family. But compared to Southwest Asia and South 


@ we 
, { 
“ of 4  Y 
, = 
& 


bcd 
4 
— ' 


a a 
» A 





‘Gg d y a r\. 
| 


Hermann Schlenker. Photo Researchers 
A Buddhist monk in Thailand collects money from people at a 
religious celebration. He hangs it on a money tree. Buddhism is 
the major religion on the Southeast Asian peninsula. 





Asia 785 


Asia, relationships between older and younger genera- 
tions fall into less rigid patterns. 

City life. All the nations of Southeast Asia have at least 
one big city, and some nations have several. Jakarta, In- 
donesia, and Manila, in the Philippines, are the largest 
cities in the region. 

Southeast Asian cities serve as centers of government 
and manufacturing and as links between the rural areas 
and the rest of the world. Farm products, lumber, miner- 
als, and other goods go from the rural areas to the cities 
to be shipped abroad. Goods from other countries pass 
through the cities before being sent on to the rural ar- 
eas. Manufacturing takes place in many of the region's 
cities. The largest cities, such as Singapore and Manila, 
have much large-scale manufacturing. 

Outsiders have long played important roles in South- 
east Asian cities. In the 1800's, Chinese and Indian immi- 
grants began taking over a large part of the retail trade 
in the cities. Today, in some countries, they are still retail 
leaders. The European colonial rulers also established 
businesses and governments in the cities. They gained 
wealth for themselves and their nations from Southeast 
Asias resources. They also built up the cities and mod- 
ernized them along European lines. 

Southeast Asians continued the modernization 
process after becoming independent. Many of the cities 
have luxury hotels, high-rise apartment and office build- 
ings, motion-picture theaters, and other modern fea- 
tures. But like cities everywhere, they include slums and 
other run-down areas. 

Education varies widely in Southeast Asia, but the re- 
gion as a whole has a high literacy rate. Since independ- 
ence, the governments of some countries have estab- 
lished many new schools and set up special programs 
to increase literacy. Indonesia has raised its literacy rate 
from less than 10 percent in 1945 to more than 80 per- 
cent today. 

The arts. Precolonial Southeast Asian art reveals 
much Indian and some Chinese influence. A large part 
of the art is religious and includes many Buddhist 
shrines and statues of Buddha. Colonial rule brought 
Western architecture and literary forms to the region. 

The art of Indonesia and Malaysia shows less outside 
influence. The people on the islands of Bali and Java, in 
Indonesia, have unique and highly developed styles of 
architecture, dance, drama, and music. Their dances, in 
which each movement helps tell a story, are probably 
their most famous art form. See Indonesia (Arts). 


Way of life in East Asia 


East Asia covers about 2,570,000 square miles 
(6,640,000 square kilometers), or 15 percent of the conti- 
nent. The region includes most of China, the world’s 
largest nation in population. Tibet, Qinghai, and Xin- 
jiang, three thinly populated parts of western China, are 
in Central Asia. 

China covers more than 90 percent of East Asia, and it 
has about 85 percent of East Asia’s people. Four other 
nations—Japan, North Korea, South Korea, and Taiwan— 
are also part of East Asia. 

About 1 5 billion people, or about 40 percent of all 
Asians and a fourth of all the people in the world, live in 
East Asia. The region is one of the world’s most crowd- 
ed places. The population density of East Asia, 594 per- 





786 Asia 





Chinese farmers work together on a 
collective farm. The Chinese Commu- 
nists established collective farms after 
they took over China in 1949. China 
covers more than 90 percent of East 
Asia‘s land and has about 85 percent 
of its people. 


sons per square mile (230 per square kilometer), is over 
five times the world average. 

Off and on throughout history, China has ruled much 
of East Asia. The Chinese influence spread through the 
places they ruled and even to areas they did not rule. 
Chinese art strongly influenced art throughout East Asia. 
People throughout the region adopted Chinese reli- 
gious and philosophical beliefs to some degree. 

The Confucian system of ethics is probably the most 
important Chinese contribution to everyday life in East 
Asia. This system teaches the duties and manners of 
rulers and subjects toward each other, of family mem- 
bers toward one another, and of friends toward friends. 
The Confucian system stresses polite behavior and obe- 
dience to proper authority, two lasting characteristics of 
East Asian society. 

The influence of China brought some unity to life in 
East Asia. But the region has been sharply divided along 
political and economic lines. China and Japan, East Asia’s 
two largest nations, have almost completely opposite 
political systems. A Communist government rules China, 
and the people have little political freedom. Japan oper- 
ates under democratic principles of government, and its 
people have much freedom. 

China’s economy has centered on agriculture and re- 
mains largely underdeveloped. As China has moved 
away from strict government control of the economy, its 
standard of living has improved. Japan ranks among the 
world’s main industrial nations and practices more ad- 
vanced agriculture than any other country in Asia. The 
Japanese have one of the world’s highest standards of 
living. 

Political differences divide China and Taiwan and also 
North Korea and Soutn Korea. The Chinese Communists 
drove the Chinese Nationalists out of China in 1949. The 
Nationalists then established their government in Tai- 
wan. Before World War II broke out in 1939, North Ko- 


rea and South Korea were one country. Todav, Commu- 
nists rule the north, and non-Communists govern the 
south. Troops have patrolled both sides of the border 





Emil Schuithess, Black Star 


between North Korea and South Korea since the two 
countries fought each other during the Korean War 
(1950-1953): 

The people. The first East Asian civilization began in 
China. Today, descendants of the early Chinese—known 
as the Han ethnic group—make up a majority of China's 
people, except in the far north and west. Han people 
also form a majority in Taiwan. The Koreans are an an- 
cient people who have often come under Chinese rule. 
People called the Ainu were among the first inhabitants 
of the islands that now make up Japan. But almost all of 
the people of Japan today are descended from Asian 
peoples who settled the country about 2,000 years ago. 

Religions. The Chinese government has worked hard 
to discourage religion. However, many of the people 
still practice the traditional religion of their country. This 
religion—Buddhism combined with teachings of Confu- 
cianism and Taoism—is also the chief faith in Taiwan. 
Many Koreans practice Buddhism, but their religion also 
shows Confucian influences. Buddhism and Christianity 
rank as the leading religions in South Korea. The North 
Korean government also discourages religion, even 
more strongly than China's government. Buddhism and 
Shinto are Japan's major faiths, and many Japanese com- 
bine the two. Confucianism influences religion in Japan, 
as elsewhere in East Asia. 

Life in China. China has many large cities, including 
about 35 with a population of 1 million or more. Even so, 
it has always been an agricultural nation. About half of 
the people work on farms. 

Most Chinese farm families live in two- or three-room 
houses. These homes are made of mud or clay brick and 
have a roof of tile or straw. Many city dwellers live in 
large apartment buildings. However, other city residents 
live in crowded apartments above stores or behind 
workshops. Still others live in old neighborhoods where 
the houses resemble those in rural areas. The Chinese 
eat mainly vegetables and various foods made from rice, 
wheat, and other grains. 

Only about 4 percent of China's people belong to the 





Communist Party. However, the party has almost com- 
plete control of the country—and it has the power to or- 
der sweeping changes in the people's way of life. In the 
early 1980's, for example, the Communists decreed that 
each married couple should have no more than one 
child. They hoped to limit China’s population growth by 
this measure. Other major Communist goals include the 
elimination of social classes and the modernization of 
Chinas economy. See China (Way of life). 

Property. After the Communists came to power in 
1949, they took over most businesses and factories in 
China. They also completely changed the ownership of 
agricultural land. Before the Communists gained control 
of the country, many Chinese farmers owned a small 
plot of land. Others worked on large farms owned by 
wealthy landlords. During the 1950's, the Communists 
collectivized China's agriculture—that is, they organized 
the peasants into groups who owned and farmed the 
land cooperatively. 

In the 1980's, the Chinese government shifted empha- 
sis away from collective farming. Individual families be- 
gan farming more of the land. Initially, the families were 
required to give part of their crop to their collective and 
to sell a quota of farm products to the government at a 
fixed price. They then sold their surplus for profit at a 
market. The government has gradually relaxed its re- 
quirements. Now many farm families are free to raise 
and sell crops as they choose. In addition, the govern- 
ment encourages families to establish small businesses, 
such as stores, repair shops, and restaurants. The gov- 
ernment still owns many large businesses, however. 

Family life has always been important in Chinese soci- 
ety. In pre-Communist China, extended families were 
widespread. In such families, the oldest male had com- 
plete authority. Husbands ruled their wives, and parents 
had total control over their children. Today, most family 
units consist only of parents and children, though some 
also include grandparents. Relationships within families 
have become much less rigid. Husbands and wives treat 
each other as equals, and parents no longer expect their 
children to show unquestioning obedience. 

In pre-Communist days, relatively few women worked 
outside the homme. Today, nearly all adults have a job. In 
many families, a grandparent cares for the children dur- 
ing the day. Many other children stay in day-care centers 
while their parents work. 

Social class. Confucian teachings gave the Chinese a 
respect for educated people. In pre-Communist China, a 
group of scholars who served as government officials 
ranked just below the emperor and his family in social 
importance. To become a scholar-official, a person had 
to learn Confucian philosophy thoroughly and pass diffi- 
cult civil-service examinations. Other well-educated Chi- 
nese, including doctors, lawyers, and teachers, also had 
high social rank. The Communists, despite their own 
control over society, teach the principle of equalitarian- 
ism. According to this principle, all people, no matter 
what their occupation, have equal social rank. In prac- 
tice, though, some groups of people—such as govern- 
ment officials have much more power, wealth, arid 

prestige than others. 


The economy. China has long been one of the world’s 


poorest nations. The country has much good farmland, 
and it ranks among the leading producers of many 


Asia 787 


SS | a a Y= 


=. . a 
——_—— 
eo pe 


CURSO ene Fe 


i, 
xe 


a 


a — 
———— ; 
——— — 
—— ve 
i 
a5 SES —— 
“ = & 

5, = 
< —— — 
wa —— : 

———_ 
—— 


si anil 


Wi, 


HAYS 
"i 
“ili 
| 7h i 


ease aneecde il 
ee 


TOTES, 


DOA aod 


re 


~ . f 
aateanecessesossaseons 
VELEBALE 


y TAA teete 
VANE A AHA 
Rai: 
a 


VALUALELRNA 


PRBVERTIARCIRTIRT 
ne 





© Superstock 


Hong Kong's skyline, crowded with skyscrapers and other 
commercial buildings, reflects the city’s prosperity. Hong Kong is 
China’s leading center of international trade and finance. 





Michele Burgess. The Stock Market 
Rural houses in China are built of mud bricks, clay bricks, or 


stone. The majority of the Chinese people work on farms and 
live in rural villages, such as this one in Yunnan Province. 


788 Asia 


crops. But China has such a large population that it 
struggles to raise enough food for everyone. 

The Communists hope to eliminate poverty in China 
through the modernization of the country’s agriculture 
and industry. Chinese agricultural production has in- 
creased, but most farmers still use crude hand tools and 
farming methods. The Communists have greatly in- 
creased industrial production. But further growth will 
depend on China's acquiring new technology and train- 
ing highly skilled workers and technicians. 

Life in Japan differs greatly from that in most of the 
rest of Asia. Japan is a modern country in every sense of 
the word. More than 75 percent of its people live in ur- 
ban areas. Japan's big cities are busy centers of com- 
merce and industry. Tokyo, the capital of Japan, is one of 
the world’s largest cities. Tokyo is also the chief city in 
the heavily populated Tokyo-Yokohama urban area. 

Manufacturing makes Japan an industrial giant and 
does much good for Japan's economy. However, manu- 
facturing also helps cause a problem faced by all indus- 
trial nations—pollution. 

Japan's farms also reflect a modern way of life. Almost 
all Japanese farmers own their land. The use of chemical 
fertilizers, farm machinery, and other advanced agricul- 
tural methods is more common in Japan than anywhere 
else in Asia. The success of modern farming methods, 
however, has forced many Japanese farmers to seek 
part-time work outside the farm. 

The Japanese, more than any other Asian people, 
have adopted features of Western life, especially Ameri- 
can life. For example, baseball ranks as Japan's favorite 
sport, and neon signs light up many city streets. Most 
people in Japan wear Western-style clothing. Some 
Japanese, especially older people, wear the traditional 
kimono (loose robe) at home and for special occasions. 


A Japanese factory produces automobiles t 
world. Factory workers in Japan manufact 
helping to provide the Japanese people wit 


The Japanese have also kept many old traditions, in- 
cluding their deep respect for beauty. Shinto, once 
Japan’s state religion, teaches love of nature's beauty. 
Zen, a branch of Buddhism chiefly practiced in Japan, is 
famous for its emphasis on beauty in even simple things. 
Long ago, monks in Zen monasteries made art forms of 
everyday functions, including bathing, flower arranging, 
gardening, and tea drinking. These and other artistic tra- 
ditions became—and remain—part of the way of life for 
people in Japan. 

Many people in Japan, including the wealthy, live ina 
traditional plain, wooden Japanese house. Most of these 
homes have a garden and a high surrounding wall. Al- 
most every Japanese family that can afford it owns at 
least one brush painting mounted on a scroll. At many 
meals, the Japanese serve each food ina separate bowl 
to emphasize the food's color, shape, and texture. Rice is 
the chief food. The people eat with chopsticks. 

The extended family is not nearly so common in Japan 
as it was before the 1900's. But the Japanese still have 
strong family ties and a deep respect for authority. They 
expect individuals to obey all people who have authority 
over them, including their father, older brothers, and 
government officials. At the same time, persons in au- 
thority must act courteously toward others. This rule 
comes from an old belief that one person should never 
embarrass another. 

Economic growth and modernization began in Japan 
in the mid-1800's. Before that time, Japan's rulers worked 
to keep the country free from outside influences. The 
Japanese way of life was rooted deep in the past. Japan 
ended its isolation when it began trading with the 
United States during the 1850's. The nation adopted 
Western economic ways and made itself a world power. 

Japan's economic progress suffered a major setback 





Karen Kasmausk:, Matrix 


t will be exported to countries throughout the 
ide variety of goods for export and use at home, 
i the highest standards of living in the world. 








with the nation’s defeat in World War II. But the Japan- 
ese, with help from the United States, rebuilt their coun- 
try and its economy with astonishing speed. 

Korea and Taiwan. North Korea modeled its eco- 
nomic, political, and social systems on those of other 
Communist countries. Rural people, who make up about 
a third of the population, live on collective farms operat- 
ed by the government. The country has much industry. 
Most of the industrial workers live in city apartments 
and work in factories owned and operated by the gov- 
ernment. 

South Korea and Taiwan were formerly agricultural 
countries. Agriculture is still important, but after the 
1950's, South Korea and Taiwan developed into industri- 
al nations. Their economies grew rapidly, and living 
standards rose greatly. 

Education. Japan and North and South Korea have 
high literacy rates. Almost all Japanese 15 years of age or 
older can read and write. Most Japanese attend elemen- 
tary school and high school, and a high percentage go 
on to college. More than 90 percent of adult Koreans 
can read and write. 

In China, the Communists have expanded elementary 
education. During the 1940's, only a small percentage of 
the people could read and write. Today, about four-fifths 
of all Chinese 15 years of age or older can do so. China 
still has a severe shortage of schools, but the situation is 
gradually improving. Some children teach their parents 
or grandparents how to read and write. 

The arts. East Asia has one of the world’s oldest and 
richest artistic traditions. The Chinese created artworks 
before the beginning of written history. Through the 
years, Chinese artists became masters in many art forms, 
including architecture, painted porcelain, carving, scroll 
painting, and sculpture. Much Chinese art shows Bud- 





Asia 789 


dha or other religious subjects. Chinese artists also por- 
trayed people, animals, and nature, and created beauti- 
ful designs and rich colors. Artists in other parts of East 
Asia combined Chinese styles with their own. 

In China today, artists strive for self-expression. But 
the government discourages art that is critical of Com- 
munism. Both Japan and South Korea have continued 
their rich artistic traditions but have also adopted some 
Western art forms. For example, the people of both 
countries enjoy Western plays, television dramas, and 
motion pictures. Filmmakers in Japan and in Hong Kong, 
which returned to Chinese control in 1997, produce 
hundreds of movies yearly, many of which have won in- 
ternational awards. 

For more detailed information on East Asian art, see 
the Arts section of the articles on China and Japan. See 
also the articles on specific art forms, including Archi- 
tecture; Painting; and Sculpture. 


Way of life in North Asia 


North Asia covers about 5 million square miles 
(12,900,000 square kilometers), or about 30 percent of 
the continent. It is the largest region in Asia. It extends 
from the Ural Mountains to the Pacific Ocean. North 
Asia consists entirely of Siberia, which makes up about 
75 percent of Russia. The rest of Russia lies west of the 
Urals, in Europe. 

North Asia covers more land than any other region in 
Asia but has the smallest population. About 38 million 
people live in the region, or about 1 percent of Asia's to- 
tal. North Asia has a population density of only 8 per- 
sons per square mile (3 per square kilometer). 

A harsh climate has limited North Asia’s development 
and population growth. The region has an abundance of 
natural resources, including many minerals, vast oil 





C } Coulson, Pictonal Parade 


A fish market in Pusan, South Korea, operates in a way that is common in many parts of Asia. Sell- 
ers display their goods out-of-doors. The customers inspect the goods carefully before buying 
them. The fishing industry is important and fish markets are common throughout East Asia. 











790 Asia 





The Trans-Siberian Railroad winds 
through a bleak and frozen part of 
North Asia. North Asia is the conti- 
nents largest region in area but its 
smallest in population. Much of the 
region is undeveloped, partly be- 
cause of its cold climate. ice and 
snow cover most of North Asia about 
half the year. 


fields, rich forests, and grasslands in the extreme south- 
west that are good for farming. But the winters are long 
and bitter. lce and snow cover most of the region about 
six months of the year. The temperature can drop below 
—90 F(-68 C). Most of the coastal waters, lakes, and 
rivers freeze for much of the year. 

Because of North Asia’s isolation, governments, in- 
cluding that of the Soviet Union, have used it as a place 
of exile and imprisonment. The Soviet Union was 
formed under Russia’s leadership in 1922, and it existed 
until 1991. Russia and the other former Soviet republics 
are now independent nations. !n the past, Russian and 
Soviet rulers sent millions of criminal and political pris- 
oners to isolated parts of Siberia. Many prisoners were 
forced to work building factories, mines, and railroads. 

The use of forced labor for Siberian construction 
projects ended after the death of Soviet dictator Joseph 
Stalin in 1953. The government then began trying to at- 
tract workers to North Asia by offering high salaries and 
long vacations. However, many workers stay only a few 
years before leaving for better living conditions else- 
where. During some years, more people leave Siberia 
than move there. 

The people. Most Siberians are Russians. Ethnic Rus- 
sians are descended from Slavs who lived in Eastern Eu- 
rope several thousand years ago. Such Mongol and Tur- 
kic groups as Buryats, Tuvinians, and Yakuts lived in 
Siberia originally, and descendants of these peoples still 
live there. 

Religion. Russian Orthodoxy, a branch of Christianity, 
is the chief religion among North Asians of European 
descent. Many descendants of the original North Asians 
practice Buddhism or Islam. The Soviet Union’s Commu- 
nist leaders tried to discourage religion, but many peo- 
ple still practiced their faith. In the late 1980's, religious 
toleration began to increase dramatically, and attend- 
ance at religious services shot up. 

Life of the people. Many North Asians farm, fish, or 
work in factories or mines. Most North Asian factories 
operate in cities along the Trans-Siberian Railroad. Until 





Sven-Erik Hedin 


the late 1980's, the Communist government owned or 
controlled most of the farms and factories throughout 
the Soviet Union. In the late 1980's, however, the Com- 
munists began to allow private ownership. After the fall 
of the Soviet Union in 1991, most businesses became 
privately owned. 

About 70 percent of Siberia’s people live in cities. 
Most city people are crowded into small apartments. 
Many people in rural areas live in simple, but more spa- 
cious, log houses. Novosibirsk is the largest city in 
Siberia. It has a population of about 1 5 million. 

Education. Almost all Russians can read and write. 
Public education is free for all citizens. Children attend 
school for 11 years, from ages 6 to 17. 

The Communist government of the Soviet Union con- 
trolled education and considered it a vehicle for social 
advancement. The government also banned private 
schools. After the breakup of the Soviet Union, new pri- 
vate schools began to open, and educators removed the 
emphasis in the school curriculum on Communist Party 
principles. 

The arts. Much art of North Asia shows Chinese and 
Islamic influence. Some art shows Christian influence. 


Way of life in Central Asia 


Central Asia covers about 3,486,000 square miles 
(9,029,000 square kilometers), or 21 percent of the conti- 
nent. It is the second largest region in Asia. Only North 
Asia has more land. Central Asia includes Tibet, Qinghai, 
and Xinjiang, which lie in western China, and the inde- 
pendent nations of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, 
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. A tiny part of 
Kazakhstan lies west of the Ural River, on the continent 
of Europe. 

Except Mongolia and the Chinese-controlled areas, 
the lands of Central Asia were once part of the Commu- 
nist-led Soviet Union, which broke up in 1991. These na- 
tions have moved away from the Communist system to 
democratic forms of government. However, most have 
retained close ties to Russia, which led the Soviet Union. 








Central Asia’s grassy plains are the 
home of many livestock herders. Rais- 
ing livestock is the major economic 
activity in Central Asia. ln Mongolia, 
the herders live in tents called yurts. 
Except for the plains, Central Asia is 
largely an area of huge deserts and 
high mountains and plateaus. 


Mongolia adopted a Communist system in 1921. In 
1990, it changed to a democratic system. The rest of 
Central Asia is under Chinese rule. Qinghai is a province 
of China, which is ruled by a Communist government. 
China calls Tibet and Xinjiang “self-governing regions,” 
but the Chinese government actually rules them. 

Central Asia is a region of high plateaus and moun- 
tains, vast deserts, and treeless, grassy plains. Much of 
the land is too dry or too rugged for farming. A majority 
of the people earn a living by herding livestock. Industri- 
al activity centers in the region's few cities. 

More than 80 million people live in Central Asia, or 
about 2 percent of the continent's population. Of the re- 
gions of Asia, only North Asia has fewer people. Central 
Asia has a population density of about 24 persons per 
square mile (9 per square kilometer). 

The people. The people of Mongolia are called 
Mongols. The great conqueror Genghis Khan united 
various Mongol tribes in the early 1200's. He and his 
grandson Kublai Khan built the largest land empire in 
history. It extended from China and Korea, across much 
of Central and Southwest Asia, and into Europe. The 
people of Central Asia's other independent nations in- 
clude the Kazakhs, the Kyrgyz ethnic group, and ethnic 
Tajiks, Turkmen, and Uzbeks. 

Even though Qinghai, Tibet, and Xinjiang are part of 
China, most of their people are not Chinese. Tibetans 
make up the population of Tibet, and many of the peo- 
ple of Qinghai are Tibetans. Tibetans have lived in the 
area since ancient times. Uygurs, a people of Turkic ori- 
gin, make up about half of Xinjiangs population. 

Religion. Most Central Asians are Muslims. Islam is 
the chief religion in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, 
Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. When these areas were 
part of the Soviet Union, the Communist government 
discouraged religion, but people continued to practice 
their faith. These nations now allow religious freedom. 

Islam is also the chief religion in the Chinese region 
of Xinjiang. Lamaism, a branch of Buddhism, is the chief 
religion in Mongolia, Tibet, and Qinghai. The Chinese 





Asia 79] 





George Holton, Photo Researchers 


Communists discourage religion in the areas under 
their control. The Chinese government regards religion 
as superstition. It encourages the people to study sci- 
ence and political thinking, rather than religious beliefs, 
to solve their problems. 

Life of the people. All of Central Asia was once un- 
der Communist control. Today, only Qinghai, Tibet, and 
Xinjiang continue to be ruled by Communists. The six in- 
dependent nations of Central Asia have moved to demo- 
cratic forms of government, and they have removed 
controls that existed in such areas as religion, education, 
and the arts. 

Tashkent, the capital of Uzbekistan, is the largest city 
in Central Asia. It has about 2 million people. Most city 
dwellers live in single-story houses or apartment build- 
ings. The majority of the people of Central Asia live in 
rural areas. Most of them farm or raise livestock. 

In much of Central Asia, people in rural areas live in 
mud-brick houses in villages. Many rural villages do not 
have electric power or running water. Most families are 
large, and many members of an extended family may 
live together in one household. Such a household might 
include parents, married children and their offspring, 
and other relatives. Some rural people live in traditional 
tentlike dwellings called yurts. These portable homes 
are constructed of a circular wooden frame covered 
with felt. 

Many of Mongolias people live on livestock farms. 
The farms are like huge ranches with small towns in the 
center. The central buildings include houses, offices, 
shops, and medical centers. 

In Xinjiang, large numbers of people are herders who 
live near oases. Many people farm on the oases. 

The Chinese Communists seized Tibet in 1950. Before 
that time, few parts of the world were so completely 
controlled by religious leaders as was Tibet. Buddhist 
monks ruled the country and owned most of the land. 
The monks and a small group of nobles made up Tibet's 
upper class. Farmers and wandering herders formed Ti- 
bet's lower class. The farmers worked the land, and 


792 Asia 


most nomads tended the flocks of monks and nobles. 

The Communists reduced the power and wealth of 
the monks and nobles. They broke up many large es- 
tates and took over the land or distributed it among the 
people. They reduced the importance of religion. The 
work of farmers and herders has changed little since the 
Communist take-over. But the farmers and herders give 
much of what they produce to the government rather 
than to landowners. 

Life in Mongolia before Mongolian and Russian Com- 
munists took over resembled life in Tibet. The monks 
had religious and political power and great wealth. They 
owned large herds, which were given to them by the 
people as offerings. The youngest son of each family 
was expected to become a monk. The monks and a 
small group of nobles made up Mongpolia’s upper class. 
The lower class consisted chiefly of herders who moved 
about the country with their flocks. 

The Communists established large livestock farms 
and tried to force herders to settle there. But in the early 
1990's, the government allowed herders to leave the 
large farms. By the end of the 1990s, the livestock herds 
and most of the agricultural land had come under pri- 
vate ownership. 

Education in Mongolia and Tibet centered around 
religious instruction before the Communists took over. 
Except for the monks and nobles, few people received 
more than a few years of schooling. The Communists ex- 
tended education to more people. Teaching Communist 
principles is an important part of the curriculum in the 
Chinese regions of Qinghai, Tibet, and Xinjiang. It also 
was important in Mongolia until 1990. 

In the rest of Central Asia, the Communist govern- 
ment of the Soviet Union once controlled education. 
Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, schools in the 
former Soviet republics have removed the emphasis on 
Communist Party principles from the curriculum. Most 
of the people in these nations can read and write. Most 
children attend school for 11 years, from ages 6 to 17. 

The arts. Carpet making is an important craft in Cen- 
tral Asia. Other important crafts include embroidery and 
jewelry making. In Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan, the recita- 
tion of epics (poems about heroic events) is an impor- 
tant part of the culture. In the Chinese regions of Central 
Asia, the arts, like education, formerly centered around 
religion but today are intended to serve Communism. 


The land 


Asia, the world’s largest continent, covers about 17 
million square miles (44 million square kilometers), or 
about 30 percent of the world’s land area. It extends 
from the Arabian Peninsula, Turkey, and the Ural Moun- 
tains eastward to the Pacific Ocean. From the Arctic 
Ocean, it reaches south to the Indian Ocean. Geogra- 
phers consider thousands of islands off the mainland as 
part of Asia. These islands include—roughly from west 
to east—Cyprus, the Maldives, Sri Lanka, most of In 
donesia, the Philippines, Taiwan, and Japan. 

Asia and Europe are part oj the same mass of land. No 
body of water separates the two completely, and so 
some geographers consider them as a single continent 
called Eurasia. Certain physical features mark the divi- 
sion between Asia and Europe. The Ural Mountains. 
Ural River, and Caspian Sea act as an east-west bound- 





ary in the north. The Dardanelles, Sea of Marmara, 
Bosporus Straight, Black Sea, and Caucasus Mountains 
link to form a north-south border in the west 

Asia has some of the world’s highest mountains, 
largest deserts and plains, most important rivers, and 
best—and worst—soil. This section describes each land 
region of Asia. It also tells about Asia's major natural fea- 
tures and how they affect the lives of the people. 

Land regions. Asia has six major land regions, as dis- 
cussed in the Way of life sections of this article. South- 
west Asia is a land of desert in the south and of moun- 
tains and plateaus in the north. Dry soil makes farming 
difficult in most of the region. But Southwest Asia‘s land 
contains much oil, one of the world’s most valuable nat- 
ural resources. The northern border of South Asia in- 
cludes the Himalaya, the world’s highest mountain 
range. Much fertile soil lies south of the mountains. 
Southeast Asia is rich in natural resources, including fer- 
tile soil, forests, and mineral deposits. East Asia also has 
much fertile soil and other valuable resources. 

Forests cover a large part of North Asia, and areas of 
good farmland lie in the southwestern section of this re- 
gion. But much of northern North Asia is so cold that the 
land stays frozen throughout most of the year. Central 
Asia has much of the continents poorest land. Its main 
features include deserts, mountains, and rocky plateaus. 

Mountains. Asia has more mountains than any other 
continent. The mountains make transportation difficult 
in many places. They also separate people from each 
other and have hindered the exchange of ideas. On the 
other hand, melting ice and snow from mountaintops 
feed many Asian rivers. Millions of farmers depend on 
water from these rivers to grow crops. 

Many of the major Asian mountain systems branch 





~ —— he Sed 


© Chamoux Beynie from Liatson Agency 


Mount Everest, highest place on the earth, towers 29,035 feet 
(8,850 meters) in the Himalaya range on the Nepal-Tibet border. 
Other Asian peaks are also over 25,000 feet (7,620 meters) high. 








Asia 793 








" @. is = ae 
f : Oe me io ° ee 





Bjorn Boélstad, Photo Researchers 


The Dead Sea shore, the lowest place on the earth’s surface, lies about 1,310 feet (399 meters) 
below sea level. The shore, shown here, is on the border between Israel and Jordan. The land 
around the Dead Sea is rocky and barren. The sea itself is about nine times as salty as the ocean. 


out from a large group of rugged peaks and deep val- 
leys called the Pamirs. This area lies where Afghanistan, 
China, and Tajikistan meet. It is sometimes called the 
root of the world. Some peaks in the Pamirs tower over 
25,000 feet (7,620 meters) above sea level. The floors of 
some of the valleys are as much as 4 miles (6 kilometers) 
below the peaks. 

The Tian Shan range extends northeast from the 
Pamirs into Xinjiang. The Altai Mountains form part of 
the boundary between Mongolia and Xinjiang. Beyond 
these high ranges, the smaller mountains of such ranges 
as the Stanovoy and Yablonowyy reach across southern 
Siberia toward the Sea of Okhotsk. 

The Kunlun Mountains extend east from the Pamirs. 
This range forms the Qilian Mountains in eastern Tibet, 
then becomes the Qin Ling range in central China. 

The Karakoram Range extends southeast from the 
Pamirs. The famous Himalaya rises south of the Karako- 
ram Range and extends along Tibets southern border. 
The lofty Himalaya includes many of the world’s highest 
peaks. On the border between Nepal and Tibet, Mount 
Everest—the world’s highest mountain—rises 29,035 feet 
(8,850 meters) above sea level. 

The Hindu Kush range extends west from the Pamirs 
across Afghanistan. Farther west, the Elburz, Zagros, and 
other ranges enclose the high Plateau of Iran. The Pontic 
and Taurus mountains surround Turkey's Plateau of Ana- 
tolia near the western end of Asia. The Caucasus Moun- 
tains extend through southern Russia, Georgia, and 
Azerbaijan. The Caucasus Mountains form one of the 
boundary lines between Asia and Europe. 

Rivers. Millions of Asians live crowded together in 
the continent's river valleys and deltas. The rivers play an 
important role in the lives of the people. Many rivers aid 
farmers by depositing fertile soil along their courses 
and providing water for irrigation. They also serve as im- 


portant transportation routes for trade and travel. 

Southwest Asia's major rivers flow through the north- 
ern part of the region. The Tigris and Euphrates rivers 
begin in Turkey and meet in Iraq, forming the Shatt al 
Arab. The Karun River flows from Iran into the Shatt al 
Arab, which empties into the Persian Gulf. The Jordan 
River flows south from Lebanon into the Dead Sea. 

In South Asia, several rivers flow south from the 
mountains in the northern part of the region. The main 
ones include the Indus, which winds through Pakistan 
and into the Arabian Sea; and the Brahmaputra and 
Ganges, which flow through northern India and 
Bangladesh before emptying into the Bay of Bengal. The 
delta, a low plain formed from sediments, at the mouth 
of the Brahmaputra and Ganges is the largest river delta 
in the world. 

Four important Southeast Asian rivers begin in the 
mountains that are in and near Tibet. There, the Irrawad- 
dy, Mekong, Chao Phraya ({Menam), and Salween rivers 
start their long routes through Southeast Asia to the sea. 

East Asia’s major rivers, the Huang He (Yellow River) 
and Yangtze, begin in the Tibetan Highlands and flow 
east across China. The Huang He empties into the Yel- 
low Sea, and the Yangtze empties into the East China 
Sea. The Yangtze, which measures 3,900 miles (6,275 
kilometers) long, is Asia’s longest river. The Xi, southern 
China's chief river, flows from south-central China into 
the South China Sea. 

The major rivers of North Asia—the Lena, Ob, and 
Yenisey—flow from south to north through northern 
Siberia. They empty into the Arctic Ocean. The Amur 
River is the major waterway of far eastern Siberia. 

Large parts of Central Asia have no rivers. But impor- 
tant rivers rise in the mountains of that region. 

Deserts and plains. Deserts extend diagonally across 
Asia from the Arabian Peninsula northeast to China and 





794 Asia 


Mongolia. These huge deserts are unsuitable for tarm- 
ing, and few people live there. 

The Arabian Desert makes up most of the Arabian 
Peninsula. Other deserts cover much of the rest of 
Southwest Asia. A desert called Karakum occupies most 
of Turkmenistan. Kyzylkum is a desert that spreads 
across southern Kazakhstan and northern Uzbekistan. 
The Thar Desert stretches across much of the border 
between India and Pakistan. Farther east, the Taklimakan 
of western China and the Gobi of China and Mongolia 
form huge wastelands. The frozen tundra region that is 
in northern Russia is sometimes called a co/d desert be- 
cause so few plants can grow there (see Tundra). 

Plains are flatlands. Rivers cut through most plains 
and rain falls on them, helping make the soil fertile. The 
major Asian plains include those that lie across northern 
India, eastern China, northern Kazakhstan, and central 
Russia. 

Coastline, bays, seas, and lakes. Asias coastline 
measures about 80,205 miles (129,077 kilometers)—over 
three times the distance around the earth’s equator. 
Many narbors along the coast are shallow. Through the 
years, mud and silt carried downstream by rivers have 
partly filled the harbors. Asia's northern harbors, on the 
Arctic Ocean, stay frozen much of the year. 

Two huge bays of the Indian Ocean indent Asia’s 
southern coast. These are the Bay of Bengal east of India 
and the Arabian Sea west of India. 

Along Asia's east coast, islands and peninsulas block 
off parts of the Pacific Ocean into a series of seas. These 
seas include—from north to south—the Bering, Okhotsk, 
Japan, Yellow, East China, and South China seas. 

The Red Sea lies between the continents of Asia and 
Africa. The Aegean, Black, and Caspian seas make up 
part of the boundary between Asia and Europe. The 
Caspian Sea, which lies north of Iran, is the world’s 
largest inland body of water. It is not really a sea but a 
salt lake that covers 143,250 square miles (371,000 
square kilometers). 

Other lakes include Lake Baikal in Russia; Lake Bal- 
khash in Kazakhstan; the Aral Sea, between Kazakhstan 
and Uzbekistan; and the Dead Sea, between Israel and 
Jordan. The Dead Sea shore, about 1,310 feet (399 me- 
ters) below sea level, is the lowest place on earth. 


Climate 


Because of Asias tremendous size, its regions have a 
wide variety of climates. These varied climates include 
the bitter cold of the polar north; the hot, dry desert en- 
vironment of Central Asia and Southwest Asia; and the 
hot, humid conditions of the tropical south. The large 
map in this section illustrates Asias climate patterns. The 
smaller maps provide statistical information on tempera- 
tures and precipitation 

Winds called monsoons infiwence the climate of 
much of Asia. A monsoon blows regularly in the same 
direction during definite seasons. In winter, monsoons 
from the north move into Last Asia and cause cold, dry 
weather. The wind switches 'n sugipwer and blows from 
the seas that lie south and southeast ot that region. It 
causes hot, humid weather 

Most of East Asia's rain falls bet veen April and Octo- 
ber. The rainfall is heaviest in the esst, and it decreases 
away from the sea. 





1 2 3 4 






Br, ittsh = 


£ 
{ Wonrn Atlenti Ogw@an 





Physical features 





Altai Mountains £ 6 Caspian Sea ’ D4 
Andaman Islands H 7 Caucasus Mountains Do 4 
Amur River c 9g Celebes Sea H 10 
Arabian Sea G 4 Oead Sea O 2 
Aral Sea DO 4 Oeccan G 5 
Banda Sea 1 40 East Siberian Sea A 8 
Bay of Bengal G 6 Euphrates River D 3 
Bering Strait A 3 Formosa Strait FES 
Brahmaputra River tiie: Ganges River iF 6 













Gubi (desert) 

Gulf of Oman 
Hangayn Mountains 
Himalaya (mountains) 
Hindu Kush 

Huang He (river) 
indus River 
Irrawaddy River 

java Sea 


=—aammamaMm 


1, 


Arctic Ocean 


CS ~ UI Oo an OY sy ae OO 


Andaman, 
Islands. 


Nicobar 
Islands 


Nias 


Mentawat, 
Is. 


K2 imountaint 
Karakum (desert) 
Khyber Pass 
Kunlun Muuntains 
Kuril Islands 
Kyzylkum Idesert! 
Laccadive Islands 
Lake Baikal 

Lake Balkhash 


SoComnaw mn mm 


= 


3 
Wu S Hus mean 


Lena River 

Lesser Sunda Islands 
Luzon Strait 

Malay Peninsula 
Mekong River 
Mulucea Islands 
Muunt Everest 
Nicobar Islands 

Oh River 


eter cya oo) aires 


TuTSswnncon 


Pantirs Imountains) 
Persian Gult 

Ryukyu Islands 

Sayan Mountains 

Sea of Japan lEast Seal 
South China Sea 
Synan Desert 

Strait ul Honnuz 
TaMlimakan Desert 


Senco~woww 


Asia 
terrain map 


Land region boundary 


International boundary 


City 


Elevation above 
sea level 


Depression 


WORLD BOOK map 


7.000 Miles 


11,000 Kilometers 


Tigris River . 
Tonie Sap (lake) 
Turpan Depression 
Ural Mountains 
Ural River 

Xi Jiang (nver} 
Yangtze River 
Yellow Sea 

Zagros Mauntains 


AAAS OMom 












WwW OOO Oo me Vist Ow 





796 Asia 


Monsoons pass through South Asia and Southeast 
Asia from November to March. They cause the coolest 
weather in those two regions. Beginning in April, mon- 
soons from the southwest send temperatures soaring. 
From May to October, wet monsoons bring heavy rains 
from the south seas. Many of these monsoons cause 
floods. 





Climate regions in Asia 


Tropical wet ~ Always hot and wet. Heavy precipitation well 
distributed throughout year 


meg Tropical wet and dry - Always hot, with alternate wet and dry 


seasons Heavy precipitation in wet season. 


Semiarid - Hot to cold. Great changes in temperature from day 
to night except in coastal areas. Light precipitation. 


i j Desert - Hot to cool. Great changes in temperature from day to 
night except in coastal areas. Very little precipitation. 


Subtropical dry summer - Hot, dry summers and mild, rainy 
winters. Moderate precipitation in winter. 


EUROPE 








Chennai 


In Southwest Asia, monsoons affect only the southern 
and southwestern coasts of the Arabian Peninsula. Most 
of Southwest Asia has long, hot summers and mild win- 
ters. Inland, temperatures often climb above 115 °F (46 
‘C) in summer. But there are no clouds to keep the day- 
time heat close to the earth at night A warm but com- 
fortable night may follow an extremely hot day. The 


Humid subtropical - Warm to hot summers and cool 
winters. Moderate precipitation in all seasons. 





Humid continental - Mild summers and cold winters. 
Moderate precipitation in all seasons. 


Subarctic - Short. cool summers and long. cold winters. 
___} Light to moderate precipitation, mostly in summer. 





Tundra - Always cold, with a brief, chilly summer. Little 
= Ssprecipitation in all seasons, 


Highland - Climate depends on altitude. Climates at various 
altitudes are like those found in flat terrain. 
WORLD BOOK map 





ul 


j 
' 


Shanghai 


Hong Kong 


Singapor 




















region's heaviest rains fall in Turkey near the Black Sea 
and in the Caucasus region between the Black and 
Caspian seas. Some parts of the Arabian Peninsula re- 
ceive no rain for several years at a time. 

Bitter cold polar weather keeps part of northern 
Siberia’s land frozen the year around. In the grasslands 
in the southwest, the temperatures vary from 3 °F (—16 
°C) in January to 64 °F (18 °C) in July. Central Asia‘s climate 
ranges from extremely cold in its mountain regions to 
extremely hot and dry in the deserts in the summer. 


Animals 


Domesticated animals. Many Asian people use do- 
mesticated (tamed) animals to do work and as sources of 
food, clothing, and shelter. Domesticated animals in- 
clude the dromedary and other camels of Southwest 
Asia and the elephant and ox of South Asia. Other do- 
mesticated animals used by Asian people are the yak 
and Bactrian camel of Central Asia, the water buffalo of 
Southeast and East Asia, and the reindeer of North Asia. 

Wild animals. Arctic foxes, Arctic hares, lemmings, 
and reindeer live in the Arctic. The lemmings live under 
the snow in the winter. Many animals in North Asia 
south of the Arctic are highly valued for their fur. They 
include brown bears, elks, ermines, lynxes, martens, ot- 
ters, and sables. 

Antelopes, burrowing rodents, and locusts live in 
Mongolia and northwestern China. From time to time, 
swarms of locusts attack the fields of northern China, 
eating the crops in their paths. The giant panda, a black- 


Average January temperatures 


This map shows the average January temperatures in Asia. The 
Himalaya forms a barrier against the cold northerly winds and 
protects southern Asia from freezing temperatures. 







Yakutsk, 





Novosibirsk — 





an Cs 


arachi 


Mumbat 






Degrees Degrees 


Fahrenheit Celsius 
Over 68 Over 20 
50 to 68 10 to 20 
321050] | Oto 10 


Asia 797 


Average yearly precipitation 
(Rain, melted snow, and other moisture) 


Most of the rainfall in Asia is caused by the summer monsoon {a 
warm and moist southerly wind). The monsoon does not reach 
the central part of Asia, which is dry throughout the year. 






Yakutsk 


res 







/}. 
<< F 
». 
7% 
af ; 
— 


Karachi? — = “Le 
| : ane 5 : 


Aden re 
Mumbar ,™ ya 


i 
iy 


Inches Centimeters 





More than 59 [AMEE More than 150 
20 to 59 | 50 to 150 


10 to 20 25 to 50 


Less than 10 re Less than 25 









Average July temperatures 


This map shows the average July temperatures in Asia. Most of 
the continent is hot, with the exception of northern Siberia and 
the high plateaus and mountain ranges of Central Asia. 







Degrees 
Fahrenheit 


Degrees 
Celsius 











Over 68 Over 20 

50 to 68 10 to 20 

32 to 50 Oto 10 
Below 32 | Betow 0 | 


WORLD BOOK maps 





798 Asia 


and-white bearlike animal, lives in the wild only in Chi- 
na. Much of East Asia is so crowded with people that 
few wild animals live in the region. 

South and Southeast Asia have the continents great- 
est variety of wild animals. Apes and monkeys and beau- 
tiful tropical birds are plentiful in these regions. Some 
animals—including crocodiles, leopards, rhinoceroses, 
scorpions, tigers, and poisonous snakes—endanger the 
rural people. 

Wild animals of Southwest Asia include antelopes, 
caracals, onagers, and ibexes and other wild goats. The 
regions deserts support many insects and reptiles. 


Plants 


Few kinds of plants can survive in the Arctic area of 
North Asia. But the world’s largest fir and pine forest lies 


SS aaa _ 


south of the Arctic. Its trees supply lumber, pulpwood, 
and other products. 

The dry land of most of Central Asia supports little 
plant life except for grasses. But grass serves as the food 
for livestock, the basis of Central Asia‘s economy. 

Valuable plant life grows in eastern East Asia, which 
has plentiful rain. Trees supply East Asians with fruit, 
lumber, and paper. The people use one fruit tree, the 
mulberry, in an unusual way. They feed its leaves to silk- 
worms, which produce silk thread for clothing. 

Much valuable plant life also grows in the warm, wet 
climate of Southeast Asia and parts of South Asia. Prod- 
ucts from plants account for a large part of the exports 
of these regions. People in many parts of the world use 
products from the nutmeg, rubber, and teak trees, the 
tea bush, and bamboo grass. 


Animals of Asia This map provides a general idea of where some animals of Asia live. Most of the animals shown 
are wild. People have trained others, including camels, reindeer, and water buffaloes, to do work 






























Baikal 
Hair Seal 


7 | 
S 


Lemming 


Murre 


Siberian 
Ibex 


Reindeer 


FR 









Bactrian Siberian Tiger 
Camel 
Przewalski's Japanese 
ve ON Horse Black Bear 
ae Golden 
a: Ne 
Dromedary <—-- Pheasant 
hs Karakul Himalayan vas 
bs Black Bea 
x 2. r 
: Cobra 9 
Onager “ Water Deer 
Indian. Bihineceros 
& Deer 
Giant Panda 
' 7 Water Buffalo 
Arabian Oryx J j : Hornbill ER 
Asian Elephant mi. 2 ~ 


Bengal Tiger 





Black Leopard ta 


Mongoose 


WORLD BOOK map 
WORLD BOOK idlusiratons by Guy Coh 


et a 
Rhesus ~~ 
Monkey 
ME Gibbon 
e. 


a 






AK Orangutan 


Malay Tapir 











Java Peacock Komodo Dragon 





Asia 799 
Few plants grow in much of the dry parts of South- ing from farming. Farm products also account for the 
west Asia. But date palms and olive trees of desert oases — majority of Asia’s exports. 
provide important parts of Southwest Asian diets. Dates In many Asian countries, most of the farmers use 
and olives are also sold for export. hand tools, and many have animals that pull plows and 
The opium poppy is grown in parts of Asia, including do other work. Yet in such countries as China and 
Afghanistan and Myanmar. Such powerful drugs as Bangladesh, intensive hand labor by farm families plus 


heroin, morphine, and opium are made from this flower. using every bit of available land produces high crop 
Doctors prescribe such drugs to ease pain and for other __ yields. But these nations have so many people that there 


purposes. But some people use these drugs just to “get is barely enough food to go around. 

high.” The drugs are addictive, and many users become The use of modern farm tools and chemical fertilizers 
drug addicts and ruin their physical and mental health has become widespread in some Asian nations, includ- 
(see Drug abuse [Abuse of illegal drugs)). ing Israel, Japan, and the countries that were formerly 


part of the Soviet Union. Some Asian nations have in- 

creased farm productivity by the use of irrigation and 
Agriculture is by far the most important economic ac- _ new, higher-yielding rice and wheat seeds. These coun- 

tivity in Asia. About three-fifths of the people make aliv- _ tries include China, India, South Korea, and Thailand. 


Agriculture 


Plants of Asia This map provides a general idea of where some plants of Asia grow. Little plant life grows in the 
cold of the Far North. Warm and wet South and Southeast Asia have a wide variety of plant life. 


Eastern 
Eastern Fir 
Spruce 












Kudzu 










) 
Soybean wine 






Tragacanth 


** Cedar of Lebanon 
Tung 






Va 






Dawn 


Date Palm Redwood < 






“4 Minna < 


+ 





& 


Frankincense 


vs Turmeric 





Teak 


) 
A . 
Banyan a he Rubber vay 
. Tree 47 
ea 
| a4 | nara) Nutmeg 


Rafflesia 








WORLD BOOK tnap. 
WORLD BOOK itlustrations by Guy Coheleack Sandalwoo 








800 Asia 


How the land of Asia is used 


This map shows the different uses of Jand in Asia. The most im- 
portant crops—such as wheat in Russia, rice in southern China, 
and rubber in Southeast Asia—are shown in larger type. Large 
areas of Asian land are generally unproductive because they are 
either extremely cold or too dry and not irrigated. 

WORLD BOOK map 






EUROPE 


AFRICA 


0 1,000 2,000 Miles 
it) 1,000 2.000 Kilometers 


This section gives an overview of how farms are or- 
ganized in Asia and of Asia's major crops and livestock 
animals. The six Way of fife sections ot this article pro- 
vide more information on how rural Asians live and 
work. 

Farm organization in Asia follows three chief sys- 
tems: private ownership, tenant tarming, and collective 
farming. : 

Some farmers in all parts of Asia own their own farms. 
Private farm ownership is most common. however in 
South Asia and on the mainland of Southeast Asia. Many 


} Mostly cropland [am Forest land 


Grazing land jo | Generally unproductive 
i land 





farmers in these areas own a small plot of land. 

Tenant farming is also practiced in many parts of the 
continent but is probably most common in Southwest 
Asia. Many farmers in that region work on land they rent 
from wealthy landlords. They pay the landlords with 
crops or money. 

Few collective farms still exist. Israel has many collec- 
tive farming communities called A/bbutzim, and there 
are still some collective farms in China. 

The Communist countries of Asia formerly practiced 
collective farming, but it proved inefficient and unpopu- 








lar. The Chinese government introduced collective farm- 
ing communities called communes in 1958 but began 
abandoning them in 1979. The government then tried a 
system similar to tenant farming. Farm families pro- 
duced a certain amount of crops for the state. They 
could sell whatever excess they produced on the open 
market. The Chinese government gradually relaxed its 
crop requirements. Now many farm families raise and 
sell crops as they choose. 

Crops. South Asia, Southeast Asia, East Asia, and 
southwestern North Asia rank as the continents main 
crop-growing regions. The land and climate of most of 
Southwest Asia, Central Asia, and North Asia are poorly 
suited to farming. 

The chief crops of Asia are rice and wheat. The coun- 
tries of Asia—led by China and India—produce more 
than 90 percent of the world’s supply of rice. Asia's lead- 
ing wheat-producing countries include China, India, 
Russia, and Turkey. 

Most of the world’s natural rubber and tea come from 
Asia. Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand are the top 
natural-rubber producers in the world. Asia's leading 
tea-growing countries include India, China, Sri Lanka, 
and Indonesia. 

Other important Asian crops include cotton, jute (fiber 
from which burlap is made), and sugar cane. China, In- 
dia, Pakistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan 
stand among the leading cotton-growing nations. Jute 
comes chiefly from Bangladesh, China, and India. India 
ranks second in the world in the production of sugar 
cane. Only Brazil produces more. 

Livestock. In South Asia, farmers who raise livestock 
use the animals chiefly to help with the work. In the less 
fertile parts of Central, North, and Southwest Asia, many 


Marc Riboud, Magnum 





Asia _ 801 


people raise livestock for a living. They get cheese, milk, 
and meat from their animals, as well as fur and hides for 
clothing and shelter. Manure from livestock is used as 
fertilizer and sometimes as a cooking fuel. 

Some of the animals are used for transportation. Live- 
stock farmers also sell animals or products made from 
them to buy supplies. 

Hogs and poultry are raised for food throughout most 
of East Asia and Southeast Asia. Camels, goats, and 
sheep are the most important livestock in Southwest 
Asia. Central Asians herd Bactrian camels, cattle, goats, 
horses, pigs, sheep, and yaks. Reindeer herding is a ma- 
jor activity in the northern part of North Asia. 


Industry 


Industry is growing rapidly in many East and South- 
east Asian nations. These countries have. prospered as 
their industries have expanded. But most other Asian na- 
tions have relatively little manufacturing and depend 
heavily on agriculture. 

Mining. Raw mined materials rank among Asia‘’s most 
important exports. Southwest Asia supplies a large part 
of the world's oil. Southeast Asia provides much of the 
world's tin. China exports large amounts of antimony 
and tungsten. Manganese and mica from China and In- 
dia and chromite mined in Turkey and the Philippines 
are exported to many parts of the world. 

Asia exports most of its raw mined materials to indus- 
trialized nations on other continents. Asia‘s factories can- 
not use all of the continent's mined products. 

Manufacturing. During colonial days, Asia served as 
a source of food for Europe's people and as a source of 
raw materials for its industries. The processing of food 
and other products became important in Asia, and it 


AL Goldman, Rapho Gulllumette 


Agriculture provides a living for more than half of all Asians. Most Asian farmers, like the Chinese 
rice growers shown wading in water, perform many tasks by hand. A growing percentage of the 
farmers, including the Israeli beet growers shown riding a tractor, use modern farm machinery. 


802 Asia 


a 





© Superstock 
Heavy manufacturing takes place chiefly in technologically ad- 
vanced countries such as China, India, Japan, Russia, South Ko- 
rea, and Taiwan. The factory shown here is in China. Many Asian 
nations, however, have relatively little manufacturing. 





Bernard Wolf, DPI 


The handicrafts industry p: work for many Asians. 
Women in Sri Lanka, shown here ke beautiful designs on tex- 
tiles. People throughout the world buy Asian handicrafts. 


still is today. Such industries as sugar refining and the 
processing of fish, rice, and tobacco have major eco- 
nomic importance in some parts of the continent. 

Most of Asia’s heavy manufacturing takes place in 
such countries as China, India, Japan, Russia, South Ko- 
rea, and Taiwan, all of which have large, modern facto- 
ries. Industries in these countries make such products 
as automobiles, electronic equipment, factory machin- 
ery, iron and steel, military weapons, and ships. Israel, 
North Korea, Singapore, and Turkey also have some 
heavy industry. 

Other industries. Light industries play an important 
role in the economies of such countries as Indonesia, 
Malaysia, and Thailand. Many Southeast Asian countries 
manufacture textiles, footwear, personal electronic 
products, and other consumer goods. 

Millions of Asians who live along the seacoasts and 
rivers catch fish for a living. China, India, Indonesia, 
Japan, Russia, and Thailand rank among the most impor- 
tant fishing nations of the world. 

Tourism and a related industry, handicrafts, have 
great economic importance in many parts of Asia. Large 
numbers of non-Asians visit the continent each year, and 
many Asians travel outside their home countries within 
Asia. The tourists spend money on food, transportation, 
and shelter. 

Tourists also buy handicrafts made by Asians. The 
handicrafts include carvings, leather goods, metalware, 
pottery, rugs, and textiles. The tourist industry is espe- 
cially active in South, Southeast, and East Asia. 

industrial development. Many Asian governments 
are trying to improve the economies of their nations by 
creating new industries and by expanding old ones. 
They have taken various steps toward industrialization. 
Some countries offer low tax rates to non-Asian busi- 
ness people to set up businesses in Asia. Asian govern- 
ments have also used their own funds and aid from oth- 
er countries to establish industries. The governments 
sold some of these industries to Asian businesspeople 
at low cost. Many changes in Asian education are aimed 
at training people in industrial skills. 

The governments of Asia‘s Communist countries have 
attempted to increase industry by tight government con- 
trol and by economic planning. In the late 1900's, howev- 
er, both China and Vietnam began to loosen govern- 
ment controls and to encourage private enterprise. 

A number of Asian countries have succeeded in in- 
creasing their industry. Japan is one of the world’s lead- 
ing industrial nations. It exports cars, electronics, and 
other consumer goods throughout the world. Israel, 
South Korea, and Taiwan have also made great progress 
in industrial development. 

Other Asian countries have made some industrial 
progress, but they continue to be less developed com- 
pared to most industrial nations. China and India have 
huge factories and manufacture a wide variety of goods. 
But they still must import many items, and most of their 
people have a low standard of living. Such other Asian 
nations as Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippines, Thailand, 
and Turkey are developing modern industry. Saudi Ara- 
bia and other oil-producing nations have large oil re- 
fineries. 

Most other Asian countries have little industry other 
than the processing of agricultural products and raw 





materials. The Asian countries that were formerly part of 
the Soviet Union face the need to replace their old in- 
dustrial equipment and to develop new markets for 
their goods. 


Transportation and communication 


The transportation and communication systems of 
Asia‘s cities are more advanced than those of the rural 
areas. The cities have many of the same modern devices 
that Western cities have. But in some rural areas, trans- 
portation and communication differs little from that of 
hundreds of years ago. 


Mining and manufacturing in Asia 


This map shows the sources of Asia’s leading mined products. Products of outstanding economic 


















Asia 803 


Transportation. Many kinds of vehicles transport 
people and goods in Asian cities. Automobiles, buses, 
motor scooters, and trucks speed by vehicles powered 
by people or animals. People supply the power for such 
vehicles as bicycles and pedicabs. The pedicab, a taxi- 
cab operated like a bicycle, has largely replaced the jin- 
rikisha and other taxis pulled by runners (see Jinrikisha; 
Pedicab). Oxen, water buffaloes, and other animals pull 
carts through the streets of some cities. 

Motor vehicles are less common in rural Asia. Buses 
travel along the rural roads, many of which are unpaved. 
Some people share the ownership of a jeep. Many vil- 


@Oold Major mineral deposit 

























importance in each area—such as petroleum in the Persian Gulf area, coal in China, and tin in etead Other mineral deposit 
Malaysia—are shown in larger type. The map shows major manufacturing centers in red. 
° Manufacturing center 
WORLD BOOK map 
Arctic Ocean 
= 
2 
“ : Gold e 
Nickel 
\ ®, 
= rr ,®@ e Platinum Eis ce > 
eg Cc atural gas 
EUROPE j Natural. ~°PP®" — bamonds J Bo 
J gas ° 
Iron ye | Diamonds” eFretroleum 
| ~~ Petroleum | Gold 
pe Yekatennbu "9. “Bauxite 7) Antimony . 
e f Coal 
" “ Chelyabinsk 2©°P Per Bauxite *Gold Coal, ‘i 
wo =< i elron ore 
/ , hy ! ass e 
eMercury / Nickel Novosibirsk; a? al Krasnoyarsk Gold, i, 
. | | | Coale / Tin head, ay 
eChromite ( Chromite Iron Iron ore e < zinc oe 
i Manganese Manganese, Coal_*® 4 ‘; eo 
‘ a Pein < F 9 = ® Tungsten® e 5 Min *Copper 
o~ ®copper sles Petroleum Coal, 
t ¢ . —_ 
Tel Av e Molybdenum inc Iron OF ® Lead, Zinc kyo 
Petroleum Lead Shfnyang 
Potash Zinc ‘ Tin 
® Lead, Zinc Coal Seoul *e 
‘ Beijinge @ Osaka 
*Tehran ron® _ aw tungsten 
Tungsten “-&Mercury ‘i an) ° 
e Petroleum @ Kitakyushu 
Antimony Coal Bauxite Coal 
etroleum — f 
echromite Iron ores g Shanghai 
Petroleum Wuhan, 
e “Chromite Chengdu, @ iron Oca 
e r Natural® Delhi ; Chongqing® ehntimony — Taipei 
Petroleum re a pa) 7 4 Manganese’ rae } 
Karachi © Petroleumy Uranium, @ a 
Bauxite =. =e =e Guangzhou 
e : \ g 
Ahmadabade Oesine e purges Tin 8 “Hong Kong 
—M ah, e 
Petroleum, phe beac! ~ t Peta Lead, Zinc eCoal Copper 
Mumbai® iron Chromite 2 
yo ore Tungsten, Chromite™ Gold 
Bauxite 
e 
AFRICA Iron ore %, : — Lead, Zinc evickel 
Manganese e cod? 
oa 
Chromite, echenna TungsteM) » Bangkok 
Gold rin | 
» 
Titanium® Ting 
Petroleum, 5 
| Tifa Natural gas 
indtan Ocean i “yon ore 
Tin@ . Bauxite 
e Petroleum® *Nicke! 
Petroleum” Singapore ri 
1, ' 
000 2.000 Miles Pewoleum® @ | 
TIN petrol 
1,000 2,000 Kilometers etroleum 





— a | 


e 
“Jakarta 





804 Asia 


lagers transport goods in carts pulled by animals or 
people. Others travel by foot—to save wear and tear on 
their animals. Carts get stuck in the soft sands of the 
deserts, so many people use the sure-footed camel for 
desert transportation. 

Rivers rank among the chiet transportation routes of 
rural Asia. The people use barges, canoelike vessels, 
junks, sampans, and other small boats for travel and to 
transport goods. Junks and some other boats of rural 
Asia have sails and are moved by the wind. But many 
Asians must paddle their boats or move them by push- 
ing along pole against the river bottom. Sometimes, 
people on shore pull heavy barges by means of long 
ropes attached to the barges. People in Iraq sail an un- 
usual boat called a kufa that looks like a huge bowl. 

Airlines link most large Asian cities with one another 
and with other parts of the world. But railroads are still 
the continents chief means of long-distance transporta- 
tion. Colonial rulers built a large network of railroads 
during the late 1800's. They used trains to carry raw ma- 
terials from inland areas to coastal cities and ports. To- 
day, aimost all Asian countries have at least one railroad. 
More trains are needed, however, to handle increased 
passenger and cargo loads. Asia also has a shortage of 
railroad managers, train repair personnel, and replace- 
ment parts for old trains. Japan, with one of the world s 
most modern railroad systems, is a major exception. 

The colonial rulers also built up Asia's highway sys- 
tem between inland areas and coastal cities. Since the 
end of colonial rule, Asian nations have continued to 
build or improve highways so that more trucks and bus- 
es can use them. 

Oceangoing vessels carry much cargo to and from 
Asia's ports. These huge, modern ships tower above the 
small, old-fashioned sampans and other boats that dock- 
workers use while loading and unloading them. 

Communication in some Asian countries is much 





€ Lincoin Potter. Larson Agency 
Motor vehicle transportation has become common through- 
out much of Asia. These residents of Bangkok, Thailand, face 
thoroughfares crowded with traffic. 


the same as in Western countries. Many people read reach some rural areas. Some families own radios, but 

newspapers. Radio and television stations broadcast few own television sets. In Myanmar, for instance, only 

from most cities. Most households have radios, and about | person out of 200 owns a TV set Satellite televi- 

many own television sets. In Oman, for example, about 7 —_ sion receivers and mobile telephones enable some rural 

out of 10 people own a television set communities to stay in touch with the rest of the world, 
In other Asian countries, newspapers, radio stations, however. 


and TV stations are less numerous. Broadcasts do not 


History 


Four areas of the world are sometimes called the cra- 
dles of civilization because of the important early civi- 
lizations that began there. One of these areas is in Egypt, 
and the other three are in Asia. The Asian cradles of civi- 
lization are (1) the Tigris-Euphrates Valley, now mostly 
Iraq; (2) the Indus Valley of South Asia; and (3) the Huang 
He and Yangtze valleys of China, in East Asia. 

The Tigris-Euphrates Valley, near the head of the 
Persian Gulf, was the site of the world’s first civilization. 
This valley forms the center of a larger historic region 
called the Fertile Crescent. This region, named for its 
rich farmland, follows the Tigris and Euphrates rivers 
north and west from the Persian Gulf. Then it curves 
south through the valley of the Jordan River. The region 
includes parts of what are now Iraq, Israel, Jordan, 

a toRewarne,,  LeDanon, and Syria. 

Railroads, a leading means of long-distance transportation Ruins of old cities dot the Fertile Crescent Archaeolo- 
Asia, carry Cargo and passengers. This Indian commuter train is gists have discovered much about the ancient civiliza- 
so crowded that riders hang out ot the doorways tions that existed in the area between about 3500 B.C 








and the 200's B.C. These civilizations included the 
Sumerian, Babylonian, and Assyrian civilizations. 

The Sumerians developed the world’s first civilization 
about 3500 B.C. They invented a method of writing, 
called cuneiform, and used it to inscribe clay tablets. 
The Sumerians traded widely with other peoples, in- 
cluding the Egyptians. Sumerian armies had war chari- 
ots a thousand years before the Egyptians did. The 
Sumerians also developed a complicated system of laws 
governing weights, measures, and trading. 

No one really knows why Sumer declined. But by 
about 1900 B.C, the first of several great Babylonian dy- 
nasties appeared in the region north of Sumer. Babylon 
became the capital city of an advanced civilization that 
gained fame for its laws, religion, and walled cities. 

The Assyrian Empire, north of Babylonia, began to ex- 
pand after 883 B.C. For about 100 years, from 728 B.C. to 
626 B.C, Assyria controlled Babylonia. Babylonia re- 
gained its independence after King Ashurbanipal of As- 
syria died in 627 B.C. But the Persians conquered the 
empire in 539 B.C 

The Persian Empire reached its height about 520 B.C 
At that time, it included much of Southwest Asia and 
parts of South Asia, the southern part of Russia, and 
North Africa. Persia's importance lasted nearly 200 years. 
Alexander the Great conquered the Persian Empire in 
3310B.E. 

The Indus Valley. From about 2500 B.C. to about 
1700 B.C., an advanced Bronze Age culture developed in 
South Asia. This civilization spread through the valley of 
the Indus River and included hundreds of settlements in 
what are now Pakistan and northwestern India. Scholars 
do not know how the Indus society began, nor if its peo- 
ple were related to the peoples of Southwest Asia. 

About 1500 B.C., nomadic tribes called Aryans invad- 
ed India. The Aryans probably came from the plains 
north of the Caspian Sea. They gradually spread their 
culture eastward to the Ganges Valley. The Aryans de- 
veloped the religious and social practices that formed 
the basis of later Hindu cultures. By 517 B.C, the Persian 
Empire had started to overrun the Indus Valley. 

From 327 to 325 B.C, Alexander the Great conquered 
the Indus area. But he soon gave up his rule over the 


Asian civilizations 
and empires of 
ancient times 


empires in Asia. 


Cradles of civilization 





300’s and 200’s B.C. 





Asia 805 


area, and India came under the control of Buddhist 
rulers. Buddhist dynasties controlled much of the Indian 
subcontinent for hundreds of years. The greatest empire 
in this period was that of Ashoka. He united nearly two- 
thirds of South Asia during his rule, which lasted from 
about 272 B.C. to 232 B.C. Art and literature thrived dur- 
ing Ashoka’s reign. 

The Huang He and Yangtze valleys of north and 
central China make up the third early center of Asian 
culture. In the Huang He Valley, during the 1700's B.C, 
the Shang dynasty became the first major civilization of 
East Asia. Palaces filled the Shang capital of Anyang. 
Shang priests used pictographs (simple drawings repre- 
senting words) to report events and keep records. This 
early picture writing formed the basis of the written Chi- 
nese language. 

The Zhou (also spelled Chou) dynasty replaced Shang 
rule about 1122 B.C. The Zhou dynasty was centered in 
the Yangtze Valley. During Zhou rule, Chinese art and 
learning flourished. Great thinkers, such as Confucius 
and Laozi (also spelled Lao Tzu), laid the basis of East 
Asian philosophy. Feudal wars weakened the Zhou dy- 
nasty after 403 B.C, and the dynasty ended in 256 B.C 
Several large states controlled China until 221 B.C, when 
the Qin [also spelled Chin) dynasty took over. 

Qin rulers created the first united Chinese empire. 
The first Qin ruler, Shi Huangdi, ordered major con- 
struction on the Great Wall of China in an attempt to 
protect the empire from the nomadic peoples of the 
north. But rebel warriors overthrew the Qin rulers in the 
late 200s B.C. China's next dynasty, the Han, ruled a large 
empire from 202 B.C. to A.D. 220. 

Nomadic invasions destroyed ancient civilizations in 
all parts of Asia after A.D. 300. For centuries, nomadic 
barbarians poured out of Central Asia and southern 
North Asia. In East Asia, during the 300's, the Huns of 
Mongolia conquered northern China. Then they turned 
west and invaded Europe, where they contributed to the 
fall of the Roman Empire. In about 500, Huns ended In- 
dias 180-year-old Gupta Empire. 

East Asia had peace from the early 600's to the 1100's, 
when nomadic invasions and religious wars weakened 
western Asia. The Tang and Song (also spelled Sung) dy- 


These maps show the locations of some of the most important civilizations and empires of Asia 
during ancient times. The map at the left locates the Asian cradles of civilization—areas where im- 
portant early civilizations developed. The other maps show the extent of some of the major early 


A.D. 100s to 300’'s 








ee 
WORLD BOOK maps 





806 Asia 





© Lawrence Migdale Photo Researchers 


Shi Huangdi's tomb is surrounded by an army of life-sized terra 
cotta statues of soldiers. In the 200's B.C, Shi Huangdi united Chi- 
na for the first time and began the famous Great Wall of China. 


nasties ruled China during that period. They developed 
gunpowder, printing, paper money, and porcelain. 

Muslim peoples conquered Southwest Asia during 
the 600's and built an empire that included North Africa 
and most of Spain and Portugal. From the 300's to the 
1100's, the Byzantine Empire in the eastern Mediter- 
ranean area was the only Christian power in Asia. That 
Christian influence eroded as the empire fell to the Ot- 
tomans, a Muslim people from Central Asia. Over sever- 
al centuries, the Ottomans steadily occupied Byzantine 
territories and established a great Muslim empire called 
the Ottoman Empire. In 1453, they captured the Byzan- 
tine capital, Constantinople, which then became known 
as Istanbul. 

New barbarian invasions came from the center of Asia 
after 1206 when Genghis Khan united Mongol tribes and 
conquered northern China, northern India, Persia (now 
Iran), and parts of Europe. The Mongol Empire extended 
from China and Korea to the Danube River in Europe. It 
was the largest land empire in history. The empire last- 


Asian empires in medieval 
and modern times 


ed until 1368, but it achieved its greatest importance 
during the mid-1200's under Kublai Khan. 

After the fall of the Mongol Empire, the Ming dynasty 
gained control of China and spread its power through- 
out most of East Asia. During the nearly 300 years of 
Ming rule, Chinese art and literature flourished. 

In 1526, Mongols again invaded India and established 
the Mughal Empire. About the same time, the Ottoman 
Empire reached its height in Southwest Asia. Ottoman 
rule also extended to North Africa and southeastern Eu- 
rope. But none of these empires remained powerful. Eu- 
ropeans had entered a period of cultural and economic 
expansion that resulted in their conquest of Asia. 

The Western conquest of Asia began during the 
early 1500s. The desire for Asia's riches—especially con- 
trol of the spice trade—excited all Europe. An age of 
colonial expansion followed. In the 1500's, the Por- 
tuguese took control of the Indian Ocean and, farther 
east, obtained Macao and Melaka as ports for trade. The 
Spanish began trading in the Philippines about 1565. 
The English and Dutch entered the Asian trade after 
1600. The Dutch gained a foothold on Java in 1619. They 
tock Melaka from the Portuguese in 1641 to control the 
spice trade. 

In Japan, the strong Tokugawa rulers forced the Span- 
ish and Portuguese to leave the country in 1639. Japan 
allowed only the Dutch to send a ship to trade at Na- 
gasaki once a year. China, under the Qing dynasty of the 
Manchus, also closed its doors to the West Foreign 
traders were permitted only at Guangzhou (Canton). 

The British and Dutch, stopped from trading with Chi- 
na and Japan, turned to South and Southeast Asia. The 
British gradually conquered most of India, and the 
Dutch took over the East Indies (now Indonesia). At 
about the same time, European Russians pushed into 
Siberia from the west. 

The age of colonialism. Europe and the United 
States brought their economic and military strength to 
bear on Asia during the 1800's. In 1839, China and the 
United Kingdom began the Opium War, a battle over 
opening China to imports. China lost and, in 1842, 
agreed to British trade at five Chinese ports. Two years 
later, China began trading with the United States and 
France. In 1854, Matthew C. Perry, the leader of an 


These maps show the locations of some of the major empires in Asia from the AD. 
700's to the 1700's. The Mongol Empire, center, was the largest land empire in history. 


It extended all the way from China and Korea to the Danube River in Europe. 


A.D. 700's 


A.D. 1200's 









EUROPE a " ‘= 
—— \ all 


~ AME Re 
Se 





A.D. 1500's to 1700's 


= 





a“ 






| Mg 
AFRICA A. 


oge 
a 
WORLD BOOK maps 


“te 


= 


‘ 














During the colonial period—the 1500's to the mid-1900's—Europeans controlled much of 
Asia. The Europeans used Asian natural resources to help their own nations economies. 
Only a small percentage of Asia's people benefited economically from the colonial system. 
This picture shows British rulers and their Asian servants in India during the mid-1700s. 


American naval mission, signed a treaty that opened 
Japan to limited U.S. trade. 

A period of fierce competition began among Western 
powers for Asian trade and colonial expansion. The 
United Kingdom became a powerful force in Southwest 
Asia, India, and southern China. Russia expanded into 
Central Asia and Manchuria. The French colonized In- 
dochina. The United States acquired the Philippines 
from Spain in 1898, atter the Spanish-American War. 

By the 1900's, Western influence had produced great 
changes throughout Asia. Western art influenced Asian 
art, and the colonials built large parts of Asian cities 
along Western lines. The colonial powers played the 
leading part in the economic and political life of much 
of Asia. 

The colonials made great profits through their control 
of Asia. At the same time, large numbers of Asians lived 
in poverty and had no voice in their government. Many 
Asians were dissatisfied with colonialism and demand- 
ed that Asians rule Asia. Feelings of nationalism grew up 
in many parts of the continent. In time, these nationalist 
movements ended colonialism in Asia. 

The rise of the Japanese Empire. Japan overthrew 
the Tokugawa system of government in 1867. After 
adopting a constitutional monarchy in 1889, Japan quick- 
ly rose to great power in eastern Asia. From 1894 to 
1905, in wars with China and Russia, Japan won the is- 
land of Taiwan and a foothold in Manchuria and Korea. 

A new Chinese republic replaced the Manchu dy- 
nasty in 1912. But China found it difficult to build a 
strong new government. For many years, war lords 
fought for control of the country. Finally, in 1928, the 
Chinese Nationalists united China under one govern- 
ment. But the Nationalists still had to contend with rival 
Communist groups, which left the nation open to attack. 

In 1931, Japanese troops invaded Manchuria. Six years 


Asia 807 


United Press Int. 


Mohandas K. Gandhi, center, was an 
Asian leader in the struggle for inde- 
pendence. He led India's movement 
for independence from British rule. 


later, they swept into central China. The troops left China 
only partly conquered and began to drive toward South- 
east Asia and the Pacific Islands. 

In 1941, Japan joined Germany and Italy in World War 
Il. At the height of its power, in 1942, the Japanese Em- 
pire extended from the Aleutian Islands of Alaska, south 
to the Netherlands Indies, and as far west as Burma 
(now Myanmar). The huge empire collapsed with Japan's 
defeat in 1945. See World War II (The war in Asia and 
the Pacific). 

The end of colonialism. The Allied victory in World 
War Il returned most of the colonies to the Western 
powers, but only for a short time. Feelings of national- 
ism in Asia had grown during the war. Mohandas K. 
Gandhi, who led India’s movement for independence 
from the United Kingdom, was perhaps the most fa- 
mous Asian nationalist. 

Between 1943 and 1949, Burma (now called Myan- 
mar), Ceylon (now called Sri Lanka), India, Indonesia, 
Pakistan, and the Philippines changed from colonies into 
nations. Anumber of Southwest Asian colonies and ter- 
ritories also became independent nations. In addition, a 
new nation, Israel, was formed in 1948 as a homeland 
for Jews. In 1949, Indochina was the only part of Asia 
that still had major Western colonies. However, that re- 
gion was torn by revolt and gained independence five 
years later. 

Results of colonialism. With the end of colonialism, 
Asian nations again controlled their own development. 
But years of colonial rule had left Asia poorly prepared 
in some ways to face the modern world. 

Economically, Asia lagged tar behind the West. An in- 
dustrial boom in the West, which began during the 
1700's, provided jobs for the rapidly increasing popula- 
tion. The boom enriched governments and business 
people and gradually raised the living standard of 


808 Asia 


most of the population. The West also made major im- 
provements in farm tools and methods. 

Under colonial rule, Asia had provided raw materials 
needed for Western industry. But most of Asia did not 
become industrialized. Nor did the continent experience 
much agricultural improvement. As a result, poverty be- 
came more widespread in Asia than in the West by the 
end of the colonial period. 

Colonialism also slowed Asia's political and military 
development. At the same time Western nations ruled 
Asia, they developed a tradition of strong central gov- 
ernment that their colonial possessions lacked. After the 


Foreign influence in Asia—1914 


This map shows Asia in 1914. Cities under colonial rule are 
shown by circles. Treaty ports, which handled international 
commerce, are shown by black dots. Pink stripes show the 
sphere of British influence, green stripes the Russian sphere. 


Abbreviations on Map 





(Fr.j . France (U.K.). . United Kingdom 
(Port.} Portuga! (U.S.) United States 
7 Pei = a. neelg 
aoe . 7 Arctic Ocean 
hes: - vii i: 
i ie 
EUROPE 


CYPRUS 
(U.K) Qe 






OTTOMAN 


EGYPT EMPIRE 












(U.K) 

\ y . ushun (Fon Ades (span J 

- = } apanl JAPANESE 
—_.  Tianjn® Weiha? ie EMPIRE 
Zs un) : 
PERSIA ‘ . Re acne 
CHINESE REPUBLIC Bea 
ARABIA elkaoil _ Nanjing Shangha: Pacific 
A Hankou, * Ningbo Ocean 
QATAR 2 a —_ 
Fuzhou, 
TRUCIAL 
STATES . r Miamen, TAIWAN (Japan) 
MUSCAT - * Gry Guangzhou 
AND OMAN BRITISH- iNDIANOE MPIRE nares rena Kong ip 
AOEN! = +4 ° O° acao 
(UK, HADHRAMAUT on es Chendecnagore (Port) 

s (Pon | aia 

FRICA ' 7 

in Goa@ Pvangon Fr) a oat 
(Port } a - 
@Prondichery iFr| ¢ 
Mahe@ ? . la 
iFe | Oxarikai (Fr , 
y Noa BORNEO Sg 
Indian Oegea CEYLON BRUNEI (U K sy (UK) 
os Wet SARAWAK , 
“ MAUAYSTATES ¢ "asia 
MALDIVES = ‘ee) 
(UK a hat =) 
% Ms | 
~~ | ae 
0 1.000 2,000 Miles ‘'.~m pertn EAST IN pd} ES. we : 
N) 1 —_—— -l = TIM ; 
= = ‘alas - fon 


z hl OUTER MONGOLIA 
‘ f oer 
il 





Europeans left, various groups in many Asian nations 
struggled for political power. In many cases, Asians who 
came to power had difficulty establishing their authority 
over all the people in their countries. Political factions 
divided many nations. 

Western nations developed militarily as well as indus- 
trially and politically during the colonial period. But in 
Asia, the colonial rulers—not the Asians—were responsi- 
ble for the military defense of the lands they governed. 
After the colonial rulers left, many Asian nations found 
themselves without suitable military protection. This mil- 
itary weakness added to Asias problems. 


4 | Portuguese 
q : 
[=z] United States 


Independent 
countries 


WORLD BOOK map 


~ 
a 














g 



























The spread of Communism. Two Asian nations—the 
Soviet Union and Mongolia—turned Communist long 
before World War II. (The Soviet Union had been 
formed in 1922, under Russias leadership.) By the time 
the war began in 1939, Communist parties had gained 
strength in many other parts of the continent. The Com- 
munists spoke out against colonial rule and used their 
stand against colonialism to gain followers. During 
World War Il, many Communists fought alongside the 
Allies, some of which were colonial powers. But after 
the war, the Communists called for an end to colonial- 
ism and sought power for themselves. 

In 1949, the Chinese Communists defeated the Chi- 
nese Nationalists. Mao Zedong led the Communists in 
their 22-year struggle for control of China. With this vic- 
tory, Communists controlled Asia‘s two largest nations 
—China and the Soviet Union. 

At the end of World War II, Korean Communists took 
control of North Korea, and non-Communist Koreans 
took South Korea. In 1950, the North Koreans invaded 
South Korea, touching off the first international war be- 
tween Communists and non-Communists. The United 
States and other non-Communist nations fought on the 
side of the South Koreans. North Korea's allies included 
China, which sent troops, and the Soviet Union, which 
sent supplies. The Korean War ended in 1953. But Korea 


When the countries of Asia became independent 


More than 30 Asian nations have become independent since 
World War II ended in 1945. This map shows when the various 
countries of Asia gained their independence. Yemen (Aden) and 
Yemen (Sana) merged into the country of Yemen in 1990. 


AFRICA 
[ 


indian Ocean 


MALDIVES 
1965 


2,000 Mites 


0 1,000 2,000 Kilometers 











Asia 809 


still remains divided between a Communist north and a 
non-Communist south. 

Communism also gained a foothold in Southeast Asia. 
In 1946, Communists in Vietnam, which was then a 
colony of French Indochina, began a long war against 
the French forces there. A nationalist group called the 
Vietminh led the movement. It was headed by the Com- 
munist leader Ho Chi Minh. The Communists finally de- 
feated the French in 1954. Indochina was then divided 
into four independent nations—Cambodia, Laos, North 
Vietnam, and South Vietnam. 

The fighting did not end when the French left. Com- 
munists in Cambodia, Laos, and South Vietnam contin- 
ued to fight the new non-Communist governments. 
North Vietnam sent troops and supplies to help them. 
China and the Soviet Union also sent supplies. 

In the early 1960's, South Vietnam seemed about to 
fall to the Communists. The United States sent troops to 
help defend South Vietnam. A cease-fire agreement 
ended U.S. participation in the fighting in 1973. But 
clashes continued between the Vietnamese Commu- 
nists and non-Communists. Battles also flared up in 
Cambodia and Laos during the 1960's and early 1970s. In 
1975, Communists took control of South Vietnam, Cam- 
bodia, and Laos. North and South Vietnam were reunit- 
ed in 1976. See Vietnam War. 


| Countries independent 
before World War | 


= Countries independent 
between World War I 
is 4 and World War Il 


Countries independent 
after World War Il 


Countries independent 
fo, sal from former Soviet 
Union in 1991 











Pacific 
Ocean 


4 TAIWAN 
7 


, PHILIPPINES 
> 1946 






BRUNEI 
1984 







MALAYSIA 1963 
[ @ 





ate oe 


LEO ORE STA 


Spetine~ 1: 





WORLD BOOK map 


810 Asia 


Communist rebels also fought against the govern- 
ments of several other Asian countries, including Myan- 
mar, the Philippines, and Thailand. But none of these re- 
bellions succeeded. 

In 1978, leftist military leaders took over the govern- 
ment of Afghanistan. Many Afghans rebelled against the 
new government. At the end of 1979, the Soviet Union 
began sending troops to help the Afghan government 
crush the rebels, who were called mujahideen. Howev- 
er, the government forces and their Soviet allies were 
unable to defeat the rebels. The Soviet Union withdrew 
its troops in 1988 and 1989. The war in Afghanistan be- 
tween the rebels and the government continued until 
1992, when the rebels overthrew the government. 

By the end of 1991, the Soviet Union had ceased to ex- 
ist as a Country. First, Communist rule ended there after 
conservative Communist officials failed in an attempt to 
overthrow Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev. After the 
failed coup, most of the Soviet republics declared their 
independence. In December 1991, Gorbachev resigned, 
and the Soviet Union was dissolved. The former Soviet 
republics became independent nations. 

Other struggles. Fighting in Asia has not been limit- 
ed to the struggle between Communists and non- 
Communists. Ethnic group friction, power struggles 
within nations, border disputes, and other causes have 
led to fighting among many Asian peoples. 

Israel and the Arabs of Southwest Asia and North 
Africa have struggled since the founding of Israel in 
1948. The Arabs claim the Israelis have no right to estab- 
lish a Jewish state in what Arabs consider their land. 
Since 1948, the Arabs and the Israelis have fought four 
wars. In the late 1970's, relations between Israel and the 
Arab country of Egypt improved. In the early 1990's, rela- 
tions improved between Israel and both Jordan and the 
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), an Arab group 
that represents Palestinians. But in the early 2000's, fight- 
ing between Israel and the Palestinians increased. 

Conflicts have also erupted between various groups 





Communists battled Nationalists in China for 22 years before 
finally gaining control of the country in 1949. The spread of Com- 
munism led to much fighting in Asia during the 1900's. 


EE EE EEO OOOO 


of Muslims in Southwest Asia. In the 1960's, rebels bat- 
tled government forces in Iraq; Syria; and Yemen 
(Sanaa), now part of Yemen. Iran and Iraq fought a war 
against each other from 1980 to 1988. In Lebanon, fight- 
ing broke out between Muslims and Christians in the 
mid-1970's, and among various Muslim groups in the 
1980's. A peace plan ended most of the fighting in 
Lebanon in 1991. In 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait. Many 
Southwest Asian nations and Western nations joined 
forces to drive Iraqi troops out of Kuwait in 1991. 

The Kurds are a Muslim people whose homeland ex- 
tends across the mountainous border regions of several 
Southwest Asian nations. In the late 1900's, the Kurds 
often battled the governments of those countries for the 
right to establish their own government. 

India and Pakistan have disputed control of Kashmir 
since the two countries were formed in the late 1940's. 
Fighting has erupted many times in the region. Now that 
both nations possess nuclear arms, the Kashmir conflict 
ranks as one of the world’s most troubling. 

Civil war broke out in Pakistan in 1971. The govern- 
ment, centered in West Pakistan, ordered troops to put 
down a rebellion in the east. But forces from India 
joined the East Pakistanis and succeeded in defeating 
West Pakistan in December 1971. East Pakistan then be- 
came the independent nation of Bangladesh. 

Indonesia occupied East Timor in 1975, after Portugal 
ended its colonial rule there. Many East Timorese op- 
posed Indonesian control, and the United Nations re- 
fused to recognize Indonesia's claim. East Timor finally 
became an independent country in 2002. 

In many Asian nations, Muslim militants have fought 
to gain power. In the late 1970's, Muslim revolutionaries 
overthrew the shah of Iran and established a conserva- 
tive Islamic government. Muslim rebels also have fought 
the governments of the Philippines and several other 
Asian nations. The Taliban, an Islamic group that gained 
control of most of Afghanistan by the mid-1990's, im- 
posed a harsh interpretation of Islamic law on that coun- 





Wide World 
War raged in Vietnam for almost 30 years as Vietnamese Com- 
munists struggled to control the country. Beginning in 1965, 
United States troops fought as allies of the non-Communists. 





Important dates in Asia 





c. 3500 B.C. Civilization began in Southwest Asia. 
c. 2500 B.C. Civilization developed in South Asia. 
1700's B.C. Civilization developed in East Asia. 
c.563 B.C. Buddha was born in what is now Nepal. 
c.551B.C. Confucius was born in China 


Before 4B.C. Jesus Christ was born in the town of Bethlehem 
in Southwest Asia. 


A.D.317 The Huns from Mongolia conquered northern China, 
starting a series of nomadic invasions of Asia. 


c.570 Muhammad was born in Arabia. 

661-750 Arab civilization spread in Southwest Asia. 
1200's The Mongols conquered much of Asia. 

1500's European nations began conquests in Asia. 
1526 The Mongols set up the Mughal Empire in India. 
1639 Japan closed its doors to influences from Europe. 


1842 After a war with the United Kingdom, China opened five 
ports to trade with Western nations. 


Japan defeated Russia and took control of Russian inter- 
ests in Korea and Manchuria. 


1912 The Chinese overthrew their emperor. 
1931 Japan invaded and occupied Manchuria. 
1937-1938 Japan invaded and occupied central China 


1941-1945 Japan fought the Allies in the Pacific area during 
World War Il—and lost all its possessions. 


1905 


try. The Taliban also supported al-Qa‘ida, the organiza- 
tion the U.S. government accused of being behind the 
terrorist attacks in the United States on Sept. 11, 2001. 
Later that year, the United States helped Afghan forces 
drive the Taliban from power. 

A new era. Asia still faces many problems. Millions of 
people in Asia are poor and illiterate. Disputes between 
peoples continue to threaten peace in many areas. De- 
spite these problems, much of Asia entered a new era of 
development in the late 1900's. 

Parts of East Asia and Southeast Asia have progressed 
rapidly. In the 1990's, some of these countries became 
known as ‘Asian tigers because their economies were 





United Nations 


Arab refugees, shown here, were forced to leave their homes 
during the 1967 Arab-Israeli War. Wars in various parts of the 
continent have made thousands of Asians homeless. 


Asia 811 


1940’s-1950’s_ Most colonial Asian nations won independence. 


1946-1954 Vietnamese Communists fought France for control 
of Vietnam and gained control of North Vietnam. 


1948 Israel was established as a Jewish homeland. The Arabs 
and the Israelis fought the first of four wars. 


1949 The Chinese Communists conquered mainland China. 


1950-1953 The Korean War pitted Communists in the northern 
part of Korea against non-Communists in the south. 


1957 The Vietnam War began as a Communist rebellion in 
South Vietnam. 


1965 The United States began sending troops to Vietnam. 


1975 The Communist North won the Vietnam War. Communists 
also took control of Cambodia and Laos. 


1980-1988 Iran and Irag engaged in a war. 


1990-1991 Iraq invaded and occupied Kuwait. An international 
force led by the United States drove Iraq out of Kuwait. 


1991 Most republics of the Soviet Union declared their inde- 
pendence. The Soviet Union was dissolved. 


1997 Control of Hong Kong returned to China from the United 
Kingdom. 
1999 Control of Macao returned to China from Portugal. 


2000 The leaders of North and South Korea met for the first 
time since Korea was divided. 


2001 The United States and its allies drove the ruling Taliban 
from power in Afghanistan. 


so strong. These economies are based largely on high- 
technology industries and businesses, such as comput- 
er manufacturing. In Southwest Asia, Israel developed a 
strong economy less than 20 years after its creation. 
Earnings from oil have greatly improved the economies 
of other Southwest Asian nations. Economic progress 
enables governments to build new schools and train 
new teachers in an effort to raise educational levels. To- 
day, a larger percentage of Asians than ever before at- 
tend school for at least a few years. 

But economic progress in Asia has been uneven. In 
some nations, including Cambodia and Laos, develop- 
ment has been slow. In other nations, including China, 





© Olmer Rebbot Woodfin Camp tox 
The Iranian revolution, led by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, 
made Iran an Islamic republic. Muslims gained greater political 
power in many of the nations of Asia during the 1900's. 


812 Asia 


ARO MDT B ay ya 
ADPrEVErOOr Ott 


PAROS UR 
VEU 
LLOEGR ayy I 


seeteary 


eiel Ti 
Mais 


fee 


iy 
| 


ny 
i 
ij 


At 
frit 


ae} 


a] 

ow 

i? 
r 


| 
f 


tinh 
iti 


| VeuERH TU 


READ i h ‘iy 


eed 


{ 


i 


| 
+ ' YW 
POVOPUPPDUODROEPD ROS ROOD DORT PERE AT DD 


EPEREEEERRERE RED OS bp O88 pallid 4 


eT AATDEKKUEERERERRERRRG EH 


i 


[ 


| 


ae 


i 


i 


\ 





© jim Steinberg, Photo Researchers 
The Petronas Towers, among the worlds tallest buildings, rise 
above Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Many East and Southeast Asian 
cities showed rapid growth in the late 1900's and early 2000's. 





India, and Pakistan, progress has been mixed. Some 
parts of these countries have taken significant steps for- 
ward. Other parts remain poor. 

Fewer Asians suffer malnutrition today, but millions 
still do not have enough to eat. The development of new 
high-yielding varieties of rice and wheat has helped re- 
duce hunger in parts of the continent. 

Political instability continues to slow progress in 
some Asian nations, but signs of hope exist. In 2000, for 
example, leaders of the two Koreas met for the first time 
since Korea was divided. Graham P. Chapman, Richard Louis 
Edmonds, Abraham Marcus, and Jonathan Rigg 

Related articles. World Book has separate articles on all the 
Asian countries and other political units. For the name of each, 
see the table of countries with this article. Articles on many 
Asian cities also appear in World Book These cities are listed at 
the end of each country article. See also: 


History 


See the History section of each Asian country, such as China 
(History). See also 


Alexander the Great Darius | 
Ashurbanipa! Darius III 

Assyria Exploration 
Babylonia Gandhi, Mohandas K. 
Chaldea Genghis Khan 

Cold War Hammurabi 


Cyrus the Great Indus Valley civilization 


OO SE se 


——— 


Korean War Phoenicia 
Kublai Khan Polo, Marco 
Kushan Empire Rome, Ancient 
Mao Zedong Silk Road 
Mesopotamia Timur 


Vietnam War 


Mongol Empire 
World, History of the 


Mughal Empire 


Palestine World War Il 
Persia, Ancient Xerxes | 
Persian Gulf War 

Peoples 
Ainu Gypsies Negritos 
Arabs Hmong Scythians 
Aryans Jews Semites 
Bedouins Kurds Slavs 
Dravidians Malays Tatars 
Druses Muslims Turks 


Physical features 


See Desert Island; Lake; Mountain; Ocean; River; and their 
lists of Related articles. 


Products 
Barley Jute Soybean 
Breadfruit Manganese Spice 
Coal Millet Sugar 
Coconut palm Petroleum Tea 
Cotton Rice Tin 
Date palm Rubber Tungsten 
Ebony Sapphire Wheat 
Hemp Silk 

Regions 
Arabian Peninsula Indochina Siberia 
Armenia Manchuria Southeast Asia 
Asia Minor Middle East Turkestan 
Far East 

Religions 
Buddhism Judaism 
Christianity Shinto 
Confucianism Sikhism 
Hinduism Taoism 
Islam Zoroastrianism 
Jainism 


Other related articles 


Agriculture (Asia) 

Architecture (Asian) 

Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
Bank (Asia and the Middle East) 
Communism 

Dance (Asian theatrical dance) 

Flag (pictures: Flags of Asia and the Pacific) 
Language 

Literacy (table: Literacy rates) 

Music (Asian music) 

Painting (Asian painting) 

Races, Human 

Sculpture (Asian sculpture) 

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization 
Television (In Asia) 

Third World 


Outline 


1. People 
A. Population distribution C Religions 
B. Peoples of Asia D. Languages 
ll. Way of life in Southwest Asia 
lll. Way of life in South Asia 
IV. Way of life in Southeast Asia 
V. Way of life in East Asia 
Vi. Way of life in North Asia 





: 


Vil. Way of life in Central Asia 
. The land 

A. Land regions 

B. Mountains 


D. Deserts and plains 
E. Coastline, bays, seas, 


C. Rivers and lakes 
iX. Climate 
X. Animals 

A. Domesticated animals B. Wild animals 
XI. Plants 


XII. Agriculture 


A. Farm organization C. Livestock 
B. Crops 
XIil. Industry 
A. Mining C Other industries 


B. Manufacturing D. Industrial development 
XIV. Transportation and communication 

A. Transportation B. Communication 
XV. History 


Questions 


What percentage of the world’s people live in Asia? 

What percentage of the world’s land lies in Asia? 

How do some Southeast Asians make use of the space under 
their houses? 

What parts of Asia are called cradles of civilization? 

What do geographers mean by Eurasia? 

Why do the Japanese often serve each food in a separate bowl? 

What empire controlled more land than any other in history? 

How do Southwest Asian nomads make use of their animals? 

What physical features mark the boundaries between Asia and 
Europe? 

Who led India's drive for independence from British colonial 
rule? 


Additional resources 

Level | 

Portraits of the Nations. HarperCollins, 1989-1993. This series in- 
cludes books on many Asian countries, such as The Land and 
People of Pakistan by Mark Weston (1992). 

Sammis, Fran. Asia. Benchmark Bks., 1999. 

Sayre, April P. Asia. 21st Century Bks., 1999. 

Tull, Mary H., and others. Northern Asia: Understanding Geogra- 
phy and History Through Art. Raintree Steck-Vaughn, 1999. 

Viesti, Joseph F., and Hall, Diane. Celebrate! In South Asia. 
Lothrop, 1996. Ce/ebrate! In Southeast Asia. 1996. Books about 
holidays celebrated in these places. 

Level Il 

Bowman, John S., ed. Columbia Chronologies of Asian History 
and Culture. Columbia Univ. Pr., 2000. 

Foster, Dean A. The Global Etiquette Guide to Asia. Wiley, 2000. 

Mason, Colin. A Short History of Asia. St. Martin's, 2000. 

Wild Asia: Spirit of a Continent Pelican Pub. Co., 2000. A book of 
photographs. 

Worldmark Encyclopedia of the Nations, Vol. 4: Asia & Oceania. 
10th ed. Gale Group, 2000. 


Asia Minor is a peninsula of western Asia between the 
Black Sea and the Mediterranean Sea. Some people call 
it Anatolia. The Aegean Sea separates Asia Minor from 
Greece on the west. On the east, the peninsula extends 
to the upper Euphrates River. Asia Minor is the geo- 
graphical name for the region. Turkey occupies all the 
land on the peninsula. 

Asia Minor was one of the first places in the world to 
become civilized. It may have been here that people first 
learned the use of iron over 3,500 years ago. Arch- 
aeologists have found evidence of an advanced society 
that lived in the south-central area before 6000 B.C. The 
Hittite kingdom developed on the peninsula in 1900 B.C, 
and the Aegean peoples settled there in about 1200 B.C 
The civilization of classical Greece had its beginnings 
among the lonian Greeks of Asia Minor. The Romans 





Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 812a 





A 
OOK map 


WORLD B 
Location of Asia Minor 


took over the western part of Asia Minor in 133 B.C. 
They gained the rest of the peninsula around 50 B.C 
People from central Asia invaded Asia Minor in the 
A.D. 200's. Arabs attacked the cities of Asia Minor in the 
600's, when the peninsula was part of the Byzantine 
Empire. The long period of Turkish control began in 
1071. The Crusades and Mongol invasions of the 1200's 
and 1300's caused the breakup of the government set up 
by the Seljuk Turks and prepared the way for the rise of 
the Ottoman Empire. The area's resources were devel- 
oped after the Turkish Republic was formed in 1923 (see 
Turkey [The Republic of Turkey)). F. Muge Gocek 
Related articles in Wor/d Book include: 


Aegean civilization Izmir 
Byzantine Empire Lydia 
Ephesus Phrygia 
Galatia Tarsus 
Hittites Troy 
lonians 


Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) is a 
forum for the discussion of economic cooperation in 
the Pacific region. It consists of 21 nations and other po- 
litical units that border the Pacific Ocean. APECs aims in- 
clude reducing trade barriers among its members and 
promoting trade and investment in the region. 

Twelve nations have been members since the group 
was formed in 1989: Australia, Brunei, Canada, Indone- 
sia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Sing- 
apore, South Korea, Thailand, and the United States. In 
1991, China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan became members. 
Mexico and Papua New Guinea joined in 1993, and Chile 
in 1994. Hong Kong became a special administrative re- 
gion of China in 1997 but kept its separate membership 
in APEC. Peru, Russia, and Vietnam became members in 
1998. 

In APECs first two years, its members established 10 
“working groups to explore avenues for cooperation. 
Foreign and economic ministers of APEC countries have 
met annually since 1989. In 1993, APEC heads of state 
met for the first time. They established committees to 
seek regional cooperation in the areas of trade and 
investment, higher education, and human resource de- 
velopment. They also set up the Pacific Business Forum 
to promote closer cooperation with privately owned 
businesses. In 1994, they agreed to establish a free-trade 
zone among their countries by the year 2020. APEC has 


an administrative office in Singapore. Jeffrey J. Schott 





812b Asian Americans 


“ we 
~~ — 
, 





Rudi Von Bnel 


Asian neighborhoods are part of many American cities. 





Michael Newman, Photo Edit 
A Vietnamese American family enjoy a meal together. 


Asian Americans add their many different ethnic and cultural groups to the blend of American 


life. They make up the countrys third largest minority group. 


Asian Americans 


Asian Americans are Americans of Asian descent 
They or their ancestors came from Asian countries, par- 
ticularly Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, Japan, Ko- 
rea, Laos, Pakistan, the Philippines, Thailand, and Viet- 
nam. More than 10 million people of Asian descent live 
in the United States. They make up the country’s third 
largest minority group, after Hispanic Americans and 
African Americans. 

The first Asian immigrants who arrived in large num- 
bers in the United States came from southeastern China. 
They immigrated to California in 1849, after gold was 
discovered there. In 1882, however, the U.S. government 
began placing restrictions on Asian immigration be- 
cause of pressure from native-born Americans. Many 
Americans feared job competition from the newcomers 
and resented their ‘foreign’ customs. It was not until 
1965 that all restrictions against Asian immigration were 
lifted. Today, Asians are the country’s second fastest 
growing minority group, after Hispanic Americans. 


Who Asian Americans are 


According to the 2000 U.S. census, about 3 } percent 
of the United States population is of Asian descent. Asia, 
the worlds largest continent, has 49 countries, so the 
Asian American population consists of many different 
ethnic and cultural groups. Chinese Americans form the 
largest Asian group, making up about 2 = million of the 
10 3 million Asian Americans. Filipino Americans are the 
second largest group, with about 1 = million people. The 
next largest groups are Americans of Asian Indian, Viet- 
namese, Korean, and Japanese ancestry. 











The contributor of this article is Hyung-chan Kim, Professor of 


Education and Asian American Studies at Western Washington 
University and editor of the Dictionary of Asian American 


History 





The languages of the many Asian American groups in- 
clude Chinese, Hindi, Japanese, Javanese, Korean, Taga- 
log, Thai, and Vietnamese. Asian Americans practice 
several major religions, including Buddhism, Christiani- 
ty, Confucianism, Hinduism, Islam, and Shintoism. 

Asian American groups differ in physical appearance, 
language, and culture from one another as well as from 
other Americans. But Asian Americans have many of the 
same values most other Americans cherish. For exam- 
ple, most strongly believe in the importance of family. 
Many Asian Americans, particularly the most recent im- 
migrants, uphold a family value called x/ao. The Chinese 
character for the word combines the word /aa, meaning 
old age or old man, with z/, which means son. !n practic- 
ing xiao, the young honor the old, and the old respect 
and protect the young. 

Success through hard work and self-discipline is an- 
other value emphasized in most Asian American fami- 
lies. Children are encouraged to work hard in and out of 
school to be worthy of the sacrifices their parents make 
for them. Self-control is also an important value. Chil- 
dren are taught that mature people do not show their 
feelings too readily. 


Where Asian Americans live 


Most Asian Americans live in the Western United 
States. According to the 2000 census, only about 22 per- 
cent of the total U.S. population lives in the West, but 
nearly half of the Asian population resides there. Almost 
4 out of 10 Asian Americans live in California. 

More than 95 percent of Asian Americans live in ur- 
ban areas. About half of them have homes in cities, and 
about half live in suburbs. In cities, Asian Americans are 
often concentrated in their ethnic neighborhoods, 
which are usually known by such names as Chinatown 
or Little Tokyo. 


Asian American accomplishments 


Asians have been in the United States for only about 
150 years. In spite of their short history, they have influ- 








enced many areas of American culture. Asian Ameri- 
cans also have distinguished themselves in many fields. 

Asian influences on American culture are reflect- 
ed in many areas of life. Tai chi chuan is a form of exer- 
cise that the Chinese have practiced for centuries. It has 
become especially popular among older Americans, 
who find that its slow, gentle movements provide good 
exercise for aging bodies. 7ae kwon dois a traditional 
Korean martial art (fighting art). It has been popularized 
by Korean immigrants who teach it to American youth. 
Judo is a traditional Japanese form of wrestling. Many 
U.S. colleges offer it in physical education programs. 

Chow mein and other Chinese foods are familiar to 
most Americans. Chow mein consists of steamed veg- 
etables topped with chicken, beef, or seafood and 
served with fried noodles. A favorite for some Ameri- 
cans is sushi, a Japanese dish of vinegar-flavored rice 
and raw fish or vegetables. Restaurants that serve spicy 
Thai or Indian food are popular. Many U.S. groceries 
carry the Korean dish Kimchi, a highly seasoned mix of 
Chinese cabbage, white radishes, and other vegetables. 

Acupuncture is an ancient Chinese method of reliev- 
ing pain and treating disease by inserting needles in the 
body. It has become accepted by the American medical 
profession as a way to treat certain ailments. 

Individual achievements. Nuclear physicist Samuel 
Chao Chung Ting is among severa! Asian American win- 
ners of the Nobel Prize. He shared the 1976 Nobel Prize 
for physics for helping to discover a subatomic particle 
known as the psi particle. Subrahmanyan Chandrasek- 
har, an Indian-born astrophysicist, shared the 1983 No- 
bel Prize for physics for his contributions to the theory 
of invisible astronomical objects called black holes. 

Award-winning Asian American athletes include Sam- 
my Lee and Kristi Yamaguchi. Lee was the first nonwhite 
American to win an Olympic go!d medal in high diving. 
He received the medal in 1948 and again in 1952. In 
1992, Yamaguchi became the first Asian American to 
win an Olympic gold medal in figure skating. In 1997, 
Tiger Woods, at the age of 21, became the youngest 
golfer ever to win the Masters Tournament. Woods is 
partly of Asian American descent. 

The first Asian American to serve in the U.S. Congress 
was Dalip Singh Saund. In 1956, he won election to the 
House of Representatives as a Democrat from Califor- 
nia. He served from 1957 to 1963. Hiram L Fong became 
the first Asian American to win a seat in the Senate. He 
represented Hawaii from 1959 to 1977. Daniel K. Inouye 
of Hawaii became the first Asian American to serve in 
both the House and Senate. He served in the House 
from 1959 to 1963, and has served in the Senate since 
1963. The first Asian American woman in Congress was 
Patsy T. Mink of Hawaii. She first served in the House 
from 1965 to 1979. She again won election to the House 
in 1990 and has served there since 1991. George R. 
Ariyoshi became the first Asian American governor of a 
U.S. state. He was governor of Hawaii from 1974 to 1986. 

Ellison S. Onizuka was the first American astronaut of 
Asian descent. Onizuka and his fellow crew members 
died in January 1986 when their space shuttle Chal- 
lenger was destroyed in an accident just after launch. 

A number of other Asian Americans have achieved 
success in their chosen professions. They include archi- 
tects |. M. Pei and Minoru Yamasaki; authors Maxine 


Asian Americans 812c 





fohn Neubauer, Photo Edit 
A Japanese American lawyer argues a Case. 





Gary Conner, Photo Edit 


Korean American drummers perform at a festival. 





David Weintraub Photo Researchers 


Ancient Chinese exercises called tai chi chuan are performed 
by large numbers of people throughout the United States. Many 
people practice tai chi outdoors early in the morning. 


812d Asian Americans 


Where Asian 
Americans live 

This map shows the state-by- 
state distribution of the U.S. 
Asian population according to 
the 2000 census. The numbers 
on the map indicate the per- 
centage of Asians in the total 
population of each state. 


Per cent of total 
population by state 


PR More than 10.0 
[2.5 to 10.0 

1.5 to 2.4 

1.0 to 1.4 

Less than 1.0 


WORLD BOOK map 


Hong Kingston and Amy Tan; broadcast journalist Con- 
nie Chung; composer and video artist Nam June Paik; 
and orchestra conductors Zubin Mehta and Seiji Ozawa. 


History of Asian immigration 


Asian immigration to the United States did not begin 
until the mid-1800's, more than 200 years after the first 
wave of European immigration. One reason for the 
slower start is that the rulers of many Asian countries 
prohibited their subjects from going abroad. In some 
cases, people who were caught attempting to leave 
were put to death. 

Another reason that Asians did not leave their home- 
lands was that their societies were relatively stable. Asia 
did not experience the revolutions that brought political 
economic, and social changes to Europe. The people 
had little reason to leave in search of a better life. But by 
the mid-1800s, the traditional Asian systems began to 
prove ineffective in the face of increasing social prob- 
lems. 

The first major social crises erupted in China. The 
government began to weaken under repeated foreign 
invasions, domestic revolts, and problems caused by 
overpopulation. The rulers could no longer control peo- 
ple who wanted to leave the country. 

The first wave of Asian immigration. The news in 
1848 that gold had been discovered on John Sutter's Cal- 
ifornia property attracted many people to the state. In 
1849, about 700 Chinese arrived hoping to find work 
mining gold. They were poor peasants from southeast- 
ern China. Most of them had not even been able to pay 
their fare to the United States. They received loans from 
merchants in their own country and made promises to 
pay off their debts after they found work in America. By 
the end of 1850, there were 4,000 Chinese in California. 
By 1860, the United States had a Chinese population of 
about 35,000, most of whor jived in California. Many 
newcomers who could not find work in the California 
mines obtained jobs building railroads. 

California civic leaders and industrialists greeted the 
first arrivals of Chinese laborers with enthusiasm. But 


f 








Ethnic background of Asian Americans 


Asian Indian 16.4%—~ 
— Vietnamese 11% 
Filipino 18.1% 


_~ Korean 10.5% 


Chinese 23.7% — 


— Other Asian 12.5% 


Figures are for 2000. 
Source. US Census Bureau. 


soon, Competition for jobs became intense between 
white workers and the increasing number of Chinese 
workers. In some instances, mobs attacked Chinese im- 
migrants. In 1882, Congress passed the Chinese Exclu- 
sion Act, which prohibited all Chinese laborers from im- 
migrating to the United States. The act permitted only 
merchants, teachers, and certain other groups from Chi- 
na to come to the United States. 

The act was the first of numerous restrictions the U.S. 
government was to place on Asian immigration. The re- 
strictions resulted in part because many American work- 
ers feared job competition from Asians, many of whom 
would work for low wages. In addition, some Americans 
argued that Asians could not be assimilated (incorporat- 
ed) into American society because of their physical and 
cultural differences. 

The second wave. Hawaii did not become a state un- 
ti! 1959. But in the late 1800's and early 1900's, it was the 
destination for several Asian immigrant groups. The first 
group was made up of Japanese workers. Between 








1885 and 1894, an association of owners of Hawaiian 
sugar plantations recruited almost 29,000 Japanese as 
contract laborers, workers imported under an agree- 
ment to work for a particular employer. 

After the Japanese fulfilled their contracts, most of 
them settled in Hawaii or in the Pacific Coast States of 
California, Oregon, and Washington. They worked first 
as farm hands and later grew vegetables on land they 
purchased or rented. 

In the early 1900s, the Japanese population in the Pa- 
cific Coast States began to face the same opposition that 
had arisen against Chinese workers. In 1905, an organi- 
zation that later became the Asiatic Exclusion League 
was established in California to work toward halting the 
immigration of Japanese people and other Asians. In 
1908, the United States and Japan reached an under- 
standing that became known as the gent/emen’s agree- 
ment. The agreement restricted new Japanese immigra- 
tion to the relatives of immigrants who had already 
settled in the United States. The gentlemen’s agreement 
was not a law, and it was never put into writing. Japan 
cooperated voluntarily. 

Arrivals of the early 1900's. The Hawaiian planta- 
tion owners began looking for other sources of labor in 
the early 1900's. Their Japanese workers had organized 
labor unions and frequently went on strike, demanding 
higher wages and better living conditions. The planta- 
tion owners turned to Korea, where the people had re- 
cently suffered through war and famine. During the 
early 1900s, the Hawaiians recruited more than 7,000 
Korean laborers. But Korean immigration halted in 1905. 
Japanese workers had complained to their government 
that Korean workers were being used as strikebreakers. 
Japan, then in the process of taking control of Korea, put 
pressure on the Korean government to stop immigra- 
tion to Hawaii. Most Koreans in Hawaii remained there. 
A small group migrated to the U.S. Pacific Coast. 

In 1906, the plantation owners began bringing in 
workers from the Philippines. By 1931, about 110,000 Fil- 


¢, e my 


Visual Communications 
Filipino farm laborers, above, were among Asian immigrants 
of the early 1900s. During thal period, thousands of Filipinos ar- 
rived to do agricullural work. 





Asian Americans 812e 


ipino laborers had arrived. During the early 1900s, a 
small number of Filipinos went to Alaska for seasonal 
work in the fishing industry. Others found agricultural 
work in such states as California and Oregon. 

Groups of immigrants from India began arriving in 
the United States in the early 1900's. Most of the immi- 
grants were young men from farm households in search 
of job opportunities. They arrived by ship in British Co- 
lumbia, Canada, and then many made their way south 
into the United States. Most of them found work in lum- 
ber mills in Washington state or on farms in central Cali- 
fornia. Like other Asians before them, they faced opposi- 
tion from local citizens. In 1907, a mob in Bellingham, 
Wash., rioted against Asian Indian sawmill workers. The 
mob attacked the homes of the Asians and drove the im- 
migrants out of town. Most of the immigrants fled to 
Canada. 

Asian immigration halted. In 1917, Congress 
passed one of the countrys most restrictive immigration 
taws. The law prohibited immigrants from an area 
known as the Asiatic Barred Zone from coming to the 
United States. This area included most of Asia and a ma- 
jority of islands in the Pacific Ocean. 

The Immigration Act of 1924, which took effect in 
1929, excluded any Asians who had not been barred by 
the 1917 law. The legislation closed the doors of the 
country to Asians—with one exception. People from the 
Philippines were allowed entry. At that time, the Philip- 
pines was a U.S. possession, so Filipinos were not con- 
sidered foreigners. However, the Tydings-McDuffie Act 
of 1934 limited immigration from the Philippines to an 
annual quota of 50. 

Japanese internment. Japan's surprise attack on the 
U.S. military base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, on Dec. 7, 
1941, caused the United States to enter World War II. It 
also stirred hostility against Japanese people in the 
United States. Many Americans associated Japanese 
Americans with the Japanese pilots who had destroyed 
U.S. Navy ships. 


AP Wide World 
A Japanese American family is confined in a detention 
camp. In the early 1940s, during World War I, all West Coast 
residents of Japanese ancesiry were forced into such camps. 


812f Asian Americans 


In February 1942, President Franklin D. Roosevelt is- 
sued Executive Order 9066, which authorized military 
commanders to designate military areas from which 
“any or all persons may be excluded. The military chose 
to establish curfews for Japanese Americans, to remove 
all people of Japanese ancestry from the West Coast and 
southern Arizona, and to confine them in detention 
camps until their loyalty could be determined. About 
110,000 Japanese were confined in 10 detention camps 
scattered over seven states: Arizona, Arkansas, Califor- 
nia, Colorado, Idaho, Utah, and Wyoming. They lost 
their homes and their jobs as a result. 

Today many scholars believe these restrictive meas- 
ures against Japanese Americans were both unneces- 
sary and discriminatory. However, the Supreme Court of 
the United States upheld the curfew in 1943 and the 
evacuation order in 1944, both on grounds of military 
necessity. But in another decision in 1944, the court 
ruled that holding admittedly loyal U.S. citizens in deten- 
tion camps against their will was unlawful. 

About 800 young Japanese Americans from the camps 
volunteered and served in the U.S. armed forces during 
the war. Most of them were part of the U.S. Army's 
442nd Regimental Combat Unit. The unit fought bravely 
in Europe and suffered many casualties. Public opinion 
changed as Japanese Americans showed their loyalty to 
the nation. 

In 1948, Congress passed the Japanese American 
Evacuation Claims Act. The law authorized a maximum 
payment of $2,500 to individual Japanese Americans as 
compensation for what they had lost while confined. 

In 1980, Representative Norman Y. Mineta of Califor- 
nia and Senator Daniel Inouye of Hawaii sponsored a 
bill that resulted in the establishment of the Commission 
on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians. After 
holding numerous hearings across the country, the 
commission recommended that the president offer a na- 
tional apology to Japanese Americans. It also called fora 
compensatory payment of $20,000 to surviving Japanese 
Americans who had been in the camps. These and other 
commission recommendations became law under the 
Civil Liberties Act of 1988. 

Restrictions lifted. Although World War II brought 
suffering to many Japanese Americans, it also brought 
about the first easing of U.S. restrictions on Asian immi- 
gration. Because China was fighting as an ally of the 
United States, many people felt that Chinese immigrants 
should no longer be barred from the country. In 1943, 
the government lifted the ban on Chinese immigration 
and also allowed Chinese immigrants to become citi- 
zens. This was the first time that foreign-born Asians 
were granted the right to U.S. citizenship. In 1946, the 
government extended similar rights to Filipino and 
Asian Indian immigrants. 

In 1952, Congress passed the Immigration and Nation- 
ality Act, also called the McCarran-Walter Act. This law 
essentially retained the Asiatic Barred Zone provision, 
but it did allow very limited immigration from the coun- 
tries within the zone. It extended to all Asian immigrants 
the right to become U.S. citizens. 

The Immigration Act of 1965 eliminated the Asiatic 
Barred Zone. After 1965, large numbers of Asians start- 
ed moving to the United States, particularly from China, 
South Korea, and the Philippines. 





Arrivals of the late 1900's. Millions of Southeast 
Asians have come to the United States since the mid- 
1970's. Most of them fled their homelands as a result of 
the Vietnam War (1957-1975). The first wave to arrive 
were Vietnamese political refugees who had worked for 
the U.S. government or U.S. companies. For the most 
part, they were educated, skilled workers. Most of the 
second wave were rural people from Cambodia and 
Laos, who had less education and fewer job skills. 

About three-fourths of the Southeast Asian immi- 
grants settled in 10 states: California, Florida, Massachu- 
setts, Minnesota, New York, Pennsylvania, Texas, Vir- 
ginia, Washington, and Wisconsin. The initial response 
in most communities where the refugees settled was 
one of sympathy. But in some cases, conflicts arose with 
local residents when the newcomers began to move 
into the labor force. Many Vietnamese refugees, for ex- 
ample, found jobs in the shrimp fishing industry in 
Texas, Mississippi, and other Gulf Coast States. Local 
fishing crews accused the Southeast Asians of setting 
too many traps, fishing in areas claimed by American 
crews, and other offenses. Fighting often broke out, and 
vandals on both sides damaged their rivals boats and 
fishing nets. 


Asian Americans today 


Asian Americans are one of the fastest growing mi- 
nority groups in the United States. Between 1990 and 
2000, the number of Asian Americans increased by 48 
percent. During that period, the percentage of increase 
of Asian Americans was second only to that of Hispanic 
Americans, whose numbers increased by 58 percent. In 
spite of their growth, however, Asian Americans still 
make up less than 4 percent of the population. 

Like other minorities, Asians face problems of accep- 
tance in American society. Also like other minorities, 
Asians struggle against inaccurate images that many 
people have of them. On one hand, for example, many 
books and motion pictures portray Asians as either sin- 
ister villains or meek servants. On the other hand, soci- 
ologists have referred to Asians as the “model minority.” 
The label implies that all Asians have achieved success 
through discipline and hard work and thus other minori- 
ties should imitate them. However, although many Asian 
Americans are successful, many are not. 

Education levels of Asian Americans vary widely, for 
example. A higher percentage of Asian Americans re- 
ceive doctorates every year than either blacks or Hispan- 
ics. Yet many recent Southeast Asian immigrants have 
little or no formal education and few job skills. 

Income levels also differ greatly. The median house- 
hold income among Asian Americans is higher than that 
for the U.S. population as a whole. But it is also true that 
a higher percentage of Asians than whites live in pover- : 
ty. And Asian American household income often in- 
cludes the wages of several people. Many Asian Ameri- 
cans operate small businesses, primarily restaurants, 
grocery stores, and dry cleaners. Often, the whole family 
is involved in the business, and some members may 
work 12 to 14 hours a day. 

Lack of English language skills is a major problem fac- 
ing many recent Asian immigrants. Until these Asian 
Americans are able to speak English well, limited job 
opportunities will be available to them. 





| 





The efforts to learn English and to become a part of 
American culture have led to another problem, particu- 
larly for young Asians in families of recent immigrants. 
In attempting to become part of American culture, these 
young Asians often put aside the language and cultural 
traditions of their ancestors. As a result, they find them- 
selves in conflict with their parents’ generation. And 
they do not find complete acceptance in American soci- 
ety. They are left feeling that they are on the fringes of 
two societies and do not belong to either. This conflict 
eases over time as families become more Americanized. 
But it is something every immigrant group experiences 
upon coming to a new country. Hyung-chan Kim 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Biographies 
Chandrasekhar, Noguchi, Isamu 
Subrahmanyan Ozawa, Seiji 
Fong, Hiram Leong Pei, |. M. 
Hayakawa, S. I. Wu, Chien-shiung 
Lee, Tsung Dao Yang, Chen Ning 
Mehta, Zubin Woods, Tiger 
History 


Oriental exclusion acts 

Riot (During the 1800's) 

Roosevelt, Theodore (Friction 
with Japan) 

World War Il (Treatment of 
enemy aliens) 


California (Early 
statehood) 

Gentlemen's agreement 

Hawaii (World War II) 

Immigration (Immigration 
to the United States) 


Other related articles 


City (Neighbor- Martial arts Racism 
hoods) Minority group Tae kwon do 
Hmong (Asian Ameri- Tai chi ch'uan 
Judo cans) 
Karate 
Outline 


Il. Who Asian Americans are 


Asian Americans 813 


An Indian restaurant is an 
example of the many small 
businesses owned and oper- 
ated by Asian Americans to- 
day. Often, several members 
of a family work long hours to 
keep the business running. 


. - , + > mt fi 
‘i ” SS 


Joseph Nettis, Tony Stone Images 


ll. Where Asian Americans live 
Ill. Asian American accomplishments 
A. Asian influences on American culture 
B. Individual achievements 
IV. History of Asian immigration 
A. The first wave of Asian D. Asian immigration halted 
immigration E. Japanese internment 
B. The second wave F. Restrictions lifted 
C. Arrivals of the early G. Arrivals of the late 1900's 
1900's 
V. Asian Americans today 


Questions 


Why was Korean immigration to Hawaii halted in 1905? 

When were foreign-born Asians residing in the United States 
first allowed the right to become citizens? 

What is kimchi? 

In what part of the United States do most Asian Americans live? 

What problem do many young Asian Americans face? 

Who was the first American astronaut of Asian descent? 

What happened as a result of Executive Order 9066? 

Which Asian group entered the United States by way of Canada 
in the early 1900's? 

What does the word xiao mean? 

What is one reason Asian immigration to the United States be- 
gan so much later than European immigration? 


Additional resources 


Level 

Asian American Experience. 14 vols. Chelsea Hse., 1994-1995. 
Books discuss the people who have immigrated to the U.S. 
and Canada since the mid-1800s. 

Asian American Reference Library. 5 vols. UXL, 1995-1997. Series 
features an almanac, chronology, biographies, and speeches. 

Dudley, William F., ed. Asian Americans. Greenhaven, 1997. 


Level Il 

Chan, Sucheng. Asian Americans. Twayne, 1991. 

Kim, Hyung-chan, ed. Dictionary of Asian American History. 
Greenwood, 1986. 

Kitano, Harry H., and Daniels, Roger. Asian Americans. 2nd ed. 
Prentice Hall, 1995. 


814 Asian Development Bank 


Ng, Franklin, ed. The Asian American Encyclopedia. 6 vols. 
Cavendish, 1995. 

Takaki, Ronald T. Strangers from a Different Shore:A History of 
Asian Americans. 1989. Reprint Penguin, 1990. 


Asian Development Bank (ADB) lends money to 
developing countries of Asia to promote their economic 
growth. A country must be an ADB member to borrow 
from the bank. The ADB also lends to—and invests in— 
private enterprises in Asia. The bank was established by 
the United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and 
the Far East. The ADB has about 50 member countries, 
including both developed and developing nations. 
Membership is open to countries that belong to the 
United Nations or to one of its specialized agencies. A 
non-Asian nation must be economically developed to 
become a member of the ADB. 

When a country joins the ADB, it pledges a sum of 
money to the bank. Money also comes from voluntary 
donations by member nations. The ADB has loaned 
money for the development of agriculture, energy re- 
sources, and industry and for many other programs. The 
ADB started operations in 1966. It has headquarters in 
Manila, the Philippines. 

Critically reviewed by the Asian Development Bank 
Asimov, AZ jh mahf Isaac (1920-1992), was an Ameri- 
can author. He wrote about 400 books for young people 
and adults, mostly nonfiction emphasizing science and 
technology. However, he became best known for his 
science fiction. Many of Asimovs short stories and nov- 
els feature robots as characters. Several were collected 
in | Robot (1950). His popular Foundation series of sci- 
ence-fiction novels includes Foundation (1951), Founda- 
tion and Empire (1952), Second Foundation (1953), Foun- 
dation’s Edge (1982), Foundation and Earth(1986), Prelude 
to Foundation (1988), and Forward the Foundation (pub- 
lished in 1993, after his death). He also wrote Fantastic 
Voyage (1966) and The Gods Themselves (1972). 

Asimov's nonfiction is notable for making complicated 
material understandable to the general reader. These 
works include Asimovs New Guide to Science (1984). He 
also wrote on history, humor, William Shakespeare, and 
the Bible. He wrote two volumes of autobiography, /n 
Memory Yet Green (1979) and In joy Still Felt (1980). 

Asimov was born on Jan. 2, 1920, in Petrovichi, Russia, 
near Smolensk. When he was 3 years old, his family 
moved to New York City. He taught biochemistry at 
Boston University from 1949 to 1958 before becoming a 
full-time writer. He died on April 6, 1992. Neil Barron 
Askia Muhammad, AS kee ah(1441?-1538), also 
called Askia 1 or Askia the Great, ruled the Songhai Em- 
pire in western Africa during its height. He was the first 
of several Songhai kings named Askia. Askia became 
king in 1493 when he overthrew Bakori Daa, the son of 
Sunni Ali (see Songhai Empire). Askia seized large terri- 
tories from the Mali Empire, conquered the Hausa 
states, and turned Saharan Berber towns into Songhai 
colonies. He encouraged the spread of Islam in West 
Africa and modeled his empire's laws on those of Islam. 
His eldest son, Askia Musa, overthrew him in 1528. 

Askia Muhammad died on March 2, 1538, in Gao, the 
Songhai capital. Many people visit his huge tomb in 
Gao, in present-day Mali. Kevin C MacDonald 
Asmara, az MAHR uh (pop. 358,100), is the Capital and 
largest city of Eritrea. It lies in central Eritrea, about 40 


miles (64 kilometers) west of the Red Sea (see Eritrea 
[map)). The city has areas of treelined streets, expensive 
homes called villas, and large public buildings. It also 
has slum areas. A Roman Catholic cathedral, a large 
Eastern Orthodox church, and a major mosque stand 
near the city center. Many buildings in Asmara date 
from the early 1900's, when Eritrea was a colonial pos- 
session of Italy. The city’s industries include tanning, tex- 
tile production, and processing of agricultural goods. A 
railroad connects Asmara with Massawa, a port on the 
Red Sea. The city is the home of the University of Eritrea. 

The site of Asmara was a small village until the late 
1800's. it became the center for the Italian colonial gov- 
ernment in 1897. The United Kingdom occupied Asmara 
from 1941 to 1952, when Eritrea became part of Ethiopia. 
In 1993, following a 30-year civil war between Eritrean 
rebels and the Ethiopian government, Eritrea gained for- 
mal independence. Stephen K Commins 

See also Eritrea (picture). 
Asoka. See Ashoka. 
Asp is the name of a co- 
bra found in Egypt It is 
also called the Egyptian 
cobra. The hood of this 
poisonous snake lacks the 
spectacular markings of , 
the Indian cobra. The an- 
cient Egyptians worshiped 
the asp. It is believed that 
Cleopatra committed sui- 
cide by holding an asp 
against her body. Others 
claim the snake was the 
horned viper, sometimes 
called an asp. See also 
Cleopatra; Cobra; Snake. 

Albert F. Bennett 


Scientific classification. 
Asps belong to the family Asp 
Elapidae. They are Naja haje. 





WORLD BOOk illustration by Richard 
Lewington, The Garden Studio 


Asparagus is a nutritious green vegetable. People eat 
the young shoots (stems) of the asparagus plant. These 
shoots are called spears. Asparagus is an excellent 
source of protein, vitamins, and minerals. For the best 
taste and highest nutritional value, tresh asparagus 
should be cooked gently until soft, but it should remain 
a brilliant green in color. 

Asparagus plants originated in the Mediterranean re- 
gion and in Africa. They grow best in moderate climates 
and in loose, moist, sandy soil. In the United States, 
most asparagus is produced in California, New Jersey, 
and Washington. 

Asparagus Is a perennial plant—that is, it can live for 
several years without replanting. Most of the commer- 
cial asparagus crop is grown from seedlings planted in 
early spring. As the plants grow, they develop a root sys- 
tem called the crown. The crown consists of fleshy roots 
that store food and underground stems called rhizomes. 
As the soil temperature rises, buds on the rhizomes 
grow through the soil and become the spears. If the 
spears are not harvested, they develop into tall, mature 
plants with feathery leaves. Generally, asparagus plant- 
ings are first harvested during the second or third year. 
depending on the area in which they are grown, when 











WORLD BOOK illustration by Kate Lloyd-Jones, Linden Artists Ltd 


Two types of asparagus. People eat edible asparagus, /eft 
Florists use asparagus fern, right, in decorations. 


the roots are able to store Jarge amounts of food. In 
some cases, such properly established plantings may 
continue to produce well for 15 to 25 years. 

The asparagus fernis a kind of asparagus used in flo- 
ral arrangements. It also is a good house plant. 

Albert Liptay 


Scientific classification. Asparagus belongs to the lily fami- 
ly, Liliaceae. Edible asparagus is Asparagus officinalis. The as- 
paragus fern is A. plumosus. 


Aspartame. See Artificial sweetener. 

Aspen, Colorado (pop. 5,914), once a rich silver-mining 
center, is now a year-round resort. It lies at an altitude of 
7,930 feet (2,417 meters) on the Roaring Fork River in 
west-central Colorado (see Colorado [political map)). It is 
one of the most popular ski centers in the western 
United States, with four mountains for downhill skiing 
and about 40 miles (64 kilometers) of trails for cross- 
country skiing. In summer, the Aspen Institute for Hu- 
manistic Studies holds seminars for business people. 
The Music Associates of Aspen runs a 9-week Aspen 
Music Festival, and Ballet/Aspen sponsors a 5-week 
dance festival. Mary Eshbaugh Hayes 

Aspen is the name of three species of medium-sized 
poplar trees found in North America, Europe, Asia, and 
Africa. Aspens have smooth, light-colored bark. Their 
leaves have long, flattened stalks and may be triangular, 
heart-shaped, or round. In fall, aspen leaves turn brilliant 
yellow. 

The most common type of aspen in North America is 
the quaking aspen. It is found from eastern Canada to 
Alaska, across the Northeastern and Great Lakes states, 
and in western mountains south into Mexico. Its nearly 
round leaves have fine-toothed edges. The bigtooth 
aspen grows throughout southeastern Canada and east- 
ward from Minnesota and lowa in the United States. It is 
found primarily in low-lying areas with sandy soils. Its 
leaves are egg-shaped and have coarse-toothed edges. 
The European aspen is found in Europe, North Africa, 
western Asia, and Siberia. Its leaves are round or oval 
with notched edges. 

Aspens require open, sunny places to reproduce. In 


Asphalt 815 


forest areas that have been opened up by fire, disease, 
or other disturbances, aspens grow rapidly and often 
become the dominant species in a few years. Later, they 
are generally replaced by trees that grow well in shade. 

Aspen wood is used primarily to make pulp for paper. 
The wood is also used to make matchsticks, boxes, and 
crates. Michael J. Baranski 


Scientific classification. Aspens belong to the willow family, 
Salicaceae, and the genus Populus. The quaking aspen is Popu- 
lus tremuloides. 


See also Poplar; Tree (Familiar broadleaf and needle- 
leaf trees [picturel). 

Asphalt, AS faw/t is a black cementlike substance that 
is found in most crude petroleum. It has hundreds of 
uses. It is used to pave streets, highways, and airfields; 
to make roofing, waterproofing, and insulating materi- 
als, and floor tiles; and to line reservoirs, waste storage 
ponds, dams, and irrigation canals. Asphalt is also used 
in varnish and inks. Asphalt coatings also protect under- 
ground pipelines from corrosion. 

Asphalt is thermoplastic. That is, it softens and be- 
comes a liquid when heated, and returns to a solid 
when cooled. Asphalt wears well, is highly waterproof, 
and is unharmed by most acids and salts. 

Asphalt production. Asphalt is separated from 
crude petroleum by refining methods that also produce 
gasoline, kerosene, and other products. Usually, gaso- 
line and other products with low boiling points are re- 
moved by a distillation (boiling) process. The oil that re- 
mains is commonly called topped crude. Topped crude 
may be used as a fuel oil, or further refined to asphalt or 
other products. By varying the refining processes, differ- 
ent kinds of asphalt may be obtained. For example, 
blown or oxidized asphalts are made by blowing hot air 
through topped crude. They are widely used for roof- 
ing, enamels, and other industrial applications. Most 
topped crude is refined to produce asphalt cement a 
semisolid asphalt used for paving. 

Asphalt also occurs in natural deposits in pits, lakes, 
and rocks. But only a small part of the asphalt used in 
the United States comes from natural deposits. Some 
natural deposits found in pits and lakes are pure, but 
most deposits have become mixed with mineral matter, 
water, and other substances. One of the best-known de- 
posits is Pitch Lake on the island of Trinidad in the Car- 
ibbean Sea. Sir Walter Raleigh discovered this 114-acre 
(46-hectare) bed in 1595. One of the largest deposits of 
asphalt is in Lake Guanoco in Venezuela, near the Gulf 
of Paria. The deposit covers about 1,000 acres (400 hec- 
tares). Uintaite or gilsonite, a solid form of asphalt, is 
found in Utah and Colorado. 

Paving with asphalt. Asphalt is used mainly to pave 
streets, highways, and airports. Over 90 percent of all 
paved roads in the United States have asphalt surfaces. 
Blacktop is the common name for many types of asphalt 
paving. Asphalt pavements are made in several ways. 
But usually, asphalt cement is mixed with mineral aggre- 
gates, such as crushed stone, gravel, and sand. These 
aggregates vary in size. The largest particles are usually 
about ? inch (19 millimeters) in diameter. 

The aggregates are blended, dried, and heated to 
about 300 °F (149 C) in a paving plant. Hot mixes are pre- 
pared by adding hot asphalt cement. Paddles mix the as- 
phalt with the aggregates in a pugmill mixer. The mix 


816 Asphyxiation 


contains only about 5 to 10 percent asphalt by weight. 

A paving machine spreads the mixture evenly on the 
roadbed, and a roller flattens it into a smooth, hard 
pavement. Co/d mixes are made with liquid asphalt. This 
is a blend of asphalt cement and a light petroleum so/ 
vent (a substance that can dissolve other substances). 
Cold mixes can also be made by carefully blending as- 
phalt cement with water. Cold mixes often can be pre- 
pared directly on the roadbed because little or no heat- 
ing is needed in their preparation. 

Surface treatment is used to resurface pavements or 
to pave lightly traveled roads. Hot asphalt cement or liq- 
uid asphalt is sprayed evenly over the roadway surface. 
Mineral aggregates are then spread over the surface 
and rolled into the asphalt. Geoffrey E. Dolbear 

See also Petroleum; Road (picture: Blacktopping). 
Asphyxiation, as fink see AY shuhn, is a condition that 
occurs when breathing stops. During breathing, the 
lungs provide the blood with oxygen needed to sustain 
life. Without oxygen, the brain, heart, and other vital or- 
gans fail to function. A person loses consciousness 
when too little oxygen reaches the brain. The heart stops 
beating if it receives too little oxygen. 

Common causes of asphyxiation include drowning, 
choking, receiving an electric shock, and inhaling poi- 
sonous fumes. A person who ts not breathing often re- 
quires the mouth-to-mouth form of artificial respiration, 
also called rescue breathing (see First aid [Restoring 
breathing)). First aid for a person choking on food or 
other objects includes the application of upward thrusts 
to the middle of the abdomen. This technique is known 
as the Heimlich maneuver (see First aid [Choking)). A 
person whose heart has stopped beating requires car- 
diopulmonary resuscitation, or CPR (see Cardiopul- 
monary resuscitation). 

Critically reviewed by the American Red Cross 
Aspidistra, 4s puh DIHS truh, is a widely cultivated 
house plant. The aspidistra is native to Asia. Because it 
grows under adverse conditions, it is also known as fron 
plantand barroom plant \t has numerous long, glossy 
leaves. The leaves may be solid green, striped with 
white, or spotted with yellow. Aspidistras bear purplish- 
brown flowers at the base. Kenneth A. Nicely 

Scientific classification. The aspidistra is in the lily family, 
Liliaceae. It is Aspidistra elatior. 

Aspin, Les (1938-1995), was United States secretary of 
defense under President Bill Clinton in 1993 and 1994. 
Before his appointment, Aspin had served since 1971 in 
the House of Representatives as a Democrat from Wis- 
consin. He had also served as chairman of the House 
Armed Services Committee almost continuously since 
1985. As secretary, Aspin helped plan major reductions 
in U.S. military bases and personnel. While he was sec- 
retary, bans were lifted on women flying combat mis- 
sions and serving on combat naval vessels. In addition, 
regulations designed to prevent homosexuals from 
serving in the armed forces were relaxed. 

Leslie Aspin, Jr., was born in Milwaukee. In 1956, he 
enrolled at Yale University, where he joined the Reserve 
Officers Training Corps. He received a bachelor’s de 
gree from Yale in 1960 and a bachelor’s degree from Ox- 
ford University in England in 1962. Aspin completed a 
Ph.D. degree in economics at the Massachusetts Insti- 
tute of Technology in 1965. From 1966 to 1968, he served 


Brian J. Sproule 


as an Army captain and as an analyst for the Department 
of Defense. Barton Gellman 

Aspirin, also known as acetylsalicylic acid, is one of 
the most commonly used drugs in the world. It helps re- 
lieve pain from headaches and arthritis, and reduces 
fever from infections. It also reduces inflammation due 
to illness or injury. Aspirin interferes with blood clotting, 
and thus it is useful in preventing heart attacks, strokes, 
and other disorders that involve blood clots. 

Aspirin is a white, odorless powder with a bitter taste. 
Its chemical formula is C,H,O,, and it belongs to the 
group of compounds called salicylates. Aspirin achieves 
at least some of its effects by blocking the formation of 
certain prostaglandins (hormonelike chemicals found 
throughout the body). See Prostaglandin. 

Aspirin is relatively safe when taken at recommended 
dosage levels. But it can irritate the stomach lining and 
cause bleeding. A few people are allergic to aspirin and 
become ill if they take it. Aspirin should not be given to 
children with chickenpox or influenza. Its use during 
these illnesses has been associated with a serious con- 
dition called Reyes syndrome (see Reye's syndrome). 

For centuries, people throughout the world had used 
wiliow bark to relieve pain and fever. The bark contains 
a chemical that is converted by the body to a salicylate. 
But it was not until the 1800's that aspirin was made in a 
laboratory. Charles Gerhardt, a French chemist, synthe- 
sized aspirin in 1853. Its medicinal value was not fully 
recognized until 1899, when Heinrich Dreser, a German 
scientist, wrote about its effectiveness. 

The drug is sold under the generic name aspirinin 
the United States and acetylsalicylic acid, or ASA, in 
Canada. It is the active ingredient in many trade-named, 
nonprescription pain relievers. N. E. Sladek 
Asquith, AS kwihth, Herbert Henry (1852-1928), 
served as prime minister of the United Kingdom from 
1908 to 1916. His ministry was significant for the Old Age 
Pension Act (1908), the National Insurance Act (1911), and 
the Parliamentary Act (1911), which restricted the power 
of the House of Lords. David Lloyd George replaced 
Asquith as both Liberal Party leader and as prime minis- 
ter in 1916. A breach between the two men helped bring 
about a decline of the Liberal Party after World War | 
ended in 1918 (see Lloyd George, David). 

Asquith was born in Morley, Yorkshire. He served as 
the United Kingdom’s chancellor of the exchequer from 
1905 to 1908. In 1925, he became the Earl of Oxford and 
Asquith. Keith Robbins 
Ass. See Donkey. 

Ass, Wild. See Onager. 
Assad, ah SAHD, Bashar al-, bah SHAHR uhl(1965- 

|, became president of Syria in July 2000. His name is 
also spelled Bashar al-Asad. He took over the presidency 
following the death of his father, Hafez al-Assad (also 
spelled Hafiz al-Asad), Syria’s leader since 1970. Hafez al- 
Assad began preparing Bashar to be his successor after 
the death in 1994 of Bashar’s older brother, Basil. Basil 
had been expected to assume the presidency. 

Bashar al-Assad was born in Damascus. Assad re- 
ceived a medical degree from the University of Damas- 
Cus in 1988. He trained in ophthalmology (the study of 
diseases of the eye) at the Tishrin military hospital in 
Damascus from 1988 until 1992. He moved to England in 
1992 to complete a medical residency program. 





In 1994, Bashar’s brother Basil was killed in a car acci- 
dent. Bashar was called back to Syria to train to take 
over the presidency. He attended the military academy 
at Homs, north of Damascus, earning the rank of 
colonel. After his father’s death, Assad was promoted to 
lieutenant general and made commander in chief of the 
armed forces. He also became head of the ruling Baath 
Party. Asad AbuKhalil 
Assad, ah SAHD, Hafez al- HAH fehz uh! (1930-2000), 
served as president of Syria from 1971 until his death in 
2000. A military leader, he seized power from Syria‘s 
radical government in 1970. He was elected president 
the next year. His name is also spelled Hafiz al-Asad. 

Assad sought to make Syria a strong regional power 
and the leader of the Arab struggle against Israel. In 
1973, Syria and Egypt fought a war against Israel in an 
unsuccessful attempt to regain Arab land Israel had oc- 
cupied in 1967. After the war, tension continued be- 
tween Syria and Israel. Assad’s government joined Arab- 
Israeli peace negotiations in 1991. In 1976, the govern- 
ment sent troops to help end a civil war in Lebanon. 
Most of the fighting ended in 1991. Also under Assad, 
Syrian troops helped allied forces defeat Iraq in the Per- 
sian Gulf War of 1991. Assad was a member of the Baath 
socialist party and of Syria‘s minority Alawite Muslim 
sect. In 1982, his government crushed a rebellion by mil- 
itant Sunni Islamic opposition. 

Assad was born in Al Qardahah, Syria, near Latakia. 
He attended the military academy in Homs and graduat- 
ed from the air force academy in Aleppo. He was com- 
mander of the Syrian Air Force and minister of defense 
when he seized power in 1970. Michel Le Gall 

See also Syria (Recent developments). 
Assassination is the murder of a person who holds a 
position of public importance. Ordinarily, assassinations 
are committed for one or more of three reasons: to gain 
revenge, to earn a reward, or to remove a political 
enemy from office. The assassination of a ruler has often 
been applauded. Brutus, one of the assassins of Julius 
Caesar, was considered a hero by many Romans. 

The assassination of Archduke Ferdinand of Austria, 
in 1914, was one cause of World War I. The series of as- 
Sassinations committed by the Black Dragon Society in 
Japan in the 1930's threw control of the government into 
the hands of the Japanese Army. Four presidents of the 
United States have been assassinated: Abraham Lincoln 
in 1865, James A. Garfield in 1881, William McKinley in 
1901, and John F. Kennedy in 1963. 

The word assassination comes from assassins or 
hashshashin (hemp-eaters), a band of Muslims in Persia 
and Asia Minor in the 1100's. They smoked a drug called 
hashish, which is made from the hemp plant, and killed 
their enemies while under its influence. Stephen Goode 
Assault and battery is a legal term that involves a 
physical threat and act. An act of assault puts the victim 
in fear of bodily harm. Spoken threats are not assaults, 
because there must be some physical act. Raising a club 
or drawing back a fist is considered to be an assault, 
even if no actual blow follows. One who levels a gun at 
a crowd of people may be found guilty of assault against 
every person in the crowd. Battery pertains to the actual 
blow, or other physical injury. The two offenses usually 
occur together and are usually punished as one. No as- 
sault results if a person has a right to threaten or inflict 


Assemblies of God 817 


harm. People can legally remove intruders from their 
homes with whatever force is necessary. 

Parents may use force in punishing children. But they 
become guilty of assault and battery if they punish too 
roughly. Assault and battery are crimes punishable by 
fine or imprisonment. The offender may also be sued for 
damages by the victim. Charles F. Wellford 
Assaying, uh SAY ihng, is any process used to deter- 
mine the amount of one or more metals or valuable 
minerals contained in substances. These substances in- 
clude ore samples, ingots (molded masses of metal), and 
alloys (mixtures of metals). Assaying tests show the pu- 
rity of precious metals and whether mineral beds will be 
profitable to mine. The method used depends on the 
substance analyzed. The two general methods are (1) 
dry, or fire, assaying and (2) wet assaying. 

Dry assaying. In this method, the sample is melted to 
separate the metals it contains. For example, an ore 
sample containing gold and silver is mixed with lead 
oxide and other substances. This mixture is put into a 
crucible of fire clay and set inside a furnace to be melt- 
ed. The hot lead oxide produces lead, which picks up 
the gold and silver and carries them to the bottom of the 
crucible. The impurities and other substances float to 
the top. The remaining alloy of lead, gold, and silver is 
placed in a porous cup and melted in a furnace. The 
lead turns to lead oxide, which evaporates. The gold and 
silver remain as a mixture called dore metal The silver is 
dissolved in nitric acid to separate it from the gold. 

Wet assaying. Assayers use various chemicals to dis- 
solve and separate the metals contained in a sample. 
The amount of a metal in a sample is determined by 
weighing the compound the metal has formed with the 
added chemicals. In some tests, the metals can be ex- 
tracted from these chemical compounds and then 
weighed in pure form. Another wet assaying method in- 
volves measuring the quantity of some agent that reacts 
with the chemical dissolved out of the ore or alloy. 

An assay Office is a laboratory where assaying is per- 
formed. Many mining and metallurgical companies have 
them. The United States Mint runs an assay office in 
New York City that assays and purchases gold and silver 
bullion. Canada maintains a similar bureau under the su- 
pervision of the Royal Mint. Baki Yarar 

See also Alloy. 

Assemblies of God is the largest Pentecostal reli- 
gious denomination in the world. Its official name is The 
General Council of the Assemblies of God. It developed 
from a revival movement during the early 1900's and 
was organized in Hot Springs, Arkansas, in 1914. 

The denomination teaches that the Bible is infallible 
(cannot be wrong). It also teaches the fall and redemp- 
tion of human beings, a life of separation from the 
world, divine healing through prayer, the return of Jesus 
Christ and His reign, and eternal punishment for the un- 
saved. The church teaches that Christians should seek to 
be filled with the Holy Spirit. The initial physical evi- 
dence of this comes when people speak in tongues 
(speak in a language they never learned). Believers are 
baptized by inmersion (dipping into water). The church 
observes the ordinance of the Lord’s Supper. 

The Assemblies of God churches direct their own 
local affairs. A General Council meets every two years 
and supervises activities throughout the world in mis- 





818 Assembly line 


sions, publications, and education. The General Council 
consists of all ordained ministers and a lay delegate 
from each affiliated church. The denomination is organ- 
ized into 57 districts, including 10 ethnic districts in the 
United States and Puerto Rico. It has about 2 million 
members. Headquarters are in Springfield, Mo. 

Critically reviewed by The General Council of the Assemblies of God 
Assembly line is a group of work areas, called sta- 
tions, arranged in a certain order to make a product. 
Each station performs a given task on a unit of a 
product—such as inserting, tightening, or inspecting a 
part—and then passes it to the next station. When a unit 
reaches the end of the line, it has passed all the stations 
and has become a finished product. Each station con- 
sists of the machines, workers, tools, and parts required 
to do its assigned task. In some cases, industrial robots 
do simple assembly-line tasks (see Robot). Many facto- 
ries also use a conveyor belt to carry a unit from station 
to station (see Conveyor belt). 

Assembly-line production relies on the use of /nter- 
changeable parts—that is, all the pieces of a particular 
part type are identical. Therefore, it does not matter 
which piece is selected for a unit of product to be made 
because each piece will fit. Assembly lines also depend 
on division of labor, in which small portions of a job are 
divided among different workers. In this way, relatively 
unskilled workers can learn their job quickly and con- 
tribute to the manufacture of even complex machinery. 
Assembly lines enable large quantities of products to be 
made at low cost. Ronald G. Askin 

See also Airplane (Mass production); Automobile 
(Manufacturing; diagram); Mass production. 
Assessment is the process of assigning a cash value 
to property for the purpose of taxation. Assessed prop- 
erty may include land, buildings, business equipment, 
and inventory. The term assessment also refers to the 
amount of tax that is levied on a property. The amount of 
tax is based on the assessed value of the property (see 
Property tax). In most cases, assessments are deter- 
mined by state or local officials called assessors. Asses- 
sors may be elected by the voters or appointed by the 
state or local government. 

Assigning a fair and uniform value to property is the 
chief goal of assessment. Assessors try to determine 
what property would sell for if it were offered on the 
open market for a reasonable time and if both buyer and 
seller were well informed. Assessors make such deter- 
minations largely by collecting information about the 
sales prices of similar property recently sold. 

Several problems make it difficult to make a fair esti- 
mate of value. One problem is that nearly all properties 
are different. For example, a large house on the corner 
differs from a small house in the middle of the block. If 
recent sales involve only small houses, the assessor 
must use that information to estimate the value of a 
large house. Another problem is that sales information 
quickly grows out of date. Prices more than a year old 
are probably not a useful guide to current values. 

Still another prohlem is that much property, such as 
office and medical buildings, is rented rather than sold. 
The assessor must use information on rental income 
and expenses to estiniate what the building is worth to 
the owner. Some property—such as factories. power 
plants, and railroad tracks—is neither rented nor sold. 


To assess such property, the assessor must collect infor- 
mation on the cost of buying vacant land and building a 
similar structure. John M. Clapp 

Assignment is the legal term for the transfer of rights 
to property or money from one person to another. The 
person who makes the transfer is the assignor. The as- 
signee receives whatever rights the assignor had. For 
example, if the assignor has the right to possess a piece 
of land, the assignee receives the right. If the assignor 
has only the right to collect rents from the land, the as- 
signee receives only that right. People usually make as- 
signments in writing. In some cases, a person may as- 
sign property that he or she expects to own. See also 
Loan company. 
Assimilation, uf sinm uh LAY shuhn, is the process 
by which cells convert food into living tissues. This 
process makes possible the growth and repair of living 
organisms. In human beings, assimilation begins when 
food is broken down into simple molecules in the stom- 
ach. This process is called digestion. The bloodstream 
absorbs the digested food and carries it to all parts of 
the body. Then, the digested food is assimilated by the 
cells for use in the growth and repair of the body. See 
also Absorption and adsorption; Cell; Digestive sys- 
tem. George B. Johnson 

Assimilation, uh sinm uh LAY shuhn, is the process 
through which one social and cultural group becomes 
part of another social and cultural group. For example, 
groups of people from many countries have settled in 
the United States. Most of these people gradually aban- 
doned the way of life of their homeland, and adopted an 
American way of life. They learned the language, 
adopted the customs, and followed the traditions. 

Assimilation may also occur when people move from 
one part of a country to another part. For example, farm 
people who move to a city become assimilated into the 
way of life of the city. A group that becomes assimilated 
does not necessarily adopt the new way of life com- 
pletely. It may keep some of its old customs or modify 
some of the new customs while adopting them. 

Sometimes, assimilation is prevented or slowed 
down because a majority group does not want contact 
with a minority group. Blacks, Jews, and other minority 
groups have often been forced to remain in ghettos 
(segregated living areas). In other cases, minorities have 
held to their way of life, and have deliberately avoided 
assimilation into the majority. The Amish of United 
States farm communities are an example (see Amish). 

In industrial countries, minorities almost always be- 
come assimilated into the majority's way of life. But in 
developing countries, majorities sometimes become as- 
similated into a minority. This occurs when a minority is 
socially and economically more advanced or powertul 
than the majority. Wolf Heydebrand 

See also Aborigines (Aborigines today). 
Assiniboia, uh sin uh BOY uh, was the name of two 
territorial districts in what are now the United States and 
Canada. One district lay on either side of the Red River 
in both countries. The other district was mainly in the 
present-day province of Saskatchewan. 

In 1811, the district along the Red River was granted 
to the Earl of Selkirk, a Scottish colonizer in Canada. He 
named the area after local Indians. Part of the district, 
which included much of what are now North Dakota 


Linda Henry Elrod 





0 200 Miles 


/0 200 Kilometers 


Saskatchewan 
> askatoon 


ASSINIBOIA 
1882-1905 


Red Rive: 





WORLD BOOK map 


Assiniboia was the name of two historic areas of southern 
Canada and the Northern United States. 


and Minnesota, was cut off when the 49th parallel be- 
came the U.S.-Canadian boundary in 1818. The rest dis- 
appeared when the province of Manitoba was created 
in 1870. See Selkirk, Earl of; Manitoba (The Red River 
Colony). 

In 1882, a district in what was then the Canadian North 
West Territories was named Assiniboia. In 1905, it be- 
came part of Alberta and Saskatchewan. See 
Saskatchewan (North West Territories). |. M. Bumsted 
Assiniboine Indians, uf SIHN uh soyn, are a large 
Plains tribe who live in parts of Canada and the United 
States. Before Europeans came to North America, the 
Assiniboine lived near Lake Superior in what is now On- 
tario. During the late 1600's and the 1700's, they moved 
to what became Saskatchewan, Montana, and North 
Dakota. The name Assiniboine probably comes froma 
Chippewa word that means one who cooks by the use 
of stones. They boiled soup by dropping hot stones into 
a pot. In Canada, they are often called Stonies. 

The Assiniboine were a nomadic people who moved 
about following buffalo herds. They lived in tepees 
made of buffalo hides and wore buckskin clothing. The 
men hunted game, especially buffalo and antelope, and 
the women gathered berries, fruits, and plants to eat. 
The Assiniboine formed bands of related families who 
camped and hunted together. Each band was headed by 
a chief and a council of elders. The tribe's religion cen- 
tered on the pursuit of visions and on a ceremony called 
the sun dance (see Sun dance). The Assiniboine be- 
lieved visions brought help from the gods. 

The Assiniboine were originally a division of the 
Sioux Indians but separated from them before 1640. 
They then became allies of the Cree, who were enemies 
of the Sioux. During the late 1700's and early 1800's, 
smallpox wiped out nearly half the Assiniboine. 

Today, about 3,500 Assiniboine live on the Fort Peck 
and Fort Belknap reservations in Montana. Another 
3,500 live on nine small reserves in Alberta and 
Saskatchewan. Each reservation or reserve is governed 
by an elected tribal council. Some Assiniboine are farm- 
ers or ranchers. Many members of the tribe are poor 
and depend on economic aid from the government of 
the United States or Canada. Despite these problems, 
the people are proud of being Assiniboine, and many 
still speak their native language. Raymond J. DeMallte 
Assisi, Francis of. See Francis of Assisi, Saint. 
Associated Press (AP) is one of the world’s largest 
news-gathering services and one of two general news 


Association for the Study 819 


services in the United States. The other is United Press 
International (UPI). The AP distributes international, re- 
gional, and local news to media worldwide. 

The AP is a nonprofit organization. It is owned and 
controlled by more than 1,500 daily newspapers in the 
United States. These members, along with 6,000 U.S. ra- 
dio and television stations, receive news from the AP. 
News media in 111 other countries also subscribe to the 
service. The AP provides its news in five languages. 

The AP offers daily news reports, features, pho- 
tographs, and graphics (artwork). Most U.S. members re- 
ceive news around the clock via satellite. Some radio 
stations receive AP audio newscasts. AP photographs 
are sent digitally via satellite or telephone line. Digital 
transmission is a method of sending sounds or pictures 
by converting them into electrical signals in the form of 
a digital (numerical) code. Some television stations also 
receive AP video graphics in digital form. 

Six New York City newspapers founded the Associat- 
ed Press in 1848. They began the service to save money 
on the gathering of news by telegraph. Today, the AP 
has about 230 news bureaus worldwide. Its headquar- 
ters are in New York City. 

See also News service. 
Association, in psychology, refers to one theory of 
how people learn things. The theory's three laws of asso- 
ciation attempt to explain how a person associates (re- 
lates) experiences. These laws are: (1) the law of contigui- 
ty, (2) the law of similarity, and (3) the law of contrast. 

The law of contiguity states that mental associations 
occur when two events take place close to each other in 
time or space. For example, teachers try to grade an ex- 
amination soon after students take it. This helps students 
associate the correct answers with the questions while 
the examination is fresh in their minds. 

The law of similarity states that a person is more likely 
to connect two things that are almost the same. For ex- 
ample, a child is more likely to associate a wagon with 
an automobile than with an airplane. 

The law of contrast states that greatly differing things 
are likely to be associated. For example, it is easier to 
learn the differences between ‘hot’ and “cold” than be- 
tween hot and “warm.” 

Critics of the theory say it puts too much emphasis on 
the events associated and not enough emphasis on the 
person. Psychologists holding other views think that the 
ability of a person to understand the similarity or differ- 
ence between things is also important in learning. 

Few psychologists accept the associationist point of 
view completely. Most realize association takes place, 
but doubt it explains all learning. Allen Frances 

See also Behavior; Learning; Psychology. 
Association for the Study of African-American 
Life and History conducts and promotes research 
and study of the black person’s role in world history. 
The association collects writings and materials relating 
to African Americans and other ethnic groups. It pro- 
motes harmony and understanding among all people. 
The association has about 2,000 members, including his- 
torians, scholars, and students. It sponsors Black History 
Month and sets the national theme for the celebration. It 
also publishes Negro History Bulletin and The Journal of 
Negro History. \ts subsidiary, the Associated Publishers, 
publishes books and a Black History Month kit. The 


Richard A. Schwarzlose 





820 Association of Southeast Asian Nations 


American historian Carter G. Woodson founded the As- 
sociation for the Study of Negro Life and History in 1915. 
The association received its present name in 1998. Head- 
quarters are in Washington, D.C. See also Black History 
Month; Woodson, Carter Goodwin. 
by the Association for the Study of African-American Life and History 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN) is an organization of 10 Southeast Asian coun- 
tries—Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, 
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and 
Vietnam. It promotes political, economic, cultural, and 
social cooperation among its members. Although 
ASEAN works for peace and stability in Southeast Asia, 
it is not a defense organization. 

The members of ASEAN cooperate in such fields as 
population control, prevention of drug abuse, and sci- 
entific research. Teachers, students, and artists of the 
member nations exchange visits. In addition, the organi- 
zation develops plans to promote tourism in ASEAN 
countries and to encourage programs of Southeast 
Asian studies. It works to reduce trade barriers among 
the members. 

The foreign ministers of the member countries meet 
annually to determine ASEAN policy and to consider 
projects recommended by ASEAN committees. These 
committees deal with subjects ranging from food and 
agriculture to the mass media. They consist of experts 
and officials from the member countries and are re- 
sponsible for putting ASEAN projects into effect. 
ASEAN’s administrative body, the Central Secretariat, 
works to make sure that the policies of the organization 
are carried out. The secretariat is in Jakarta, Indonesia. 

ASEAN was established in 1967 by Indonesia, 
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand. Dur- 
ing the 1970's, cooperation increased among the mem- 
ber nations. The ASEAN heads of government met in 
1976 for the first time and made several important 
agreements. The member nations agreed to share basic 
products during shortages and to gradually remove 
trade restrictions. They also decided to build an industri- 
al project in each country. The leaders established the 
organizations Central Secretariat, as well as a council to 
settle disputes among the member nations. 

Brunei became a member of ASEAN in 1984. Vietnam 
was admitted in 1995, Laos and Myanmar in 1997, and 
Cambodia in 1999. David P. Chandler 
Assumption is the religious belief that a certain per- 
son was taken bodily into heaven. The belief is part of 
both Jewish and Christian tradition. 

In Judaism, an assumption is Called an a/iyah, which 
means ascent or going up.|n the Old Testament, or He- 
brew Bible, there is only one specific reference to an as- 
sumption. In 2 Kings 2:1-13, God takes the prophet Elijah 
into heaven in a whirlwind. Other Jewish traditions 
based on Old Testament stories state that Enoch, the fa- 
ther of Methuselah, and the Israelite leader Moses as- 
cended into heaven. 

Belief in assumption is not found in the New Testa- 
ment, but it became significant during the late Middle 
Ages, especially in the Western church. The Assumption 
of the Blessed Virgin is a doctrine of the Roman Catholic 
Church. It states that the body and soul of the Virgin 
Mary were taken into heaven. Pope Pius Xi proclaimed 
the Assumption a church doctrine in 1950. Romian Cath- 


Critically reviewed 


olics celebrate the Feast of the Assumption on August 
15. Assumption is not a Protestant doctrine but has been 
accepted as a belief in the Eastern Orthodox Churches. 

The Assumption of Mary has been a popular subject 
in painting. Many pictures portray Mary ascending to 
heaven with angels or bands of cherubs. A painting 
called Assumption of the Virgin by the Spanish artist El 
Greco appears in Art and the arts. 
Assurbanipal. See Ashurbanipal. 
Assyria, uh S/HR ee uh, was an ancient country on the 
upper Tigris River in Mesopotamia. It covered roughly 
the northern part of present-day Iraq. Assyrias civiliza- 
tion was similar in many ways to that of ancient Babylo- 
nia, its neighbor to the south. 

The Assyrians have been called the Romans of Asia. 
Like the Romans, they were great conquerors. They won 
their victories in the Roman way, by superb organiza- 
tion, weapons, and equipment. 


The land 


Assyria was a land of rolling hills. The Tigris River and 
the small streams that fed it kept the valleys fertile. To 
the north rose the steep Armenian Mountains. On the 
east were the Zagros Mountains and the high hills of 
lran. These mountainous lands did not attract the Assyri- 
ans much. But the lands to the south and west were bet- 
ter than their own. The rich lands of Babylonia and the 
fertile plains of western Mesopotamia and Syria lay 
open to the Assyrian conquerors. Assyria had a better 
natural climate for agriculture than Babylonia. It was 
cooler, and the rainfall was heavier. But irrigation was 
easy on the Babylonian plain and very hard in the Assyri- 
an hills. Once started on the path of conquest, the Assyr- 
ians took much more than the fertile farmland next to 
them. The empire came to include mining land, forest- 
land, and other kinds of land. But Assyria itself remained 
a farming country. Ancient Assyria also had plenty of 
good building stone, some timber, and a few minerals. 


Way of life 


The Assyrian people dressed in coatlike garments 
called tunics and wore sandals. The men wore their hair 
long, and many grew beards. Most men had short 
beards, but many high-ranking officials wore long 
beards that were squared at the bottom. 

Most Assyrians worked for Assyrian rulers or for 
other powerful people. Farmers lived in small villages 
on estates and worked the land. They dug irrigation 
canals that channeled water to the farmland and helped 
control flooding. They lived in houses that had thatched 
roots and walls made of intertwined branches and mud. 
Farmers raised livestock and produced milk and other 
dairy products. The most important crop was barley. 

Assyria had few large cities. The most important were 
Assur, Nineveh, and Kalhu (also spelled Calah, but now 
called Nimrud). Most city dwellers were craftworkers or 
traders. Craftworkers made pottery, and objects out of 
gold, silver, bronze, ivory, and wood. High walls, guard- 
ed by archers, encircled the cities to protect residents 
from attack. Citizens grew fruits and vegetables in gar- 
dens and orchards just outside the city walls. 

Some Assyrians roamed the countryside in semino- 
madic groups. These groups consisted mostly of run- 
a\way slaves, unsuccessful farmers, and people who had 


Stanley K Stowers 





been expelled from the cities. From time to time, bands 
of these people raided and looted the cities. Relations 
between the city dwellers and the seminomads were al- 
ways tense. Monarchs always tried to strengthen control 
over the land as soon as they took the throne. 

Assyria had only a few slaves. Most slaves were pris- 
oners of war or people who could not pay their debts. 
Some Assyrians sold their wives and children into slav- 
ery to clear their debts. 

Language and literature. A variety of peoples lived 
in Assyria. As a result, a number of different languages 
were spoken there. Until about 1000 B.C, however, writ- 
ing was done only in a Semitic language related to mod- 
ern Hebrew and Arabic. 

The early Assyrians used a writing system called cu- 
neiform that was developed by the Babylonians. It con- 
sisted of wedge-shaped symbols on clay tablets. The 
writings dealt with religion, literature, medicine, history, 
and other subjects. Assyrian kings collected the clay tab- 
lets in huge libraries. There, librarians carefully indexed 
the tablets and kept them on shelves. 

In the 1850's, archaeologists discovered two major li- 
braries in Nineveh, each containing thousands of clay 
tablets. King Sennacherib, who reigned in Assyria from 
704 to 681 B.C, assembled one of the libraries. His 
grandson, King Ashurbanipal, assembled the other, 
which included Assyrian, Babylonian, and Sumerian tab- 
lets. Most of the tablets from Ashurbanipal's library are 
now in the British Museum in London. 

The Assyrians also wrote legal texts. The Middle As- 
syrian Laws date from about 1400 B.C. Like the Babylo- 
nian Code of Hammurabi, these laws consist of exam- 
ples of cases, each with its judgment. But the Assyrians 
imposed harsher penalties on lawbreakers than the Bab- 
ylonians did. 

Most later Assyrians probably spoke Aramaic. Much 
of the writing was done in Aramaic script, probably 
written in ink on parchment. Aramaic did not completely 
replace the cuneiform script, however. Both survived as 
written languages until the end of the Assyrian Empire, 
but they were used for different purposes. The historical 
and religious texts were written in cuneiform. But Assyr- 
ians used Aramaic for their everyday business. Most of 
the Aramaic parchments decayed long ago, so scholars 
have learned little about Assyria‘s trading activities dur- 
ing its last few hundred years. 

Religion. Assyrian religion was closely related to the 
earlier Sumerian and Babylonian religions. Assyrians be- 
lieved that many gods directed human destiny and con- 
trolled the sky, the earth, water, storms, and fire. The As- 
syrians also believed in good and evil spirits, and in 
magic. 

Their religion differed from the earlier religions in 
some ways. The chief god of Assyria was Ashur, or 
Assur, whose name was the same as the Assyrians’ 
name for their country and most important city. The 
chief Babylonian god was Marduk. Babylonian kings 
were not religious leaders. They could enter the temple 
only once a year under special circumstances. But the 
Assyrian king served as both the ruler and the chief 
priest, and the people considered him Ashur's governor 
on the earth. 

Assyrians worshiped other gods, including Nabu, the 
god of learning and patron of scribes (writers); Ninurta, 


Assyria 821 





The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City, Gift of John D Rockefeller, Jr. 1932 


A winged lion of the 800s B.C. stood in front of the palace of 
Ashurnasirpal fl. It was supposed to ward off evil. 


god of war; and Ishtar, the goddess of love. The god- 
dess Ishtar was so famous in Nineveh that her statue 
was once sent from there to Egypt to help cure the 
Egyptian king of an illness. Assyrians offered food and 
precious objects to the gods. Priests tried to foretell the 
future by examining the innards of sacrificed animals 
and by observing and interpreting things in nature such 
as the weather and flights of birds. 

Art and architecture. The earliest Assyrian art was 
similar to the art of Babylonia and of other nearby cul- 
tures. A separate style of Assyrian art developed be- 
tween 1400 and 1000 B.C. Assyrian craftworkers made 
some of the finest cylinder seals ever produced in Mes- 
opotamia. These seals were rolled over soft clay to seal 
documents and other objects. 

The early Assyrians decorated their buildings with 
wallpaintings and with brightly colored bricks. Later, be- 
tween 900 and 600 B.C, they decorated palace walls 
with carved stone slabs showing religious Ceremonies 
or military victories. The wall carvings became the most 
familiar of all Assyrian artistic works. Some of the finest 
carvings, found at the palace of Ashurbanipal in Nine- 
veh, show hunting scenes. Human figures in Assyrian art 
never display any emotion. But the carvings at Ashurba- 
nipal’s palace show vividly the ferocity and suffering of 
the hunted lions. 

Assyrian relief carvings were skillfully done, but As- 
syrian sculptors never understood how to show dis- 
tance and depth in their carvings. Except for the statues 
of human-headed bulls and lions that guarded the pal- 
aces, they made few good statues in the round. 

Assyrians usually made their buildings of unbaked 
mud bricks. Some of the foundations and wall decora- 
tions were made of stone. All the buildings had flat 


822 Assyria 













Black Sea 












tes 
up? 
“aver Urartu 






Asia Minor 











2 é 
- Cyprus ge Syria Ass e 
Mediterranean Phoenicid- oan. i ahi sec. 
Sea p a 
“Tyre 
Palestine i 





Arabia 


0 400 Mies 


a eee 
0 400 Kilometers 
WORLD BOOK map 





Location of the Assyrian Empire 


roofs, and even the largest were only one story high. 
Some, however, had rooms with ceilings as high as 30 
feet (9 meters). The magnificent palace courts, cham- 
bers, and hallways spread over several acres or 
hectares. Great temples and palaces as well as smaller 
buildings filled the cities of Assur, Nineveh, and Kalhu. 

Assyrian craftworkers excelled in decorating small ob- 
jects made of stone, metal, wood, and ivory. Some art 
objects were imported from Phoenicia and Egypt. 

In the late 1980's, Iraqi archaeologists uncovered royal 
tombs at Kalhu containing exquisite examples of Assyri- 
an gold work. The tombs held hundreds of beautifully 
crafted gold vessels and pieces of jewelry, including 
crowns, bracelets, necklaces, and earrings. 


Government 


The Assyrian king was known as ‘the great king, the 
legitimate king, the king of the world, king of Assyria, 
king of all the four corners of the earth, king of kings, 
prince without rival, who rules from the Upper Sea to 
the Lower Sea.’ The king served as supreme head of the 
Assyrian Empire and as chief priest of the god Ashur. He 
personally led the army in military campaigns to various 
parts of the empire. These campaigns brought in taxes 
and other payments. The king's oldest son and heir usu- 
ally handled the administrative affairs of the country, and 
lived in the Palace of Administration. . 

Residents of some of the older cities, such as Assur 
and Nineveh, enjoyed special privileges, including low 
taxes and freedom from military service. Landlords had 
to pay taxes and provide young men from their estates 
to serve in the army. Beyond Assyria itselt, the empire 
was divided into provinces. Each province was adminis- 
tered by a governor who was responsible to the central 
government. 


Written records and sculptured reliefs indicate that 
the Assyrians treated conquered peoples cruelly. But 
sometimes the Assyrians orily threatened to be cruel to 
frighten other peoples into surrendering. The Assyrians 
sometimes allowed conquered peoples to keep thei: 
own rulers. But if the people rebelled ot retused to pay 


taxes, the Assyrians often destroyed their cities and sent 
the people to distant parts of the empire. 


History 


People began to settle in farming viliages in Assyria 
about 8500 B.C. The villagers cultivated plants and do- 
mesticated sheep and goats. They traded goods with 
both nearby and distant towns and villages. As the pop- 
ulation grew, villages in Assyria developed into small 
towns, and trade increased. Some Assyrians became 
wealthy and powerful, while others lived in simple 
homes with few possessions. By about 3000 B.C, many 
different peoples lived in Assyria. 

From about 2000 to 1700 B.C, Assyrian traders estab- 
lished colonies in Anatolia (now part of Turkey) to ac- 
quire the silver and gold that were plentiful there. They 
traded tin and Babylonian cloth for the metals. In 1813 
B.C., Shamshi-Adad, ruler of a desert people called the 
Amorites, took control of Assyria. He extended its pow- 
ers and boundaries to western Syria, northern Meso- 
potamia, and the borders of Babylonia. 

No records have been found of the next few hundred 
years of the history of Assyria. Historians believe that the 
country was ruled for part of the period by Mitanni, a 
kingdom in northern Syria. Records show that Assyria 
had again become independent by the mid-1300's B.C 

Assyria enjoyed brief periods of expansion in the 
1200's and 1100's, before it began to build its empire in 
the 800's B.C. Shalmaneser III, who reigned from 858 to 
824 B.C, gained control of the Mediterranean trade 
routes. Tiglath-pileser II, the king from 744 to 727 B.C, 
conquered large parts of Syria and Israel and became 
king of Babylonia. Esarhaddon, who held the throne 
from 680 to 669 B.C., added Egypt to the empire. Assyria 
declined after the mid-600's B.C, and Median and Baby- 
lonian attacks in 614 and 612 B.C. ended the empire. 

Norman Yoffee 


Related articles in World Book include: 


Aramaic language Hittites Semiramis 
Architecture Iraq Semites 
(Mesopotamian § Mesopotamia Sennacherib 
architecture) Mitanni Syria 
Ashurbanipal Nineveh Tiglath-pileser Il 
Babylonia Phoenicia (Decline) —_ Tigris River 
Cuneiform Sargon of Akkad 


Astaire, uh STAIR, Fred (1899-1987), an American 
dancer and actor, became a popular star of musical mo- 
tion pictures. He was best known for his graceful, imagi- 
native dancing and his lively portrayals of charming, so- 
phisticated gentlemen. 

Astaire, whose real 
name was Frederick 
Austerlitz, was born in 
Omaha, Nebraska. From 
1916 to 1932, he and his 
sister, Adele Astaire, 
starred as a dance team in 
many Broadway musicals. 
Astaire made his movie 
debut in 1933 in Dancing 
Lady. Later that year, he 
teamed up with dancer 
Ginger Rogers in Flying | 
Down to Rio. Their danc- Wide World 
ing delighted audiences, Fred Astaire 








and Astaire and Rogers made nine more films together, 
including Top Hat (1935), Swing Time (1936), and Shall 
We Dance?(1937). 

Astaire appeared in over 35 movies, including the mu- 
sicals Holiday Inn (1942), Easter Parade (1948), Royal 
Wedding (1951), The Band Wagon (1953), and Finian’s 
Rainbow (1968). He also played straight dramatic roles in 
such films as On the Beach (1959) and The Towering In- 
ferno (1974). He died on June 22, 1987. 

See also Rogers, Ginger. 

Astana, ah stah NAH (pop. 300,000), is the capital of 
Kazakhstan. Astana serves as the railroad hub for a major 
grain- and livestock-producing region of Kazakhstan and 
is a center for food processing and industry. The city lies 
along the Ishim River on the plains of north-central Ka- 
zakhstan. For Astanas location, see Kazakhstan (map). 

The city began in 1830 as a Russian military outpost. It 
soon grew into a town called Akmolinsk. In the 1950's, 
while Kazakhstan was a republic of the Soviet Union, the 
Soviet government chose the region around Akmolinsk 
as the site of the Virgin Lands project, an agricultural de- 
velopment project. In 1961, Akmolinsk was renamed 
Tselinograd, which means Virgin Lands City. 

The Soviet Union broke up in 1991, and Kazakhstan 
became independent. The city adopted its Kazakh name, 
Aqmola {also spelled Akmola). In 1997, the country’s cap- 
ital was moved from Almaty to Aqmola, which is closer 
to the center of Kazakhstan. Aqmola was renamed As- 
tana in 1998. Astana means capita/in the Kazakh lan- 
guage. William Fierman 

See also Kazakhstan (picture). 

Astarte, as TAHR tee, is the Greek name for one of the 
most important goddesses of the ancient Middle East. 
Astarte was worshiped in Syria, Egypt, and the Phoeni- 
cian colonies of the western Mediterranean. 

The first mention of Astarte appeared about 1430 B.C 
in Egyptian records that called her a war goddess. She 
was also a goddess of sexual love. The Greeks later iden- 
tified her with Aphrodite, their goddess of love. Astarte 
was also related to the important Mesopotamian god- 
dess Ishtar. An Egyptian myth about Astarte was found 
in a papyrus fragment that dates from approximately 
1300 B.C. In this myth, Astarte apparently persuaded the 
Sea not to impose tribute (forced payments) on the 
deities of Egypt. The deities rewarded Astarte by accept- 
ing her into their circle. In the Bible, Astarte is called 
“Ashtoreth the goddess of the Sidonians” and Ashtaroth, 
the plura! form of the name, is used with the meaning 
“pagan goddesses. Small clay figurines of nude females 
excavated in Palestine are often considered representa- 
tions of Astarte. RF. G. Sweet 
Astatine, AS tuh teen or AS tuh tihn, is the heaviest 
member of the halogen family of chemical elements. It is 
extremely unstable, and all 30 of its isotopes undergo ra- 
dioactive decay. Its most stable isotope has a half-life of 
8 hours and an atomic weight of 210. 

Astatine has the chemical symbol At and the atomic 
number 85. Its chemical properties resemble those of 
iodine. But astatine loses electrons in a chemical reac- 
tion more readily than does iodine. In addition, astatine 
is less likely than iodine to gain electrons (see lodine). 

Astatine was first prepared in 1940 by Dale R. Corson, 
K.R. MacKenzie, and Emilio Segré at Berkeley, Califor- 
nia. It was produced in a cyclotron by bombarding bis- 


Roger Ebert 


Asteroid 823 


muth with high-energy alpha particles. Although small 
amounts of the element exist in uranium ores, almost all 
astatine is created artificially. Evan H. Appelman 
Aster is the name of a large group of plants valued for 
their colorful flowers. Most asters are perennials, which 
means they live more than two years. Some are annual/s 
that die after one growing season. More than 200 spe- 
cies of asters grow in North America, and lesser num- 
bers are found in Europe, Asia, and South America. 
Aster is the Greek word for star 

The leaves of asters are positioned alternately along 
the stem. Each blossom is made up of two flowers—a 
small disk fower in the center surrounded by a petallike 
ray flower. The disk flowers range in color from white to 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Lorraine Epstein 
The New England aster has purple petals. 


dark purple. The ray flowers are most commonly white 
but also may be blue or purple. Most asters bloom late 
in summer. Some bloom until late fall. 

The New England aster is a popular garden flower 
that blooms in the fall and has purple flowers. Its long 
narrow leaves grow on a hairy stem. Because these 
asters bloom at the time of the feast of Michaelmas, they 
are known as Michaelmas daisies in England. 

Most asters are difficult to grow from seed. They can 
be broken into several pieces and transplanted in the 
spring. Asters thrive in almost any type of soil. The China 
aster, an annual, is grown from seed. James S. Miller 

Scientific classification. Asters are in the composite family, 
Compositae. The scientific name for the New England aster is A. 
novae-angliae. The China aster is Ca/listephus chinensis. 

See also Flower (picture: Garden perennials). 
Asteroid is any of numerous small planetary bodies 
that revolve around the sun. Asteroids are also called 
minor planets or planetoids. Most of them are in the as- 
teroid belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. The 
belt contains more than 200 asteroids larger than 60 
miles (100 kilometers) in diameter. Scientists estimate 
that there are more than 750,000 asteroids in the belt 
with diameters larger than = mile (1 kilometer). There are 
millions of smaller asteroids. The average temperature 
of the surface of a typical asteroid is — 100 °F (— 73 °C). 

Astronomers are not sure how the asteroids originat- 
ed. According to the leading theory, however, most 


824 Asteroid 


known asteroids are the shattered remains of a smaller 
group of larger objects. These objects were left over 
from the time the planets formed. Elsewhere in the solar 
system, other such objects gathered together to form 
the planets and satellites. 

Size. Asteroids vary greatly in size. The largest and 
first known asteroid, Ceres, was discovered in 1801. It is 
580 miles (933 kilometers) in diameter. Ceres is believed 
to contain about 4 of the total mass of all the asteroids. 
One of the smallest, discovered in 1991 and named 1991 
BA, is only about 20 feet (6 meters) across. 

Composition. Studies of an asteroid’s reflected light 
as well as analyses of meteorites have provided infor- 
mation about the composition of asteroids. Astronomers 
classify asteroids into two broad groups based on their 
composition. One group of asteroids dominates the out- 
er part of the belt. These asteroids are rich in carbon. 
Their composition has not changed much since the so- 
lar system formed. Asteroids in the second group, 
which are in the inner part of the belt, are rich in miner- 
als. These asteroids formed from melted materials. 

Measuring asteroids. Until the 1990's, astronomers 
could determine the size of an asteroid in only three 
ways. In the first method, they use telescopes to deter- 
mine the asteroid’s distance from the sun, the amount of 
the sunlight it reflects, and the amount of heat it gives 
off. The amount of sunlight or heat reaching the earth 
depends on the size of the asteroid and its distance 
from the sun. Therefore, calculations involving distance 
and either light or heat yield the size of the asteroid. 

In the second method, astronomers use a telescope 
to measure an asteroid during an occultation, when the 
asteroid passes in front of a star and is silhouetted 
against it. The third technique involves the use of radio 
telescopes to produce images of an asteroid. 

In 1991, scientists began to use a fourth method 
close-range observation of asteroids by space probes. 
That year, the United States space probe Galileo took 
the first detailed photograph of an asteroid. This was 
Gaspra, an irregularly shaped object measuring about 
12 by 7 5 by 7 miles (19 by 12 by 11 kilometers). 

In 1996, the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Ad- 
ministration (NASA) launched the Near Earth Asteroid 
Rendezvous (NEAR) probe. The probe flew within 753 
miles (1,216 kilometers) of the asteroid Mathilde in 1997. 
In 1997, NEAR flew past the asteroid Eros at a distance of 





NASA 
The asteroid Ida 15 about 35 miles (55 kilometers) long. Itis one 


of thousands of asteroids in the asteroid belt, a region between 
the orbits of Mars and Jupiter 





Aflantt 
Osean 


Bahamas 
mo | 
oN, 


Cuba : 


at 


. Jamaica 
Caribbean Sea ani 
WORLD BOOK map 


The Chicxulub Basin in Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula formed 
when an asteroid hit the earth about 65 million years ago. Debris 
from the impact may have led to the extinction of the dinosaurs. 


2,378 miles (3,829 kilometers). NEAR went into orbit 
around Eros in February 2000. In March, NEAR was re- 
named Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous-Shoemaker 
(NEAR Shoemaker) in honor of the American astron- 
omer Eugene Shoemaker. In February 2001, NEAR Shoe- 
maker became the first spacecraft to land on an asteroid. 

In October 1998, NASA launched a probe called Deep 
Space 1. The probe flew within only about 16 miles (26 
kilometers) of the asteroid Braille in July 1999. 

Orbits. Most asteroids follow e/fiptical (oval-shaped) 
orbits in the asteroid belt. Groups of asteroids that fol- 
low the same orbit are called Hirayama families, named 
for Kiyotsugu Hirayama, the Japanese astronomer who 
first discovered them. Many asteroids follow orbits out- 
side the belt. For example, a number of asteroids called 
Trojans follow the same orbit as does Jupiter. Three 
groups of asteroids—Atens, Amors, and Apollos—orbit 
in the inner solar system and are known as near-Earth 
asteroids. Some near-Earth asteroids cross the path of 
Mars, while others cross Earth's orbit. 

Asteroid collisions. Many scientists believe that a 
near-Earth asteroid collided with Earth about 65 million 
years ago, triggering widespread environmental 
changes that led to the extinction of the dinosaurs. The 
asteroid created a huge circular depression called the 
Chicxulub (pronounced CHEEK shoo /oob/Basin cen- 
tered in Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula. The diameter of the 
basin is about 190 miles (300 kilometers). 

In 1908, an object exploded about 6 miles (10 kilome- 
ters) above the Tunguska River area of Siberia. The ob- 
ject may have been a comet's nucleus or a large mete- 
orite—sometimes referred to as a small asteroid. Debris 
from the explosion flattened forests and burned an area 
about 50 miles (80 kilometers) across. 

The gravitational pull of Jupiter and other large plan- 
ets causes asteroid orbits to change slowly. Orbital 
changes lead to collisions that create smaller asteroids 
and fragments, increasing the chance of more collisions. 
Some small fragments reach Earth's surface as mete- 
orites. Marian E Rudnyk 

See also Ceres; Dinosaur (Why dinosaurs died out); 
Eros; Meteor; Space exploration (Probes to asteroids). 
Asthma, AZ muh, is a chronic lung disease character- 
ized by periods of breathlessness, wheezing, and 
coughing. People with asthma suffer from chronic in- 
flammation of the bronchi(airways to the lungs). The in- 
flamed airways react to irritation by swelling, constrict- 





ing, and filling with mucus. These changes obstruct 
airflow (the ability to force air in and out of the lungs). An 
asthmatic person may feel short of breath or experience 
difficulty in breathing. Severe attacks may involve 
spasms (sudden constriction) of the airways, causing suf- 
ferers to gasp for air and feel that they are suffocating. 
These attacks require immediate medical attention and 
can cause death. 

A variety of environmental or emotional stimuli, called 
triggers, may irritate the sensitive airways of asthma suf- 
ferers and cause an attack. Triggers include respiratory 
infections, pollen, mold spores, chemical irritants, to- 
bacco smoke, animal dandruff, dust mites, exercise, or 
breathing cold air. An attack usually begins within min- 
utes after exposure to a trigger and can last a few min- 
utes, several hours, or even days. 

Physicians diagnose asthma by studying the patient's 
history of symptoms, physical examination, and tests of 
lung function. Recurring episodes of breathlessness 
caused by one or more triggers usually indicate asthma. 
Physicians use a device called a spirometer to determine 
the amount of air patients can breathe out of their lungs. 
Another device called a peak flow meter measures air- 
flow. People with asthma often have reduced airflow 
when exposed to triggering substances, or after vigor- 
ous exercise. 

Asthma affects both children and adults. Some chil- 
dren with asthma experience fewer symptoms as they 
get older, while others develop more. Despite advances 
in the treatment of asthma, the incidence of the disease 
is increasing, especially among children living in cities. 

Causes. Scientists are not certain what causes asthma 
or why it is becoming more common. Research shows 
that infants exposed to indoor air pollution, especially 
tobacco smoke, have a much higher risk of developing 
asthma than infants who are not exposed. 

Asthma tends to run in families and is often accompa- 
nied by allergies. People with asthma, or members of 
their family, often have respiratory allergies, such as hay 
fever, or they are allergic to certain foods. Asthmatic 
persons and their family members also have a higher in- 
cidence of an allergy called atopic eczema that causes 
itchy red swellings on the skin. Researchers are working 
to discover genetic markers that can identify people at 
risk of developing asthma. 

Treatment. There is currently no cure for asthma, 
but the disease can be controlled. Sudden attacks can 
be prevented by avoiding substances that trigger them. 





lisa Schonemen, University ot Illinois at Chicago Eye Center 
Astigmatism is usually caused by an abnormally shaped cor- 
nea. A normal cornea is shaped like a basketball and has equal 
curvatures, /eft. !n a person with astigmatism, the cornea has un- 
equal curvatures, like those of a football, ght 


Astigmatism 825 


But it is not possible to avoid all asthma triggers all the 
time, so asthma sufferers usually require medication. 

Medications are divided between those used for 
quick relief from sudden attacks, and others used for 
long-term control of symptoms. Quick-relief medicines 
are usually bronchodilators, drugs that decrease the 
constriction in the airways by relaxing small muscles in 
and around the lungs. These medicines are inhaled from 
smail aerosol canisters at the onset of a sudden asthma 
attack. Long-term control medications include corticos- 
teroids, which are anti-inflammatories (substances that 
reduce inflammation) that can be inhaled or taken orally. 

Most people with asthma can lead normal, even ac- 
tive, lives. With proper treatment, people with asthma 
can participate in sports, even those that require inten- 
sive breathing, such as football, track and field, or swim- 
ming. Mark H. Moss and Robert F. Lemanske, Jr. 

See also Allergy; Bronchitis; Bronchodilator; Dust 
mite; Hay fever. 

Astigmatism, uh STIHG muh tihz uhm, is a visual de- 
fect in which both nearby and distant objects-appear 
blurred. It is usually found in both eyes. In most cases, 
astigmatism is caused by the shape of the cornea. 

A normal cornea has a spherical shape, somewhat 
like a basketball cut in half. As light rays pass through a 
normal cornea, they are bent so they focus at a single 
point on the retina. In people with astigmatism, the 
cornea is shaped somewhat like a football cut in half 
lengthwise. The length and the width of the football- 
shaped cornea have unequal curvatures (degrees of 
curve), and the difference between these curves deter- 
mines how much astigmatism the person has. Light rays 
entering an eye with astigmatism cannot focus on a sin- 
gle point on the retina. Instead, the rays meet at two 
points, one or neither of which is on the retina. 

Many cases of astigmatism are present at birth. Some 
cases result from injury or disease. Astigmatism may de- 
velop or change as a person grows older, and it is often 


12 
v\ 7 


? S 
6 


A practical test for astigmatism. The three parallel lines of 
each ‘spoke’ in the “wheel” shown here are equally black. Cover 
one eye and hold the chart about 2 feet (60 centimeters) away. !f 
all lines do not appear equally black, you may have astigmatism. 
Any eye condition should be checked by a doctor. 





826 Astor, John Jacob 


associated with nearsightedness or farsightedness. Mild 
cases of astigmatism may come and go. 

The symptoms of astigmatism include blurred vision, 
double vision in one eye, eyestrain, fatigue, and head- 
aches. People with astigmatism may squint in an effort to 
see Clearly. Doctors treat it by prescribing glasses or 
contact lenses. In some cases, surgical or laser treat- 
ment of the cornea may restore a more spherical shape 
and reduce or eliminate astigmatism. 

See also Contact lens; Eye (Astigmatism). 

Astor, John Jacob (1763-1848), was a famous Ameri- 
can businessman. He built a large fortune through his 
involvement in the fur trade and through his extensive 
real estate investments in New York The investments in- 
creased in value over the years, and Astors family be- 
came one of the wealthiest in the United States. 

Astor was born in Walldorf, Germany, near Heidel- 
berg. He came to New York City when he was 20 years 
old. He worked as a baker's boy and peddler and ran a 
music store before entering the fur trade in about 1787. 
He shipped furs overseas, often in his own vessels. 

Astor's Pacific Fur Company established the trading 
post of Astoria, Oregon, in 1811, but lost it during the 
War of 1812. His fur companies won an almost complete 
monopoly of the trade in the United States. Astor invest- 
ed his profits principally in Manhattan Island farmland, 
which became the heart of New York City. Astor retired 
from the fur trade in 1834. At his death, his estate was 
estimated at more than $20 million. John Elgin Foster 
Astor, Lady (1879-1964), became the first woman to 
serve in the British Parliament. A Conservative, Astor 
was a witty champion of temperance and of the rights of 
women and children. Before World War I] began in 
1939, she became a promi- 
nent supporter of the poli- 
cy of appeasement toward 
Nazi Germany (see World 
War Il [The failure of ap- 
peasement). 

Astor was born Nancy 
Langhorne in Danville, Vir- 
ginia. She went to England 
in 1903 and, in 1906, mar- 
ried Waldorf Astor, a 
great-great-grandson of 
the wealthy American 
businessman John Jacob 
Astor. Waldorf Astor 
served in the British 
House of Commons, where he represented the Sutton 
district of Plymouth. In 1919, he gave up his seat in the 
House, and Lady Astor was elected to replace him. Ten 
years later, after the election of 1929, Lady Astor tried 
unsuccessfully to form a women s party in the House 
under her leadership. She retired from the House in 
1945. Keith Robbins 
Astonia, a STOHR ee uh (pop. 9.813), is a historic sea- 
port at the mouth of the Columbia River in the north- 
west corner of Oregon. it is the seat of Clatsop County 
For location, see Oregon ‘political map). The chief in- 
dustries in the area are fishing, tish packing. wood prod- 
ucts milling, and shipping. 

The city gets its name from a fur-trading post estab- 
lished in 1811 by a party sent out by John Jacob Astor. It 


Ronald A. krefman 


uted Pre 


Lady Astor 





was the first American settlement west of the Rocky 
Mountains. The post was located near the site of Fort 
Clatsop, where the Lewis and Clark Expedition spent the 
winter of 1805-1806. 

The Clatsop County Historical Society Museum and 
the Columbia River Maritime Museum are located in As- 
toria. The city has a council-manager government. 

Gordon B. Dodds 

See also Astor, John Jacob; Lewis and Clark Expedi- 
tion. 

Astrolabe, AS truh /ayb, is an instrument used by early 
astronomers and navigators to measure the angles of 
celestial bodies above the horizon. It consists of a metal 
disk mounted on a circular frame. The astrolabe is sus- 
pended so that jt remains vertical. The disk has sights for 
observing a star. The frame has a set of marks for meas- 
uring the stars elevation. The astrolabe was replaced by 
the sextant and other more accurate instruments. See 
also Exploration (picture); Navigation (History); Sextant. 

Raymond E. White 
Astrology, wh STRAHL uh jee, is the study of how the 
sun, moon, planets, and stars are supposedly related to 
life and events on the earth. It is based on the belief that 
the heavenly bodies form patterns that can reveal a per- 
son's character or future. 

Many people throughout the world believe in astrolo- 
gy. They base important decisions on the advice of an 
astrologer (a person who tells fortunes by studying the 
stars). Other people say there is no scientific basis for as- 
trology, and they consider it a form of entertainment. 

Astrology differs from astronomy. Astrology devel- 
oped from a set of principles that originated more than 
4,000 years ago. At that time, astronomy was also based 
on the same principles. But during the 1500's and 1600's, 
several astronomers, including Nicolaus Copernicus of 
Poland and Tycho Brahe of Denmark, made discoveries 
about the heavenly bodies that conflicted with the prin- 
ciples of astrology. As a result, astrology and astronomy 
became widely different in their methods and purpose. 
Today, astrologers observe the heavenly bodies to un- 
derstand things that happen on the earth. Astronomers 
seek scientific knowledge about objects in space. 


Principles of astrology 


The basic principle of astrology is that the heavenly 
bodies influence what happens on the earth. Astrolo- 
gers learn about this influence by casting (drawing) a cir- 
cular chart called a horoscope or birth chart. A horo- 
scope shows the position of the planets in relation to 
both the earth and the stars at a certain time. In most 
cases, it shows the position of these bodies at the time 
of a person s birth. See Horoscope. 

The system used by astrologers to cast a horoscope is 
based ona special view of the universe. This view in- 
volves four elements: (1) the earth, (2) the planets, (3) the 
zodiac, and (4) the houses. 

The earth. In casting a horoscope, astrologers place 
the earth at the center of the solar system. Therefore, all 
heavenly bodies revolve around the earth rather than 
around the sun. Astrologers use this arrangement to de- 
termine the positions of the heavenly bodies in relation 
to the earth. They believe that the study of the positions 
of the heavenly bodies can reveal a person's character 
and future. 





The planets. In astrology, the moon and the sun are 
considered planets, along with Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, 
Neptune, Pluto, Saturn, Uranus, and Venus. Each planet 
supposedly represents a force that affects people ina 
certain way. Astrologers believe the planets influence a 
person more than do any other heavenly bodies. 

The zodiac is a band of stars that appears to encircle 
the earth. It is divided into 12 equal parts called signs. 
Each sign of the zodiac has certain characteristics, which 
are determined by a particular planet and other factors. 
Astrologers believe the signs determine how the plan- 
ets affect a person's character. See Zodiac; and the arti- 
cles on the signs of the zodiac, such as Aries. 

The houses. Like the zodiac, the earth's surface is di- 
vided into 12 parts. Each of these parts, called houses, 
represents certain characteristics of an individuals life. 
Astrologers believe the houses determine how the plan- 
ets and the signs influence a person's daily life. See 
House (in astrology). 


A horoscope and astrological symbols 

Astrologers study charts called horoscopes or birth charts to 
foretell the future. A person's chart shows the position of the 
planets in relation to the earth and stars at his or her birth. As- 
trologers believe that these patterns reveal the person's charac- 
ter and future. The chart shown here is the horoscope of Presi- 
dent Thomas Jefferson. 


WORLD BOOK illustration adapted from Horoscopes 
of the U.S. Presidents by Doris Chase Doane 


Sign Symbols 


T Aries 
Taurus 
Gemini 
Cancer 
Leo 

Virgo 
libra 
Scorpius 
Sagittarius 
Capricornus 
Aquarius 
Pisces 


Planet Symbols House Symbols 
Sun Col 7 
Moon x > 


Venus Qs a 


Mars 
Jupiter 
Saturn 
Uranus 
Neptune 
Pluto 


xe ar SpPsooHna 
MO Gr SNOOCYO 








Astrology 827 
History 


Astrology began sometime before 2000 B.C. in Baby- 
lonia (now southeastern Iraq). Astrologers of that time 
knew of five planets—Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, Saturn, 
and Venus. They believed that the sun, moon, and plan- 
ets sent out different forces, which had certain charac- 
teristics. For example, one of the planets—now known as 
Mars—appeared to be red. Astrologers linked it with 
anger, aggression, and war. 

The 12-sign zodiac was probably first used in the Mid- 
dle East sometime during the 1000's B.C. Astrologers 
gradually developed a system that linked seasonal 
changes with specific groups of stars called constella- 
tions (see Constellation). At that time, for example, heavy 
rainfall occurred in the Middle East when the sun was in 
a certain constellation. As a result, astrologers named 
the constellation Aquarius, the water bearer. 

At first, astrologers studied the heavenly bodies in 
making general predictions about the future. But be- 
tween 600 B.C. and 200 B.C, they developed the system 
of casting individual horoscopes. The ancient Greeks 
and Romans practiced astrology and greatly influenced 
its development. The Roman names for the planets and 
the signs of the zodiac are still used today. 

Interest in astrology declined in Europe with the com- 
ing of Christianity as people sought guidance from reli- 
gious leaders rather than from astrologers. Astrology re- 
gained popularity during the A.D. 1100's. By the 1600's, it 
was particularly strong in England. Several astrological 
almanacs were published, and many other books either 
defended or attacked astrology. The number of follow- 
ers of astrology fell in England during the 1700's, but the 
subject's popularity returned again in the early 1800's. By 
the late 1800's and early 1900's, interest in astrology had 
spread to many other nations. 

Newspapers in England began publishing horoscope 
columns during the 1930's. Such columns soon ap- 
peared in newspapers throughout the world, and peo- 
ple became increasingly interested in astrology. Today, 
astrology is followed more widely than ever before. 


Astrology today 


Many people believe astrology is simply a supersti- 
tion, and scientists declare that its whole basis is unsci- 
entific. Scientists point out that the earth's position has 
changed in space since ancient times. As a result, the 
dates astrologers associate with the signs of the zodiac 
no longer match the positions of the constellations for 
which they were named. 

Some people who believe in astrology support it in 
terms of magnetic fields, solar storms, and other natural 
occurrences. Others, though they also believe in astrolo- 
gy, claim that it cannot be supported scientifically. They 
consider it a set of powerful symbols that can provide a 
deep understanding of human beings. They defend as- 
trology by pointing out that, in many cases, it works. 

Christopher McIntosh 


Additional resources 


Crosse, Joanna. The Element Illustrated Encyclopedia of Mind, 
Body, Spirit & Earth Element Bks., 1998. 

Snodgrass, Mary E. Signs of the Zodiac: A Reference Guide to 
Historical, Mythological, and Cultural Associations. Green- 
wood, 1997. 


828 Astronaut 





An astronaut on the moon. Buzz Aldrin, shown here, and Neil A. Armstrong land- 
ed on the moon on July 20, 1969. The flag, which they left on the windless lunar sur- 


face, was stiffened by a wire to give it the appearance of waving. 
Astronaut 


Astronaut is a person who pilots a spacecraft or 
works in space, particularly in the space program of the 
United States. In Russia and the other former republics 
of the Soviet Union, such men and women are called 
cosmonauts. The cosmonaut program was a project of 
the Soviet Union until that « ountry broke up In 1991 


Russia then took over the program. China also has an as- 
tronaut-tral 1g progran ind hopes to send its first das- 
tronauts Into space the early 2000's 

Astronauts and cosmonauts operate spacecraft and 
space stations, launch and recapture satellites, and con- 
due t SCIeENntiii xpe e ~ ) aU omes 
trom Greek words that me 5 nNaG the stars 
Cosmonaut me 

Most astronauts \ en e Na \erona . 
and Space Administration NASA 


the Lyndon B ns 
nauts travel it ; 
NASA selects Kinds 
flights = pilot as 
astronauts. Pilot ; 
Most pilot astron 
States Air Force, Na 
according to their mi 
Mission specialists ilots 


James Oberg, the contribi 


engineer, author. and lecture 


spacecraft and the equipment aboard. They also con- 
duct experiments and launch satellites. In addition, they 
perform spacewalks to work outside the spacecraft 

Mission specialists may be engineers, scientists, or 
physicians who have extensive research experience. 
Those who are in the armed forces are paid according 
to their rank. The civilians receive salaries based on an 
equivalent rank in the civil service system. This system 
includes almost all the federal government's civilian em- 
ployees who are appointed rather than elected. 

A third kind of astronaut is called a payload specialist. 
This kind of astronaut carries out scientific experiments 
involving the pavioad (cargo) on the spacecraft. Most 
payload specialists are scientists who work for the own- 
er of the payload. They must be approved by NASA. 

The term astronaut also has a meaning that is not con- 
nected with NASA activities. In the 1960's, the United 
States Department of Defense awarded the rating of as- 

ronaut to military and civilian pilots who flew aircraft 

Jher than 50 miles (80 kilometers). Seven test pilots re- 

ved this rating for flights in the X-15 rocket plane. 

ights of the X-15 ended in 1968. 
nonauts train at the Yuri Gagarin Russian State 
> tic-Research Test Center of Cosmonauts Training, 
in Starry Town, also known as Star City, near 
They travel into space aboard vehicles called 
like space shuttles, these vehicles are not 
Crews lift off from the Baykonur Cosmodrome, 
ear the Aral Sea in south-central Kazakhstan. 


ee 
—y,_ — — = ———_— = 











= 
ke 





Landings take place in remote, flat areas of Kazakhstan. 

A Soyuz carries two or three specialized cosmonauts. 
The commander is almost always a military jet pilot, and 
the flight engineer is almost always a civilian. The flight 
engineer is usually a member of the staff of the design 
bureau responsible for the craft. On about half the 
Soyuz flights, a third cosmonaut, usually called the cos- 
monaut researcher, is aboard. This person can be a non- 
Russian “guest cosmonaut’ or a Russian physician. 

Cosmonauts began making guest flights aboard space 
shuttles in 1994, and astronauts began visiting Russia‘s 
Mir space station in 1995. Both astronauts and cosmo- 
nauts helped build, and then worked aboard, the Inter- 
national Space Station. 


Achievements in space 


On April 12, 1961, Yuri A. Gagarin of the Soviet Union 
became the first person to travel in space. He orbited 
the earth once in a Vostok capsule. Vostok is Russian for 
east. Gagarin’s flight fasted 1 hour 48 minutes. Twenty- 
three days later, on May 5, Alan B. Shepard, Jr., became 
the first American space traveler. He made a 15-minute 
flight in a Mercury capsuie but did not go into orbit. 
John H. Glenn, Jr., the first American in orbit, circled the 
earth three times on Feb. 20, 1962. 

The first woman in space, cosmonaut Valentina 


Yuri A. Gagarin of the Soviet 
Union was the first person in 
space. He rocketed into orbit 
on April 12, 1961, in the Vos- 
tok 1 spacecraft. Gagarin 
made one orbit of the earth. 


Astronaut 829 


Tereshkova, was in space for 3 days in 1963. Twenty 
years later, astronaut Sally K. Ride became the first 
American woman in space. In June 1983, Ride orbited 
the earth with four other crew members on a six-day 
mission aboard the space shuttle Challenger. 

In 1964, the Soviet Union placed the first three-person 
spacecraft in orbit. This design was called Voskhod, 
which is Russian for sunrise. In 1965 and 1966, the Unit- 
ed States conducted a series of 10 two-person flights in 
Gemini spacecraft. During those flights, the astronauts 
practiced maneuvering their craft and joining it to other 
orbiting space vehicles. 

On March 18, 1965, cosmonaut Alexei A. Leonov be- 
came the first person to step outside a spacecraft and 
float freely in space. Less than three months later, on 
June 3, astronaut Edward H. White [I made the first 
space walk for the United States. 

In 1967, cosmonauts began flying the Soyuz series of 
spacecraft. These are three-seat vehicles, but the first 
crewed flight carried only one cosmonaut, and other 
early flights carried two. The Soviet Union also tested 
spacecraft to send cosmonauts to the moon and land 
them there. After many failures, however, the Soviets 
canceled their moon-trip projects. 

Space flights of the Apollo program, the U.S. project 
to land astronauts on the moon, began in October 1968. 


John H. Glenn, Jr., America’s 
first orbiting astronaut, circled 
the earth three times on Feb. 
20, 1962. Glenn took control of 
his space capsule, Friendship 
7, after its automatic controls 
failed. 


Sovfoto Wide World 





Astronauts on a space shut- 
tle mission work in a pres- 
surized laboratory called 
Spacelab. The shuttle carries 
Spacelab within its cargo bay, 
and a tunnel connects the lab- 
oratory to the crew compart- 
ment. Each Spacelab mission 
focuses on research in a par- 
ticular area of science or tech 
nology, such as life sciences 
or materials processing. 





830 Astronaut 


On December 24 and 25 of that year, Frank Borman, 
James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders orbited the 


moon 10 times in 20 hours. In doing so, they became the 
first people to orbit a celestial body other than the earth. 


On July 20, 1969, astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and 
Buzz Aldrin became the first people to set foot on the 
moon. They landed the Apollo 11 lunar module, called 


the Eagle, and performed scientific experiments and col- 


lected rock samples. Other astronauts made five more 
moon landings from 1969 to 1972. 

In June 1971, cosmonauts established the first space 
station, Salyut 1. In 1973, the United States sent up a 


team of astronauts to operate its first space station, Sky- 


lab. Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Joseph P. Kerwin, 
and Paul J. Weitz lived in Skylab for almost a month. 


In 1975, the United States and the Soviet Union under- 


took their first joint space mission, the Apollo-Soyuz 
Test Project. On July 17, an Apollo spacecraft docked 
with a Soyuz craft. The Apollo craft carried astronauts 


Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slay- 


ton. Aboard the Soyuz were cosmonauts Alexei A. 
Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov. For two days, the five 


spacefarers conducted experiments in the docked craft. 


On April 12, 1981, the United States launched the 
space shuttle Columbia, the first reusable spacecraft to 
carry a Crew. Astronauts John W. Young and Robert L. 
Crippen orbited the earth more than 36 times during a 


flight lasting about 2 days 6 hours. On Nov. 28, 1983, Co- 


lumbia carried the first European-built research labora- 
tory, called Spacelab, into space. 

Cosmonaut Valery Polyakov completed a record 438 
days in space on March 22, 1995. Polyakov spent this 
time aboard Mir. His mission helped scientists study 
how extended periods of weightlessness affect the hu- 


man body. 


Astronauts first recovered, repaired, and relaunched a 


disabled satellite in April 1984. Traveling aboard Chal- 
lenger, they used a Canadian-made robot arm to cap- 





Date 

April 12, 1961 
May 5, 1961 
Feb. 20, 1962 
June 16, 1963 
March 18, 1965 
July 20, 1969 
June 7, 1971 


May 25, 1973 
March 2, 1978 
July 23, 1980 
April 12, 1981 
June 18, 1983 
Aug. 30, 1983 
Oct. 5, 1984 
Jan. 24, 1985 
Jan. 12, 1986 
Jan. 22, 1992 
Sept. 12, 1992 
April 8, 1993 
March 22, 1995 
Sept. 26, 1996 


July 23-28, 1999 
June 19, 2002 





Name 

Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin 
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. 
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. 
Cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova 
Cosmonaut Alexei A. Leonov 


Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin 


Cosmonauts Georgi T. Dobrovolsky, 
Victor |. Patsayev, and Vladislav N. Volkov 


Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz 


Cosmonaut Vladimir Remek (Czechoslovak) 
Cosmonaut Pham Tuan (Vietnamese) 


Astronauts John W. Young and Robert L Crippen 


Astronaut Sally K. Ride 

Astronaut Guion §S. Bluford, Jr. 
Astronaut Marc Garneau 
Astronaut Ellison Shoji Onizuka 
Astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Diaz 
Astronaut Roberta Bondar 
Astronaut Mae C. Jemison 
Astronaut Ellen Ochoa 
Cosmonaut Valery Polyakov 
Astronaut Shannon Wells Lucid 


Astronaut Eileen M. Collins 
Astronauts Daniel Bursch and Carl Walz 





ture the satellite. In May 1992, astronauts aboard the 
shuttle Endeavour captured a satellite using only their 
gloved hands. They then attached a special tool to the 
satellite so that a robot arm could hold it. In December 
1993, astronauts aboard Endeavour repaired the Hubble 
Space Telescope. They installed a device that made up 
for a defect in the telescope’s main mirror. 


Accidents in space 


Space travel is risky, and a number of astronauts and 
cosmonauts have lost their lives in training or on space 
flights. The first fatality in a space program occurred on 
March 23, 1961. Valentin V. Bondarenko, a Soviet cos- 
monaut trainee, died in a fire in a pressure chamber. 

During a ground test on Jan. 27, 1967, an Apollo 
spacecraft caught fire, killing the three astronauts inside. 
The astronauts—Virgil |. Grissom, Edward H. White II, 
and Roger B. Chaffee—had been scheduled to fly the 
first Apollo spacecraft. 

On April 24, 1967, cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov be- 
came the first person to die ona space flight. Komarov’s 
flight was the first in which a Soyuz vehicle carried a 
cosmonaut into space. When Komarov tried to land the 
vehicle, its parachutes failed to open properly. Komarov 
died when the Soyuz crashed to earth. 

The first mission in which people occupied a space 
station also ended in disaster. In June 1971, Georgi T. 
Dobrovolsky, Victor |. Patsayev, and Vladislav N. Volkov 
boarded the experimental station Salyut 1 from their 
Soyuz 11 spacecraft. During their 23-day mission, they 
conducted medical examinations of one another and 
carried out scientific studies. On the return flight, all 
three cosmonauts died because of a sudden loss of cab- 
in pressure in the Soyuz. 

On Jan. 28, 1986, Challenger broke apart shortly after 
launch. All seven crew members were killed. They in- 
cluded Christa McAuliffe, a teacher, who was aboard as 
part of a program to make the experience of space flight 


Achievement 

First person in Earth orbit 

First American in space 

First American in Earth orbit 
First woman in space 

First person to ‘walk’ in space 
First crew to land on the moon 


First crew of an orbiting space station 

First crew of a U.S. space station 

First non-Soviet Cosmonaut 

First Asian in space 

First space shuttle flight 

First American woman in space 

First African American in space 

First Canadian in space 

First Asian American in space 

First Hispanic American in space 

First Canadian woman in space 

First African American woman in space 

First Hispanic American woman in space 

Completed record 438 days in space 

Completed 188 days in space, a record 
for women and Americans 

First woman to command a shuttle 

Completed 196 days in space, a new 
record for Americans 


EE 





better known to the public. After the Challenger disas- 
ter, NASA canceled this program and suspended all 
shuttle flights. Astronauts returned to space on Sept. 29, 
1988, aboard the shuttle Discovery. 


Selecting the astronauts 


NASA accepts applications for pilot astronauts and 
mission specialist astronauts on a continuing basis. A se- 
lection board normally picks a group of about 15 to 25 
candidates every two years. An applicant must be a US. 
citizen and must hold a bachelor’s degree or higher in 
engineering, a biological science, a physical science, or 
mathematics. There is no age limit, but every candidate 
must pass the NASA space flight physical examination. 

Pilot astronaut candidates must have flown for 1,000 
hours as acommand pilot in high-performance jet air- 
craft. They must be between 5 feet 4 inches and 6 feet 4 
inches (163 and 193 centimeters) tall. Candidates for mis- 
sion specialist do not need flight experience, but they 
must have at least three years of related professional ex- 
perience. They must be between 5 feet and 6 feet 4 inch- 
es (152 and 193 centimeters) tall. 


A look at the astronauts 


Since 1959, more than 250 astronauts have flown in 
space. NASA chose seven test pilots as the first group of 
astronauts and introduced them to the public on April 9, 
1959. The group consisted of Air Force officers L Gor- 
don Cooper, Virgil |. Grissom, and Donald K. Slayton; 
Navy pilots M. Scott Carpenter, Walter M. Schirra, Jr., 
and Alan B. Shepard, Jr; and Marine Corps pilot John H. 
Glenn, Jr. In the 1960's, NASA selected an additional 49 
experienced jet pilots. From 1965 to 1967, NASA picked 
17 scientist astronauts. 

In 1978, NASA announced the selection of astronauts 
for upcoming flights of the space shuttle. In this group 
were 15 pilot astronauts and the first 20 mission special- 
ists. Among the mission specialists were the first six 
women selected to become astronauts. All six held doc- 
tors degrees. They were physician Anna L Fisher, bio- 
chemist Shannon Wells Lucid, electrical engineer Judith 
A. Resnik, physicist Sally K. Ride, physician Margaret R. 
Seddon, and geologist Kathryn D. Sullivan. In 1990, 
NASA chose the first woman to become a pilot astro- 
naut, Eileen Marie Collins. 

In 1983, Canada selected six of its citizens to receive 


Astronaut 831 


training for NASA missions. The next year, Marc Gar- 
neau, a commander in the Canadian Navy, flew aboard 
Challenger. He thereby became the first Canadian astro- 
naut to travel in space. NASA has also flown payload 
specialists from Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, 
Mexico, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Switzer- 
iand, and Ukraine, and cosmonauts from Russia. 

In 1985, Senator Edwin J. (Jake) Garn of Utah became 
the first elected official to fly in space. He was chairman 
of the Senate committee that had oversight responsibili- 
ties for the NASA budget. Garn flew aboard Discovery. 
The next year, Congressman C. William Nelson of Flori- 
da flew aboard Columbia. In 1998, John Glenn, then a 
U.S. senator, returned to space aboard Discovery. He 
was 77 years old at the time of the flight, making him the 
oldest person ever to travel in space. 


Training the astronauts 


Candidates for pilot and mission specialist undergo 
one year of general training at Johnson Space Center. 
After successfully completing this training, they become 
astronauts. The training involves two major phases: (1) a 
general phase, involving classroom work, flight training, 
and survival training; and then (2) more specific basic 
mission training and advanced mission training. 

Classroom work. NASA brings in instructors from its 
research centers and from universities to teach aerody- 
namics, physics, physiology, computer science, and oth- 
er subjects. Experienced astronauts lecture on such top- 
ics as how to communicate with astronauts in space. 
Other NASA personnel discuss the people, equipment, 
and funding that make space flight possible. 

Mercury and Gemini astronauts took courses in rock- 
et engines, flight mechanics, and navigation. In addition 
to those subjects, Apollo astronauts studied the geology 
of the moon. They also traveled to Hawaii, Iceland, Alas- 
ka, and other places to study volcanic rocks similar to 
those on the moon. Skylab crews took classes in astron- 
omy, geology, and life sciences to enable them to per- 
form experiments and make observations. 

Flight training takes place in T-38 jet aircraft. Once 
mission specialist candidates learn to operate the air- 
craft , they fly about 4 hours per month. Pilot candidates 
must fly 15 hours. Pilots are also trained on a special air- 
plane called Shuttle Training Aircraft (STA). These air- 
planes perform as a space shuttle does during landing. 


Astronauts are weightless 
in space, and so they must an- 
chor themselves with straps 
and other devices to keep 
from floating about. Aboard 
the Sky/ab space station, 
shown here, Gerald P. Carr ap- 
pears to be supporting a 
weightless Edward Gibson 
with one finger. 


832 Astronaut 


Survival training teaches candidates how to survive 
after an unplanned landing in water or in a forest. Before 
shuttle flights, returning spacecraft landed in the ocean. 
The space shuttle lands on a runway, but astronaut can- 
didates prepare for emergency bailout over water from 
shuttles and T-38’s. For example, they are towed through 
the water in a parachute harness to simulate being 
dragged by a parachute in a wind. In addition, candi- 
dates practice survival training in the wilderness. 

Basic mission training involves the study of cockpit 
layout and flight-control systems. Candidates also pre- 
pare for the actual conditions of space flight. 

Candidates for pilot and mission specialist train for 
weightlessness in two ways. They ride in large airplanes 
that fly through a series of arcing climbs and dives. For 
about 30 seconds during each arc, they float weightless- 
ly in the padded body of the aircraft. Floating in water 
also simulates (reproduces conditions of) weightless- 
ness. The tanks used for training purposes are known as 
the Weightless Environmental Training Facility (WETF) 
and the Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory (NBL). 

After successful completion of the training program, 
new astronauts continue to develop their skill while they 
wait for crew assignments. Some become experts in 
several support or operational areas. 

Advanced mission training. Once assigned to a 
crew, astronauts spend most of their time training in 
simulators. Shuttle astronauts train in the Shuttle Mis- 
sion Simulator (SMS). This device can reproduce the 
events of an entire mission. Crew members spend as 
many as eight hours a day in the simulator. Instructors 
continually give the crew problems to solve to prepare 
them for emergency situations. 

Training in simulators is valuable preparation for what 


Training in a simulator, an astronaut learns 
When an astronaut operates the controls, the si 


they may later face on actual flights. For example, in 
1970, the Apollo 13 astronauts used the oxygen and 
power supply of their lunar module to return home 
safely after an explosion damaged their main spacecraft. 
This operation was less difficult to carry out because the 
crew was very knowledgeable about all systems on 
board. 

Astronauts also train in mock-ups—that is, full-sized 
models of the spacecraft. The astronauts store items, 
prepare foods, and check equipment in the mock-ups. 
They also practice entering and leaving the spacecraft. 

Advanced training prepares astronauts for tasks that 
are not part of all missions. For example, astronauts in- 
volved in the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz project and the visits to 
Mir in 1995 learned the Russian language. They also 
studied the operation of Russian space vehicles. 

Astronauts who work in the Spacelab practice operat- 
ing special equipment and instruments needed to con- 
duct experiments. Astronauts preparing for spacewalks 
receive extra training in the WETF and the NBLThey also 
train with virtual reality systems. 


Astronauts on the ground 


Astronauts taking part in a space mission work on the 
ground as well as in space. Those on the ground relay 
information and instructions from flight controllers, en- 
gineers, and scientists to the crew. If problems develop, 
other astronauts help engineers find solutions. 

Astronauts have helped change the design of space- 
craft and their operating systems. For example, Mercury 
astronauts insisted on a window in the capsule and a 
hatch that opened from the inside. Also, skill displayed 
by the astronauts led designers to give them more con- 
trol over flying the craft. Shuttle astronauts worked on 





i\dout the instruments and controls of a space shuttle. 
mulator shows how an actual shuttle would react. 





| 
| 
| 
i 


the location of instruments and the modification of 
space suits. They also helped develop special equip- 
ment, such as satellite repair tools. 


The cosmonauts 


Since April 1961, about 100 cosmonauts have flown in 
space. Most of them have been from the Soviet Union 
and, since 1991, Russia. The first cosmonauts were mili- 
tary pilots. Most were in their middle 20's, and many 
were sent to college after returning from space. Since 
1964, crews of cosmonauts could include civilian engi- 
neers and physicians. 

The first cosmonauts spent less than two years in 
training. The original training program involved con- 
stant athletic activity. It included swimming, running, cy- 
cling, and parachute jumping over land and water. The 
U.S. program did not require such activities, but the as- 
tronauts were expected to get into good physical condi- 
tion on their own. 

The early Soviet program also included training in 
heat chambers and an isolation cell. They also sat ina 
spinning, swinging chair that was designed to test for 
motion sickness. 

As the Soviets became more experienced in space 
travel, they learned that training did not need to be so 
demanding. They eliminated the heat and isolation 
chambers, and required less parachute jumping. In ad- 
dition, motion sickness training became easier. Today, 
cosmonauts spend most of their time studying complex 
spacecraft systems and working in simulators. They now 
spend several years preparing for space flight. 

The Soviet Union and Russia have sent guest cosmo- 
nauts into space since 1978. These cosmonauts home 
countries included Afghanistan, Austria, Bulgaria, Cuba, 
Czechoslovakia (now the Czech Republic and Slovakia), 
France, the former East Germany, Germany, Hungary, In- 
dia, Japan, Kazakhstan, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, Slo- 
vakia, Syria, the United Kingdom, Vietnam, the United 
States, and the former West Germany. James Oberg 


Related articles in World Book include Space exploration; 
Cape Canaveral; Johnson Space Center; and the following bi- 
ographies: 

Aldrin, Buzz 
Armstrong, Neil A. 
Bluford, Guion S., Jr. 
Bondar, Roberta 


Carpenter, M. Scott 
Collins, Eileen Marie 
Conrad, Charles, Jr. 
Cooper, Leroy G., Jr. 





Wide World 


The first spacewalk. Alexei A. Leonov climbed from the 
Voskhod 2 on March 18, 1965, to test the space suit and hatch. 
Pavel |. Belyayev controlled the two-person spacecraft. 


Astronomical unit 833 





Sovfoto 


First woman in space, Valentina Tereshkova, ate food froma 
tube before her flight in Vostok 6 on June 16-19, 1963. 


Gagarin, Yuri A. 
Garneau, Marc 
Glenn, John H., Jr. 
Grissom, Virgil I. 
Haise, Fred W., Jr. 
Jemison, Mae C. 
Lovell, James A., Jr. 
Lucid, Shannon Wells 
McAuliffe, Christa 


Ride, Sally K. 

Schirra, Walter M., Jr. 
Schmitt, Harrison H. 
Shepard, Alan B., Jr. 
Slayton, Donald Kent 
Tereshkova, Valentina V. 
White, Edward H., Il 
Young, John W. 


Outline 


I. Achievements in space 
ll. Accidents in space 
lll. Selecting the astronauts 
IV. A look at the astronauts 
V. Training the astronauts 
A. Classroom work 
B. Flight training 
C. Survival training 
VI. Astronauts on the ground 
Vil. The cosmonauts 


D. Basic mission training 
E. Advanced mission training 


Questions 


What is a mission specialist? 

What did astronauts do on the moon? 

Who was the first woman in space? 

What are the main duties of an astronaut? 

Why do candidates train in mock-ups? 

Where do astronauts receive most of their training? 
What are simulators? 

For what government agency do the astronauts work? 
What is a guest cosmonaut? 

What are some of the subjects studied by astronauts? 


Additional resources 


Level 

Baird, Anne. The US. Space Camp Book of Astronauts. Morrow, 
1996. 

Maze, Stephanie, and Grace, C. O. / Want to Be an Astronaut. 
Harcourt, 1997, 

Level Il 


Cassutt, Michael. Who's Who in Space. Macmillan, 1993. 
Stine, G. Harry. Living in Space. M. Evans & Co., 1997. 


Astronautics is the scientific study of space flight. Sci- 
entists from many countries working on the problems of 
space flight are united in the International Astronautical 
Federation. See also Space exploration. 
Astronomical unit. See Astronomy (Units of dis- 
tance). 


834 Astronomy 


Stars fill the sky in the large photograph, which shows what can be seen 
with the unaided eye. The familiar Big Dipper tilts downward toward the 
mountain at the left. The inset photo, taken by the powerful Hubble Space 
Telescope, shows how much more astronomers can see with teles¢ opes. It 
reveals galaxies filling a tiny speck of sky near the Dipper’s ‘handle 


Astronomy 


Astronomy is the study of the universe and the ob- 
jects in it. Astronomers ob 


that gather not only visibl. 


the sky with telesc opes 





IgQnt DUT also | WISID e forms 


of energy, such as radio w hey investiaate nearby 
bodies, such as the sun, planets, and comets. as well as 
distant galaxies and other { cts. Thev also 
study the structure of sp t and future of 


the universe. 
Astronomers seek ans 


The co tres) forort Pe ticle 
rial Protessor ot Astronomy and 


atoryv at Williams Colleae 








Astro Phot 


NASA 


did the universe begin? What processes release energy 
deep inside stars? How does one star steal matter from 
another? How do storms as big as Earth arise on Jupiter 
and last for hundreds of years? 

To answer such questions, astronomers must study 
several subjects besides astronomy. Almost all as 
tronomers are also astrophysicists because the use of 
physics is essential to most branches of astronomy. For 
example, some parts of cosmology, the study of the 
structure of the universe, require an understanding of 
the physics of elementary particles, such as the bits of 
matter called quarks that make up protons and neutrons 
Astronomers use chemistry to analyze the dusty 
gaseous matter between the stars. Specialists in the 
structure of planets use geology. 

Astronomy is an ancient science. Like today's re 
searchers, ancient scholars based their ideas of the uni- 





verse on what they observed and measured and on their 
understanding of why objects move as they do. Howev- 
er, the ancients developed some incorrect ideas about 
the relationships between Earth and the objects they 
saw in the heavens. One reason for their errors was that 
they did not understand the laws of motion. For exam- 
ple, they did not know that a torce—which we know as 
gravitation—controls the movements of the planets. An- 
other reason was that their measurements did not reveal 
the movements of the planets in sufficient detail. 

The ancients noted that the positions of the sun, 
moon, and planets change from night to night. We 
know that these movements are a result of the revolu- 
tion of the moon about Earth and the revolution of Earth 
and the other planets about the sun. The ancients, how- 
ever, concluded that the sun, moon, and planets orbit a 
motionless Earth. In many places, religious teachings 
supported this conclusion until the 1600's. 

Although ancient people misinterpreted much of 
what they saw in the heavens, they put their knowledge 
ot astronomy to practical use. Farmers in Egypt planted 
their crops each year when certain stars first became 
visible before dawn. Many civilizations used the stars as 
navigational aids. For example, the Polynesians used the 
positions of the stars to guide them as they sailed from 
island to island over thousands of miles or kilometers of 
the Pacific Ocean. 


Observing the sky 


If you look at the night sky without a telescope or a 
pair of binoculars, you will see what the ancients saw. If 
the night is clear and you are far from city lights, you 
will see about 3,000 stars. Stretching across the sky will 
be a splotchy band of bright and dark areas called the 
Milky Way. In addition, a few fuzzy spots will be visible. 

Ancient people in the Western world noticed that cer- 
tain stars are arranged in patterns shaped somewhat like 
human beings, animals, or common objects. Many an- 
cient civilizations associated such patterns, called con- 
stellations, with mythology. Many names of constella- 
tions have come to us from Greek myths. In one myth, 
Artemis, goddess of hunting. was greatly saddened by 
the death of a human hunter named Orion. In her sor- 
row. she placed Orion in the sky as a constellation. 

How the stars move. If you map the location of sev- 
eral stars for a tew hours, you will observe a regular mo- 
tion. The stars move relative to Earth because of Earth's 
rotation about its own axis. All stars move in circles 
around a point in the sky known as a celestial pole. Stars 
rotate counterclockwise around the celestial north pole 
and clockwise around the celestial south pole. Stars that 
are tar from the pole rise trom below the horizon in the 
east, Move upward, and then set in the west. 

One bright star, Polaris, is so close to the celestial 
north pole that it moves very little. Because of its loca- 
tion, Polaris is also known as the North Star. There is no 
“South Star,’ but the constellation Octans (Octant) is 
close to the celestial south pole. 

The sun, like the other stars, rises in the east and sets 
in the west. But the sun also moves eastward relative to 
the other stars about 1° each day. By noting which stars 
are visible above the horizon just before sunrise and 
just after sunset, people have mapped the path of the 
sun among the stars for thousands of years. This path is 


Astronomy 835 


known as the ec/iptic, and the band of constellations 
near this path is called the zodiac. 

How the planets move. With the unaided eye, you 
can see the planets Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and 
Saturn. The planets move every night from east to west 
along the zodiac. In addition, their position in the zodiac 
changes from night to night. That is, when viewed at the 
same time on successive nights, the planets move rela- 
tive to the background stars. Most of the year, they 
move from west to east. 

The planets also have a motion that differs from that 
of any other celestial object. In their night-to-night 
movement relative to the stars, they slow down, stop, 
and then move westward in what is known as retro- 
grade motion. They then slow down again, stop, and re- 
sume their eastward motion. 

How the moon moves. The moon is the brightest 
and most easily seen object in the night sky. As a result, 
the most tamiliar observation is of the moon's phases, 
such as the full moon, half moon, and crescent. The 
moon moves from east to west as it rises and sets. From 
night to night, the moon moves eastward about 13° rela- 
tive to the stars, rising almost an hour later each night. 

Earth-centered theories. Ancient scholars produced 
elaborate schemes to account for the observed move- 
ments of the stars, sun, moon, and planets. In the 300's 
B.C, the Greek philosopher Aristotle developed a sys- 
tem of 56 spheres, all with the same center. The inner- 
most sphere, which did not move, was Earth. Around 
Earth were 55 transparent, rotating spherical shells. The 
outermost shell carried the stars, believed to be merely 
points of light. Other shells carried the sun, moon, and 
planets. These shells rotated inside other shells that ro- 
tated within still other shells in ways that accounted for 
almost all the observed movements. 

During the A.D. 100’s, Ptolemy, a Greek astronomer 
who lived in Alexandria, Egypt, offered an explanation 
that better accounted for retrograde motion. Ptolemy 
said that the planets moved in small circles called epicy- 
cles. The epicycles moved in large circles called defer- 
ents. Earth was near the center of all the deferents. 

Sun-centered theories. By the early 1500's, the Pol- 
ish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus had developed a 
theory in which the sun was at the center of the uni- 
verse. This theory correctly explained retrograde motion 
as the changing view of the planets as seen from a mov- 
ing Earth. The theory also correctly explained the east- 
to-west movement of the sun and stars across the sky. 
This movement is due to the west-to-east rotation of 
Earth about its own axis, rather than an actual motion of 
the sun and stars. 

Several decades later, the Danish astronomer Tycho 
Brahe built gigantic instruments that he used to make 
precise measurements of planetary movements. German 
mathematician Johannes Kepler analyzed Tycho’s meas- 
urements of the movement of Mars. He discovered that 
Mars moves in an e//ipse, a type of squashed circle, with 
the sun at a key point inside the ellipse. Kepler also 
found a relationship between how far Mars is from the 
sun and how rapidly it moves. He concluded that all 
planets have elliptical orbits and that the relationship be- 
tween distance from the sun and speed applies to all the 
planets. These findings, which became known as Kep- 
lers first two laws of planetary motion, were published 


836 Astronomy 


in 1609. In 1619, Kepler published his third law, which 
shows the relation between the sizes of the planets’ or- 
bits and the time they take to orbit the sun. 

Thus, by the early 1600's, astronomers had used ob- 
servations made with the unaided eye to determine the 
movement of the planets. But the Italian astronomer and 
physicist Galileo had already built and used the first of 
the great ‘aids to the eye,’ the optical telescope, usher- 
ing in the era of modern astronomy. 


Modern astronomy 


Today's astronomers gather information in four major 
ways: (1) they use telescopes and other instruments to 
detect visible light and other forms of radiation that are 
emitted (sent out) by celestial objects; (2) they detect par- 
ticles called neutrinos and cosmic rays from outer 
space; (3) they study chunks of matter that originated in 


The stars and constel- 
lations of the North- 
ern Hemisphere 


outer space; and (4) they send spacecraft to land on oth- 
er objects or to study them close-up. 

Using these techniques, modern astronomers have 
made discoveries beyond the imagination of the an- 
cients. They have discovered three planets outside the 
orbit of Saturn—Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto. They have 
found that more than 50,000 smaller bodies called aster- 
oids revolve about the sun, most of them between the 
orbits of Mars and Jupiter. Astronomers have learned 
that the sun is merely one of hundreds of billions of 
stars in a vast, disk-shaped galaxy, the Milky Way. They 
now understand that many of the fuzzy spots visible with 
telescopes in the night sky are other galaxies. 

In addition, astronomers have discovered exotic ob- 
jects called pu/sars and quasars that emit vast amounts 
of energy. They have found evidence of black holes, ob- 
jects from which nothing—not even light—can escape. 


This map shows the sky as it appears from the North Pole with Polaris, the North Star, directly over- 
head. To use the map, face south and turn the map so that the current month appears at the bot- 
tom. The stars in about the bottom two-thirds of the map will be visible at some time of the night 


from most areas of the United States and southern Canada 


WORLD BOOK tllustration by W. J. M. Tirion 


rec EIED 





= 7 ai + 
a eo 


+ © ee 








CAMELOPARDALIS 


DECEMBER. 


CANIS MINOR 
. 


Prove@ 





CANCER a 
a 


> 
& 
~) 
= 
> 


DE se 


They have studied exploding stars called supernovae. 

Units of distance. Many distances involved in astron- 
omy are so huge that they are measured in special units. 
One such unit is the /ight-year, the distance that light 
travels in a vacuum in a year. This distance equals about 
5.88 trillion miles (9.46 trillion kilometers). The nearest 
star, Proxima Centauri, is about 4 light-years from Earth. 
The Milky Way is about 100,000 light-years across, and 
the sun is roughly 25,000 light-years from its center. The 
nearest large galaxy is the Andromeda Galaxy, which is 
about 2 million light-years away. Some galaxies are 
more than 10 billion light-years distant. 

Astronomers measure distances in the solar system in 
astronomical units (AU). One AU is the average distance 
from Earth to the sun—about 93,000,000 miles 
(150,000,000 kilometers). This distance equals about 8 
light-minutes. The average distance from the sun to Plu- 


The stars and constel- 
lations of the South- 


ern Hemisphere 
month appears at the bottom. 


Astronomy 837 


to, the farthest planet, is about 39.5 AU. 

In their work with extremely long distances, as- 
tronomers use a unit called a parsec, rather than the 
light-year. The parsec is based on parallax, an angular 
measurement. One parsec equals about 3.26 light-years. 

Locating objects in space. Astronomers still use two 
concepts developed by the ancients to specify locations 
of celestial objects: (1) an imaginary celestial sphere and 
(2) the constellations. 

The celestial coordinate system. Astronomers specify 
locations in terms of the celestial coordinate system, a 
set of imaginary lines drawn on the celestial sphere. The 
celestial sphere is similar to the outermost shell in Aris- 
totle’s system—the shell that was thought to carry the 
stars. The lines are similar to the lines of longitude and 
latitude used by geographers. The poles of the celestial 
sphere are the celestial north pole and the celestial 


This map shows the sky as it appears from the South Pole. There is no “South Star,” but the constel- 
lation Octans would be almost directly overhead if you were at the South Pole. To use the map, an 
observer in the Southern Hemisphere would face north and turn the map so that the current 


WORLD BOOK illustration by W. J. M Tirion 












gy ERIDANUS | 


| o 
Ay 
> 
my 
ky 


e 
@ 


- s 
“2 


’ f 
“sé 


Am. 
¥ 
dcheon "@ 
ad 
HOROLOGIUM © 
e - -@ 
Kiae ~ » a 
p é WS» F CAELUM ° yr e< 
e e a 


e © >" — xyDRUS 
Taranto ly 
a e 









e Sf #@ LEPUS 


2 
S wa # COLUMBA . oe 
4 a ARS it MENSA 
t —~s PICTOR ied 
CANIS MAIOR s Canopus 
2 » A ss 









Y¥3SEN393q 


. > 


e 
CARINA *. @ e 


® MUSCA® » 


“ee 
e ce? 


ee © PUPRIS © 






| MONOCEROS 





¢ 


oa 
ce 
ws 


& . 
Sen  SEXTANS 
Af bp ‘ 


SCULPTOR 


¢ PHOENIX @ 
? Ld 

















: d 
we VOLANS cHamaElLEON® 
@ » @- 


rs -—° a 


Ni 


4 " 
| $7 
awa <: 


ww 


of AQUARIUS | 


athe PISCIS « 
Fom ath ut a _AUSTRINUS ’ 
4 : . ; * 
@ be 4 bt 


, + CAPRICORNUS e 
ld i ‘ 
: P we 


Vi 
x 
‘d AQUILA } 
i. \ 49 
MICROSCOPIUM \ 
A. TUCANA s ; as 
= a 
INDUS 





















< SAGITIARIUS | 

















es 
s% 
@ é 
» é CORONA : AUSTRALIS 
. & TELESCOPIUM & 
OCTANS «& *h 


AaPUS 


g** 
q 






z ® 
TRIANGULUM 
AUSIRALES «--» 
—a 





838 Astronomy 


south pole, which tie over Earth's north and south geo- 
graphic poles. The sphere atso has a celestial equator 
over the earthly equator. 

Longitude in the sky, marked by half-circles going 
from the north celestial pole to the south cetestial pole, 
is called right ascension. Latitude in the sky, marked by 
circles parallel to the celestial equator, is known as dec- 
hnation. Dectination north of the celestial equator Is pos- 
itive, white declination south of the equator ts negative. 

Using the constellations. Vo locate and assign names 
to stars, astronomers have divided the sky into 88 parts, 
each associated with a constellation. Astronomers still 
use a system developed in the early 1600's to identify the 
brightest stars in the constellations. The brightest star of 
all in a constellation is usually designated by alpha, the 
first letter of the Greek alphabet; the second brightest by 
beta, the second letter; and so forth. The brightest star in 
the constellation Orion is thus Atpha Orionis. Orionis 
means of Orion in Latin. 

Because the Greek alphabet has only 24 letters, this 
system ts limited to 24 stars per constellation. Later as- 
tronomers developed naming systems in which num- 
bers are assigned to fainter stars and Roman letters to 
variable stars (stars that vary in brightness). 

Electromagnetic radiation is the most plentiful 
source of information about heavenly bodies. Its name 
comes from the fact that it consists of waves of electric 
and magnetic energy. Visible light is electromagnetic ra- 


Units of astronomical distance 


1 astronomical unit 150.0 million kilometers 


1 light-year 9.46 trillion kilometers 


1 parsec 30.9 trillion kilometers 





Sizes of astro- 
nomical objects 


93.0 million miles 
5.88 trillion miles 
19.2 trillion miles 


diation, and objects in space also emit many kinds of in- 
visible electromagnetic radiation. Scientists can identify 
the various forms of this radiation by their wavelength, 
frequency, or energy. 

Wavelengthis the distance between successive crests 
of a wave. From the shortest wavelength to the longest, 
the forms of electromagnetic radiation are gamma rays, 
X rays, ultraviolet rays, visibte light, intrared rays, and ra- 
dio waves. Arranged in order of wavelength, the forms 
make up the e/ectromagnetic spectrum. 

Frequency. Alt electromagnetic radiation travels at the 
same speed. Therefore, a relatively short wave passes a 
given point more quickly than does a relatively long 
wave. Thus, more of the shorter waves pass that point 
each second. Scientists say that a shorter wave has a 
higher frequency. The unit used to measure frequency is 
the hertz (symbol Hz). One hertz represents the passing 
of one wave past a point in one second. 

Energy. According to quantum theory, a cornerstone 
of modern physics, electromagnetic radiation can also 
be thought of as particles of energy called photons. The 
amount of energy of a given photon depends on the 
wavelength—or frequency —of the corresponding wave. 
Radiation that has a relatively short wavelength and 
therefore a relatively high frequency also has relatively 
high energy. Radiation with a relatively long wavelength 
has a relatively low frequency and relatively low energy. 

Optical astronomy is the study of the heavens by de- 


0.0000158 light-years 0.00000485 parsecs 
63,200 astronomical units = 0.307 parsecs 
206,000 astronomical units = 3.26 light-years 





The photographs on this page and the next illustrate the great variation in the size of objects that 
many astronomers investigate~ planets, stars, galaxies, and groups of galaxies. Other astronomers 


study bits of matter as small as the grains of dust and the molecules of gases between stars, while 
specialists known as cosmologists study the structure of the universe as a whole. 




















NASA NSSIK 
Earth has a diameter of about 7.900 miles (12.700 kilometers). 
The diameter of Jupiter, the biggest planet in our solar system, 1s 
more than 11 times as large as the diameter ot Earth. 





NASA NSSDC 
The sun is a star with a diameter of approximately 864,000 miles 
(1,390,000 kilometers), about 109 times the diameter of Earth. The 
largest stars have a diameter about 1,000 times that ot the sun. 





The electromagnetic spectrum 


Wavelength’ 
Radio waves 1 millimeter and up 


700 nanometers$ 
to 1 millimeter 


Infrared rays 





Visible light 400 to 700 nanometers 


Ultraviolet rays 10 to 400 nanometers 
X rays 0.1 to 10 nanometers 


Gamma rays Up to 0.1 nanometer 


Astronomy 839 





Frequency, Sources 

hertz’ 

Up to 3.00 x 10°" Pulsars; quasars; gas clouds 
orbiting the center of the Milky Way 

3.00 X< 10' Stars in the process of forming; 

to 4.29 x 10" relatively cool stars; planets 

4:29 X 10" Planets; stars; galaxies; asteroids; comets 

to 7:50ex 10° 

7.50 X 10" Hydrogen gas between the stars; 

to 3.00 x 10" the sun 

3.00 X 10" The suns corona; disks of material 

to 3.00 x 10° around black holes; quasars 


3.00 < 10" and up Collapsed stars; matter-antimatter 


annihilations 


* The ranges indicated are typically used by astronomers to distinguish between forms of electromagnetic radiation. Scientists working in other fields may use slightly different numbers 


t One hertz ts one cycle of vibration per second 


+ The smail numeral! next to the 10 indicates how many places the decimal point is moved to the nght when the number is written out For exainple, 3.00 


§ One nanometer is 1 billionth of a meter 


tecting and analyzing visible light. Visible light of differ- 
ent wavelengths has different colors. The wavelengths 
range from about 400 nanometers for deep violet to 700 
nanometers for deep red. One nanometer equals a bil- 
lionth of a meter, OF 3za¢0000 inch. 

Modern observational astronomy began with 
Galileo's observations of the sky through an optical tele- 
scope. Today, astronomers often use observations made 
with visible light together with observations made in 
other parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. As- 
tronomers use optical telescopes to observe objects 
ranging from nearby cool bodies, such as planets, to 
hotter objects, such as the sun and stars, and to ex- 
tremely hot objects, such as supernovae. 

An optical telescope gathers and focuses Jight with a 
lens or mirror. To study the brightest objects, such as 
the sun, a telescope with a lens or mirror only a few 
inches or centimeters across may do. For the faintest ob- 
jects, a much larger light-collecting area is needed. The 





NOAO AURA NSF 


The galaxy M83 is shaped much like our home galaxy, the 
Milky Way. The diameter of the Milky Way is approximately 
100,000 light-years —roughly 700 billion times the sun's diameter 


10 equals $00 000 006 00G 


largest all-purpose telescopes now in general use in- 
clude the twin Keck Telescopes on Mauna Kea, an ex- 
tinct volcano on the island of Hawaii. Each telescope has 
a mirror 33 feet (10 meters) in diameter. 

Major optical telescopes are installed on mountains 
so that starlight does not have to travel far through the 
atmosphere. These locations minimize blurring due to 
the atmosphere. The atmosphere bends light due to a 
phenomenon known as refraction, and the atmosphere 
is constantly moving. As a result, starlight jiggles about 
and changes in brightness as it passes through the air. 
Thus, stars appear to twinkle. Twinkling blurs images. 

Only a telescope operating in space can avoid blur- 
ring entirely. The largest orbiting telescope is the Hub- 
ble Space Telescope, which was launched in 1990, re- 
paired in 1993, and upgraded in 1997. This telescope’s 
main mirror measures 94 inches (2.4 meters) across. 
Because of the size of its mirror and its location above 
almost all of the atmosphere, the Hubble Space Tele- 





Markarian's Chain of galaxies is about 70 million light-years 
away. At that distance, the width of the space shown in this pho 
to is 2 , million light-years—25 times the Milky Ways diameter 


840 Astronomy 








National Radio Astronomy Observatory 


An astronomer studies an image produced by the Very Large 
Array of radio telescopes. The colors in the ‘painting represent 
different amounts of radio energy sent out by objects in the sky. 


scope can produce tmages that are approximately five 
times smaller in detail than images made from tele- 
scopes on Earth's surface. 

Professional astronomers rarely look through tele- 
scopes. Instead, they study photographic images. 
Astronomers began to photograph images through tele- 
scopes in the 1850's. The use of long exposure times re- 
vealed taint objects that the eye could not see through a 
telescope. But film has largely been replaced by elec- 
tronic devices that can detect and record even fainter 
light. The charge-coupled device (CCD), for example, is 
about 50 times or more sensitive to light than film is 

Optical astronomers have developed three special 
techniques that have also been used in other kinds of 
astronomy: (1) spectroscops 
adaptive optics 

Spectroscopy is the breaking down of the incoming 
radiation into a spectrum of its parts. The spectrum of 
visible light, for example, is a rainbowlike band of col 
ors. At one end is red, whi 


2) interferometry, and (3) 


has the longest wave: 


The Very Large Array radio 
observatory in Socorro, New 
Mexico, consists of 27 mov- 
able dish antennas, each 82 
feet (25 meters) across. The 
arrangement of dishes can ex- 
tend up to 22 miles (35 kilo- 
meters). Computers can com- 
bine signals from the 
antennas to produce images 
with the detail that would be 
provided by a single tele- 
scope 22 miles across. 


National Radio Astronomy Observatory 


length. At the other end is violet, with the shortest wave- 
length. Spectroscopy is based on a discovery made in 
1814 by German optician Joseph von Fraunhofer: The 
spectrum of the colors of sunlight contains dark lines 
where specific colors are absent. Later, scientists discov- 
ered that light from other stars also has such dark lines. 
When the object emitting the light is a hot gas, the spec- 
trum has bright lines. Other kinds of electromagnetic ra- 
diation from celestial objects also have spectral lines. 

Studies of spectral lines reveal the temperature, den- 
sity, and chemical composition of the object emitting 
the radiation. The spectral lines arise in energy process- 
es in atoms. An electron orbiting an atomic nucleus can 
have only certain definite levels of energy. These levels 
can be thought of as stairsteps. When light energy pass- 
es through a group of atoms, the electrons can absorb 
just the right amount of energy to jump from a lower 
step to a higher one. Because the energy is removed 
from the passing light, a kind of spectral line called an 
absorption line appears in the spectrum. The dark lines 
discovered by Fraunhofer were absorption lines. Each 
kind of atom has its own pattern of absorption lines for a 
given range of temperature. 

Bright spectral lines called emission lines occur when 
electrons in atoms of hot objects “jump down the stairs” 
by emitting energy. In the early 1940's, an analysis of 
emission lines confirmed an earlier discovery that the 
sun's corona, the outer edge of its atmosphere, has a 
temperature of millions of degrees. 

The entire band of radiation emitted by the surface of 
a star also contains information about the star's tempera- 
ture. Relatively cool stars are red-hot and can appear 
slightly reddish to the eye. Hotter stars can become 
blue-white. 

Spectroscopy can even reveal the distance to a star or 
galaxy. In the spectrum of any moving object, the spec- 
tral lines are shifted from where they would appear in 
the spectrum of a stationary object. Such shifts are inter- 
preted in terms of the Doppler effect. One familiar exam- 
ple of this effect is a change in the pitch of sound waves 
emitted by a vehicle. For example, when a car approach- 
es you, the pitch of the sound made by the engine is 
higher than it is when the car is going away. The shift of 

















spectral lines also depends on whether the object is ap- 
proaching or receding. If the lines shift toward the blue 
(shorter-wavelength) end of the spectrum, the object is 
approaching. If they shift toward the red (longer-wave- 
length) end, the object is moving away. 

In 1929, the American astronomer Edwin Hubble dis- 
covered that the farther away a galaxy is, the faster it is 
retreating, and thus the greater is its redshift. Thus, as- 
tronomers can determine the distance of a remote 
galaxy by measuring its redshift. 

Interferometry uses a phenomenon called interfer- 
ence in which rays of light combine to form a pattern. 
Astronomers use such patterns, often with the aid of 
computers, to produce extremely detailed images. In 
the simplest example in optical astronomy, a ray of light 
emitted by a star strikes the mirror of a telescope, and 
another ray emitted by the same star strikes the mirror 
of a nearby telescope. Optical and mechanical devices 
combine the rays so that a series of bright and dark 
bands of light called an interference pattern appears. For 
an explanation of why this pattern appears, see the arti- 
cle Interference. The pattern reveals any difference in 
the routes taken by the rays as they travel from the star 





WORLD BOOK diagram by Precision Graphics 


Astronomy 3841 


A combined optical and ra- 
dio image shows radiation 
produced by what is probably 
a huge black hole in the cen- 
ter of a galaxy. Objects fall 
into the black hole, generat- 
ing energy. The galaxy sends 
out the energy as visible light, 
shown in blue, and as radio 
waves, artificially colored red. 
The total distance from left to 
right is about 2 million light- 
years. 


National Radio Astronomy Observatory 


to the telescopes. For example, if the rays were emitted 
at opposite edges of the star, the pattern could reveal 
the diameter of the star. A computer helps astronomers 
analyze the interference pattern and use the results to 
produce an image. 

Adaptive optics can make up for atmospheric blur- 
ring in ground-based telescopes. In this technique, light 
reflects from a telescope’s main mirror to a special de- 
formable mirror, then to a CCD. Pistons mounted on the 
underside of the deformable mirror can change its 
shape several hundred times a second to make up for 
atmospheric blurring. A special control system senses 
the amount of blurring and operates the pistons. 

In one arrangement, the deformable mirror is in the 
main telescope and the control signals come from a 
smaller auxiliary telescope. A laser beam emitted by the 
auxiliary telescope reflects off atoms in the atmosphere 
and returns to the auxiliary telescope. As the beam trav- 
els, the atmosphere distorts it slightly. A computer ana- 
lyzes the reflected beam, then operates the pistons ina 
way that would remove the distortion from the image of 
the beam. This operation removes much of the distor- 
tion in the image viewed by the main telescope. 


University of Manchester/NASA 


z Light rays from 
distant object 


Distant object - 


Einstein 
ring image 


Lens golaxy 


Where light from ° 
object oppears to 
be coming from 





Gravitational lensing occurs 
when the gravitational force 
of a massive galaxy apparently 
acts as a lens, bending light 
rays sent out by an object on 
the other side of the galaxy. 
The light from the distant ob- 
ject appears to come from an 
arc or, as shown in the inset 
photo, a ring. Such rings are 
called Einstein rings—named 
after physicist Albert Einstein, 
who described how gravita- 
tion seems to bend light 


842 Astronomy 


Locating a star by 
declination and 
right ascension 


Celestial 


Earths 


Oxis 


Celestial 8 wa [- | ““~ Negative 
south pole - - = Hed roman 


Vertical angles are measured northward and southward from 
the celestial equator, which lies above Earth's equator. A vertical 
angle is known as a deci/ination and can be positive or negative. 





} 1 Graph cS 
Celestial coordinates |ocate the star Vega at right ascension 
(RA} 18 hours 36 minut 
+ 38 degrees 47 min 
nates of the star Fomal! 


seconds and at declination (Dec 
1. Astronomers give the coordi 
>A } =o: 2g | De 


29°37 20 


Infrared astronomy deals with invisible electromag- 
netic waves whose w ths are longer than those of 
visible light. Objects that are bright in infrared wave- 
lengths include relati cool stars and stars in the 
process of forming. Planets and other objects that glow 
by retlecting sunlight tarlight are also best studied in 


—~ Extension of | 


Astronomers locate objects in the sky by means of a celestial coordinate system. All the objects are 
considered to lie on an imaginary sphere surrounding Earth. Astronomers specify a location in 
terms of an angle measured from a horizontal circle and an angle measured from a vertical circle. 


ascension 





Horizontal angles are measured eastward from the verma/ 
equinox, where the sun crosses the celestial equator. An angle, 
or right ascension, is given in hours, minutes, and seconds. 


the infrared spectrum. 

The infrared spectrum covers a range from about 700 
nanometers to 1 millimeter. Infrared astronomers com- 
monly express wavelengths in micrometers (thou- 
sandths of a millimeter), specifying the overall range as 
about 0.7 to 1,000 micrometers. 

A photon of infrared radiation has less energy thana 
photon of visible light. Most infrared photons do not 
have enough energy to cause the chemical reaction that 
produces images on film. Infrared astronomy therefore 
did not develop fully until about the 1960's, when elec- 
tronic sensors that could produce infrared images were 
introduced. 

One problem with infrared astronomy is that Earth's 
atmosphere absorbs rays of most wavelengths in the in- 
frared spectrum. However, some of the shorter waves 
can be detected at mountaintop observatories. Notable 
infrared telescopes include the Infrared Telescope Facil- 
ity of the National Aeronautics and Space Administra- 
tion (NASA) of the United States and the United King- 
dom Infrared Telescope. Both are on Mauna Kea. The 
telescopes are above most of the water vapor in Earth's 
atmosphere, one of the main absorbers of infrared rays. 

In 1997, an infrared astronomy project called the Two 
Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS) began under the direc- 
tion of the University of Massachusetts. Telescopes at 
Mount Hopkins, which is near Tucson, Arizona, and at 
Cerro Tololo, a mountain in Chile, are mapping the sky 
at a wavelength of 2 micrometers. 

For 10 months in 1983, a multinational orbiting tele- 
scope Called the Infrared Astronomical! Satellite (IRAS) 
mapped infrared radiation across the entire sky. In 1995, 
the Infrared Space Observatory, a European spacecraft, 











took up where IRAS had left off, surviving until 1998. 

An orbiting infrared telescope has a limited useful life 
because it must be cooled artificially. Its lifetime is limit- 
ed by the amount of coolant it carries. Cooling is neces- 
sary to prevent the telescope's own infrared radiation 
from overwhelming the faint rays coming from outer 
space. The telescope must be cooled to the temperature 
of liquid helium—about 4 Celsius degrees above ab- 
solute zero (~—459.67 “F or —273.15 °C). Absolute zero is 
the theoretical temperature at which atoms and mole- 
cules would have the least possible energy. 

In 1989 and 1990, a satellite called the Cosmic Back- 
ground Explorer (COBE) mapped the sky at the longest 
infrared wavelengths. In 1997, astronauts installed a de- 


vice called the Near Infrared Camera/Multi-Object Spec- 


trometer on the Hubble Space Telescope. 

Radio astronomy. Astronomers use radio waves 
emitted by celestial objects to produce images of the 
objects and to study the objects spectroscopically. 
These are the same kinds of waves that radio and televi- 
sion broadcasters create to transmit programs—as- 
tronomers just use them differently. 

The radio spectrum includes all electromagnetic 
waves longer than about 1 millimeter. Waves longer 
than about 1 millimeter and shorter than about 10 me- 
ters pass readily through Earth's atmosphere. 
Astronomers receive radio signals from a wide variety 
of objects, including particles swirling in the magnetic 
field of Jupiter, gas clouds orbiting the center of the 
Milky Way, pulsars (rapidly spinning collapsed stars 
from which regular bursts of radiation are received), dis- 
tant galaxies, and quasars. A quasar is a distant object 
that produces an enormous amount of radiation. Almost 
all astronomers believe that a quasar is powered by an 
enormous black hole at the center of a galaxy. 

Karl G. Jansky, an American engineer, discovered ra- 
dio waves from outer space in 1931. The science of ra- 
dio astronomy was not established until after World 
War II (1939-1945), however. 

A radio telescope is essentially a large dish antenna. 
Unlike the reflecting surfaces of other kinds of tele- 
scopes, the dish surface does not have to be extremely 
smooth. The smoothness required of a reflecting sur- 
face depends on the length of the waves to be reflected. 
The shorter the wavelength is, the smoother the surface 
must be. Because radio waves are long, some dish sur- 
faces are even made of metal mesh. 

The largest radio telescopes that can be steered to 
point anywhere in the sky are 328 feet (100 meters) in di- 
ameter. One is in Effelsberg, Germany, near Bonn. The 
other is in Green Bank, West Virginia. The largest radio 
telescope of all is a nonsteerable telescope near Areci- 
bo, Puerto Rico. Its reflecting mesh covers a natural 
bowl in the ground 1,000 feet (305 meters) in diameter. 

Radio astronomy is the field in which interferometry is 
most useful. To use separate telescopes as an interfer- 
ometer, the distance between them must be controlled 
to a fraction of the wavelength of the radiation to be de- 
tected. This requirement severely limits the use of inter- 
ferometry in the other branches of observational astron- 
omy, where wavelengths are shorter. Because radio 
waves are so long, however, the dishes of radio interfer- 
ometers can be ten, hundreds, or even thousands of 
miles or kilometers apart. 





Astronomy 843 


Sad 


A 
4 


NASA JPL 


The Mars Odyssey probe, launched in 2001, found evidence of 
water ice beneath the surface of Mars in 2002. The probe also 
analyzed the chemical composition of the Martian surface. 


The Very Large Array (VLA) in Socorro, New Mexico, 
links 27 movable dishes, each 82 feet (25 meters) in di- 
ameter. The telescopes move along railroad tracks built 
in the shape of a Y. Individual dishes can be up to 22 
miles (35 kilometers) apart. The Very Long Baseline Ar- 
ray (VLBA) consists of 10 telescopes, each 82 feet across, 
spread across one side of Earth. Their locations range 
from the Virgin Islands north to New Hampshire and 
west to Hawaii. As an interferometer, the VLBA is equiv- 
alent to a single telescope with a diameter roughly 
equal to the diameter of Earth. 

Astronomers have learned much by studying red- 
shifts and blueshifts in spectral lines. Because the radio 
spectrum is not visible, astronomers see these ‘lines’ as 
low and high points in a graph of wavelength. The low 
points represent wavelengths of radiation absorbed by 
celestial objects. The high points represent wavelengths 
of radiation emitted by strong radio sources. 

Redshift and blueshift work with radio waves exactly 
as they work with waves of visible light: If the lines in the 
spectrum of radiation emitted by an object shift toward 
the shorter-wavelength end, the object is approaching. 
The object is said to be blueshifted. If the lines shift to- 
ward the longer-wavelength end, the object is moving 
away and is said to be redshifted. 

Astronomers have analyzed redshifts and blueshifts in 
radio radiation emitted by gas clouds in the Milky Way 
Galaxy. Their analysis showed how rapidly the galaxy is 
rotating and how the speed of the revolution of its stars 
changes with the stars distance from the galactic center. 
The astronomers then applied a formula relating the 


844 Astronomy 


oe 
Earth six 
months 
later 
WORLD BOOK diagram by Precision Graphu 
Parallax is the angle by which a star's location relative to back- 
ground stars differs when measured from two points 1 astro- 
nomical unit (AU) apart and on a line perpendicular tc the line 
from the star. One AU is the distance from Earth to the 
sun—about 93 million miles (150 million kilometers). Parallax is 
thus half the difference seen from opposite sides of Earth's orbit. 


speed of the stars revolution to the stars masses. They 
discovered that the amount of mass in the galaxy is 
about 1 trillion times the mass of the sun. 

Both radio astronomers and optical astronomers have 
studied a phenomenon known as gravitational lensing. 
This phenomenon occurs, for example, where radiation 
emitted by a small, distant galaxy passes near a massive 
galaxy that is between the object and Earth. The gravita- 
tional force of the galaxy apparently bends the radiation 
much as an ordinary optical lens bends light rays that 
pass through it. Gravitational lensing can produce an im- 
age of the small galaxy in the shape of an arc or even a 


Detecting redshift 
and blueshift 


Astronomers can learn about a star's mo 
tion by comparing the spectral lines in its 
visible light with those in a spectrum p 
duced in a laboratory If the star's spectral 
lines are shifted toward the red end of 
the rainbowlike spectrum of colors, th« 
star iS MOVING away from Earth. If the 
lines are shifted toward the blue end, thi 
Star is app Astronomers use 
similar tech 
spectral ‘line 
tion, such as i 


1 . 
inalyze shifts in the > 5 ali 
sible for { radi 

d and ulti 


WORLD BOOK nest Na Rectst 





“Laboratory spectrum 


_ 
\ hi 
_ | 

ANS eee 





ring. Astronomers can study the radiation in the arc or 
ring to learn about the small galaxy. 

Ultraviolet astronomy. The ultraviolet part of the 
electromagnetic spectrum has wavelengths shorter than 
those of visible light. Wavelengths of ultraviolet light 
range from near the limit of the shortest waves that the 
eye can see, about 400 nanometers, down to about 10 
nanometers. Radiation from 400 to 300 nanometers (near 
ultraviolet) passes through Earth's atmosphere and 
therefore can be detected on the ground. But ultraviolet 
astronomers get much of their information from shorter 
wavelengths—in the far ultraviolet, from 300 to about 
100 nanometers; and in the part of the extreme ultravio- 
let from 100 to 10 nanometers. 

Studies in the far and extreme ranges must be carried 
out by satellites. From 1978 to 1997, the International UI- 
traviolet Explorer studied wavelengths from 320 down 
to 115 nanometers. NASA sent the Extreme Ultraviolet 
Explorer aloft in 1992 to study wavelengths of 7 to 76 
nanometers. In 1999, NASA launched the Far Ultraviolet 
Spectroscopic Explorer to observe wavelengths of 
about 90 to 120 nanometers. 

The largest and most sensitive ultraviolet telescope in 
orbit is the Hubble Space Telescope. Astronomers have 
used this telescope to study hydrogen gas, whose 
strongest spectral lines are in the ultraviolet spectrum. 
The researchers have studied both normal hydrogen 
and a heavy form known as deuterium in the space be- 
tween the sun and nearby stars. All this deuterium 
formed in the first 1,000 seconds after the big bang, the 
explosion that began the universe. Astronomers under- 
stand how the amount of deuterium that formed is relat- 
ed to present amounts of other kinds of matter. Knowing 
the amount of deuterium in space therefore can help 
them determine the density of the universe. 

Another space telescope is the Solar and Heliospher- 
ic Observatory (SOHO), which orbits between Earth and 
the sun. The European Space Agency launched SOHO in 
1995 to monitor the sun with visible-light and ultraviolet 
cameras and spectrographs. NASA provided some of 
this equipment. Highly detailed images from SOHO 
show the sun in, for example, the ultraviolet light of heli- 
um gas at 60,000 C or iron gas at 1,500,000 C NASA’s 
Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) is send- 
ing images that are even more detailed. 

X-ray astronomy. X rays have wavelengths from 
about 10 nanometers down to about 0.1 nanometer. The 


J 


Laboratory spectrum 


_— 


Star spectrum 





Blueshift 





hottest regions in space produce X rays. These regions 
include the sun’s corona and disks of material around 
black holes. The material in these disks heats up due to 
friction as it spirals into the black holes. As the material 
heats up, it emits X rays. The hot gas at the center of 
clusters of galaxies also emits X rays. Quasars are anoth- 
er source of X rays. 

Celestial X rays do not penetrate Earth's atmosphere 
and therefore can be studied only from spacecraft. 

X rays would pass through ordinary telescope mirrors 
and lenses, so one kind of X-ray telescope has specially 
designed mirrors. X rays strike these mirrors at low an- 
gles, then skip away like stones skipping off water. Rays 
from all the mirrors meet at a single focal point. 

Other X-ray telescopes do not have mirrors. The rays 
enter the telescope through openings between lead or 
iron slats, then strike special detectors. 

In the 1970's and 1980's, a series of High-Energy As- 
tronomy Observatories mapped the sky in X rays and 
studied certain objects in detail. From 1990 to 1998, a 
German-U.S.-British spacecraft named Rosat surveyed 
the sky. In 1995, NASA launched the Rossi X-ray Timing 
Explorer. A Japanese satellite, Yohkoh, sends back X-ray 
images of the sun that show the corona and solar flares, 
explosive events that reach millions of degrees. 

In July 1999, NASA launched the Chandra X-ray Obser- 
vatory from the space shuttle Columbia. Chandra can 
produce much more detailed images than any other X- 
ray telescope. In December 1999, The European Space 
Agency used an Ariane 5 rocket to launch an X-ray ob- 
servatory known as XMM-Newton. This satellite's tele- 
scopes can detect much fainter X-rays than Chandra can, 
though with lower resolution. 

Gammacray astronomy. Electromagnetic waves that 
have the shortest wavelengths—about 0.1 nanometer 
and shorter—are known as gamma rays. Gamma-ray 
photons have the highest energy in the electromagnetic 
spectrum. Thus, they form in the regions of the highest 
energy in the universe. 

Gamma-ray sources include places where matter and 
antimatter are annihilating each other. For every type of 
ordinary subatomic particle, there also exists an antipar- 
ticle. An antiparticle has the same amount of mass (total 
matter) as its Corresponding particle, but it carries an 
opposite electric charge. For example, the antiparticle of 
an electron is a positron. An electron carries a negative 
charge, while a positron carries a positive charge. If a 
particle and its antiparticle collide, they annihilate each 
other, releasing gamma rays and other energy. 

Astronomers have observed that matter-antimatter an- 
nihilation occasionally occurs near the center of the 
Milky Way. Other gamma-ray sources include the Crab 
Nebula, in the constellation Taurus, and a nearby col- 
lapsed star known as Geminga. The Crab Nebula con- 
sists of matter that was thrown out into space during a 
supernova observed in A.D. 1054. 

The Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, which was in 
orbit from 1991 to 2000, had several gammacrray instru- 
ments. One detector followed up on an earlier discovery 
of gamma-ray bursts that apparently come at random in- 
tervals from random places in the sky. The instrument 
detected one gamma-ray burst approximately every day. 

In October 2000, an international team of research 
centers launched the High Energy Transient Explorer-2 


Astronomy 845 


(HETE-2) satellite to detect and locate gamma-ray bursts. 
HETE-2 carries a gamma-ray detector and two X-ray de- 
tectors. When the satellite detects a gamma-ray burst, it 
computes the location of the source and sends this in- 
formation to ground stations around the equator. The 
stations forward the data to a control center at Massa- 
chusetts Institute of Technology. Within seconds, the 
center sends the data to ground-based observers so that 
they can study the source with optical telescopes. 

Neutrino astronomy. Another type of particle that 
arrives from outer space is the neutrino. Neutrinos 
rarely interact with particles on Earth. Neutrino detec- 
tors therefore use large amounts of matter as targets for 
the neutrinos. One detector, called Super-Kamiokande, 
is deep underground in a mine in Japan. Its main part is 
a cylindrical tank of water that measures 131 feet (40 me- 
ters) deep and 131 feet in diameter. Electronic devices in 
the detector can sense flashes of light produced when a 
neutrino collides with an atomic nucleus or an electron 
in the water. This detector began operating in 1996. 

The most sensitive neutrino detector is the Sudbury 
Neutrino Observatory {(SNO), in a mine near Sudbury, 
Ontario. The facility uses 1,000 tons of heavy water. In 
heavy water, the nucleus of each hydrogen atom con- 
sists of a proton and a neutron, instead of only a proton. 
SNO began taking measurements in 1999. 

Beginning in the 1960's, scientists working with an 
older kind of detector found that certain neutrinos were 
“missing.” These neutrinos were e/ectron-neutrinos cre- 
ated by nuclear reactions in the sun. Electron-neutrinos 
are one of three kinds of neutrinos known to exist. The 
others are muon-neutrinos and tau-neutrinos. The scien- 
tists measured only about one-half to one-third of the 
expected number of electron-neutrinos from the sun. 

Physicists suspected that the missing electron-neutri- 
nos change into muon-neutrinos and tau-neutrinos on 
their way to Earth. In 2001, scientists at Sudbury claimed 
that a comparison of measurements made there and at 
Super-Kamiokande shows that the change does occur. 

Cosmic-ray astronomy. Cosmic rays are electrically 
charged, high-energy particles. There are two kinds of 
cosmic rays:({1) primary cosmic rays, often called pr- 
maries, which originate in outer space; and (2) sec- 
ondary cosmic rays, or secondaries, which form in 
Earth's atmosphere. Secondaries originate when pri- 
maries collide with atoms at the top of the atmosphere. 

Most primaries are protons or other nuclei of atoms. 
They do not usually penetrate the atmosphere. As- 
tronomers therefore use instruments aboard high-flying 
airplanes or satellites to detect them. Secondaries can 
reach low altitudes. A small fraction of them even strike 
Earth's surface, where special sensors can detect them. 

Some primary cosmic rays come from the sun, but 
most of them are galactic cosmic rays, which originate 
outside the solar system. Many galactic cosmic rays 
have tremendous energy. This energy may come from 
supernova explosions. 

Gravitational-wave astronomy. Astronomers are 
building equipment to detect another type of radiation: 
gravitational waves. These waves are predicted by the 
general theory of relativity announced in 1915 by Ger- 
man-born physicist Albert Einstein. No gravitational 
waves have ever been directly detected. Researchers 
have found indirect evidence for them, however—cer- 


846 Astronomy 


tain variations in the orbits of two dense stars that re- 
volve about each other. 

Direct sampling is the examination of pieces of ma- 
terial from celestial objects. In their examinations, scien- 
tists often use techniques of geology, including chemi- 
cal analysis. The most common samples are meteorites, 
rocks that fell through the atmosphere from farther out 
in our solar system. Thousands of meteorites have been 
found. Most come from asteroids, and only a handful 
are known to have come from the moon or Mars. The 
best place to find meteorites is Antarctica. They can be 
seen on the polar ice much more easily than they can be 
detected among ordinary rocks at other locations. 

Scientists have also studied hundreds of kilograms of 
moon rocks brought to Earth by astronauts from 1969 to 
1972. In 1970, the Soviet Union's Luna 16 spacecraft, a re- 
motely controlled vehicle, returned small samples of 
soil from the moon. In addition, researchers have ana- 
lyzed bits of space dust collected by devices on high- 
altitude aircraft. They have determined that some of the 
dust came from beyond our solar system. 


Computer modeling 


Astronomers use computers to build scientific mod- 
els{sets of mathematical equations) that represent cer- 
tain processes, such as the formation of a star. After en- 
tering the equations into a computer, an astronomer 
inserts numbers into the equations, and the computer 
then simulates (represents) how the process would de- 
velop. In some cases, the computer produces a moving 
picture on a computer screen. The picture can run much 
faster than the actual process. This kind of model can 
help astronomers because many important processes 
occur much too slowly for astronomers to observe. Oth- 
er important processes that can be simulated occur in 
inaccessible places, such as the interiors of stars. 


Learning about astronomy 


It is easy for students and the general public to take 
part in astronomy. Amateur astronomers range from in- 
dividuals who make casual nighttime or solar observa- 
tions to people for whom astronomy is a serious pursuit. 





. oe we 


Amateur astronomers have their own associations and 
local and regional clubs. Some of the larger clubs hold 
star parties at which members set up their own tele- 
scopes and observe the skies. 

Amateur astronomers make major contributions to 
various branches of astronomy. For example, the Ameri- 
can Association of Variable Star Observers, whose 
headquarters are in Cambridge, Massachusetts, collects 
observations from amateurs throughout the world and 
puts them together. The association shares the data with 
professional observers, including astronomers who 
want to know what certain stars are doing before they 
conduct observations. Other amateur astronomers 
search for new comets or supernovae. 

Much technical information is available to amateur as- 
tronomers. Books on observing the heavens contain ta- 
bles that indicate where stars and planets can be found 
each month. Many cities have planetariums, which can 
present shows demonstrating the movements of celes- 
tial objects. Some planetariums sponsor lectures by pro- 
fessional astronomers. Computer programs available on 
CD-ROM simulate sky conditions for any location and 
any date and time. Many of the programs contain pho- 
tographs and motion pictures of astronomical objects. 
Such images are also available on the Internet. 

In addition, certain computer programs enable users 
to combine or enhance existing astronomy photo- 
graphs. For example, individual images taken at total 
eclipses can be combined to show the structure of the 
solar corona in more detail. 


History 


The roots of astronomy extend back to the dawn of 
civilization. More than 4,000 years ago, in what is now 
England, several generations of people built Stone- 
henge, an ‘observatory’ consisting of huge, cut stones 
arranged in circles. Certain stones and alignments of 
stones appear to mark locations of astronomical impor- 
tance, such as the point at which the sun rose on the 
longest day of the year. Stonehenge was apparently also 
a place of worship. 

Some of today’s constellations have their roots in pat- 


© Tony & Daphne Hallas, Astro Photo 


Ata star party, amateur as- 
tronomers set up their tele- 
scopes, chat with friends, and 
wait for sunset and a night of 
viewing the heavens. Astrono- 
my clubs throughout the 
world sponsor star parties. 


= 


Center 
of 
deferent 


Equant 


Deferent 





The old theory of Ptolemy 
put Earth at the center of the 
universe. Each of the other 
planets revolved in a circle 
called an epicycle. which re- 
volved along a deferent The 
epicycle’s center moved at a 
constant speed about a point 
called an equant This com- 
plex movement, right, ex- 
plained why the planets 
sometimes appear to change 
direction relative to the stars. 


terns in the sky noted by the Sumerians in perhaps 2000 
B.C. Chinese constellation patterns, which are largely 
different from those used in Europe, may also date from 
that time. Babylonian tablets show that astronomers 
there were noting the positions of the moon and planets 
by 700 B.C. The Babylonians also noted eclipses. 

The ancient Greeks carried forward ideas from the 
Babylonians and invented some of their own. Aristotle's 
system of physics and astronomy, developed in the 
300's B.C., survived for almost 2,000 years. In Aristotle's 
system of astronomy, Earth was the center of the uni- 
verse. During the A.D. 100s, Ptolemy modified Aristotle's 
system to account for the retrograde motion of the plan- 
ets Ptolemy also maintained that Earth was the center of 
the universe, however 

Developing the modern view. By the early 1500s, 
Nicolaus Copernicus had developed a theory in which 
Earth and the other planets revolved about the sun. In 
the early 1600's, Johannes Kepler analyzed precise meas- 
urements of planetary positions that had been made by 





Astronomy 84/7 


Movement of planet 
relative to the stars 


2) 


| 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
t 
° 
 d 
I 


—_ 
—_ 
—— = oo 
— 
— ww 
~ 
—— = 
— 
— = 4 
— e 
~~ 
—_— 


ad 
a 
—, 
~ 
— 
a oe 
— 


| 
. Re 
™~ 
ox 
== 


--@-=@ 
oe. 


= we 


ners 
& 
NO 


—a 


Orbit of planet 





WORLD BOOK diagram by Precision Graphics 


The modern explanation is that the planets appear to change 
direction because of differences in orbital speed as one planet 
passes another. A planet close to the sun orbits the sun more 
rapidly than does a more distant planet. In this diagram. each set 
of three numbers—for example, the three 5's—represents the 
same moment of time. 


Tycho Brahe. Kepler then developed three laws that cor 
rectly describe the shapes of the orbits of planets, indi- 
cate how rapidly a planet moves at various times of its 
year, and account for the length of the planet s year. 

While Kepler based his laws of planetary motion on 
observations, the English astronomer and mathemati- 
cian Isaac Newton proved them mathematically. In 1687, 
Newton completed a book usually called Principia Math- 
ematica setting forth not only laws of motion but also 
the law of gravity that is still in general use. 

By Newtons time, the field of optical astronomy had 
already bequn. In 1609 Galileo heard that an optical de- 
vice had been built that made distant objects appear 
closer. He soon built his own telescope. The discoveries 
Galileo made with this instrument backed the Coperni 
can theory over the theories of Aristotle and Ptolemy. Jn 
1616, however, the Roman Catholic Church warned 





848 Astronomy 


Galileo not to teach that Earth revolves about the sun. A 
book of Galileo's published in 1632 was interpreted as a 
violation of the ban, and Galileo was put under house 
arrest. Only in 1992 did the Catholic Church confirm that 
Galileo should not have been tried or convicted. 

Finding new planets. The British astronomer 
William Herschel discovered a new object in the sky in 
1781. At first, he thought the object was a comet. It 
turned out to be a planet—later named Uranus. This was 
the first planet discovered since ancient times. 

In 1845, astronomers John C. Adams of Britain and Ur- 
bain Leverrier of France declared that another planet 
must lie a certain distance beyond Uranus. They based 
their statement on their calculations of differences be- 
tween the observed orbit of Uranus and the orbit pre- 
dicted by one of Kepler's laws. They said that this differ- 
ence was due to the gravitational attraction of the 
then-unknown planet. Using one of their predictions the 
next year, the German astronomer Johann G. Galle found 
the planet, Neptune. 

The American astronomer Clyde W. Tombaugh found 
the last of the known planets in the solar system in 1930. 
He discovered Pluto on photos he had taken for the pur- 
pose. He used a wide-angle telescope at Lowell Obser- 
vatory in Flagstaff, Arizona. 

Discovering other galaxies. In the early days of opti- 
cal astronomy, the fuzzy regions of the sky became 
known as nebulae—Latin for clouds. When viewed 
through the telescopes then available, the nebulae re- 
sembled comets. Someone who was trying to discover 
comets could easily mistake a nebula for a come. To 
prevent such errors, the French astronomer Charles 
Messier made a list from the 1750's to 1784 of the most 
prominent nebulae. This Messier Catalog now contains 
110 objects, known by their Messier numbers. 

In Messier’s time, no one knew what the nebulae 
were. But in the mid-1800's, Lord Rosse of Ireland built a 
telescope whose superior light-gathering power en- 
abled him to discover that many nebulae have spiral 
shapes. The telescope’s mirror measured about 6 feet 
(1.8 meters) across—gigantic for that time. 

It took decades to discover what the spiral nebulae 
were. The answer came only in 1924 with the discovery 
by Edwin Hubble that the spiral nebulae are so far away 
that they must be beyond the Milky Way. Astronomers 
concluded that they are independent galaxies. The “neb- 
ula” with Messier number M31, for example, is actually 
the Andromeda Galaxy. Astronomers now use nebula to 
mean a cloud of dust and gas. The remaining objects in 
the Messier catalog are star clusters, groups of closely 
placed stars. 

Advances in astrophysics. By the end of the 1930's, 
the German-born physicist Hans Bethe had suggested 
how nuclear fusion powers the stars. For example, a 
process known as the proton-proton chain powers the 
sun. In this process, six protons come together in sever- 
al steps to produce a helium nucleus and two protons. 
The final products contain slightly less mass than the 

original ingredients. The missing matter is converted to 
energy according to Einstein's formula E= mc*, where E 
is energy, mis the missing mass, and c’ is the speed of 
light multiplied by itself. 

British astronomers Geoffrey Burbidge, Margaret Bur- 
bidge, and Fred Hoyle and American physicist William 





gg 1r1t? 4 reurof. 


© Jay M. Pasachoff 
The sun-centered theory proposed by Nicolaus Copernicus of 
Poland in 1543 revolutionized astronomy. This diagram is from 
his Concerning the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres. 


LTD 


ia 


he 
<P ry 


res 


“ at me 4 
- 
= 2 y 
: ~ i oJ 
ae Bye h . 
i . 





Ann Ronan Picture Library 


Tycho Brahe’s observatory is pictured in this drawing, which 
dates from 1598. Brahe, a Dane, is shown seated behind his giant 
quadrant, an instrument used to measure the altitude of stars 
and planets. Brahe's observations of the planets were far more 
accurate than any previous ones. 





A. Fowler showed in the 1950's how nuclear reactions 
could have built up all but the lightest chemical ele- 
ments. Astronomers now know that the lighter elements 
formed minutes after the big bang. Moderately heavy el- 
ements formed inside stars; the heaviest elements, in su- 
pernova explosions. 

In 1965, American physicists Arno Penzias and Robert 
Wilson discovered faint radio radiation coming equally 
from all directions in space. Scientists showed that the 
radiation was emitted about 300,000 years after the big 
bang and has been cooling ever since. Its temperature is 
now about 3 Celsius degrees above absolute zero. 

For four years starting in 1989, instruments aboard the 
Cosmic Background Explorer satellite measured more 
precisely the temperature of the radiation detected by 
Penzias and Wilson. Another instrument aboard the 
satellite found small variations in the temperature from 
one location in the sky to another. These so-called rip- 
ples in space may be the “seeds” from which the galax- 
ies and clusters of galaxies grew long ago. 

Finding quasars and pulsars. !n 1963, the Dutch- 
born astronomer Maarten Schmidt identified the star- 
like objects now known as quasars. Schmidt showed 
that the spectra of quasars have huge red shifts, indicat- 
ing that the spectra are produced by powerful sources 
of energy in distant galaxies. Most of them are billions of 
light-years away. 

In 1967, the British astronomer Jocelyn Bell Burnell 
identified a new type of object in radio observations she 
was making as part of her Ph.D. thesis. These objects 
emit radio waves that arrive at Earth in regular pulses 
about 1 second apart. The objects came to be known as 
pulsars. Later work showed that pulsars are rapidly spin- 
ning neutron stars (stars made mostly of neutrons). With 
every spin, a narrow beam of radio waves sweeps over 
Earth, producing a pulse. Astronomers have found pul- 
sars that pulse as often as 600 times per second. 

Space probes. The United States began to send 
space probes to other planets and to the moon in the 
late 1900's. From 1979 to 1981, Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 
flew near Jupiter and Saturn. Voyager 2 flew past Uranus 
in 1986 and Neptune in 1989. Both craft sent back data 
and photographs that greatly enriched scientists’ knowl- 
edge of those planets. 

The United States has put a number of scientific satel- 
lites into orbit around celestial objects. From 1990 to 
1994, the orbiter Magellan mapped the surface of Venus 
with radar. The Galileo spacecraft entered an orbit 
around Jupiter in 1995 on a mission to explore that plan- 
et and several of its satellites. In 1997, the Mars Global 
Surveyor went into orbit to study Marss magnetic fields, 
monitor its weather, and measure visible light and other 
radiation emitted by the planet. Also in 1997, the United 
States launched the Cassini mission to study Saturn, its 
rings, and its satellites. The Cassini craft is due to reach 
Saturn in 2004. It will drop a probe into the atmosphere 
of Saturn’s moon Titan. Lunar Prospector entered an or- 
bit over the moon's poles in 1998. The spacecraft’s mis- 
sion was to map the mineral composition of the moon. 


Careers 


What astronomers do. Most professional as- 
tronomers work at observatories or research institutes 
or teach and conduct research at colleges and universi- 


Astronomy 849 





J. R Eyerman, Life magazine, © 1956 Time Inc 


Edwin Hubble, an American astronomer, demonstrated that the 
universe is expanding. He is shown in the observer's cage of the 
Hale telescope at the Palomar Observatory near San Diego. 


ties. Planetariums employ astronomers to lecture and 
conduct classes for the public. A few astronomers work 
for companies that build equipment for scientific satel- 
lites and space probes. Others work for firms that do 
such work as monitoring the environment from space. 

Becoming an astronomer. The most important 
characteristic for a person who wishes to become an as- 
tronomer is a powertul spirit of inquiry. The person 
should also have a strong ability to learn mathematics. 

High-school students who are interested in becoming 
astronomers should take as many math courses as they 
can to prepare for college mathematics and physics. A 
high-school physics course is also useful. Some branch- 
es of astronomy deal more with chemistry or geology 
than physics, so courses in those subjects can also help. 
Visits to planetariums and science museums as well as 
participation in an amateur astronomy club can help 
prepare a student for a career in astronomy. Other use- 
ful skills include keyboarding and an ability to work with 
basic scientific and mathematical software. 

To conduct research and teach astronomy at the col- 
lege level requires a Ph.D. degree. Students usually take 
about six years to obtain this degree after receiving their 
bachelor’s degree. During most of this time, Ph.D. stu- 
dents perform research, and they are almost always sup- 
ported through research grants or teaching salaries. Af- 
ter obtaining their degree, most astronomers take 
postdoctoral positions for two or more years before 
searching for permanent jobs. 

Astronomy associations. Astronomers from 
throughout the world gather every three years at the 
General Assembly of the International Astronomical 
Union. Professionals in the United States and Canada be- 
long to the American Astronomical Society. Both profes- 
sional and amateur astronomers may join the Astronom- 
ical Society of the Pacific. Many countries also have 





850 Astronomy 


organizations devoted to astronomy, such as the Astro- 
nomical Society of India, the Royal Astronomical Society 
of Canada, and the United Kingdom's Royal Astronomi- 


cal Society. 


Jay M. Pasachoff 


Related articles in World Book. See Star and its list of Re/at- 


ed articles. See also the following articles : 


Aristarchus 
Banneker, Ben- 
jamin 


Barnard, Edward E. 


Bell Burnell, Joce- 
lyn 

Bessel, Friedrich 
W. 

Bowditch, 
Nathaniel 

Bradley, james 

Brahe, Tycho 

Campbell, William 
W. 

Cannon, Annie J. 

Cassini, Giovanni 
Domenico 

Copernicus, Nico- 
laus 


Astrolabe 
Bolometer 


Hubble Space Telescope 


Astronomers 


De Sitter, Willem 

Eddington, Sir 
Arthur S. 

Galileo 

Hale, George E. 

Halley, Edmond 

Herschel, Caroline 
L. 

Herschel, Sir John 
FLW. 

Herschel, Sir 


Laplace, Marquis 
de 

Leavitt, Henrietta 
S. 

Lovell, Sir Bernard 

Lowell, Percival 

Messier, Charles 

Mitchell, Maria 

Newton, Sir Isaac 

Omar Khayyam 

Payne-Gaposchkin, 


William Cecilia H. 
Hipparchus Ptolemy 
Hogg, Helen S. Russell, Henry N. 
Hubble, Edwin P. Sagan, Carl E. 


Jansky, Karl G. 
Kepler, Johannes 
Langley, Samuel P. 


Instruments 


Shapley, Harlow 

Shoemaker, Eu- 
gene Merle 

Struve, Otto 


Interferometer 
Spectrometer 


Solar system 


Telescope 


Asteroid Leonids Pluto (planet) 
Ceres (asteroid) Mars (planet) Satellite 
Comet Mercury (planet) Saturn (planet) 
Earth Meteor Solar system 
Eclipse Moon Sun 
Fireball Neptune (planet) Uranus (planet) 
jupiter (planet) Planet Venus (planet) 
Kuiper belt 
Terms 
Azimuth Horizon Orbit Spectrum 
Baily’s beads Magnitude Parallax Sunspot 
Corona Nadir Perihelion Transit 
Evening star Opposition Redshift Zenith 
Time and astronomy 
Blue moon International Month Sundial 
Day Date Line Season Time 
Equinox Leap year Sidereal time — Twilight 
Hour Midnight sun Solstice Year 
Other related articles 

Andromeda Halo Quasar 

Galaxy Interstellar medi- Refraction 
Antimatter um Relativity 
Astrology Maffei galaxies Satellite, Artificial 
Astrophysics Magellanic Clouds — SETI Institute 
Big bang Milky Way Solar wind 
Black hole Nebula Space exploration 
Bodess law Nebular hypothe- Universe 


Brown dwarf 
Constellation 
Cosmology 
Galaxy 

Halleys Comet 


SIS 
Observatory 
Oort cloud 
Planetarium 


Outline 


1. Observing the sky 
A. How the stars move 
B. How the planets move 


X rays (In astrono- 
my} 

Zodiac 

Zodiacal light 


C. How the moon moves 

D. Earth-centered theories 

E. Sun-centered theories 
ll. Modern astronomy 

A. Units of distance 
Locating objects in space 
Electromagnetic radiation 
. Optical astronomy 
Infrared astronomy 
Radio astronomy 
. Ultraviolet astronomy 
. X-ray astronomy 
Gamma-ray astronomy 
Neutrino astronomy 
Cosmic-ray astronomy 
Gravitational-wave astronomy 

M. Direct sampling 

(ll. Computer modeling 
IV. Learning about astronomy 
V. History 
Vi. Careers 


(As ee ae ie ee 


Questions 


In what ways has space travel benefited astronomy? 

Why do the stars seem to move during the night? 

How do astronomers still use the constellations? 

How many stars can be seen without a telescope? 

How did Nicolaus Copernicus revolutionize astronomy? 
What is retrograde motion? 

Why do stars appear to twinkle? 

How is an absorption line produced? 

How do astronomers use computerized scientific models? 
Why did Charles Messier make a list of nebulae? 


Additional resources 

Level] 

Burnham, Robert. The Readers Digest Children’s Atlas of the 
Universe. Readers Digest, 2000. 

Farndon, John. The Universe. Copper Beech. 2001. 

Mitton, Jacqueline and Simon. Scholastic Encyclopedia of Space. 
Scholastic, 1999. 

Wills, Susan and Steven R. Astronomy. Oliver Pr.. 2001. 

Wilsdon, Christina. The Solar System: An A-Z Guide. Watts, 2000. 


Level Il 


Mitton, Jacqueline. Cambridge Dictionary of Astronomy. Cam- 
bridge, 2001. 

Moore, Patrick. Atas of the Universe. Rev. ed. Cambridge. 1998. 

Schorn, Ronald A. Planetarv Astronomy. From Ancient Times to 
the Third Millennium. Tex. A & M Univ. Pr.. 1998. 

Weissman, Pau! R.. and others, eds Fnevclopedia of the Solar 
System. Academic Pr., 1999. 

Zeilik, Michael. Astronomy. 9th ed. Cambridge. 2002. 


Astrophysics is a science that applies principles of 
physics to many fields of astronomy. Astrophysicists try 
to determine the physical nature, origin, and develop- 
ment of the solar system, galaxies, and the universe. Al- 
most all astronomers are also astrophysicists. 

Astrophysicists use optical telescopes to view celes- 
tial objects that give off electromagnetic waves in the 
form of visible light. They use other kinds of telescopes 
to study the other forms of electromagnetic radiation- 
radio waves, infrared rays, ultraviolet rays, X rays. and 
gamma rays. One of their major techniques is the studv 
of patterns of wavelength (distance between successive 
wave crests} of the radiation emitted by celestial objects. 
For example, analysis of the pattern of wavelengths in 
the light from a star provides information about the 
stars density and temperature. Harding F. Smith 

See also Astronomy; Cosmology; Spectrometer; 
Telescope (Radio telescopes). 


——_ 


Asturias, ahs [OO ryahs, Miguel Ange!, mee GEHL 
AANG hehi/ (1899-1974), a Guatemalan author and diplo- 
mat, won the Nobel Prize tor literature in 1967. His early 
work Legends of Guatemala (1930) displays a creative 
use of Central American Indian traditions. His novel Mr. 
President (1946) condemns political dictatorship while 
experimenting with narrative techniques. His novel Men 
of Corn (1949) combines mythological narrative from In- 
dian sources with social criticism. The trilogy of novels 
Strong Wind (1950), The Green Pope (1954), and The Eyes 
ot the Interred (1960) tocuses on unjust conditions of 
agricultural work in Central America. 

Asturias was born in Guatemala City. He was his coun- 
trys ambassador to France irom 1966 to 1970. 

Naomi Lindstrom 
Asuncion, 4H soon SYAWN (pop. 500,938), is the capi- 
tal, largest city, and chief port of Paraguay. It is in south- 
ern Paraguay on a bay of the Paraguay River. This river 
flows into the Parana River. The two rivers link Asuncion 
with the Atlantic Ocean, about 1,000 miles (1,600 kilome- 
ters) by water to the south. For the location of Asuncion, 
see Paraguay (map). 

Downtown Asuncion is made up of rectangular 
blocks in which older, low buildings stand near modern 
skyscrapers. Treelined plazas provide relief from the 
busy streets. 

The Pantheon of Heroes. which honors Paraguay’s war 
heroes, taces the citys main plaza. Nearer the Paraguay 
River are the National Cathedral, the Government Palace, 
and Constitution Plaza. One of the few remaining build- 
ings from the Spanish colonial period is the Casa de la 
Independencia, where Paraguayan nationalists plotted 
their freedom from Spanish rule in 1811. There are many 
buildings from the late 1800's and the early 1900's. The 
highly decorated Main Post Ottice dates from about 
1900. The city also has a working system of electric trol- 
leys dating from 1913. 

Most Spanish-style houses in and around Asuncion 
have been replaced by modern homes. The city has 
large sluins. Most of Asuncion’s residents are of mixed 
Spanish and Indian ancestry. Many speak both Spanish 
and Guarani, an Indian language. 

The main industries in Asuncion include the process- 
ing of agricultural and forest products for export; and 
the production of textiles, footwear, and food products. 
Most people work in these industries, in commerce, or 
for the national government 

Spanish colonizers founded Asuncion in 1537. Asun- 
cion became the seat ot government for all of Spain's 
territory in southeastein South America, and remained 
so until 1617. The city has been the capital of Paraguay 
since the nation gained independence from Spain in 
1811. Nathan A. Haverstock 

See also Paraguay (picture). 

Aswan, AS wahn or ahs WAHN (pop. 220,000), is an im- 
portant commercial, mining, and resort city in south- 
eastern Egypt It lies on the east bank of the Nile River, 
about 430 miles (692 kilometers) south ot Cairo. For loca- 
tion, see Egypt (political imap). 

Aswan serves as a ajo! market center tor farmers of 
the Nile Valley traders from Sudan, and Arab nomads 
called Bedouius. the city also ranks as a leading trans- 
portation center A principal line ot Egypts chiet railroad 
extends trom Aswan to Cairo. The Aswan High Dam 


Asylum 851 


which has revolutionized the Egyptian economy, stands 
about 5 miles (8 kilometers) south of Aswan (see Aswan 
High Dam). Red granite mined near Aswan has been 
used to build many of Egypts most famous monuments 
since ancient times. Aswanss hot, dry climate makes the 
city a popular health resort. For the monthly weather in 
Aswan, see Egypt (Climate). Robert L Tignor 

Aswan High Dam, AS wahn or ahs WAHN. controls 
the floodwaters of the Nile River in Egypt. It stands south 
of the city of Aswan, on the northern shore of Lake Nass- 
er in southeastern Egypt. For location, see Egypt (politi- 
cal map). [he dam measures 364 feet (111 meters) high 
and about 2 5 miles (3.7 kilometers) long. 

The dam was designed to provide Egypt with a regu- 
lar supply of water for irrigation the year around. To ac- 
complish this goal, the dam holds back a vast quantity of 
water in Lake Nasser, which extends from the dam into 
Sudan. The water is used to irrigate farmland during dry 
periods and to generate electric power for factories and 
rural villages. The dam increased the amount of land irri- 
gated the year around by about 2 } million acres 
(910,000 hectares). It enabled Egypt to double its agricul- 
tural production. 

The dam has seriously damaged the environment, in 
addition to providing benefits. For thousands of years, 
farmland along the Nile has been fertilized by si/t (layers 
of earth particles) deposited by the floodwaters. Today, 
the dam prevents this water from flowing over the land, 
and so farmers must enrich the soil with expensive 
chemical fertilizers. The absence of silt has also in- 
creased the erosion (wearing away) of land along the 
Mediterranean coast near the Nile. In addition, the dam 
has caused poor drainage of nearby land. 

Scientists also blame the dam for an increase of a dis- 
ease Called schistosomiasis, which causes intestinal and 
urinary infections. Schistosomiasis is transmitted by mi- 
croscopic worms that breed in snails living in the Nile 
and its canals. The worms are discharged into the Nile 
and its canals, where they bore into the skin of people 
who wash clothes, bathe, or swim in the water. Before 
year-round irrigation became available, the snails died 
when the canals dried up. Today, however, the canals 
are full all year, enabling the snails to live and the dis- 
ease to spread rapidly. 

Construction of the dam began in 1960 and cost about 
$1 billion. The dam began operating in 1968. The Soviet 
Union provided technical assistance and more than 
$300 million in loans for the project. The dam replaced 
the smaller Aswan Dam, which stands nearby and is 
used chiefly to generate electric power. Robert L Tignor 
Asylum, in international law, is shelter and protection 
that is given by a nation to a person who is fleeing an- 
other nation. The granting of asylum is guided by na- 
tional Jaws and international laws and treaties. Accord- 
ing to the United Nations, retugees may seek asylum if 
they fear persecution based on race, religion, nationali- 
ty, or social or political beliefs. But no person has a right 
to asylum. Political persecution is the main reason na- 
tions grant asylum. 

The two main types of asylum are territorial and non- 
territorial Territorial asylum is granted within a nation’s 
boundaries. Nonterritorial asylum, commonly called 
diplomatic asylum, is given in toreign diplomatic mis- 
sions—such as embassies—and on ships. Under in- 





— a 


852 AT&T Corp. 


ternational law, no nation may grant diplomatic asylum 
unless a treaty with the host nation allows for it. But 
even then, the practice is rare. 

Asylum is an ancient practice. Early Israelite and 
Greek societies offered asylum for certain crimes. The 
ancient Romans recognized a more limited form of asy- 


lum. Political asylum started to flourish during the 1900's. 


The United States bases its asylum policy on interna- 
tional law and the federal Refugee Act of 1980. In Cana- 
da, a federal agency dealing with refugees handles all 
requests for political asylum. 
AT&T Corp. is one of the world’s largest communica- 
tions companies. AT&T s business centers on providing 
voice, data, and video communications services to resi- 
dential, business, and government customers through- 
out the world. The company manages the largest long- 
distance telephone network in the United States. AT&T 
also operates a cable television system. It offers local 
telephone service through its cable lines in some parts 
of the United States. In other areas, it offers local service 
through agreements with various local telephone com- 
panies. AT&T Corp. has headquarters in New York City. 

AT&T was incorporated in 1885 as the American Tele- 
phone and Telegraph Company. It became commonly 
known as AT&T. The company eventually became the 
parent organization of what was sometimes known as 
the Bell System, which included AT&T and other sub- 
sidiary companies. Among these were 22 companies 
that provided local service to about 80 percent of U.S. 
telephone customers. In 1974, the U.S. government filed 
a lawsuit charging AT&T with anticompetitive practices. 
Settlement of the lawsuit resulted in the local compa- 
nies being separated from AT&T in 1984. The company 
shortened its name to AT&T Corp. in 1994. 

Prior to 1996, AT&T also produced communications 
equipment, such as telephones, telephone switching 
equipment, and computer chips. In 1996, AT&T divided 
its Operations among three separate companies. Its 
communications services continued to operate under 
the AT&T name. NCR Corporation, a computer manufac- 
turer AT&T had merged with in 1991, was separated 
from the company to operate the computer business. 
AT&T created a third company, Lucent Technologies 
Inc., to run its communications equipment business. 

In 2000, the company that remained under the AT&T 
name announced a plan to further divide into four sepa- 
rate companies by 2002. The first of the new companies, 
AT&T Wireless, was spun off in 2001. It produces mo- 
bile telephones and provides wireless telephone serv- 
ice. The other new companies will be AT&T Business 
Services, which will provide long-distance calling and 
networking services to corporate customers; AT&T Con- 
sumer Services, which will provide long-distance calling 
service and Internet access to consumers; and AT&T 
Broadband, which will provide cable television service, 
Internet access via cable, and other high-speed commu- 
nications. Critically reviewed by AT&T Corp. 

Atacama Desert, 47 uh KAM uh or AH tah KAH mah, 
is a barren, mineral-rich region in northern Chile and 
the southern tip of Peru. The desert begins near Tacna, 
Chile, and extends southward about 600 miles (970 kilo- 
meters). It is bordered on the west by the Pacific Ocean 
and on the east by the Andes Mountains. The Atacama 
Desert averages less than 0.5 inch (1.3 centimeters) of 


Surya Prakash Sinha 


rain yearly. Its surface contains much sand and gravel. 
Beds of salt are scattered throughout. For location of the 
Atacama Desert, see Chile (terrain map). 

The Atacama is the world’s only source of natural 
sodium nitrate, a mineral used in making fertilizers and 
gunpowder. Until the 1920's, when the production of 
synthetic sodium nitrate began, the desert was the 
world’s only producer of the mineral. The desert also 
yields copper, iron ore, lithium, and silver. 

Chile defeated Bolivia and Peru in the War of the Pa- 
cific (1879-1883). As a result of its victory, Chile took pos- 
session of all parts of the Atacama Desert that had been 
controlled by Bolivia and Peru. In 1929, Chile returned 
the northern end of the desert to Peru. Robert C Eidt 

See also Chile (The Northern Desert; picture). 
Atahualpa, 44 tah WAHL pah(1500?-1533), also called 
Atabalipa, was the last ruler of the Inca Empire in Peru. 
In 1532, soon after he took the throne, Francisco Pizarro 
and his men landed in Peru (see Pizarro, Francisco). Ata- 
hualpa refused to recognize King Charles I of Spain as 
his overlord or to accept Christianity. Pizarro’s men then 
killed over 4,000 unarmed Inca nobles and imprisoned 
Atahualpa in the city of Cajamarca. Although he had one 
room filled with gold and another room filled twice with 
silver in ransom, Atahualpa was not released. He was ex- 
ecuted in 1533. See also Inca (History). Brian S. Bauer 
Atatiirk, A7 uh TURK or ah tah TURK, Kemal, keh 
MAHL (1881-1938), was the founder and first president of 
the Republic of Turkey. He served as president from 
1923 until his death. Under Atatiirk’s leadership, Turkey 
adopted sweeping political, economic, and social re- 
forms. Ataturk helped create a parliamentary form of 
government in Turkey and adopted European law 
codes. His government founded new industries and 
banks, gave women the right to vote, and improved ed- 
ucation. In addition, the Roman alphabet was introduced 
for the Turkish language. 

Ataturk also ordered all Turks to choose family names. 
He was given the name Ataturk, meaning father of the 
Turks, by the Turkish National Assembly in 1935. 

Mustafa Kemal was born March 12, 1881, in Thessa- 
loniki, Greece (then part of the Ottoman Empire). He at- 
tended military schcols. During World War | (1914-1918), 
he rose to the rank of general. He became famous for 
his role in defeating the Allies at Gallipoli Peninsula. Af- 
ter the war ended, he organized a Turkish nationalist 
movement and resisted Allied plans to break up Asia 
Minor. His forces drove Armenian, Greek, and French 
troops from the area, forcing the Allies to negotiate the 
Treaty of Lausanne and to recognize Turkish independ- 
ence in 1923. Justin McCarthy 

See also Turkey (History). 

Ataxia, uh TAK see uh, is a lack of coordination in the 
muscles. It is a symptom of damage to part of the central 
nervous system. Ataxia involves a lack of balance, or 
equilibrium. Patients must stand on a broad base, eyes 
open, or they will sway or even fall. The swaying may in- 
crease if they shut their eyes. 

Many diseases that damage the central nervous sys- 
tem may Cause ataxia. They include tumors of the brain's 
cerebrum and cerebellum, some deficiency diseases, 
and diseases of the spinal cord. Ataxia may also result 
from Overuse of such drugs as barbiturates or alcohol. 

In addition, ataxia may be due to syphilis, especially if 

















the patient's unsteadiness occurs or increases when the 
eyes are closed (see Syphilis). Marianne Schuelein 
Atchison, David Rice (1807-1886), was a United 
States senator from Missouri. Some people claim that 
he was president of the United States for one day— 
March 4, 1849. This was to be Zachary Taylor's inaugura- 
tion day. However, it was postponed one day because it 
fell on Sunday. Technically, there was no president that 
day. Atchison, as president pro tempore of the Senate, 
was next in line for the office. He was elected president 
pro tempore of the Senate 16 times between 1846 and 
1854. He was born in Frogtown, Kentucky. 

Robert F. Dalzell, Jr. 
Athabasca, Lake. See Lake Athabasca. 
Athabasca River, 47H uh BAS kuh, is one of the most 
important rivers in western Canada. It begins in the 
Rocky Mountains with water that melts from the Colum- 
bia Icefield and empties into Lake Athabasca (see Alber- 
ta [physical map]). The Athabasca River, which forms the 
southernmost part of the Mackenzie River system, is 765 
miles (1,231 kilometers) long and flows entirely within 
Alberta. The river drains about 51,000 square miles 
(133,000 square kilometers) of land. Oil-soaked sands 
along the Athabasca, north of Fort McMurray, form one 
of the largest known oil deposits. The river was an im- 
portant transportation route used by fur traders during 
the 1700's and 1800's. G. Peter Kershaw 
Athanasius, ath uh NAY shuhs, Saint (295?-373), was 
the leading Christian churchman of his time. He gained 
importance for his many writings that defended ortho- 
dox Christianity against attacks by the Arians. The Arians 
were a religious sect who believed that only God the Fa- 
ther was completely divine. Athanasius also introduced 
Eastern Christian religious community life called monas- 
ticism to Western Christianity. 

Athanasius was probably born in Alexandria. He was 
ordained a deacon about 318 by Bishop Alexander of 
Alexandria. In 325, Athanasius attended the Council of 
Nicaea, which helped establish the doctrines of ortho- 
dox Christianity. In 328, Alexander died and Athanasius 
succeeded him as bishop. Athanasius strongly defended 
the decrees of the council against Arianism. His defense 
of Nicaea cost him five different periods of exile. During 
one such period, he took refuge in the Egyptian desert. 
There, he wrote Life of Anthony (about 357), a biography 
of Saint Anthony of Thebes, the founder of Christian 
monasticism. This book influenced the establishment of 
monastic orders in the Western church. Athanasius's 
feast day is May 2. Marilyn J. Harran 
Atheism, AY thee ihz uhm, is the belief that there is no 
God. Atheism is the opposite of theism, the belief that 
God exists. Atheism is also distinguished from agnosti- 
cism, a belief which states that human beings do not, 
and cannot, know whether any gods exist. 

Atheists argue that God is never encountered in hu- 
man experience. They believe that nothing in human ex- 
perience needs to be explained by the existence of a de- 
ity. Atheists also reject the arguments that various 
thinkers have advanced to prove the existence of God. 

Atheists point to the presence of serious impertec- 
tions in the world, such as widespread suffering and in- 
justice. They argue that such imperfections show that 
the world could not have been created by a deity who 
was perfect in power and goodness. Atheism conflicts 


Athena 853 


with most religions. However, some forms of Buddhism 
seem not to assert the existence of a supreme being. 

Some prominent thinkers have been advocates of 
atheism. They include Baron Paul d’Holbach and Voltaire 
of France in the 1700's; Arthur Schopenhauer, Karl Marx, 
and Friedrich Nietzsche of Germany in the 1800's; and 
Bertrand Russell of England and Albert Camus and Jean- 
Paul Sartre of France in the 1900's. 

See also Agnosticism; God; Theism. 


Ivan Soll 


Additional resources 


Angeles, Peter A., ed. Critiques of God: Making the Case Against 

the Belief in God. 1976. Reprint. Prometheus, 1997. 

Johnson, B. C. The Atheist Debaters Handbook. Prometheus, 
19S 
Smart, J.J. C, and Haldane, J. J. Atheism and Theism. Blackwell, 

1996. 

Athena, wh THEE nuh, in Greek mythology, was the 
goddess of warfare, wisdom, and arts and crafts. She 
also was the patron goddess of Athens. The Athenians 
called Athena Parthenos (Virgin) because of her chosen 
state of virginity. In the 400's B.C, they dedicated a tem- 
ple called the Parthenon to Athena. Athena represented 
strategic war planning rather than the raw violence of 
war. The Romans identi- 
fied their goddess Miner- 
va with Athena. 

According to some an- 
cient sources, Athena was 
born full-grown and 
dressed in armor from the 
head of Zeus, the king of 
the gods. Zeus had swal- 
lowed the goddess Metis 
when Metis was pregnant 
with Athena. From her 
mother, Athena inherited 
cunning and, according to 
some sources, an ability to 
change shape and assume 
disguises. Athena also em- 
bodied the ancient Greek 
ideal of self-restraint. 
Athena assisted and in- 
spired such Greek heroes 
as Heracles, Odysseus, 
and Perseus. 

As the goddess of arts 
and crafts, Athena was 
skilled at weaving, em- 
broidery, and spinning. 
According to one myth, a oo 
mortal woman named Athena 
Arachne once boasttfully challenged Athena to a weav- 
ing contest. After the contest, Athena turned Arachne 
into a spider so she would have to spend the rest of her 
life spinning. 

Athena is depicted in art as a tall, stately woman wear- 
ing a crested helmet and carrying a spear and shield. On 
the shield was the head of Medusa, which could para- 
lyze her foes (see Medusa). Athena is often shown ac- 
companied by a snake and carrying an owl on her 
shoulder. Nancy Felson 

See also Arachne; Minerva; Mythology (picture: The 
gods and goddesses). 





Roman marble copy of a Greek sculpture 
400s B C); Vatican Museums, Rome 








J. Alex Langley OPI 


The ruins of ancient Athens stand among modern buildings in the southwest part of the city. Re- 
mains of the Parthenon and other temples are on a hill called the Acropolis, background. Sixteen 
columns are all that is left of the Temple of Olympian Zeus, foreground. 


Athens, A7H jhnzor ATH uhnz (pop. 748,110; met. area 
pop. 3,096,775), is one of the worlds most famous and 
historic cities. It became the capital ot Greece in 1833, 
after the Greeks freed themselves trom Ottoman rule. 
But Athens's greatest fame dates from the 400s B.C, 
when it was the world’s most powerful and most highly 
civilized city. The city's name in Greek is Athinai. 

Athens lies ona plain near the southern end of Attica, 
a peninsula that extends from southeastern Greece into 
the Aegean Sea. A crescent of mountains up to 4,600 
feet (1,400 meters) high bounds Athens on the west, 
north, and east. Athens is about 5 miles (8 kilometers) 
from Piraeus, Greece's largest seaport. 

When Greece gained independence in 1829, Athens 
had only a few thousand people. The city evolved dra- 
matically during the reign of Otto |, a Bavarian prince 
who became the first ruler of the new Greek kingdom. 
Otto was king of Greece from 1832 to 1862. Under his di- 
rection, German architects planned and built modern 
Athens. 

Ancient Athens was the leading cultural center of the 
Greek world. Many of the most gifted writers of Greece 
lived there. They wrote works of drama, history, lyric po- 
etry, and philosophy that have influenced literature for 


John }. Baxevanis, the contributor of this article, is Dean of the 
Faculty of Social ScienCes at East Stroudsburg University and the 
author of LConomy and Population Movements in the Pelopon: 
nesos of Greece. 


centuries. Athenian architects built masterpieces of clas- 
sical beauty, and the ruins of many of these structures 
may stili be seen. The government of ancient Athens 
provided an example of democracy that has inspired 
lawmakers ever since. The ancient Athenian statesman 
Pericles called Athens the “school of Greece.” In many 
ways, the city was the birthplace of Western civilization. 


The modern city 


Landmarks. The bustling life of modern Athens cen- 
ters around the citys three main squares—Syntagma, 
Omonoia, and Monastiraki. Syntagma Square, or Consti- 
tution Square, is the administrative center of Athens. The 
Parliament Building, formerly the royal palace, faces 
Syntagma. In 1843, the new Greek Constitution was pro- 
claimed from the balcony of this building. A special 
corps of Greek soldiers, called evzones, guards the 
Tomb of the Unknown Soldier and the Parliament Build- 
ing. The evzones wear a colorful traditional uniform in- 
cluding a red tasseled cap, embroidered vest, white kilt, 
and red leather slippers. Hotels and office buildings also 
face Syntagma. 

Omonoia Square, also known as Concord Square, lies 
about 5 mile (0.8 kilometer) northwest of Syntagma. The 
area between Omonoia Square and Syntagma Square is 
Athenss chief shopping center. Omonoia Square has 
numerous department stores, restaurants, and other 
businesses. Main streets and trolley lines branch out 
trom Omonoia. 

South of Omonoia lies Monastiraki Square, the heart 


2 —— 


ae MN as 








of an old market district. Numerous small shops, open- 
air stalls, and street vendors surround Monastiraki. To 
the southeast is the Plaka, a district that dates from the 
time when Turkey controlled Greece. The Plaka still 
shows Turkish influence in its winding, cobblestoned al- 
leys. But today it also hosts many nightclubs and hotels. 

In northeastern Athens, the cone-shaped hill of Lyca- 
bettus rises steeply to a height of about 910 feet (277 me- 
ters). It offers a dramatic view of the city. Directly south 
of Lycabettus lies the fashionable residential district of 
Kolonaki. The large, flat hill of the Acropolis, to the 
southwest, was the original center of life in ancient Ath- 
ens. Here lie the remains of the Erechtheum, the Parthe- 
non, the Propylaea, the Temple of Athena Nike, and 
other reminders of the glorious past. 

People. Athens ranks as the cultural center of Greece, 
and large numbers of foreigners live in the city or visit 
there. As a result, Athens has an international atmos- 
phere and a more modern style of life than any other 
Greek city. 

The great majority of Athenians, like more than 95 
percent of all Greeks, belong to the Greek Orthodox 
Church. Athens has many churches. The largest is the 
Cathedral, begun in 1840 and completed in 1855. The 
church of Saint Nicodemus dates from the early 1000's. 

Athenian food is similar to food served in other east- 
ern Mediterranean regions. The people of Athens eat 
lamb prepared in many different ways, as well as a wide 
variety of fish and other seafood. Other popular Greek 
specialties include feta, a cheese made from sheep's or 
goats milk, and retsina, a wine flavored with pine resin. 


Athens » 
RAILWAY STATION 
} Park PELDPONNESU 
RAILWAY STATION 
Expressway or avenue x 
Other road or street | 
; ‘Anexart 
——-| Railroad 


Subway araigkak! 


Point of interest 


Maditerranean 
Sea 


Square 


Athens 





© Dallas and John Heaton, Stock, Boston 


The Parliament Building is the center of the Greek govern- 
ment It faces Syntagma Square, the administrative center of 
modern Athens. The building once served as the royal palace. 


Most Athenians live in small apartments or inexpen- 
sive houses. Many of the people own an automobile, 
but most of them ride the city’s buses and trolleys or the 
subway that connects Athens with Piraeus. 

Education and cultural life. Athens has many public 
schools and several institutions of higher learning. The 
University of Athens, founded in 1837, has schools of 
law, medicine, philosophy, theology, and mathematics 
and the physical sciences. At the National Technical Uni- 
versity of Athens, students study engineering and other 
subjects not taught at the University of Athens. 





ERN GREECE === 


ss eer 





Aharnon 


CaP warions ECHNICA 
: a 
AS 


5 NATIONAt ARCHAEQLOGICAL 
? tog: | seuUM ev 


issias 


2 
oF 
“e Pa 
a 
RAR | 
NIVERSITY OF ATHENS: res 
AMERICAN SCHOOL QE- 
CLASSICAL STUDIES @ 
CgriTISH SCHOOL OF | 
; ARCHAEOLOGY =” 


tie: 
"ny. 
ox OF 
% * : 


a 

hes 
PPRESIDENTIA 
LACES = 


7 
Cc 
'@ 


U 








a7 


OF, ~~, 


. aij, i. 
a 


2 Miles 


0 2Kilometers 





WORLD BOORK iraps 


INYSUS fF 


‘Makrigiani, *. 


a . ™ 
i i 1 1 
q yl i A. 
id A 


ro 4 
= 
DAR 
~~ 


o Merkour, 


DLYMPIAN 


t PANATHENIAN 
e STAOIOM | 
aN \\ t 
" x 
Pr 


_ eae et) 
SS E .oNo 


1 





2 Kilometers 


i 





856 Athens 





Margot Granitsas, The image Works 


Downtown Athens is a busy center of shops, offices, and ho- 
tels. Many tourists visit Athens, the cultural center of Greece, and 
large numbers of foreigners live and work there. 


Next door to the National Technical University stands 
the National Archaeological Museum, one of the world’s 
greatest museums. It houses masterpieces of jewelry, 
pottery, and sculpture from all areas and every period of 
ancient Greece. Other museums tn Athens include the 
Benaki Museum, which features art objects from me- 
dieval and modern Greece; the Acropolis Museum; and 
the Byzantine Museum. 

The city's archaeological schools have won world- 
wide fame, especially the American School of Classical 
Studies at Athens and the British School of Archaeology 
in Athens. These two schools, founded in the 1880's, 
conduct excavations and train archaeologists. 

Economy. Athens is the economic and financial cen- 
ter of Greece. It is the headquarters for the nation’s ma- 
jor corporations, including insurance companies and re- 
search institutions. Tourism is the single largest source 
of income for the city, which hosts more than 7 million 
visitors each year. Goods manufactured in the metropol- 
itan area include chemicals, clothing, electronic equip- 
ment, food products, machinery, medicines, military 
supplies, petroleum products, pharmaceuticals, ships, 
and textiles. The city also produces brassware, jewelry, 
and a wide variety of other items popular with tourists. 


The ancient city 


The Acropolis and its buildings. The ancient Greeks 
built Athens upon and around a great flat-topped, rocky 
hill. This hill, which covers a little more than 10 acres (4 
hectares}, became known as the Acropolis. The Greek 
words akro and polis mean high city, and the early 
rulers of Athens probably lived on the steep, easily de- 
fended hill. Through the years, the Athenians built tem- 
ples and public buildings on the Acropolis, and people 
stopped living there. 

By about 1200 B.C, the Athenians had erected a wall 
around most of the Acropolis. Parts of the wall still 





stand, but a series of larger walls replaced it during the 
400's B.C. About 530 B.C, the Athenians built a temple on 
the Acropolis and dedicated it to Athena, the patron 
goddess of the city. The temple was Athens’s largest 
building until 480 B.C. That year, a Persian army cap- 
tured the city and destroyed most of the buildings on 
the Acropolis. In 447 B.C, the people of Athens began to 
rebuild the Acropolis site under the leadership of the 
great statesman Pericles. They erected many new struc- 
tures, including the magnificent Parthenon, a marble 
temple dedicated to Athena (see Parthenon). 

Pericles also began the Propylaea, the huge monu- 
mental entrance to the Acropolis. In 431 B.C, the Pelo- 
ponnesian War interrupted its construction, and the 
Propylaea was never completed. To its right stands the 
small temple of Athena Nike. The Erechtheum, a temple 
built in several joining sections, stands about 60 yards 
(55 meters) from the Parthenon. It was completed about 
400 B.C. The Athenians dedicated it to Athena, the god 
Poseidon, and Erechtheus, a legendary king of early Ath- 
ens. The most famous part of the Erechtheum is the 
south porch, where six columns in the form of standing 
maidens hold up the roof. Cement copies have replaced 
the original marble figures. Most of the original figures 
were moved to the Acropolis Museum in the early 
1980's for protection from air pollution. 

Other buildings. Southeast of the Acropolis stands 
the Theater of Dionysus, where the playwrights of an- 
cient Athens staged their dramas. The surviving struc- 
ture dates from the 300's B.C, but it includes many 
changes made in later times. The theater could seat 
about 15,000 spectators. Southwest of the Acropolis 
stands the restored Odeon, a theater that seats more 
than 5,000 people. It is still used for plays and concerts 
(see Europe [picture: Ancient Greek dramal). Herodes At- 
ticus, a wealthy Greek, built the Odeon about A.D. 160. 

The Temple of Olympian Zeus, the largest temple 
ever built in Greece, stood about 400 yards (370 meters) 
east of the Theater of Dionysus. The Athenian tyrant Pisi- 
stratus began the structure about 530 B.C, but many in- 
terruptions delayed it. The temple was finally completed 
during the reign of the Roman emperor Hadrian, who 
ruled from A.D. 117 to 138. The building had 104 col- 





© Cart Purcell 


The National Archaeological Museum is one of the world’s 
greatest museums. Its exhibits include jewelry, pottery, and 
sculpture trom every period of ancient Greek civilization. 





umns, each 56 feet (17 meters) high, but only 16 remain. 

Northwest of the Acropolis was the Agora, the mar- 
ketplace of ancient Athens. Archaeologists have uncov- 
ered the ruins of many of the Agora’s public buildings. 
Along the east side of the Agora stood the Stoa of At- 
talus, a long, roofed co/onnade (row of marble columns) 
that housed many shops. It was built between 159 B.C. 
and 138 B.C. and was restored in the A.D. 1950's. Today 
the Stoa of Attalus serves as a museum and as head- 
quarters for excavations of the Agora. See Greece, An- 
cient (illustration: A bustling marketplace). Just outside 
the Agora stands the Temple of Hephaestus (also called 
the Hephaesteum or Theseum), built about 449 B.C. It re- 
mains the best-preserved temple in Greece. 


History 


Earliest times. Scholars know little about the history 
of Athens before about 1900 B.C, when Greeks first oc- 
cupied Attica. Later invaders never drove out the Greek 
settlers, as they did in other parts of Greece. 

Athens was one of the first city-states. Each of these in- 
dependent states consisted of a city and the region that 
surrounded it. Athens had a king, as did other Greek 
states. According to tradition, the first king of Athens 
was named Cecrops. Kings ruled the city-state until 682 
B.C. Beginning that year, elected officials called archons 
headed the government of Athens. The general assem- 
bly, which consisted of all adult male citizens of Athens, 
elected the archons to one-year terms. At first, a group 
of three archons managed the affairs of Athens. In time, 
the people increased the group to nine. 

After their term of office, the archons joined the Are- 
opagus, a council of elder statesmen. The Areopagus 
judged murder trials and prepared political matters for 
the vote of the general assembly. See Areopagus. 

As Athens's population grew, the farmers of Attica 
could not produce enough food for all the people and 
for themselves. The ruling aristocracy gradually ac- 
quired the best farmlands. Many small farmers went into 
debt and borrowed food that they promised to pay back 
out of the next year's crop. Some, who could not pay 
their debts, even lost their land and became slaves. Civil 
war threatened to break out between the lower classes 
and the wealthy Athenians. 

Solon, one of the archons of 594 B.C., made several 
important reforms. First he canceled all debts, thus free- 
ing the people who had fallen into slavery. But they did 
not get their land back. Solon also set up qualifications 
for public office based on wealth. Any qualified citizen 
could become a public official, regardless of whether 
he belonged to the traditional ruling class. In addition, 
Solon reorganized and published all the laws of Athens. 

Solon’s work did not solve the problem of poverty in 
Attica. In 560 B.C, Pisistratus, a respected army com- 
mander, seized power and made himself tyrant (see Tyr- 
anny). He fell from power twice but ruled firmly from 
about 545 B.C. until his death in 527 B.C. The lower class- 
es supported Pisistratus, and he repaid his followers by 
distributing land taken from his wealthy opponents. He 
thus continued the work of Solon in sharply reducing 
the power of the traditional ruling class. Pisistratus con- 
trolled, but did not suspend, the regular government 
and the archons. He made himself popular by making 
various improvements in the city, including construction 


Athens 857 


of the first stages of the Temple to Zeus. After Pisistra- 
tuss death, his son Hippias ruled as tyrant. 

Democracy. Hippias fell from power in 510 B.C, and 
Cleisthenes, the head of a leading family, became the 
most powerful statesman in Athens. About 508 B.C, the 
Athenians adopted a new constitution proposed by 
Cleisthenes, which made the state a democracy. This 
constitution was an unwritten one, but it stayed in effect 
with little change for hundreds of years. The constitution 
kept the ideas of Solon, but it also provided for new 
conditions that had developed since Solon’s rule. 

Until Cleisthenes's time, citizenship had been based 
on blood relationship to the four lonic tribes that had 
originally settled Attica. A man had to belong to a pAra- 
try (brotherhood) to be a citizen. Under Cleisthenes's sys- 
tem, all men 18 years of age and older were registered 
as citizens and as members of the deme (village or town) 
in which they lived. In time, membership in the demes 
became hereditary, and so a man might belong to a 
deme in which he did not actually live. Cleisthenes or- 
ganized the demes into 30 groups called trittves, which, 
in turn, were grouped into 10 new tribes. Each of the 10 
tribes was made up of 3 trittyes from different regions of 
Athens. Thus, members of each tribe came from various 
families and different parts of the city-state. 

Cleisthenes’s most important reform was the creation 
of a council of 500 members who were chosen each 
year by drawing lots. The council prepared business for 
the general assembly. The new political system provid- 
ed every citizen of Athens with a chance to help run the 
city government. All citizens were eligible for the coun- 
cil and for other offices. Women were not considered 
citizens and could not vote or hold office. In time, all 
public officials except generals were chosen annually by 
drawing lots. Generals were elected. Individuals who 
were considered to be a threat to the government could 
be banished for 10 years by a vote of the people. 

The Golden Age. Athens played a leading role in the 
Greek victories over Persia in the two Persian Wars (490 
B.C. and 480-479 B.C). Athens soon became head of the 
Delian League, a group of Greek states organized to 
continue to wage war against Persia. The league quickly 
developed into an Athenian empire. The period from 
477 to 431 B.C, called the Golden Age, was the most 
brilliant in Athenian history. During this time, Athens 
was led by the great statesman Pericles. He increased 
Athensss power in Greece and reformed its government. 
Pericles also funded many great works of art and archi- 
tecture. Athens became famous as the literary and artis- 
tic center of Greece. 

War and decline. Athens led the empire into the Pel- 
oponnesian War (431-404 B.C.) against Sparta and its al- 
lies. Sparta won the war and remained the most power- 
ful Greek state until 371 B.C, when Thebes defeated it. 

Although Athens never regained its political leader- 
ship, it remained Greece's intellectual center. People 
came to Athens as a center of culture under Macedo- 
nian rule, and later under Roman rule. For hundreds of 
years, wealthy Romans sent their sons to Athens to com- 
plete their education. However, Athens lost its position 
as a cultural center in A.D. 529, when the Byzantine em- 
peror Justinian closed the citys schools of philosophy. 

From about 1100 to 1400, during the Middle Ages, 
Athens declined even turther. As the power of Byzan- 


858 Atherosclerosis 


tium weakened, various Italian and other European rul- 
ers occupied the neglected city. In 1456, Athens fell to 
the Ottoman Empire. The !slamic Ottomans did little to 
restore the Christian city to its former glory. 

In 1833, after the Greek War of Independence, Athens 
became the capital of the new kingdom of Greece. The 
first king, Otto !, and his advisers were German. They ap- 
plied modern Western European designs—such as pub- 
lic squares and straight streets—to the urban landscape 
along the northern and eastern slopes of the Acropolis. 
The population grew to about 500,000 by the mid-1920's. 

During World War I! (1939-1945), Athens was an open 
city—that is, the Greeks agreed to neither fortify nor de- 
fend Athens. They made this agreement to protect the 
city's historic buildings and works of art against bomb 
attacks. However, it did nothing to protect Athenians 
from harsh treatment at the hands of the Germans, who 
occupied Athens in Apri! 1941. The following winter, 
thousands of Athenians died of starvation. German 
troops abandoned the city in 1944. 

Renewal. After the war, archaeologists again began 
to restore the ruins of ancient Athens. New buildings 
began to replace structures that had been erected dur- 
ing the reign of Otto ! in the mid-1800's. The historic sky- 
line of three-story buildings is now dotted with modern 
skyscrapers. In the 1990's and early 2000's, new construc- 
tion continued as Athens prepared to host the 2004 
Olympic Games. John J. Baxevanis 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Biographies 
Aeschylus Epicurus Socrates 
Alcibiades Euripides Solon 
Aristides Lysias Sophocles 
Aristophanes Miltiades Themistocles 
Aristotle Pericles Thespis 
Cimon Phidias Thucydides 
Cleisthenes Pisistratus Xenophon 
Demosthenes Plato Zeno of Citium 
Draco Praxiteles 
Other related articles 

Acropolis Greece, Ancient (Education; 
Areopagus Athens; History) 
Athena Law (The influence of ancient 
Ballot ‘Older customs! Greece) 
City-state Lyceum 
Democracy (Origins of Marathon 

democracy) Oratory (Beginnings) 
Drama ‘Greek drama Parthenon 
Education (Ancient Greek ed- Peloponnesian War 

ucation) Theseus 


Europe (picture: Ancient 
Greek drama 
Greece ‘pictures) 


Thirty Tyrants 
\Vomen's movements (In an- 
cient societies) 
For the monthly weather in Athens, see Greece (Climate). 
Atherosclerosis. See Arteriosclerosis. 
Athlete's foot is an infectious skin disease that in- 
volves itching and scaling between the toes and on the 
soles of the feet. It is caused by a type of microscopic 
fungus. Nearly everyone comes into contact with this 
fungus, but some people are infected easier than others. 
The fungi thrive on warm, moist skin surfaces. For this 
reason, the disease affects many athletes and other peo- 
ple whose feet regularly become hot and sweaty. 
Athlete's foot starts between the toes and then makes 
the bottoms of the feet red and scaly. In some cases, it 
also causes blisters. The disease may spread to other 


parts of the body. !t is then known as ringworm (see 
Ringworm). Athlete's foot is sometimes also called ring- 
worm of the feet. 

The disease is treated by—and can be prevented by— 
washing and drying the feet thoroughly; wearing socks 
and shoes that provide proper ventilation; using talcum 
powder to absorb the moisture; and, if needed, apply- 
ing medicine that kills the fungus. The fungus is hard to 
get rid of completely if the toenails become infected. Re- 
peated attacks of athlete's foot may occur in such cases. 
In severe or long-lasting cases, a physician may pre- 
scribe a drug called griseofulvin. Yelva Liptzin Lynfield 
Athletics means sports in the United States (see 
Sports). In the United Kingdom and Commonwealth 
countries, it refers to track and field events (see Track 
and field). 

Athlone, Earl of (1874-1957), a member of the British 
royal family and a military officer, served as governor 
general of Canada from 1940 to 1946. As governor gen- 
eral, he devoted himself to maintaining the Canadian 
war effort in World War I! (1939-1945). In 1943 and 1944, 
he hosted President Franklin D. Roosevelt of the United 
States and Prime Minister Winston Churchill of the Unit- 
ed Kingdom during two historic wartime conferences at 
his residence in Quebec. 

The Earl of Athlone was born on April 14, 1874, in 
London. His full name was Alexander Augustus Freder- 
ick William Alfred George Cambridge. He was the 
younger brother of Queen Mary, wife of King George V. 
In 1904, he married Princess Alice, a granddaughter of 
Queen Victoria. He was an officer in the British Army 
and served in the Second Anglo-Boer War (1899-1902) 
and World War ! (1914-1918). He became Earl of Athlone 
in 1917. From 1923 until 1930, the earl was governor 
general of South Africa. 

See also King, William Lyon Mackenzie (picture: King 
hosted meetings). 

Athos, Mount. See Greece (Macedonia); Religious 
life (The Eastern Orthodox Churches). 

Atkins, Chet (1924-2001), was one of the most influen- 
tial individuals in the development of modern country 
music in the United States. Atkins helped shape country 
music as a guitarist, record producer, and recording 
company executive. Atkins is credited with being a ma- 
jor force behind the creation of the “Nashville sound,” 
which broadened the audience for country music inter- 
nationally in the late 1950's and 1960's. 

Chester Burton Atkins was born on June 20, 1924, 
near Luttrell, Tennessee. As a young guitarist, he greatly 
admired the playing of Merle Travis, who he heard on 
the radio. Travis played rhythm on the lower strings with 
his thumb, while playing melody on the higher strings 
with his index finger. Atkins developed the style further, 
often using two or even three fingers instead of one. 
Atkins toured with country bands and played on various 
radio shows during the 1940s. He first performed at the 
Grand Ole Opry in Nashville in 1946. Atkins settled per- 
manently in Nashville in 1950. 

Atkins made his first solo recording in 1946 and 
recorded over 100 albums. He served as vice president 
of Nashville operations for RCA Victor Records from 
1968 to 1982. During those years, he helped shape the 
Nashville sound, which brought a smooth, pop-oriented 
style to country music. Paul F. Wells 


Jacques Monet 















seor 


seseece 


seen 


peesemsanece eeese ee 2 
1 4G Sm SSSHSSCSSSSSSSSOSSSO SHS FASSSHSSOSSFSOOSAEEOOM, Ss 






ee ee ee 





Atlanta 859 






wenann’t jh aww’ y 


asonmwaw 


sont —— 
a 


* 
i 


lakes 











ail nies oo == i ee 
ae Se 
= = Seri 


= 
2 


Tel 


Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau 


Atlanta's skyline has many prominent buildings. The three tallest pictured here are, /eft to right 
the stair-shaped Georgia Pacific Building, 191 Peachtree, and the Westin Peachtree Plaza. 


Atlanta 


Atlanta is the capital and largest city of Georgia. It 
serves as a center of trade and transportation for the 
Southeastern United States. More than 400,000 people 
live in the city, and the Atlanta metropolitan area has 
about 4 million people. 


Atlanta is known for its rolling hills and beautiful dog- 


wood blossoms. It lies in northern Georgia, in the 
foothills of the Blue Ridge Mountains. 

In 1837, a town called Terminus was founded at what 
is now Atlanta. The town soon developed into a busy 
trade and transportation center. In 1845, it was renamed 
Atlanta. During the Civil War (1861-1865), Atlanta served 
as a Confederate supply depot. Union troops led by 
General William T. Sherman captured the city in 1864 
and burned most of its buildings. 

Atlanta has had several periods of industrial expan- 
sion and construction growth. Today, it is the center ot 
one of the fastest-growing U.S. urban areas. 


The city 


Layout of Atlanta. Atlanta covers 132 square miles 
(342 square kilometers). The Chattahoochee, one of 
Georgia's major rivers, forms part of the city’s western 
border. Most of Atlanta lies in Fulton County, but its 
easternmost section extends into DeKalb County. 

Downtown Atlanta is a bustling area in the east-cen- 
tral part of the city. It has a mix of modern office towers 


and mid-rise buildings that date from the late 1800's and 
early 1900's. The traditional heart of downtown is an in- 
tersection called Five Points, which has a cluster of 
banks, department stores, and office buildings. To the 
east is Auburn Avenue, the location of the Martin Luther 
King, Jr., National Historic Site. The site honors King, 
who was born in Atlanta and became a famous civil 
rights leader. It includes King’s birthplace; the Ebenezer 
Baptist Church, where King preached; and the King Cen- 
ter, which houses his tomb. The State Capitol—which 
dates from 1889—and other government buildings stand 
near Five Points. Underground Atlanta, a 22-acre 
(9-hectare) shopping and entertainment complex lies be- 
low street level just south of Five Points. 

Atlantas most famous street, Peachtree, runs from 
downtown northward to residential areas. It is the site of 
Peachtree Center, a modern downtown business com- 
plex that includes hotels, office buildings, restaurants, 
shops, and convention and entertainment facilities. Also 
to the north of downtown is Atlanta's tallest building, the 
1,023-toot (312-meter) Bank of America Plaza. Other land- 
marks include the cylinder-shaped Westin Peachtree 
Plaza, which is the tallest hotel in the Western Hemi- 
sphere; and the Fox Theater, a grand movie house that 
dates from 1929. 

Residential areas spread out beyond the downtown 
region. Industrial activity is scattered throughout the 
area, most heavily in the south. 

The metropolitan area. Atlantas metropolitan area 
spreads out over 20 counties and covers 6,126 square 





860 Atlanta 


Facts in brief 


Population: City—416,474. Metropolitan area—4,112,198. 
Area: City—132 mi? (342 km’). Metropolitan area—6,126 mi’ 
(15,866 km), excluding inland water. 
Altitude: 1,050 ft (320 m) above sea level. 
Climate: Average temperature—january, 41 °F (5 °C); July, 
79 °F (26 °C). Average annual precipitation (rainfall, melted 
snow, and other forms of moisture)—51 in (130 cm). For the 
monthly weather in Atlanta, see Georgia (Climate). 
Government Mayor-council. 7erms—Four years for the 
mayor, the council president, and the 18 council members. 
Founded: 1837. Incorporated as a city, 1847. 


Largest communities in the Atlanta area 


Name Population 
Atlanta 416,474 
Sandy Springs” 85,781 
Roswell 79,334 
Marietta 58,748 
Smyrna 40,999 


"Unincorporated. 
Source: 2000 census. 


Name Population 
Fast Point Rie eee 
North Atlanta* 38,579 
Alpharetta 34,854 
Redan* 33,841 
Dunwoody* 32,808 





Symbols of Atlanta. The flag, /ef, and the seal, right, fea- 
ture the phoenix and the dates 1847 and 1865. Atlanta was 
chartered as a city in 1847. Atlanta adopted the phoenix as a 
symbol because, like that bird of Greek mythology, the city 
rose from its own ashes. Rebuilding began in 1865. 


rower 


arr? 


a . 





Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau 


The tomb of Martin Luther King, Jr., stands at the Martin 
Luther King, Jr., National Historic Site in Atlanta. The civil rights 
leader was a minister in Atlanta, his hometown. 








Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau 


Underground Atlanta is a shopping and entertainment com- 
plex that lies beneath street level in the heart of downtown. The 
mall spans 22 acres (9 hectares) and is mostly enclosed. 


miles (15,866 square kilometers). It is home of about half 
of Georgia's people. 

Most of the metropolitan area population is concen- 
trated in five counties—Clayton, Cobb, DeKalb, Fulton, 
and Gwinnett. Sandy Springs, Atlanta's largest suburb, 
lies north of the city. Other large suburbs include East 
Point, Marietta, Roswell, and Smyrna. 

Atlanta’s suburban areas offer many historical sites as 
well as new housing developments and large business 
districts. At least two business complexes rival those 
within the city limits and are anchored by major shop- 
ping malls. The malls are Cumberland Mall/Galleria Mall 
in Cobb County and Perimeter Mall in DeKalb County. 
The metropolitan area also offers beautiful scenery the 
year around. Popular recreation areas near Atlanta in- 
clude the Blue Ridge Mountains and Lake Sidney Lanier, 
both north of the city. 


People 


Ethnic groups. African Americans make up Atlantas 
largest single ethnic group. They account for about 61 
percent of the city's population. In the entire metropoli- 
tan area, whites make up about 63 percent of the popu- 
lation and African Americans about 29 percent. The 
largest white groups include people of British, German, 
and Irish ancestry. Asians and Hispanics represent small 
but growing parts of the area's population. 

Housing. Atlanta is famous for its large, single-family 
houses with beautiful flower gardens and dogwood 
blossoms. The Druid Hills area is one of the nation’s old- 
est planned suburban neighborhoods. It was designed 
in 1903 by American landscape architect Frederick Law 
Olmsted and Atlanta businessman Joel Hurt. The neigh- 
borhood is known for its large houses, broad front 
lawns, and curving streets shaded by towering trees. 
Other suburbs also include luxurious neighborhoods. 

Substandard housing is a problem in some older 
neighborhoods in poor areas of the central city, espe- 
cially those south of downtown. A number of private or- 
ganizations, including Georgia-based Habitat for 


| City of Atlanta \ AIR FURCE BA 
- “ ATLA TA 


AVA 
AIR STATIO 


Smyrna Spring St 





Atlanta lies in northwestern Georgia. 
' The larger map shows the city and 
some of its points of interest. The 
smaller map shows the Atlanta area. 


CAMP TI MBER RIC RIG: 
@ (GIRL sey 


City 
a) boundary |] Park 








___ County Military 
boundary area 
| 
) Expressway -——— Railroad 
Point of 
——— Other street interest 


| | Kennesaw Mtn \ FULTONCOUNTY __~ 
i] National * Roswell_-~ ic 


\ 
e Battlefield Park ' 
BMaridline ~~ }/ Norcross 


. COBB COUNTY snte ‘Someries 


Smyrna® Ser t 
[e. j eNorth Atianta 


Tucker® ™ 


g Douglasville 


OOUGLAS 
COUNTY 


to “Euuron ae | 
eCity. COUNTY 


Faurburn @ Morrow ® 





30 Miles 


40 Kilometers 





Humanity, run programs to assist in renovating or build- 

__ ing houses for the poor. 
| Education. The Atlanta metropolitan area has about 
) 700 public schools that serve about 500,000 students. 

_ The largest school systems are those of DeKalb and 
Cobb counties. About 36,000 students attend approxi- 
mately 185 church-supported and other private schools 
in the Atlanta area. 

Atlanta has about 35 accredited colleges and universi- 
ties. The largest are Georgia State University and the 
Georgia Institute of Technology, often called Georgia 
Tech. The Atlanta University Center is the largest com- 
plex of predominantly African American colleges and 
universities in the United States. It consists of Clark At- 
lanta University; Morehouse, Morris Brown, and Spel- 
man colleges; and the Interdenominational Theological 
| Center. Located just outside the city limits, Emory Uni- 
versity is recognized for its medical research programs. 
Other institutions of higher learning in the area include 
Agnes Scott College and Columbia Theological Semi- 














nary in Decatur, Kennesaw State University in Kennesaw, 


and West Georgia College in Carrollton. 
Social problems. Atlanta faces many social problems 
experienced by other large urban areas. Major prob- 








Atlanta 860a 


AKOOCHEE R 
NATIC 


i 
nits si ie ENCE CENTER, 
— ee 
= ‘state 
f AGNES SCOTT CO Ss E 
ey Deyaur:. * 


a Belvedere ma) 


wood ™ Ave. 


AR ISFIELD / 
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT 


Zn Forest Park 
< AERS MARK! 
}\ 8 take City 


15 Miles 


20 Kilometers 


WORLD BOOK maps 


lems include crime and homelessness. Much of the 
crime is associated with the problems of drug abuse 
and gang activity. Rising housing costs have contributed 
to homelessness. In 1991, Georgia native and former U.S. 
President Jimmy Carter launched the Atlanta Project. The 
project is an effort to attack social problems in the poor- 
est parts of the Atlanta area. Its volunteers work with 
community groups, churches, and local, state, and fed- 
eral government programs to help the poor. 


Cultural life 


The arts. The Atlanta Ballet, founded in 1929, is the 
oldest regional ballet company in the United States. It 
performs in the Atlanta Civic Center. The Civic Center 
also hosts summer musicals produced by Theater of the 
Stars. The Robert W. Woodruff Arts Center houses the 
Alliance Theater Company, the Atlanta Symphony, and 
the Atlanta College of Art. Clayton State College in Mor- 
row offers performances by the Thamyris chamber mu- 
sic ensemble at Spivey Hall. Suburban playhouses in- 
clude the Neighborhood Playhouse in Decatur and the 
Theater in the Square in Marietta. 

Museums and libraries. Collections at the High Mu- 
seum of Art emphasize European and American paint- 


860b Atlanta 


ings and sculptures from the 1800's and 1900's. The mu- 
seum is part of the Robert W. Woodruff Arts Center. 
Other art museums in Atlanta include the Hammonds 
House Galleries and Resource Center for African-Ameri- 
can Art and the Michael C. Carlos Museum at Emory 
University. Atlanta's public library system has a down- 
town facility and about 25 branches. 

The Atlanta Historical Society complex houses a mu- 
seum and a library of local history. The Fernbank Sci- 
ence Center includes a planetarium and a forest pre- 
serve. Wren’'s Nest, the home of journalist Joel Chandler 
Harris, is now a museum. Harris is famous for his “Uncle 
Remus’ stories, which were published during the late 
1800's. 

The Carter Presidential Center stands on a hill over- 
looking downtown Atlanta. This large complex houses 
the Jimmy Carter Library and the Carter Center of Emory 
University. The library contains items associated with 
Carter's term as president of the United States. The Car- 
ter Center of Emory University is a research institute that 
deals with international affairs. 

Recreation. The Atlanta area has hundreds of parks. 
Piedmont Park, which opened in 1895, hosts the Atlanta 
Arts Festival each fall. The festival features art exhibits, 
concerts, and dance programs. A series of roadside 
parks near suburban North Druid Hills was designed by 
Frederick Law Olmsted. Grant Park includes the Atlanta 
Zoo and the Cyclorama, a circular painting of the Battle 
of Atlanta of 1864. The Cyclorama, housed around a 
moving platform, measures 42 feet (13 meters) high and 
358 feet (109 meters) in circumference. 

Atlanta has a number of professional sports teams. 
The city is the home of the Atlanta Falcons of the Nation- 
a! Football League, the Atlanta Braves baseba!! team of 
the Nationa! League, the Atlanta Hawks of the National 
Basketball Association, and the Atlanta Thrashers of the 
National Hockey League. 


Economy 


The Atlanta metropolitan area is a center for service 
industries. It ranks as a leader in wholesale and retail 
trade, transportation, and communication. Service- 
related jobs employ about 447,000 of the area's people. 
Manufacturing employs about 195,000 people. 

Service industries. Atlanta has a thriving wholesale 
trade industry. Much of this trade takes place in the 
huge downtown Merchandise Mart. Numerous large re- 
tail trade centers serve both residents of Atlanta and vis- 
itors. 

Atlanta is a transportation and communication hub. 
Hartsfield International Airport in College Park ranks 
among the worlds busiest airports for passenger and 
cargo flights. Delta Air Lines is headquartered in Atlanta. 
The city is also the chief railroad center of the Southeast. 
United Parcel Service, Inc., the largest U.S. package de- 
livery company, has its headquarters in Atlanta. Two ma- 
jor Communications companies headquartered in At- 
lanta are the Cable News Network (CNN) and BellSouth. 
A number ot daily newspapers serve the area. The major 
paper is The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. 

Government services also contribute to Atlanta's 
economy. The Georgia state government, based in At- 
Janta, employs many people. A number of federal gov- 
ernment agencies also have offices in the area. The U.S. 








Atanta Convention and Visors Bureau 


The Atlanta Arts Festival attracts many visitors with its varied 
art exhibits, concerts, and dance programs. Piedmont Park, 
which opened in 1895, hosts the festival each fall. 


Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) main- 
tains its headquarters just outside the city limits and has 
many laboratories in Atlanta. Military installations in the 
area include Fort McPherson south of downtown, Fort 
Gillem near Forest Park, and the Atlanta Naval Air Station 
and Dobbins Air Force Base near Marietta. 

Manufacturing. The chief manufactured products of 
the Atlanta area include food, transportation equipment, 
tobacco products, electronics, and textiles. The Coca- 
Cola Company has its headquarters in Atlanta. Lockheed 
Martin Aeronautical Systems, which manufactures mili- 
tary planes, is near Marietta. 


Government 


Atlanta has a mayor-council form of government. The 
city's voters elect the mayor, the city council president, 






% bo: 


> et Pe 


+ ey 
‘= 





Atlanta Convention and Vistiors Bureau 


The Coca-Cola Company maintains headquarters and a visi- 
tors’ center in Atlanta. The brightly colored visitors center, 
shown here, stands next to the company’s executive offices. 








and the 18 members of the council to four-year terms. 
The Atlanta area has over 60 other local government 
bodies, including county and city governments, local 
boards of education, and a regional transit authority. 


History 


Early days. The Creek Indians inhabited the Atlanta 
area before whites reached the region. In 1813, the U.S. 
Army sent troops commanded by Lieutenant George R. 
Gilmer to the area to build a fort about 7 miles (11 kilo- 
meters) northwest of present-day downtown Atlanta. 
The fort stood along the Chattahoochee River at a site 
known as Standing Peachtree. It became an important 
trading post. In 1837, the Western and Atlantic Railroad 
selected a site at what is now Atlanta for the end of a 
new rail line. A town called Terminus was established at 
the site. It was renamed Marthasville in 1843. In 1845, the 
town sought a new name. J. Edgar Thompson, a railroad 
engineer, suggested the name At/anta. Some people say 
the name is a feminine version of Atlantic from the 
Western and Atlantic Railroad. Others say it is a femi- 
nine version of Af/antis, a legendary lost continent 

Destruction and redevelopment. Atlanta was char- 
tered as a city in 1847. Fulton County was established in 
1853, with Atlanta as the county seat. After the American 
Civil War began in 1861, Atlanta's central location and its 
railroad network made it a main shipping point for Con- 
federate supplies. In 1864, Union troops led by General 
William T. Sherman captured Atlanta and burned most 
of it to the ground. Fewer than 400 of the city’s approxi- 
mately 3,700 buildings were left standing. 

After the Civil War ended in 1865, Atlanta was quickly 
rebuilt. It replaced Milledgeville as the state capital in 
1868. By 1880, Atlanta had over 37,000 residents and 
ranked as Georgias largest city. In 1881, it held the Inter- 
national Cotton Exposition to focus attention on its po- 
tential as a manufacturing center. The city’s Cotton 
States and International Exposition of 1895 included an 
exhibit on the progress made by blacks since the Civil 
War. The popular soft drink Coca-Cola was invented in 
Atlanta in 1886. By 1900, Atlanta had become an impor- 
tant manufacturing and retailing center and had nearly 
90,000 residents. 

In 1906, a race riot between blacks and whites result- 
ed in 12 deaths and numerous injuries. Afterward, city 
leaders established a committee to promote racial toler- 
ance. The riot resulted in black businesses moving away 
from the central business district to Auburn Avenue. Au- 
burn Avenue gradually became an important street for 
black businesses and black churches. 

Gate City of the South. In 1917, a fire destroyed 
about 2,000 buildings in Atlanta. The city was again 
quickly rebuilt. By 1920, Atlanta's 14 rail lines and 4 ma- 
jor railroads earned it the name Gate City of the South. 
Through a promotional campaign, the Atlanta area at- 
tracted hundreds of new businesses. In 1936, the na- 
tion’s first federally funded low-income housing project, 
Techwood Homes, was opened in Atlanta. 

The mid-1900's. World War II brought new military 
installations and industries to Atlanta. In 1943, the area s 
first naval air station opened on the site of what is now 
DeKalb-Peachtree Airport, near Chamblee. Many farm- 
workers moved to the Atlanta area to work in war indus- 
tries and remained after the war ended in 1945. By 1950, 


Atlanta 861 


about 330,000 people lived in the city, and the metropol- 
itan area had grown to about 727,000. In 1952, Atlanta 
annexed 81 square miles (210 square kilometers) of sub- 
urban land to the north, west, and south of the city, 
adding about 100,000 residents to its population. 

The 1960's marked a period of major growth for At- 
lanta. The area’s first expressways were completed in 
the late 1950's and early 1960's. Atlanta-Fulton County 
Stadium, finished in 1965, became the home of the city’s 
first major league sports team, the Braves. 

In the 1960's, Atlanta became known as one of the 
South's most racially progressive cities. It was a center 
of leadership for the civil rights movement. Martin Lu- 
ther King, jr., and others founded the Southern Christian 
Leadership Conference (SCLC) in Atlanta in 1957 to coor- 
dinate the work of civil rights groups. Under Mayor Ivan 
Allen, Jr., who held office from 1962 to 1969, Atlanta inte- 
grated its public schools peacefully. An alliance of white 
business leaders and influential members of the black 
community helped accomplish this change. In 1969, city 
voters elected Sam Massell, Jr., a white, as mayor, and 
Maynard Jackson, a black, as vice mayor. Jackson was 
elected mayor in 1973. He became the first black mayor 
of a major Southern city. He was reelected in 1977. 

The late 1900's. Andrew Young, also a black, was 
elected to succeed Jackson in 1981 and was reelected in 
1985. Jackson was elected mayor again in 1989. In 1993, 
Bill Campbell, another black, was elected to succeed 
Jackson. He won reelection in 1997. 

Atlanta's population reached its highest level, about 
495,000, in 1970. In the next 20 years, the movement of 
many Atlantans to the suburbs helped cause the city’s 
population to decrease to about 394,000. But the move 
to the suburbs and an increase of the size of the metro- 
politan area helped the metropolitan population soar 
from about 1,600,000 in 1970 to about 4 million in 2000. 

The Omni International Complex, a recreational and 
commercial center, opened in 1975. In 1986, Atlanta 
businessman Ted Turner bought the complex and re- 
named it the CNN Center after his Cable News Network 
(CNN). The Georgia World Congress Center, a state- 
owned convention center, was completed in 1976. The 
NationsBank Plaza (now the Bank of America Plaza) 
opened in 1992. The Underground Atlanta shopping and 
entertainment complex opened in 1989, and the Georgia 
Dome in 1992. In 1996, Atlanta hosted the Summer 
Olympic Games. Construction for the event included a 
downtown stadium, which afterward—in 1997—became 
the new home of the Braves. A new park, Centennial 
Olympic Park, was created downtown. 

One of the major problems facing Atlanta's city gov- 
ernment continued to be the rebuilding of the aging 
streets, bridges, and sewerage system. In 1993, a major 
sewer line collapsed, destroying a parking lot and part 
of a downtown building. 

Recent developments. Voters elected Shirley Frank- 
lin mayor in 2001. Franklin, a former city administrator, 
became the city s first female mayor. Brian P O Shea 

Related articles in World Book include: 

Centers tor Disease Control Georgia Institute of 

and Prevention Technology 
Coca-Cola Company Jordan, Vernon E., Jr 
Emory University King, Martin Luther, Jr. 


Fort McPherson Marino, Eugene A. 
Georgia (pictures) 





862 Atlantic Charter 


Atlantic Charter expressed the post-World War Il 
aims of the United States and the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern ireland. President Franklin D. 
Roosevelt of the United States and Prime Minister Win- 
ston Churchill of the United Kingdom adopted the dec- 
laration in August 1941 during a conference aboard ship 
off the coast of the Canadian island of Newfoundland. 
The complete text is given below. 


UPt Bettmanr 


The Atlantic Charter was adopted at a 1941 meeting between 
U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt, seated /eft and British Prime 
Minister Winston Churchill, seated right 


Text of the Atlantic Charter 

















The President of the United States of America and the Prime 
Minister, Mr. Churchill, representing His Majesty's Government 
in the United Kingdom, being met together, deem it right to 
make known certain common principles in the national policies 
of their respective countries on which they base their hopes for 
a better future for the world. 

First, their countries seek no aggrandizement, territorial or 
other; 

Second, they desire to see no territorial changes that do not 
accord with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples con- 
cerned; 

Third, they respect the right of all peoples to choose the form 
of government under which they wili live. and they wish to see 
sovereign rights and self-government restored to those who 
have been forcibly deprived of then 

Fourth, they will endeavor, with due respect for their existing 
obligations, to further the enjoyment by all states, great or small, 
victor or vanquished, of access, on equal terms, to the trade and 
to the raw materials of the world wt re needed for their eco 
nomic prosperity: 


Fifth, they desire to bring about tt est collaboration be- 








Atlantic City, New Jersey (pop. 40,517), is one of the 
largest seaside resorts in the world. It lies on Absecon 
Island, on the southeast coast of New Jersey (see New 
Jersey {political map}). Roadways connect Absecon Is- 
land to the mainland. The Atlantic-Cape May metropoli- 
tan area has 354,878 people. 

Atlantic City is famous for its gambling casinos and its 
Boardwalk. The Boardwalk—made of wood, steel, and 


‘ 
Ps 


i") 


| 


Picceecen” 





| 
: 


i, (OREO 
allel 





Rudi VonBrel 
Auantic City’s famous Boardwalk stretches along the Atlantic 
Ocean for 4 | miles (7.2 kilometers). It is lined with restaurants, 
shops, and hotels with gambling casinos. 





tween all nations in the economic field with the object of secur- 
ing, tor all, improved labor standards, economic advancement, 
and social security; 

Sixth, after the final destruction of the Nazi tyranny, they hope 
to see established a peace which will afford to all nations the 
means of dwelling in safety within their own boundaries, and 
which will afford assurance that all the men in all the lands may 
live out their lives in freedom from fear and want; 

Seventh, such a peace should enable all men to traverse the 
high seas and oceans without hindrance; 

Eighth, they believe that all of the nations of the world, for re- 
alistic as well as spiritual reasons, must come to the abandon- 
ment of the use of force. Since no future peace can be main- 
tained if land, sea, or air armaments continue to be employed by 
nations which threaten, or may threaten, aggression outside of 
their frontiers, they believe, pending the establishment of a 
wider and permanent system of general security, that the disar- 
mament of such nations is essential. They will likewise aid and 
encourage all other practicable measures which will lighten for 
peace-loving peoples the crushing burden of armaments. 








concrete—is 60 feet (18 meters) wide. It stretches along 
the Atlantic Ocean for 4 5 miles (7.2 kilometers) in At- 
lantic City. It continues for 2 more miles (3.2 kilometers) 
in Ventnor City, a community southwest of Atlantic City. 
The Boardwalk is lined with restaurants, shops, and ho- 
tels with gambling casinos. 

Also on the Boardwalk is Boardwalk Hall. The renovat- 
ed 1929 landmark building, formerly called the Conven- 
tion Center, is a sports stadium and concert hall. It is 
also the site of the Miss America Pageant each Septem- 
ber. Five piers extend into the Atlantic Ocean from the 
Boardwalk. Places of interest on the piers include an art 
center and a shopping mall. 

Tourism ranks as Atlantic City’s chief economic activi- 
ty. The city has long attracted many vacationers and 
weekend and holiday visitors. Its first gambling casino 
opened in 1978. Atlantic City now has about a dozen 
casinos. The casinos have attracted large numbers of ad- 
ditional visitors to the city. Besides tourism, the city's 
economic activities include fishing. 

Atlantic City has a mayor-council form of government. 
The city was incorporated in 1854. A Boardwalk was 
completed in the city in 1870. The present one dates 
from 1896. In 1976, New Jersey voters approved a refer- 
endum to allow gambling casinos in Atlantic City. By 
law, each casino must be part of a hotel complex with at 
least 500 guest rooms. The casinos were originally pro- 
moted as a way for the city to finance urban renewal. In 
the late 1900's, after the arrival of the casinos, some ar- 
eas of the city were rebuilt. But critics point out that 
there are still other areas in the city in much need of 
renovation. Critically reviewed by Martin DeAngelis 

See also New Jersey (picture). 





Trenton 
Philadelphia 







@ Chesapeake Bay) 


29 — Dismal 
. Swamp 
} Canal 


Jf ATLANTIC 
INTRACOASTAL s 
WATERWAY oe 


it 


North 
Atlantic 
Ocean 


Avacksonville 


ee te 


Q 200 Mies 
0  200Kilometers| 
WORLD BOOK map 
The Atlantic Intracoastal 
Waterway provides a shel- 
tered route for small boats. 


ee) ey 


Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway 863 


Atlantic Coastal Plain. See United States (The 
Coastal Lowlands). 

Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway is a sheltered wa- 
ter route used by boats along the Atlantic Coast of the 
United States. It consists of a series of rivers, estuaries, 
inland bays, sounds, and inlets, nearly all linked by 
canals. 

United States Army engineers are continually dredg- 
ing the 1,200-mile (1,930-kilometer) waterway. Its channel 
has a depth of 12 feet (3.7 meters) or more. Barges and 
small pleasure boats travel on the waterway. These ves- 
sels are exposed to the open ocean for only about 50 
miles (80 kilometers) south from Boston, along the 
Rhode Island coast, and for a 37-mile (60-kilometer) 
stretch along the New Jersey coast. A canal extends from 
Philadelphia to Chesapeake Bay. The remainder of the 
waterway lies back from the shoreline, or is protected 
by islands and sand bars. 

About 175 bridges cross the Atlantic Intracoastal Wa- 
terway. Twenty-two lighthouses help guide the vessels. 
Water locks lift and lower boats to different levels in the 
Dismal Swamp Canal in eastern Virginia and in eastern 
North Carolina. 

A one-way voyage on the waterway takes about 10 
days for small vessels. The trip presents scenery ranging 
from the busy shipping scenes at New York Harbor to 
the lonely wilderness along the Carolina coast and the 
colorful resorts in Florida. Many colonists in America 
founded settlements on streams and bays of the Atlantic 
seaboard. They were among the first to use the coastal 
and inland waterways for travel, trade, and communica- 
tion along the coast. John Edwin Coffman 

See also Canal; Inland waterway. 


Shostal 














1 Soild. se. ateatbnatita toll 
Ff ty 


a 


Li38 6A 








864 Atlantic Ocean 


Atlantic Ocean is the world’s second largest ocean. 
Only the Pacific Ocean is bigger. The Atlantic makes up 
about 26 percent of the earth's ocean area and 17 per- 
cent of its total surface area. The Atlantic Ocean contains 
many special habitats for marine life. It is a rich source 
of seafood as well as other valuable resources. The At- 
lantic has been a major avenue for commerce and an ac- 
tive site for exploration for hundreds of years. The is- 
lands and coastal regions of the Atlantic are valuable 
sites for marine recreation and tourism. 


Boundaries and size 


The Atlantic Ocean is bordered by North America and 
South America on the west and by Europe and Africa on 
the east. The Atlantic connects to the Arctic Ocean south 
of the Davis Strait, the Greenland Sea, and the Norwe- 
gian Sea. It joins the Southern Ocean at 60° south lati- 
tude. 

The Atlantic Ocean is separated into the North At- 
lantic and the South Atlantic by the equator. The North 
Atlantic has a number of seas Opening into it. These 
seas, Called marginal seas, include the Caribbean, 
Labrador, and North seas and the Gulf of Mexico. Some 
scientists regard the Arctic Ocean as a marginal sea of 
the North Atlantic. The South Atlantic has no marginal 
seas. 

The widest part of the Atlantic, between Spain and 
Mexico, extends about 5,500 miles (8,800 kilometers). 
The narrowest part spans about 1,800 miles (2,900 kilo- 
meters), between Brazil and western Africa. The Atlantic 
is about 9,000 miles (14,500 kilometers) long from north 
to south, and its area is about 34 million square miles (88 
million square kilometers). 


The Atlantic seafloor 


The continental margin is the part of the Atlantic 
seafloor that borders the continents. The continental 
margin consists of (1) the continental shelf, (2) the conti- 
nental slope, and (3) the continental rise. 

The continental shelf slopes gently from the coastline 
to a depth of approximately 330 feet (100 meters). The 
width of the continental shelf varies from a few miles or 
kilometers to about 250 miles (400 kilometers). Beyond 
the continental shelf, the seafloor drops steeply to about 
9,800 feet (3,000 meters). This region is called the conti- 
nental slope. At the base of this slope is the continental 
rise, which is a region of sediments that have washed 
from the continents. From there, the seafloor drops 
gradually to the abyssa/l depths of about 13,100 feet 
(4,000 meters). 

At some places along the continental shelf, continen- 
tal slope, and continental rise, erosion has formed sub- 
marine canyons and channels. Some of these features 
occur Off rivers. Others may represent ancient patterns 
of drainage from the continents. 

The ocean's large islands lie close to the mainland of 
the continents and are called continental islands. They 
include Cuba, Great Britain, Jreland, and Newfoundland 
in the North Atlantic, and the Falkland Islands in the 
South Atlantic. The marginal seas have many more is- 
lands than the ocean itself. 

The Mid-Atlantic Ridge is the most striking feature 
on the floor of the Atlantic Ocean. The Mid-Atlantic 
Ridge is a submarine mountain range that extends from 


north of Iceland to the Antarctic Ocean. The ridge forms 
the boundary between the tectonic plates, rigid slabs of 
earth s crust that support the continents and make up 
the seafloor. 

New seafloor is created in the rift by seafloor spread- 
ing. During this process, the tectonic plates move away 
from the rift. Melted rock rises into the rift and hardens 
to form the new seafloor. The spreading of seafloor 
causes the Atlantic to widen about 5 inch (1.3 centime- 
ters) a year. 

The Mid-Atlantic Ridge is part of a mid-ocean ridge 
system that circles the earth. This great mountain range 
is the site of submarine earthquakes, volcanos, and /Ay- 
drothermal vents. Hydrothermal vents occur when water 
seeps through cracks in the seafloor and is then heated 
by underlying volcanic molten rock. The water then ris- 
es back to the ocean floor as mineral-rich hot water 
springs. 

The Mid-Atlantic Ridge rises above the ocean surface 
in several places, forming islands. These islands include 
Ascension, the Azores, Iceland, and St. Helena. Volcanic 
islands—that is, those created by the eruption of volca- 
noes—include Bermuda, the Canary Islands, Cape 
Verde, Iceland, the Madeira !slands, the South Sand- 
wich Islands, St. Helena, and Tristan da Cunha. 

The seafloor slopes gradually away from the Mid- 
Atlantic Ridge to the abyssal plains, which lie mainly at 
depths of about 14,000 to 18,000 feet (4,300 to 3,500 me- 
ters) below sea level. Trenches form the deepest parts of 
the Atlantic. A small number of trenches occur near the 
West Indies and off the southern tip of South America. A 
small number of trenches occur near the West Indies 
and off the southern tip of South America. The ocean's 
deepest point is in the Puerto Rico Trench, 28,232 feet 
(8,605 meters) below the surface. 


The ocean depths 


The layers of water at the Atlantic s lowest depths are 
known as deep waters and bottom waters. They come 
from the surface and are the only source of oxygen for 
the life in the deep basin. Deep waters range from about 
3,300 to 13,100 feet (1,000 to 4,000 meters) below sea lev- 
el. Bottom waters range from a depth of about 13,100 
feet to the seafloor. 

An important water mass, the Antarctic bottom wa- 
ters, forms along the Antarctic coast, which has the 
world s coldest ocean waters. When ice forms in the 
Antarctic, most of the salt separates from the water that 
freezes and remains in the water that does not freeze. 
The water that remains liquid becomes extremely dense 
because of its high salt content and its low tetnperature. 
It sinks down the Antarctic slope into the basin. Then, as 
bottom waters, it moves slowly across the ocean floor 
into the North Atlantic Ocean, sometimes reaching 43° 
north latitude. 


Climate 


The far northern and southern parts of the Atlantic 
Ocean have long, cold winters and short, cool summers. 
In these regions, the winter air may be much colder 
than the water. The variation between surface and air 
temperature causes low fog, sometimes called sea 
smoke, to form. In the Grand Banks and other areas, 
warm, moist air moves over cold water, producing 


































15 180 


FO all a. ay >‘ = y =) —as > ‘ ; 
Arctic Gocam 3 Saae/ Sa a pe 
ae —7" mas oP LX. coe | B. Gang Sab A 




















— (<a Lee ot BF h AS \ Gey aN ee | ak >/ Sea A 
Re <r oF; a ~~ CAL Norwegian- 
: a nasa , ag © > DBattin t, < 3 | naw FeSeaal j 
| ee ae i” <a 
peu = Ga vc) rae 
a LVS ” 
60° North tte Audsor y 2 # 4 = Sa Wo ip &. 
| o Cape Farewall ina 58 
Canada 7, , R Fr pg 
& Gulf of 33 . \ 
St. Lawrence ~Longons 


ae, News Se 


fam wy he ww | 
= 


dane reo Evanos 
Grand Biscay \\ 
Banks —— rc 


AMERICA /->—~ cot apf 
/ 7 “/ _y Boston, pa ee, 


} | 


‘New York City, a Georges Bank 











































































Cape Cod Portugal vf ; \ 
Philadelphia’ 4 Webon’ pain to git . = \ 
United States } sears 7“ | aot 
| a — _— = 
Nortotk* = a | {PK : 
y CapeHe neras = OMtathaaitar — \ aay 2 cig he pee a 
adeira a : 
l- Cec a *Casab anca ~~ oe ; — t Cc 
Houston — _ nh”Amersend ee ors ort h ste ——-- os a * 
Va [Basin xi is. 4 : _ a ari 
; {stats Frit ty Atlanti c / ‘La eis Egypt 
CPs so f ’ 
gout any te Q Mie add Ss y 
* ‘- an Orel oy fa =} — — — - Tropic 4f Cancer~ 
J 
ang*— ; 
pombe a> 5] q s ce Trench .._$ Verde ) 
> — SS = Sain } Mauritania | ‘i \ 
WN ‘ Cape Vi = ! ; iger 
Jamaica = Indies ape Verde {sJ (Dakar! eek Mali enen 1D 
ral “Caribbean Sea rare Verde” Senegal eye te RISC (A \ 
S ~° \ | 
oe f yaa ms tie. “ Guines 
x — aracaibo <2 rimdad 
ee eiic ar) wh Sierra Leone uechese 
: | v Venezuela (G,, ana eae ng atagos 
Ocean piteme’ | ¥ Liberta 
“i ane Picea 1 Cameroon 
Cana! Y Colombia “ Guiana a Palmas ae at” a 
ina an ulf of Guinea © Bioko 
T= 7 pas BMP iter and Paul Equatortal Countercurrenr | Principe an 
0 are or i¢ — ot _— wee —— ‘Sao-Tome’—— += Equator 0 E 
an d y 
ec | =< * Belém. pie |g q Congo 
: — et a Annobon ithe} (Kinshase} 
SqO,UutTsH Fortaleza®. <<_Fernando de_Noronha [Brazzaville 
| Cape $40 Roque a oe 
A M E R | (es A Recife, —_— Ascension \ a ia 
ie 5 ; eet 2!ria, \ Luanda | 
Sr. é 
Brazil “On / 
= Salvador® / Angola a 
} St. Helena f ane A) F 
N Bolivia -_ = ~~ = | 
a ; A \ f S ou r h Cape Fria. 7. 
AV 7 \ Namibia | 
ev mee 18 q “varia Rio de Janeiro, aa tlan tic \ Walvis Bay M 
deceteno eG ft = =. a a“ a Pa { | 
| h i ; Se Parts uay y TH 1c Oo Cagorn 
| \ ‘t yi | Ocean i é 
\ vs t 
oo | 
\ ( i SOUMN=s/ Fur - 
30° South Latitude —-——----= f= \ : -———sf ; = an em i es aor — a. 36 
: de’ a < Africa G 
} | Mbntev deo ; 7 / | oo < 
| \ Buenos Aires « = Cape of Good Hope Ae 
Rio de /a Plata ’ = : ; Cape wate 
i Argentina o . Tristan da Cunha ra oe 
. J / v + 
AtlanticOcean || ol ose f 
Gi °) —————— ee A. “Basin Sle a... 
oS ) on Bas: a : Se ; 
Water depth t r y 1 . asin oo — es a sé In d ian 
» FFs —_ West Wing “% , ae Ocean 
= in Drift Ya f - = 1 
0 to 656 ft. (0 to 200 m) wis = Suro ae a a ed Le a Se H 
656 ft. to 13,100 ft Ss "a Shag Rocks SIS J 
(200 to 4,000 m) are’ wt Tierra Rg Fuego ~ South, Georgia I. “- a 
13,100 ft to 19.700 ft = ull “ me — South Sandwich Tre + i 


{4,000 to 6.000 m) 


>| Deeper than 19,700 ft 
7 (6,000 m) 


— {2 


* South Orkney bs. 


“gouth Sandwich Is. f 


——e Warm current Southern Ocean 


i _- ftare te Crrcle- 


——-. Cold current 








International boundary 


XS es ee ANTARCTICA 


East — 


v Depth below sea leve! 60 Longitude 











0 1.000 2.000 3.000 4000 5.000 6.000 Miles 
WORID BOOK map 1,000 2,000 3.000 4,000 5.000 6,000 7,000 8.000 9.000 Kilometers 
Brazil Current f 4 Drake Passage ios Labrador Current B 3 Nonvegian Sea A 3 
Map index Canary Current OMS English Channe! B 5 Labrador Sea ATES Puerto Rico Trench D 3 
Cape Basin H 6 Equatorial Counter- Magellan, Strait nf H 2 Sargasso Sea {@ 2 
RnonteBadin . @ Cape Earewell B 4 current 3 Mid-Atlantic Ridge = D 3 South Equatorial 
Br Lets oll Ta Hoy Cape Hatteras C2 Falkland Current H 3 North American Basin C2 Current ES 
Ballin Ba Ax Cape Horn Hie Grand Banks B 3 North Atlantic South Sandwich 
Bay ol Bixca BS C aps of Good Greenland Sea A 4 Current B 4 Trench H 4 
Bens ils rime » ¢ inpe G 6 Gull of Guinea E 6 North Equatnnal Walvis Ridge G 6 
Brazil Basi ' 3 Cape Verde Basin D3 Gulf of Mexico C 1 Current D 4 Wedell Sea 1 4 
sae tiite-ainde Canhhean Sea 2 Gull Stream G& 2 North Sea B 5 


866 Atlantic Ocean 


heavy fog that may be dangerous for ships. Icebergs 
float in the far north and south, and are hazards to navi- 
gation. Near the equator, the climate stays hot all year. 

Cyclical events also affect weather patterns and cli- 
mate. For example, El Nino, a warm current in the Pacific 
Ocean, affects the formation of hurricanes in the Atlantic 
(see El Nino). Another cyclical event, the North Atlantic 
Oscillation, takes place about every 10 years. It may af- 
fect temperature, rainfall, drought, and storm conditions 
in Europe and Africa. 

Water temperatures at the Atlantic's surface range 
from about 86 F (30 C) at and near the equator in sum- 
mer to about 28 F {—2 C) at and near the boundary with 
the Southern Ocean in winter. In warm and moderate 
regions, the temperature may vary little from the surface 
to a depth of about 330 feet {100 meters). In these re- 
gions, the temperature drops off quickly below 330 feet. 
At a depth of about 3,300 feet {1,000 meters), the temper- 
ature is about 41 F (5 ‘C) and varies little to the ocean 
floor. In cold regions, temperatures change little be- 
tween surface and deep waters. 

Winds. Wind belts in the Atlantic Ocean include the 
trade winds and the prevailing westerlies. The trade 
winds occur on each side of the equator. The northeast 
trades blow steadily from Africa to the Caribbean at 5° to 
30° north latitude. The southeast trades blow from Africa 
toward South America at 5 to 30° south latitude. An area 
of light and variable winds called the do/drums occurs 
between the two trade wind belts. 

The westerlies extend from 35 to 60° north latitude 
and 35’ to 60 south latitude. The westerlies in the north- 
ern hemisphere influence weather patterns across 
North America and the Atlantic to Europe. From July 
through October, tropical storms develop in the area of 
10° to 20° north latitude between Africa and Central 
America. These storms sometimes intensify into power- 
ful hurricanes that can cause great destruction. 


Moving ocean waters 


Currents along the surface of the Atlantic move in 
enormous circular patterns called gyres. The trade 
winds and the westerlies drive the gyres, which center 
in the subtropics. The North Atlantic Gyre is north of the 
equator, and it circulates clockwise. The South Atlantic 
Gyre, south of the equator, circulates counterclockwise. 

The movement of the trade winds and the westerlies 
determines the direction of currents in the Atlantic. The 
trades drive the North and South Equatorial currents 
from Africa westward. The South Equatorial Current 
splits at the eastern tip of South America. One portion 
travels southward, and the other flows to the Caribbean, 
where it joins the North Equatorial Current. Waters 
build up in the Gulf of Mexico, resulting in the Gulf 
Stream, a strong current that sweeps up the North 
American continent. The current then flows eastward, 
becoming the North Atlantic Current. This current splits 
into several routes carrying waters toward the United 
Kingdom, Iceland, the Norwegian Sea, and Portugal. The 
southernmost branch continues southward off the coast 
of Africa as the Canary Current. The South Atlantic Gyre 
consists of the South Equatorial Current, the Brazil Cur- 
rent, the West Wind Drift, and the Benguela Current. 

Other major surtace currents in the Atantic include 
the Labrador Current, which brings cold water down 


the east side of North America to about Cape Hatteras; 
the Equatorial Countercurrent, which flows toward 
Africa; and the Falkland Current, which brings cold wa- 
ters into the South Atlantic Gyre circulation. 

Tides. Along most of the Atlantic coast, tides reach 
their maximum height twice each day. The Atlantic s— 
and the world s—largest difference in high and low tides 
takes place in Canada's Bay of Fundy, between New 
Brunswick and Nova Scotia. The daily tidal range in the 
bay may exceed 50 feet (15 meters). The Gulf of Mexico 
has only one high and low tide each day. The average 
range between high and low tides in the gulf is only 
about 2 feet (0.6 meters). Some places in the gulf have 
tidal ranges of only a few inches or centimeters. Tides 
are also small in the Mediterranean. 


Ocean life 


A wide variety of plant and animal life thrives in the 
Atlantic Ocean. Plants and plantlike organisms can live 
only in the sunlit surface waters, to a depth of about 330 
feet (100 meters). Animals live throughout the Atlantic. 

The surface waters of the continental shelf support 
one-celled plantlike organisms called phytoplankton, 
which are a major food for marine life. In winter months, 
surface waters are mixed by strong winds to greater 
depths. This process increases nutrient concentrations 
in the upper waters. When spring begins to warm the 
surface waters, the ocean experiences the year’s largest 
phytoplankton growth, called the spring bloom. 

The hydrothermal vents on the seafloor support vast 
communities of marine life. Near these vents, bacteria 
thrive by using mineral substances from the vents as 
food. The bacteria, in turn, are consumed by other 
forms of marine life. Many rare types of shellfish live in 
hydrothermal vent communities. 

In the Sargasso Sea, a type of seaweed called sargas- 
sum weed grows drifting on the ocean. The weed pro- 
vides a habitat for small fish, crabs, and other organisms. 

Coral communities are found only in warm waters. 
They are common in the Caribbean and in Bermuda. 

Whales migrate over long distances between the 
warm waters of the tropics and the cooler, plankton-rich 
waters in coastal and high-latitude areas. In the North At- 
lantic, whales live in the Caribbean and in the waters 
around Greenland and the Norwegian Sea. In the South 
Atlantic, they are found along the coasts of Africa and 
Brazil and in the waters of the Antarctic Ocean. 


Ocean resources 


The Atlantic Ocean provides about a fourth of the 
world’s annual catch of fish and shellfish. The leading 


Facts in brief 


Area: About 34 million mi’ (88 million km:). 

Greatest distances: North-south—9,000 mi (14,500 km). Fast- 
west 5,500 mi (8,800 km). 

Average depth: 12,100 ft (3,700 m). 

Greatest depth: 28,232 ft (8,605 m), in the Puerto Rico Trench. 
Surface temperatures: Highest, about 86 F (30 °C), near the 
equator in summer. Lowest, 28 “F (~ 2 °C), at and near the 

boundary with the Southern Ocean in winter. 
Tides: Highest- Over 50 ft (15 m), in the Bay of Fundy, Canada. 


Lowest—Less than 1.5 ft (0.5 m) in areas of the Gulf of Mexico 
and the Mediterranean Sea. 











fishing areas include Dogger Bank and the Grand Banks. 
People raise fish and shellfish on coastal fish farms 
using a process called aquaculture. 

Petroleum and natural gas are the Atlantic’s most valu- 
able mineral resources. About a fourth of the world’s 
petroleum comes from sediments in the Atlantic's conti- 
nental shelf. About 70 percent of this petroleum is from 
marginal seas, especially the Gulf of Mexico and the 
North Sea. Other valuable mineral products of the At- 
lantic include gems, sand and gravel, and sulfur. 


Pollution 


Pollutants enter the ocean from many sources. Rivers 
and runoff from land bring many wastes to the sea. 
Many coastal cities discharge treated and untreated 
wastes into the ocean. Some pollutants are transported 
through the atmosphere to the ocean. Some wastes en- 
ter the ocean from ships. Spills of petroleum and haz- 
ardous wastes occur when ships run aground or are 
damaged by storms. Before the 1980's, factories and 
power plants commonly discarded industrial and ra- 
dioactive wastes into the ocean. Ships also incinerated 
hazardous wastes at sea. 

Phytoplankton thrives on certain nutrients produced 
by the decay of organic matter. Thus, organic pollution 
can lead to a huge increase in the population of phyto- 
plankton off the continental shelf. The phytoplankton 
eventually decomposes, consuming more oxygen than 
normal in the process. The increase in the loss of oxy- 
gen can make the waters unfit for marine animals. Under 
some conditions, the populations of certain phytoplank- 
ton species can increase rapidly within a few days. They 
reach such high concentrations that they affect the color 
of the water. The water may appear soupy green, 
brown, or red. These thick growths of phytoplankton, 
called blooms, can kill fish. Some species produce tox- 
ins that are absorbed by the fish and shellfish that eat 
them. Such contaminated seafood can cause poisoning 
and paralysis in human beings. 

Since the 1970's, governments have begun to regulate 
most uses of the ocean for waste disposal. The regula- 
tors strive to use the natural systems and cycles in the 
ocean to take in wastes in ways that will not harm hu- 
man beings or the environment. Governments have also 
taken steps to ban the use of certain pollutants, such as 
lead, which was once used as an additive in gasoline, 
and the pesticide DDT. Both substances are widely dis- 
persed in the Atlantic. 


Exploration 


Early explorers. Phoenician traders began to explore 
the Atlantic by the 700’s B.C. They ventured through the 
Strait of Gibraltar to trade along the coast of Spain and 
Morocco. They probably reached the islands of Great 
Britain and Ireland and the southern part of the conti- 
nent of Africa by about 600 B.C. Vikings started to ex- 
plore the North Atlantic in the A.D. 800's. During the next 
200 years, they colonized Greenland and Iceland and 
sailed as far as North America. 

During the 1300's and 1400's, exploration of the At- 
lantic increased rapidly. Many merchants sought new 
routes from Europe to the Spice Islands of the East In- 
dies. People learned to build better ships, and naviga- 
tion methods improved. Europeans explored most of 


Atlantic Ocean 867 


the west coast of Africa by the late 1400's. The Por- 
tuguese navigator Bartolomeu Dias sailed around the 
southern tip of Africa in 1488. In 1492, Christopher 
Columbus made the first of his historic voyages from 
Europe to North America. His voyages raised great inter- 
est in exploration, brought knowledge of the New 
World to Europe, and proved that ships could safely 
travel the western Atlantic. During the next 50 years, ex- 
plorers from such nations as England, France, Portugal, 
and Spain sailed through most of the Atlantic Ocean. 

The beginnings of scientific oceanography. 
Oceanographers aboard the British research ship Cha/- 
lenger made the first major study of the Atlantic floor. In 
1873 and 1876, they obtained samples of the Atlantic 
seabed and of many deep-sea animals and plants. 

During the German expedition of the Meteor from 
1925 to 1927, scientists performed the first extensive sur- 
vey of the South Atlantic Ocean below the surface. They 
gathered conclusive evidence for the existence of the 
Mid-Atlantic Ridge. 

New techniques. By the mid-1960's, sonar and other 
electronic devices enabled geologists to chart much of 
the Atlantic floor. Beginning in 1968, deep sea drilling of 
sediments and rocks from the ocean floor provided new 
information about the ocean basins. Scientists found evi- 
dence to support the theory that the Atlantic formed by 
seafloor spreading over the past 180 million years. They 
also learned more about the geology and mineral re- 
sources of the continental shelf. 

During the late 1900's and early 2000's, oceanographic 
studies of the Atlantic assembled large teams of scien- 
tists from many countries. Important scientific studies in- 
cluded the Geochemical Ocean Section Studies 
(GEOSECS), an international project begun in 1971 to in- 
vestigate the chemical properties of ocean water. The 
Joint Global Ocean Flux Study {JGOFS) analyzed the role 
of carbon in the world’s oceans. The World Ocean Cir- 
culation Experiment (WOCE) was a 40-nation effort to un- 
derstand ocean circulation. 

The technologies developed for oceanic studies cre- 
ated new opportunities in the area of submarine archae- 
ology. Explorers located many shipwrecks at the bottom 
of the Atlantic, including the 7itanic, in the late 1900's. 
Underwater archaeologists also explored sites from Ro- 
man times in the Mediterranean. These sites had re- 
mained undisturbed for about 1,000 years, and they of- 
fered new opportunities to learn about the past. 

Dana R. Kester 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Arctic Ocean Dias, Bartolomeu North Sea 
Atlantis Fishing industry Ocean 
Baltic Sea Grand Banks Plate tectonics 
Bermuda Triangle Gulf Stream (Plate move- 
Black Sea iceberg ment) 
Columbus, Labrador Current Sargasso Sea 
Christopher Mediterranean Southern Ocean 
Deep Sea 


Additional resources 


Couper, Alistair, ed. The Times Atlas and Encyclopedia of the 
Sea. 2nd ed. Harper, 1989. 

Ellis. Richard. Deep At/antic. Knopf, 1996. 

Emery, Kenneth O., and Uchupi, Elazar. The Geology of the At- 
lantic Ocean. Springer-Verlag, 1984. 

Waterlow, Julia. The Atiantic Ocean. Raintree Steck-Vaughn. 
1997. Younger readers. 


868 Atlantic Provinces 


Atlantic Provinces are the four Canadian provinces 
of New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova 
Scotia, and Prince Edward Island. Three of the prov- 
inces--New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward 
Island—are sometimes called the Maritime Provinces. 

New Brunswick and Nova Scotia form part of the 
Canadian mainland. Newfoundland and Labrador con- 
sists of the island of Newfoundland and the coast of 
Labrador, a part of the mainland. The Atlantic Provinces 
cover 208,612 square miles (540,303 square kilometers), 
or about 5 percent of the total area of Canada. 

About 8 percent of Canada’s people live in the Atlan- 
tic Provinces. The 2001 Canadian census reported that 
the region had a population of 2,285,729. About two- 
thirds of the people have some English ancestry. Other 
large ethnic groups include French, Irish, and Scottish. 
Indians make up 1 percent of the population. Over half 
the people live in cities or towns. The three largest com- 
munities of the region are, in order of size, Halifax, Nova 
Scotia; Cape Breton, Nova Scotia; and St. John’s, in New- 
foundland and Labrador. 

See also the articles on each of the Atlantic Provinces 
and their lists of Related articles. 

Atlantic States are states of the United States that lie 
south of New England and which border on the Atlantic 
Ocean or are closely tied to it economically. The Middle 
Atlantic States are New York, New Jersey, and Pennsyl- 
vania. The South Atlantic States are Delaware, Maryland, 
Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and 
Florida. West Virginia is sometimes included in the 
South Atlantic States. 

Atlantis was a legendary continent that many people 
believe sank into the Atlantic Ocean thousands of years 
ago. The first mention of Atlantis appeared during the 
300's B.C. in Critias and Timaeus, two works by the 
Greek philosopher Plato. According to Plato, a brilliant 
civilization once existed on Atlantis. But its people be- 
came corrupt and greedy, and so the gods punished 
them. During one day and night, great explosions shook 
Atlantis, and the continent sank into the sea. 

Plato's tale of Atlantis fascinated many people of later 
times. They developed various theories about the loca- 
tion of the continent and how it disappeared. A number 
of expeditions attempted to discover the remains of At- 
lantis. Some people have claimed that Atlantis was the 
basis of all later civilizations. A few have even predicted 
that the continent will someday rise from the sea. 

Today, many scholars believe Atlantis was actually the 
island of Thira in the Aegean Sea, about 70 miles (110 
kilometers) north of the larger island of Crete. Volcanic 
eruptions destroyed most of Thira about 1470 B.C. and 
largely wiped out the Minoan civilization, which had 
thrived on Thira and Crete. Scholars think these events 
inspired Plato's description of Atlantis. © Scott Littleton 
Atlas is a collection of maps usually displayed in a 
printed book or viewed on a computer. Most printed at 
lases also contain charts and tables. Many have pho 
tographs, including images taken by cameras on satel- 
lites. Most atlases show places on Earth, but there are 
also atlases of the moon, other planets, and the stars. 

Typical maps in atlases show countries, cities, and 
towns as well as land features, such as rivers and moun 
tains. Some maps show the distribution of a particular 
feature, such as population or rainfall, over an area. An 


Simon M. Evans 





WORLD BOOK photo by Steinkamp Ballogg 


An atlas aids the study of geography. Many atlases have large 
pages so the maps can show areas in detail. 


index lists the place names shown on the maps. The in- 
dex also tells where to find the places on the maps. 

Many atlases contain text related to information given 
in maps, charts, tables, and photographs. An atlas that 
covers a small area, such as a state, or a special subject, 
such as agriculture, often has a relatively large amount 
of text. A general atlas of the world has little text. 

Electronic atlases provide rapid access to maps. The 
user of an electronic atlas can type in a place name, and 
a map will show the location of the place. Some elec- 
tronic atlases have audio clips that describe the location. 

Electronic road atlases that are built into automobiles 
display maps on a small computer screen. A driver can 
set some of these atlases to make the map on the screen 
always show the location of the car. 

History. In the A.D. 100’s, Ptolemy, an astronomer and 
geographer who lived in Egypt, published what some 
historians consider the first atlas. This work contained a 
variety of maps as well as information on cartography, 
the study and making of maps. 

In the late 1500's, the Dutch cartographer Abraham 
Ortelius and the Flemish cartographer Gerardus Merca- 
tor developed more accurate atlases. These books con- 
tained maps of vast regions that were unknown to Ptole- 
my. Ortelius’s work, published in 1570, is considered the 
first modern atlas. Mercator’s work, which followed, 
was the first to use the title At/as for a collection of 
maps. At the front of the book was an illustration of the 
Greek god Atlas supporting Earth on his shoulders. 

Before printing was invented, cartographers drew all 
the maps in each atlas by hand. The invention of printing 
boosted atlas production. But cartographers still had to 
make by hand the woodcuts and metal engravings for 
the maps. Later, cartographers hand-drew maps that 
were photographically transferred to printing plates. To- 
day, they use computers to create maps. judy M. Olson 

See also Map. 

Atlas, in Greek mythology, was one of a group of gods 
called Titans. He was the son of the Titan lapetus and a 








Marble statue by an unknown Roman sculptor; Museo Archeologico 
Nazionale, Naples, Italy [EPA Alinari 


Atlas was forced by Zeus, king of the gods, to support the sky 
forever. In this sculpture, the sphere represents the sky. 


sea nymph named Clymene, and the brother of 
Prometheus. Atlas and the other Titans fought an unsuc- 
cessful war against Zeus and the other Olympian gods. 
Zeus punished Atlas by forcing him to stand and sup- 
port the sky on his shoulders forever. 

The famous Greek hero Hercules asked Atlas for help 
in taking the apples of the Hesperides (see Hesperides). 
Atlas went to get the apples, leaving Hercules to hold up 
the sky. When he returned with the apples, Atlas re- 
fused to take back the sky, hoping to force Hercules to 
support it permanently. But Hercules outwitted Atlas 
and deceived him into taking up the sky again. 

Atlas stood in the northwest region of what is now 





Atoll 869 


Africa. The Atlas Mountains, which are located in north- 
western Africa, were named for him. Books of maps also 
are named for Atlas. Many works of art show Atlas sup- 
porting the earth, rather than the sky, on his shoulders. 

William F. Hansen 
Atlas Mountains extend for 1,500 miles (2,410 kilome- 
ters) across northwestern Africa. They run from Cape 
Rhir on the Atlantic Ocean to Cape Bon on the Mediter- 
ranean Sea, and cross part of Morocco, Algeria, and 
Tunisia (see Africa [terrain map]). They were named for 
Atlas, the Greek Titan (see Atlas). 

The Atlas Mountains are made up of several chains 
that run from southwest to northeast. The southern 
chains are the Grand, or High, Atlas and Anti-Atlas in 
Morocco and the Saharan Atlas in Algeria. The southern 
and northern chains are separated by high plateaus. 
These northern Atlas chains rise along the Mediter- 
ranean coast. the Rif Atlas in Morocco; the Tell Atlas in 
Algeria; and the Tunisian Atlas. The highest peaks in the 
Atlas Mountains include Jebel Toubkal (13,665 ft, or 
4,165 m) and Irhil MGoun (13,356 ft, or 4,071 m) in Mo- 
roccos Grand Atlas. 

Phosphate rock, iron ore, and manganese are mined 
in the Atlas Mountains. Plant life of the northern regions 
resembles that of Mediterranean Europe. Esparto (alfa 
grass) grows on the high plateaus. It is used to make 
fiber, paper, and rope. Only scrubby vegetation grows 
on the southern slopes. Hartmut S. Walter 
ATM. See Automated teller machine. 

Atmosphere is a measure of atmospheric pressure. 
One atmosphere is a pressure 14.696 pounds per square 
inch of surface. One atmosphere equals 101.325 kilopas- 
cals in the metric system. See also Barometer; Boiling 
point; Pressure. 

Atmosphere is the mass of gases that surrounds a 
planet or other heavenly body. Scientists divide Earth's 
atmosphere into five layers: the troposphere, the strato- 
sphere, the mesosphere, the thermosphere, and the ex- 
osphere. For information on the atmospheres of other 
planets, see the separate articles such as Venus. See 
also Air; Earth (The atmosphere; Earth's early develop- 
ment); Mesosphere; Planet (The planets of our solar sys- 
tem); Stratosphere; Thermosphere; Troposphere. 
Atoll, AT ahi is a circular ring of coral in the open sea, 
built up on a sunken bank, or formed on the crater of a 


© Karen Lukas, Photo Researchers 





An atoll, such as the one 
shown in this photograph, is a 
circular island that surrounds 
a body of water called a /a- 
goon. The cross-section draw 
ing shows that the ring- 
shaped coral reef making up 
an atoll completely encloses 
the lagoon, dark area. 


870 Atom 


volcano that has sunk below the surface of the sea. A 
thin layer of soil generally lodges on the reef, and vege- 
tation springs up. Tropical plants thrive on the atoll, and 
it becomes a coral island. Atolls enclose shallow pools 
or lagoons. One or more channels usually connect the 
lagoon of most atolls to the surrounding sea, on the 
windward side. Atolls are found chiefly in the Pacific 
Ocean. See also Coral. 
Atom is one of the basic units of matter. Everything 
around us is made up of atoms. An atom is incredibly 
tiny—more than a million times smaller than the thick- 
ness of a human hair. The smallest speck that can be 
seen under an ordinary microscope contains more than 
10 billion atoms. The diameter of an atom ranges from 
about 0.1 to 0.5 nanometer. A nanometer is a billionth of 
a meter, Ors: oem inch. 

Atoms form the building blocks of the simplest sub- 
stances, the chemical elements. Familiar elements in- 
clude hydrogen, oxygen, iron, and lead. Each element 
consists of one basic kind of atom. Compounds are 
more complex substances made of two or more kinds of 
atoms linked in units called mo/ecules. Water, for exam- 
ple, is a compound in which each molecule consists of 
two atoms of hydrogen linked to one atom of oxygen. 

Atoms vary greatly in weight, but they are all about 
the same size. For example, an atom of plutonium, the 
heaviest element found in nature, weighs more than 200 
times as much as an atom of hydrogen, the lightest 
known element. However, the diameter of a plutonium 
atom is only about 3 times that of a hydrogen atom. 


Peter P Sakalowsky, Jr. 


The parts of an atom 


Tiny as atoms are, they consist of even more minute 
particles. The three basic types are protons, neutrons, 





Robert H. March, the contributor of this article, is Emeritus 
Protessor of Physics at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and 
the author of Physics for Poets. 





The parts of an atom 


An atom consists of three ba- 
sic types of particles called 
protons, neutrons, and elec- 
trons. Protons have a positive 
electric charge, and electrons 
have a negative charge. Neu- 
trons are electrically neutral. 
The protons and neutrons are 
clustered in the nuc/eus, a tiny 
region near the center of the 
atom. The electrons whirl at 
fantastic speeds through the 
empty space outside the 
atoms nucleus. 


Nucleus 


Proton 4 


Neutron ‘wal 


Electron © 








AV Crewe, M Ohtsuki, and M Utlaut, 
Ennco Ferm Institute, University of Chicago 


Individual atoms of the metals platinum and palladium magni- 
fied about 3 million times appear as yeliow dots in this photo 
made with an electron microscope. The yellow areas with red or 
purple centers are clusters of atoms. Color was added electroni- 
cally to improve the image. Atoms themselves have no color. 


and electrons. Each atom has a definite number of these 
subatomic particles. The protons and neutrons are 
crowded into the nuc/eus, an exceedingly tiny region at 
the center of the atom. If a hydrogen atom were about 4 
miles {6.4 kilometers) in diameter, its nucleus would be 
no bigger than a tennis ball. The rest of an atom outside 
the nucleus is mostly empty space. The electrons whirl 
through this space, completing billions of trips around 
the nucleus each millionth of a second. The fantastic 
speed of the electrons makes atoms behave as if they 
were solid, much as the fast-moving blades of a fan pre- 
vent a pencil from being pushed through them. 

Atoms are often compared to the solar system, with 


WORLD BOOs illustration by Leonard £ Morgan 













the nucleus corresponding to the sun and the electrons 
corresponding to the planets that orbit the sun. This 
comparison is not completely accurate, however. Unlike 
the planets, the electrons do not follow regular, orderly 
paths. In addition, the protons and neutrons constantly 
move about at random inside the nucleus. 

The nucleus makes up nearly all the mass of an 
atom. Mass is the quantity of matter in an atom. Each 
proton has a mass roughly equal to that of 1,836 elec- 
trons. It would take 1,839 electrons to equal a neutron’s 
mass. Each proton carries one unit of positive electric 
charge. Each electron carries one unit of negative 
charge. Neutrons have no charge. Under most condi- 
tions, an atom has the same number of protons and 
electrons, and so the atom is electrically neutral. 

Protons and neutrons are about 100,000 times smaller 
than atoms, but they are in turn made up of even smaller 
particles called quarks. Each proton and neutron con- 
sists of three quarks. In the laboratory, scientists can 
cause quarks to combine and form other kinds of sub- 
atomic particles besides protons and neutrons. All these 
other particles break down and change into ordinary 
particles in a small fraction of a second. Thus, none of 
them is found in ordinary atoms. However, scientists 
first learned that protons and neutrons consist of quarks 
through the study of other subatomic particles. For in- 
formation on these other particles, see Subatomic parti- 
cle and the separate articles on subatomic particles 
listed in the Re/ated articles at the end of this article. 

The electrons, unlike the protons and neutrons, do 
not seem to have smaller parts. Electrons have very little 
mass. The mass of an electron in grams may be written 
with a decimal point followed by 27 zeros and a 9. 

Opposite electric charges attract. The positively 
charged nucleus therefore exerts a force on the nega- 
tively charged electrons that keeps them within the 
atom. However, each electron has energy and so is able 
to resist the attraction of the nucleus. The more energy 
an electron has, the farther from the nucleus it will be. 


How atoms compare 
in weight and size 


Atoms vary greatly in weight, 
but they are all about the 
same size. The smallest and | oe. } 
lightest atom is the hydrogen | 
atom. It consists of 1 proton 
and 1 electron. The largest 
and heaviest atom found in 
nature is the plutonium atom. 
It has 94 protons, 150 neu- 
trons, and 94 electrons. An 
atom of plutonium weighs 
more than 200 times as much 
as an atom of hydrogen. How- 
ever, a plutonium atom is only 
about 3 times as large in di- 
ameter as a hydrogen atom. 


Hydrogen atam 





Atom 87] 


Thus, electrons are arranged in she//s at various dis- 
tances from the nucleus according to how much energy 
they have. Electrons with the least energy are in inner 
shells, and those with more energy are in outer shells. 

Each electron shell is labeled with a number. The 
shell closest to the nucleus is called shell 1. The other 
shells, in order of increasing distance from the nucleus, 
are shells 2, 3, 4,5, 6, and 7. The shells are sometimes 
named by the letters K, L, M, N, O, P, and Q. Each shell 
can hold only a limited number of electrons. Shell 1 can 
hold no more than 2 electrons. Shell 2 can hold 8 elec- 
trons, shell 3 can hold 18, and shell 4 can hold 32. In the- 
ory, Shell 5 can hold 50 electrons, shell 6 can hold 72, 
and shell 7 can hold 98. However, these outer shells are 
never completely filled. 


The properties of atoms 


The atomic number tells how many protons an 
atom has. All atoms of the same element have the same 
number of protons. For example, every hydrogen atom 
has a single proton, and so the atomic number of hydro- 
gen is 1. The atomic numbers for other natural elements 
range successively up to 92 for uranium, which has 92 
protons in each atom. Tiny amounts of plutonium, which 
has an atomic number of 94, also occur naturally. Ele- 
ments whose atoms have more than 92 protons can be 
created in the laboratory. 

The atomic number determines an elements place in 
the periodic table. This table organizes the elements 
into groups with similar chemical properties. For a re- 
production of the table, see Element, Chemical. 

The mass number is the sum of the protons and 
neutrons in an atom. Although all atoms of an element 
have the same number of protons, they may have differ- 
ent numbers of neutrons. Atoms that have the same 
number of protons but different numbers of neutrons 
are called /sotopes. 

Most of the elements in nature have more than one 
isotope. Hydrogen, for example, has three. In the most 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Leonard E Morgan 





872 Atom 


Electron shells and An atom’s electrons are arranged in she//s. Starting with the innermost, the shells are numbered 1 


chemical behavior 


through 7. Each shell can hold only a certain numher of electrons. For example, shell 2 can hold 


eight. In chemical reactions, the outermost shell gains, loses, or shares electrons. 


Shell 2 
+— Shell 1 


Fluorine otom 


A fluorine atom has seven electrons in 
shell 2. The atom fills the shell by accept- 
ing one electron from another atom. 


common hydrogen isotope, the nucleus consists only of 
a proton. In the two other hydrogen isotopes, the nu- 
cleus consists of one or two neutrons in addition to the 
proton. Scientists use the mass number to distinguish 
the three isotopes as hydrogen 1, hydrogen 2, and hy- 
drogen 3. They also refer to hydrogen 1 as protiurn, to 
hydrogen 2 as deuterium, and to hydrogen 3 as ¢ritium. 

In most lighter elements, the nucleus of each atom 
contains about an equal number of protons and neu- 
trons. Most heavier elements, however, have more neu- 
trons than protons. The heaviest elements have about 3 
neutrons for every 2 protons. For example, uranium 238 
has 146 neutrons and 92 protons. 

Atoms that have the same mass number but different 
atomic numbers are called /sobars. Thus, isobars are 
atoms of different elements. For example, the isobars 
argon and calcium have a mass number of 40, but 
argon’s atomic number is 18 and calciuim’s is 20. 

Atomic weight is the weight of an atom expressed in 
atomic mass units (amu). One amu, also called a da/ton, 
equals =. the weight of an atom of carbon 12. For most 
atoms, the weight in amu is extremely close to the mass 
number. Atomic mass units are very small. There are 602 
billion trillion amu in a gram. 

Scientists determine the atomic weight of an element 
with more than one isotope by averaging the weights of 
all the isotopes in the proportions in which they occur 


The isotopes 
of hydrogen 


Proton 
Isotopes are atoms of the 
same element that have differ 
ent numbers of neutrons. Hy 
drogen, for example. has 
three isotopes. In protium, the 
most common hydrogen iso- 
tope, the nucleus consists of 
one proton. The nucleus of an 
atom of deuterium has one 
proton and one neutron. Two es 
neutrons and a proton make 
up the nucleus of the third hy- 
drogen isotope, (rium. 


Protium otom 





Neon otom 





In a neon atom, shell 2 is filled. As a re- 
sult, neon generally does not enter into 
chemical reactions with other atoms. 


Electron ~~ iJ 





WORLD BOOK diagrams by Zorica Dabich 


Shell 2 
— Shell 1 


Sodium atom 





A sodium atom tends to lose its single 
electron in shell 3. The filled shell 2 then 
becomes the outermost shell. 


in nature. For example, the atomic weight of chlorine is 
35.453 amu. This value is an average for the two isotopes 
chlorine 35 (atomic weight 34.96885) and chlorine 37 
(atomic weight 36.96590) in their natural proportions. 

Electric charge. Although an atom is normally elec- 
trically neutral, it can lose or gain a few electrons in 
some chemical reactions or in a collision with an elec- 
tron or another atom. This gain or loss of electrons pro- 
duces an electrically charged atom called an jon. An 
atom that loses electrons becomes a positive ion, and an 
atom that gains electrons becomes a negative ion. The 
gain or loss of electrons is called /onization. 

Chemical behavior. The chemical behavior of an 
atom is determined largely by the number of electrons 
in its outermost shell. When atoms combine and form 
molecules, electrons in the outermost shell are either 
transferred from one atom to another or shared be- 
tween atoms. The number of electrons involved in this 
process is called the va/ence. The atoms of some ele- 
ments can have more than one valence, depending on 
the number and kind of atoms with which they combine. 

If an atom tends to lose electrons to other atoms, its 
valence is positive. If an atom tends to gain electrons, its 
valence is negative. For example, sodium tends to lose 
its one electron and thus has a valence of +1. Chlorine 
tends to accept one electron from another atom and so 
has a valence of —1. A molecule of ordinary table salt 


WORLD BOOK diagram by Zorica Dabich 














Proton Proton 


| 





One neutron Two neutrons 








Electron Electron 





Deuterium otom Tritium otom 








consists of one atom of sodium linked to ore atom of 
chlorine. The sodium atom donates the electron that 
chlorine is able to accept. 

Radioactivity. In some atoms, the nucleus can 
change naturally. Such an atom is called radioactive. The 
change in the nucleus may be only in the arrangement 
of the protons and neutrons. Or the actual number of 
protons and neutrons may change. When a nucleus 
changes, it gives off radiation. This radiation consists of 
alpha or beta particles or gamma rays. Atoms of urani- 
um, radium, and all other elements heavier than bis- 
muth are radioactive. Some isotopes of lighter elements 
are also radioactive. In addition, physicists can create ra- 
dioactive isotopes of nearly all elements in a laboratory 
by bombarding atoms with subatomic particles. 

The type of radiation given off by a radioactive nucle- 
us depends on the way the nucleus changes. Gamma 
rays are given off if only the arrangement of the protons 
and neutrons in the nucleus changes. But alpha or beta 
radiation is given off if the number of protons and neu- 
trons in the nucleus changes. The atom then becomes 
an atom of a different element. This process is called 
transmutation, See Transmutation of elements. 


The forces within an atom 


The field of physics called quantum mechanics deals 
with the forces inside an atom and the motions of sub- 
atomic particles. This field began in 1913, when the Dan- 
ish physicist Niels Bohr used the quantum theory to ex- 
plain the motion of electrons in atoms. See Quantum 
mechanics. 

Electron energy levels. According to quantum me- 
chanics, electrons cannot have just any amount of ener- 
gy. Instead, electrons are restricted to a limited set of 
motions, each of which has a specific value of energy. 
These motions are called quantum states or energy lev- 
els. When an electron is in a given quantum state, it 
does not absorb or give off energy. For this reason, an 
atom can gain or lose energy only if one or more elec- 
trons change their quantum state. 

Just as water always seeks its lowest possible level, 
electrons seek the state of lowest energy. However, only 
one electron at a time can occupy each quantum state. If 
the lower states are filled, other electrons are forced to 
occupy higher states. !f all electrons are in the lowest 
possible state, the atom is in its ground state. This condi- 
tion is normal for atoms at ordinary temperatures. 

When matter is heated to temperatures higher than a 
few hundred degrees, energy is available to raise one or 
more electrons to a higher energy level. The atom is 
then in an excited state. However, atoms rarely remain in 
an excited state for more than a fraction of a second. An 
excited electron almost immediately drops to a lower 
State and continues dropping until the atom returns to 
its ground state. At each succeeding drop, the electron 
gives off a tiny packet of radiant energy called a photon. 
The energy of the photon equals the difference between 
the two energy levels of the electron. The photons given 
off by electrons are detected as visible light and other 
forms of electromagnetic radiation. 

Bohr originally described the quantum states of elec- 
trons as orbits like those of the planets around the sun. 
However, physicists now know that this description is 
incorrect because an electron is not simply a particle. 











Atom 873 


An electron also has some characteristics of a wave. It is 
difficult to imagine how something could be both a par- 
ticle and a wave. This difficulty is one of the problems 
scientists have in trying to describe the atom to nonsci- 
entists. To do so, scientists must use familiar ideas 
based on our knowledge of the world as we observe it. 
But conditions inside the tiny atom differ greatly from 
those in our everyday world. For this reason, physicists 
can describe the motions of electrons accurately and 
completely only in mathematical terms. 

Forces in the nucleus. The quantum rules that gov- 
ern the motions of electrons also apply to the motions 
of protons and neutrons clustered inside the nucleus. 
However, the force that keeps the nuclear particles 
together differs greatly from the electrical attraction that 
holds the electrons within the atom. Each nuclear parti- 
cle is attracted to its nearest neighbor by what is called 
the strong nuclear force or strong interaction. Like 
electric charges repel each other. However, the power- 


Electron energy levels in an atom 


An electron in an atom cannot have just any amount of energy. 
Instead, it is restricted to a limited set of motions, each with a 
specific value of energy. These motions are called energy levels 
or quantum states. An electron absorbs or gives off energy only 
when it changes from one energy level to another. 

WORLD BOOK diagrams by Zorica Dabich 


Electron 


Nucleus 


O 


In this atom, the electron is in its lowest possible energy level. 
Physicists say that such an atom is in its ground state. 


Nucleus Electron 
| 


Heating the atom provides energy to raise the electron to a high- 
er energy level. The atom is now in an excited state. 


Nucleus Electron 


The electron drops back almost immediately. As it does so, it 
gives off energy in the form of a photon (particle of light). 


874 Atom 


ful nuclear force overcomes the mutual repulsion of the 
positively charged protons. It thus keeps the nucleus 
from flying apart. This force dies off quickly, however, 
unless the nuclear particles are extremely close to- 
gether. Electrons are immune to the nuclear force. 

The nuclear force is highly complicated, and no exact 
mathematical description of it has been formulated. 
Nevertheless, a theory known as the nuclear shell model 
provides reasonably accurate estimates of the energy 
levels in the nucleus. 

One neutron and one proton can occupy each quan- 
tum state in the nucleus. For this reason, a light nucleus 
has a nearly equal number of protons and neutrons. But 
a proton and a neutron in the same state do not have the 
same amount of energy. Each proton is electrically re- 
pelled by all other protons in the nucleus, which in- 
creases its energy. In a nucleus with many protons, the 
difference in energy levels between protons and neu- 
trons is considerable, and more low-energy states are 
available for neutrons than for protons. This is why a 
heavy nucleus has more neutrons than protons. 


How scientists study atoms 


Scientists use a variety of instruments and techniques 
to study atoms. The devices and methods used depend 
on whether the researchers are studying atoms them- 
selves, electrons, nuclear particles, or quarks. 

Researchers use X rays to study the arrangements of 
atoms in regular, repeated patterns, such as in crystals. 
When X rays pass through a crystal, the atoms in the 
crystal diffract (spread out) the X rays in a certain way. 
These diffracted rays produce patterns on photographic 
film that reveal how far apart the atoms are and how 
they are arranged. Extremely powerful scanning elec- 
tron microscopes, scanning tunneling microscopes, and 
field-emission microscopes enable scientists to observe 
the positions of individual atoms. However, these instru- 
ments cannot reveal any details of the structure of 
atoms. 

Scientists study the energies of electrons chiefly by 
analyzing the light given off by atoms in heated gases. 
Instruments called spectrometers break up the light into 
a spectrum with a separate line for each wavelength of 
light. Each wavelength is related to the difference in en- 





ergy between two quantum States in the atom. After de- 
termining the wavelengths, scientists can draw up a 
complete list of energy levels. With the aid of quantum 
mechanics, they can then obtain a description of the 
electron motions in the atom. 

Most of what scientists know about nuclear structure 
has come from experiments with particle accelerators. 
These devices bombard the nucleus with beams of 
high-energy electrons or protons. The swift-moving 
electrons or protons can disrupt the motion of particles 
in the nucleus and occasionally even knock some of 
them loose. In some experiments, whole nuclei are ac- 
celerated and smashed into stationary nuclei. Nuclear 
physicists have developed a wide variety of detectors 
for observing the particles that emerge from these colli- 
sions. Most of the detectors produce an electric signal 
when a particle passes through them. 

Particle accelerators are also used to study the behav- 
ior of quarks. But such studies require particles with 
much greater energies than those used to study atomic 
nuclei. Thus, much more powerful accelerators are re- 
quired. 


Development of the atomic theory 


The idea that everything is made up of a few simple 
parts originated during the 400s B.C in the philosophy 
of atomism. Atomism was founded by the Greek philos- 
opher Leucippus, but his disciple Democritus devel- 
oped the philosophy more fully. Democritus gave his 
basic particle the name atom, which means uncuttable. 
He imagined atoms as small, hard particles, all com- 
posed of the same substance but of different sizes and 
shapes. During the 300s B.C, a Greek philosopher 
named Epicurus incorporated Democritus's ideas about 
atoms into his philosophy. About 50 B.C, the Roman phi- 
losopher and poet Lucretius presented the fundamental 
principles of atomism in his long poem, On the Nature 
of Things. See Atomism. 

During the Middle Ages, the idea of atoms was 
largely ignored. This neglect resulted partly from the 
fact that atomism had been rejected by Aristotle, an an- 
cient Greek philosopher whose theories dominated me- 
dieval philosophy and science. The idea that atoms form 
the basic units of all matter did survive, however. During 


Fermilab Visual Media Services 


Tracks of particles that 
make up atoms and other bits 
of matter are displayed on 
computers at a research labo- 
ratory, /eft At this lab, a ma- 
chine called a particle accel- 
erator collides particles at 
almost the speed of light. The 
collisions produce other par- 
ticles whose tracks are re- 
corded by computerized de- 
tectors. Researchers use 
computer displays and print- 
outs to study the particles. 














the 1500's and 1600's, such founders of modern science 
as Francis Bacon and Isaac Newton of England and 
Galileo of Italy believed in atoms. But those scientists 
could add little more to the atomic theory than Democri- 
tus had described. 

The birth of the modern atomic theory. In 1750, 
Rudjer Boscovich, a scientist born in what is now Croa- 
tia, suggested that Democritus might have been wrong 
in believing that atoms are “uncuttable.” Boscovich 
thought that atoms contain smaller parts, which in turn 
contain still smaller parts, and so forth down to the fun- 
damental building blocks of matter. He felt that these 
building blocks must be geometric points with no size 
at all. Today, most atomic physicists accept a modern 
form of this idea. 

The development of the atomic theory advanced 
greatly when chemistry became an exact science during 
the late 1700's. Chemists discovered that they could 
combine elements to form compounds only in certain 
fixed proportions according to mass. In 1803, a British 
chemist named John Dalton developed an atomic theory 
to explain this discovery. Dalton proposed that each ele- 
ment consists of a particular kind of atom and that the 
varying properties of the elements result from differ- 





Atom 875 


ences in their atoms. He further suggested that all atoms 
of a given element are identical in size, shape, and mass. 
According to Dalton’s theory, when atoms combine and 
form a particular compound, they always combine ina 
specific numerical ratio. As a result, the composition by 
mass of a particular compound is always the same. 

The first descriptions of atomic structure. In 1897, 
a British physicist named Joseph John Thomson discov- 
ered that atoms are “cuttable.” He made this discovery 
while studying the rays that travel between charged 
metal plates in a vacuum tube. Thomson determined 
that the rays consisted of lightweight, negatively 
charged particles. He had thus discovered electrons. 
Thomson immediately realized that the electrons must 
be part of the atom. He proposed a model of the atom in 
which negatively charged electrons were embedded in 
a positively charged sphere. Although Thomsonss de- 
scription was far from correct, his work encouraged 
other scientists to investigate the structure of the atom. 

In 1911, the British physicist Ernest Rutherford pre- 
sented his theory of atomic structure. Rutherford, a for- 
mer student of Thomsonss, declared that nearly all the 
mass of an atom is concentrated in a tiny nucleus. He 
also stated that the nucleus is surrounded by electrons 


Models of the atom —_ During the 1900's, physicists proposed various models of atomic structure. These diagrams show the 
three most important early models and a present-day model. 


Cross section of — 
positively 

chorged 

sphere 


The Thomson model was proposed by the British physicist 
Joseph John Thomson in 1904. It showed the electrons embed- 
ded in a positively charged sphere like seeds in a watermelon. 


Electron 


Nucleus 


The Bohr model, proposed in 1913 by the Danish physicist 
Niels Bohr, described the electron structure. It showed the elec- 
trons traveling in fixed orbits around the nucleus. 





WORLD BOOK diagrams by Zorica Dabich 





The Rutherford model showed the atom’s mass concentrated 
in a positively charged nucleus surrounded by electrons. Ernest 
Rutherford, a British physicist, proposed this model in 1911. 


Electron cloud 


Nucleus 





The electron cloud model, a currently accepted model, indi- 
cates the regions within the atom where electrons may be found. 
Electrons are most likely to be where a cloud is darkest. 


876 Atom 


traveling at tremendous speeds through the atom’s out- 
er regions. 

Rutherford based his theory on the results of experi- 
ments in which he bombarded thin sheets of gold with 
alpha particles. Most of the particles passed through the 
sheets, which showed that the gold atoms must Consist 
chiefly of empty space. But some particles bounced 
back as if they had hit something solid. Rutherford con- 
cluded that these particles had been reflected by a 
strong force from the tiny but heavy nucleus of an atom. 

Rutherford’s theory did not explain the arrangement 
of electrons in atoms. In 1913, however, a description of 
the electron structure was proposed by Niels Bohr, a 
Danish physicist who had worked with Rutherford. Bohr 
suggested that electrons could travel only in a certain 
set of orbits around the nucleus. Bohr's original, crude 
picture of the atom was inadequate, but many of the 
ideas behind it proved correct. In 1924, the French 
physicist Louis de Broglie proposed that electrons have 
some properties of waves. By 1928, a correct description 
of the arrangement of electrons had been obtained with 
the help of other physicists, especially Erwin Schr6- 
dinger and Wolfgang Pauli of Austria and Max Born and 
Werner Heisenberg of Germany. 

Studying the nucleus. Although physicists under- 
stood the motions of electrons by 1928, the nucleus re- 
mained largely a mystery. Protons had been identified in 
1902, and Rutherford had proposed in 1914 that they 
must form part of the nucleus. In 1932, a British physicist 
named James Chadwick discovered the nucleus also 
contains uncharged particles, or neutrons. Also in the 
early 1930's, scientists developed particle accelerators 
capable of producing energies high enough to study 
the nucleus. 

The pioneers of nuclear physics did not expect that 
they would soon see a practical use for their knowledge. 
In 1938, however, researchers discovered that bombard- 
ing the nucleus of a uranium atom with a neutron 
caused the nucleus to split into two parts and release 
energy. They called the process nuclear fission. The dis- 
covery came a few months before the start of World 
War II in 1939, and fission was used in atomic bombs 
that helped end the war in 1945. 

The development of atomic weapons made govern- 
ments aware of the importance of nuclear physics. As a 
result, they provided great sums of money for nuclear 
research after the war. The funds made possible the 
construction of accelerators of increasing size and ener- 
gy. As these accelerators revealed more and more de- 
tails of the nucleus, researchers realized that the proton 
and neutron could not be simple objects. They also 
found that the neutron did not completely lack an elec- 
tric charge. Instead, it contained equal amounts of posi- 
tive and negative charge. In addition, researchers dis- 
covered hundreds of new particles. These particles 
were sufficiently similar to one another and to protons 


and neutrons to suggest that all nuclear particles might 
be merely different arrangements of a few simple parts. 
Recent discoveries. By 1964, researchers had turned 
up enough clues to indicate what the fundamental parts 
of protons, neutrons, and other nuclear particles might 


be like. Two California Institute of Technology physi- 
cists, the American Murray Gell-Mann and Russian-bora 
George Zweig, thus proposed a theory describing these 





parts. Gell-Mann named the parts quarks. According to 
this theory, quarks are always combined in groups of 
two or three. The original theory required only three 
kinds of quarks, up (or u) down(or d) and strange lor s} 
to make up protons, neutrons, and the other particles. 
But by 1977, experimenters had found not only the u, d, 
and s, but also a charm (or c/and a bottom (or b/ quark. 

Physicists concluded that a sixth quark, which they 
named the top (or t), must also exist. In 1995, scientists at 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory near Batavia, IIli- 
nois, announced that they had found the top quark. 
Physicists are almost certain that there are no more 
quarks to discover. Robert H. March 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Biographies 


Democritus 
Rutherford, Ernest 
Thomson, Sir Joseph J. 


Bohr, Niels 
Chadwick, Sir James 
Dalton, John 


Subatomic particles 


Baryon Hadron Neutrino Quark 
Boson Higgs boson _— Neutron Subatomic 
Electron Lepton Proton particle 
Fermion Meson Psi particle Tachyon 
Gluon Muon 

Other related articles 
Antimatter Magnetism (Mag- Particle detector 
Atomism netism in atoms) Quantum mechan- 


Electricity (Atoms) Molecule ics 


Element, Chemical | Nanotechnology Radiation 
Fission Nuclear energy Transmutation of 
Fusion Nuclear physics elements 
lon Nuclear weapon Valence 
Isotope Particle accelerator 
Outline 


I. The parts of an atom 
A. The nucleus 
B. The electrons 
ll. The properties of atoms 
A. The atomic number 
B. The mass number E. Chemical behavior 
C Atomic weight F. Radioactivity 
Il. The forces within an atom 
A. Electron energy levels 
B. Forces in the nucleus 
IV. How scientists study atoms 
V. Development of the atomic theory 


D. Electric charge 


Questions 


What is the difference between an atom’s mass number and its 
atomic number 

What three basic types of particles make up an atom? 

Why does a heavy nucleus have more neutrons than protons? 

What determines the chemical behavior of an atom? 

When did the idea of atoms originate? 

How do physicists create radioactive isotopes in a laboratory? 

On what did Ernest Rutherford base his theory of atomic struc- 
ture? 

How does the size of a proton compare with that of an atom? 

What is an fon? How are ions produced? 

How do scientists study the energies of electrons? 


Additional resources 


Level I 

Cooper, Chris. Matter. Dorling Kindersley, 1992. 

Kerrod, Robin. Matter and Materials. Benchmark Bks., 1996. 

Lampton, Christopher. Particle Physics. Enslow, 1991. 

Stwertka, Albert. The World of Atoms and Quarks. 21st Century 
B8ks., 1995.Whitman, 1995. 








Level i 

Asimov, !saac. Atom: Journey Across the Subatomic Cosinos. 
1991. Reprint. Truman Talley, 1992. 

Drake, Gordon W., ed. Afomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics 
Handbook Am. \nst of Physics, 1996. 

Haken, Herman, and Wolf, H. C. The Physics of Atoms and Quan- 
ta. 5th ed. Springer-Verlag, 1996. 

Lederman, Leon M., and Schramm, D. N. From Quarks to the 
Cosmos. 1989. Reprint W. H. Freeman, 1995. 

Von Baeyer, Hans C. Taming the Atom: The Emergence of the 
Visible Microworld. 1992. Reprint Random Hse., 1995. 


Atomic bomb. See Nuclear weapon. 

Atomic clock is a device for measuring time intervals 
by measuring the frequency of electromagnetic waves 
given off or absorbed by atoms or molecules. In an 
atomic clock, such frequencies are extraordinarily sta- 
ble, so the clock is very accurate. Some clocks would 
gain or lose no more than a second in 1 million years. 
Atoms and molecules used in atomic clocks include ce- 
sium atoms, hydrogen atoms, and molecules of ammo- 
nia gas. Atomic clocks control the time signals sent out 
to the world from national laboratories, such as the Na- 
tional Institute of Standards and Technology. In 1958, 
scientists throughout the world adopted the vibration 
rate of an atomic clock as the standard for defining time 
units. James Jespersen 

Atomic energy. See Nuclear energy. 

Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) was a United 
States government agency that directed the develop- 
ment and use of atomic energy. Created by Congress in 
1946, the AEC emphasized military over civilian opera- 
tions. In 1954, however, it began to allow private compa- 
nies to develop technologies that make use of atomic 
energy, such as nuclear power plants. Congress abol- 
ished the commission in 1974. Its research operations 
were transferred to the Energy Research and Develop- 
ment Administration and later to the Department of En- 
ergy. A new body, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 
took over the AEC functions of licensing and regulating 
nuclear power plants. Richard F. Hirsh 

See also Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 

Atomic fission. See Nuclear energy (introduction; 
Nuclear fission); Fission. 

Atomic fusion. See Nuclear energy (Nuclear fusion); 
Fusion. 

Atomic reactor. See Nuclear energy. 

Atomic weapon. See Nuclear weapon. 

Atomism, AT uh mihz uhm, is a philosophical view 
that developed in Greece during the 400s B.C. The atom- 
ists asserted that reality consisted of two things: atoms 
and void. The term atom comes from the Greek word 
atomos, Which means uncuttable. According to the 
atomists, atoms are invisible and indivisible bits of mat- 
ter that are ungenerated and indestructible. They are un- 
limited in number and vary in size, shape, and arrange- 
ment. Atoms have come together by chance to form our 
world and the things in it as well as innumerable other 
worlds. 

The atomists believed the motion of the atoms is gov- 
erned by necessity. They also believed every event is the 
result of a series of collisions. The atomists theorized 
that events can be predicted in advance. The philoso- 
pher Epicurus introduced a major revision with the idea 
that atoms are subject to an occasional swerve. Epicurus 
thought the swerve broke the pattern of predetermined 


Atropine 877 


events and provided a basis for free will. 

The atomistic philosophy was formulated by Leucip- 
pus during the second half of the 400’s B.C. It was devel- 
oped in detail by Democritus, taken over and modified 
somewhat by Epicurus, and popularized by the Roman 
poet Lucretius. The best source for knowledge of Greek 
atomism comes from Lucretiuss poem On the Nature of 
Things. Carl A. Huffman 

See also Democritus; Epicurus; Leucippus; Lucretius; 
Materialism. 

Atrium, AY tree uhm, was the central room of early 
Roman houses. The atrium contained the hearth and 
was used for cooking, sleeping, and entertaining. A hole 
in the center of the roof allowed the smoke to escape. 
As the design of Roman houses became more ad- 
vanced, the kitchen and hearth were removed to other 
locations. The atrium remained as a formal reception 
area and center of family life. Rain falling through the 
roof opening was caught in a central marble basin 
called the jmp/uvium. A typical later Roman atrium was 
richly decorated. See Rome, Ancient (picture: A Roman 
house). 

In later times, the word atrium came to refer to any 
Open courtyard surrounded by an arcade. An atrium led 
to the entrance of many early Christian churches from 
the 300's to the 500’s. See Architecture (Early Christian 


architecture; picture). William J. Hennessey 





SCALA Art WieuLrce 
The atrium was a courtlike reception room in Roman houses. 
This ruined atrium was part of the House of the Faun at Pompeii. 


Atrocity. See Concentration camp; Genocide; Nurem- 
berg trials; Torture; War crime. 

Atrophy, A7 rub fee, is the normal or abnormal shrink- 
ing of any part of the body. Some body tissues may 
shrink in size as a result of disease. For example, pro- 
gressive muscular atrophy, a disease of a part of the 
spinal cord, causes certain muscles to atrophy. People 
with this disease lose the ability to move their arms and 
legs. The name atrophy comes from two Greek words 
meaning not nourished. Mary Frances Picciano 
Atropine, A7 ro/ peen, is a drug derived from several 
plants in the nightshade family, especially from a bushy 


878 Atropos 


plant called belladonna or deadly nightshade. Physicians 
now also use numerous synthetic versions of atropine 
because they provide shorter-lasting effects and work 
more selectively on specitic organs of the body. 

Physicians use atropine and its synthetic versions dur- 
ing eye examinations to relax the muscles of the eye and 
to cause the pupil to dilate (expand). The drug also re- 
lieves certain types of noninfectious diarrhea and is use- 
ful as a remedy for poisoning by certain pesticides and 
nerve gases. A common side effect of atropine is dry 
mouth. 

Atropine works by counteracting the effect of acety/- 
choline, a body chemical that transmits nerve impulses. 
The drug is extremely powerful and should never be 
taken without a prescription and supervision by a physi- 
cian. High doses can cause hallucinations (seeing, hear- 
ing, or feeling things that do not exist), rapid heartbeat, 
and coma. Frank Welsch 

See also Belladonna. 

Atropos. See Fates. 

Atsina Indians. See Gros Ventre Indians. 

Attaché, 47 uh SHAY, is an officer attached to a diplo- 
matic office. The word is French for attached. An attache 
is usually an officer of the army, navy, or air force, and is 
called a military, naval, or air attache. The United States 
often sends officers from the Departments of Com- 
merce, Agriculture, or Labor as attachés to an ambas- 
sador. This officer is called a commercial, agricultural, 
or labor attache. Most large countries send attaches of 
some kind. The United Kingdom assigns scientific- 
research attachés to important embassies. 

Cultural and social-welfare officers have attache sta- 
tus. Attaches usually accompany ambassadors or other 
high officials on missions of state. Their duties are simi- 
lar to those of secretaries. Some attachés of the U.S. 
government are assigned to consular offices, particular- 
ly in larger cities of the world. Most are appointed from 
the list of foreign-service officers in the Department of 
State. But many attaches with special skills and experi- 
ence are selected from private industry. 

Michael P Sullivan 
Attachment is the legal term for a court order to 
seize a person or a persons property. It was used in 
England so long ago that no record of its beginnings ex- 
ists. Some people believe that the English got attach- 
ment from the Romans. At first, attachment provided a 
way of forcing a person to come to court An officer 
would take the person's horse, plow, or furniture. The 
owner had to go to court to get these goods back. To- 
day, attachment is used chiefly against debtors. If peo- 
ple leave the state, itis hard to collect any debts they left 
behind. But if they also leave some property. an attach- 
ment of the property will protect the person to whom 
the debt is owed. This person can then sue for the debt. 
and, if he or she wins, the attached property can be sold 
to satisfy the claim. In many states, the person obtaining 
the attachment has to put up a bond or security for pay- 
ment of damages, in the event that the court later deter- 
mines that there was no right to attach the property. 
Writs of attachment formerly were issued against peo- 
ple as well as goods. They now are used in this way as a 
rule only to seize a person who is in comtempt of court 
See also Contempt Debt Garnishment. 


james L Winokur 





Attainder, uh TAYN duhr, is a legal term for the loss 
of civil rights by an outlawed person or a person sen- 
tenced to death. According to old English law, such 
people lost their rights to property. Their land and per- 
sonal belongings were taken from them. Because they 
were judged to have suffered fainting (corruption of 
blood), they could not inherit property or leave property 
to anyone. Parliament put an end to attainder in Britain 
in 1870, and now almost all countries have abolished it 
In the United States, people may lose their civil rights 
for the crime of treason, but the Constitution (Article III, 
Section 3 [2)) states their punishment may not affect their 
families, who may inherit their property. 

A bill of attainder is an act passed by a legislature 
which aftaints some person or group and thus takes 
away property and civil rights without a trial. To be clas- 
sified as a bill of attainder, the act must punish. Mere 
regulations are not considered bills of attainder. Bills of 
attainder are not legal in most countries. In the United 
States, the Constitution (Article I, Section 9 (3]) prohibits 
the nation or any state from passing such a bill. 

After the American Civil War (1861-1865), Congress 
passed a law taking away the property of some people 
it called rebels. But the courts held that Congress could 
only take the rents or income from such property dur- 
ing the lifetime of the rebels, and could not deprive 
their heirs of the property. Jean Appleman 
Attar, AT uhr, is a sweet-smelling oil obtained from 
rose petals. It is used to give a rose odor to perfumes. 
The most fragrant attar comes from a kind of red rose 
grown in Bulgaria and is used only in expensive 
womens fragrances. A less fragrant attar is taken from a 
white rose grown in Bulgaria. In addition, attar comes 
from roses grown in Ukraine, Turkey, Morocco, and 
France. 

Producers obtain attar by placing rose petals in a tank 
and passing steam through them. The steam is collected 
in large flasks, where it cools and condenses (changes 
to a liquid). The attar floats to the top of the liquid and 
can then be removed. Patricia Ann Mullen 
Attention deficit disorder is a behavior problem in 
which people have unusual difficulty paying attention, 
sitting still, or controlling their impulses. The formal 
term for attention deficit disorder is attention-deficit hy- 
peractivity disorder (ADHD). ADHD is the most common 
behavior problem in children. The disorder is diag- 
nosed in boys more than twice as often as in girls. A sig- 
nificant number of teen-agers and adults also have 
ADHD. 

Most experts recognize three types of ADHD. The 
hyperactive-impulsive type is also called hyperactivity. 
Children with this type of ADHD are excessively fidgety 
and restless. They often cannot wait their turn to speak 
in class or to take part in a group activity. People with 
the inattentive type of ADHD are not physically restless, 
but they have trouble concentrating. They are forgetful 
and disorganized and often fail to finish schoolwork or 
other tasks. The inattentive type of ADHD occurs more 
often in girls than does the hyperactive type. Most pa- 
tients with ADHD have the combined type, which in- 
cludes symptoms of both the hyperactive and inatten- 
tive types. 

Most experts think ADHD has a physical cause that 
has not yet been identified. Scientists now study brain 








function using magnetic resonance imagitig and other 
techniques that harmlessly produce images of the living 
brain. Such studies show that the brains of children with 
ADHD differ from those of children without the condi- 
tion. Some of these differences occur in regions of 
brain called the frontal lobes that contro! planning and 
setting limits on behavior. Other studies suggest that 
certain genes (the hereditary material in cells) play a role 
in many cases of ADHD. 

Most physicians believe that certain medications help 
people with ADHD. The drug most often prescribed is 
methylphenidate, known by the trade name Ritalin. Rita- 
lin and similar drugs appear to improve self-control by 
stimulating the parts of the brain that regulate brain ac- 
tivity. Children with ADHD also benefit from behavior 
modification. \n this therapy, adults help children gain 
self-control by providing close supervision as well as 
frequent rewards for appropriate behavior. 

F. Xavier Castellanos 
Attica. See Athens. 

Attila, AT uh luh or uh TIHL uh(? -A.D. 453), was a king 
who united the Huns, a Mongoloid people that began 
to invade the Roman Empire during the late A.D. 300's. 
Attila inherited the Hunnish kingdom, which was cen- 
tered roughly in what is now Hungary. He conquered 
surrounding territories, until the Huns controlled a re- 
gion extending from the Danube River to the Baltic Sea, 
and from the Rhine River to the Caspian Sea. 

Attila became king in 434. He ruled jointly with his 
brother, Bleda, until he murdered Bleda in 445. From 
435 to 439, Attila conquered many barbarian peoples in 
eastern and central Europe. He forced the East Roman 
Empire to pay him a yearly fee so he would not attack. 
But he looted its provinces in southeastern Europe from 
441 to 443, and again in 447. 

Attila then turned his attention to the West Roman 
Empire. In 450, he demanded Honoria, sister of Emperor 
Valentinian III, as his bride, and half the West Roman 
Empire as her inheritance. Valentinian refused. Attila 
stormed into Gaul (now mainly France), but a combined 
army of Romans and barbarians stopped him in the Bat- 
tle of Chalons, near Troyes, in 451. He retreated east of 
the Rhine River. In 452, he invaded Italy, capturing and 
destroying many cities north of the Po River. But famine 


Attila’s empire stretched 
from the Danube River on the 
south to the Baltic Sea on the 
north, and from the Rhine 
River on the west to the Cas- 
pian Sea on the east. In the 
400s, Attila attacked the East 
and West Roman empires. 


(el Empire of Attila the Hun 
Raman Empire 


——= Route of the Huns 


North 
Atlantic 
Oceen 


0 800 Mites 
ee 
0 800 Kitometors 


WORLD BOOK map 


Attorney general 879 


and disease forced his troops to withdraw. Attila died in 
453, and, in time, the Huns were absorbed into the peo- 
ples of southeastern Europe. 

Scholars question Attila’s historical importance. He 
won battles only against weak enemies. Although he se- 
riously threatened the East and West Roman empires, 
he was unable to win decisive victories over them. His 
kingdom collapsed soon after his death. Perhaps his 
greatest importance was his ability to unite the Huns for 
a short time. 

See also Hun. 
Attlee, Clement Richard (1883-1967), was the leader 
of the British Labour Party from 1935 to 1955. He served 
as prime minister of Britain from 1945 to 1951. During 
those years, the British government brought various in- 
dustries under state ownership. It also established tax- 
supported health and welfare services. 

Attlee was born in London. He studied at Oxford Uni- 
versity. After four years of law practice, from 1905 to 
1909, he did social-service work in the Limehouse dis- 
trict of London. In 1910, he became secretary of Toyn- 
bee Hall, a famous settlement center. He lectured in so- 
cial science at the London School of Economics and 
Political Science from 1913 to 1923. In 1919 and 1920, he 
was mayor of the Stepney district in London. 

Attlee served as a major in the British Army in World 
War | (1914-1918). He entered the House of Commons in 
1922 as a member for Limehouse. He became leader of 
the Labour Party in 1935. Attlee served as Britain's 
deputy prime minister from 1942 to 1945 and as /ord 
privy seal (the keeper of one of Britain's official seals) 
from 1940 to 1942. Queen Elizabeth I] made Attlee an 
earl in 1955. Keith Robbins 
Attorney. See Lawyer. 

Attorney, District. See District attorney. 
Attorney, Power of. See Power of attorney. 
Attorney general is the chief law officer in the gov- 
ernments of English-speaking countries. In the United 
States, the attorney general is appointed by the presi- 
dent, with the approval of the Senate, and serves in the 
Cabinet. The attorney general heads the Department of 
Justice and represents the government in legal matters 
(see Justice, Department of). The responsibilities of this 
office include enforcing federal laws, particularly crimi- 


William G. Sinnigen 





880 Attucks, Crispus 


nal statutes. Each U.S. state government has an attorney 
general. This official is elected by the voters in 43 states 
and is selected by other methods in the remaining 7. In 
Canada, the minister of justice may also be called the at- 
torney general. A member of the majority party in Parlia- 
ment is chosen for this post by the prime minister and is 
appointed by the governor general. 

See also Flag (picture: Flags of the United States gov- 
ernment). 

Attucks, AT uhks, Crispus (1723?-1770), was a leader 
of the patriot crowd that British troops fired upon in the 
so-called “Boston Massacre’ of 1770. The British had sta- 
tioned four regiments in Boston in 1768. On March 5, 
1770, about 400 Bostonians surrounded a detachment of 
British troops and goaded them into firing. Attucks and 
two other men were killed instantly. Two others died lat- 
er of wounds. See Boston Massacre. 

Little is known of Attucks, but several historians be- 
lieve he was a runaway slave of mixed black and white 
descent. In 1888, Boston erected a monument to honor 
the patriots who died in the incident. 

See also African Americans (picture). 
Atwood, Margaret (1939- )is a Canadian poet, 
novelist, and critic. Atwood first gained recognition for 
her collection of poems The Circle Game (1966). Her 
many other books of poetry include 7he Journals of Su- 
sanna Moodte (1970), which is a verse biography of an 
early Canadian writer; Power Politics (1971), which is an 
investigation of the limits of male-female relationships; 
and 7wo-Headed Poems (1978), which includes poems 
about a mother and child. Atwood’s Selected Poems was 
published in 1978, and her Se/ected Poems I/ was pub- 
lished in 1986. 

Atwood gained a wide reputation as a novelist with 
Surfacing (1972), which is the story of a woman who 
searches in the world of nature for the meaning of her 
life. The Edible Woman (1969) is a satiric comedy about a 
woman whose personality is being destroyed by her re- 
lationship with her fiance. Lady Oracle (1976) is a mix of 
social satire, psychological analysis, and fantasy. Bodily 
Harm (1981) deals with a Canadian journalist and her ex- 
periences during a revolution in the Caribbean. The 
Handmaidss Tale (1985) is a novel in which women living 
in the United States in the future are stripped of all 
rights. Cat's Eye (1988) is a detailed investigation of the 
forms of autobiography. The Robber Bride (1993) puck- 
ishly analyzes feminist politics by rewriting a Grimms 
fairy tale. Alias Grace (1996) is a psychological mystery. 
The Blind Assassin (2000) is a complex family chronicle 
that includes a science-fiction novel within the main sto- 
ry. The novel won the 2000 Booker Prize, the United 
Kingdom's most important literary award. 

Atwoods stories have been collected in Dancing Girls 
(1977), Bluebeard’ Egg (1983), and Wilderness Tips 
(1991). Atwood’s selected literary essays were collected 
in Second Words (1982). In addition, Atwood is the au- 
thor of an influential book of criticism called Survival-A 
Thematic Guide to Canadian Literature (1972). Margaret 
Eleanor Atwood was born in Ottawa, Ontario. 

Laurie R Ricou 

See also Canadian literature (Modern English-Canadi- 
an fiction; picture). 

Auburn University is a coeducational state university 
that has campuses in Auburn and Montgomery, Alaba- 


David R Berman 


James Kirby Martin 





ma. The Auburn campus has colleges of agriculture, 
business, education, engineering, liberal arts, sciences 
and mathematics, and veterinary medicine. It also has 
schools of accountancy, architecture, fine arts, forestry, 
home economics, nursing, pharmacy, and graduate 
studies. Courses lead to bachelor’s, masters, and doc- 
tor’s degrees. 

The Montgomery campus has divisions of business, 
education, liberal arts, and sciences. It grants bachelor's 
and master's degrees. 

The campus in Auburn was chartered in 1856 as the 
East Alabama Male College of the Methodist Church. In 
1872, it became a state-supported school and was re- 
named Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College. It 
became Alabama Polytechnic Institute in 1899 and was 
renamed Auburn University in 1960. The Montgomery 
campus opened in 1969. 

Critically reviewed by Auburn University 
Auchincloss, AW kihn klahs, Louis (1917- ), is an 
American author. He ranks as one of the finest literary 
observers of the American “upper class’ of his time. 

Born in Lawrence, New York, he attended Groton, a 
private school; Yale University; and the University of Vir- 
ginia. Auchincloss is also a lawyer with a Wall Street 
firm in New York City. Many characters in his novels are 
attorneys. 

Auchincloss acknowledged the influence of authors 
Henry James and Edith Wharton. Like them, he sees that 
the traditions of family, social position, and wealth can 
frequently decline into snobbishness and materialism. 
The Great World and Timothy Colt(1956) shows a law- 
yer's desire for success and his struggle to satisfy his 
principles. Auchincloss’s novel The Rector of Justin 
(1964) is a study of a famous headmaster of a New Eng- 
land prep school. Auchincloss’s other novels include / 
Come as a Thief(1972), The Partners (1974), The House of 
the Prophet (1980), and The Golden Calves (1988). 

Auchincloss'ss stories were collected in The Winthrop 
Covenant (1976), Narcissa and Other Fables (1983), Skinny 
Island (1987), and The Anniversary (1999). His essays were 
collected in 7he Styles the Man(1994). He described his 
early life in an autobiography, A Writers Capital (1974). 

Victor A. Kramer 
Auckland, AWK /uhnd (pop. 345,768; met. area pop. 
1,109,100), is New Zealand's largest city and chief port. 
More than a fourth of the nation’s people live in the 
greater Auckland region, which includes the central city 
and several suburbs. Auckland occupies a strip of land 
between Waitemata Harbour and Manukau Harbour in 
the country’s North Island. For location, see New 
Zealand (political map). 

Auckland is a market center for nearby agricultural 
and timber areas. It is also New Zealand's chief business 
and transportation center. Auckland's industries pro- 
duce food, marine products, steel, and other items. The 
Auckland Harbour Bridge, which links the central city 
and the suburbs to the north, is an important landmark 

Auckland is known as the City of Sails because of the 
many yachts in its harbors. It has spacious parks and 
many beaches. Auckland's cultural institutions include 
the University of Auckland, the War Memorial Museum, 
and a number of art galleries. 

New Zealand's Maori people had lived in the Auck- 
land area for thousands of years before British settlers 











arrived in the 1800's. Auckland was founded as the na- 
tion's capital in 1840. The capital was moved to Welling- 
ton in 1865. Robin A. Kearns 

See also New Zealand (picture: Downtown Auckland). 
Auction is a type of sale in which an item is sold to the 
person who bids, or offers, the most money for it. An 
auctioneer receives the bids and conducts the sale. 
Goods often sold at auctions include fine and decorative 
arts, antiques, collectibles, farm products, livestock, and 
real estate. Tobacco and thoroughbred horse auctions 
are also popular. 

Many bidders set maximum price levels, often called 
limits or stop prices, above which they will not bid. Simi- 
larly, many sellers establish minimum price figures 
known as reserves, below which they will not sell. In an 
auction with reserve, the seller has the right to withhold 
an article from sale if he or she has decided that the 
highest bid is too low. Reserves are usually confidential 
and determined before the auction between the seller 
and the auctioneer or auction company. In an auction 
without reserve, the seller agrees to sell the article to 
the highest bidder regardless of the price. 

Many auctioneers speak in a quick, rhythmic chant to 
inform participants of an item's bidding status. Some 
use the famous call of “Going once, going twice, sold!” 
to warn bidders that the end of the auction seems near. 
When one bidder outbids all the others—and exceeds 
the seller's reserve—the dropping of the auctioneers 
hammer signals a sale. At this point, the final bid creates 
a binding contract between the seller and the highest 
bidder. The selling price is called the hammer price. 

After an auction, the seller usually pays a selling com- 
mission and the buyer often pays a buyers premium to 
the auctioneer or the auction company. Most auction or- 
ganizations require auctioneers to have official licenses. 

In the 1990's, certain computer Web sites introduced 
online auctions over the Internet. The largest and most 
popular auction Web site is called eBay. Online auctions 
closely follow the procedures of live auctions, except 





Audiology 3881 





Auckland is the largest city 
and chief port of New 
Zealand. More than a fourth 
of the nation’s people live in 
the greater Auckland region. 
Auckland is also the country's 
main center for business and 
transportation. 


© Wolfgang Kaehler 


that bidders can enter bids from their computers at any 
time. Another advantage is that the Internet allows sell- 
ers to offer a wide variety of items to a vastly expanded 
international audience. The most reliable auction Web 
sites guarantee both the authenticity and the condition 
of their offerings. C. Hugh Hildesley 
See also E-commerce; Fur (Marketing fur); Internet 
(Business transactions); Livestock (Marketing livestock); 
Tobacco (Marketing tobacco). 
Auden, AW duhn, W. H. (1907-1973), an English-born 
poet, is best known for the remarkable variety of his 
works. He wrote ballads, blues, limericks, sonnets, non- 
sense verse, oratorios, free verse, /ibrettos (words) for 
operas, and dramas. Auden won the Pulitzer Prize in 
1948 for his book-length poem The Age of Anxiety. 
Wystan Hugh Auden was born Feb. 21, 1907, in York. 
As a student at Oxford University, he was the leader of a 
group of writers. In the 1940's, he turned to Christianity 
and psychoanalysis as partial solutions to civilization’s 
problems. He moved to the United States in 1939 and 
became a U.S. citizen. In 1972, he moved back to Oxford. 
Auden collaborated with Christopher Isherwood on 
travel books and some symbolic and satirical plays in 
the 1930's, including The Dog Beneath the Skin (1935) 
and The Ascent of F6(1936). He helped write the libretto 
for Russian composer Igor Stravinsky's opera The Rake's 
Progress (1951). Many of Auden’s critical essays appear 
in The Dyer's Hand (1963). William Harmon 
Audiology, AW dee AHL uh jee, is a profession devot- 
ed to the diagnosis and treatment of hearing problems. 
Audiologists determine if an individual has a hearing de- 
ficiency. They also measure the effect of partial or total 
hearing loss on a patient's ability to communicate. 
Audiologists use behavioral and electrophysiologic 
tests to determine a persons ability to hear. Behavioral 
tests measure how the person responds to a variety of 
sounds and vibrations. Electrophysiologic tests measure 
the electric activity of a person's nervous system in re- 
sponse to sound. Audiologists evaluate patients and fit 


882 Audio-visual materials 


them for hearing aids. Some patients are also taught 
speech reading (lip reading) to supplement their use of 
hearing aids. 

The audiologist determines the effect that a loss of 
hearing might have on a person's ability to handle 
schoolwork or a job. Language instruction and counsel- 
ing help overcome problems that the hard of hearing 
may have when conversing with other people. 

To practice audiology in the United States, a person 
usually must have a certificate from the American 
Speech-Language-Hearing Association. In some states, 
the person also must pass a test for a state license. Most 
audiologists have at least a masters degree in audiolo- 
gy, and many have a Ph.D. as well. College requirements 
for a degree in audiology include introductory courses 
in hearing, speech, and language. 

Audiologists work in many settings. These include pri- 
vate offices, hospitals, clinics, community speech and 
hearing centers, and schools. Frank E. Musiek 

See also Deafness. 

Audio-visual materials, also known as instructional 
media, are educational devices that work through sight, 
sound, or both. Any combination of seeing and hearing 

information can greatly increase a person’s ability to re- 

member what he or she learns. 

Teachers use a great variety of audio-visual materials. 
These range from simple devices, such as chalkboards, 
to complex technology, such as computers. 

Visual! materials are primarily for seeing. Such mate- 
rials are often combined with talks and lectures to help 
listeners visualize and thus understand the information 
that is being presented. For example, teachers often use 
as visual aids pictures, maps, charts, models, or the actu- 
al objects being discussed. !n addition to these common 
visual aids, the major forms of visual materials include 
(1) chalkboards and dry-erase boards, (2) flip charts, (3) 
projectors, and (4) film strips and slides. 

Chalkboards and dry-erase boards. Chalkboards— 
made of slate, glass, or wood—are probably the most 
widely used visual aid. Accessories that are used with 
chalkboards include large protractors to measure an- 
gles and devices to draw the five lines of a musical staff. 
In addition, teachers can use patterns that are cut from 
cardboard to trace outlines on the chalkboard. 

A dry-erase board is a steel surface coated with white 
enamel on which the user writes with special felt mark- 
ers. Some dry-erase boards include a device that scans 
what is written on the board and makes paper copies to 
give to the audience. 

Flip charts consist of a large pad of paper mounted on 
a frame. The user writes information on the pad during a 
presentation or prepares it beforehand to display while 
speaking. Material on a regular sheet of paper can be 
enlarged by a special machine for use ona flip chart. 
Business and industrial trainers frequently use flip charts. 

Projectors can display both “solid” and transparent 
objects. An opaque projector is used to project materi- 
als that do not let light through. This unit can display on 
a screen an enlarged image of a book, document, or 
small object. Light from the projector lamp shines on an 


object, an image of which is reflected by a tilted mirror 
and enlarged through a lens onto the screen. 
Overhead projectors are used to project transparen- 


cies onto a screen. The transparency is a clear plastic 


sheet with material printed on it. It is placed on a clear, 
flat surface over the projector lamp. The image on the 
transparency is reflected by a mirror and through a lens 
onto the screen. 

Transparencies can be made by several methods, in- 
cluding drawing or writing on a clear plastic sheet. They 
may also be made ona special machine that copies 
printed material onto a sheet of plastic film, which be- 
comes the transparency. Transparencies can also be 
made using a photocopying machine. Computer de- 
signs of graphs, charts, and drawings can be printed out 
as transparencies by a laser printer. 

Color transparencies can be made using photography 
or a color photocopying machine. A thermal-wax color 
printer connected to a computer can make transparen- 
cies of an image designed on the computer. The printer 
has a roll of clear plastic coated with wax in four colors. 
The printer melts the wax onto specially treated paper 
that absorbs some colors but leaves an image remaining 
on the plastic. 

A liquid crystal display (LCD) unit that connects to a 
computer creates what may be thought of as an elec- 
tronic transparency. The LCD panel has a thin layer of a 
substance called /iquid crystal, which changes color 
when an electric charge is applied to it. The panel picks 
up and displays an image of what appears on the com- 
puter screen. The LCD panel is placed on an overhead 
projector to be projected onto a screen. LCD panels 
may be colored or black-and-white. LCD units are con- 
venient because they save the step of making a trans- 
parency and because computer images can be changed 
and updated easily. LCD panels are also lightweight and 
inexpensive. 

Filmstrips and slides. A filmstrip is a strip of 35-mil- 
limeter film with a series of related still images that are 
displayed by a projector. Filmstrip projectors can be 
controlled by hand or electrically by remote units. A 
record player or tape recorder attached to the projector 
may provide sound for the filmstrips. Some projectors 
have built-in tape players, and some cassette tapes have 
a Signal recorded on them that advances the filmstrip 
automatically. 

A 35-millimeter slide projector is used to show slides, 
which are individual transparent photographs. A person 
can take pictures to develop into slides by using a 35- 
millimeter camera. Slides are arranged in a tray from 
which they individually drop between the light and the 
lens that projects them. Slides are easily removed froma 
tray and rearranged to create different slide shows. 
Most slide projectors have a remote control device that 
enables the presenter to manage the show from any- 
where in the room. Slide projectors are sometimes used 
with or connected to tape players to add sound to a 
slide show. 

A device called a dissolve unit allows two or more 
slide projectors to work together. The unit causes the 
image from one slide to fade out while another picture 
fades in on the same screen. As many as 100 or more 
projectors with dissolve units can be worked together 
through the use of an interface programmer board, an 
electronic device that plugs into a computer. A comput- 
er program directs signals through the board to control 
the slide equipment. Museums, tourist centers, and 
sales conventions often use such slide presentations. 








Teachers can use computer graphics to develop slide 
shows. Computer graphics is a term that refers both to 
the use of computers to create pictures and to the pic- 
tures themselves. See Computer graphics. 

Audio materials are primarily for hearing. They in- 
clude phonograph records, audio cassette tapes, audio 
compact discs (CD's), and the machines on which they 
are played. These materials are used to listen to music, 
stories, poetry readings, dramatic performances, and 
speeches. With tape recorders, students can record and 
listen to themselves. Music and foreign-language stu- 
dents, for example, often record themselves as they 
practice speaking or singing. They can then play the 
tape to hear how well they did. People also record lec- 
tures to review later. 

Multisensory materials are designed for both see- 
ing and hearing. A filmstrip or slide projector combined 
with an audiotape is an example of a simple multisenso- 
ry medium. More sophisticated multisensory aids in- 
clude motion pictures, computers, and telecommunica- 
tion equipment. 

Motion pictures. Films, especially 16-millimeter films, 
were once a major instructional tool. Videotapes are 
now more common. Videotape is easier to use, More 
durable than film, and less expensive. Videocassettes 
are acommon form of videotape used in schools. 
Videocassette recorders (VCR's) play back the tapes, 
which students usually view on television sets. However, 
TV sets can be too small for a large audience to see. 
Video projectors can play a videotape by projecting a 
large image onto a screen. Some video projectors can 
work with computers to display output from computer 
programs. 

A videodisc is a flat, round platter that is played ona 
videodisc player. The player uses a laser to convert the 
pictures and sounds recorded on the videodisc into TV 
signals. The clarity of the TV image provided by video- 
disc is superior to that of videotape. 

There are three levels of videodisc players. Leve/ 7 al- 
lows only the playback of the material. Leve/ 2 enables 
the viewer to quickly seek and select different parts of 
the disc to view. Leve/ 3 players are linked to a comput- 
er. These players permit the user to interact with the 
video. For example, a student can answer a test question 
and have the disc respond automatically. 

Many schools have a video-production system, which 
includes equipment to tape and play back videos. More 
sophisticated systems have cameras, editing equipment, 
and audio equipment. They may also have computer 
graphics devices to create visual effects in producing 
videos. School video-production systems are used by 
teachers to produce educational material as well as by 
students learning to work with television. 

Computers are a major new force in education. Origi- 
nally, they were used only as an addition to regular 
learning programs, such as for a mathematics drill. How- 
ever, the sophistication of instructional computer pro- 
grams has increased. Students can now use computer 
tutorials that check their answers and provide additional 
help if the student gives a wrong answer. In addition, 
some publishers have begun offering electronic books, 
also called e-books, that present textbook information 
through computers. 

Computer simulations (representations that respond 


Audio-visual materials 883 


to changing conditions) enable students to experience 
realistic situations. For example, pilots in training use 
flight simulators, which imitate an airplane in flight. 
Computer simulations can also be used by an entire 
class. The scene for the simulation may be projected 
onto a screen for the class to see. The computer man- 
ages the input and output, while the class tries to work 
through the situation presented in the simulation. For 
example, one simulation program presents political 
problems facing a mayor and city council. Another pro- 
gram involves city planning, and one used in a biology 
class portrays the activities in an ant colony. An advan- 
tage of these programs is that a whole class can use one 
computer, which is less costly for schools than provid- 
ing individual computers. 

Multimedia is the most recent development in educa- 
tion and training. It is the combination of computers, 
sound, and visuals to create an instructional package. 

Telecommunication equipmentis used to transmit 
and receive information over long distances. Modern 
telecommunication systems have allowed a develop- 
ment in instructional media known as distance educa- 
tion. Distance education involves the use of satellites or 
cable TV to transmit a lecture or other educational pre- 
sentation to many locations. This enables many schools 
to share a class taught by one teacher. Distance educa- 
tion provides many students with instruction that would 
not be available to them otherwise. For example, a small 
college with limited resources could show on television 
a class taught by a well-known professor at a large uni- 
versity. Carl W. Stafford 


Related articles in World Book include: 
Chalkboard 
Compact disc 
Computer (Educational software) 
Computerized instruction 
DVD 
Filmstrip 
Library (School libraries) 
Multimedia 





© David Young: Wolff, Photo Edit 
A videotape recording project allows students to produce 
their own videotapes, which can then be played back on a TV 
set. The students shown here are using a video camera to create 
a videotape about skateboarding. 


884 Audit 


Phonograph Tape recorder Videotape 
Projector Telecommunica- recorder 
tions Virtual reality 


Additional resources 


Keyes, Jessica, ed. The Ultimate Multimedia Handbook 2nd ed. 

McGraw, 1996. 

Simpson, Robert. Fffective Audio Visual: A Users Handbook 3rd 

ed. Butterworth, 1996. 

Audit is a systematic and official examination and check 
of business activities. The activities may be those of a 
public or private organization. Such organizations rely 
‘on audits to provide independent and expert business 
advice. A person who conducts an audit is called an au- 
ditor. There are three basic types of audits —financtal, 
compliance, and operational. 

A financial audit checks the reliability of financial in- 
formation. One important kind of financial audit is a fi- 
nancial statement audit. The auditor, usually a certified 
public accountant (CPA), inspects the accounting 
records to decide whether the financial reports reflect 
generally accepted accounting principles. The Financial 
Accounting Standards Board establishes these account- 
ing principles. In a financial audit, the procedures used 
by a CPA are based on auditing standards that have 
been established by the American Institute of Certified 
Public Accountants. All corporations that have publicly 
traded securities in the United States are required to 
have a financial audit. 

A compliance audit determines if an organization has 
followed internal policies, laws, regulations, and con- 
tracts. Operational audits deal with some aspect of an 
organization's operations. These audits are concerned 
with the efficient use of economic resources and the 
achievement of stated goals. Operational audits are in- 
tended to help an organization become more produc- 
tive and more profitable. 

The word audit comes froin the Latin word auditus, 
meaning a hearing. Auditing began in ancient times. 
However, modern auditing techniques originated in 
Britain during the mid-1800's. At that time, the main pur- 
pose of an audit was to detect fraud. Richard P. Brief 

See also Accounting; Certified public accountant. 
Auditory canal. See Ear (The outer ear; diagrams). 
Audubon, AVW/ duh Ban, John James (1785-1851), 
was one of the first people to study and paint the birds 
of North America. Audubon’s lifelike paintings of birds 
in their natural surroundings brought him fame and for- 
tune. 

His life. Audubon’s diaries and letters created a mys- 
tery about his background and parentage, but records 
indicate that he was born on April 26, 1785, at Les Cayes 
Santo Domingo (now Haiti). His mother, a Creole of 
Haiti, died soon after his birth. Records show that the 
boy, known as Jean Rabin, was taken to France by his fa- 
ther, Jean Audubon, a French sea captain. 

Audubon and his wife legally adopted the boy when 
he was 8 years old. These records disprove claims by 
Audubons descendants, derived from passages in his 
diaries and letters, that Audubon was the Lost Dauphin 
of France. 

In 1803, Captain Audubon sent the youth to live on an 
estate called Mill Grove near Philadelphia. There, young 
Audubon spent much time drawing birds. He and f erdi- 
nand Rozier opened a general store in Louisville, Ken 


f 





Courtesy of the New-York Historical Society, New York City 


An Audubon painting of passenger pigeons shows the realis- 
tic, colorful style of the artist and naturalist. John James Audubon 
published this water color in 1829. 


tucky, in 1807. Audubon married a Mill Grove neighbor, 
Lucy Bakewell, the next year. He failed in several busi- 
ness ventures. While Rozier conducted their business, 
Audubon wandered through the countryside looking 
for birds. His business career ended in 1819 when he 
was jailed for debt. He entered a plea of bankruptcy to 
gain his freedom. 

In 1820, Audubon conceived the idea of publishing a 
collection of paintings of North American birds. His fam- 
ily followed him to Louisiana, where he painted birds in 
their natural surroundings. His wife worked as a gov- 
erness and teacher to support the family. Audubon 
drew portraits and taught music and drawing. 

His works. Unable to find an American publisher, 
Audubon went to England and Scotland in 1826. His pic- 
tures created a sensation, and he published Birds of 
America (1826-1838), which was a work of 87 parts con- 
taining 435 life-sized, colored engravings made from his 
water colors. Audubon and William MacGillivray, a 
Scottish naturalist, wrote a text, Ornithological Biogra- 
phy(1831-1839). 

Audubon returned to the United States in 1839 and 
published American editions of his bird paintings. Later, 
Audubon worked with John Bachman on The Viviparous 
Quadrupeds of North America (1842-1854). Audubon 
made his last collecting trip, along the Missouri River, in 


1843. He died on Jan. 27, 1851. Donald F. Bruning 














Additional resources 


Audubon, john james. Writings and Drawings. Ed. by Christoph 
Irmscher. Lib. of Am., 1999. 

Foshay, Ella M. john James Audubon. Abrams, 1997. 

Kastner, Joseph. john James Audubon. Abrams, 1992. Younger 
readers. 


Audubon Society, AW duh Bann, National, is one 
of the oldest and largest national conservation organiza- 
tions in the world. It was founded in 1905 and named for 
the American bird artist and naturalist John James 
Audubon. The society is dedicated to the long-term pro- 
tection of wildlife and of land, water, and other natural 
resources; the protection of life from radiation, toxic 
substances, and other pollutants; and the easing of glob- 
al problems caused by overpopulation and the deple- 
tion of natural resources. 

The National Audubon Society has about 625 chapters 
and affiliated clubs and 10 regional offices. It also main- 
tains a legislative center in Washington, D.C. Its nation- 
wide sanctuary system protects over 250,000 acres 
(101,000 hectares) of wildlife habitat and many endan- 
gered species. The society conducts research on 
wildlife and environmental issues. Audubon ecology 
camps in Connecticut, Maine, Wisconsin, and Wyoming 
offer summer sessions for adults, children, and families. 
Education centers in Connecticut, California, Ohio, and 
Wisconsin provide training for naturalists and outdoor 
programs for the public. Audubon Adventures is a pop- 
ular environmental education program for youngsters. 

The society publishes Audubon, a magazine; Ameri- 
can Birds, a scholarly journal; and the Audubon Activist, 
a newspaper on environmental issues. The National 
Audubon Society's headquarters are in New York City. 

Critically reviewed by the National Audubon Society 

See also Audubon, John James; Bird (Bird study and 
protection). 

Auer, OW uhr, Leopold (1845-1930), a Hungarian vio- 
linist, became one of the most famous violin teachers of 
his time. Auer inaugurated a new method of violin play- 
ing and bow technique. From 1868 to 1917, he was a 
professor at the St. Petersburg Conservatory in Russia. 
Among Auer's famous students were Mischa Elman, 
Jascha Heifetz, and Nathan Milstein. Auer wrote about 
his teaching methods in Violin Playing as | Teach It(1921) 
and Violin Masterworks and Their Interpretation (1925). 
He also wrote an autobiography, My Long Life in Music 
(1923). Auer was born in Veszprem. Stephen Clapp 
Auerbach, OW whr bahk, Red (1917- ), was one of 
the greatest coaches in the history of the National Bas- 
ketball Association. During his 20 years as a professional 
basketball coach, his teams won 938 regular-season 
games. This total stood as a league record until it was 
broken by Lenny Wilkens during the 1994-1995 season. 

Auerbach coached the Boston Celtics from the 1950- 
1951 season through the 1965-1966 season. He led the 
Celtics to nine NBA championships, eight in a row from 
the 1958-1959 season through the 1965-1966 season. In 
1966, he retired as Celtics coach and became the team’s 
president and general manager. He retired as general 
manager in 1984 but remained as the team’s president 
until 1997, when he became a vice president. 

Arnold Jacob Auerbach was born in the Brooklyn bor- 
ough of New York City. He began his professional ca- 
reer in 1946, coaching the Washington Capitols for three 


Augur 885 


seasons. He coached the Tri-Cities Blackhawks for a sea- 
son before joining the Celtics. Bob Logan 
Augsburg, AWGZ burg or OWKS boork (pop. 
250,197), is a commercial and industrial city in southern 
Germany. For location, see Germany (political map). 
Augsburg is known for its well-preserved medieval and 
Renaissance buildings. Its many landmarks include the 
Augsburg Cathedral, which dates from the 900’s, and 
the town hall, completed in 1620. A number of beautiful 
Renaissance buildings stand on Maximilianstrasse and 
Karolinenstrasse, two famous streets in the city center. 
Factories in Augsburg manufacture such products as 
chemicals, electronics, machinery, and textiles. 

The Romans founded Augsburg in 15 B.C. and later 
made it a provincial capital of their empire. The city be- 
came a thriving commercial and trade center during the 
Middle Ages. Protestant and Roman Catholic leaders 
met in Augsburg in 1530 to try to settle their differences 
(see Augsburg Confession). During World War II (1939- 
1945), Allied bombing damaged much of the city. The 
damaged areas were soon rebuilt. John W. Boyer 
Augsburg Confession, AWGZ burg or OWKS 
boork, was a short summary of the religious teachings 
of Martin Luther. It was written mainly by Philipp 
Melanchthon, Luther's chief associate in starting and 
leading the Protestant Reformation. The confession was 
prepared in 1530 for Charles V, the Holy Roman emper- 
or. It was named for Augsburg, Germany, scene of a diet 
(meeting) called by Charles to end religious divisions 
within the Empire. 

Melanchthon wrote the confession to prove that 
Lutherans supported the historic tradition of the Chris- 
tian church. He tried to compromise on some controver- 
sial issues, hoping for the reunification of Christendom. 
Luther, who was not permitted to attend the diet, ad- 
mired the confession for “treading lightly” over disputed 
issues, but insisted that no more concessions be made. 
But it was too Protestant in tone for the emperor, and he 
rejected it. Melanchthon continued to make changes to 
the confession over the years, and conservative Luther- 
ans objected to the altered versions. The original ver- 
sion became the basic statement of faith of the Lutheran 
Church. M. U. Edwards 

See also Luther, Martin; Melanchthon, Philipp; Refor- 
mation (picture). 

Augur, AW guhr, was the title given to priests in an- 
cient Rome who interpreted signs, such as thunder and 
lightning, the flight and cries of birds, and the move- 
ment of snakes and mice. Romans believed that the 
gods revealed their wishes through these signs. Augurs 
did not predict the future. Instead, they read the signs to 
see if the gods approved of human actions. Augurs 
wore a trabea (white garment with a purple border). 

Roman officials sought the advice of augurs before 
beginning elections, wars, and other important public 
activities. The officials might delay or cancel great ven- 
tures if the augurs reported unfavorable signs. Because 
augurs controlled the doctrine and practice of interpret- 
ing signs, they had great power in Roman politics. 

Early Rome had three augurs;, all from the patrician 
(aristocratic) class. By the late Roman Republic, the 
priesthood had 16 members, both patricians and pl/e- 
beians (commoners). C.J. Bannon 

See also Omen; Oracle. 


886 August 


August is the eighth month of the year according to 
the Gregorian calendar, which is used in almost all the 
world today. The Romans called the month Sextilis, 
which means sixth. They later renamed it in honor of the 
emperor Augustus. During Augustus's reign, the Roman 
Senate lengthened the month to 31 days by taking a day 
from February. 

The first Monday in August is Emancipation Day in 
much of the Caribbean. In Barbados, it is also called 
Kadooment Day. On this day and the weeks leading up 
to it, people in Barbados combine a celebration of the 

‘end of the sugar cane harvest with the commemoration 
of the abolition of slavery. The holiday is observed with 
parades, music, feasting, and dancing. Native American 


Important August events 


harvest celebrations called green corn dances often fall 
in August. 

Lammas Day, August 1, is an ancient British festival. 
This celebration of the harvest became associated with 
the Christian Church, and loaves of bread made from 
the season's first grains were taken to church to be 
blessed. The Feast of the Assumption, August 15, is cele- 
brated by Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox 
churches. It is based on the belief that the Virgin Mary 
was taken up to heaven in body and soul. The feast may 
be related to harvest festivals of pre-Christian times. In 
parts of Europe, it is called the Feast of Our Lady of the 
Harvest. 

In Nepal, Gokarne Aunsi (Father's Day) usually falls in 


1 National Day, Switzerland. 
— William Clark, American explorer, born 1770. 
— Francis Scott Key, American lawyer and author of “The 
Star-Spangled Banner,” born 1779. 
— Richard Henry Dana, Jr., American author, born 1815. 
— Maria Mitchell, American astronomer, born 1818. 
— Herman Melville, American author, born 1819. 
— Colorado became the 38th U.S. state, 1876. 
— Germany declared war on Russia, World War I, 1914. 
— U.S. Congress passed the Atomic Energy Act, providing 
for civilian control of nuclear energy, 1946. 
2 First United States census began, 1790. 
— John Tyndall, British physicist, born 1820. 
— First Lincoln penny issued in United States, 1909. 
3 Christopher Columbus set sail from Palos, Spain, on his 
first voyage across the Atlantic, 1492. 
— Ernie Pyle, American newspaper columnist, born 1900. 
4 German American publisher John Peter Zenger acquit- 
ted of libel in 1735, helping to establish American free- 
dom of the press. 
— Percy Bysshe Shelley, English poet, born 1792. 
5 Independence Day, Jamaica. 
— Guy de Maupassant, French novelist and short-story 
writer, born 1850. 
— Union forces won the Battle of Mobile Bay in the Ameri- 
can Civil War, 1864. 
6 Daniel O'Connell, Irish patriot, born 1775. 
— The Holy Roman Empire came to an end, 1806. 
— Alfred, Lord Tennyson, English poet, born 1809. 
— Bolivia became independent in 1825. 
— Alexander Fleming, British discoverer of penicillin, born 
1881. 
— Gertrude Ederle became the first woman to swim the 
English Channel, 1926. 
— Atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima, Japan, 1945. 
7 Louis S.B. Leakey, Kenyan anthropologist, born 1903. 
— Ralph J. Bunche, American statesman, born 1904. 





Aug. birthstone 
sardonyx 


Aug. flower 
poppy 


— United States troops landed on Guadalcanal in the Solo- 
mon Islands in World War Il, 1942. 
8 Sara Teasdale, American poet, born 1884. 
— Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings, American novelist, born 1896. 
— Ernest Orlando Lawrence, American physicist, born 1901. 
9 Izaak Walton, English author, born 1593. 
— John Dryden, English poet and dramatist, born 1631. 
— Richard M. Nixon became first U.S. president ever to 
resign from office, 1974. 
10 The Columbia completed the first voyage around the 
world by an American ship, 1790. 
— Missouri became the 24th U.S. state, 1821. 
— Smithsonian Institution founded, 1846. 
— Herbert Hoover, 31st U.S. president, born 1874. 
11. «~Gifford Pinchot, American conservationist and statesman, 
born 1865. 

12 Julius Rosenwald, American philanthropist, born 1862. 
~ George Bellows, American artist, born 1882. 

— The United States annexed Hawaii, 1898. 

13. Spanish conquerors won Mexico City from the Aztec, 1521. 
— Lucy Stone, American women’s rights leader, born 1818. 
— Annie Oakley, American sharpshooter, born 1860. 

— East Germans began building the Berlin Wall, 1961. 
14 John Galsworthy, English novelist, born 1867. 
— US. Social Security Act approved, 1935. 
— The Atlantic Charter was made public, 1941. 
— Pakistan became independent, 1947. 
15 Napoleon Bonaparte born 1769. 
— Sir Walter Scott, Scottish author, born 1771. 
— Indians attacked soldiers and settlers of Fort Dearborn (now 
Chicago) in 1812. | 
— Panama Canal opened to traffic, 1914. 
— India became independent in 1947. 
— South Korea was established in 1948. 
— Congo (Brazzaville) became independent in 1960. 
16 Patriots defeated the British in the Battle of Bennington in 
the American Revolution, 1777. 





Aug. 6—first woman 
to swim English Channel 


Aug. 6—atomic bomb 
dropped on Hiroshima 











| 


August or early September. Fathers, both living and 
dead, are honored on this day. 

August flowers are the poppy and gladiolus. August 
gemstones are the sardonyx and peridot. 

Carole S. Angell 


Quotations 


The brilliant poppy flaunts her head 
Amidst the ripening grain, 
And adds her voice to swell the song 
That Augusts here again. 
Helen Maria Winslow 


All the long August afternoon, 
The little drowsy stream 


important August events 


August 887 


Whispers a melancholy tune 
As if it dreamed of June, 
And whispered in its dream. 
William Dean Howells 


Dry August and warm 
Doth harvest no harm. 
Thomas Tusser 


lf the twenty-fourth of August 
be fair and clear, 
Then hope for a prosperous Autumn that year. 
John Ray, English Proverbs 


See also Assumption; Augustus; Calendar. 


17 Indonesia declared independence in 1945. 
— Davy Crockett, American frontiersman, born 1786. 
~— United States and Canada arranged for joint defense of 
North America, 1940. 
18 Virginia Dare, first English child born in America, born 
1587. 
— Meriwether Lewis, American explorer, born 1774. 
— Marshall Field, American merchant, born 1835. 
19 The British warship Guerriére surrendered to the 
U.S.S. Constitution in 1812, during the War of 1812. 
— Bernard Baruch, American financier and statesman, 
born 1870. 
— Orville Wright, pioneer American aviator and airplane 
designer, born 1871. 
— Manuel Quezon, first president of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines, born 1878. 
— Philo T. Farnsworth, American inventor who discovered 
a system for electronic television, born 1906. 
— Bill Clinton, 42nd U.S. president, born 1946 in Hope, Ark. 
20 Bernardo OHiggins, Chilean patriot, born 1778. 
— Oliver Hazard Perry, American naval officer, born 1785. 
— Benjamin Harrison, 23rd U.S. president, born 1833. 
21 Lincoln-Douglas debates began in United States, 1858. 
— Hawaii became the 50th U.S. state, 1959. 
22 John Fitch successfully demonstrated his side-paddle 
steamboat, 1787. 
— The Savannah, first steamship to cross the Atlantic, 
launched 1818. 
— Claude Debussy, French composer, born 1862. 
— Clara Barton founded first local chapter of the American 
National Red Cross, 1881. 
23 Baron de Cuvier, French naturalist, born 1769. 
—~ Edgar Lee Masters, American poet and biographer, 
born 1869. 
24 Massacre of St Bartholomew's Day began in Paris, 1572. 
— William Wilberforce, British statesman and crusader 
against slavery, born 1759. 
— British troops captured Washington, D.C, and burned 





Aug. 15—Napoleon 
Bonaparte born 


Aug. 15— Panama 
Canal opened 


the Capitol and the White House in 1814, during the War 
of 1812. 
25 Bret Harte, American author of stories about the Western 
United States, born 1836. 
— Leonard Bernstein, American composer, conductor, and 
pianist, born 1918. 
26 Antoine Lavoisier, French chemist, born 1743. 
— Lee De Forest, American inventor, born 1873. 
— Ottmar Mergenthaler received a patent for his Linotype 
machine, 1884. 
— Amendment 19 to the U.S. Constitution, giving women the 
right to vote, proclaimed 1920. 
27 Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, German philosopher, 
born 1770. 
— Commercial oi] production began in the United States 
when Edwin Laurentine Drake struck oil, 1859. 
— Theodore Dreiser, American novelist, born 1871. 
— Lyndon B. Johnson, 36th U.S. president, born 1908. 
28 Spanish explorers landed in Florida where St Augustine 
now stands, 1565. 
— Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, German poet and dramatist, 
born 1749. 
— The United Kingdom ended slavery in its colonies, 1833. 
— More than 200,000 civil rights demonstrators staged a 
march on Washington, D.C, 1963. 
29 Oliver Wendell Holmes, American physician and man of 
letters, born 1809. 
— Charles F. Kettering, American inventor and automobile 
pioneer, born 1876. 
30 Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley, English author of Franken- 
stein, born 1797. 
— Second Battle of Bull Run, or Manassas, ended in Confed- 
erate victory, American Civil War, 1862. 
— Ernest Rutherford, British physicist, born 1871. 
— Huey Long, American political leader, born 1893. 
31 Federation of Malaya (now part of Malaysia) became inde- 
pendent, 1957. 
— Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands born 1880. 


WORLD BOOK illustrations by Mike Hagel 





Aug. 22—side-paddle 
steamboat demonstrated 


Aug. 24—British troops 
burn White House 


888 Augusta 


Augusta, aw GUHS tuh, Georgia (pop. 199,775; met 
area pop. 477,441), lies on the state’s eastern boundary, 
about 125 miles (201 kilometers) from the mouth of the 
Savannah River. Augusta's metropolitan area includes 
nearby Aiken, South Carolina. See Georgia (political 
map). 

Augustas chief industries produce brick, detergents, 
fertilizer, food products, golf carts, hospital products, 
newsprint, paper products, and textiles. Augusta is on 
the eastern edge of one of the world’s greatest kaolin 
belts. Several plants near Augusta process kaolin, a 
white clay used for making fine pottery and as a coating 
on high-quality paper. Nearby Fort Gordon, a United 
States Army training center, has a larger payroll than 
that of the combined industries of metropolitan Augusta 
(see Fort Gordon). The city is a medical center and has 
several large hospitals. It is the home of Augusta State 
University, Paine College, and the Medical College of 
Georgia. The Masters Tournament, one of the world's 
major golf competitions, is held every spring at the Au- 
gusta National Golf Course. 

James Oglethorpe, who founded the Georgia colony, 
ordered Augusta established in 1736. The Georgia legis- 
lature made Augusta capital of the state from 1786 to 
1795. During the American Civil War (1861-1865), Augus- 
ta served as ordnance center of the Confederacy. It is 
the seat of Richmond County and has a mayor-council 
form of government james O. Wheeler 
Augusta, aw GUHS tuh (pop. 18,560), is the capital of 
Maine. It lies on both sides of the Kennebec River in the 
central part of the state (see Maine [political map)). 

Augustas major buildings include the State Capitol; 
other state buildings; the Maine State Library; the gover- 
nors residence, called Blaine House; and Fort Western, 
a restored colonial-era fort. The University of Maine has 
a campus in Augusta. The state government is the city’s 
largest employer. Other employers include health-care 
services, an electronic equipment assembly plant, and a 
steel plant. 

In 1628, Pilgrims from Plymouth Colony in Massachu- 
setts established a trading post on the site of Augusta, 
then an Indian village called Cushnoc. Beginning in the 
1660's, Indian wars brought trade in the area to a halt. 
Fort Western was built on the site of the old trading 
post in 1754. The settlements that grew up around the 
fort were then part of the present town of Hallowell. In 
1797, Augusta became a separate town. It replaced Port- 
land as the capital of Maine in 1832, because of its more 
central location. Augusta has a council-manager form of 
government It is the seat of Kennebec County. 

Patty Ammons 

See also Maine (pictures: The State Capitol; Maine's 
House of Representatives). 

Augustan Age. See Augustus; England (The Augus- 
tan Age); English literature (The Augustan Age); Latin lit- 
erature (The Augustan Age). 

Augustine, AIV guh sT&ex or aw GUHS tihn, Saint 
(354-430), was one of the greatest leaders of the early 
Christian church. His writings had a strong influence on 
medieval religious thought. Augustine's ideas also ap- 
peared in the teachings of lohn Calvin, Martin Luther. 
and other Protestant reformers. He influenced such 
philosophers as Immanuel Kant and Blaise Pascal. 

His life. Augustine was born Nov. 13, 354, in Tagaste 


a city near what is now Constantine, Algeria. His name in 
Latin was Aurelius Augustinus. His mother, Saint Moni- 
ca, was a devout Christian. His father was a pagan. As a 
young man, Augustine pursued worldly success and 
was attracted to several non-Christian movements. He 
described his early life and spiritual struggles in Confes- 
sions, one of the first great autobiographies. 

In the early 380s, Augustine taught rhetoric in 
Carthage and Rome and then in Milan, Italy. Some 
friends in Milan encouraged him to read the works of 
the Greek philosophers called Neoplatonists (see Neo- 
platonism). These writings and the sermons of Saint Am- 
brose, the bishop of Milan, helped him overcome the 
intellectual obstacles to accepting Christianity. In 386, 
Augustine decided to devote himself to the faith, and 
Ambrose baptized him the next year. 

Soon afterward, Augustine returned to Tagaste, 
where he organized a community of believers. In 391, he 
traveled to nearby Hippo. The Christian congregation 
there persuaded him to stay. He was ordained as a 
priest in Hippo in 391. From 396 until his death, he 
served as bishop of Hippo. 

His beliefs can be divided into three main groups: (1) 
God and the soul, (2) sin and grace, and (3) the church 
and the sacraments. 

God and the soul. Augustine's study of Neoplatonism 
convinced him that God is present in the soul of every 
human being. He believed that people should direct 
their attention to God and not be distracted by the cares 
and pleasures of the world. 

Sin and grace. Augustine preached that people could 
not change their sinful ways unless helped by the grace 
of God. He believed that God chooses only certain indi- 
viduals to receive His grace. This belief forms part of a 
doctrine called predestination or election. 

The church and the sacraments. Augustine believed 
that people could not receive God's grace unless they 
belonged to the church and received the sacraments. A 
group of clergymen in northern Africa said grace could 
not be given unless the clergy itself was perfect. But Au- 
gustine declared that God could bypass human weak- 
nesses through the sacraments. Augustine's book The 
City of God presents the history of humanity as a strug- 
gle between people who depend on God and those 
who rely on themselves. David B. Burrell 

See also Philosophy (picture). 


Additional resources 
Brown, Peter. Augustine of Hippo. Univ. of Calif. Pr., 1967. A clas- 
sic biography. 
Price, Richard. Augustine. Triumph Bks., 1997. 


Augustine of Canterbury, AIV guh sTEEN or aw 
GUHS tihn, Saint ( ? -604), was the apostle to the English 
nation and the first archbishop of Canterbury. He was 
formerly prior (head) of the monastery of Saint Andrew 
in Rome. Pope Gregory | called him to lead a band of 
missionaries to England. The group landed in 597 on the 
island of Thanet, southeastern England. They were wel- 
comed by Ethelbert, king of Kent. The preaching of Au- 
gustine and his missionaries turned thousands of the 
English to Christianity, including the king. The pope 
made Augustine archbishop of Canterbury in 601. Au- 
gustine’s feast day is May 26 in England and Wales and 
May 28 in other parts of the world. William J. Courtenay 








Augustus, aw GUHS tuhs (63 B.C-A.D. 14), meaning 
the exalted, was the name given Gaius Julius Caesar Oc- 
tavianus (Octavian) when he became the first Ronian em- 
peror in 27 B.C. The period of the Roman Republic 
ended, and the era of the Roman Empire began under 
Augustus. 

Augustus influence was so far-reaching that it lasted, 
and even increased, for nearly 200 years. Rome achieved 
great glory during Augustus reign, and the period came 
to be known as the Augustan Age. This period was the 
golden age of Roman literature and architecture. Such 
famous writers as Virgil, Horace, Ovid, and Livy lived 
during this time, under the patronage of the emperor. 
Augustus himself was a writer, known for his simple 
and direct style. 

Many roads, bridges, aqueducts, and beautiful build- 
ings were built in Rome under Augustus. He boasted 
that he “found Rome brick and left it marble.” He not 


ay 


Britain 


x Teutoburg Forest Sarmatia 


a 


giack ae 


North 
Atlantc 


Ocean oh 
‘eau eons 
jae I~ 
ft Italy 


Lens rit 


“3 
e o) 
iad idia ) “8 Seg 


ermania 





woes | yy 


Rn, {s.: 
reste e 
{aged 


—— - 
yA. 


Africa 
500 Miles 


500 Kilometers 


WORLD BOOK map 


The Roman Empire under Augustus expanded greatly. The 
yellow area above shows the empire when Augustus became 
emperor. He added the area shown in shaded yellow. 


only completed buildings left unfinished by Julius Cae- 
sar, but also restored many structures, including 82 tem- 
ples. Sculptors created many beautiful works in a classic 
style to decorate his buildings. 

Octavian was born in Rome. He took the name Gaius 
Julius Caesar Octavianus in 44 B.C, after his great-uncle, 
Julius Caesar, was murdered. Caesar adopted Octavian 
in his will and made the 19-year-old youth his heir. Oc- 
tavian returned to Rome from Apollonia, in what is now 
Albania, to claim his inheritance. The orator Cicero 
helped him legalize his adoption over the objections of 
Mark Antony, Caesar's chief lieutenant, who had seized 
Caesar's papers and money. 

Rise to power. Antony controlled Rome after Cae- 
sars death. But Octavian raised an army of Caesar's vet- 
erans and defeated Antony in northern Italy in 43 B.C 
Octavian forced the Senate to elect him one of the twe 
consuls (chief government officials) of Rome. He 
reached an agreement with Antony, and they with Mar- 
cus Lepidus ( ? -13 B.C), a Roman general, formed the 
Second Triumvirate. They killed more than 2,000 ene- 
mies, including Cicero, who had befriended Octavian 
but was hated by Antony. 

Octavian and Antony led an army against Brutus and 
Cassius, the conspirators who had murdered Caesar. 





Augustus 889 


Thanks to the generalship of Antony, the army defeated 
the murderers at Philippi, in Macedonia, in 42 B.C. Oc- 
tavian became ruler of the western provinces, and An- 
tony of the eastern provinces. The weak Lepidus was as- 
signed to Africa, but Octavian soon forced him to retire. 
Another enemy of Octavian, Pompey the Younger, had 
gained control of Sicily. However, Pompey was defeated 
in 36 B.C. by Marcus Agrippa, Octavian’s general and 
chief adviser. 

In 40 B.C. Antony married Octavia, sister of Octavian, 
but he deserted her later for Cleopatra, queen of Egypt. 
The Romans feared and hated Cleopatra. When Antony 
gave Roman provinces to his children by her, Octavian 
went to war against Antony and Cleopatra. In 31 B.C, 
Agrippa, who was also an admiral, defeated the com- 
bined fleets of Antony and Cleopatra at Actium, on the 
west coast of Greece. Within a year, Antony and Cleopa- 
tra committed suicide. 

In 27 B.C, the Senate voted Octavian the name Augus- 
tus. It also gave him legal power to direct Rome's reli- 
gious, civil, and military affairs, with the Senate as an ad- 
visory body. 

Achievements. Augustus restored peace and order 
after 100 years of civil war. He maintained honest gov- 
ernment, a sound currency system, and free trade 
among the provinces. He developed an efficient postal 
system, improved harbors, and established colonies. He 
extended the elaborate highway system that connected 
Rome to remote parts of the empire. 

Augustus gave control of the empire's more peaceful 
provinces to the Senate. But he kept control of frontier 
provinces that needed protection or pacification, and 





Vatican Museums (SCALA Art Resource! 


Augustus was the first Roman emperor. This statue was made 
by an unknown sculptor who lived during Augustus reign. 


890 Auk 


maintained a standing army for this task. He also kept a 
standing navy in the Mediterranean Sea and a small 
bodyguard in Rome known as the Praetorian Guard. 

Expansion. Augustus expanded the empire, but he 
was more interested in peace than in war. He fought 
only when necessary. Augustus's generals Agrippa and 
Tiberius won victories in Spain, Gaul (now mainly 
France), and in Pannonia and Dalmatia (now parts of 
Hungary and Croatia). Augustus annexed Egypt and paci- 
fied Spain, Gaul, and most of southeastern Europe up to 
the Danube River. 

In A.D. 9, his army was destroyed by Germans at the 
Battle of Teutoburg Forest, in what is now Germany. As 
a result, the Roman frontier in Germany was pushed 
back from the Elbe River to the Rhine River. 

Augustus was a cold, calculating statesman, but he 
knew how to win affection. After his death on Aug. 19, 
A.D. 14, the people of the Roman Empire worshiped him 
as Divine Augustus. The remains of his tomb and many 
of his buildings stand in Rome. Mary Francis Gyles 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Actium, Battle of Calendar Library (Libraries 
Agrippa, Marcus Cicero, Marcus of papyrus) 
Antony, Mark Tullius Rome, Ancient 
Brutus, Marcus Cleopatra Tiberius 

Caesar, Julius Triumvirate 


Additional resources 


Greenblatt, Miriam. Augustus and Imperial Rome. Benchmark 
Bks., 2000. Younger readers. 
Southern, Pat. Augustus. Routledge, 1998. 


Auk, awk, is the name of a family of sea birds that in- 
cludes dovekies, guillemots, murres, and puffins. Auks 
are also known as alcids. There are 22 living species of 
auks. They live in the North Pacific, North Atlantic, and 
Arctic oceans. Auks look and behave somewhat like 
penguins. However, unlike penguins, auks can fly. 

Like penguins, auks are excellent underwater swim- 
mers. They propel themselves rapidly through the water 
with their strong wings, steering with their webbed feet. 





Jacana 
ind white feathers 
Auks live in the northern half of the world. They make their 
homes at sea and on rocky islands. 


A dovekie, like most other auks, has black 





Hand-colored aquatint (1834-1836) by John James Audubon; Nationa! Audubon Society Library 
Great auks were flightless marine birds of the Northern Hemi- 
sphere. Sailors in search of food on long voyages killed thou- 
sands of the birds. By the mid-1800's, great auks were extinct. 


Auks feed on fish and other marine animals. They catch 
their food by chasing it in the water. 

Auks have thick bodies and short legs. They range in 
size from 6 to 30 inches (15 to 75 centimeters) long. Most 
auks have black and white feathers. Some have gray 
feathers. Certain species, including guillemots and 
puffins, have brightly colored legs and feet. Puffins also 
have brightly colored bills during the breeding season. 

Auks spend all the year except the breeding season at 
sea. They tend to nest in colonies of thousands of birds 
on rocky islands and return to the same nesting sites 
every year. Most make their nests among rocks, in bur- 
rows in the ground, or on ledges of cliffs. The female 
lays One or two eggs, which hatch in 3 to 6 weeks. 

The great auk, also called the garefow/, is an extinct 
member of the auk family. About the size of a goose, 
this bird was the largest auk and could not fly. Hunters 
killed the last great auks in 1844. Donald F. Bruning 

Scientific classification. Auks make up the family Alcidae. 
The great auk is classified as Pinguinus impennis. 

See also Guillemot; Murre; Puffin. 

Auld Lang Syne, AWD /ang SYN, is a traditional 
song of friendship in the English-speaking world. The ti- 
tle means old long since, or days gone by, in Scottish di- 
alect. The Scottish poet Robert Burns is usually given 
credit for the song's words, but he probably based them 
on a folk song. The melody is a version of an old Scot- 
tish tune. “Auld Lang Syne’ is a traditional New Year's 
Eve song in the United States. 

See also Burns, Robert. 
Aung San Suu Kyi, awng sahn soo chee (1945- ), 
leads the opposition to the military dictatorship that 
rules Myanmar, formerly called Burma. She won the 
1991 Nobel Peace Prize for her nonviolent efforts to re- 
store democracy to her country. 

Aung San Suu Kyi first became involved in her na- 
tion's politics in 1988, after the dictatorship killed thou- 
sands of protesters. That year, she cofounded and be- 
came secretary general of the National League for 
Democracy (NLD), soon the main opposition party in 
Myanmar. The NLD won a landslide victory in national 
elections held by the military in 1990. But the military re- 
fused to recognize the election results and began to ar- 
rest members of the NLD. Aung San Suu Kyi was held 
uncer house arrest from 1989 to 1995. After her release, 
she continued working to bring democracy to Myan- 


Valerie Woodring Goertzen 





mar, though the military 
government restricted her 
freedom of travel. The mil- 
itary again confined her to 
her home from Septem- 
ber 2000 to May 2002. 
Aung San Suu Kyi was 
born on June 19, 1945, in 
Yangon. Her father, Thakin 
Aung San, was the found- 
er of independent Burma. 
Aung San Suu Kyi studied 
in Burma and India and 
graduated from Oxford 
University in 1967. She is 
the author of several books, including Freedom from 
Fear and Other Writings (1991). James F. Guyot 
Aurangzeb, AWR uhng ZenHs8 (1618-1707), was an em- 
peror who ruled what is now India and Pakistan from 
1658 until his death. His reign as monarch of the Mughal 
Empire was marked by wars of expansion in southern 
India and wars to put down rebellions in the north. 
Aurangzeb, a devout Muslim, tried to make all his peo- 
ple follow Islam, the Muslim religion. He placed special 
taxes on Hindus, who made up the majority of the popu- 
lation, and destroyed Hindu temples and images. Au- 
rangzeb also destroyed many works of art because he 
feared that they might be worshiped as idols. His poli- 
cies led to much political and religious discontent, 
which helped weaken the empire. The empire declined 
rapidly after Aurangzeb’s death on March 3, 1707. 
Aurangzeb was born on Nov. 3, 1618, in Dohad, near 
Ahmadabad. In a struggle for the throne, he defeated 
three of his brothers in battle and executed two of them. 
Aurangzeb imprisoned his father and became emperor. 
Patricia Risso 
Aurelian, aw REE lee uhn (A.D. 215?-275), was a Roman 
emperor. His vigorous military rule reunited the empire, 
which seemed to be breaking up when he came to pow- 
er. Aurelian stamped his coins with the words Restorer 
of the World. He won victories over barbarian invaders 
near the Danube River; over Zenobia, queen of Palmyra 
in Syria; and over Tetricus, a semi-independent ruler of 
Gaul (now mainly France). Aurelian was born Lucius 
Domitius Aurelianus, probably in IIlyricum, a Roman 
province on the northeastern coast of the Adriatic Sea. 
He became emperor in 270 and ruled until 275, when a 
group of officers murdered him. Most of the wall he 
started to build around Rome still stands. F.G.B. Millar 
Aurelius, Marcus. See Marcus Aurelius. 
Auriga, aw RY guh, also called the Wagoner or Chario- 
teer, is a constellation between the constellations Perse- 
us and Gemini. Capella is the brightest star in Auriga. In 
mythology, the Charioteer often represents Phaéthon, 
son of Helios (see Phaéthon). Sumner Starrfield 
Aurochs, AWR ahks, also called urus, is the name of a 
kind of extinct wild ox. Aurochs are the ancestors of pre- 
sent-day domestic (tame) cattle. After the most recent ice 
age, which ended about 11,500 years ago, aurochs were 
spread across Europe, Asia, and northern Africa. Cattle 
were domesticated by about 8,500 years ago, probably 
in northern Europe or in India and the Middle East. It is 
believed they arose from two types of aurochs, one with 
humps and one without. Aurochs populations were 





© Candace Scharsu, Archive Photos 


Aung San Suu Kyi 


Aurora 891 


gradually reduced as people hunted them and civiliza- 
tion destroyed their habitats. The last aurochs died in a 
game preserve in Poland in 1627. William L Franklin 

Scientific classification. Aurochs belonged to the bovid 
family, Bovidae. Their scientific name is Bos taurus. 

Aurora, aw RAWR uh, was the Roman name for Eos, 
the Greek goddess of the dawn. She was the sister of 
Helius, the sun, and Selene, the moon. 

Aurora abducted several lovers. The most famous was 
Tithonus, a brother of King Priam of Troy. Aurora and 
Tithonus had a son named Memnon, who was killed by 
the Greek hero Achilles during the Trojan War. Aurora 
prayed to Jupiter, the king of the gods in Roman mythol- 
ogy, to make Tithonus immortal. However, she forgot to 





Detail of the Aurora Crater (300s B C}, a vase painting by an unknown Greek 
artist; Villa Giulio, Rome {SCALA/Art Resource) 


Aurora was the Roman name for Eos, the Greek goddess of the 
dawn. The goddess often carried off handsome men to be her 
lovers, including the prince Cephalus, shown here. 


ask for eternal youth for him as well. As a result, Titho- 
nus, though immortal, grew older and older and shriv- 
eled up. Aurora had him locked up. He slowly became 
only a voice. According to one story, Tithonus turned 
into a grasshopper. F. Carter Philips 

Aurora is a natural display of light in the sky that can 
be seen with the unaided eye only at night. An auroral 
display in the Northern Hemisphere is called the aurora 
borealis, or the northern lights. A similar phenomenon 
in the Southern Hemisphere is called the aurora aus- 
tralis. Auroras are the most visible effect of the sun’s ac- 
tivity on Earth's atmosphere. 

Most auroras occur in far northern and southern re- 
gions. They appear chiefly as arcs, clouds, and streaks. 
Some move, brighten, or flicker suddenly. The most 
common color in an aurora is green. But displays that 
occur extremely high in the sky may be red or purple. 
Most auroras occur about 60 to 620 miles (97 to 1,000 
kilometers) above Earth. Some extend lengthwise across 
the sky for thousands of miles or kilometers. 

Auroral displays are associated with the solar wind, a 
continuous flow of electrically charged particles from 
the sun. When these particles reach Earth's magnetic 
field, some get trapped. Many of these particles travel 
toward Earth's magnetic poles. When the particles strike 
atoms and molecules in the atmosphere, energy is re- 
leased. Some of this energy appears as auroras. 


892 Auschwitz 





Hopkins Observatory. Williams College ‘Kevin Reardon! 


An aurora glows in the night sky. Most auroras occur in the far 
northern and far southern regions. But occasionally, strong auro- 
ras like this one appear at lower latitudes. 


Auroras occur most frequently during the most in- 
tense phase of the 11-year sunspot cycle. During this 
phase, dark patches on the sun’s surface, called sun- 
spots, increase in number. Violent eruptions on the 
suns surface, known as so/ar flares, are associated with 
sunspots. Electrons and protons released by solar flares 
add to the number of solar particles that interact with 
the earth's atmosphere. This increased interaction pro- 
duces extremely bright auroras. It also results in sharp 
variations in the earths magnetic field called magnetic 
storms. During these storms, auroras may shift from the 
polar regions toward the equator. CR ODell 

See also Magnetic storm; Sun; Sunspot. 
Auschwitz, OW SH vihts, was a forced-labor and exter- 
mination center run by the German Nazis during World 
War II (1939-1945). About 15 million people died at 
Auschwitz from September 1941 to January 1945. The 
Nazis used gas chambers and other methods to murder 
most of these people. Other victims died of starvation or 
disease, and some were worked to death in nearby fac- 
tories. Most of the victims at Auschwitz were Jewish. 
The Nazis killed them as part of a plan to murder all the 
Jews in Europe. 

Auschwitz was located in Poland, near what is now 
Oswiecim. It consisted of three concentration camps— 
Auschwitz |, built in 1940; Auschwitz Il, or Birkenau, built 
in 1941; and Auschwitz III, or Monowitz, built in 1942. 
Today, Auschwitz is a museum and archive that is pre- 
served by the Polish government. Charles W. Sydnor, jr. 

See also Concentration camp; Holocaust (The camps). 
Austen, Jane /1775-1817), one of the best-loved Eng- 
lish novelists, wrote with a keen sense of irony about the 
social institutions of her time. In each of Austen’s six 
novels, a woman meets and marries an eligible man af- 
ter a series of usually comic difficulties. Overcoming 
these obstacles helps one or both of the characters gain 
the self-knowledge required for a happy marriage. Few 
authors have matched Austen's sure eve for human 
weakness, her affectionate description of everyday life, 
or her witty and elegant prose. 

Austen's first novel, Sense and Sensibility (1811), fol- 
lows Elinor and Marianne Dashwood. two sisters with 


differing temperaments. Elinor possesses careful self- 
control, or “sense,” while Marianne permits hasty emo- 
tions, or “sensibility,” to rule her decisions. Pride and 
Prejudice (1813) is Austen's most famous work In the 
novel, the lively Elizabeth Bennet dislikes Fitzwilliam 
Darcy's proud behavior and is blinded to his better qual- 
ities. Their marriage can take place only after he hum- 
bles his pride and she loses her prejudice. In Mansfield 
Park (1814), the long-suffering and modest Fanny Price 
grows up mistreated by rich relatives. Her character may 
seem uninteresting compared with Austen's more 
flawed women, but Fanny is a successful portrait of per- 
sonal integrity. 

The self-satisfied and overly imaginative heroine of 
Emma (1816) almost ruins her chances for happiness 
with matchmaking schemes. Northanger Abbey, begun 
in 1797 and published in 1818, makes fun of the Gothic 
tales of romance and terror popular in Austen's time 
(see Gothic novel). In Persuasion (1818), Anne Elliot and 
Frederick Wentworth find love that survives an earlier 
parting and a disapproving family. 

Jane Austen was born on Dec. 16, 1775, in Steventon, 
a village in Hampshire. Her father was a clergyman, and 
she received a better education than most women of 
her time. Austen began writing novels in her early 20's 
but did not publish them until late in life. Austen never 
married, and she lived happily in the rural, upper mid- 
dle class society described in her books. K K Collins 


Additional resources 


Copeland, Edward, and McMaster, Juliet, eds. The Cambridge 
Companion to Jane Austen. Cambridge, 1997. 
Poplawski, Paul. A jane Austen Encyclopedia Greenwood, 1998. 
Waldron, Mary. Jane Austen and the Fiction of Her Time. 
Cambridge, 1999. 
Austenlitz, AW stuhr lihts, Battle of, was a major 
battle of the Napoleonic Wars. It was fought on Dec. 2, 
1805, near the Moravian town of Austerlitz (now in the 
Czech Republic). Napoleon | and his Grand Army, in his 
most brilliantly fought battle, defeated a larger, com- 
bined army of Austria and Russia. The Battle of Austerlitz 
led to the Treaty of Pressburg, by which Austria lost Is- 
tria and Dalmatia to Italy, and the Tyrol to Bavaria. The 
Holy Roman Empire, headed by Francis II, was dis- 
solved, and the way opened for Napoleon to rule central 
Europe. See Napoleon | (Dominates Europe). 

Eric A. Arnold, jr. 
Austin (pop. 656,562; met. area pop. 1,249,763) is the 
capital of Texas and its educational center. The city of 
Austin lies on the Colorado River, about 160 miles (257 
kilometers) west of Houston (see Texas [political map). 

Austin was founded in 1839 and became the capital of 
the Republic of Texas in 1840. Officials of the republic 
chose the site, on bluffs overlooking the Colorado River, 
for its beauty and central location. The city was named 
for Stephen F. Austin, often called the father of Texas. 

Description. Austin, the county seat of Travis County, 
covers 254 square miles (658 square kilometers). The 
Austin-San Marcos metropolitan area, which consists of 
Bastrop, Caldwell, Hays, Travis, and Williamson coun- 
ties, occupies about 4,282 square miles (11,090 square 
kilometers). 

The State Capitol, Austin’s chief landmark, is near the 
center of the city. State government agencies and insti- 
tutions are throughout the city. The main campus of the 








University of Texas lies near the Capitol. Many athletic 
and entertainment events take place at the university's 
Frank C. Erwin Center, with 18,000 seats. Other institu- 
tions of higher learning include Austin Community Col- 
lege, Austin Presbyterian Theological Seminary, Episco- 
pal Theological Seminary of the Southwest, Huston- 
Tillotson College, and St. Edward's University. 

The Lyndon Baines Johnson Library on the University 
of Texas campus houses documents and souvenirs of 
the 36th President. The Texas Memorial Museum, also 
on campus, has exhibits on Texas history. The Laguna 
Gloria Art Museum shows work by Texas artists. Austin 
has a ballet association and symphony orchestra. 

Since 1895, Austin has produced its own “moonlight.” 
Mercury vapor lamps, atop iron frames 165 feet (50 me- 
ters) high, cast a blue glow over the city. 

Economy. The state, local, and federal governments 
employ more than a third of Austins work force. The 
University of Texas, a state institution, ranks as the 
largest single employer. 

Austin is the market center of a region that raises beef 
cattle and other farm products. Over 200 trade organiza- 
tions and associations have headquarters in Austin. The 
city is a center of the country music industry. Austin is 
famous for its parks, many of which are linked by green- 
belts (belts of woodland or parkland). 

The Austin metropolitan area has about 550 manufac- 
turing plants. The area is an important center for elec- 
tronics and other high-technology industry. Many plants 
work with research institutions based in Austin. Other 
major industries include publishing and tourism. 

Government and history. Austin has a council- 
manager form of government. The voters elect a mayor 
and six council members to two-year terms. The council 
hires a city manager to carry out its policies. 

When white settlers first arrived in the early 1800's, 
Tonkawa Indians lived in what is now the Austin area. 
The settlers named their community Waterloo. Few fam- 
ilies lived there when Austin was founded in 1839. 

In 1900, when Austin had 22,258 people, the Colorado 
River flooded the lower part of the city and burst a dam. 
Since then, seven new dams have been built. They have 
created seven artificial lakes near Austin. These lakes 
provide recreaiion facilities. 

Austin’s population has increased by more than a 
third every 10 years from 1920—when 34,876 people 
lived in the city—to 2000. During the 1970's, the increas- 





Australasia 893 


es resulted mainly from the growth of the University of 
Texas and from Austin’s development as a center of 
business and government. During the 1970's and early 
1980's, many large construction projects were undertak- 
en in the Austin area. These included many office build- 
ings, apartments, hotels, shopping centers, and universi- 
ty and state government buildings. In 1992, a new 
convention center opened in Austin. By 2000, Austin’s 
population had reached 656,562. 

See also Texas (pictures). 
Austin, Stephen Fuller (1793-1836), was an Ameri- 
can colonizer and pioneer. He started the first American 
colony in Texas, which was then part of Mexico. His fa- 
ther, Moses Austin, had obtained a grant of land on the 
Brazos River from Spanish authorities in Mexico in 1821. 
Moses planned to bring 300 families to settle the land. 
But he died before establishing the colony. Stephen ob- 
tained permission to continue the project—first from 
Spain, and later from Mexico after it won independence 
from Spain in 1821. The main settlement was named San 
Felipe de Austin in Stephen's honor. Later, Austin, Texas, 
was named for him. 

Austin managed the affairs of the colony wisely. By 
1830, there were more than 20,000 Americans in Texas. 
That year, the Mexican government prohibited further 
immigration of Americans to Texas. This action in- 
creased the desire of many Texans for a more independ- 
ent government. In 1833, when Austin asked Mexico for 
a separate state government for Texas, he was accused 
of trying to annex Texas to the United States. He was 
sent to prison, but never received a trial. He returned to 
Texas in 1835. There he found the people ready to fight 
for freedom from Mexico. Austin took command of the 
Texan army, but soon resigned. He went to the United 
States for money and supplies for the Texans. 

Texas became a republic in 1836. Austin was a candi- 
date for President, but Sam Houston was elected. Austin 
was named secretary of state. He worked secretly for the 
U.S. annexation of Texas but died before it happened. He 
was born in Wythe County, Virginia. A statue of Austin is 
in the U.S. Capitol. Joseph A. Stout, Jr. 

See also Texas (American settlement); Texas Rangers. 
Australasia, aw struh LAY zhuh, refers to Australia, 
New Guinea, New Zealand, and other nearby islands. 
New Guinea and New Zealand are also considered as 
part of the Pacific Islands, or Oceania. See Australia; 
New Guinea; New Zealand; Pacific Islands. 


Terry G. Jordan 


Shostal 


Austin, a leading educational 
center of the Southwest, is the 







* home of the Lyndon Baines 
yaw7A"A TVA Johnson Library, shown here. 
PRRRRARRRRRRD RD The library stands on the cam- 
Blk ee pus of the University of Texas. 





2 — oe wee 
’ 





894 Australia 


‘fe = 


ae saab Peg At a pce shea Ae 
of tx va, LA% f ga ‘ shy sie aR / 


bo ee) 
+7 To 





© Peter Mead, Tom Stack & Associates 


The vast interior of Australia, often called the outback, consists mainly of deserts and dry 
grasslands. Spinifex grass, foreground, is a common plant in the outback. 


Australia 


Australia is the only country that is also a continent. In 
area, Australia ranks as the sixth largest country and 
smallest continent. It lies between the South Pacific 
Ocean and the Indian Ocean, about 7,000 miles (11,000 
kilometers) southwest of North America and about 2,000 
miles (3,200 kilometers) southeast of mainland Asia, Aus- 
tralia is often referred to as being “down under’ be- 
cause it lies entirely within the Southern Hemisphere. 
The name Australia comes from the Latin word australis, 
which means southern. The official name of the country 
is the Commonwealth of Australia 


Much of Australia is dry and thinly populated. Howev 
er, Australia has numerous areas with a pleasant climate 
and enough rainfall to support rge population. The 

The contributors ot this articie are D. N. Jeans. Associate 
fessor of Geography at the Universin vdney and Joh 
Rickard, Reader in History at Monash versity and 10 


Australia. A Cultural History 


southeastern coastal region has the most people by far. 
Australia’s two largest cities—Sydney and Melbourne— 
lie in this region. Canberra, the national capital, lies only 
a short distance inland. The huge interior of Australia is 
mostly desert or dry grassland and has few settlements. 
The country as a whole averages only about 6 people 
per square mile (2 people per square kilometer). Most 
Australians live in urban or suburban areas in the major 
cities. Australia is famous for its vast open spaces, bright 
sunshine, and unusual wildlife. Kangaroos, koalas, platy- 
puses, and wombats are only a few of the many unusual 
animals that live in Australia. 

The country was once a group of British colonies, and 
most Australian people are of British ancestry. When 
people moved to Australia from Great Britain (now the 
United Kingdom), they took many British customs with 
them. For example, Australians drive on the left side of 
the road, as do British drivers. However, Australians 
have developed a way of life all their own. Australia has 





a 





a warm, sunny climate. People spend much of their free 
time outdoors. Australians love sports and outdoor liv- 
ing in general. Since the 1950's, immigration from many 
different countries has made the population more mixed 
and the way of life more varied. Australia now considers 
itself a multicultural nation. 

Australia is one of the world’s developed countries. It 
has busy cities, modern factories, and productive farms 
and mines. Australia is the world’s leading producer and 
exporter of wool and bauxite (the ore from which alu- 
minum is made). The country also produces and exports 
large amounts of other minerals and farm goods. In- 
come from these exports enables most Australians to 
have a high standard of living. In the past, the United 
Kingdom was Australia’s leading trading partner. Today, 
Australia trades most with Japan and the United States. 

The first Australians were a people known today as 
Aborigines (pronounced 48 uh rity uh neez) The Aborig- 
ines had lived in Australia for as long as 65,000 years be- 
fore the first white settlers arrived. 

Great Britain settled Australia as a prison colony in 
1788. After British settlement, the number of whites 
steadily increased while the Aboriginal population de- 
clined dramatically. The Aboriginal population slowed 
its decline in the early 1900's and has been increasing 
since the mid-1900’s. Today, the majority of Australians 
are white or have mixed European ancestry, though 
there are now also many Australians of Asian and Mid- 
dle Eastern descent. 


Government 


The Commonwealth of Australia is a federation of 
states governed under a written constitution. The Aus- 
tralian Constitution gives certain powers to the federal 
government and leaves all other powers to the states. 

Australia has six states, each with its own government. 
These states are New South Wales, Queensland, South 
Australia, Tasmania, Victoria, and Western Australia. 





Australia 895 


Australia also has two mainland territories—the Aus- 
tralian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory. Each 
territory is responsible for its own administration, the 
first step toward statehood. But the federal government 
must approve major policy changes for the territories. 

Australia has a parliamentary system of government. 
Under this system, the national government is con- 
trolled by the political party or the coa/ition (combina- 
tion) of parties with a majority of seats in the lower 
house of parliament. The leader of the majority party or 
the coalition heads the government as prime minister. 

Australia is a constitutional monarchy like the United 
Kingdom. The British monarch, Queen Elizabeth Il, is 
also queen of Australia and the country’s head of state. 
However, the queen has little power in Australia. She 
serves mainly as a symbol of the historical tie between 
the two countries. Australia is a member of the Com- 
monwealth of Nations, an association formed by the 
United Kingdom and some former British colonies. 

The federal government of Australia is officially 
headed by a governor general, who represents the 
queen. The queen appoints the governor general on the 
recommendation of the Australian prime minister. The 
governor general's role, like the queen’s, is mainly sym- 
bolic. In 1975, however, the governor general used his 
power to remove the prime minister from office. See the 
History section of this article for details. 

The prime minister, Australia’s head of government, 
is normally responsible only to the majority party or 
coalition. If the party or coalition chooses a new leader, 
that person becomes prime minister. 

The prime minister appoints members of Parliament 
to head government departments. The department 
heads, called ministers, and the prime minister make up 
the Cabinet, which sets major government policies. 

The federal Parliament has an upper and a lower 
house. The upper house is called the Senate, and the 
lower house is called the House of Representatives. 


John Carnemolla, Australian Picture Library 


Sydney is the largest city in 
Australia. Founded in 1788, it 
is also the country’s oldest 
city. Today, the downtown 
area of Sydney has many 
high-rise buildings. The sail- 
like Sydney Opera House, 
foreground, stands ona 
peninsula in Sydney Harbour 
and is a city landmark. 


— 


“—] |) 
— 


* 


896 Australia 


Australia in brief 


General information 


Capital: Canberra 

Official language: English. 

Official name: Commonwealth of Australia 

Anthems: “Advance Australia Fair” (national); “God Save the 
Queen’ (royal). 

Largest cities: (1996 census) 
Sydney (3,741,290) 
Melbourne (3,138,147) 
Brisbane (1,488,883) 

Perth (1,244,320) 
Adelaide (1,045,854) 









Australia’s coat of arms features 
a kangaroo and an emu; golden 
wattle blossoms (the national flo- 
ral emblem); a shield with the 


Australia’s flag has a 
British Union flag, five 
stars that represent the 
constellation Southern 
Cross, and a large star for coats of arms of the six states of 


Australia; and a star for the states 
and territories. 


the country’s states and 
territories. 


Land and climate 


Land: Australia is the only country that is also a continent It 
lies between the South Pacific and Indian oceans. Australia 
is mostly flat, except for the Great Dividing Range in the 
east and several smaller mountainous regions. The major 
rivers include the Murray and the Darling. 





AUSTRALIA Fiji 


os. 
la 
Ug 





ANTARCTIE,g 


Area: 2,978,147 mi? (7,713,364 km‘), including 26,000 mr {67,800 
km‘) for Tasmania Greatest distances (mainland}—east-west 
2,475 mi (3,983 km); north-south— 1,950 mi (3,138 km). Coast- 
Jine— 37,118 mi (59,736 km), including 1,760 mi (2,833 kmi for 
Tasmania and 14,825 mi (23,859 km) for offshore islands. 

Elevation: Highest—Mt Kosciuszko, 7,310 ft (2,228 m) above 
sea level. Lowest—Lake Eyre, 52 ft 116 m) below sea level 

Climate: The northern third of Australia lies in the tropics and 


is warm the year around. The rest of the country has warm 
summers and cool winters. About a third of the country is 
desert Australia lies south of the equator, and so its seasons 
are opposite those in the Northem Hemisphere 


Government 


Form of government Constitutional monarchy; in practice, 
a parliamentary democracy. 

Head of state: Queen of the United Kingdom, who is also 
queen of Australia In practice, governor general performs 
functions in queen's absence. 

Head of government: Prime minister, the leader of the party 
or coalition of parties holding a majority in the House of 
Representatives. 

Parliament Senate—76 members; House of Representatives— 
150 members. 

Executive: Prime minister and Cabinet 

Political subdivisions: Six states, two mainland territories, 
and eight externa! territories. 


People 


Population: 2002 estimate—19,231,000. 1996 census— 
17,892,423. 

Population density: 6 per mi? (2 per km’). 

Distribution: 85 percent urban, 15 percent rural. 

Major ethnic/national groups: About 91 percent of Euro- 
pean descent, chiefly British and Irish, but also Italian, 
Greek, German, Dutch, and others. About 7 percent Asian. 
About 2 percent Aborigine (native Australian peoples). 

Religion: About 25 percent Anglican, 25 percent Roman 
Catholic, and 10 percent Uniting Church, which consists of 
Methodist, Congregationalist, and some Presbyterian 
churches. 





Population trend 
Millions 
Year Population 
1881 2,250,194 
1891 3,177 B23 
1901 3,373,801 
1911 4,455,005 
1921 5,435,734 
1933 6,629 839 
1947 7,579,338 
1934 8,386,530 
1961 10,508,186 
1966 11,599,498 
1971 12,735,638 
1976 13,548,472 
1981 14.574,488 
1986 15,602,156 
1991 16,850,540 
1996 17 892.423 
1880 1900 1920 1940 1966 1980 2000 


Economy 


Chief products: Agricu/ture—apples, barley, beef cattle, 
chickens and eggs, grapes, milk, oats, oranges, potatoes, 
rice, sheep and lambs, sugar cane, wheat, wool. Fishing— 
lobsters, oysters, shrimp. Forestry—eucalyptus and pine 
timber, wood pulp. Manufacturing—automobiles and other 
transportation equipment; chemicals; household appli- 
ances; iron, steel, and other metals; paper; processed 
foods; textiles, clothing, and shoes. Mining—bauxite, coal, 
copper, diamonds, gold, iron ore, lead, manganese, natural 
gas, nickel, opals, petroleum, silver, tin, titanium, uranium, 
zinc, zircon. 

Money: Basic unit—Australian dollar. 

International trade: Major exports—alumina, beef, coal, iron 
ore, petroleum products, wheat, wool. Major imports—elec- 
trical appliances, industrial machinery, office equipment, 
petroleum products, telecommunications equipment, yarns 
and fabrics. Major trading partners—Germany, Japan, New 
Zealand, United Kingdom, United States. 


iar tl Oe Oh of od ee oe oe oe | 





pe wr a ar af 29? be ae? 


h-*h* 


&* a 


Australia 897 


Most bills are introduced in the House. The Senate re- 
views bills passed by the House and can reject them. 

The Australian Senate has 76 members. Each state 
elects 12 senators, and each mainland territory elects 2. 
Membership in the 150-member House of Representa- 
tives is divided among the states and mainland territo- 
ries according to population. Senators are elected to six- 
year terms, and representatives to three-year terms. 
Elections for the House must be held at least every three 
years. But the prime minister may ask the governor gen- 
eral to dissolve the House and call for new elections at a 
any time. All Australians 18 years of age or older must — “er 
vote in parliamentary and state elections. Those who do a o yl 
not vote may be fined. , = 4 

The federal courts. The High Court of Australia de- 
cides constitutional questions. It also serves as the na- 
tion’s court of final appeals. Other federal courts deal 
with bankruptcy cases, family law, industrial disputes, 
and violations of federal law. | 

State and local government. Each Australian state Parliament House in Canberra is the meeting place of the Aus- 


has its own parliament, court system, head of govern- tralian Parliament The unusual structure is set into a hill over- 
ment, and governor. The heads of state governments are _lvoking the city. The building was dedicated in 1988. 





National Capitol Development Commission 


Australia map index 
(Map appears on following pages.) 


States and mainland territories External territories* 
Map Area Area 
key Name In m? In kn? Population Name In m? In kn? Population 
1 13 Australian Capital Ashmore and Cartier Islands 77 199 0 
Territory (Canberra) 930 2,400 299,243 Australian Antarctic Territoryt 2,362,875 6,119,818 0 
H 12 New South Wales 309,500 801,600 6,038,696 Christmas Island 52 135 1,906 
D 9 Norther Territory 519,800 1,346,200 195,101 Cocos (Keeling) Islands 5 13 655 
E 12 Queensland 666,900 1,727,200 3,368,850 Coral Sea Islands t + 0 
G 9 South Australia 380,000 984,000 1,427,936 Heard and McDonald Islands 183 474 0 
K 12 Tasmania 26,200 67,800 459,659 Norfolk Island 14 36 1,800 
in Victoria 87,900 227,600 4,373,520 
F 5 Western Australia 975.100 2,525,500 1,726,095 *Not shown on map. 
tClaimed by Australia. 
+400,000 square miles [1,035,995 square kilometers), including about 1 square mile 
{3 square kilometers) of land. 
Cities and towns 
Adelaide ..... 1,045,854 ..H 10 CASINOS. 6c ces. 10,774 ..G 14 Grafton .........17,110..G 14 Moe- Rock- 
eeealiy . eee... 14,590.10 5 Cessnock ...... 44,362 ..H 13 Griffith on...2-.- 21,594 ..H 12 Yalloum...... 17,878 ..J 12 hampton .....59,732..£ 14 
Albury- Charters Gunnedah ...... 12,819..G 13 Moree .......... 15,517 ..G 13 Rockingham ....58,167..H 4 
Wodonga ... 83,564 ..! 12 Towers ........ 8,893 ..D 12 Gympie ......... 15,147 ..F 14 Morning- Retrite teres cacy 6,439 ..F 13 
Alice Clarence’ ....... 47,461 ..K 12 Hamilton ........ 9248.1 11 Ton eae 110,409...) 11 Sale” ..:. Wess: 13,366 .J 12 
Springs ..... apOo2e.c 9 Cobar ... 3,676 ..H 12 Hervey Morwell 22,801 ..J 12 Salisbury ...... 108,465 ..H 10 
Ararat. ...g.s.-.- 1,098 ..1 11 Coffs Bay 42,391 ..F 14 Mount Shell- 
Armidale 21,330 ..G 13 Harbour..... 58,337 ..G 14 Hobart ......... 189,944 ..K 12 Gambier 22,037 ..1 10 harbour’ 52,080 ..1 13 
Bacchus Colac’ . Soc) bd) UL Horsham........ Miz 322 - olin Mount Isa ...... 22,866 ..D 10 Shepparton .... 39,694 ..1 12 
Marsh’ ....... 13.489...) 11 Comes. 2.200... 8636.H 4 Inverell ... 14,899 ..G 13 Mudgee ........ 17,074 ..H_ 13 Singleton* ..... 20,133 ..H 14 
Bairnsdale’ .....23,378..J) 12 Cooma’ ......... 9,680.1 13 Ipswich ........ 126,855 ..G 14 ge la Stawell .......... 9211.4 11 
Ballarat. .......76, {J} Coota- goorlie ..... 29,683 ..G 5 Bridge ....... 15,893 ..1 10 Sunbu socom’ eeeMad| [2 
Ballina .......... 34,702 ..G 14 mundra ....... (Rvs ele Kempsey ...... 26,430 ..H 14 Muswell- Swan Hill........ 9,385.1 11 
Bathurst ..... ., 28,842 ..H 13 Cowra .......... 12,146 ..H 13 Kiama’ ..........17,706..4 13 brook ........ 15,562 ..H_ 13 Sydney .. 3,741,290 ..H 13 
Benalla’ .. 8,582.1 12 Cran- Kingaroy ........11,141 ...F 14 Nambour ....... 11,397 ..F 14 Tamworth ..... 35,014 ..H 13 
| Bendigo 71,429 ..1 11 bourne’ ......44,171..J 12 Kin Naracoorte....... 4,674.1 10 LETT aecuamad | 42,410 ..H 14 
Berwick’ ........43.624..J 11 Day aa sacs S517 ..F 14 borough" 26,839 ..K 12 Narrabri 14,101 ..G 13 Tewantir- 
Blue Moun- DaGwilhene tee 72,622.A 8 Kingston .. 13,148 ..C 12 Narrogin ......... 4491..H 4 Noosa’ ....... 8856 .F 14 
tains’ .. ......72,506..H 13 Deniliquin 7,816.1 12 Kwinana ........ 19,186..H 4 Newcastle ..... 133,686 ..H 13 Toowoomba ... 83,633 ..F 14 
Bourke . 4,049 ..G 12 Devonport 23,814. .K 12 Launceston 59,606 ..K 12 Northam ......... 6,300..H 4 Townsville ...... 85,239 ..D 13 
Bowen ......... 14.411..0 13 GUbie 2-2-2. 36,701 ..H 13 Leeton......... 11,031 ..H 12 Drange ........ a3 ..H 13 Traralgon’ ..... 24,199 ..J 12 
Brisbane ... 1,488,883 ..G 14 Echuca .... 10,014... 11 Lismore ....*..... 42,954 .G 14 Par@G cn. 5: 15,098 ..H 12 Luss Qi ccitons 10,951 ..1 12 
Broken Elizabeth .. 25,852 ..H 10 Lithgow .. 19,248 ..H 13 Penrith ........ 163,122 ..H 13 Wagga 
Hill .... 2ijg962-H 11 Emerald ........ 13,312 ..£ 13 Mackay .. 60,703 ..D 13 Parti. ... 1,244,320 ..H 4 agga...... 255,519), | Biz 
Bunbury . 26536..H 4 Esperance ......11,837..H 6 Maitland ........ 49,941 ..H 14 Port Wangaratta ....25,035..1 12 
Bunda- Forbes ..........10,138..H 12 Mandurah ..... 37,925..H 4 Augusta ..... .14,244 ..H 10 Warrnam- 
berg .. 42,842... 14 Fremantle ... 30521..H 4 $Mareeba........ 18,188 ..C 12 Port bool. ........26,776.J 11 
Burdekin® _ ...18,957 ..D 13 Gawler ... 16,656 ..H 10 Maroochy- Hedland .....13,116..D 4 Warwick .. .....19,967 ..G 14 
Bamie ....<.....17,202 ..K 12 Geelong 146,166...) 11 dore- Port Lincoln .....12,182..H 9 Wellington’ ..... 8,648 ..H 13 
Busselton ..17,490..H 4 George Mooloo- Port Mac- Wentworth’ .....7,245..H 14 
Cairns . ...... 121,036..C 12 Town. . .. 6,653 ..K 12 abA 6. 2. 4 28,206 .F 14 quane...... 28,038 ..H 14 Weston’ . ..... 3,298 ..H 13 
Caloundra ..... 66,336..F 14 Geraldton . ...19,816.G 3 Mary- Port Pirie . 13,960 ..H 10 bale 23,644 ..H 10 
Camden’ 32,109 ..H 13 Gladstone . .. 2646 E 14 borough .....24,868 ..F 14 Portland . 10.217 ..J 11 Wodo 
Campbell- Glen Innes . 6,101.G 14 Melbourme . 3.138.147...) 12 Quean- see Albury- 
town .. 143,773 .H 13 Gold Coast 334.826. G 14 Melton’ 39,169.11 11 m” ii....27/414 1 13 Wodon 
Canberra... 298,847.11 13 Gosford . 144,840 ..H 13 Mildura 45.418 H 11 Richmond Wollongong .. 177,009 | 13 | 
Carnarvon... 8616.F 3 Goulbum . 21293 Millicent 7,247.1 10 River* 10,059 ..H 13 Young... 11,046 ..H 12 


Source: 1996 census. 
“Does not appear on map; key shows general location. 





Australia 
political map 


National park (N.P)} 


[| Aboriginal land 
—_— 
— 


Expressway 
Road 
Railroad 


Seasonal stream 





Dry lake 
National capital 
State or territorial capital 


Other city or town 


WORLD BOOK map 





State or territorial boundary 







3 4 5 


ig 


— Bal (abok —_ ombawa i 






Beagle Gulf 2 
Ashmore !s. «D; 


Cartier |. 


af v - 
AGEIKIEGORGE . 
NP 


. i os 
— 


CRATER NP 





Austra lia 
Peg — eke = ™ J 
> 


is 






GreatA ustrailan BIg 









—u “agin 

phe pok “Katanni 
DF 

| Donnyor' r ; 





17 1 12 
9 


















Arafura Sea 































































































SOLO 
so ~~ 
JAROINE RIVER Wy p { 
Wessel iS ! PAPUA A QUisiade 
pa Gove- /s REAT BARRIER Ager NE GUINE ES ash 
Maningrida . Nhulunbuy i MARINE PARK a = 
: J i 
t 
ait 
ARCHER BEND ‘ 
BY CROLL 
Groote , 
uy Eylandt arp es Meivitle ace ae ih) Ca 
© iiuite: ‘ KEFIELONp \ 
\ 
\ 
Sir Edward Petlew { 
Group , laure. £00k. 
Wellesley " he ‘1 VEREE = 
islendigen s a a, Mossman Be 
Ne oie i , Mareeba. Cairns — S 
" Atherton \ O 
Kfrunbe nC BELLENOEN- Kea? Prdonvale sees, 
Burketown" | . y= pl avenshoe anistat ao i; 
Croydon? oe 
yf , Beare 7 INCHINEROOR tang NP Oc Bee. 
Xi" CRYSTAL CREEK ty x 
yet ‘ 
~ 
ey fy im Charters Tow, ae Nesterfierg 
- .* S$) ands 
hs 
Mount Isa, _ Ereek tchmond “eaTsusaay © a oe rance) 
#* Hughenden .s 
': Kynuna ackay ~ 
b' iV, *Saring 
~ Moranbah, \ 
. _— Winton \ 
. Q \ lerma t 1SREAT Bape 5 
j he A ue m4 Ss i an d A \ Merterougn | MARINE PARK EEF 
— sell = Longreach’ Ba Idine Em or 7 Me Poon \ 
ag P< iauatfiampton 
Bedourie, ry f pee 
e . Blackall, caRwaavon erat } Gladstone \ 
J woe Mouse” “Biloeig 
, Tembo*% . Bea 
450 Ogsear Windorah, Yeraka Tembo Md sPundater 
Birdsville ~y Adavale, t GEN ey ISLANO Wy p 
/ Augathetts 
- Chartevitte,“ a 
Quitpie* = —. Mitchell” ~~Floma 
: % _ : Oo} 
ea i Oofap 
-Dadnadatta re Tr. y 
ae “Moomba "hargomindan*- Sinnemuter * St George 
a aol ta ss Ts Dirranbands, Goondwing: ast 
\ ober Pedy a . 7 e 
‘y fie 45 Sy STURT NP : : ", i 
1) c »Marree Tibap Dura ’ Moree { 
aw II *Milparinka jy ‘e ness 
« 
GAMMON RARGES Np , Tanai — Glee 
A rha # Lofts Harbour 
NO Ny 
lorg Howe { 
Forbes 
West Wy, valong c 
: gore Pete? 
Hay, 7 en onan BLUE m 
Ndra* Goutbyr park = 
| Pater Wa agga- -Wesg 7 MORTON, 4 
Victor Harbor* “Denitiquin —' Tumut®.. Ci 
FLINOERS CHASE N PO COORON 7, ‘si 
Kangeroo NP arton 
island LITTLE DE SER ° 
ea 
. CANUNOA N P No , 
Mithicent® ~ t 
Mount Gambier Port f CRO, INGO 
LOWER GLENELG Wp NP 
| Warmenesn ~ fallow Morwell 
Cape Otway OTWay 
| aey MISONS PROMONTORY y p 
— V3 Ss as Pp iS 
| King |. Funders i | ea 
. ©» MT ste EC, NP 
Smithton, Sine 8h € Barren) 
Devodit “George Town 
CRAOLE MOUNTAIN oe : aunceston 
KEST CLAIR NP BEN LOMONO jy p 
Queenstown’) = Ta Mania 
“New Norfotk 
Hobart 
| SOUTH. wesy NP. 4 
| 2.500 Miles 
* 2,250 
| 1,750 lh 3.750 4.000 Kilometers 
.500 500 fa 
} 1.250 a ; a 3.250 3 
| Ae 2.75 
} 2.000 2.250 
. 


SS pe 








900 Australia 


called premiers. The governor of each state represents 
the queen. 

Australia’s states do not operate as independently of 
the federal government as do, for example, the states of 
the United States. The Australian states have heavy ad- 
ministrative responsibilities in certain areas, such as lo- 
cal law enforcement, public education, and the building 
of roads. But the federal government colleets nearly all 
the nation’s taxes. tach state receives a share of the fed- 
eral tax income. But this allowance is usually not enough 
to finance major new publie works. By granting or deny- 
ing a state’s requests for additional funds or loans, the 
federal government strongly influences the services that 
the state provides. 

Local governments in Australia consist mainly of shire 
(county) and eity or town councils. Local governments 
are responsible for such services as building local 
roads, maintaining publie libraries, and colleeting the 
residents garbage. The states, rather than local govern- 
ments, control the local publie schools and police. Local 
governments receive income from property taxes and 
federal and state grants. 

Political parties. Australia has three main political 
parties —the Australian Labor Party (ALP), the Liberal Par- 
ty of Australia, and the National Party of Australia. The 
ALP promotes government action in economic and so- 
cial affairs, especially to improve working conditions. 
Many ALP supporters belong to labor unions. The Liber- 
al Party favors the free enterprise system with little gov- 
ernment interference. Many merchants and business ex- 
ecutives support the Liberals. The National Party 
represents the interests of farmers and other rural Aus- 


Where the people of 
Australia live 


This map shows how Austral: 
ia's population is distributed, 
Most of the peopte live along 
the east, southeast, and ex 
treme southwest coasts. The 
vast, dry interior of the coun 
try has few settlements. 


Major Urban Areos WisetERN AUSTRALIA 


@ More thon | million inhebttants 
¢ 250,000 to 1 million inhabitants 


75,000 ta 250,000 inhabitonts ‘ 


Persons per Persons per 





sqm. him? 
Mare thon 15 Mote thon 6 
to 15 4to6 
5 to 10 2 to 4 
2405 1 to 2 
Less thon | 


less thon 2 | 


WORLD BOOK map 


tralians. Jn Parliament, the Liberal and National parties 
often form a coalition in opposition to the ALP. 

Environmental issues are becoming increasingly im- 
portant to Australians. Today, the parties’ positions on 
such issues strongly influence voters. 

The armed forces of Australia consist of the Aus- 
tralian Army, the Royal Australian Navy, and the Royal 
Australian Air Force. The three services make up a unit- 
ed command that is called the Australian Defence Force. 
The Australian Defence Force has a total of approximate- 
ly 70,000 men and women. All of the military service is 
voluntary. 


People 


Population and ancestry. Approximately 80 percent 
of Australia’s people live in the southeastern quarter of 
the country, especially in large cities along the coast. 
Most of the rest of the people live along the northeast 
and the extreme southwest coasts. The vast interior of 
Australia is too dry to support a large population, and 
few people live there. Canberra, the national capital, is 
the largest inland city. !t lies only about 80 miles (130 
kilometers) from the ocean. 

Most Australians are European immigrants or de- 
scendants of European immigrants. Aborigines make up 
about 2 percent of the population. Traditionally, Aus- 
tralia has relied heavily on immigrants to build up its la- 
bor foree. Through the years, millions of immigrants 
have been attracted to Australia by the promise of high- 
paying jobs, security, and a clean environment. 

Until the mid-1900's, the great majority of Australia’s 
immigrants came from the United Kingdom and Ireland. 






| 
NORTHERN 
TERRITORY 


ownsville 


a a | alisbu { yewcastle 
on Sydney 


Wollongong 
wera 











© Robert Frerck 


A street scene in Perth reflects the strongly European ancestry 
of the Australian people. The great majority of Australians are 
descendants of British or irish immigrants. 


As aresult, most Australians are of British or Irish ances- 
try. 

After World War I! ended in 1945, the government 
began a special program to encourage mainland Euro- 
peans left homeless by the war to move to Australia. The 
government later broadened this program to include 
any Europeans who wished to move to Australia and 
could meet the country’s immigration requirements. In 
general, the immigration authorities prefer applicants 
who have some special job skill and a stable personal 
background. 

Australia has an exceptionally large foreign-born pop- 
ulation because of the high rate of immigration since 
World War Il. About 22 percent of all Australians were 
born in other countries. Australia has admitted about 
6 million immigrants since the end of World War II. Ap- 
proximately one-third of these immigrants have come 
from the United Kingdom and Ireland. The majority of 
the rest of the immigrants have come from mainland Eu- 
rope, especially from the former Yugoslav republics and 
from such southern European countries as Greece and 
Italy. 

Relatively few Canadians and Americans have moved 
to Australia. !mmigration from Asia has greatly in- 
creased since the 1970's, and European immigration has 
declined. During the late 1900's, the number of immi- 
grants from New Zealand and Southeast Asia increased 
rapidly. 

Language. English is the official language of Aus- 
tralians. However, more than 15 percent of the people 
speak a language other than English at home. The most 


Australia 901 





Bill Bachman 


Aborigines are descendants of Australia’s first settlers, people 
who migrated from Asia thousands of years ago. This school for 
Aboriginal children is in the Northern Territory. 


common languages after English are Chinese, Italian, 
Greek, Vietnamese, and Arabic. 

Australian English differs from British English in cer- 
tain ways. The British who settled in Australia had to de- 
velop a vocabulary to describe the many unfamiliar ani- 
mals and plants in their new environment. In some 
cases, the settlers used existing English words. For ex- 
ample, they gave the name magpie to a bird thet resem- 
bles the British magpie but is actually unrelated to any 
bird in the United Kingdom. 

In other cases, many of the British settlers borrowed 
words from the language of the Aborigines. Such Abo- 
riginal words as kangaroo and koala were thus intro- 
duced into English. 

Pioneer settlers in the Australian interior invented a 
large, colorful vocabulary. Large farms became known 
as stations, farm owners as squatters, a herd of animals 
as a mob, and wild horses as brumbies. The interior it- 
self became known as the outback. 

Australian English has also produced many colorful 
figures of speech. For example, an exceptionally brave 
person is said to be “as game as Ned Kelly.” Ned Kelly 
was a famous Australian outlaw of the 1870's. “Waltzing 
Matilda,” which is the title of Australia’s most famous 
song, refers neither to a dance nor to a woman. A matil- 
dais a blanket roll. "To waltz matilda” means “to tramp 
the roads.” 

Australians speak with an accent that differs from the 
accents in other English-speaking countries around the 
world. The accent differs little from one part of Australia 
to another. However, it varies somewhat according 


902 Australia 


to a person's family background, amount of schooling, 
and gender. 

The Aborigines. Australia has about 400,000 Aborig- 
ines. Most are of mixed Aboriginal and white ancestry. 
The rest are of unmixed ancestry. Many Aborigines live 
in or near cities and towns. Some live in rural areas of 
New South Wales, the Northern Territory, Queensland, 
and Western Australia. Torres Strait Islanders make up 
Australias other indigenous (native) group. 

The history of the Aborigines since the arrival of Euro- 
peans has been similar to that of the American Indians. 
Many Aborigines were killed or forced from their 
homes by white settlers. Since then, most Aborigines 
have lived on the fringes of white society. In many Cases, 
they have been actively discouraged from joining white 
communities. The majority of Aborigines live in cities 
and towns, though many retain strong links with their 
Aboriginal community and traditional lands. Since the 
late 1900's, some Aborigines in central and northern 
Australia have stayed on, or returned to, their traditional 
lands. There they often live in Aboriginal community set- 
tlements. These communities preserve some Aboriginal 
ways of life, especially traditional languages, religious 
beliefs, and styles of painting and craftwork. 

Regardless of where they live, the Aborigines gener- 
ally lag far behind white Australians in education and in- 
come. They also lack decent housing and proper health 
care. Some whites have tried to help the Aborigines 
raise their standard of living. But for many years, church- 
es and other private groups provided the only ergan- 
ized assistance. A clause in the Australian Constitution 
prevented the federal government from aiding most 
Aborigines directly. But in 1967, Australians voted over- 
whelmingly to remove this clause from the Constitution. 

Today, the Australian government has programs to 
improve the health, education, job skills, and living con- 
ditions of the Aborigines. The government also has a 
program to help Aboriginal communities in rural areas 
gain title to their land. However, many Aborigines want 
a greater voice in deciding their own affairs. They espe- 
cially want to regain control over all their traditional trib- 
al territories, not only those lands occupied by Aborigi- 





© David R. Frazer Photolibrary 
Housing in Australia varies from city to city. Most families live 
in single-story dwellings, such as these in Port Mac quarie, New 
South Wales. Each house typicaliv has its own garden, 


nal communities. For detailed information on the Abo- 
rigines, see the article Aborigines, Australian. 


Ways of life 


For most of the 1900's, the difference between rich 
and poor in Australia was smaller than in most other 
Western countries. In the late 1900's, this gap began to 
grow rapidly. Australia now has clear differences in 
wealth, employment, and education among its people. 
But except for some Aborigines, Australia still lacks the 
extremes of poverty found in other developed countries. 

Australia does not have strong regional differences in 
cultures or lifestyles. However, rural lifestyles differ 
from those in the cities. Many rural regions are poorer 
than city areas. The rural areas have higher levels of un- 
employment, reduced access to cultural and education- 
al institutions, and fewer government and commercial 
services. Rural and urban voting patterns also differ. Rur- 
al voters more often support conservative candidates. 

City life. More than 80 percent of all Australians live 
in cities and towns, making Australia one of the world’s 
most urbanized countries. About 70 percent of all Aus- 
tralians live in cities of more than 100,000 people. These 
cities include the federal capital, Canberra, and the six 
state capitals. The state capitals are Sydney, New South 
Wales; Melbourne, Victoria; Brisbane, Queensland; 
Perth, Western Australia; Adelaide, South Australia; and 
Hobart, Tasmania. Canberra is smaller than all the state 
capitals except Hobart Sydney and Melbourne are by 
far the biggest cities in Australia. Sydney has about 3 2 
million people, and Melbourne about 3 million. 

Each state capital is not only the political center but 
also the chief commercial, industrial, and cultural center 
of its state. Each is the oldest or one of the oldest settle- 
ments in the state. Each was laid out near the mouth of a 
river and as close as possible to a good ocean harbor. 
The river provided drinking water. The harbor enabled 
the settlement to develop into a center of trade and im- 
migration. These advantages helped each state capital 
become the largest city in its state. 

The main business district of each state capital is its 
oldest section, the area nearest the waterfront In the 





© Philip Quirk, Wildlight 
An Asian food shop operates in Sydney's Chinatown. Most 
Australians have British or Irish ancestors, but increasing num- 
bers of Asians have settled in the country since the 1970's. 








largest cities, most of the original buildings in this sec- 
tion have been replaced by modern structures, includ- 
ing many high-rise office buildings. In addition to office 
buildings, the downtown areas have fine shops, the- 
aters, and restaurants. 

Most urban dwellers in Australia live in suburbs that 
extend outward from a central business district. The 
suburbs have their own schools, churches, shopping 
centers, and recreational facilities. Some suburbs, espe- 
cially those near Sydney and Melbourne, also have in- 
dustrial districts. Most families live in single-story hous- 
es, each with its own garden. About three-fourths of all 
families own their own homes. Older styles of housing 
differ from city to city. In Queensland cities, for example, 
older houses are made of wood, have verandas (wide 
porches), and are raised above the ground on poles 
called stumps. |In Melbourne and Sydney, many older 
houses are made of brick or stone and stand in rows 
called terraces. Since the late 1900's, developers have 


et 
hee 


© Robert Frerck 


Sheep auctions, such as this one in New South Wales, are a fa- 
miliar sight in rural Australia. The raising of sheep for both wool 
and meat is one of the country’s chief economic activities. 


io ret si — Fey PEL GA ey Sm 
ee ee ek Pe Thee! Fege 8 
a == - - = . Ce “= = 


a et “3 » 


i ia — 








~~ —_ Sa F A a 
—— ay “| P - : ea 
le +34, heeds Se 


Australia 903 


built new high-rise apartment buildings in the central ar- 
eas of large cities. Older buildings, such as factories and 
warehouses, have been turned into modern apartments. 

Australia’s big cities have problems common to all big 
cities, including air pollution and rush-hour traffic jams. 
Before the 1950's, the inner suburbs, those closest to the 
city, were the poorest residential areas. These areas had 
high rates of unemployment and crime. But in the 
1950's, many non-British immigrants began settling in 
the inner-city suburbs and helped regenerate them. 
Many middle-class residents have moved to these areas. 
Many poorer families now live in the outer suburbs. 

Country life. Only about 15 percent of Australia’s 
people live in rural areas. Australians call the remote 
countryside the bush. The term outback refers to the in- 
terior. The outback consists mainly of open countryside, 
including vast grazing lands. It also has widely scattered 
settlements. The largest ones are mining towns. 

Nearly all farms in the outback are cattle, sheep, or 
wheat stations (farms). Life on the stations tends to be ex- 
tremely isolated. The largest stations cover over 1,000 
square miles (2,600 square kilometers) and so may be 
100 miles (160 kilometers) or more from the nearest 
town. In addition, the outback has few paved roads, and 
so travel by automobile may be difficult or impossible. 
Many well-to-do farm families have a light airplane for 
transportation to and from town. Families who do not 
own a plane may get to town only a few times a year. In 
farming regions nearer the coasts, the towns are larger 
and closer together. But even in those regions, farm 
families may feel far removed from the life of the cities. 

All rural areas in Australia are subject to such disas- 
ters as droughts, floods, and bushfires. Because they 
share the threat of frequent disaster, rural Australians 
tend to feel exceptionally strong ties with one another. 
Their sense of community is reflected in the fact that 
they have long had their own political party, the National 
Party. Many rural communities in Australia have their 
own traditional fairs, festivals, and sports competitions. 

Poverty is a problem in some rural areas due to the 
lack of local employment. However, most farm families 
own their farms and live comfortably. Older farmhouses 
are built of wood and surrounded by a veranda. Newer 


John Baker, Australian Picture Library 


Rural communities in Aus- 
tralia serve mainly as market- 
ing and shopping centers for 
farmers. This community, 
Tanunda, lies in a grape- 
growing and winemaking re- 
gion northeast of Adelaide in 
South Australia. 


> 3h =" 5 3 


ja St “J / 
= wmeeth egt fact See SON A 


904 Australia 


farmhouses are constructed of bricks. Nearly all the 
houses have electric power, and a growing number of 
them have air conditioning. 

Food and drink. Meat is plentiful in Australia and 
makes up a large part of the people's diet. Beef is the 
most popular meat, followed by poultry, pork, and lamb 
and mutton. British customs strongly influenced Aus- 
tralian food choices until after World War Il ended in 
1945. Since the late 1900's, the number of immigrants 
from mainland Europe has increased, and more Aus- 
tralians travel to Europe and other areas. As a result, Ital- 
ian, Greek, and other European styles of cooking have 
become popular. In restaurants and homes, Australian 
food also shows the strong influence of Indian and 
Southeast Asian cooking styles. Chinese restaurants are 
common throughout Australia. In addition, larger cities 
have Indian, Japanese, Thai, and Vietnamese restaurants. 

Tea is the favorite hot drink of many older Australians. 
Most younger Australians prefer coffee. Coffee con- 
sumption has about quadrupled since the mid-1900's, 
while tea consumption has declined. Beer is the most 
popular alcoholic drink Wine consumption has in- 
creased since the 1980's. Australia is an important wine 
producer, and many Australians drink wine regularly. 

Recreation. Most Australians enjoy such recreation 
as visiting with friends, going for a drive or walk, or 
watching television. Outdoor sports are extremely popu- 
lar. Many people enjoy skin diving, surfing, swimming, 
or boating. Many also play golf and tennis. Team sports 
are a national pastime. Australians begin to play team 
sports in elementary school, and many continue to play 
them throughout life. The best players may work their 
way up through local and state competitions and per- 
haps win a position on one of the national teams. The 
nation's professional sports teams have large and enthu- 
siastic followings. 

The most popular team sports in Australia are cricket, 
Australian rules football, rugby league, rugby union, 
basketball, soccer, and netball. Cricket, an English game 
played with bats and ball, is a favorite summer sport in 
Australia. The Australian national cricket team regularly 
plays against teams from England, India, New Zealand, 
Pakistan, South Africa, and the West Indies. 

Australian rules football, rugby league, rugby union, 
and soccer are played mainly during the winter. Austral- 
ian rules football was invented in Australia and is played 
mainly there and in the former Australian possession of 
Papua New Guinea. It is especially popular in southern 
Australia. Rugby league and rugby union are forms of 
football invented in England. Rugby league is the profes- 
sional form of the sport, and rugby union is the amateur 
form. Australia plays rugby league and rugby union 
chiefly against France, New Zealand, and the United 
Kingdom. Soccer is the tastest-growing team sport in 
Australia. The national soccer team plays teams from 
many other countries. Netball is a goal-scoring game of 
throwing and catching that is played by two teams. 

Australia has produced many world-tamous athletes, 
especially in tennis, golt, swimming, and track and field. 
Top Australian tennis stars include Evonne Goolagong 
Cawley, Margaret Smith Court, Lleyton Hewitt, Lew 
Hoad, Rod Laver, John Newcombe. Patrick Rafter, and 
Ken Rosewall. Bruce Crampton, Kel Nagle. Greg Nor- 
man, Peter Thomson, and Karrie Webb have been 


© Tony Lew1s, Getty Images 
Australian rules football was invented in Australia and is 
played mainly there and in Papua New Guinea. It is especially 
popular in southern Australia. This match is in Melbourne. 





© Darren England Getty Images 


Cricket, an English game played with bats and a ball, is a fa- 
vorite summer sport in Australia. Teams from each Australian 
state play each year in a championship series. 


among Australia’s top golfers. Well-known Australian 
swimmers include Rebecca Brown, Dawn Fraser, Shane 
Gould, Grant Hackett, Susie O'Neill, Kieren Perkins, Sa- 
mantha Riley, Murray Rose, lan Thorpe, and Tracey 
Wickham. Famous Australian track and field stars in- 
clude Ron Clarke, Herb Elliott, Cathy Freeman, and John 
Landy. Australians have won numerous Olympic medals 
in swimming, track and field, rowing, cycling, and yacht- 
ing. Australians also compete successfully in the interna- 
tional sport of surfing. 

Some of Australia s sporting events receive world- 











é 


= 
ec 








wide attention. Probably the most famous event is the 
annual Melbourne Cup, a horse race attended by racing 
fans from throughout the world. 

Education. Each Australian state and mainland terri- 
tory has its own laws concerning education. The federal 
government regulates education in the other territories. 
In all the states and territories except Tasmania, children 
must attend school from age 6 to age 15. However, they 
may start school before the age of 6, and most start at 
age 5. Tasmania requires children to attend school from 
age 6 to age 16. About 70 percent of Australian students 
attend government schools. The rest attend Rornan 
Catholic or other private schools. 

Each Australian state operates its own public school 
system. But the state systems depend on the federal 
government for most of their funds. The Roman Catholic 
Church owns and operates most of Australia’s private 
schools. Unlike the public schools, most of the private 
schools in Australia charge a tuition fee. The federal 
government grants funds to assist the private schools. 

Australian elementary schools provide six to eight 
years of study. The number of years varies from one 
state or territory to another and in some cases includes 
a year of kindergarten. Australian secondary schools of- 
fer five or six years of education, depending on the sys- 
tem of the state or territory. About four-fifths of the stu- 
dents continue beyond the required years of schooling, 
and about three-fourths of the students graduate from 
secondary school. Most of the students who graduate 
from secondary school go on to a university or college. 

Many Australian children in remote areas are educat- 
ed at home by means of traveling teachers and corre- 
spondence schools, often called schools of the air. Each 
State operates a correspondence school for children in 
isolated areas. The Northern Territory operates two such 
schools. The students receive and turn in their assign- 
ments by mail. Four states and the Northern Territory 
operate schools of the air to enable students to commu- 
nicate with teachers directly. The teachers are stationed 
at broadcasting centers in various parts of the country 
and communicate with students by means of two-way 
radios, computers, televisions, and fax machines. 

Australia has about 40 universities and colleges. Most 


AusStralia 905 


Surfboat races, such as this 
one at a beach in Sydney, are 
a favorite sport in the coastal 
cities. A race begins with each 
team rowing out from the 
shores. The teams then round 
a marker and race one anoth- 
er back to shore on the surf. 


Photographic Library of Australia 


of Australia’s universities are publicly owned. Each uni- 
versity offers undergraduate and graduate studies. Aus- 
tralia also has several publicly owned colleges of ad- 
vanced education that offer various degrees. Students at 
publicly owned universities and colleges pay tuition that 
covers part of the cost of their education, and the feder- 
al government pays the rest. Tuition costs at Australia’s 
private universities are considerably higher. | 

Australia has many public and school libraries. For in- 
formation about Australia’s libraries, see Library (Aus- 
tralia and the Far East). 

Religion. The Australian Constitution forbids a state 
religion and guarantees religious freedom. The great 
majority of Australians are Christians, but many do not 
attend church regularly. The Anglican Church and the 
Roman Catholic Church have the most members. 

Smaller numbers of Australians belong to the Baptist, 
Eastern Orthodox, Lutheran, and Uniting churches. The 
Methodist Church of Australia joined with a majority of 
the country’s Congregationalists and Presbyterians to 
form the Uniting Church in 1977. Australia still has some 





© Australian Picture Library 


Schools of the air help children in remote areas of Australia ob- 
tain an education at home. Teachers communicate with students 
using two-way radios, computers, and other equipment. 


906 Australia 


Congregational and Presbyterian churches. But the total 
membership of these churches is relatively small. The 
Uniting Church is now Australia’s third largest religious 
denomination. Australia has small Jewish and Muslim 
minorities. About one-fourth of the population claim no 
specific religion. 

The religions growing most rapidly in Australia are 
Buddhism, Hinduism, and Islam. The proportion of 
Christians is declining. In general, the size of Australia’s 
religious groups reflects the ancestry of the people. For 
example, the Anglican Church began in England, the 
source of many Australian immigrants. The large num- 
ber of Roman Catholics reflects the fact that many of the 
immigrants came to Australia from Ireland, Italy, and 
other Catholic countries. Muslims or their ancestors mi- 
grated chiefly from the Middle East and from southern 
and southeastern Asia. Most of Australia’s Jews, or their 
parents or grandparents, came from mainland Europe. 


The arts 


The federal government helps fitnd the major opera, 
ballet, and theater companies; the major symphony or- 
chestras; and the motion-picture industry. It gives finan- 
cial help to writers, painters, musicians, and composers. 

Literature. Until the late 1900's, few Australian literary 
works written before the 1890's were read. The excep- 
tions included two novels—one by Marcus Clarke and 
the other by Thomas Alexander Browne, writing under 
the name Rolf Boldrewood. Clarke's novel, His Natural 
Life (1874), tells about life in an Australian prison colony. 
Browne's classic novel, Robbery Under Arms (1888), is 
an adventure tale about a gang of Australian 
bushrangers (outlaws). A number of early colonial writ- 
ers, including novelists Ada Cambridge and Tasma 
(Jessie Couvreur), have been rediscovered. 

During the 1890's, Australian writers began to create a 
national literature. Poems known as bush ballads be- 


Reproduced by courtesy of the artist, George Milpurrurr, 
and of the Abonginal Artist Agency Ltd. © Robert Frerck 





came popular. They describe the colorful, adventurous 
life in the Australian countryside from the 1860's to the 
1890's. Andrew Barton (Banjo) Paterson was the leading 
bush ballad poet. His most famous work is “Waltzing 
Matilda.” Many critics regard Henry Lawson as the finest 
Australian writer of the 1890's. He is best known for his 
short stories and poems about life in the bush. 

Many Australian writers of the 1900's wrote about life 
in the city as well as the bush. The novelist Patrick White 
belonged to this tradition. White won the 1973 Nobel 
Prize in literature. His best-known novels include The 
Tree of Man (1955), Voss (1957), and Riders in the Chariot 
(1961). Thomas Keneally's works explore the topics of 
goodness, guilt, and sin. His most famous novels in- 
clude Bring Larks and Heroes (1967) and Schindler's Ark 
(1982; U.S. title Schindler's List. Arthur Upfield’s works 
include detective stories whose hero is a part-Aborigine 
detective and tracker named Napoleon Bonaparte. Oth- 
er well-known writers include Peter Carey, Shirley Haz- 
zard, Henry Handel Richardson, Christina Stead, and 
Randolph Stow. 

Painting. The Aborigines had a highly developed 
artistic tradition long before the first European settlers 
arrived in Australia. They painted on bark and rock and 
made elaborate designs of human and animal figures. 
Albert Namatjira, an Aborigine, adopted some European 
techniques and painted scenes of the Australian desert. 

The first major white Australian painters worked dur- 
ing the late 1800's. These painters were influenced by 
the French impressionists, who tried to catch the ever- 
changing effects of nature in their works. They often 
worked in Heidelberg, near Melbourne, and became 
known as the Heidelberg School. Leaders of this school 
included Charles Conder, Frederick McCubbin, Tom 
Roberts, and Arthur Streeton. 

During the 1900's, a number of Australian painters de- 
veloped highly individual styles. The portrait painter 


Australian Nattonal Gallery 
Painting in Australia has a long history. Long before the Euro- 
peans arrived, the Aborigines painted elaborate designs of hu- 
man and animal figures on bark or rock. The bark painting at the 
left, by a present-day Aboriginal artist, is in the traditional style. 
Australian artworks from the 1900's are among the works in the 
Australian National Gallery in Canberra, shown here. 





j 











i ue 3 Vii 

( <i we 
a] — 4 ad . Ms, }. 
a ae |. 


EE 












pe ae <q 


‘ et, 
J = : 4 
aa , 5 
i) 
i lt Ag Et 2s 
a } whe ny * at. 
y*. wa ihe > 
e “ at 4 Ry tela 1 tee a »* 
a \ " a aoe ab 
‘ — . 
Ee - . ope: ay > tre 
nee “= a a 
. a - = 
i ees : ‘ 
s 
a 





bad +? oe . 
oe ee 
at 4 


vs 


Warren Garst, Tom Stack & Assoc. 


Aboriginal dancers like to imitate such animals as emus, the 
flightless birds that the Aborigines once hunted for food. The 
dancer on the ground is portraying a wounded and dying emu. 


William Dobell became famous for his revealing charac- 
ter studies. Russell Drysdale became known for his 
haunting pictures of the outback. Sidney Nolan created 
fantastic, dreamlike paintings based on themes from 
Australian folklore. During the middle and late 1900's, 
paintings of the outback by Frederick Williams won 
much admiration. Today, there is great interest in Ab- 
original art. 

The Australian National Gallery in Canberra houses 
the country’s national art collection. The National Gallery 
of Victoria, in Melbourne, and the Art Gallery of New 
South Wales, in Sydney, also have major collections. 

Music and dance. Australia has a national opera 
company, the Australian Opera, and a national ballet 
company, the Australian Ballet. Such state companies as 
the Sydney Dance Company and the Victoria State 
Opera are well known. Each state capital has a profes- 
sional symphony orchestra. A number of world-famous 
singers and composers were born in Australia. They in- 
clude opera singers Marjorie Lawrence, Dame Nellie 
Melba, and Dame Joan Sutherland and composers Percy 
Grainger and Peter Sculthorpe. Modern composer Rich- 
ard Meale is known for his stage and instrumental 
works, including the opera Voss (1986). 

Theater and motion pictures. Each of Australia's 
state capitals has a permanent company of professional 
actors and actresses. Each company offers a yearlong 
season of classical and modern piays. 

Australia became one of the first countries to develop 
a motion-picture industry. Australian filmmakers pro- 
duced their first feature motion picture in 1906, only 
three years after the first such film was made in the 
United States. The Australian film industry practically 
died out after the !ate 1930's because of competition 
from American and British movies. But Australian film- 
making began to revive during the late 1960's. Today, 
the industry produces 20 or more feature films a year, 
and a growing number are distributed overseas. 

Several famous stage and movie stars were either 
born or raised in Australia. They include Dame Judith 
Anderson, Judy Davis, Peter Finch, Errol Flynn, Paul 
Hogan, and Cyril Ritchard. 


Australia 907 





© Robert Frerck 


Symphony concerts are presented regularly in all of Austral- 
ia‘s large cities. This performance is being given in the main 
concert hall of the Sydney Opera House. 


Architecture. During the 1800's, many public build- 
ings and private houses in Australia were built in the 
Georgian or Victorian style of architecture. Both these 
styles originated in England. The Georgian style featured 
a simple square or rectangular design and classical or- 
naments, especially columns. The Australian version of 
the Georgian style introduced the veranda as a basic el- 
ement of the country’s architecture. 

Most Victorian buildings had an irregular shape and 
elaborate ornaments, such as spires and pointed domes. 
The railings and roof supports for Victorian verandas 
were made of showy iron grillwork. There is an active 
state-supported movement to preserve Australia's his- 
toric buildings. Some fine examples of Georgian and 
Victorian architecture have been preserved. But many 





Modern highrise buildings tower above older brick build 
ings in Adelaide, above. During the middle and late 1900s, all 
the major cities of Australia buil! similar high-rise structures 


908 Australia 


have been replaced by modern structures. 

Today, Australia’s architecture is international in style. 
All the large cities have towering structures of concrete, 
steel, and glass. These high-rises differ little from those 
in other countries. However, some modern Australian 
architecture is highly unusual. The Sydney Opera 
House, a spectacular structure with saillike roofs, has at- 


tracted worldwide attention since its completion in 1973. 


It was designed by Danish architect Jorn Utzon. 
The land 


Australia is surrounded by water, like an island. But 
geographers class it as a continent rather than as an is- 
land because of its great size. It is sometimes referred to 
as an ‘island continent.” 

Australia covers about 5 percent of the earth's land 
area. The island of Tasmania, which lies about 130 miles 
(209 kilometers) south of the Australian mainland, is con- 
sidered part of the continent. Tasmania was part of the 
mainland until about 12,000 years ago. It became sepa- 
rated because the level of the ocean rose and covered 
the land connection. 

Most of Australia is low and flat. The highest and most 
mountainous land lies along the east coast. Nearly all the 
land west of this region—about 90 percent of the total 
land area—consists of level plains and plateaus. 

Land regions. Australia can be divided into three ma- 
jor land regions. They are, from east to west: (1) the East- 
ern Highlands, (2) the Central Lowlands, and (3) the 
Western Plateau. 

The Eastern Highlands include the highest elevations 
in Australia. The region extends from Cape York Penin- 
sula in extreme northeastern Australia to the south coast 
of Tasmania. A low plain bordered by sandy beaches 
and rocky cliffs stretches along the Pacific coast. More 
rain falls on this coastal plain than anywhere else in the 
country. The southeastern section of the plain, from 





The Eastern Highlands ex- 
tend in a narrow band along 
Australia’s east coast. They are 
sometimes called the Great 
Dividing Range because their 
slopes divide the flow of 
rivers in the region. The high- 
lands are the most fertile land 
region in Australia. 


© SuperStock 


Brisbane to Melbourne, is by far the most heavily popu- 
lated part of Australia. 

The Eastern Highlands are sometimes called the Great 
Dividing Range because their slopes divide the flow of 
the rivers in the region. Rivers that flow down the east- 
ern slopes empty into the ocean. Rivers that run down 
the western slopes flow to the Central Lowlands. How- 
ever, the highlands are not a single range, nor are they 
especially mountainous. They consist mainly of high pla- 
teaus that are broken in many places by gorges, hills, 
and low mountain ranges. 

Many of the plateaus have fertile soils and are used as 
cropland. Grass or forests cover other plateaus. At one 
time, forests also covered much of the coastal plain. Ex- 
cept in the far north, however, most of the coastal for- 
ests have been cleared for farms and cities. 

The Central Lowlands have the lowest elevations in 
Australia. The region is generally flat. Many rivers flow 
through the lowlands after heavy rains. Rains are infre- 
quent, however, except along the region's north and 
south coasts and near the Eastern Highlands. Riverbeds 
farther inland are dry most of the year. 

Farmers in the southern part of the Central Lowlands 
grow wheat. Most of the rest of the region is too dry or 
too hot for most kinds of crops. However, much of the 
land is covered with coarse grass or shrubs and is used 
to graze livestock. The west-central part of the region ts 
a barren, sandy desert. Lake Eyre, the lowest point in 
Australia, lies 52 feet (16 meters) below sea level along 
the southern edge of this desert. 

The region has no large cities. The two biggest cities 

~Mount Isa and Broken Hill—have fewer than 30,000 
people each. Both cities are mining centers. 

The Western Plateau covers the western two-thirds of 
Australia. The region has a higher average elevation 
than the Central Lowlands. However, most of the land is 
flat, as in the lowlands. 





Deserts cover the central part of the Western Plateau. 
Except in the south and northeast, the deserts gradually 
give way to land covered by grass and shrubs. Much of 
this land is used to graze livestock. Low mountain 
ranges rise above the general level of the plateau in the 
grazing areas. Rainfall is heaviest in the extreme north 
and southwest. These areas have most of the region's 
cropland. A vast, dry, treeless plateau called the Nullar- 
bor Plain extends about 400 miles (640 kilometers) along 
the southern edge of the region. The name Nullarbor 































Australia 909 


comes from the Latin words nu/la and arbor, which 
mean no tree. 

The Western Plateau region has two large cities, Ade- 
laide and Perth. Both cities lie on coastal plains, Ade- 
laide in the extreme southeastern part of the region and 
Perth in the extreme southwest. 

Mountains. Australia’s highest mountains rise in the 
Australian Alps in the extreme southern part of the East- 
ern Highlands. The Australian Alps consist of several 
ranges. The Snowy Mountains are the best known. Aus- 










































1 2 3 5 6 7 
et fe mi = * 
? Timor P PS Ne On MoE shy | 
ba Coburg Peninsu : 
P 7" i al Melvilie I. Jf Wessel ts. cgtape York yy 
s DONESIA lage PAPUA >” 
iN Tem Sh Bathurst I.” NEW GUINEA 
ae 
A Ashmore Is.- - “cartier! Dee! Cape Arnhem 
Cape Londonderry —s Groote 
Cape Bougamnvile ae.) ry Eylandt 
In d ia A 9ED 
Ocean : 5 
Cape Leveques = GHLANDS ape 4 
ca = Oe, ‘C 
= d 7 ou F : ie Frere Oce me 
B —— a NORTHERN | (1.611 my 
S rs =~. (f TERRITORY 
2d y: > ‘ A B q op 
wt al Great Sandy — 4 i, Tanami Desens at ‘ Dwnsvitie 
iw “Desert Ni » 
Barsow |. ; Tt 
é 623%,‘ Ke, , WESTERN PLATEAU ; 
Nogthwest a: ee Lt. Dora L. Mackay~ }° are i ij A ~ 
a ’ — = = ~ i af 
"f ts ‘ge _ £e re Disappointment Ie 7 ! ) 4 < < ; 
b, if a L. Macdona ge? "See ¢ 
CC). se) é rs \ Sed 
‘ . 4 = ail a Pe Gibson Desert ~ Chafinel Pod \ y, ge 
a ‘ = 
pmct ALIA / 7 5 
se Be S SOP csTERN AUSTR te is Fraser | 
= rs Cameaten 0 4 
Res : ~ 
. i < ; peo 
” » 1. Austia 4 ; "a Lake Eyre Fa 
ay hoe + Great Victoria gs : 
ai é' S2ft (16m) yee ; 
"a 4 fe J Desert balow sea level _ : 
. t « & ! 
D Gera o ) in q L: Ballard © SL Minigwale POUTH ANS - 
7 as © 
Se Kio Tin hia bake tbe” 
{ 3 aed ite pot a i Everard) ; 
ye . yirat 8 U 
¢ Cowan - ug 
y “ “ Gairdner { 
L. Dundas. — =a Awstraibat Whyallae *. 
Great straliat i Eyre Ps { 
4 eo eninsu’a ¢ 
pete B g ht . 7. ¢ 
aetna Yorke Peninsula D> is J es 
E t Kangaroo |.7 -* QE 
alr ) -- \ 
Bie uszko 
° (2.228 
Australia Mount Gambier* oy 
e Pe Howe 
terrain map ndian| Ofean “il 
King 1.) 288 Promontory 
: Fu 
Land region boundary -. + rougeex ? 
F Mr 
State boundary 5,305 ft vane TF eston 
Elevation above TASMAN; 
sea level A 
4 City oo South East Capt 
0 250 500 750 1,000 1,250 1,500 Miles 
WORLD BOOK map ) 250 500 750 1.000 1.250 1.500 1.750 2.000 2.250 Kilometers 
Physical features 
Aratura Sea A 4 Coral Sea A 7 Great Sandy Desert B 3 Lake Gairdner D4 Musgrave Ranges C4 
Ambhem Land A 4 Darling Range . oo ae Great Victona Lake Gordon F 6 pontiwest Cape Cc 1 
Australian Alps .£ 6 Darling River D's6 Desert .D 3 Lake Torrens D §S Nullarbor Plain D 3 
Ayers Rock ag 4 Eyre Peninsula Eland Groote Eylandt MacDonnell Ord River B 3 
Barkly Tableland B 5 Fitzroy River Gore lislan AGO Ranges C 4 Port Phillip Bay ££ 6 
Bass Strait FF 6 Flinders Ranges D5 Gulf of Carpentana A 353 Melville Island _ A 4 Shark Bay aC (1 
Bathurst Island A 3 Fraser Islan ca Gulf St Vincent a Mount Kosciuszko F 6 Simpson Desert Cc 5 
Botany Bay Ea? Gibson Desert C 3 Ht Range Cc 1 Mount Ossa F 6 Snowy Mountains E 6 
Cape Leeuwin Ee Great Australian aroo Islan — 5 Mount Zeil C 4 Spencer Gulf £5 
Cape Londonderry A 3 Bight — 3 kim ley Plateau B 3 Murchison River D1 Tasman Sea ib 7 
Cape York Great Barrier Reet B 7? Lake Argyle B 3 Murray River —E 5 Timor Sea A 2 
eninsula . A 6 Great Dividing Lake Eyre D 5 Murrumbidgee Torres Strait A 6 
Cooper Creek fe) Range B 6 Lake Frome D 5 River E 6 Yorke Peninsula E's 





910 Australia 


tralia’s highest peak, Mount Kosciuszko, rises 7,310 feet 
(2,228 meters) above sea level in the Snowy Mountains. 
Mount Kosciuszko and other tall peaks in the Australian 
Alps are snow covered in winter and attract many skiers. 

The mountain ranges in the Western Plateau are 
much lower than those in the Australian Alps. The high- 
est peaks are in the MacDonnell and Musgrave ranges 
in central Australia. Ayers Rock, called U/uru (great peb- 
ble) by the local Aborigines, is a huge loaf-shaped rock 
formation just south of the MacDonnell Ranges in Ulu- 
ru-Kata Tjuta National Park. It is a major tourist attraction. 

Deserts cover about a third of Australia. The country 
has four major deserts. The Simpson Desert lies along 
the western edge of the Central Lowlands. The three 
other deserts—the Gibson, Great Sandy, and Great Vic- 
toria—cover the central part of the Western Plateau. All 
the deserts except the Gibson consist of swirling sands, 
which often drift into giant dunes. Some dunes measure 
more than 200 miles (320 kilometers) long. The Gibson 
Desert lies outside the path of the general wind direc- 
tion and of wind-blown sands. Its surface consists of a 
mass of small stones and pebbles. 

Rivers are one of Australias most vital resources. 
Rivers provide the towns and cities with drinking water, 
and they supply farmers with much-needed water for ir- 
rigation. However, most of Australia's rivers are dry at 
least part of the year. They fill with water only during the 
rainy season. The rainy season occurs in summer in 
northern Australia, and in winter in southern Australia. 
Dams and reservoirs on all the largest rivers store water 
for use during the dry season. 

The Murray River is Australia's longest permanently 
flowing river. The Murray River starts in the Snowy 
Mountains and winds west 1,609 miles (2,589 kilome- 
ters). It empties into the ocean southeast of Adelaide. 
During the southern dry season, the Murray is fed by 
the country s longest river, the Darling. The Darling Riv- 
er begins in the central part of the Eastern Highlands 
and flows southwest 1,702 miles (2,739 kilometers) to the 
Murray. The Darling is dry along most of its course in 
the winter. Its flow increases in summer, when the 








© Robert Frerck 
Irrigation projects have greatly increased farm productivity in 
the southeastern part of the Central Lowlands. These irrigated 
orchards are in the Murrumbidgee River Irrigation Area. 


David Moore Black Star 


Dry grazing land covers 
much of Australia west of the 
Eastern Highlands. This 
sheep-grazing area in South 
Australia is part of the West- 
ern Plateau land region. 








Australia 911 


Ayers Rock (called Uluru in 

Aboriginal), a popular tourist 

attraction, stands in Uluru- 
a , Kata Tjuta National Park in 

. 4 — central! Australia. The rock is 

about 1 $ miles (2.4 kilome- 
ters) long. It rises 1,142 feet 
(348 meters) above the desert 
floor and 2,844 feet (867 me- 
ters) above sea level. It has 
many small caves. The walls of 


| 





northern and central parts of the Eastern Highlands re- 
ceive most of their rain. The Darling thus supplies the 
Murray when most of the other rivers in southern Aus- 
tralia dry up. 

Australia's biggest water conservation project is the 
Snowy Mountains Scheme. It consists of an extensive 
system of dams, aqueducts, and tunnels. Some of the 
aqueducts and tunnels carry water from melting snows 
in the Snowy Mountains to nearby dams. The dams 
store the water. Other aqueducts and tunnels channel 
water from the dams into the Murray and Murrum- 
bidgee rivers. The increased flow of water in these 
rivers is used to irrigate cropland in New South Wales 
and Victoria. Hydroelectric plants at the dams supply 
New South Wales, Victoria, and the Capital Territory 
with a little of their electric power. Tasmania draws al- 
most all of its electric power from hydroelectric facili- 
ties. 





many caves are covered with 
rock paintings made long ago 
by Aboriginal artists. 


7 © Robert Frerck 


stock. In general, the water in the coastal basins has less 
salt. Some of this water is used for irrigation. Adelaide, 
Perth, and many smaller communities get some drinking 
water from coastal basins. 

The Great Barrier Reef is the world’s largest coral 
reef and one of Australia's most popular tourist attrac- 
tions. Although its name suggests one reef, the Great 
Barrier Reef is a chain of more than 2,500 reefs. It also in- 
cludes many small islands. The reefs and islands extend 
in a nearly unbroken chain for about 1,400 miles (2,300 
kilometers) along Australia’s northeast coast. The reefs 
are composed of about 400 species of corals of many 
shapes and colors. The waters around the Great Barrier 
Reef are warm the year around. The warm waters and 
the beauty of the coral formations attract swimmers and 
skin divers. The Great Barrier Reef area has a number of 
tourist resorts. 


Lakes. Australia’s only large permanent lakes have 
been artificially created. They include Lake Argyle in 
Western Australia and Lake Gordon in Tasmania. Both 
are reservoirs for water conservation projects. 

Most of Australia’s natural lakes are dry for months or 
years at a time. Dry lakes called p/ayas are common in 
South Australia and Western Australia. Most of the time, 
a playa is simply a dry bed of salt or clay. The playa fills 
with water only after heavy rains. Many playas lie in ar- 
eas of extremely light rainfall and so may remain dry for 
years. The largest playas are in South Australia. They in- 
clude Lake Eyre, Lake Torrens, Lake Gairdner, and Lake 

| Frome. 

Underground water. Australia has fairly plentiful un- 
derground water. But most of it is too salty for people to 
| 


drink or for use as irrigation water. In many areas, how- 
| ever, the water is not too salty for livestock to drink. On 
| many large cattle and sheep stations, underground 
wells supply all the drinking water for the animals. 
Much of Australia’s underground water is artesian 
| water. Artesian water is trapped under such great pres- 
| sure that it gushes to the surface through any opening. 
The water can thus be brought to the surface merely by 
__ digging a well. It does not have to be pumped. 
| Australia’s chief source of artesian water is a vast un- 
derground rock formation called the Great Artesian 
| Basin. The basin extends across much of eastern Aus- 
| tralia. Other artesian basins lie near the northwest, west, 
| and south coasts. Most of the water in the Great Artesian 





© Carl Roessler 


The Great Barrier Reef, the world’s largest coral reef, extends 
about 1,400 miles (2,300 kilometers) along Australia’s northeast 


Basin is quite salty and so can be drunk only by live- coast. Its beauty attracts many skin divers. 


912 Australia 





G R. Roberts 
The unequal distribution of rainfall throughout Australia is a major feature of the country’s cli- 
mate. The interior is dry most of the year and comes to life only after a heavy rain, /eft. Rain forests 
along the northeast coast receive plentiful moisture and are green all year, right. 


Climate 


The northern third of Australia lies in the tropics and 
so is warm or hot the year around. The rest of the coun- 
try lies south of the tropics and has warm summers and 
mild or cool winters. 

In winter, many parts of the south have occasional 
frosts. But the Australian Alps and the interior of Tasma- 
nia are the only areas of the country where tempera- 
tures remain below freezing for more than a day or so at 
a time. 

Australia receives most of its moisture as rain. Snow 
falls only in Tasmania and the Australian Alps. About a 
third of the country is desert and receives less than 10 
inches (25 centimeters) of rain a year. The deserts are 


What Australia’s 
climate is like 


In general, Australia has a 
warm, dry climate. But the cli- 
mate differs from one part of 
the country to another, as this 
map shows. Australia lies 
south of the equator, and so 
its seasons are opposite those 
in the Northern Hemisphere. 


Port Hedland, 


| Tropical Wet and Dry: 

| | Alwoys hot; oiternote wet 
ond dry seosons; heovy 
precipitotion in summer, 


{ 
| Semlarid: Hot summers; 
bean | miid winters; greot chonges 
~~~ in daily temperoture; light } 
precipitation, | 
Desert: Hot to cool; greot 
chonges in doily tempero- 
ture except in coastal 
areos; littie precipitation. Perth 


. Kalgoorhe 


ee eee. Molsts 

| | Warm to hot summers; 
wormor mild winters; mod- 
erote precipitation, 


Oceanle Molst: Moder 
otely worm summers; 

generoliy cool winter 

moderote precipitation. 


iF Subtropical Dry Sum- 
a] mer: Hot, dry summer:; 
mild winters; moderote | 
precipltotion in winter. 


WESTERN AUSTRALIA 





© Robert Frerck 


too barren even for the grazing of livestock. Much of the 
rest of Australia has less than 20 inches (51 centimeters) 
of rainfall annually. Few crops can be grown in these re- 
gions without irrigation. The heaviest rainfall occurs 
along the north, east, southeast, and extreme southwest 
coasts. 

The east coast of Queensland is the wettest part of 
the continent. Some places along this coast receive as 
much as 150 inches (381 centimeters) of rain a year. Parts 
of the southeast coast and of Tasmania are the only 
areas of the continent that receive uniform amounts of 
rainfall the year around. Rainfall is seasonal throughout 
the rest of Australia. 

Australia lies south of the equator, and so its seasons 
are opposite those in the Northern Hemisphere. The 


WORLD BOOK map 





NORTHERN r Townsville 
TERRITORY . ne 









; | QUEENSLAND 
Alice Spnngs 








| Le — Bnsbanes « 
4 td > =" | 
SOUTH AUSTRALIA | a ~ 


+ Broken Hil ; 
| 7 NEW SOUTH 





TASMANIA 














Degrees 
Celsius 


Over 29 
| 24 to 29 
18 to 24 
13 to 18 
Below 13 


Degrees 
Fohrenheit 


Over 85 
75 to 85 
65 to 75 
55 to 65 
Below 55 





te. 
Average January 
temperatures 





WORLD BOOK map 


This map shows the average temperatures in Australia during 
January, midway through the country’s summer. Australia’s sum- 
mers are hottest in the northwest and coolest in the southeast 


Centimeters 


More thon 75 


Inches 
More thon 30 | 


5 to 10 
Less thon 5 


Average yearly 
precipitation 


Less thon 13 





WORLD BOOK map 


This map shows the average amounts of annual precipitation in 
Australia. Almost all the precipitation is in the form of rain. Snow 
falls only in the extreme southeastern highlands. 


southern part of the continent has four distinct seasons. 
Winter, the wettest and coolest season in Australia, lasts 
from June through August. Summer, which is the hottest 
and driest season, lasts from December through Febru- 
ary. 

Tropical northern Australia has only two seasons—a 
wet season and a dry one. The wet season corresponds 
with summer and lasts from November through April. 
The dry season corresponds with winter and lasts from 
May through October. 

The wet season brings heavy downpours and violent 





Australia 913 


Degrees 
Fohrenheit 


Over 75 Over 24 
65 to 75 | 18 to 24 


55t065| | 131018 


45 to 55 7 to 13 


Below 45 fa Raton 7 


Degrees 
Celsius 


eHoban 


Average July 
temperatures 





WORLD BOOK map 
July is the coolest month in every part of Australia. Light frosts 
are common in the south during July. But the extreme southeast- 
ern highlands are the only areas that ever have cold weather. 





David Moore, Black Star 


Snow covers Mount Kosciusko, above, and other peaks in 
the Australian Alps in winter. The area attracts many skiers. 


storms, especially on Australia’s north coast. In 1974, for 
example, a cyclone almost leveled the northern coastal 
city of Darwin. Floods plague many parts of Australia 
during the wet season. However, droughts are usually a 
far more serious problem. Nearly every section of Aus- 
tralia has a drought during the country’s annual dry sea- 
son. 

Water conservation measures prevent these droughts 
from doing serious harm in most cases. However, Aus- 
tralia also has periods when little or no rain falls even 
during the wet season. These droughts can cause se- 
vere water shortages. 


Animals and plants 


Native animals. At one time, all the continents were 
part of one huge land mass. Australia became separated 
from this land mass about 200 million years ago. As a re- 
sult, its animals developed differently from those on 
other continents. Australia’s most famous native animals 
include kangaroos, koalas, wallabies, wombats, and 


914 Australia 
Animals of Australia Some of the many mammals, birds, and reptiles of Australia are pictured on the map below. The 
animals live in various other areas on the continent in addition to those indicated. For example, 
emus live everywhere in Australia except the rain forests. 


Salt-Water Crocodile 


~~ 


Flock 






Red-Tailed 
Cockataa 


Perentie 


Lizard Desert Death 












- Adder cl ae 
, ~ Wallaby 
Thorny ‘Desert ——— 
Devil & ' 
SE we 
St 
Red Oem \ Par dice Kookaburra 
he, Riflebird 
——- Skink , mei Kangaroo 
? Fawl 
Tiger Quall 
x Latta ge ne 
“at Bral 
, Bondicaat — Worth << 90 
Echidna 
Wandering L 
» » Albatrass yrebird a 
a ' 
y Flory pus Fairy 
a Penguin 
Tasmanian : = 
Mutton Bird PA Cape Barren 





other marsupials. Marsupials are mammals that give 
birth to tiny, poorly developed offspring. In most spe- 
cies, the babies mature in a pouch on the mother’s ab- 
domen. Australia has about 150 species of marsupials, 
all of which have pouches. One or more species live in 
every part of the country. 

The platypus and the echidna are among the strang- 
est Australian animals. They are the only mammals that 


hatch their young from eggs. Platypuses live only in Aus- 


tralia. Echidnas live in Australia and on the neighboring 
island of New Guinea. 

Australia has about 700 species of native birds. They 
include the worlds only black swans and about 60 kinds 
of cockatoos, parakeets, and other parrots. Two large 
flightless birds, the emu and the cassowary, are also na- 
tive to Australia. The kookaburra, a member of the king- 
fisher family, is one of Australia’s best-known birds. Its 
loud, harsh call is a familiar sound in residential areas. 







Pigean 









WORLD BOOK map. illustrations by Tom Dolan 





Dugong 


ae 


e “4 Amethystine 
Pythan 













Tasmanian Devil Se 
, emma , 


Australia has about 140 species of snakes and about 
370 species of lizards. Most of the snakes are poisonous. 
In fact, two of them, the taipan and the tiger snake, are 
among the deadliest snakes in the world. All the lizards 
are nonpoisonous. 

Native plants. Two main kinds of native plants, aca- 
cias and eucalyptuses, dominate Australia’s landscape. 
They are the most common shrubs in the dry lands and 
the most common trees in the moister areas. Acacias, 
which Australians call watt/es, bear their seeds in pods. 
Australia has about 700 species of acacias. Many of them 
have brightly colored flowers. Common shrubby spe- 
cies include the mulga and the myall. The silver wattle 
and the blackwood are tall trees. 

Eucalyptuses—or euca/ypts, as they are known in 
Australia—are the most widespread plants in the coun- 
try. Australia has about 500 species of eucalyptuses. 
Most species have narrow, leathery leaves. The leaves 











Plants of Australia 


Australia 915 


This map pictures sore of the trees, shrubs, and other plants of Australia. Many of the plants, such 


as wallaby grass and golden wattles, grow in other areas of the continent in addition to those 
shown. However, forest trees grow only in the moist coastal regions. 






Kangaroo 


Ghast Gum 





Spider 
Orchid 
rd Macrazamia 
1% Jarrah 
Tuart = 





contain a fragrant oil, which gives the plants a notice- 
able odor. Scrubby eucalyptuses, which are known as 
mallees, cover large areas of the interior. Eucalyptus 
trees, which Australians call gum trees or gums, are the 
tallest trees in the country and among the tallest in the 
world. Two species, the mountain ash and the karri, may 
grGw to about 280 feet (85 meters). Eucalyptuses once 
grew only in Australia and on a few islands to the north. 
However, eucalyptuses have been planted in many 
other warm areas, including California, Hawaii, and 
countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea. 

Palms and trees that resemble palms grow in many 
parts of Australia. Grass trees are palmlike trees of the 
western dry lands. They are related to the yucca trees of 
the American Southwest. Macrozamia trees grow 
throughout Australia. They have palmlike or fernlike 
leaves and bear cones, like needleleat trees. Australia 
has few native needleleaf trees, other than kauri pines 


Parcupine Grass 


‘i j i sf 
i} i a } i Ny 






Beefwood 


"i 2 





White Mallee 


WORLD BOOK map. illustrations by Tom Dolan and James Teason 





Craw’'s Ash 











Ca dieput 
Queensland 


Battle 
Tree ¢ 


Desert Kurrajang 
Red lranbark 





a fia 


Ahn Manna Gum L 


Saltbush Fan Palm 











_ Crimsan 
Fe: PW E Spay 









Farked Sundew gt e¢ 


Sp 





<# & Farest 
Red Gum | 


~ ar os; 
Galden Wattle is | 
& 
% % 
"Rie ZS Tasmanian 


| Blue Gum 


byes Gum 


and bunya pines. Shrubs called sa/tbushes are common 
in the dry grazing areas of southern Australia. They are 
so named because their leaves have a salty taste. The 
leaves are excellent feed for livestock. 

Australia has thousands of wildflowers. Many of them 
are desert species whose seeds lie buried until brought 
to life by a heavy rain. Then, for a few days or weeks, the 
desert is carpeted with flowers of every color. 

Introduced species. The only mammals that lived in 
Australia before the first settlers arrived were bats, 
echidnas, mice, platypuses, rats, and the various kinds 
of marsupials. The first settlers, the Aborigines, brought 
along a type of dog known as a dingo. Some dingoes es- 
caped into the wild. Today, their descendants are Aus- 
tralia’s chief beasts of prey. European settlers intro- 
duced into Australia many familiar mammals, including 
cats, cattle, deer, foxes, goats. horses, pigs, rabbits, and 
sheep. They also introduced such animals as camels and 


916 Australia 


Some typical 
Australian plants 





G. R. Roberts 


A flowering wattle Eucalyptus trees 


Some typical 
Australian animals 





An emu and its eggs 





Australian Information Service 


A red kangaroo 





David R. Frazier Photolibrary 


© 





Dave Watts, ANT. Photo Library 
A platypus in water 


These pictures show three common kinds of Australian plants. Acacias, or wattles, have attractive 
flowers. Eucalyptus trees are among the world’s tallest trees. Grass trees resemble palms. 





oO Suneeniecilia 
Spor en =| 


~ 





© Rabert Frerck 
Grass trees 


These pictures show four common kinds of Australian animals. Emus are big, flightless birds. Platy- 
puses are egg-laying mammals. Kangaroos and koalas are marsupials. 








G. R Roberts 
A koala eating eucalyptus leaves 


water buffaloes, various kinds of birds, and many 
species of plants. 

Camels, cane toads, water buffaloes, and certain other 
introduced species have become wild and are pests. In 
some cases, species have had to be exterminated. Wild 
rabbits, for example, cause extensive damage to crops 
and grazing lands. In the 1950's, a drive to wipe them 
out with a deliberately introduced disease, myxomato- 
sis, met with considerable success. But then the rabbits 
developed immunity (natural protection from the dis- 
ease), and their numbers began increasing again. In the 
mid-1990's, scientists released a new virus, Calicivirus, 
that has helped control the number of rabbits. 


Economy 


Australia is one of the world’s rich, developed coun- 
tries. Most developed countries have become rich 
through the production and export of manufactured 
goods. Unlike other developed countires, Australia has 











become wealthy chiefly through farming and mining. 

The processing of farm and mineral products is a ma- 
jor part of Australia’s manufacturing industry. For many 
years, manufacturing was the leading employer in Aus- 
tralia. But in the late 1900's, manufacturing declined in 
importance, while service industries rose in importance. 

The nation relies on its farms and mines to produce 
goods for export. By selling farm products and minerals 
abroad, Australia earns the export income that most oth- 
er developed countries earn from the sale of manufac- 
tured products. But only part of Australia’s export in- 
come goes to the farmers and mining companies that 
produce the goods. Much of it goes to firms that pro- 
cess and distribute the goods. Thus, agricultural and 
mineral exports benefit the economy as a whole and en- 
able many Australians to have a high standard of living. 

Australia has traditionally been handicapped by a lack 
of capita/—that is, money to finance business and indus- 
trial development. As a result, the country has had to 
borrow capital from other nations and has accumulated 
large debts. Many mining companies, factories, and oth- 
er businesses in Australia are owned or controlled by 
American, British, Japanese, and other foreign investors. 

Service industries are the economic activities that 
provide services, rather than produce goods. Service in- 
dustries provide nearly three-fourths of Australia’s jobs 
and make up more than two-thirds of Australia’s gross 
domestic product—the total value of goods and services 
produced within the country annually. 

Hospitals, schools, government agencies, stores, ho- 
tels, and restaurants are service industries. Also includ- 
ed in this category are banking, trade, transportation, 
and communication and tourism activities. 

Manufacturing. Unlike most other developed coun- 
tries, Australia imports more manufactured goods than 
it exports. Australian factories produce many of the con- 
sumer goods, such as processed foods and household 
articles, that the people require. But the nation has to 
import most of its producer goods—that is, factory ma- 
chinery, construction equipment, and other goods used 
in production. lron and steel are the chief exceptions. 
Australia’s iron and steel industry produces enough of 





Australia 917 


Assembly plants, such as 
this automaking plant in the 
Melbourne suburb of Broad- 
meadows, account for much 
of Australia’s industrial output 
Many other plants process 
farm products or minerals. 


Nick Rains, Australian Picture Library 


Australia’s gross domestic product 


_ Industry 26% 


Services 71% 
~ 


‘“ 


=. Agriculture 3% 


Australias gross domestic product (GDP) was $364,511,000,000 in 
U.S. dollars in 1998. The GDP is the total value of goods and ser- 
ices produced within a country in a year. Services include com- 
munity, government, and personal services; finance, insurance, 
and real estate; transportation and communication; and whole- 
sale and retail trade. /ndustry includes construction, manufactur- 
ing, mining, and utilities. Agricu/ture includes agriculture, 
forestry, and fishing. 


Production and workers by economic activities 


Employed workers 


Percent 

of GDP Number Percent 
Economic activities produced ofpeople of total 
Finance, insurance, real estate, 

& business services 27 1,247,400 1S 
Community, government, 

& personal services BZ 2,697,500 31 
Manufacturing (ey 1,099,600 13 
Wholesale and retail trade 12 1,776,200 21 
Transportation & communication —_10 345,000 
Construction 6 620,300 7! 
Mining 4 83,700 ] 
Agriculture, forestry, & fishing 3 422,200 5 
Utilities S 64,900 1 
Total 100 8.556.800 100 
Fiqures are for 1998 
Sources International Labour Organwahon; International Monetary Fund 





918 Australia 






















Mining and 
manufacturing Bauxite 
in Australia | Graton Baca 
: F Manganese 
This map shows the location BaNixite 
of Australia’s chief mineral 
; - Lead 
deposits and manufacturing ffov'Ore Zinc 
centers. Most of the mineral ee Ser 
deposits are mined, and so NORTHERN Tin 
they are the centers of Aus- Te gk Ons Lead, Zinc — Nickel Townsville 
oD Ste oes ; Gold Copper, Silver e 

tralias mining industry. Ma- Copper 
: fey h : Gas Bismuth Uranium 
jor deposits are shown in a Iron Ore bhosthtate 
large type, and lesser ones in Geni 
small type. Manufacturing | Iron Ore | QUEENS Caen 
centers are in red. | Iron Ore Gas Coal Copper 

| peat, WESTERN AUSTRALIA = - 

: Gas 
Uranium oe Mineral Sands. 
Gold Opals a , —— Brisbane® 
Gold SOUTH AUSTRALIA 
| Silver Coal : ; 
| . | Bem Uranium NEW SOUTH WALES = Asbestos 
icke 
; Iron Ore Copper Mineral Sands 
Tin Mineral deposit Perth ® Gold Whyalla® Lead, Zinc 
* Monvfocturing cente Limestone 4 ewcastle 
anh : Coal Adelaide Tin *Sydney 
Gypsum Limestone "Wollongong 
. Canberra 
VICTORIA ACT 
Melbournee Brown Coal, 






WORLD BOOK map 


the metals to meet the needs of other industries. Aus- 
tralia’s factories depend heavily on foreign capital. 

Most of Australia’s factories specialize in assembly 
work and light manufacturing. Many plants process 
farm products or minerals for export. The leading manu- 
factured products are processed foods; metals, includ- 
ing iron and steel; transportation equipment, including 
automobiles; paper; printed materials; chemicals; tex- 
tiles, clothing, and shoes; and household appliances. 
New South Wales and Victoria are the chief manufactur- 
ing states. Together, these two states have about two- 
thirds of the country’s factories and about two-thirds of 
the factory workers. Most of the factories are located in 
and around Sydney and Melbourne. 

Mining. Australia has rich mineral resources. But 
many of the deposits lie in the dry areas, far from major 
settlements. Such deposits are extremely expensive to 
mine. Roads and railroads have to be constructed to the 
mining sites. The miners and their families must have 
housing. The costs of mining development in Australia 
are so high that the mining industry depends heavily on 
foreign capital. Foreign investors own or control about 
half of the mining industry. In 1975, the Australian feder- 
al government established a general rule that at least 50 
percent of every major new mining operation in the 
country should be owned by Australian investors. How- 
ever, the government does not strictly enforce this rule 
if the Australian capital needed for the mining operation 
is unavailable. 

Australia began to develop its mineral resources dur- 
ing the 1800's. By the end of the century, it was export- 
ing large amounts of copper, gold lead, silver, tin, and 






e 
Geelong Gas 


Oil 


Tungsten 






iron Ore Launceston 


Tin 
iF oa 
Copper, Pyrite ungsiten, Tin 
TASMANIA © Hobart 





zinc. These minerals remained the chief products of the 
mining industry until the mid-1900's. During the 1950's, 
geologists discovered huge deposits of bauxite, coal, 
and iron ore in Australia. They discovered manganese, 
natural gas, nickel, and petroleum during the 1960's. 
Australia has become one of the major mining coun- 
tries of the world. It ranks first in the production of baux- 
ite, diamonds, and lead. In addition, it is a leading pro- 
ducer of coal, copper, gold, iron ore, manganese, nick- 
el, silver, tin, titanium, zinc, and zircon. Nearly all of the 





© Mike James, Photo Researchers 


Australia’s thriving mining industry produces large amounts 
of bauxite, coal, copper, diamonds, iron ore, lead, opals, and 
zinc. This iron ore mine is near Iron Knob, South Australia. 





Australia 919 


Agriculture and 
fishing in Australia 


This map shows Australia’s 
chief agricultural and fishing 
regions. The most fertile crop- 
land lies along the east, south- 
east, and extreme southwest 
coasts. Dry grasslands cover 
much of the interior and are 
used to graze livestock. Shell- 
fish are Australia’s leading 
fishery products. 













Tobac 
a Cane 


= % ac Cane 


“ft | 


i ee. 


s ms — 


p= ~ay 








" F a © 
OE be, 
a 


~~ noelers 


TASMANIA 
peur 


WORLD BOOK map 
world’s high-quality opals are mined in Australia. tralia are Australia’s main source of petroleum. Other 
Western Australia, Queensland, and New South major petroleum producers include South Australia and 
Wales, in that order, are the leading mining states. Victoria. Natural gas is produced mainly in South Aus- 
Western Australia produces most of the nickel, ironore, _ tralia and the northwest coastal shelf of Western Aus- 
and goid and much of the bauxite. Queensland is the tralia. The country has the world’s largest undeveloped 
chief producer of bauxite, copper, and silver. New deposits of uranium. The richest uranium deposits are 
South Wales leads in the production of coal, lead, and located in the Northern Territory and South Australia. 
zinc. All the manganese is mined in the Northern Terri- Agriculture. Australia’s farms are highly mechanized 
tory. Most of Australia’s tin comes from Tasmania. Off- and thus require a minimum of human labor. Only about 
shore fields along the northwest coast of Western Aus- 5 percent of the country’s workers are farmers. How 


© Robert Frerck 





The Snowy Mountains 
Scheme is a vast irrigation 
and hydroelectric power proj- 
ect in Australias southeastern 
highlands. Pipelines like those 
at the left carry water from 
mountain streams to a nearby 
series of dams and hydroelec- 
tric plants. The runoff from 
the dams flows into the Mur- 
ray and Murrumbidgee rivers 
for use in irrigation. 





920 Australia 





ever, they produce nearly all of the food the people 
need. 

Farmland covers about 60 percent of Australia. How- 
ever, most of this land is dry grazing land. Crops are 
grown on only about 10 percent of the farmland. But 
farmers use modern agricultural methods and so make 
the cropland highly productive. About 10 percent of the 
cropland is irrigated. 

Australia’s !eading farm products by far are cattle and 
calves, wheat, and wool, followed by dairy products, 
fruits, and sugar cane. These products are also the coun- 
try’s chief agricultural exports. Australia is the world’s 
largest producer and exporter of wool and a leading 
producer and exporter of beef, sugar, and wheat. A 
rapidly growing industry is winemaking. The country’s 
other major farm products include barley, chickens and 
eggs, oats, rice, potatoes, sheep and lambs, vegetables, 
and cotton. 

Sheep and cattle are raised in all the Australian states, 
though some states raise far more than others. New 
South Wales and Western Australia together raise more 
than half the country’s sheep and produce about half its 
wool. Queensland and New South Wales raise more 
than half of Australia’s beef cattle. Victoria is the leading 
producer of dairy products. 

Wheat is grown in all areas of the country that have 
medium rainfall and moderate temperatures. But pro- 
duction is heavily concentrated in New South Wales and 
Western Australia. Farms on the east coast of Queens- 
land grow sugar cane, bananas, pineapples, and other 
crops that need a wet tropical climate. Such fruits as ap- 
ples and pears are grown in all the states. New South 
Wales and South Australia produce most of the coun- 
try’s oranges. 

Forestry and fishing. Forests cover about 20 percent 
of Australia. Nearly all of them grow in the Eastern High- 
lands and in the moist coasta! areas. The northeast coast 
has tropical rain forests. The vast majority of Australia’s 
forest trees are eucalyptuses. The wood of some euca- 
lyptus species is used for making paper and such items 





Golden wheat fields, such as 
this one in New South Wales, 
are important to the Austral- 
ian economy. Australia ex- 
ports great quantities of 
wheat to China, Japan, and 
other Asian countries. 


© Lance Nelson, Stock Photos 


as fleorboards and furniture. But eucalyptus wood is too 
hard for most other purposes, including most types of 
housing construction. Therefore, imported species of 
softwoods have been planted on tree farms. Monterey 
pines, which were imported from California, have be- 
come Australias second most important timber trees, 
after eucalyptuses. 

Although Australia is surrounded by water, its fishing 
resources are limited. Thousands of species of fishes 
live in the coastal waters. However, only a few are both 
plentiful and good to eat. Nevertheless, Australia has de- 
veloped a small but profitable fishing industry. The in- 
dustry earns most of its income from the catch of shell- 
fish, especially abalones, lobsters, oysters, prawns, and 
scallops. In addition, the fishing fleet brings in fairly 
large catches of mullet, salmon, and tuna. Much of the 
shellfish catch is exported. Some pearls are collected 
from oysters. 

Tourism. Australia has a variety of tourist attractions. 
They include wildlife sanctuaries, sandy beaches, the 
Great Barrier Reef, the Australian Alps, and numerous 
points of historical interest. More than 4 million foreign 
tourists visit Australia each year. Tourism aids the econ- 
omy. 

Distance and cost have been the major obstacles to 
growth of Australia’s tourist industry. Australia is about 
twice as far from North America and Europe as North 
America and Europe are from each other. Travel be- 
tween Europe and North America is therefore less costly 
than it is between Europe or North America and Aus- 
tralia. About half of Australia’s visitors come from less 
distant places, especially New Zealand and other Pacific 
islands, Japan, and Southeast Asia. These places are also 
the ones most visited by Australians. 

International trade. Farm products, minerals, and 
other raw materials account for about half of Australia’s 
export earnings. Manufactured goods account for ap- 
proximately one-third of such earnings. More than 
three-fourths of Australia’s imports are manufactured 
goods. 





— =. Joe 
pane 


© Robert Frerck 


Beef cattle are raised throughout Australia except the deserts. 
But production is greatest in New South Wales and Queensland. 
This cattle auction is being held in Rockhampton, Queensland. 


For many years, the United Kingdom (U.K.) was Aus- 
tralia’s chief trading partner. The British bought Aus- 
tralian farm products and supplied Australia with pro- 
ducer goods. During the 1960's, the U.K's trade with 
Australia began to decline. Australia still exports miner- 
als, wheat, and fruits to the U.K. and other Western Euro- 
pean countries. But today, Japan is Australia’s biggest 
customer. It especially buys coal, iron ore, and other 
minerals. China, Japan, and other Asian countries have 
become major purchasers of Australian farm products, 
especially wheat. Japan is by far the leading buyer of 
Australian wool. The United States and Japan have re- 
placed the U.K. as Australia’s chief source of producer 
goods. The United States, in turn, imports large amounts 
of Australian beef, shellfish, sugar, and a/umina—the 
substance in bauxite that is used to make aluminum. 

Transportation. Automobiles are the chief means of 
passenger transportation in Australia. Nearly every fami- 
ly owns a Car and uses it for most local travel. Paved 
highways link the state capitals and the largest inland 
cities. Most roads in the outback are unpaved. 

Qantas (Queensland and Northern Territory Aerial 
Services Ltd.) is Australia’s largest domestic airline and 
its main international airline. Many foreign airlines also 
fly between Australia and major cities throughout the 
world. Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Cairns, and Perth 
have large international airports. Air transportation is 
particularly important in the outback. A private, nonprof- 
it organization called the Royal Flying Doctor Service 
flies emergency medical help to all areas of the outback 
except the Northern Territory. A publicly owned compa- 
ny provides this service in the Northern Territory. 

Trucks, railroads, and ships haul most of Australia’s in- 
tercity freight. The trucking industry is mainly privately 
owned. Australia’s main-line railroads were all publicly 
owned until the late 1900's, but many are now privately 
owned. The Trans-Australian Railroad is the country's 
longest rail line. It extends 1,108 miles (1,783 kilometers) 
from Port Pirie in South Australia to Kalgoorlie in West- 
ern Australia. The main-line railroads chiefly haul farm 
goods and minerals from the producing areas to the 





Australia 921 


coastal cities and ports. In addition to the main rail lines, 
Australia has several small private railroads. These lines 
largely haul minerals from out-of-the-way mines to the 
main-line railroads. Sydney and Melbourne have exten- 
sive commuter rail and subway systems. 

Ships carry large amounts of minerals between Aus- 
tralian coastal ports, and they haul nearly all the coun- 
try's overseas freight. However, Australia has only a 
small merchant fleet. Foreign vessels carry most of the 
nation’s intercoastal freight and almost all its overseas 
cargo. The busiest eastern ports include Gladstone, Hay 
Point, Melbourne, Newcastle, and Sydney. Dampier, 
Fremantle, Port Hedland, and Port Walcott are among 
the busiest ports in Western Australia. 

Communication. Australia’s postal, telephone, and 
telegraph systems are partly or fully owned by the fed- 
eral government and operated by independent govern- 
ment agencies. The Australian Postal Corporation runs 
the postal system. The telephone system was fully gov- 
ernment-owned until the 1990's. But the telecommunica- 
tions industry now operates in a competitive market. 
Telstra, a partially government-owned company, is the 
biggest operator. Except in the outback, nearly every 
Australian household has a telephone. In the remotest 
parts of the outback, many people use two-way radios 
instead of telephones. The Internet has become an im- 
portant means of communication throughout Australia. 
Most Australian homes have at least one computer. 

Almost all Australian families own one or more televi- 
sion sets and radios. Commercial broadcasters own and 
operate about half the radio stations and three of the 
five free TV stations. Almost all the rest are owned and 
financed by the federal government and operated by the 
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC), an inde- 
pendent government agency. Unlike the commercial sta- 
tions, the ABC stations accept no advertising. 

Australia has approximately 50 daily newspapers, all 
of which are privately owned. Every big city has at least 
one daily paper. The most widely read daily newspapers 
in the country include Melbourne's Hera/d Sun and 
The Age and Sydney's Morning Herald and Daily Tele- 







fee 
= C20 Ul FEDENG Fearn Tange SERVICE coe 


~~ @09+ 









Ran al F Te art Senice 
The Royal Flying Doctor Service provides emergency medical 
services to people living in remote areas of Australia. Air trans- 
portation is vital in the Australian outback. 


922 Australia 


graph. A national daily, The Australian, is published in 
Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, and Brisbane. 


History 


Australia’s first settlers were ancestors of today’s Abo- 
rigines. They may have reached the continent as early as 
65,000 years ago and came from Asia by way of New 
Guinea. When the first whites arrived in 1788, about 
750,000 Aborigines lived in Australia. 

European discovery. The European discovery of 
Australia began with the discovery of New Guinea by 
Portuguese and Spanish explorers during the 1500's. 
These explorers and others after them were searching 
for a mysterious continent believed to lie south of Asia. 
The continent was known as Jerra Australis Incognita, a 
Latin term meaning Unknown Southern Land. 

In 1606, a Spanish explorer named Luis Vaez de Tor- 
res proved that New Guinea was not the unknown conti- 
nent. He sailed through the strait between New Guinea 
and Australia and so showed New Guinea to be an is- 
land. However, Torres had no idea that a vast continent 
lay only about 100 miles (160 kilometers) to the south. 
Also in 1606, a Dutch navigator named Willem Jansz 
sailed along and briefly visited what he thought was a 
coast of New Guinea. Actually, it was the west coast of 
Cape York Peninsula in extreme northeastern Australia. 
Jansz thus became the first European known to sight the 
continent and land in Australia. 

From 1616 to 1636, other Dutch navigators explored 
Australia's west, southwest, and northwest coasts. Ex- 
plorers then began to believe they had found the myste- 
rious southern continent. In 1642 and 1643, Abel Jans- 
zoon Tasman, a Dutch sea captain, sailed around the 
continent without sighting it. During his voyage, Tasman 
saw and briefly visited a land mass that he named Van 
Diemens Land. He originally thought that this land was 
part of the continent. But actually, it was an island, which 
was renamed /asmania in his honor in 1855. 

All the early explorers reported unfavorably on what 
they had seen of Australia. The land was dry and barren, 
and the people had no gold or other riches. Then, in 
1770, James Cook of the British Royal Navy became the 


first European to sight and explore Australia’s fertile east 
coast. Cook claimed the region for the United Kingdom 
and named it New South Wales. 

Early settlement. Before the Revolutionary War in 
America, the United Kingdom regularly shipped many 
convicts to its American colonies. This practice, which 
was known as transportation, helped relieve overcrowd- 
ing in British jails. After the United States won its inde- 
pendence in 1783, the United Kingdom had to find a 
new place to transport convicts. In 1786, the British de- 
cided to start a prison colony in New South Wales. Cap- 
tain Arthur Phillip, a retired naval officer, was appointed 
to establish the colony and serve as its governor. 

In May 1787, Phillip sailed from England with about 
570 male and 160 female convicts, about 200 British sol- 
diers to serve as guards, about 30 wives of soldiers, and 
a few children. The group traveled in 11 ships. The first 
ship reached Botany Bay, on Australia’s east coast, on 
Jan. 18, 1788. Phillip set up the colony's first settlement 
by a large harbor about 7 miles (11 kilometers) north of 
Botany Bay. It was the first white settlement in Australia 
and the beginning of the city of Sydney. 

The new colony had to support itself by farming. The 
convicts worked on community farms near the settle- 
ment. During the 1790's, the colonial government began 
to grant land to military officers and freed convicts, and 
free settlers began arriving from the United Kingdom. 

Exploring the new land. When New South Wales 
was first settled, people did not know if Australia con- 
sisted of one huge land mass or of two or more large is- 
lands. The northwestern, western and southwestern 
coastline had been thoroughly mapped, and so it was 
known that all western Australia formed one land mass. 
Tasman had named this land New Holland. The east 
coast of Australia was mapped after Cook discovered it. 
But much of the southern coastline and part of the 
northern coastline remained uncharted. People there- 
fore thought that New South Wales and New Holland 
might be islands rather than parts of one continent. 

In 1798 and 1799, two British navigators, George Bass 
and Matthew Flinders, sailed around Tasmania and so 
proved it to be an island. From 1801 to 1803, Flinders 


Engraving {1863} based on a wood engraving by John Alexander Gilfillan, 
ifustrated Melbourne Post. December 1863; Nationa! Library of Australia 





i= = 
| F< a eal 


as 


James Cook explored Aus- 
tralia’s fertile east coast in 
1770 and claimed it for the 
United Kingdom. Cook's expe- 
dition largely completed the 
European discovery of Aus- 
tralia, which had begun dur- 
ing the early 1600's. 














Important dates in Australia 


65,000 years ago Ancestors of the Aborigines may have settled 
Australia. 

A.D. 1606 Willem Jansz became the first European known to 
sight Australia and land there. 

1642 Abel Janszoon Tasman sighted Van Diemen’s Land. !t was 
renamed Tasmania in 1855. 

1770 James Cook explored Australia’s east coast. He claimed the 
area for the United Kingdom and named it New South Wales. 

1788 The United Kingdom established New South Wales as a 
prison colony. 

1801-1803 Matthew Flinders sailed completely around Australia, 
proving it to be one large land mass. 

1829 Charles Fremantle claimed the entire western part of the 


sailed around the continent and mapped all the unchart- 
ed areas of the southern coastline. This proved the 
mainland to be one land mass. There could no longer 
be any doubt that this land mass was Jerra Australis, the 
southern continent. By the 1820's, Australia had become 
its generally accepted name. 

The settlers in New South Wales explored the area 
around Sydney during the early 1800's. In 1824, Hamil- 
ton Hume and William Hovell opened up an overland 
route from Sydney to the future site of Melbourne. On 
their way, they sighted an exceptionally broad river. In 
1829 and 1830, Charles Sturt followed this river to its 
mouth, near what is now Adelaide. He thus paved the 
way for the establishment of the colony of South Aus- 
tralia in 1836. Sturt named the river the Murray. 

Also in 1829, a British sea captain named Charles Fre- 
mantle landed on Australia’s southwest coast and 
claimed the entire western part of the continent for the 


Australia 
exploration and 
discovery 


Sea Explorers 

eccceee Jansz 1606 (Neth.) 

----- Tasman 1642,1644 (Neth.) 
ecoooee Cook 1770 (G.B.} 


_ Bass and Flinders 1798- 
1799 (G.B.) 


Flinders 1801-1803 (G.B.) 





Land Explorers 

esccooeee Blaxland 1813 

+¢++¢++ Hume and Havell 1824 
aaa Sturt 1829-1830 
—-— Mitchell 1835 

oooooee Eyre 1840-1841 
—---— Leichhardt 1844-1845 
—o— Burke and Wills 1860-1861 
——— Stuart 1861-1862 
——»— Warburtan 1873 
—+— Farrest 1874 


0 500 Miles 
——————e 
0 500 Kilometers 


WORLD BOOK map 


Australia 923 


Australian continent for the United Kingdom. 

1851 Gold was discovered in New South Wales and Victoria. 

1868 The United Kingdom ended the transportation of convicts 
to Australia. 

1901 Australia became an independent nation. Melbourne was 
named the temporary capital. 

1927 The federal capital was transferred to Canberra. 

1967 The Australian Constitution was amended to permit the es- 
tablishment of federal programs to aid the Aborigines. 

1978 The Northern Territory became responsible for its own ad- 
ministration, the first step toward Australian statehood. 

1999 Voters rejected a plan to make Australia a republic and 
chose to keep the British monarch as Australia’s head of state. 


United Kingdom. Later that year, a group of about 70 
English settlers officially established the colony of West- 
ern Australia and founded its capital, Perth. 

The squatter period. During the 1820's, the people 
of New South Wales began to develop a strong econo- 
my based on the production of wool for export to the 
United Kingdom. The large profits that could be made 
from the wool trade encouraged more and more set- 
tlers to raise sheep for a living. But the government of 
New South Wales allowed settlers to buy or lease graz- 
ing land only within a limited area. All the land outside 
this area was considered government property. To raise 
sheep, many settlers began to occupy government land 
illegally. These illegal landholders became known as 
squatters, Squatters gradually won legal recognition and 
were granted long-term leases on their land. Some 
eventually became the biggest landholders in Australia. 

During the 1830's, a number of sheep farmers mi- 


amt Bass and Flinders 
47 1798-1799 











924 Australia 


grated to southern New South Wales from Tasmania 
and the area around Sydney. They founded Melbourne 
and occupied the rich grazing lands south of the Murray 
River. They did so well that they asked Britain to make 
them a separate colony. The request was granted in 
1851. That year, the part of New South Wales south of 
the Murray River became the new colony of Victoria. 

Exploring the interior. The first long expeditions 
into the interior began during the 1830's. In 1839 and 
1840, Edward John Eyre discovered the vast, dry salt 
lakes northwest of Adelaide. In 1860 and 1861, Robert 
O'Hara Burke and William Wills became the first white 
people to cross the continent from south to north. They 
died of starvation on the return journey south. John Mc- 
Douall Stuart made the first round trip between the 
south and north coasts in 1861 and 1862. 

The Australian gold rush. In 1851, gold was discov- 
ered in New South Wales. A few months later, an even 
richer gold field was discovered in Victoria. Thousands 
of prospectors from overseas rushed to the gold fields. 
Some became rich. But most did not find enough gold 
to pay their passage home. Many gold seekers stayed in 
Australia. As a result, the population soared from about 
400,000 in 1850 to more than 1,100,000 in 1860. 

The end of transportation. Britain stopped trans- 
porting convicts to the eastern colonies of Australia by 
the early 1850's. However, it continued to send them to 
Western Australia until 1868, when the practice was fi- 
nally ended. Altogether, more than 160,000 convicts 
were sent to Australia from 1788 to 1868. 

Political and economic developments. As the 
number of free settlers in Australia grew, so did the col- 
onists demands for self-government. By 1856, Britain 
had granted self-government to all the colonies except 
Western Australia. Each had its own elected legislature 
and government ministers, who controlled the colony's 
internal affairs. Britain continued to manage the foreign 
affairs and defense of the colonies. Meanwhile, squat- 
ters had settled the part of New South Wales north and 
west of Brisbane. In 1859, Britain created the colony of 
Queensland out of this area, with Brisbane as its capital. 

By 1860, thousands of disappointed gold miners 
wanted to buy plots of land and take up farming. But 
most of the best farmland was held by squatters. How- 


Western 
Austraka 
1829 





New South Wales 
1788 Western . ! 
Australia i 








Van Diemen’'s Land : 
1825 
— = 











In 1829, Western Australia became the 






Van Diemen's Lana 


In 1836 and 1851, Britain established two 


ever, the squatters leases expired in 1861. During the 
early 1860's, the colonial legislatures passed laws to re- 
distribute the squatters land. These laws permitted indi- 
viduals to select any small area of farmland they wanted, 
including land held by squatters, and buy it from the 
government on credit. To defeat these measures, many 
squatters hired people to buy up as much land as they 
legally could and turn it over to the squatters. The big 
landholders thus kept much of their land. 

The birth of a new nation. All the Australian colo- 
nies had self-government by the 1890's. However, a 
growing number of Australians believed that the colo- 
nies would be better off as a single nation with a unified 
government. Without such a government, it would al- 
ways be difficult for the colonies to deal with their com- 
mon problems in an organized manner. The movement 
toward federation was also encouraged by a growing 
sense of national pride. The creation of a national folk- 
lore by such writers as Henry Lawson and Banjo Pater- 
son helped strengthen this spirit. 

In 1897 and 1898, a federal convention drew up a con- 
stitution for Australia. The people approved it in ballot- 
ing during 1898 and 1899. Britain approved it in 1900. On 
Jan. 1, 1901, the six colonies became states of a new na- 
tion, the Commonwealth of Australia. The new nation 
kept the British monarch as head of state. The federal 
Parliament met at Melbourne until a site for a national 
capital could be selected and developed. 

At first, Australia had three political parties—the Pro- 
tectionist Party, the Free Trade Party, and the Labor 
Party. The Protectionists wanted high tariffs (taxes on im- 
ports) to protect Australian industries from foreign com- 
petition. The Free Traders wanted low tariffs or none. 
The Labor Party represented the labor unions. By 1909, 
Parliament had settled the tariff question in favor of 
some tariffs. The Free Traders joined the Protectionists 
to form the Fusion Party, the forerunner of today’s Lib- 
eral Party. The National Party was founded in 1919. It was 
called the Australian Country Party from 1919 to 1975 
and the National Country Party from 1975 to 1983. 

World War 1. When Britain declared war on Ger- 
many in 1914, Australia considered itself automatically at 
war on the side of Britain. More than 400,000 Australians 
served in the Australian armed forces before the war 






New South 
Wales 


Tasmania 


renamed in 1855 





WORLD BOOK maps 
By 1911, the map of Australia looked 


third British colony in Australia. Britain more colonies—South Australia and Vic- much as it looks today. Queensland and 
had established New South Wales in toria. The land for the new colonies was the mainland territories were set up. Van 
1788 and Van Diemen’s Land in 1825. taken from New South Wales. Diemen’s Land was renamed Tasmania. 

















Australian prime ministers 


Name Dates served Party 
Edmund Barton 1901-1903 Protectionist 
Alfred Deakin 1903-1904 Protectionist 
John Christian Watson 1904 Labor 
George H. Reid 1904-1905 Free Trade 
Alfred Deakin 1905-1908 Protectionist 
Andrew Fisher 1908-1909 Labor 
Alfred Deakin 1909-1910 Fusion 
Andrew Fisher 1910-1913 Labor 
Joseph Cook 1913-1914 Liberal 
Andrew Fisher 1914-1915 Labor 
William M. Hughes 191529 1% Labor 
William M. Hughes S792 Nationalist 
Stanley M. Bruce F9Z3-1929 Nationalist 
James Scullin 1929-1932 Labor 
Joseph A. Lyons 1932-1939 United 
Earle Page 1939 Country 


ended in 1918. During the war, a corps of Australian and 
New Zealand troops called Anzacs (Australian and New 
Zealand Army Corps) won a reputation for outstanding 
bravery. About 59,000 Australians died in the war—the 
most deaths in proportion to total number of troops 
among all the Allies. The war is commemorated on An- 
zac Day, a national day of mourning on April 25. 
Between the wars. Work on the new federal capital 
at Canberra continued after the war. Parliament had se- 
lected the site in 1908, and construction had begun in 
1913. The capital was transferred from Melbourne to 
Canberra in 1927. The Great Depression, the worldwide 
business slump of the 1930's, had a disastrous effect on 
Australia’s economy. Many wool, wheat, and sugar pro- 
ducers went bankrupt. In the worst of the depression, 
nearly a third of the country’s workers had no job. 
World War If. Australia entered World War II on the 
side of the British on Sept. 3, 1939. It sent troops to fight 
German forces in mainland Greece, Crete, and northern 
Africa. Many of these troops were brought back to Aus- 
tralia after Japan entered the war on Germany's side in 
December 1941. On Feb. 19, 1942, Japanese planes 
bombed Darwin. By early March, Japanese troops had 
landed in New Guinea and were threatening to invade 
Australia. This threat was removed by the U.S. show of 
strength in the Battle of the Coral Sea in May. From then 
until the war ended in 1945, Australia directed its mili- 
tary effort at driving the Japanese from New Guinea. 
About 925,000 men and about 65,000 women served 
in Australia’s armed forces during World War Il. Over 
29,000 Australians died in battle or as prisoners of war. 
The postwar years. The Labor Party governed Aus- 
tralia from 1941 to 1949, when it was defeated in parlia- 
mentary elections. The Liberals won enough seats to 
form a government with the Country Party. Such Liberal 
and Country party coalitions held power until 1972. 
Australia became a charter member of the United Na- 
tions (UN) in 1945 and began to play an increasingly ac- 
tive role in world affairs. The country contributed to the 
UN forces that fought in Korea from 1950 to 1953. In 
1950, Australia helped create the Colombo Plan for eco- 
nomic development in southern and southeastern Asia. 
In 1951, Australia joined New Zealand and the United 
States in signing the ANZUS Treaty, a mutual defense 
agreement. From 1964 to 1972, Australian troops assist- 
ed the United States in the Vietnam War. 


Australia 925 





Name Dates served Party 
Robert G. Menzies 1939-1941 United 
Arthur Fadden 1941 Country 
John Curtin 1941-1945 Labor 
Francis M. Forde 1945 Labor 
Ben Chifley 1945-1949 Labor 
Robert G. Menzies 1949-1966 Liberal 
Harold E. Holt 1966-1967 Liberal 
John McEwen 1967-1968 Country 
John G. Gorton 1968-1971 Liberal 
William McMahon 1971-1972 Liberal 
Gough Whitlam AO7Z21975 Labor 
Malcolm Fraser 1975-1983 Liberal 
Robert Hawke 1983-1991 Labor 
Paul Keating Too) Labor 
John Howard 1996- Liberal 


During the 1960's, Australia generally enjoyed eco- 
nomic growth and prosperity. It resulted chiefly from 
the discovery of vast mineral deposits in the 1950's and 
1960's. The export of bauxite, coal, iron ore, and nickel 
added greatly to the country's income. 

Political crisis. In 1972, the Labor Party came to pow- 
er with a majority in the House of Representatives but 
not in the Senate. Gough Whitlam, the party leader, be- 
came prime minister. By 1975, inflation and unemploy- 
ment were rising, and the Labor government had be- 
come unpopular. In October 1975, the Liberal and Na- 
tional parties used their Senate majority to threaten to 
stop the supply of money for day-to-day government op- 
erations. They hoped to force Whitlam to resign. 

Whitlam refused to resign, and the opposition parties 
refused to assure the flow of government money. In No- 
vember, the governor general, Sir John Kerr, resolved 
the crisis by removing Whitlam from office. Kerr named 
Malcolm Fraser, head of the Liberal Party, to serve as 
prime minister until new elections could be held. The 
Liberal and National coalition won elections in Decem- 
ber 1975 and in 1977 and 1980. Fraser remained prime 
minister. The Labor Party regained power in elections in 
1983. Party leader Robert Hawke became prime minister. 
The Labor Party won elections in 1984, 1987, and 1990. 

Recent developments. Problems faced by Australia 
today include continuing inflation and unemployment, 
as well as a growing international debt. Australia’s 
hopes for economic growth are closely tied to the 
growth of its mining industry. Uranium is Australia’s 
most valuable undeveloped mineral resource. The ura- 
nium industry began to expand in the late 1970's, when 
the worldwide demand for uranium increased. Howev- 
er, Australians who oppose nuclear power because of 
its potential hazards also oppose plans to mine and ex- 
port uranium. Also, some of the richest uranium de- 
posits lie in the traditional tribal lands of the Aborigines. 

In the early 1970's, vast fields of natural gas were dis- 
covered on the coast of Western Australia. Australia be- 
gan developing the fields in 1980. It is the largest single- 
resource development project in Australia’s history. 

In 1989, the Australian government set up the Aborigi- 
nal and Torres Strait Islander Commission (ATSIC). Abo- 
rigines and Torres Strait Islanders elect the ATSIC to 
represent their interests and to manage many aspects of 
Aboriginal affairs. In 1992, the High Court of Australia, 





926 Australia 


in the case of Mabo v. Queensland, ruled that Aborig- 
ines and Torres Strait !slanders had legal title to their 
lands before European settlers took the land. Previous 
British and Australian law had said the land belonged to 
no one. The case helped establish the Aborigines’ legal 
right, under certain conditions, to reclaim their lands. 

In 1991, during a recession, the Labor Party members 
of Parliament voted to replace Hawke with Paul Keating 
as head of their party. As a result, Keating also replaced 
Hawke as prime minister. The Labor Party won parlia- 
mentary elections in 1993, and Keating remained in of- 
fice. A coalition of the National and Liberal parties won 
general elections in 1996, 1998, and 2001. John Howard, 
the leader of the Liberal Party, served as prime minister. 

During the 1990's, many Australians called for their na- 
tion to become a republic with a president replacing the 
British monarch as head of state. In 1998, a constitutional 
convention voted in favor of making Australia a republic 
by Jan. 1, 2001. In a 1999 referendum, however, Austra- 
lian voters rejected the convention's plan to make Aust- 
ralia a republic and chose instead to keep the British 
monarch as head of state. D. N. Jeans and John Rickard 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Biographies 


Anderson, Judith 
Bruce, Sir David 
Burnet, Sir Macfar- 


Greer, Germaine Sutherland, Joan 
Hawke, Robert J. L Torres, Luis Vaez 
Howard, John W. de 


lane Keneally, Thomas Travers, P. L 
Florey, Lord Kenny, Elizabeth White, Patrick 
Fraser, Malcolm Melba, Nellie Wilkins, Sir 
Grainger, Percy A. Murdoch, Rupert Hubert 


Characteristic animal life 


Apostlebird Dugong Lyrebird Platypus 
Bandicoot Echidna Marsupial Quoll 
Bowerbird Emu Marsupial Tasmanian 
Cane toad Glider mouse devil 
Cassowary Honeyeater Mound bird Tasmanian 
Cockatoo Kangaroo Numbat tiger 
Cuscus Koala Parakeet Weaver 
Dingo Kookaburra Parrot Wombat 

Characteristic plant life 
Acacia Bottle tree Kava 
Beefwood Eucalyptus Silky oak 

Cities 

Adelaide Darwin Newcastle Sydney 
Brisbane Hobart Perth Wollongong 
Canberra Melbourne 


Natural features 


Australian Desert 
Botany Bay 

Coral Sea 

Great Barrier Reef 
Great Victoria Desert 
Indian Ocean 

Lake Eyre 

Lake Torrens 


Mount Kosciuszko 

Murray River 

Pacific Ocean 

Seven Natural Wonders of the 
World (Ayers Rock) 

Tasman Sea 

Torrens 

Torres Strait Islands 


States and territories 


New South Wales 
Norfolk Island 
Northern Territory 


Queensland 
South Australia 
Tasmania 


Victoria 
Western Australia 


Other related articles 


Aborigines, Australian 
Bank (Australia and New 
Zealand) 


Barossa Valley 
Boomerang 
Colombo Plan 


Conservation (Australia) 

Cook, James 

Exploration (Exploring the Pa- 
cific; Exploring Australia’s 
interior) 


Immigration 

Nationa! park (Australia) 

Stolen Generation 

Television (In Australia and 
New Zealand) 


Outline 


I. Government 
A. The federal government 
B. State and local government 
C. Political parties 
D. The armed forces 


ll. People 
A. Population and C. The Aborigines 
ancestry B. Language 
lll. Ways of life 
A. City life C. Food and drink E. Education 
B. Country life D.Recreation F. Religion 
IV. The arts 
A. Literature D. Theater and motion pic- 
B. Painting tures 
C. Music and dance E. Architecture 
V. The land 


EF. Lakes 
F. Underground water 
G. The Great Barrier Reef 


A. Land regions 
B. Mountains 
C. Deserts 
D. Rivers 
VI. Climate 
Vii. Animals and plants | 
A. Native animals 
B. Native plants | 
’  C_Introduced species 
Vill. Economy 
A. Service industries F. Tourism 
B. Manufacturing G. Internationa! trade 
C Mining H. Transportation 
D. Agriculture I. | 
E. Forestry and fishing 
IX. History 


Communication 


Questions 


Who were the first Australians? 

Why did Australia’s animals develop differently from those on 
other continents? 

In what parts of Australia do most of the people live? 


How did the Revolutionary War in America lead to the settle- | 
ment of Australia by the United Kingdom? | 
What is the Snowy Mountains Scheme? . 


What are bush ballads? When did they become popular? 

Who were the squatters? 

How do children in remote areas of Australia receive their edu- 
cation without attending school? 

Who is Australia’s head of state? Who is its head of government? 

Why has Australia welcomed large numbers of immigrants? 


Additional resources 


Level | 
Arnold, Caroline. Australian Animals. HarperCollins, 2000. 
Darlington, Robert. Australia. Raintree Steck-Vaughn, 2001. 
Grupper, Jonathan. Destination Australia. National Geographic 
Soc., 2000. 
Porter, Malcolm, and Lye, Keith. Australia and the Pacific. Rain- 
tree Steck-Vaughn, 2001. 


Level Il 

Cosgrove, Peter. Australia: The Complete Encyclopedia. Firefly 
Bks., 2001. 

Jupp, James, ed. The Australian People. 2nd ed. Cambridge, 2001. 

Menkhorst, Peter. A Fie/d Guide to the Mammals of Australia. 
Oxford, 2001. 

Smith, Roff M. The National Geographic Traveler: Australia. Na- 
tional Geographic Soc., 1999. 


Australian Aborigines. See Aborigines, Australian. 
Australian cattle dog is a breed of dog that origi- 
nated in Australia during the 1800's. It was developed 








from several breeds of farm dogs, including collies and 
kelpies. Farmers and ranchers use Australian cattle dogs 
to herd cattle. These dogs nip at the heels of the cattle to 
keep them from straying. The dogs also make excellent 
watchdogs and affectionate pets. 

Australian cattle dogs stand from 17 to 20 inches (43 
to 51 centimeters) high and weigh 35 to 45 pounds (16 to 
20 kilograms). They have short, thick coats and bushy 
tails. Many of the dogs are blue and may have black, 
blue, or tan markings on the head, and tan markings on 
the chest and legs. Others are red, and many have red 
speckles all over the body. Puppies are born with white 
coats. Their color and markings appear in a few months. 
The Australian cattle dog has been known by several 
other names, including the Australian heeler, the 
Queensland heeler, the Queensland blue heeler, and the 
blue heeler. Critically reviewed by the American Kenne! Club 

See also Dog (picture: Herding dogs). 

Australian Desert refers to three deserts that cover 
most of western and central Australia. The deserts are 
the Great Sandy Desert, the Gibson Desert, and the 
Great Victoria Desert The three deserts are not as dry as 
most other deserts, and they have a thin cover of vegeta- 
tion. The Great Sandy Desert stretches south to the Gib- 
son Desert. It covers about 160,000 square miles (414,000 
square kilometers). P. Egerton Warburton first walked 
over it in 1873. That same year, Ernest Giles became the 
first European to reach the 250,000-square-mile (647,000- 
square-kilometer) Gibson Desert. The Great Victoria 
Desert runs south from the Gibson Desert to the Nullar- 
bor Plain (see Australia [physical map]). See also Great 
Victoria Desert. D.N. Jeans 

Australian shepherd is a medium-sized dog that 
was originally bred for herding livestock. The breed was 
developed in the United States. It got its name because 
many sheepherders who came to the United States from 
Australia in the late 1800's used similar dogs to herd 
their flocks. Australian shepherds are often referred to 
as “Aussies.” The Aussie stands 18 to 23 inches (46 to 58 
centimeters) tall at the shoulders and weighs about 45 to 
65 pounds (20 to 29 kilograms). It has a straight to wavy 
coat that may be blue or red mer/e (dark blotches 
against a lighter background of the same color), black, 





Paulette Johnson 


The Australian shepherd has strong herding instincts. 


Australopithecus 927 


or red, often with white or tan markings. Aussies are in- 
telligent, have protective instincts, and make good pets. 

Critically reviewed by the United States Australian Shepherd Association 
Australian terrier is a small dog once used to guard 
mines and tend sheep in Australia. People now keep 
these terriers chiefly as pets. They have harsh, straight 
coats, with a soft-haired topknot on their heads. The 
coats may be blue- or silver-black, with tan markings on 
the head and legs. The dog weighs about 12 to 14 
pounds (5.4 to 6.4 kilograms). The breed originated in 
Australia about 1885. See also Dog (picture: Terriers). 

Critically reviewed by the American Kenne! Club 
Australopithecus, AW struh loh PIHTH uh kuhs, isa 
group of species that most anthropologists regard as 
one of the earliest humanlike creatures. These species 
lived in Africa from about 4,000,000 years ago to be- 
tween 2,000,000 and 1,000,000 years ago. Members of 
the genus (group of species) known as Australopithecus 
are Called australopithecines. Australopithecine fossils 
include some of the oldest known Aominid fossils. Ho- 
minids make up the scientific family of human beings 
and prehistoric humanlike species. 

Australopithecines stood upright and walked on two 
legs. They were about 4 to 5 feet (120 to 150 centimeters) 
tall and had a brain about one-third the size of a modern 
human brain. 

Most anthropologists recognize five species of Aus- 
tralopithecus. They are, in the order in which they ap- 
peared, A anamensis, A. afarensis, A. africanus, A. boisei, 
and A. robustus. A. boiseiand A. robustus had much 
larger jaws and teeth than the other species and are 
called robust australopithecines. The first three species 
are Called gracile (slender) australopithecines. Most sci- 
entists believe human beings evolved from the gracile 
species. A africanus and A. robustus lived in southern 
Africa. The other three species lived in eastern Africa. 
The Australopithecus species were closely related to the 
earliest known hominid, Ardipithecus ramidus, which 
lived in what is now Ethiopia about 4,400,000 years ago. 

Australopithecine fossils were first recognized in 1924 
when South African anthropologist Raymond A. Dart 
identified a child's skull that had been found at Taung, 
near Vryburg, South Africa. Dart named the creature 
Australopithecus africanus. He believed it was a hom- 
inid, but most scientists thought it was an extinct ape. 
Additional fossils found during the next 35 years con- 
vinced scientists that Australopithecus was a hominid. 

In 1974, researchers uncovered parts of the skeleton 
of a humanlike creature at Hadar, Ethiopia. The creature, 
nicknamed “Lucy,” was about 3,200,000 years old. In 
1978, researchers at Laetoli, Tanzania, found fossil foot- 
prints together with fossilized bones of a hominid that 
lived 3,600,000 years ago. These discoveries indicated 
that humanlike creatures had begun walking upright 
long before people began making stone tools about 
2,500,000 years ago. Researchers have classified “Lucy” 
and the Laetoli fossils as Australopithecus afarensis. Aus- 
tralopithecine bones that may be those of A. afarensis 
have also been found in Chad, in north central Africa. In 
1998, a complete A. africanus skeleton was found near 
Johannesburg, in South Africa. Alan E. Mann 

See also Homo habilis; Johanson, Donald Carl; 
Leakey, Mary Douglas; Prehistoric people (Prehuman 
ancestors; picture: The skeleton of “Lucy’). 


928 Austria 





Toni Schneiders, Bruce Coleman Inc. 


A picturesque village nestles in a valley high in the Alps of western Austria. The ruins of a castle, 
right, overlook the village and the neat farmlands nearby. The majestic snow-capped Alps and their 


foothills cover most of Austria. 


Austria 


Austria is a small country in central Europe famous for 
its beautiful mountain scenery. The towering Alps and 
their foothills stretch across the western, southern, and 
central parts of the country. In many areas, broad, green 
valleys separate the mountains. Austria has many lovely, 
mirrorlike lakes. Thick forests cover much of the coun- 
try’s land. 

Austria has no coastline. It shares boundaries with the 
countries of Switzerland and Liechtenstein to the west, 
Germany and the Czech Republic to the north, Hungary 
and Slovakia to the east, and Slovenia and Italy to the 
south. Vienna is the capital and largest city of Austria. It 
lies on the Danube River in the northeastern part of the 
country. 

Most of Austria's people live in cities and towns. 
About a fifth of the people live in Vienna. Austrians en- 
joy good food, outdoor sports, and the arts. They take 
great pride in the fact that their country has long beena 
leading cultural center of Europe. The cultural institu- 
tions and scenic beauty of Austria attract millions of 
tourists each year. 

Austria was once one of the most powerful countries 
in Europe. The royal Habsburg (or Hapsburg) family be- 
gan to gain control of Austria in the late 1200's. In time, 
the country became the center of a huge empire that 
was ruled by the Habsburgs. This empire collapsed fol- 


A 


The contributor of this article, William |. McGrath, is Professor 
of History at the University ot Rochester. 








lowing the end of World War I in 1918. Austria then be- 
came a republic and went through a long period of eco- 
nomic difficulty and political unrest During the last half 
of the 1900's, however, Austria became increasingly in- 
dustrialized, and the economy of the country grew 
steadily. In addition, the country achieved political stabil- 


ity. 


Facts in brief 


Capital: Vienna 

Official language: German. 

Official name: Republik Osterreich (Republic of Austria). 

Area: 32,378 mi? {83,859 km’). Greatest distances—east-west, 355 
mi (571 km); north-south, 180 mi (290 km). 

Elevation: Highest—Grossglockner, 12,457 ft (3,797 m) above sea 
level. Lowest—Neusiedler Lake, 377 ft (115 m) above sea level. 

Population: Estimated 2002 population—8,233,000; density, 255 
per mi? (98 per km/); distribution, 65 percent urban, 35 percent 
rural. 1991 census—7,795,786. 

Chief products: Agricu/ture—barley, cattle, corn, grapes, hogs, 
milk, potatoes, sugar beets, wheat. Manufacturing—cement, 
chemical products, electrical equipment, furniture, glass, iron 
and steel, leather goods, lumber, machines and tools, motor 
vehicles, optical instruments, paper and pulp, processed 
foods and beverages, textiles and clothing. Mining—coal, cop- 
per, graphite, iron ore, lead, magnesite, natural gas, petrole- 
um, salt, zinc. 

National anthem: ‘Land der Berge, Land am Strome’ (Land of 
Mountains, Land at the River’. 

Money: Basic unit—euro. One hundred cents equal one euro. 
The schilling was taken out of circulation in 2002. 





ee eee 








Government Austria 929 


Austria is a federal republic made up of nine 
| provinces: Burgenland; Carinthia; Lower Austria; . 
Salzburg; Styria; Tyrol (or Tirol); Upper Austria; the city ¥ ee a 
of Vienna; and Vorarlberg. Its Constitution was adopted ._~ Yt eee T Pete = 
in 1920. All Austrians 19 years and older may vote. ‘ (ees AS Paes 

The president is Austrias head of state. The people : Se 
elect the president to a six-year term. The president may | 
serve any number of terms but no more than two in a 
row. The president's duties are largely ceremonial. They 
include appointing ambassadors and acting as comman- 
der in chief of the armed forces. But the president does 
} not have the power to declare war or to veto (reject) bills 
/ passed by Parliament. 

The chancellor and Cabinet run the Austrian gov- 
ernment. The chancellor (prime minister) serves as head 
of government. Generally, the president appoints as 
. chancellor the leader of the political party with the most 
seats in the Nationa/rat (National Council). The National- 
| rat is the more important of the two houses of the Aus- 

: trian Parliament. On the chancellor's advice, the presi- 
dent also appoints members of the Cabinet to head the 





government departments. The chancellor and Cabinet —_ Austrian Tourist Board 
| form government policies and are responsible to the Parliament Building in Vienna is the meeting place of both 
i Nationalrat. The Nationalrat may force the chancellor houses of the Austrian legislature. The building, designed in the 


and Cabinet to resign by rejecting their policies ina vote Greek classical style, dates from the late 1800's. 
of no contidence. 

The Parliament. The Nationalrat forms the lower 
house of Austria’ Parliament. The upper house is called 
the Bundesrat (Federal Council). The Nationalrat has 183 
members, elected by the people to four-year terms. But 
the Nationalrat may dissolve itself at any time, or the 
president may dissolve it on the chancellor's advice. 
New elections then take place. The Bundesrat 63 mem- 
bers are elected by the countn’s nine Landtags (provin- 





cial legislatures). Members of the Bundesrat serve as 
| long as the Landtag that chose them stays in power. The 
| number of members a province has in the Bundesrat Austria's flag has stripes of Coat of arms was adopted in 
] varies according to population. red, white, and red. It is one its present form in 1945. The 
“Provincial and local government. The people in 9htreldestnaonl ag, use oan eagle 0 ombalze 
| each province elect Landtag members to four- to six- : , , 
year terms, depending on the province. Each Landtag 
chooses the governor of the province. The provinces aa 0 WH 105 20' Exet | Sage 30° 
are subdivided into about 2,320 communes (units of lo- offs 5 Sweden ~Lawis \ puss? | 
cal government). Voters in each commune elect a gov- F. North oe .° | 
erning council, which selects one of its number to serve , >. = igh oe et 
as mayor. Vienna is both a province and a commune. Its Kingdom se ve y 


communal council serves as the provincial legislature, 
and its mayor serves as governor. 







lL i 
- _ Nethertands Poland 


Political parties. Three political parties control the = Bei Germany yxraine | 
great majority of seats in the Nationalrat. They are the . 
liberal Social Democratic Party, the conservative Peo- : Jue 
ple’s Party, and the far-right Freedom Party. Other par- water jac 
ties include the Greens and the Liberal Forum. ss Romania 
Courts. The Supreme Court is Austria’s highest court - er | 
of appeal in civil and criminal cases. Four regional ee Pane | 
courts hear appeals of decisions made by lower courts. = Bulger ! 
Various special courts handle juvenile matters, labor — | fi 
disputes, and administrative and constitutional cases. Atbenié ‘ pe 
Armed forces. Austria has about 55,000 men in its “SF Greece | 





armed forces. Men 18 years of age must serve at least 
six months in the army with additional periods of follow- Austria is a landlocked country in central Europe. It is surround- 
up training later. ed by eight other European countries. 





930 Austria 











_ Austria political map 


—— Internatianal boundary = National capital 
| Expressway * — Pravincial capital 
~ + Other road and tunnel * Other city or town 
+-+ Railroad and tunnel —  Mauntain pass 


WORLD BOOK map 


ITALY 





~ 






SLOVENIA 
a Jol 





















































0 100 200 300 Miles 
0 100 200 300 400 Kilometers 
1 2 3 5 7 
Cities and towns Ebreichsdort* 7333 B 7 Hollabrunn i0,461 B 6 liezen 7051 C 5 Stockerau 13.608. 8B 6 
Eisenerz 7139 5.C. > Horn 6265 A 6 Linz 203045 B 5 Telts 10,179. C 2 
Altmunster’” 9067 B 4 Eisenstadt 10.349 B 7 Imst 7535 C 2 Lustenav’ 18484 C 1 Ternitz 15.445 C 6 
Amstetten 21972 B 53 Enns .10,192 B 3 Innsbruck W8.112 C 2 \Marchtrenk® 10,369 B 5 Tratskirchen* 13852 B 6 
Anstelden’ 14.636 B 5 Feldkirch 26,730 C Jenbach* 6188 C 3 Miana Enzerdorf 85954 B 6 Traun 22260 B 5 
Arnoldstein’ 6691 D 4 Feldkirchen’® 12,977 D 5 judenburg 10,581 C 5 Mistelbach 10233 .A 7 Trofaiach B8519.C 5 
Atinang- Ferlach 7464 D 5 Kapfenberg 23,380.C 6 Modiling 20290.B 6 Tulin® 12038 B 6 
Puchheim’® 8.139 B 5 Fohnsdort 3302 C 35 Kitzbihel . . 8119 C 3 Miirzzuschlag _ 9.990 C 6 Velden* 7370 D 4 
Bad Goisern‘ 6349 C 4 Freistadt 63917 B 5 Klagenfurt 89415 D 5 Neunkirchen" 10216 C 6 Vienna 
Bad Hofgastein 6085 C 4 Freisach 5.702 D 3 Klosterneu- Oberwart 6319 C 6 Wien) 1539.48 B 7 
Bad I 13.887 C 4 Frohnienen’ . 6841 C 6 burg 24442 B 6 Perchtoldsdorf .14.051 C 6 Villach S60 D 4 
Bad Voslau’ 11055 B 6 Furstenteld 6028 C 6 Knittelfeid 12873 C 5 Purkersdort® 6413 B 6 Vocklabruck 11239 B 4 
Baden 23,488 .B 6 Ganserndort* £509 B 7 Koflach 1122769 Gs Radenthein’ 6853 D 4 Voitsberg 10,351 ..C 6 
Berndort* B265 B 6 Gerasdort’ 6661 B 7 Korneuburg* S730 8 7 Rankweil? 10,509 C 1 Volkermarkt 11,061 D 5 
Bischofshoten 10.138 .C 4 Gmind 6,062 A 3 Krems 22,783 B 6 Ried 11,260 B 4 Vorchdort* 6368 B 4 
Bludenz 13.369 C FH Gmunden 13133 B 4 Kufstein 13,483 C 3 Rum* 8095 C 7 Waidhofen 11,435 B 5 
Braunau 16264 B 4 GOGtzis’ 93512 C€ 1 Laa 6280 A 7 Saalfeiden 12604 C 4 Waals- 
Bregenz 27497 C 3 Graz 237810 C 6 Llaakirchen’® 7968 B 5 143978 B 4 Siezenheim’ S33 CC 3 
Bruck an der Guntramsdort®’ 6977 B 7 Landeck AEE 2 St Andra 10582 D 5 Wattens’ 6304 .C 2 
Leitha’® 72359—8 fF Hall in Tirol 12.368 C 3 Langentots* 6367 B 6 St Johann im Weiz 8474 C 6 
Bruck .an der Hallein’ ipezn) Coa! Langenzers- Po im 8855 C 4 Wels 52594.8 5 
S4ur] 14046 C 6 Hard” 10,747 C 1 dort® 6139 8B 7 St Jo in Wiener 
Brunn’ 8573 B 6 ° 6.169 C 6 Lauterach’ issg ei Tirol’ 7180 C 3 Neudorf® 8385 C 4 
Deutschlands- Hermagor’” 73403.D 4 Leibnitz 6551 D 6 St Potten 30026 B 6 Wiener 
7760 D 6 Herzogenburg’ 7461 B 6 Leoben 28897 C 6 St. Valentin 8791 C 6 Neustadt . 3.13% B 6 
Dornbirn 40,735 C1 Hochst?’ 6423 C 1 Leonding* 21208 B 35 St Vert 12.045.D 5 Withelmsburg’® ...6572.8 6 
Ebensee 89738 B 4 Hohenems’ 13.531..C 1 Lienz 11864 D 4 Schrems 5325 A §S Wolfsberg 27,791.D 5 
Schwaz 11.839 C 3 Wolturt’ 7289 C 1 
Schwechar 14.669 B 7 Worg! 10053 C 3 
Seekirchen* 8273.C 4 Zell cam See! B70 .C 4 
Sierning 7988 B 5 . i B89 C 5 
Sprttal 153436 D 4 wettl -Nieder 
CERNETY , ; Steyr 39.337 B 5 Osterreich) 11,427 A 6 
Lower Austna 
Upper 7 * 
bla: i Vien tia” Provinces 
Area : 
__ WECHTENSTEIN Name Papulation In sq. mi. In km 
J Burgenland. 270.880 1,531 3,965 
Cannthia 347,796 3,681 9.533 
’ Sakburg Siyria Lower Austria 1.473.813 7402 19.172 
Vorariberg Fro! ~. Salzburg 482 365 2.762 7.158 
1 Styria 1,184,720 6.327 16,387 
Tyrol . 631,410 4 883 — 
F U Austna 1,333 480 4626 11 
—— Vienna 1/539. 888 160 41S 
Vorarlberg 331.472 1.004 2.601 






Austria is divided into nine provinces. 





CROA 


WORLD BOOK map 





"Does not appear on map. key shows general location 


Source: 1991 census. 














People Austria 931 


Most of Austria's people live in the lower areas of the Way of life. Most city dwellers in Austria live in four- 
country—in the east and just south of the Danube River. or five-story apartment buildings. Others live in high- 
About a fifth of the people live in Vienna, the country's rise apartment buildings or in one-family homes. Many 
capital and largest city. farm and village families live in single-family homes. The 

Ancestry. Many different groups of people have set- _ style of these houses varies from region to region. For 
tled in Austria. Each group mixed with other peoples example, many homes in Burgenland are simple in de- 
and so helped shape the ancestry of present-day Austri- — sign and covered with a kind of plaster called stucco. 
ans. In ancient times, the peoples of Austria included The provinces of Tyrol and Vorarlberg have many 
Celts and Romans. Later, Asians, various Germanic wooden chalets similar to those of Switzerland. Most 
groups, and Magyars (Hungarians) settled in Austria. chalets have a steep, pointed roof that hangs out over 
From the 1300s on, Austria attracted peoples from many __ the sides of the house. 
parts of central Europe. These peoples included Italians Austrians wear clothing much like that worn in the 
and various Slavic groups. During the 1950's and 1960s, United States, but they dress up somewhat more than 
many people fled to Austria from Communist-controlled § Americans do. On special occasions, many Austrians 
Czechoslovakia and Hungary. wear traditional national or regional costumes. Men may 

As a result of this mixing of peoples, there is no ‘typi- |= wear a green-trimmed, gray wool suit consisting of a 
cal” Austrian. Some are tall and slim, with fair skin, blue coat and knickers—short, loose-fitting trousers gathered 
eyes, and blond hair. Others are short and stocky, with in just below the knee. Women may wear a peasant cos- 
fairly dark skin, brown eyes, and brown hair. Many oth- tume called a dirnd/. It consists of a blouse; a wide gir- 
ers do not fit either description. dle worn over the blouse and laced up the front; and a 

Language. Almost all Austrians speak German, the full, brightly colored skirt and apron. 
country's official language. In different parts of the coun- Austrians appreciate good food. Many of their dishes 
try, the people speak various dia/ects (local forms) of have been influenced by Czech, German, or Hungarian 
German. cooking. Popular meats in Austria include beef, chicken, 

A number of Austrians speak another language as pork, sausage, and veal. An Austrian dish called Wiener 
their first language. In the province of Burgenland, for schnitzel (breaded veal cutlet) has become a favorite in 
example, there are communities of people who speak many countries. Popular side dishes in Austria include 
Serbo-Croatian. Burgenland also has some people who dumplings, noodles, and potatoes. The people drink 
speak Magyar. Carinthia has a number of people who beer or wine with many meals. The delicious cakes and 
speak Slovenian. Small groups of people in Vienna pastries created by Austrian bakers have become world 
speak either Czech or Slovak. famous. 





H. Gntscher. Black Star Francis O. Spalding. Tom Stack & Assoctates 


Austrians attend Mass at a Roman Catholic church designed Charming old Vienna, Austria’s capital and largest city, has 
in the highly decorated rococo style of the 1700's. Most of the many sidewalk cafes and beautiful buildings. The monument 
Austrian people belong to the Catholic Church. above was built in memory of a plague that hit Vienna in 1679. 


932 Austria 


Festivals and holidays play an important part in Aus- 
trian life. Some festivals date from pre-Christian times. 
One such festival takes place throughout the Tyrol at the 
beginning of spring, when the people pretend to chase 
away the “evil spirits” of winter. Wearing special cos- 
tumes and masks, they march through the streets and 
wave large sticks in the air. The name and date of this 
festival vary from place to place. 

Social welfare. The Austrian government provides a 
number of welfare services. Under the national social in- 
surance program, workers may receive disability, mater- 
nity, old-age, sickness, survivors, or unemployment 
benefits. Austria also has a national health insurance 
program for all citizens. The costs of both programs are 
shared by insured people; employers; and the federal, 
provincial, and local governments. 

Since 1919, Austrian law has limited the workday to 
eight hours and has guaranteed employed people an- 
nual holidays. Today, employed people who have been 
on the job for six months or longer receive at least an 
18-day vacation with pay each year. In 1975, the work- 
week became limited to 40 hours. 

Recreation. Austrians love the outdoors, and their 
country’s many forests, lakes, and mountains offer op- 
portunities for a variety of outdoor sports. In winter, the 
people especially enjoy ice skating, skiing, and tobog- 
ganing. Other popular winter sports include bobsled- 
ding; ice hockey; ski jumping; and curling, a game in 
which the players slide heavy stones along the ice to- 
ward a circular target. Favorite summer sports include 
boating, fishing, hiking, mountain climbing, swimming, 
and water skiing. The people also enjoy bicycling, 
camping, picnicking, and playing soccer. 

Austrians love the arts as well as sports. Ballets, con- 
certs, motion pictures, operas and operettas, and plays 
all attract large, enthusiastic crowds. 

















R Heininger Jr. Bruce Coleman Inc 
Boating and other water sports are enjoyed by both Austrians and 
tourists during the summer. The country has many popular summer re- 
sort areas, including Lake Wonther, above, in the province of Carinthia. 


Education. Almost all adult Austrians can read and 
write. For the country’s literacy rate, see Literacy (table: 
Literacy rates for selected countries). Austrian children 
between the ages of 6 and 15 are required to attend 
school. Most students attend free public schools. The 
rest attend private schools, which may charge a tuition 
fee. 

Austrian students may choose from a variety of edu- 
cational programs. The minimum program requires a 
student to attend eight years of elementary school and 
one year of either vocational school or po/ytechnical 
school, which offers courses in the arts and sciences. 
Students who wish to go to a university may attend (1) 
elementary school for four years and high school for 
nine years; (2) elementary school for eight years, prepa- 
ratory school for one year, and high school for four 
years; or (3) elementary school for eight years and voca- 
tional high school for five years. 

Austria has 12 universities and 6 fine arts colleges. 
The University of Vienna is the country’s largest univer- 
Sity. 

Religion. Austria and the pope have a concordat 
(agreement) under which the Roman Catholic Church in 
Austria receives financial support from the national gov- 
ernment But Austrians have freedom of worship. About 
80 percent of the people are Roman Catholics, and 
about 5 percent are Protestants. Austria also has about 
12,000 Jews, most of whom live in Vienna. 

The arts. Austria has long been one of the great cul- 
tural centers of Europe. The country has made outstand- 
ing achievements in architecture, literature, and paint- 
ing. But its most famous and important contributions to 
Western culture have been in music. 

Music. Austria has produced many great composers. 
During the late 1700's and early 1800's, Joseph Haydn 
helped make the symphony one of the most important 





H Gritscher, Black Star 
A centuries-old festival takes place in the Tyrol at the 
start of spring. In this festival, people in costumes and 
masks use sticks to chase away winter's ‘evil spirits.” 











The Vienna State Opera House presents operas almost every 
day for 10 months of the year. Music and drama are popular in 
Austria, and operas attract large, enthusiastic crowds. 


forms of musical composition. Haydn and Wolfgang 
Amadeus Mozart became the leading composers of the 
classical period of music. Mozart wrote masterpieces in 
a wide range of musical forms. Many people consider 
his Don Giovanni the world’s greatest opera. 

During the early 1800's, Franz Schubert composed 
more than 600 songs. His “Ave Maria’ and “Who Is 
Sylvia?” are among the most beautiful songs ever writ- 
ten. Gustav Mahler and Hugo Wolf, who wrote in the 
late 1800's, rank with Schubert as composers of songs. 
Anton Bruckner wrote emotionally powerful sym- 
phonies during the middle and late 1800's. Also during 
the 1800's, Johann Strauss and his son, Johann Strauss, 
Jr, composed their famous waltzes. 

Arnold Schoenberg became one of the most revolu- 
tionary composers of the 1900's. He developed a new 
system of composition called the twe/ve-tone technique. 
Schoenberg influenced many composers, including his 
fellow Austrians Alban Berg and Anton Webern. 

Austria today continues to make important musical 
contributions. The Vienna Boys Choir, Vienna Philhar- 
monic, Vienna State Opera, and Vienna Symphony Or- 
chestra have won international fame. The annual 
Salzburg Festival is one of the great musical events of 
the year. Students from all over the world study at Aus- 
tria's fine music schools. 

Architecture. Austria has some of Europe s best ex- 
amples of baroque architecture. This highly decorated 
style dates from the 1600's. Through the use of such ma- 
terials as gold, marble, and wood, baroque architects 
created buildings that pleased the senses. At the same 
time, their buildings appealed to people's spiritual na- 
ture because they were decorated with paintings and 
sculptures of religious and mythical figures. Johann 


Austria 933 





John Launois, Black Star 


Austrian bakers create some of the delicious pastries for which 
their country is famous. Coffee and pastry make up a favorite 
snack among Austrians. 


Bernhard Fischer von Erlach was one of Austria's lead- 
ing baroque architects. His designs include the Karls- 
kirche (Church of St. Charles) in Vienna and the Church 
of the Holy Trinity in Salzburg. 

Austria also has many churches, palaces, and other 
buildings designed in the rococo style of the 1700's. Ro- 
coco architecture is even more decorated than baroque. 

During the late 1806's and early 1900's, Adolf Loos de- 
veloped a simplified style of architecture marked by un- 
cluttered lines and flat surfaces. His work did not be- 
come highly popular in Austria. But it strongly 
influenced architects in the United States. 

Literature. Austrians have a deep love for the theater, 
and many of the country’s most important writers have 
been playwrights. One of the most outstanding was 
Franz Grillparzer, who wrote in the early 1800's. Grill- 
parzer’s plays drew on the traditions of classical German 
drama as well as on the humor and liveliness of Austrian 
folk drama. 

During the late 1800's and early 1900's, Arthur Schnitz- 
ler became famous for exploring the psychology of hu- 
man emotions in his plays and stories. Hugo von Hof- 
mannsthal, a playwright and poet of the early 1900's, 
shared Schnitzler’s interest in psychology. Other impor- 
tant Austrian writers of the 1900's included Franz Werfel 
and Stefan Zweig. 

Painting. Gustav Klimt, who worked in the late 1800's 
and early 1900's, was one of Austria's first painters of in- 
ternational importance. In his works, Klimt explored the 
inner nature of human beings and tried to express his 
own strong emotions. Two of Klimt's followers—Egon 
Schiele and Oskar Kokoschka—carried his ideas still fur- 
ther. Their paintings reflected an art movement of the 
early 1900s called expressionism. 


934 Austria 


Mountains cover about three-fourths of Austria. The 
Alps stretch across the western, southern, and central 
parts of the country. A separate mountainous area, the 
Granite Plateau, lies in the north. The country’s highest 
point, the mountain Grossglockner, stands 12,457 feet 
(3,797 meters) above sea level in central Austria. 

The Danube, the country's longest river, flows 217 
miles (350 kilometers) from west to east through north- 
ern Austria. Almost all Austrian rivers flow into the Dan- 
ube. Austria largest lake is Neusiedler Lake. Part of this 
lake lies in Hungary. The Austrian part covers 51 square 
miles (132 square kilometers). 

Land regicns. Austria has six main land regions. 
They are (1) the Granite Plateau; (2) the Eastern Fore- 
lands; (3) the Alpine Forelands; {4) the Northern Lime- 
stone Alps; (5) the Central Alps; and (6) the Southern 
Limestone Alps. 

The Granite Plateau forms Austrias northernmost re- 
gion. It consists of hills and mountains that are made up 
mostly of granite and partly covered by thick forests. 

The Eastern Forelands lie southeast of the Granite 
Plateau. The northern part is a lowland called the Vienna 
Basin. Its fertile soil helps make it Austria’s chief agricul- 
tural area. The southern part consists of rolling hills and 
broad valleys, with the land becoming flatter in the east. 

The Alpine Forelands lie south of the Granite Plateau 
and west of the Eastern Forelands. The region is made 
up of hills and low mountains. 

The Northern Limestone Alps rise south and south- 
west of the Alpine Forelands. The mountains in this re- 


| Austria terrain map 


{ 





Internatianal boundary Mauntain pass 


Land regian boundary Natianal capital 


City 





sea level 


WORLD BOOK map 






Augsburg 


Munich,/ 
GERMANY / 
( 


48° North Latitudg 






lake 
~ai Constance 4 






: rassglockner 
,| 2.457 ft. {3.799.m) 
zs HOHE 





118" ppd ong ae 
0 100 





The land and climate 


j 
a. } 





Toni Schneiders, Bruce Coleman Inc. 


Austria‘s mirrorlike lakes include lovely Lake Grundl, above. 
It lies in the Northern Limestone Alps, a region of steep, for- 
ested slopes and rugged peaks. Much of the land in this region, 
as in most of Austria, is too mountainous for raising crops. 






CZECH REPUBLIC 
























¥825) ft.) 
4? Ion , 


a le 
a a 


st a és v, 
g Pass, 


oe ‘ 


oh. 









200 300 Miles 





0 100 200 





300 400 Kilometers 























gion consist of limestone. The region is marked by high 
plateaus; steep, forested slopes; and jagged peaks. Sev- 
eral large lakes formed by ancient glaciers are found in 
this region. 

The Central Alps are separated from the Northern 
Limestone Alps to the north by a series of valleys. Unlike 
the Northern Limestone Alps, the Central Alps do not 
consist of limestone but of such rock materials as gran- 
ite and gneiss. The Central Alps have Austria's highest 
mountains. Large glaciers cover many of the mountain 
peaks. 

The Southern Limestone Alps lie south of the Central 
Alps. A series of valleys separates the two regions. The 
physical features of the Southern Limestone Alps resem- 
ble those of the Northern Limestone Alps. 

Climate. Austria has four sharply defined seasons. 
The country’s climate is influenced by both west and 
east winds. Warm, moist winds blowing eastward from 
the Atlantic Ocean affect the climate of western and cen- 


Austria 935 


tral Austria. These winds bring precipitation (rain, snow, 
and other forms of moisture) and help produce moder- 
ate temperatures the year around. Dry winds blowing 
westward from the Asian plains are hot in summer and 
cold in winter. Partly as a result of these winds, eastern 
Austria has less precipitation and more extreme temper- 
atures than western and central Austria. 

Within the western, central, and eastern areas, Aus- 
tria‘s climate varies from place to place, partly because 
of differences in altitude. Local winds also influence the 
climate. For example, warm, dry winds called foehns 
cause sudden rises in temperature in some mountain 
valleys in winter. Because they may rapidly melt moun- 
tain snow, foehns sometimes cause destructive ava- 
lanches (see Foehn). 

January temperatures in Austria average about 27 °F 
(—3 °C). July temperatures average about 67 °F (19 °C). 
The country receives an average of about 25 inches (64 
centimeters) of precipitation yearly. 


Economy 


Austria economy is based mostly on private owner- 
ship. But the government owns companies in several in- 
dustries as well as certain transportation and communi- 
cation services. The country’s economy was brought to 
a standstill as a result of World War II (1939-1945). In the 
late 1940's, the Austrian government purchased most of 
the companies in certain industries. These industries in- 
cluded coal and metal mining; electric power produc- 
tion; iron and steel production; and oil drilling and refin- 
ing. Large amounts of aid from the United States helped 
the government rebuild these industries. 

Since the early 1950's, Austria has become increasing- 
ly industrialized, and its economy has grown steadily. 
Today, Austria is a prosperous country with little unem- 
ployment. 

Natural resources. Austria has a variety of minerals. 
But most deposits are too small to meet the country’s 
needs, or the quality is low. For example, Austria's coal— 
found chiefly in Styria—consists almost entirely of /ig- 
nite, a low-quality brown coal. Austria must thus import 
high-quality coal. The Erzberg (Ore Mountain) in Styria 
has much iron ore. But the country has to import some 
high-grade iron ores. Petroleum and natural gas must 
also be imported because the country’s reserves, found 
mostly in Lower Austria, do not meet its neeos. 

Austria ranks as one of the world’s leading producers 
of magnesite, which is used to make such products as 
heat-resistant bricks, plaster, and artificial stone. The 
country is also a leading producer of graphite, which 
comes mostly from Lower Austria. Other mineral de- 
posits include copper, lead, salt, and zinc. 

Austria's rich forests, which cover about 40 percent ot 
the country, provide plentiful lumber, paper, and other 
products. Spruce and fir are the most commercially im- 
portant trees. Strict conservation laws and extensive re- 
planting programs prevent the forests from being used 
up. 

Austria's swift-flowing rivers are perhaps its most im- 
portant natural resource. They provide energy for many 


hydroelectric power stations, which produce most of 
the nation’s electric power. 

Service industries, taken together, account for the 
largest part of Austria's gross domestic product (GDP)— 
the total value of goods and services produced within a 
country in a year. Community, government, and person- 
al services form one of the most important service in- 
dustries in terms of the GDP and employ about a fourth 
of the workers. The government controls several of Aus- 
tria’s major companies. Community, government, and 
personal services also inc!ude the operation of schools 
and hospitals. Foreign investment in Austria's banks 
helps to make finance, insurance, real estate, and busi- 
ness services another important service industry. Trade, 








Austnan Tounst Board 
The production of fine handicrafts forms an important part of 
Austria s economy. Craftworkers make a variety of objects, in- 
cluding glassware, shown here, jewelry, and woodcarvings. 


936 Austria 





Horst Ehersberg, Rapho Guillumette 


Skiers from many countries flock to the superb ski areas in 
the Austrian Alps every winter. The booming tourist industry 
adds more than $1 billion to Austria's annual national income. 


restaurants, and hotels benefit from heavy spending by 
tourists. The other service industries include transporta- 
tion and communication. 

Manufacturing. Austria’s leading manufacturing ac- 
tivities are the production of metals and metal products. 
The chief metals include iron and steel. The main metal 
products include automobiles and other motor vehicles, 
locomotives, machines and tools, and ships. Other ma- 
jor manufactured products are chemical products, elec- 
trical equipment, processed foods and beverages, and 
textiles and clothing. Austrian factories also produce ce- 
ment, furniture, glass and porcelain products, lumber, 
optical instruments, and paper and pulp. 

Factories are scattered throughout Austria, but the 
heaviest concentration is in the Vienna area. Manufac- 
turers tend to stress high quality rather than mass pro- 
duction. Many factories are small or medium-sized. In 
small workshops throughout Austria, skilled craftsmen 
produce excellent glassware, jewelry, needlework, 
porcelain objects, woodcarvings, and other handicrafts. 

Agriculture. Austria is so mountainous that only 
about 20 percent of the land can be used for growing 
crops. But the country’s farmers use modern machinery 
and scientific farming methods. As a result, they can 
supply more than three-fourths of the food needed by 
the people. All Austrian farms are privately owned. 
Since the late 1940's, there has been a trend toward larg- 
er farms. But most farms in Austria are still small. 

Dairy farming and livestock production are the main 
sources of tarm income. Austria's farmers produce all 
the eggs, meat, and milk needed by the people. Farm 
animals graze in the high areas of the country, where it 
is too rugged and cold for growing crops. 

The best croplands are in the Vienna Basin. But farm 
plots can be found in every province. The farmers pro- 
duce all the potatoes and sugar beets and most of the 





barley, oats, rye, and wheat needed in Austria. Other 
farm crops grown in the country include apples, corn, 
grapes, hay, hops, and vegetables. 

Tourism. Austria is one of Europe’s most popular va- 
cationlands. Millions of tourists visit the country every 
year. The booming tourist industry adds more than $1 
billion to Austria's annual national income. 

Innsbruck, Kitzbuhel, and other sports centers in the 
Alps attract many winter vacationers, especially skiers. In 
summer, the lakes of Carinthia and of the Salzkam- 
mergut area in central Austria are popular recreation 
spots. Vienna's art galleries, concert halls, and museums 
also attract many tourists, as do the summer music festi- 
vals held throughout the country. 

Foreign trade. Austria depends heavily on trade, es- 
pecially trade of manufactured goods with other Euro- 
pean industrialized nations. It imports some types of ma- 
chinery and vehicles and exports other types. The 
country’s other imports include foods and petroleum. 


Austria’s gross domestic product 


_ _Industry 32% 
Q 


Services 66% 


~~ Agriculture 2% 


Austria s gross domestic product was $208,182,000,000 in 1999. 
The gross domestic product is the total value of goods and serv- 
ices produced within a country in a year. Services include com- 
munity, government, and personal services; finance, insurance, 
real estate, and business services; trade, restaurants, and hotels; 
and transportation and communication. /ndustry includes con- 
struction, manufacturing, mining, and utilities. Agricu/ture in- 
cludes agriculture, forestry, and fishing. 


Production and workers by economic activities 


Employed workers 


Percent 

of GDP Number Percent 
Economic activities produced ofpeople of total 
Finance, insurance, real estate, 

& business services 22 382,400 10 
Community, government, 

& personal services 20 947,900 25 
Manufacturing 20 763,300 20 
Trade, restaurants, & hotels yy 805,000 22 
Construction 9 336,400 9 
Transportation & communication 7 254,400 7 
Utilities 3 31,200 1 
Agriculture, forestry, & fishing 2 230,600 6 
Mining : 11,200 i 
Total 100 3,762,400 100 
*Less than one-half of 1 percent. 


Figures are for 1999 
Source: Intet national Labour Organization: International Monetary Fund 








Other exports include forest products, including paper 
and pulp; iron and steel; and magnesite. The value of 
Austria's imports is greater than that of its exports. In- 
come from tourism largely makes up the difference. 

Austrias chief trading partner is Germany. Both coun- 
tries are members of the European Union (EU). The EU is 
an organization of European nations that works for eco- 
nomic and political cooperation among its member na- 
tions. Most of Austria's trade is with EU members or 
with members of the European Free Trade Association 
(EFTA), an economic organization of European nations. 
EU and EFTA members have removed almost all tariffs 
and other restrictions on imports of manufactured 
goods from one another. See European Free Trade As- 
sociation; European Union (History). 

Transportation. Austria has an excellent road net- 
work. Almost all Austrian families own an automobile. 
Railroads link almost all cities and towns. The federal 


Austria 937 


government owns 90 per cent of the nation’s railroad 
tracks. Both buses and trains provide fast and frequent 
passenger service. Many mountain areas have cable rail- 
ways. 

The federal and provincial governments own most of 
the stock in the national airline, Austrian Airlines. The 
airline operates international and domestic flights. For- 
eign airlines also serve the country. Vienna has Austria’s 
chief airport. The Danube River is a major shipping 
route for trade between Austria and nearby countries. 
Passenger vessels also travel on the Danube. 

Communication. Austria has about 30 daily newspa- 
pers. The federal and provincial governments own the 
nation’s radio and television network. People who own a 
radio or television set pay a monthly fee for its use. The 
federal government operates the postal, telegraph, and 
telephone services. Most families in Austria have a 
radio, television set, and telephone. 


History 


Early years. People have lived in what is now Austria 
for thousands of years, but historians do not know much 
about the earliest inhabitants. They do know that after 
about 800 B.C, the people mined and traded iron ore 
and salt. About 400 B.C., a people called Celts began to 
move into central and eastern Austria. 

By 15 B.C, the Romans controlled Austria south of the 
Danube, and they made it part of their empire. In the 
late A.D. 100's, warlike tribes from the north began to in- 
vade Roman Austria, and Roman control slowly weak- 
ened. In 476, the Roman Empire collapsed. During the 
period of the empire's decline, groups of Asians, Ger- 
mans, and Slavs invaded and settled in Austria. 

In the late 700s, Austria came under the rule of Char- 
lemagne, king of a Germanic people called the Franks. 
After Charlemagne’s death in 814, the Frankish empire 
gradually broke up. In the 900s, tribes of Magyars over- 
ran Austria. But the king of Germany, Otto I, defeated 
them in 955. Austria then came under his rule. In 962, the 
pope crowned Otto emperor of what later became 
known as the Holy Roman Empire. German emperors 
ruled the Holy Roman Empire until it ended in 1806. 
Austria became the empire's most important state. 


The Habsburg lands 


In 1282, alinost all of what is 
now Austria, outlined in red, 
formed part of the Holy 
Roman Empire. The Habsburg 
family controlled the areas 
shown in yellow. In 1526, the 
Habsburg lands included Bo- 
hemia, part of Hungary, and 
other areas. 


300 Miles 


300 Kilometers 


WORLD BOOK maps 


Duchy of |. 


= 





In 976, Emperor Otto II gave control of northeastern 
Austria to Leopold | of the Babenberg family. In 1156, 
Emperor Frederick | increased the importance of this 
area by declaring it a duchy—a territory ruled by a duke. 
In 1186, the Duchy of Styria, which lay south of the 
Duchy of Austria, also came under Babenberg rule. 

The Habsburgs. The last Babenberg duke died with- 
out an heir in 1246. King Ottokar of Bohemia then gained 
control of the Babenberg duchies of Austria and Styria, 
plus some lands to the south. In 1273, the princes of 
Germany elected Rudolf 1, a member of the Habsburg 
family of Switzerland, as Holy Roman emperor. Rudolf 
defeated Ottokar in battle in 1278 and began to acquire 
for his family the lands that the king had taken. 

In the 1300s, the Habsburgs lost the Holy Roman 
crown. The empire was a disorganized patchwork of 
states ruled by various families, including the Habs- 
burgs. In 1359, the great-grandson of Rudolf 1, Rudolf IV, 
claimed the title of archduke of Austria. But his claim 
was not recognized by other European rulers until 1453. 
In that year, the Duchy of Austria became the Archduchy 
of Austria. In time, the Habsburgs acquired the other re- 
gions that make up present-day Austria. 


é 


of Austna * 


ae Cannthis 
& 


938 Austria 


Austria-Hungary 
in 1914 


Austria-Hungary, established 
in 1867, consisted of the Aus- 
trian Empire and the Kingdom 
of Hungary. Austria-Hungary 
had reached its greatest size 
in 1914, when World War | 
began. It broke up at the end 
of the war in 1918. 


AUSTR 
alzburg ny’ 
Styria 
Carinthia 
5 


Tyrol 


ra 
a 
Istria ° % 


Croetia-Slavonia 


Austrian Empire j 
7 " , AA 


Fa] Kingdom of Hungary 


0 200 Miles 
0 200 Kilometers 
WORLD BOOK map 


In 1438, a Habsburg had again been elected Holy 
Roman emperor. From then on, the Habsburgs held the 
title almost continuously. Their Archduchy of Austria be- 
came the empire's chief state. One of the greatest Habs- 
burgs was Maximilian I. In 1496, he arranged for his son, 
Philip, to marry the daughter of the king and queen of 
Spain. Philip’s son became King Charles | of Spain in 
1516 and Holy Roman Emperor Charles V in 1519. In 
1556, Charles gave up the two thrones. Spain went to his 
son, and Austria and the title Holy Roman emperor went 
to his brother, Ferdinand |. The Habsburgs thus became 
divided into Spanish and Austrian branches. 

Ferdinand had become king of Bohemia and Hungary 
in 1526. He fought against the Ottoman Empire, which 
had conquered a large part of Hungary. The Ottomans 
attacked Vienna twice but failed to capture it. They were 
driven out of almost all of Hungary in the late 1600s. 

In 1618, Protestants in Bohemia revolted against their 
Habsburg ruler, who was a Roman Catholic. But they 
were defeated in 1620. The revolt became the start of 
the Thirty Years War (1618-1648). This series of religious 
and political wars eventually involved most European 
nations. The Peace of Westphalia, which ended the 
Thirty Years’ War, declared that each German ruler 
could determine the official religion of the state. The 
Habsburgs could thus force Catholicism on the people 
in their lands. 

Wars In the 1700's and 1800's. The last Habsburg 
king of Spain died in 1700. Both Austria and France 
claimed the throne. The War of the Spanish Succession 
(1701-1714) followed. Austria won Belgium and Spain's 
Italian lands. A French prince became king of Spain. 

Charles VI, archduke of Austria, became Holy Roman 
emperor in 1711. He had three daughters but no sons. 
An old European rule known as the Sa/c /aw prohibited 
a woman from inheriting a kingdom (see Salic law). But 
in 1724, Charles publicly announced a decree called the 
Pragmatic Sanction. This decree made his oldest daugh- 
ter, Maria Theresa, heir to the Habsburg possessions. 
The principal European states agreed to recognize the 
Praginatic Sanction. 





Bosnia- 
Hercegovina 


. 


After Charles VI died in 1740, several states broke 
their promise and challenged Maria Theresa's right to 
rule. They tried to take her lands in the War of the Aus- 
trian Succession (1740-1748). In the war, Maria Theresa 
lost one of her lands, Silesia, to Prussia. But the powers 
of Europe recognized her as ruler of Austria, Bohemia, 
and Hungary. In the Seven Years’ War (1756-1763), she 
tried unsuccessfully to regain Silesia. 

Austria suffered many defeats in the Napoleonic Wars 
of the late 1700's and early 1800s. In these wars, Napo- 
leon | of France fought an alliance of European states 
that included—in addition to Austria—Britain, Prussia, 
and Russia. Napoleon conquered large parts of the Holy 
Roman Empire, and in 1806 he forced Emperor Francis II 
to dissolve the empire. In 1804, Francis had changed his 
title from archduke to emperor of Austria. After 1806, he 
reigned as Emperor Francis | of Austria. Napoleon was 
finally defeated in 1815. 

Metternich and revolution. The major political fig- 
ure in Austria from 1809 to 1848 was Prince Klemens von 
Metternich, who served as minister of foreign affairs. 
Metternich played a leading role at the Congress of Vi- 
enna. The congress was a series of meetings of Euro- 
pean political leaders that arranged the peace settle- 
ment following the Napoleonic Wars. The congress 
returned to Austria most of the land it had lost. But Aus- 
tria gave up its claim to Belgium. The congress also set 
up the German Confederation, a loose union of inde- 
pendent states. Austria and Prussia began a struggle to 
lead the confederation. 

During the 1800's, the forces of democracy and na- 
tionalism swept across Europe. Revolutions broke out in 
many areas. Because he feared revolution, Metternich 
tried to put down all democratic or nationalist move- 
ments in the Austrian Empire. But in 1848, revolution 
began in France and spread to Bohemia, Hungary, and 
even Vienna. In Vienna, revolutionaries demanded that 
Metternich resign and that a constitutional government 
be set up. Metternich fled to England. Revolts also broke 
out in the Austrian-controlled states in Italy. But by 1851, 
the Austrian army had put down all revolts. 











| 





important dates in Austria 


15 B.C. The Romans controlled Austria south of the Danube 


River. 

A.D. 100's Warlike tribes from the north began to invade 
Roman Austria, and Roman control started to weaken. 

476 The Roman Empire collapsed. 

976 The Holy Roman emperor gave control of northeastern 
Austria to Leopold | of the Babenberg family. 

1278 Rudolf !, a Habsburg, began to acquire the Babenberg 
territory and nearby lands for his family. 

1438-1806 The Archduchy of Austria was the most important 
state in the Holy Roman Empire. 

1867 Austria-Hungary was established. 

1914-1918 Austria-Hungary was defeated in World War 1. 


1918 The Habsburgs were overthrown, and Austria became a 
republic. 


1938 Adolf Hitler made Austria part of Germany. 

1939-1945 The Allies defeated Germany in World War 11. 

1945-1955 Britain, France, the Soviet Union, and the United 
States occupied Austria. 


1995 Austria joined the European Union, an economic and po- 
litical organization of European nations. 


In the following years, unification movements in Italy 
and Germany weakened the empire. In the various Ital- 
ian states, many people wanted national unity under the 
king of Sardinia. Austria declared war on Sardinia in 
1859. Italian and French forces defeated the Austrians. 
As a result of the defeat, Austria gave up its Italian state 
of Lombardy and lost its influence in other Italian states. 
In Germany, Prussia sought to unite the northern states 
under itself. In 1866, a minor dispute led to the Seven 
Weeks War, in which Italy and Prussia quickly defeated 
Austria. The German Confederation was dissolved. Prus- 
sia formed a new confederation without Austria. 

Austria-Hungary. In 1867, the Hungarians forced 
Emperor Francis Joseph to give Hungary equal status 
with Austria by setting up the Dua/ Monarchy of Austria- 
Hungary. Under this arrangement, both the Austrian Em- 
pire and the Kingdom of Hungary pledged allegiance to 
Francis Joseph. The two countries also were united in 
their conduct cf foreign, military, and certain financial 
affairs. But each country had its own constitutional gov- 
ernment to handle all other matters. 

In the late 1800's and early 1900's, Slavs and other mi- 
nority groups in Austria-Hungary demanded the right to 
govern themselves. Serbia, a Slavic country south of 
Hungary, led the Slavic nationalist movement. In 1914, 
Gavrilo Princip, a Serbian from Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
killed Archduke Francis Ferdinand, heir to the Austro- 
Hungarian throne. Austria-Hungary then declared war 
on Serbia, marking the start of World War | (1914-1918). 
Germany and other nations joined Austria-Hungary in 
fighting the Allies, which included Britain, France, Rus- 
sia, and the United States. 

After World War I. A defeated Austria-Hungary 
signed an armistice on Nov. 3, 1918. On November 12, 
the last Habsburg emperor was overthrown, and Austria 
became a republic. Many Austrians wanted to make 
Austria part of Germany. But the Treaty of St.-Germain, 
signed by Austria and the Allies in 1919, forbade sucha 
union. The treaty also established Austria's present 


Austria 939 


boundaries. In 1920, Austria adopted a democratic con- 
stitution. 

Austria had many political problems after the war. 
These problenis centered on conflict between the two 
major parties—the Christian Social Party and the Social 
Democratic Party. Each party supported a private army. 
These armies often clashed with each other and with a 
group led by the Austrian Nazi Party. This party sought 
to unite Austria and Germany. 

In March 1933, Chancellor Engelbert Dollfuss, a 
Christian Socialist, adjourned Parliament. This and other 
actions brought about a four-day war between his sup- 
porters and the Social Democrats in February 1934. The 
Christian Socialists won the war, and Dollfuss then ruled 
Austria as a dictator. Dollfuss strongly opposed the Nazi 
Party's goal of uniting Austria and Germany, and so, in 
July 1934, the Nazis killed him. Dollfuss was succeeded 
by Kurt von Schuschnigg. Schuschnigg also tried to 
keep Austria an independent nation. 

In 1938, German troops seized Austria. Adolf Hitler, 
the German dictator, then announced the Anschluss 
(union) of Austria and Germany. Austria's fate thus be- 
came tied to that of Nazi Germany, whose quest for 
power led to World War II in 1939. The Allies, including 
Britain, France, the Soviet Union, and the United States, 
finally defeated Germany in 1945. 

After World War Il, Austria was divided into Ameri- 
can, British, French, and Soviet zones of occupation. But 
the four powers allowed Austria to set up a single provi- 
sional (temporary) government based on the 1920 Con- 
stitution. Following elections in November 1945, a na- 
tional government was formed. It included leaders of 
both the People’s Party (formerly the Christian Social 
Party) and the Socialist Party (formerly the Social Demo- 





Wide World 


The German dictator, Adolf Hitler, front /eft, visited Vienna 
in April 1938. His troops had seized Austria the month before. 

Hitler had then announced the union of Austria and Germany, 

which lasted until Germany's defeat in World War 1. 


940 Austria 


cratic Workers’ Party). This coalition government helped 
stabilize Austria. In 1955, the Allies ended their occupa- 
tion of the country. To obtain its independence, Austria 
agreed to be permanently neutra/that is, completely 
uninvolved in international military affairs. Later in 1955, 
Austria joined the United Nations (UN). 

Austria had coalition governments until 1966, when 
the People’s Party, led by Chancellor Josef Klaus, won a 
majority of seats in the Nationalrat. In 1970, the Socialist 
Party became the strongest party, though it lacked a ma- 
jority. The party formed Austria first Socialist govern- 
ment, with Bruno Kreisky as chancellor. In 1971, the So- 
cialists gained a majority in the Nationalrat, and they 
retained their majority in the 1975 and 1979 elections. 

In 1983 elections, the Socialists won the most seats in 
the Nationalrat but did not win a majority. They formed a 
coalition with the Freedom Party to keep control of the 
government. Kreisky resigned as chancellor following 
the elections. Fred Sinowatz of the Socialist Party suc- 
ceeded him. The coalition broke up in 1986. In 1987, the 
Socialists formed a new coalition with the People’s Party. 

Recent developments. In 1986, Kurt Waldheim was 
elected to the largely honorary post of president His 
campaign was marked by controversy when records 
surfaced concerning his possible involvement in Nazi 
atrocities in World War Il. Waldheim denied involve- 
ment. He served as president until 1992. The day after 
Waldheim’s election, Sinowatz resigned as chancellor. 
Franz Vranitzky of the Socialist Party succeeded him. In 
1990 elections, the coalition of the Socialist and People's 
parties retained its majority. In 1991, the Socialist Party 
changed its name to the Social Democratic Party. In 1994 
and 1995 elections, the coalition retained its majority. 
Austria joined the European Union in 1995. Chancellor 
Vranitzky retired in 1997. Viktor Klima, also of the Social 
Democratic Party, became chancellor. 

Elections in 1999 gave the right-wing Freedom Party 
the second largest number of seats in the Nationalrat. 
This party was led by Jorg Haider, known for making 
pro-Nazi statements. The other parties could not build a 
large enough coalition without the Freedom Party, and 
early in 2000 the People’s Party formed a coalition with 
Haider's group. Governments around the world reacted 
with concern, and the European Union enacted political 
sanctions (penalties) against Austria. Haider then re- 
signed his leadership of the Freedom Party, but the 
coalition remained in place. The sanctions were lifted 
several months later. William J. McGrath 


Study aids 


Related articles in Wor/d Book include: 


Biographies 
For biographies of Austrian composers, see the list of Re/ated 
articles at the end of the Classical music article. 


Adler, Alfred Ferdinand Ill Mach, Ernst 
Charles | Francis Il Maria Theresa 
Charles V Francis Joseph Maximilian | 
(Holy Roman Freud, Sigmund Meitner, Lise 
emperor) Hofmannsthal, Mendel, Gregor J. 
Charles VII Hugo von Mesmer, Franz A. 
(Holy Roman Klimt, Gustav Metternich 
emperor) Kokoschka, Oskar Musil, Robert 
Ferdinand Il Landsteiner. Karl Otto I, the Great 


Steiner, Rudolf 
Straus, Oscar 
Waldheim, Kurt 


Otto II (Holy Ro- 
man emperor) 
Pauli, Wolfgang 


Schiele, Egon 
Schnitzler, Arthur 
Schrédinger, 


Erwin Wiesenthal, Simon 
Zweig, Stefan 
Cities 
Graz Innsbruck Salzburg Vienna 
History 
Austerlitz, Battle of Nazism 


Austria-Hungary 

Czech Republic (History) 

Europe, Council of 

Flag (picture: Historical flags 
of the world) 

Germany (History) 

Habsburg, House of 

Holy Roman Empire 


Pragmatic Sanction 
Revolution of 1848 
Saint-Germain, Treaty of 
Seven Weeks War 
Seven Years’ War 
Succession wars 

Thirty Years War 
Vienna, Congress of 


Hungary (History) World War | 
Italy (History) World War Il 
Other related articles 
Alps Clothing (pictures) German language 
Brenner Pass Danube River Tyrol 
Outline 
1. Government 
A. The president D. Provincial and local gov- 
B. The chancellor and ernment 
Cabinet E. Political parties 
C. The Parliament F. Courts 
G. Armed forces 
ll. People 
A. Ancestry E. Recreation 
B. Language F. Education 
C. Way of life G. Religion 
D. Social welfare H. The arts 
Il. The land and climate 
A. Land regions B. Climate 


IV. Economy 
A. Natural resources E. Tourism 
B. Service industries F. Foreign trade 
C Manufacturing G. Transportation 
D. Agriculture H. Communication 
V. History 


Questions 


What religious group in Austria receives financial support from 
the national government? Why? 

What attractions draw many vacationers to Austria? 

Why does the climate of western and central Austria differ from 
that of eastern Austria? 

What family ruled Austria for more than 600 years? 

What is Wiener schnitzel? A dirndl? 

Who are some famous Austrian composers? 

What is Austria's most important mineral resource? 

What sports are popular in Austria? 

Who serves as Austria’s head of state? 

What did Austria agree to do to obtain its independence after 
World War II? 


Additional resources 


Brook-Shepherd, Gordon. The Austrians. Carroll & Graf, 1997. 

Greene, Carol. Austria. Rev. ed. Childrens Pr., 1994. Younger 
readers. 

Solsten, Eric, and McClave, D.E., eds. Austria: A Country Study. 
2nd ed. U. S. Government Printing Office, 1994. 


Austria-Hungary, also called the Austro-Hungarian 
Monarchy and the Dual Monarchy, was a country in 
central Europe from 1867 until 1918. It was formed from 
the Austrian Empire, which included the Kingdom of 
Hungary. Austria had gained control of Hungary in the 
late 1600's. But in the mid-1800's, several military de- 








feats weakened Austria's power. Hungary's demand for 
equal status with Austria led to the formation of Austria- 
Hungary. The Habsburg (also spelled Hapsburg) family, 
an influential line of rulers who held thrones in Europe 
as early as 1273, governed the country. Austria-Hungary 
gained control of the neighboring province of Bosnia- 
Herzegovina in 1878 and annexed it in 1908. 

The monarchy covered about 260,000 square miles 
(670,000 square kilometers), an area slightly smaller than 
Texas. About 50 million people lived in Austria-Hungary, 
including 23 million Slavs, 12 million Germans, 10 mil- 
lion Magyars, and many smaller groups. Each group 
kept its own customs and language. 

Austria-Hungary enjoyed a brilliant cultural life. Dur- 
ing the late 1800's and early 1900's, such influential 
thinkers as the physician Sigmund Freud lived and 
worked in the capital city of Vienna. Composers Gustav 
Mahler and Arnold Schoenberg also contributed to the 
country’s artistic achievements. 

Austria-Hungary never became a strong nation. Its 
many different nationalities had a greater interest in 
gaining independence for themselves than in strength- 
ening the monarchy. The country suffered from wide- 
spread discontent for more than 40 years. 

In 1914, Gavrilo Princip, a Serbian from Bosnia-Herze- 
govina, killed Archduke Franz Ferdinand, the crown 
prince of Austria-Hungary. Franz Ferdinand was seen as 
a threat to the union of South Slavic people. In addition, 
the act was a protest of Austria-Hungary’s control of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. Most Serbs believed that Serbia, 
which lay south of Austria-Hungary, had a right to the 
province. The Serbs valued the region because it pro- 
vided an outlet to the Adriatic Sea, which was important 
to their shipping industry. 

The assassination caused Austria-Hungary to declare 
war on Serbia. Russia promised to support Serbia. Then 
Germany, Austria-Hungary’s ally, declared war against 
Russia and Russia's ally, France. Germany invaded Bel- 
gium to attack France, and Britain joined the fight in sup- 
port of Belgium. World War | had begun. 

During the war, Austria-Hungary sent troops to Italy, 
Bulgaria, Romania, and Albania. But morale became low 
because of defeats. Thousands of soldiers deserted. 
Many from Austria-Hungary fought for the Allies. 

After the war ended in 1918, the new states of Austria, 
Hungary, and Czechoslovakia were formed entirely from 
Austria-Hungary’s territory. Other land went to Italy, 
Poland, Romania, and the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, 
and Slovenes (later called Yugoslavia). The breakup of 
Austria-Hungary marked the end of the empire of the 
Habsburg family. William J. McGrath 

See also Austria; Hungary. 

Austrian Succession, War of the. See Succession 
wars (The War of the Austrian Succession). 
Austro-Prussian War. See Seven Weeks’ War. 
Author. See the various literature articles, such as 
American literature; Russian literature; also the Arts 
section of the various country articles, such as Brazil 
(The arts). See also Literature; Writing. 
Authoritarianism, u/h THAW uh TAIR ee uh Ninz 
uhm, is any form of government in which relatively few 
people run the country, and the rest of the population 
takes little part in decision making. Authoritarian states 
may prohibit, severely restrict, or manipulate elections 


Autism 941 


to suit their own purposes. They may limit the powers of 
legislatures that represent the people, such as a parlia- 
ment or congress, and restrict individual freedom. Au- 
thoritarianism includes such types of government as ab- 
solute monarchy, dictatorship, and totalitarianism. 

The goals and methods of authoritarian governments 
vary. In a totalitarian state, for example, the leaders try to 
change society according to a set of doctrines. In an ab- 
solute monarchy or a dictatorship, the ruler may only be 
interested in gaining personal wealth and power. Some 
authoritarian states exercise cruel and unjust use of 
power, but others may not. Democratic states occasion- 
ally may adopt authoritarian methods of rule during a 
war or other emergency. Alexander J. Groth 

Related articles in World Book include: 

Absolutism Dictatorship Totalitarianism 
Despotism Fascism Tyranny 
Authority. See Power (Forms of power). 

Autism, AW tihz uhm, is a serious medical disorder 
that appears in young children and persists throughout 
life. Itis characterized by limited ability to communicate 
and interact with other people. Some symptoms may be 
present in infancy, but the condition becomes more no- 
ticeable as affected children reach the age when their 
peers are beginning to speak in phrases and participate 
in social play. In the United States, autism and related 
disorders, Asperger syndrome and pervasive develop- 
mental disorder, occur in 2 to 6 of every 1,000 births. 
Boys are more commonly affected than girls. 

The American psychiatrist Leo Kanner first described 
the symptoms in the 1940's. He chose the name autism, 
from the Greek word for self, referring to the children’s 
apparent lack of interest in other people. 

Symptoms. Autism is diagnosed by a variety of symp- 
toms that can occur in different combinations and range 
from mild to severe. However, diagnosis requires that 
all cases have symptoms from each of these three cate- 
gories: 1) abnormal social interaction 2) abnormal com- 
munication 3) restricted and repetitive interests and be- 
haviors. 

Abnormal social interaction in persons with autism is 
reflected in such behaviors as failure to seek comfort 
from a parent and lack of eye contact. Children with 
autism may not respond when their name is called or 
play with other children. They do not understand the so- 
cial behaviors necessary to make friends or work with 
teachers. This lack of social contact isolates people with 
the disorder from many experiences by which most 
people come to understand the world. 

Abnormal communication. Most children with autism 
do not develop language as early as others, and some 
never develop language. Problems with communication 
extend to gestures and facial expression, as well as lan- 
guage. Affected children with fluent speech may talk 
endlessly about a single subject or use words in a way 
that is abnormally precise and literal. Others exhibit a 
speech pattern called echolalia, where they repeat what 
is said to them instead of giving their own response. 

Restricted and repetitive interests and behaviors. 
Some children with autism appear to have only one in- 
terest, such as clocks, airplanes, or calendars, and spend 
their time pursuing that interest, excluding all others. 
Repetitive movements, such as hand flapping, rock- 
ing, or head banging, are common. Children may show 


942 Autobiography 


repetitive behaviors in other ways, such as placing toys 
in a line rather than playing with them. Children with 
autism often insist on sameness and become distressed 
by changes in their environment or routine. 

Causes. Scientists know that autism is caused by an 
abnormality in the development of the brain. However, 
the nature of the abnormality has been difficult to de- 
scribe. The symptoms are so complex that no single 
area of the brain can account for all of them. Even so, 
there is one consistent finding in the brains of people 
with autism. People with autism have a lower number of 
Purkinje cells (pronounced pur KIHN jee/ compared to 
other people. These cells are important in coordination 
of movement and may also play a role in higher brain 
functions, such as planning and language. Scientists do 
not know, however, what part the reduction of Purkinje 
cells plays in the symptoms of autism. 

Scientists know that susceptibility to autism is inherit- 
ed. They have observed in families that parents, siblings, 
and other relatives of a child with autism often have 
some symptoms of the disorder. !n addition, the diagno- 
sis is More common in relatives than would be expected 
by chance. Researchers believe that autism likely results 
from the interaction of several genes. 

Scientists also know that environmental factors play a 
role in autism and related disorders. Women exposed to 
rubella, also called German measles, or certain drugs 
during early pregnancy have an increased risk of having 
a child with autism. 

Some people with autism have mental retardation, 
but autism occurs among individuals of all levels of in- 
telligence. Children with autism and related disorders 
tend to have brains that are somewhat larger than nor- 
mal, while children with mental retardation, alone, tend 
to have small brains. This suggests that the causes of the 
two conditions are different, even though they some- 
times occur together. 

Treatment. There is no cure for autism, but early de- 
tection and treatment can improve the lives of children 
with the disorder. Behavioral intervention, where the 
child is rewarded for progress toward more typical be- 
havior, is often helpful. Many children respond with im- 
provements on tests of language and intelligence. Drug 
therapy can reduce repetitive behavior in some patients. 
With treatment, some children with autism are able to 
take part in regular school classes. For others, the same 
treatments seem to have little effect. Scientists hope new 
treatments will become available as they learn more 


about the biology of autism. Patricia M. Rodier 


Additional resources 


Cohen, Shirley. Targeting Autism. Univ. of Calif. Pr., 1998. 
Mesibov, Gary B., and others. Autism: Understanding the Disor- 
der. Plenum, 1997. 


Autobiography is a type of biography in which the 
author tells the story of his or her own life. Autobiogra- 
phies give readers an inside view of the lives of interest: 
ing people. They also may provide eyewitness descrip- 
tions of historical events or accounts by people who 
helped shape such events. Some people use autobi- 
ographies to explain or justify actions in their lives. 
Some autobiographies are inspired by feelings of nos- 
talgia for the author s past. Still others are written by 
celebrities who feel they can earn money from the pub- 


lic’s curiosity about their lives. 

The first genuine autobiography is generally consid- 
ered to be the Confessions (about A.D. 400) by the early 
Christian leader Saint Augustine. The book tells of Au- 
gustine’s spiritual struggles and triumphs. The Autobi- 
ography of Benjamin Franklin (1789) is probably the most 
famous American autobiography. By writing the book, 
Franklin wished to give his son and other young people 
a model they could imitate so they could succeed and 
be well known. 

Many authors have written novels that are largely au- 
tobiographical. For example, the Irish novelist James 
Joyce's Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (1916) close- 
ly resembles the author's early life. Some authors have 
written novels in the form of autobiographies. For exam- 
ple, the English author Jonathan Swift wrote Gulliver's 
Travels (1726) as a ship's surgeon's autobiographical ac- 
count of experiences in strange lands. — Marcus Klein 

See also Literature for children (Books to read (Bi- 
ographies and autobiographies). 

Autocracy, aw TAHK ruh see, is a form of government 
in which one person holds supreme power. This indi- 
vidual cannot be restricted, according to law, by any in- 
stitution or group of citizens from doing whatever he or 
she wishes. However, some of these leaders have used 
the appearance of public accountability and elections to 
conceal their autocracies. The Russian government un- 
der the czars was an autocracy, extending from the mid- 
1500's to the early 1900's. Dictator Adolf Hitler's govern- 
ment in Germany from 1933 to 1945 was also a form of 
autocracy. Many countries have been controlled by au- 
tocrats since World War Il ended in 1945. These auto- 
crats included Idi Amin Dada of Uganda and Muammar 
Muhammad al-Qadhafi of Libya. See also Dictatorship; 
Government. Alexander §. Groth 

Autogiro, 4 tuh /Y roh, is a type of heavier-than-air 
craft that is supported in the air by a rotor instead of by 
fixed wings, as an airplane is. Most autogiros have short, 
stubby wings for balance. An autogiro's rotor spins by it- 
self as it passes through the air. The craft differs from a 
helicopter, whose rotor is always powered by an en- 
gine. The chief purpose of an autogiro’s engine is to 
provide thrust to pull the vehicle through the air. 

The rotor is set in motion through the use of gears 





NYT Prctures 
Autogiros have a helicopterlike rotor to keep them aloft and a 
nose propeller to pull them forward. These aircraft were flown 
mainly during the 1920's and 1930's. This photograph, taken in 
1930, shows autogiros flying over New York City. 








and a clutch connected to the engine. These gears are 
disconnected in flight, but the rotor blades continue to 
revolve. A hinge at each blade’s hub makes the rotor 
somewhat flexible. When the airflow strikes each rotat- 
ing blade, /ft (upward pull) occurs. In addition, autogi- 
ros are designed in such a way that when airflow strikes 
the blades, it also causes them to be pulled forward 
around their hubs. This forward pull causes the blades 
to autorotate (rotate by themselves) and hold the craft 
aloft. 

An autogiro can fly from 20 to 140 miles (32 to 225 kil- 
ometers) per hour. It cannot Aover (stay motionless in 
the air) like a helicopter. But an autogiro requires an ex- 
tremely short take-off run and can descend almost verti- 
cally to land in a small space. 

Juan de la Cierva, a Spanish inventor, flew the first 
successful autogiro in 1923. Autogiros were later pro- 
duced in Europe, the United States, and Japan. They 
were eventually replaced by helicopters, which are 
quicker and more maneuverable. Roger E. Bilstein 
Autograph is anything handwritten. The term often re- 
fers to a person's signature. However, autographs also 
may be lengthy examples of writing, such as letters, 
documents, and manuscripts. The term autograph 
comes from the Greek words autos, meaning se/f, and 
graphein, meaning to write. 

Collecting autographs. The hobby of collecting au- 
tographs is called philography, from a Greek word 
meaning /ove of writing. People collect many kinds of 
autographs. Some collect signatures or other handwrit- 
ten materials of authors, composers, movie stars, or 
sports heroes. Others focus on certain events, such as 
the signing of the Declaration of Independence, a presi- 
dential election, or the space program. Some collectors 
try to acquire a complete set of autographs of the Presi- 
dents of the United States, the justices of the U.S. Su- 
preme Court, Nobel Prize laureates, or Academy Award 
winners. 

Collectors use a number of terms to identify different 
types of autographs. A letter completely handwritten 
and signed is called an autographed /etter signed 
(A.LS.). A letter either typed or handwritten by another 
person but actually signed by the subject is known as a 
letter signed (L.S.). The terms autographed document 
signed (A.D.S.) and document signed (D.S.) usually refer 
to legal items, such as bank checks or receipts. 

Collectors may request autographs from celebrities 
either in person or by letter. They may also buy auto- 
graphs at auctions or from dealers who guarantee the 
authenticity of the autographs they sell. Most beginning 
autograph collectors do not have the knowledge to de- 
termine whether an autograph is genuine. Many years 
of study are required to learn to verify handwriting and 
to become familiar with different types of paper and ink. 

Inexperienced collectors also may mistake other 
kinds of signatures for genuine handwritten signatures. 
For example, some people have secretaries who sign 
their mail. Some individuals send out mass-produced 
letters or signed photographs to collectors who request 
their autographs. These facsimile autographs can be 
identified because they are not addressed to a specific 
person. Many famous people use a mechanical device 
called an Autopen to sign autographs. The machine can 
sign 3,000 signatures in eight hours. The only way to 





Autograph 943 


recognize an Autopen autograph is to compare two of 
them. All Autopen autographs are identical, but no two 
handwritten autographs are exactly alike. 

The value of autographs varies widely. Some signa- 
tures sell for less than $5, while some handwritten let- 
ters sell for thousands of dollars. The value of many au- 
tographs depends on supply and demand. William 
Henry Harrison served as President of the United States 
for only one month in 1841 before he died. Therefore, 
the supply of his autograph as President is quite small. 
On the other hand, a number of well-known figures, 
such as Daniel Webster and Henry Wadsworth Longfel- 
low, wrote many letters during their lifetime, and so 
their autographs are relatively inexpensive. 

In all cases, the content of an autograph helps deter- 
mine its value. For example, a letter written by astronaut 
Neil A. Armstrong that describes his walk on the moon 
is extremely valuable. A brief typed ‘thank you’ letter 
signed by the astronaut would be relatively inexpensive. 


rebel core Killa Rebor frat 















md 
“Ub Lika [200 = 
6. Aescetned Mrwreicic 


i—— 


Baki = 


Universal Autograph Collectors Club 
Autographs of famous people. (1) Ludwig van Beethoven; (2) 
Napoleon Bonaparte; (3) Helen Keller; (4) Robert Frost; (5) Ronald 
Reagan; (6) Clark Gable; (7) Albert Einstein; (8) Robert E. Lee; (9) 
Mark Twain; (10) Douglas MacArthur; (11) George Washington 
Carver: (12) Abraham Lincoln; (13) Geronimo, who signed his 
name vertically, as shown above: (14) Sigmund Freud; (15) Alex- 
ander Graham Bell; (16) Winston Churchill; (17) Babe Ruth. 


944 Automated teller machine 


Preserving autographs. A collector may mount au- 
tographs in albums or put them between sheets of acid- 
free paper to help prevent them from turning yellow 
with age. Some collectors place autographs in transpar- 
ent envelopes in a loose-leaf binder. These envelopes 
protect autographs from dirt and rough handling. Li- 
braries usually place valuable autographs in manila fold- 
Crs: Herman Darvick 

For examples of autographs, see Declaration of Inde- 
pendence; Emancipation Proclamation; English litera- 
ture. 

Automated teller machine (ATM) is a computer 
terminal that functions as a miniature financial institu- 
tion. ATM's enable people to make a variety of banking 
transactions at any time. For example, a customer can 
use an ATM to make a bank deposit, withdraw a limited 
amount of cash, transfer funds between accounts, or get 
a cash advance on a credit card. 

To use an ATM, a customer must have a special plas- 
tic card with a magnetic stripe across the back The cus- 
tomer inserts the card into the ATM and uses the key- 
board to enter a personal identification number (PIN) 
and tell the machine what to do. The machine reads the 
customer's account number from the magnetic stripe 
and performs the desired action. To dispense cash, an 
ATM uses either a vacuum pump or rubberized rollers 
inside the machine. These devices pick up bills from a 
stack, count them, and deliver them to the customer. 

ATM's are located at banks, airports, stores, and many 
other public places. Most ATM's are connected to a 
computer network so that the customer can receive the 
same service at any machine. 

Machines that could dispense cash came into use in 
the late 1960's. Automated teller machines were first in- 
troduced in the early 1970's. |. G. Adamson 

See also Bank (picture); Smart card. 

Automatic flight control system (AFCS), some- 
times called an automatic pilot or autopilot, is a device 
that automatically steers aircraft. The device controls a 
craft using information provided by sensors along with 
a detailed set of computerized instructions. An AFCS re- 
duces the amount of work a pilot must do, makes navi- 
gation easier, and improves fuel economy and flight 
safety. In addition, an AFCS can take over control of par- 
ticularly difficult flight operations from a pilot. !t can thus 
aid a pilot faced with such situations as landing in poor 
visibility or flying low to avoid radar detection. 

How an AFCS works. An AFCS is part of the avionics 
(flight electronics) of an aircraft. The heart of a modern 
AFCS system is a computer with many high-speed digi- 
tal processors. The processors communicate with other 
airplane systems and equipment, including gyroscopes, 
accelerometers, a compass, and an air-data system. The 
gyroscopes, accelerometers, and other equipment pro- 
vide information about the vehicle's attitude (orientation 
in relation to the horizon), altitude, and velocity. A spe- 
cial compass provides information on the craft's heading 
(direction) relative to magnetic north. The air-data sys- 
tem provides data associated with the movement of the 
aircraft through the atmosphere. 

The AFCS processors perform complex calculations 
using a set of control modes. Typical modes include 
those that maintain an aircraft's altitude, airspeed, head- 
ing, and designated flight path. The processors then is 


sue control signals to various servo (or servomechanism) 


units. These units have motors and hydraulic devices 
that move the throttle and the craft's control surfaces— 
the ailerons, elevator, and rudder. 

In a fly-by-wire system, a Computer combines instruc- 
tions from the pilot with those of an AFCS to improve 
flight safety. Such a system can, for example, prevent a 
pilot from endangering the aircraft by exceeding a cer- 
tain airspeed or angle of descent or ascent 

Many airplanes include a device called a Global Posi- 
tioning System (GPS) receiver that can contribute data to 
the AFCS. A GPS receiver can determine a plane's posi- 
tion in space by calculating its distance from 3 or more 
satellites in the GPS network. Each of the 24 satellites in 
this network continually broadcast their positions. 

History. !n 1912, Lawrence Sperry invented and flight- 
tested an automatic gyroscopic stabilizing device for air- 
planes using four gyroscopes. In 1932, the Sperry Gyro- 
scope Company, founded by Lawrence's father, Elmer A. 
Sperry, developed an automatic pilot This device en- 
abled American aviator Wiley Post to make the first solo 
flight around the world in 1933 (see Post, Wiley). 

In 1998, the tnsitu Group, a developer of long-range 
unpiloted aircraft, together with the University of Wash- 
ington, flew a pilotless plane across the Atlantic Ocean 
for the first time. The aircraft was directed by an AFCS 
using a GPS receiver for navigation. It took off from 
Newfoundland and landed in Scotland, crossing 2,030 
miles (3,270 kilometers). Uy-Loi Ly 

See also Global Positioning System; Gyroscope; Ser- 
vomechanism; Sperry, Elmer Ambrose. 

Automatic pilot. See Automatic flight control sys- 
tem. 

Automatic transmission. See Transmission. 
Automation is the use of machines to perform tasks 
that require decision making. Automation is used fora 
wide variety of jobs that are too complex or dangerous 
for people to do, for repetitive tasks that many people 
would find boring, and for work that would be extreme- 
ly costly if done by people. 

Uses of automation. Automated systems can make 
decisions that are beyond the capacity of people to 
make. For example, many cities use automated systems 
to coordinate their traffic lights to smooth the flow of 
traffic. Sensors in the pavement determine the number 
and speed of vehicles on the street and send the data to 
a computer. The computer decides how to time each 
traffic light in the area and sends signals to the lights. 

Automated systems can also make decisions more 
quickly than people can. For example, high-speed mili- 
tary aircraft sometimes fly at very low altitudes to avoid 
detection by enemy radar. To avoid hitting obstacles, 
these aircraft use automated guidance systems that can 
react much faster than a pilot can. 

Repetitive, simple jobs can be boring for people to do 
for long periods of time. Automated machinery is well 
suited to these routine tasks, such as assembling, in- 
specting, and packaging manufactured products. 

Automated machinery can operate in environments 
that are unsafe for people. Automated systems are used 
for repairing underwater pipelines at high pressures. 
Automobiles are painted by robots using spray paint 
that would harm people. 

Automated systems can do some jobs more quickly 











Correction 
signol 


Temperoture 





Automation 945 


Automated temperature 
control relies on feedback 
The actual room temperature 
is measured by a sensor and 
fed back to a comparator that 
compares it with the desired 
temperature. Any difference 
between the two tempera- 
tures causes an error signal to 
be sent to a controller, which 
sends a correction signal to 
the furnace to adjust the heat 
flowing to the room. 


WORLD BOOK illustration by Bill and judie Anderson 


and cheaply than people can. In many stores, checkout 
clerks use an optical scanner to read bar codes printed 
on product packaging. The scanner sends signals to the 
stores computer, which relays price and product infor- 
mation to the cash register. The computer records the 
sale, keeping a tally of how much of each item remains 
in stock. It can even place orders to restock items. The 
use of automation also allows companies to save money 
they otherwise would have to spend to make hazardous 
work areas safe for human workers. In addition, a manu- 
facturing robot may be able to perform different tasks 
by having its program changed, allowing one robot to 
do the work of several single-task machines. 

How automation works. An automated system has 
devices called sensors that pick up information about 
the results of the machine's operation. Sensors may also 
sense certain environmental conditions that affect the 
machine's performance. Information “read” by the sen- 
sors is fed directly back to the system, enabling the ma- 
chine to adjust its operation as needed. Such a system of 
self-regulation is called feedback. 

Feedback is what makes automation different from 
mechanization (the use of machinery to replace human 
workers or work animals). A mechanized industrial ro- 
bot, for example, does not use feedback and therefore 
cannot adapt its operation to changing conditions. 

The basic elements of feedback can be illustrated by 
an automated home heating system, which maintains a 
certain room temperature using input and output The 
input is the thermostat setting—that is, the desired room 
temperature. The output is the actual temperature. The 
input tells the system what the output should be. An au- 
tomated system needs sensors to measure output The 
heating system's sensor is a thermometer that measures 
room temperature. Sensors in other systems measure 
such variables as pressure, size, and weight. 

Automated systems compare the actual output with 
the desired output through devices called comparators. 
In a heating system, the thermostat acts as the compara- 
tor. It compares the thermometer reading with the tem- 
perature for which the thermostat has been set. If the ac- 
tual output of the system differs from the desired 
output, the comparator sends an error signal to a con- 
troller. The controller decides how to correct the error 
in output The thermostat in a heating system functions 
as a controller as well as a comparator. In some feed- 
back systems, the controller may be a computer. 

The part of any automated system that is controlled by 


feedback and changes the output is called the process. 
The controller directs the process to correct the output 
In a home heating system, the process is the furnace. 
The thermostat turns the furnace on to raise the room 
temperature or shuts it off to lower the temperature. 

History of automation. The first industrial applica- 
tion of automation was a flyball governor, a device that 
regulated the speed of a steam engine. James Watt, a 
Scottish engineer, constructed this device in 1787. 

In the 1900's, automated controls were applied to 
many processes. Automated steering systems controlled 
by gyroscopes were first used in ships in the 1920's and 
came into regular use in airplanes in the 1930's (see Au- 
tomatic flight control system). 

Also at this time, the quality of telephone signals was 
improved by using amplifiers controlled by feedback. 
Automated controls used in chemical production and 
petroleum refining date from the early 1900’s. World 
War II (1939-1945) further stimulated the development of 
automation. Automatically aimed antiaircraft guns, using 
radar and electronics equipment, were introduced in 
1944. 

The first industrial robot was used in 1961. It was con- 
trolled by a computer and worked in an automobile as- 
sembly plant Many robots are now used in the electron- 
ics industry and in the production of automobiles, 
airplanes, and heavy construction machinery. Since the 
late 1970's, the use of computers to run machines has 
greatly stimulated development. 

Automation and jobs. Many people expect an in- 
crease in automation to cause unemployment as work- 
ers are replaced by machines. However, while the use of 
automation eliminates low-skill jobs, it increases the de- 
mand for highly skilled workers. Many skilled people 
are needed to design, build, and maintain automated 
systems. In addition, automation may enable manufac- 
turers to lower prices and increase sales. As sales in- 
crease, employment may rise. Mark A. Lawley 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Artificial intelligence Robot 
Computer Servomechanism 
Cybernetics Technology 


Labor movement (The chal- 


Unemployment (Types of un- 
lenge of automation) 


employment) 


Additional resources 


Hall, George M. The Age of Automation. Praeger, 1995. 
South, David W. Encyclopedic Dictionary of Industrial Automa- 
tion and Computer Control. Prentice Hall, 1995. 


946 Automobile 


ae 





— 
<> 
= 


© Cameramann International, Ltd. 


Automobiles jam the streets of the world’s major cities—in this case, Mexico City. Many people 
consider the automobile a necessity, despite such problems as traffic congestion and air pollution. 


~ 


fEschbos n 
Kronberg 

f Schwalbach 
-| Sossenheim 


F-Miquelallee 
Hannover 
Kassel 
Dortmund 


Frankfurter Kreuz 2 


© Mike Mazz 
Superhighways crisscross developed nations, speeding auto 
travel]. The multilane autobahn, shown here, links German cities. 


Automobile 


Automobile is the most important means of personal 
transportation for many millions of people around the 
globe. People depend on their cars and trucks to travel 
to and from work, to run errands, to visit friends, and to 
take vacations. Companies and government organiza- 
tions operate commercial fleets of automobiles. 

The United States, Canada, Japan, Western European 
countries, and other developed nations have the most 


The contributors of this article are David |, Andrea, Chief Econ- 


omist for CSM Worldwide, and Michael S. Flynn, Associate Di 


rector of the Office tor the Study ot Automotive 1 ransportation at 


the University of Michigan 


aschi, Stock, Bosten 





© Robert Landau, West Light 


Drive-thru businesses, such as this restaurant in Los Angeles, 
serve the fast-paced life style created by the automobile. 


automobiles. But even in developing nations, more and 
more people own cars, and bumper-to-bumper traffic 


clogs the streets of big cities in many of those countries. 


The origin of the automobile can be traced to Europe. 
But it became a major form of transportation first in the 
United States. Most European cars were built by hand. 
They were expensive, and few people could afford 
them. In the early 1900's, Ransom E. Olds, Henry Ford, 
and other pioneer automakers began mass-producing 
cars. Although some people disliked the “horseless car- 
riage,’ many welcomed the introduction of the new ma- 
chine because it would replace horse-drawn carriages. 
Unsightly horse droppings would no longer litter the 











— 








4, Sl 
"alt 2 


© David R. Frazier Photolibrary 


The auto industry is basic to the economic health of the United 
States and other industrialized countries. 





© Bob Daemmrich 
Auto shows let carmakers test new designs on potential buyers. 
The shows help continue America’s “love affair with the car.” 


streets, creating a stench and attracting disease-bearing 
flies. No longer would people be burdened by the need 
to keep horses or be limited to traveling short distances. 
The giant U.S. auto industry developed over the years 
as an increasing number of people bought cars. Ameri- 
cans were said to have a love affair with the automobile, 
and the United States became a nation on wheels. The 
automobile revolutionized the American way of life and 
would change living patterns in much the same way 
when it spread to other countries. The automobile 
helped give people the freedom to live, work, and travel 
wherever they wanted. It ended the lonely lives of farm 
families by placing neighbors, cities, and towns within 
easy reach. The automobile led to the growth of sub- 
urbs, motels, shopping centers, superhighways, theme 
parks, drive-in restaurants, and drive-through banks. 


Automobile 947 
Interesting facts about automobiles 


The word automobile was first applied to the horseless car- 
riage in France about 1890. It comes from the Greek word autos, 
meaning se/f, and the French word mobile, meaning moving. 

A nation on wheels. The United States has about 25 percent of 
the world’s passenger cars. Americans drive over 2 “trillion 
miles (4.3 trillion kilometers) a year. 

Car owners. About 80 percent of all U.S. households own a car, 
and about 30 percent own two or more. 

Vacation travel. People in the United States use their automo- 
biles for about 80 percent of all vacation trips. 

Fuel consumption by motor vehicles in the United States totals 
about 160 billion gallons (610 billion liters) a year—an average of 
about 730 gallons (2,760 liters) for each motor vehicle. 

Cash and credit. About 6 percent of U.S. new-car buyers and 28 
percent of used-car buyers pay cash. The rest buy on credit that 
totals about $470 billion a year. 

insurance premiums paid on car policies of all types in the 
United States total more than $135 billion a year. 


Sources: American Automobile Manufacturers Association; National Automobile Dealers 
Association; U.S. Department of Commerce 


But along with all the glories of the automobile cul- 
ture came serious problems. Car accidents became a 
major cause of death and injury throughout the world, 
exhaust fumes fouled the air, and the roar of city traffic 
became nerve-racking. Some people yearned for the old 
days before the automobile, when life seemed simpler, 
slower, and gentler. But there could be no going back. 
The automobile had become woven into the fabric of 
modern life. And the auto industry itself had become ba- 
sic to the economic well-being of developed countries. 
Today, many developing nations also seek to set up an 
automotive industry because it generates and supports 
a wide range of businesses, such as automobile dealer- 
ships, garages, and filling stations, and so can stimulate 
economic growth. 


The importance of automobiles 


The development of automobiles has had an enor- 
mous effect on people’s way of life throughout much of 
the world. Probably no other invention, discovery, or 
technological advance has created greater or more 
rapid changes in society. 

Impact on society. The automobile influences where 
people live and work and how they spend their leisure 
time. It enables them to decide where they want to go 
and when. The striking changes in people's lives created 
by the automobile began in the United States and have 
since spread across much of the globe, especially in de- 
veloped countries. But even in developing nations, the 
automobile is increasingly reshaping patterns of living. 

When the first automobiles were produced, only the 
well-to-do could afford them. Soon, however, prices de- 
clined as production increased in response to the grow- 
ing demand. The lower prices put the automobile within 
reach of more and more people. Well-off urban resi- 
dents found car ownership cheaper than keeping a 
horse and carriage. The growth in car ownership led to 
the building of more and better roads, which further in- 
creased travel. 

Although cars were first bought mainly by wealthy 
city folk, it was country people who became the first 
large-scale group of car owners. During the late 1890's, 
most people in North America and Europe lived in rural 


948 Automobile 


areas and had little contact with people more than 20 
miles (32 kilometers) or so away. Many of these people 
were farmers or residents of small towns that served 
farmers. In the early 1900's, they became the first mass 
group of car buyers. Automobiles enabled farmers to 
sell their goods faster and farther away, and to travel 
more often and in greater comfort than ever before. 

Before the development of automobiles, urban work- 
ers walked, bicycled, or rode trains or horse-drawn ve- 
hicles to their jobs. But as roads improved and car own- 
ership expanded, the freedom provided by automobile 
ownership enabled more and more people to move to 
the suburbs. By the mid-1950’s, even factories had be- 
gun to relocate in the suburbs. 

Wherever people have easy access to automobiles, 
cars play a major role in social life and the choice of 
recreational activities. People find it fun to hop in the car 
and visit friends and relatives, whether the drive takes a 
few minutes, hours, or days. The automobile helps make 
it easy to organize picnics, family reunions, and other 
get-togethers. Trips by automobile to such places as 
theme parks, national parks, and mountain and seashore 
resorts are a favorite type of vacation for many people. 

Economic impact. Such developed nations as the 
United States, Japan, Germany, and Italy depend on au- 
tomotive production to provide jobs for millions of 
workers. But even in developed nations with little or no 
automotive production—for example, Norway and New 
Zealand—the widespread use of cars has become vital 
to the economy. Filling stations, motels, restaurants, and 
other businesses that serve automobile travelers are of 
major importance to the economic well-being of all de- 
veloped countries and increasingly of developing ones. 
In addition, many developing nations have begun mak- 
ing automotive vehicles or parts to stimulate industry 
and to provide the vehicles needed for growth. For ex- 
ample, China has promoted broad-based automotive 
manufacturing, and the Philippines has expanded parts 
production for export to carmakers in other countries. 
For more information on the automobile’s economic im- 
pact, see the section 7he automobile industry. 

Problems of safety. Each year, motor vehicle acci- 
dents kill an estimated 300,000 people throughout the 
world. A high percentage of those killed in automobile 


Sr. 

fi . 3 =| ; = 

t. o's 3 ceil 

a 
a ep i ell De ia 
© David R. Frazier Photolibrar 

Automobiles carry vacationers to places near and far from 
their homes. The automobile provides a means of travel that is 


comfortable, convenient, and affordable. 





Motor vehicle traffic deaths in the United States 


Number of motor vehicle traffic deaths each year 


Thousands 
60 


30 





1930 1940 


1960 


1950 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 


Motor vehicle traffic death rate per 100 million vehicle miles 
(160 million vehicle kilometers) 


Rate 
20 


1930: 16.0 
15 


10 


2000: 1.6 


0 


1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 


Source: Nationa! Safety Council. 


accidents are young people. In fact, in the United States, 
traffic accidents are the leading cause of death for peo- 
ple from 5 to 32 years old. Young people also have the 
highest accident rate of all drivers. 

Almost every accident results from one or more of 
these three factors: the driver, the car, and the road. The 
same three factors contribute to accident prevention. 

Drivers are the chief factor in vehicle safety because 
they are responsible for about two-thirds of all acci- 
dents. They cause accidents by speeding, driving in the 





© Paul Saloutos, The Stock Market 
Heavy automobile traffic contributes greatly to air pollution. In 
the United States and many other countries, governments limit 
the amount of pollution new cars may produce. 











wrong lane, making improper turns, and breaking other 
rules of safe driving. Many traffic deaths involve drunk- 
en drivers. Alcohol slows a driver's reflexes, reduces 
alertness and concentration, impairs vision, and clouds 
judgment The use of illegal drugs by drivers is also a 
serious Safety problem. 

The automobile itself has become safer over the years 
because of advances in its design and manufacture. Au- 
tomakers must meet strict government standards de- 
signed to prevent accidents and to protect drivers and 
passengers. The standards to prevent accidents involve 
the installation of government-specified lights, reflec- 
tors, brakes, tires, windows, windshield wipers and de- 
frosters, and dashboard controls. Standards to protect 
car occupants include the installation of seat belts or air 
bags, head restraints, and bumper systems. Seat belts— 
when used—are probably the main safety equipment. A 
driver must not assume that the engine, brakes, lights, 
and steering system always operate properly. All equip- 
ment should be tested frequently. 

Modern roadbuilding techniques have increasingly 
lowered the risk of automobile accidents. To build safe 
roads, highway engineers consider such factors as road 
foundations and surfaces, lighting, guardrails, and grad- 
ing. They carefully plan bypasses, intersections, on-and- 
off ramps, traffic signals, and the number of lanes. 

Environmental impact As automobiles burn gaso- 
line, they release hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, and 
nitrogen oxides into the air and so pollute it Air pollu- 
tion endangers people's health and damages crops and 
livestock. Automobiles produce terrible pollution in 
many of the world’s big cities. Especially severe pollu- 
tion occurs in such cities as Los Angeles, Mexico City, 
Tokyo, and Madrid, where the streets and highways are 
choked with traffic. 

In many countries, steps have been taken to control 
air pollution caused by automobiles as well as by other 
sources. Government agencies enforce emission stand- 
ards that limit the amount of pollution new automobiles 
may produce. The agency that enforces these regula- 
tions in the United States is the Environmental Protec- 
tion Agency (EPA). 

Automakers have made great progress in reducing 
the emission of major pollutants by meeting the increas- 
ingly strict environmental standards. From the 1960's to 
the 1990's, the emission of hydrocarbons and carbon 
monoxide by American-built cars was reduced more 
than 95 percent and nitrogen oxides more than 90 per- 
cent. The reduction was achieved largely with the instal- 
lation of a catalytic converter in the exhaust system of 
cars. The device changes carbon monoxide and hydro- 
carbons into carbon dioxide and water vapor. In 1990, 
the U.S. Congress passed new rules calling for even 
tougher limits on the emission of pollutants. 


How an automobile works 


This section describes the major interconnected sys- 
tems that function together in the operation of an auto- 
mobile. But first, it may be helpful to understand the ba- 
sic way in which the typical car works. 

Most automobiles made today have a front-mounted, 
gasoline-burning engine; an automatic transmission; 
and front-wheel drive. The typical engine is an internal- 
combustion engine, which works by burning a mixture 


Automobile 949 


of gasoline and air inside closed cylinders. When you 
turn the car's ignition key, electric current from the bat- 
tery causes the starting motor to crank the engine. Pis- 
tons move up and down inside the engine's cylinders. 
As the pistons move down, intake valves above the 
cylinders open, and fuel and air are sucked into the 
cylinders. The pistons then move back up the cylinders, 
compressing the fuel-air mixture. Electric sparks from 
the ignition system’s spark plugs ignite the mixture, and 
the engine starts to run as the pistons move rapidly. 

Expansion of the burning gases forces the pistons 
down, and these downstrokes provide the power that 
moves the car. The pistons’ downstrokes turn the crank- 
shaft. Power travels from the crankshaft to the transmis- 
sion and, finally, to the front wheels. Burned gases es- 
cape as the exhaust valves above the cylinders open and 
the pistons move up, forcing the waste products out 
through the catalytic converter, muffler, and tail pipe. 

The power system. The heart of an automobile’s 
power system—indeed, the heart of the car itself—is the 
engine. It produces the power that turns the wheels and 
that generates the electric power to operate the lights 
and accessories. The power system also includes (1) the 
fuel system, (2) the exhaust system, (3) the cooling sys- 
tem, and (4) the lubrication system. 

The engine. Most automobiles have a gasoline en- 
gine. The majority of cars have the engine in the front of 
the vehicle. Others have it mounted in the rear or the 
middle. The engine block, also called the cylinder block, 
houses the engine’s internal parts and provides the 
foundation for pumps, pulleys, and other accessory 
parts. Blocks are cast from iron, iron alloys, or alu- 
minum. The engine block contains the cylinder cavities 
in which the pistons move. 

The number and arrangement of the cylinders varies 
among the makes of cars. American cars have 4, 6, or 8 
cylinders. Cars made in other countries also have 2, 3, 5, 
or even 12. In most cases, the cylinders are arranged ei- 
ther in a straight line or in two equal rows set at an an- 
gle to form a V shape. An in-line engine with, for exam- 
ple, 4 or 6 cylinders is called a straight 4 or a straight 6. 
A V-type engine with, for example, 4, 6, or 8 cytinders is 
called a V-4, V-6, or V-8. Typically, the more cylinders an 
engine has, the greater its power. 

The gasoline engine operates on a four-stroke cycle 
in most cars. On the intake stroke, the piston moves 
down the cylinder and draws in a fuel-air mixture as the 
intake valve opens. The valve then closes, and the piston 
moves back up the cylinder on the compression stroke, 
Squeezing the fuel-air mixture. At the top of the stroke, 
the spark plug ignites the compressed mixture. The 
burning causes the gases to expand, forcing the piston 
down in the power stroke. On the ex/aust stroke, the 
piston moves up again and pushes the burned gases out 
the open exhaust valve. The exhaust valve then closes, 
the intake valve opens, and the cycle starts again. 

During the power stroke, the connecting rod transfers 
energy from the piston to the crankshaft, which then 
transmits the energy to the transmission. For a car's 
wheels to turn, the up-and-down movement of the pis- 
tons must be converted to rotary motion. The connect- 
ing rod and crankshaft do the job. The connecting rod 
turns the pistons up-and-down motions into the crank- 
shafts rotary motion. 


950 Automobile 


The major systems of an This diagram illustrates the major systems of a car with a front-mounted gasoline engine, an auto- 












automobile matic transmission, and front-wheel drive. The power system produces the force that moves the 
car. The power train transfers power from the engine to the driving wheels. The steering and 
brake systems help the driver control the vehicle. The suspension system supports the car, and 
the electrical system produces and distributes the electric power that ignites the fuel and runs 
the lights, windshield wipers, and many options. 
WORLD BOOK diagram by Paul Perreault 
: Parking Coil spring 
Coolant Exhaust Windshield Windshield brake cable Shock absorber 
reservoir manifold washer fluid wipers Turn signal 
reservoir f 
Alternator Ailintake Catalytic Brake light 
Poor manifold convene! — 
——a 
ae i, Brake master 
pump 


_ cylinder 














Dashboard 
instruments | 


Transmission 





Air ” 


Battery Brake 
cleaner / Half Disc pedal 
/ shaft brake 
rs Accelerator 
Differential pedal 
Power brake 
booster 
Power systems 
CS engine 
exhaust system 
Sc eC system 
— Cooling system 





Highly advanced devices regulate modern engines. 
An electronic control unit receives data regarding en- 
gine speed, air pressure and temperature, and other fac- 
tors. The unit uses the data to regulate the timing of the 
ignition sparks and the fuel flow. It adjusts the engine 
hundreds of times a minute. 

For more information, see the article Gasoline 
engine. To learn about other types of engines used in 
some Cars, see the articles Diesel engine; Rotary en- 
gine; Turbine. 

The fuel system stores fuel in a cars gasoline tank and 
transports it to the engine. Most tanks hold 12 to 20 gal- 
lons (45 to 76 liters) and are made of steel or plastic. The 
fuel system also mixes the gasoline with air. To burn effi- 


Fuse box 


Power train 
ates ee | Support system 
aC clectrical system 


ra 






Fuel tank 
Fuel filler 


tube 


Steering wheel | 


Drum 
brake 


Suspension 
control arm 


Control systems 


anemia mee Steering system 
CS Brake system 


ciently, the gasoline must first be vaporized into fine 
droplets and then mixed with the air. 

Most cars produced since the late 1980's use a system 
called fuel injection, which times and delivers precise 
amounts of gasoline. A pump in the fuel tank or mount- 
ed on the engine forces the gasoline under high pres- 
sure from the tank through fuel lines to fuel injectors. 
An injection system may be multiport or single point 
Most cars today have a multiport system, also called a 
direct-port system, which has an injector for each cylin- 
der. A single-point system, on the other hand, injects 
fuel into the throat of the intake manifold, which is basi- 
cally a pipe with a branch to each cylinder. The standard 
injector has a needle valve. Electric current opens the 











Automobile 951 


Powering the car The typical car engine burns a mixture of gasoline and air inside closed cylinders. As the fuel 
burns, it produces expanding gases that force each piston down inside its cylinder. This down- 
stroke provides the power that ultimately moves the car. Connecting rods transmit this power to 
the crankshaft, which converts the pistons’ up-and-down movement into rotary movement. 
WORLD BOOK diagrams by Paul Perreault 


Pistons 


Flywheel 


Movement of 
flywheel and 
crankshaft 


Movement of 
starting motor 





—— gear 
Starting 
motor Crankshaft 
ignition begins when the key turns the starting Cranking takes place as the starting motor spins the flywheel. The 
switch. Electric power flows from the battery to flywheel turns the crankshaft, which starts the pistons moving up 
the starting motor, which cranks the engine. and down in the cylinders and activates the fuel pump. 


eee SC LAULUN  ofiee.. Seeeseeeeneees 


Fuel pump 


Fuel injectors 








hee Accelerator 


pressed down 





Pressing the accelerator opens the throttle, letting the 
pistons draw the fuel mixture into the cylinders. The fuel 
pump supplies gasoline under high pressure to the fuel 
injectors, which deliver it to the cylinders. 


The engine runs as the bat- — Spark 
tery feeds electric power plugs 
through the coils. A computer 

in the engine signals each 

coil to fire each of its two 

spark plugs at the right time. 

Sparks from the plugs ignite 

the fuel, and the pistons go 

into a rapid, pumplike action. 

As the pistons move up and 

down, connecting rods turn 

the crankshaft. The rods trans- 

fer energy from the power 

stroke to the crankshaft and 

flywheel, which transmit en- 

ergy to the car's transinission. Z 
The engine is now providing Connecting4~— 
the power to move the car. rods 





Power to transmission 


952 Automobile 


valve, allowing the pressurized fuel to spray out. See the 
article Fuel injection for more information. 

Some older cars use a device called a carburetor to 
provide the fuel-air mixture. But fuel injection has largely 
replaced the carburetor. In a carbureted engine, it is dif- 
ficult to control the fuel precisely enough to achieve the 
low emissions and the fuel efficiency demanded in to- 
day's cars. See Carburetor. 

The exhaust system works with the emission control 
system. The exhaust system removes the burned gases 
from the engine, and the emission control system re- 
duces air pollution. 

Even with precise fuel injection controls, the engine 
does not burn all the fuel completely and so produces 
emissions that may be harmful. The burned and partly 
burned gases leave the engine and enter a pipe or set of 
pipes called the exhaust manifold. They then go through 
the exhaust pipe to the catalytic converter. The interior 
of this device is divided into honeycomblike cells or, 
less commonly, is packed with tiny pellets. The cell walls 
or pellets are coated with certain rare metals, such as 
platinum, palladium, and rhodium. As the exhaust flows 
over the metals, a chemical process occurs that breaks 
down the pollutants into safer emissions. See Catalytic 
converter. 

Next, the exhaust gases pass to the muffler. Exhaust 
leaves the engine rapidly and at a far higher tempera- 
ture than the outside air. If released directly into the air, 
the exhaust would expand suddenly and create loud 
noise. A muffler uses a series of tubes pierced with 
holes to cool and slow the exhaust before it exits the car 
through the tail pipe. See Muffler. 

While a car is moving or parked in the sun, gasoline 
evaporates from the vehicle. This evaporation can re- 
lease harmful hydrocarbons into the atmosphere. A sep- 
arate system controls such emission by collecting the 
vapors and channeling them to the engine for burning. 

The cooling system keeps the engine from overheat- 
ing, which could damage it. Most automobiles use a 
coolant consisting of about half water and half an- 


Transferring power 
to the wheels 


tifreeze. A pump on the front of the engine circulates the 
coolant through passages called water jackets, which 
surround the cylinders. The coolant absorbs engine heat 
as it flows through the water jackets. The heated coolant 
then passes through copper or aluminum tubes in the 
radiator. Copper or aluminum fins around the tubes ab- 
sorb heat from the coolant in the tubes. The motion of 
the car and, at slower speeds, the action of a fan, draw 
air through the radiator. As the air moves between the 
fins, it absorbs their heat. The cooled coolant returns to 
the engine, and the process starts over. A thermostat 
controls the engine temperature by regulating the flow 
of coolant through the radiator. 

The lubrication system delivers oil to the moving 
parts of the engine. As the oil circulates through pas- 
sages in the engine, it spreads a film on the parts. Lubri- 
cation reduces friction and so minimizes engine wear. 
The oil also helps cool the engine. Oil is stored in a pan 
under the engine. A pump circulates oil from the pan 
through a filter and then through lines to the engine. 
The filter prevents impurities from entering the engine. 

The power train, also called the drive train, transmits 
power from the engine to the driving whee/ls—the 
wheels that make a vehicle go. The power train's parts 
include (1) the transmission and (2) the drive system. 

The transmission gets power from the rotary move- 
ment of the ywheel, a heavy disk that is turned by the 
crankshaft. This rotary movement has two related as- 
pects: speed and torque. Speed refers to the rate of rota- 
tion, and torque to twisting force. The transmission uses 
gears to vary the ratio of speed to torque. For example, a 
car requires great torque to be put into motion from 
rest. But as the car moves, it needs less torque and more 
speed. The first gear, also called /ow gear, provides the 
greatest torque and lowest speed. As the car goes faster 
and the transmission shifts to higher gears, torque de- 
creases and speed increases. 

If a car has a manual transmission, the driver shifts 
gears with a gearshift After the car has been put into 
motion and gains speed, the driver shifts to second gear 


The drive train carries power from the engine to the wheels. A key part of the drive train in a front- 
wheel drive car is the transaxle, which consists of the transmission and the differential. The trans- 


mission has gears that vary the speed and torque (twisting force! of the engine power. The differen- 
tial enables the outside front wheel to rotate faster when the car turns a corner. 





—_ j Half 
i eee shoft 
‘ ta 

Lacatian of 

differential 


WORLD BOOK diagram by Craham Studios 











Power fram 


; Wheels are 
engine 








Transaxle 
housing 






Lacation af 


Om transmission 











wheel 











Automobile 953 
Steering the car The steering system guides the front wheels. The steering wheel sits atop the steering shaft. When 
the driver turns the steering wheel, the steering shaft twists. The twisting operates the steering 
gears. The gears push and pull on the tie rods, causing the wheels to turn in the desired direction. 
With power steering, an engine-powered /Aydraulic (fluid) system helps operate steering gears. 








Power steering 
fluid 


Power steering reservoir 


fluid pump 


1 any 


Pressure 
hose 


Steering Power steering 
arm volve 
ossembly 


Rack 


Pinion 


and then to higher gears. Most manual transmissions in 
new cars have five forward speeds and one reverse 
gear. When shifting gears, the driver must step on the 
clutch to disconnect the engine from the transmission. 

If a car has an automatic transmission, the driver does 
not have to operate a gearshift and clutch. To move 
ahead, the driver simply slides the se/ector /ever to the 
drive position. A microcomputer and hydraulic oil pres- 
sure control the transmission on the basis of the car's 
speed, shifting io the gear that is best for a given driving 
condition. In new cars, most automatic transmissions 
have three or four ferward speeds and one reverse 
gear. A torque converter connects the flywheel to the 
automatic transmission. A torque converter increases 
torque. It also enables the driver to have the transmis- 
sion in gear with the engine running slowly while keep- 
ing the car from moving by lightly braking. See Trans- 
mission. 

The drive system carries the engine's power from the 
transmission to the wheels that move the car. Depend- 
ing on the automobile, these may be the front wheels, 
the rear wheels, or both sets of wheels. 

In a car with front-wheel drive, the front wheels not 
only steer the vehicle but also drive it. A front-wheel dri- 
ve combines the engine, transmission, and differential 
under the hood. The differential is a set of gears that en- 
ables an outside wheel to rotate faster than an inside 
wheel as the car turns a corner. The outside wheel trav- 
els farther when cornering, and so it must rotate faster 
to cover more ground in the same time. Power from the. 


Steering wheel 












Steering 
column 


WORLD BOOK diagrams by Graham Studios 


(4) Tie rods moke 


wheels turn (1) Steering wheel 


is turned 











(2) Pinion turns, 
moving rock 


(3) Rock pushes ond 
pulls tie rods 


As a driver turns the steering wheel, the 
pinion—a circular gear—torces the rack— 
a flat bar gear—to move in the opposite 
direction. The rack pushes and pulls on 
the tie rods, turning the front wheels in 
the same direction that the steering 
wheel was turned. 


transmission is transferred through the differential to 
each front wheel by a short bar called a ha/f shaft. Cars 
with front-wheel drive can be more compact than those 
with rear-wheel drive. They also may have less power 
and cost less to buy and operate. Most passenger cars 
and vans for private transportation are front-wheel drive 
vehicles. 

Cars with rear-wheel drive have a long drive shaftto 
transfer power to the back wheels. The differential is at- 
tached to the rear axle. Rear-wheel drive provides better 
weight distribution, front to back, than does front-wheel 
drive. Better weight distribution improves a car's han- 
dling performance. Most pick-up trucks and vans for 
commercial use have rear-wheel drive, as do many 
sport utility vehicles (SUV's). 

A vehicle with four-wheel drive delivers power to all 
four wheels. A transfer case distributes the power be- 
tween the front and rear wheels. Four-wheel drive pro- 
vides good traction on rough or slippery terrain. Many 
light trucks and SUV's and some cars come with four- 
wheel drive. In many vehicles, the driver can switch 
back and forth between four-wheel drive and two-wheel 
drive. 

Control systems include (1) the steering system and 
(2) the brake system. 

The steering system controls the front wheels. The 
driver operates it with the steering wheel, which is atop 
the steering column. Most new cars have a steering sys- 
tem with rack-and-pinion gears. The pinion is a circular 
gear at the lower end of the steering shaft. The pinion’s 


954 Automobile 


The brake system slows or stops the car. Most cars have disk brakes on their front wheels and 
drum brakes on their rear wheels. Hydraulic pressure operates both types. Pressing the brake 
pedal forces fluid from the master cylinder through the brake lines to the brakes. The pressure of 
the fluid forces a friction material to rub against the disks or drums on the wheels. 
WORLD BOOK diagram by Graham Studios 


Stopping the car 


handle 





Pawer brake 
booster 






Brake line 
Brake pedal 


Master 
cylinder 






Caliper 


Disk 


Disk 
brake 


Disk 
brake 


teeth fit into the teeth of the rack, a flat bar gear. As a dri- 
ver turns the steering wheel left or right, the pinion 
forces the rack to move in the opposite direction. The 
rack turns the wheels in the direction opposite of its 
own by means of a tie rod connected to each wheel. 
Many cars have power steering, in which a hydraulic 
system helps force the rack. A driver can turn the steer- 
ing wheel far more easily with power steering. 

The brake system slows or stops an automobile. Cars 
have brakes on all four wheels. All autos use disc brakes 
on the front wheels, and most use drum brakes on the 
rear wheels. Some cars have four-wheel disc brakes. Hy- 
draulic pressure operates both types of brakes. Whena 
driver steps on the brake pedal, brake fluid goes 
through brake lines to each wheel. The pressure of the 
fluid forces a friction material to rub against the discs or 
drums attached to the moving wheels. The resulting fric- 
tion slows or stops the wheels. 

Cars with power brakes use the difference in pressure 
between the engine and the surrounding atmosphere to 
help force the fluid through the brake system. Power 
brakes make it easier to push the brake pedal, but they 
do not stop a car any faster than regular brakes. Many 
cars have an antilock-brake system, which keeps the 
wheels turning in certain circumstances after the brakes 
have been applied. The system helps keep a car from 
skidding and is especially useful on wet roads. A com- 
puter controls the antilock system. See Brake. 

The support system. The tires, wheels, axles, and 
suspension system support the weight of a car. In the 
past, the frame—a rectangular arrangement of heavy 
steel tubes—formed the bottom of the car and support- 
ed the weight of the cars body. Most cars today do not 
have a separate body and frame. Instead, they are con- 
structed with a unitized body, made of steel panels 
welded together to form the engine compartment, the 
Passenger compartment, and the trunk. The underbody 
panels are welded to the body panels. 


Mechanical 
parking brake 


Drum brake 







Parking brake Brake line 


cables 











Brake 








Brake fine 


Brake drum 


Drum brake 


The suspension system enables the wheels to move 
up and down with variations in the road surface. It thus 
helps protect the car body and mechanical parts from 
the shock of bumps and holes. it also provides better 
steering control and adds to the comfort of a car's occu- 
pants. 

Most suspension systems consist of springs and de- 
vices called shock absorbers or simply shocks. A spring 
and shock are attached to each wheel. As a tire hits a 
bump, the wheel is forced upward and the spring and 
shock are compressed. As the road levels out again, the 
spring and shock rebound, which forces the wheel back 
downward. See Shock absorber. 

The electrical system drives the starting and ignition 
systems, the lighting system, and the comfort and con- 
venience systems. A 12-volt battery stores energy for the 
starter, which begins the operation of the electrical sys- 
tem by cranking the engine to life. As a car runs, an en- 
gine-powered alternating-current generator—better 
known as an a/ternator—produces power for the electri- 
cal system and recharges the battery. See Battery; Elec- 
tric generator; Ignition; Starter. 

Comfort and convenience systems. Dashboard in- 
struments provide the driver with certain information. A 
speedometer measures a cars speed, and an odometer 
records the total distance a car has been driven. A fuel 
gauge tells how full the gas tank is. Many cars have 
gauges that record oil pressure, battery voltage, and the 
temperature of the engine coolant. Other cars have 
warning lights to alert the driver to problems with oil 
pressure, battery voltage, and engine temperature. 

Virtually all cars come with a heater, which blows air 
warmed by engine heat into the passenger compart- 
ment. Many cars also have an air conditioner, an option 
that draws on engine power to produce cool air. Other 
optional devices include audio equipment, power door 
locks, power windows, and power mirrors. A computer- 
operated mechanism called cruise contro! makes it pos- 
































© Andrew Sacks 


Computer-aided design (CAD) programs help automotive de- 
signers prepare drawings of a proposed new car. Designers can 
create, test, and modify their plans on the computer. 


sible for a driver to cruise at a desired set speed without 
stepping on the gas pedal. 


Building an automobile 


Most automakers bring out new models every year. 
But high costs prevent them from making major 
changes or introducing an entirely new car very often. 
Manufacturers make mostly minor yearly changes to 
add features, to meet new standards, to correct prob- 
lems in earlier models, or to give the car a fresh look 
and so attract buyers. 

Developing a new vehicle—whether it is a major mod- 
el change or the introduction of an entirely new make— 
is a task that requires many people, many processes, 
and many parts. From the initial idea of what the car will 
be like until the first one is sold takes two to four years. 
Automakers must therefore try to predict what the mar- 
ket conditions, consumer tastes, and products of their 
competitors will be several years ahead as they begin 
designing and developing a new automobile. 

Market research typically serves as the first step in 
developing a new car. Manufacturers survey auto own- 
ers and people in the age or income group the vehicle 
is aimed at to learn their likes and dislikes. They also try 
to foresee people's concerns in such areas as safety and 
the environment. Above all, automakers try to forecast 
the demand for different kinds of vehicles, such as small 
and large cars, trucks, and minivans. 

Designers, engineers, marketing executives, and fi- 
nancial officers study the market research. If a particular 
market—for example, people wanting small economy 
cars or large luxury automobiles—appears big enough 
for profitable production, the firm's top executives may 
approve the new car program. Such a program may cost 
hundreds of millions of U.S. dollars—or up to several bil- 
lion dollars if it requires new assembly and engine 
plants. 

Development of the concept begins after research 
has identified the market for the vehicle. Automotive de- 
signers create exterior colors, interior fabrics, and over- 
all car design. They make hundreds of drawings based 
on such factors as the potential buyers tastes, age, and 
income. The designers may work for the manufacturer 


Automobile 955 





F 
© Andrew Sacks 


A clay model of a new car shows how the finished product 
will look. Working from design drawings of the car, modelers 
use machine tools and hand tools to shape the clay. 


or an independent design firm. The design staff chooses 
the best drawings for review by corporation executives, 
who make the final selections. Designers enlarge those 
drawings to full scale. Today, most of the design draw- 
ings are created on a computer. This process, called 
computer-aided design {CAD), enables automotive de- 
signers to create, test, and modify their plans all on the 
computer. 

Clay modelers turn the drawings into a concept car—a 
full-sized model that resembles a real car. They cut and 
Shape the clay with machine tools that use data and in- 
structions obtained from the drawings. The modelers 
also use hand tools to carve some tricky bends and 
openings in the car body. They then apply adhesive film 
to the clay. The film reflects light, which makes the shiny 
model resemble what the new car will look like in the 
dealer's showroom. While artists make this model, other 
specialists create interior models of the car's seats and 
instrument panel. 

The auto industry's rapidly expanding use of comput- 
ers to simulate physical properties and events is reduc- 
ing the time it takes to bring a vehicle to market. The in- 





‘Andrew Sat hs 
A wind tunnel can be used by automotive engineers to test the 
effects of airflow on a new car prototype. The tunnel blows a 
stream of air at Ihe car at a uniform speed. 


956 Automobile 


Assembling an The drawings below show some of the chief steps involved in assembling an automobile using 

automobile unitized body construction. \n this method of assembly, manufacturers build the car body and at- 
tach the engine and other chassis parts to it along a main assembly line. Assembly and testing in- 
cludes about 1,800 separate operations and takes about two days from start to finish. 


Autamatic aptical 
scanner 


Camputer-cantralled 
welding rabat 





Assembling the body. After the main body parts are brought together for assembly, computer- 
controlled welding robots automatically weld the parts together, above /eft. Then, devices called 
automatic optical scanners use laser beams and electronic cameras to check the body, above right 
They measure the parts to make sure they fit together accurately. 


Electrastatic 
recipracatar 





Antirust 
primer tank 








Painting the body. The body is dipped in a tank of primer—a paint that helps protect the body 
from rust Automatic devices called e/ectrostatic reciprocators spray on the final coats of paint The 
fine droplets of paint are electrically charged so that they are attracted to the surface of the auto- 
mobile body, which has an opposite charge. In this way, little paint is wasted. 


Chassis 
assembly 





WORLD BOOK illustrations by Tony Crnovich Koralik Associates 
Chassis assembly and quality assurance. After the body has been painted, the chassis—includ- 
ing the engine, axles, and wheels—is attached to it. The windows, seats, and trim are also added. 
The car is tested at several points during assembly. At the quality assurance station at the end of 
the assembly line, technicians make a final check of the car's interior and exterior. 











dustry uses fewer clay models than in the past, and sim- 
ulation is replacing many, but not all, repetitions of tests, 
such as wind tunnel tests for aerodynamics. 

Workers next build a fiberglass body model based on 
the clay model and interior models. The fiberglass body 
model is given real tires, glass windows, doors, and in- 
terior and exterior trim. It looks as much like a final pro- 
duction vehicle as possible. After further reviews of the 
program and management approval, development of 
the new car begins in full force. 

Product engineering. A team of automotive engi- 
neers plans, coordinates, and carries out the specifica- 
tions for the new car and the engineering of every need- 
ed part. In addition to the manufacturer's engineers, the 
team may include engineers from automotive suppliers 
and from independent engineering firms. 

Some parts, such as the engine and transmission, 
need not be developed for a new vehicle if the automak- 
er has appropriate designs. But many parts are newly 
created. Everything from steering wheels and road 
wheels to headlights and taillights must be specified. 
Computers now handle a large portion of automotive 
engineering. Engineers rely on computer-aided engi- 
neering (CAE) programs to design and draw parts, to 
combine the parts into components, and to package the 
components into a car's systems. In CAE, a scanner 
traces every line and curve on the clay model, gathering 
information that is stored in the computer. The comput- 
er is then used to produce engineering drawings for 
making dies—the precision tools that shape metals and 
other materials for the parts and components. 

As parts and components are engineered, manufac- 
turers have prototypes of the vehicle assembled to test 
its design and engineering. The prototypes may look 
nothing like the final car. American automakers test pro- 
totypes on proving grounds in the dry heat of Arizona, 
the humid heat of Florida, and the cold of northern 
Canada. The prototypes put on tremendous mileage and 
may be modified again and again until the manufacturer 
is satisfied with the quality and cost of the components. 

Automakers also use prototypes to test the planned 
car's endurance and emissions control. The emission- 
control tests involve running the prototypes 24 hours a 
day to cover 100,000 miles (160,000 kilometers). The en- 





© Andrew Sacks 
In computer-aided manufacturing (CAM), computers oversee 
various tasks during auto production. tn this assembly line, com- 
puters operate robots that weld car bodies. 


Automobile 957 


durance tests may cover twice that distance. Prototypes 
are further used to check a vehicle's safety. As engineers 
design the body, computers show how well the car will 
protect occupants in a crash. But actual cars must be 
crashed into walls to be sure they meet government 
standards for impact protection. Prototypes cost hun- 
dreds of thousands of dollars. If the prototypes fail the 
tests, they must be redesigned and reengineered until 
they pass. 

Manufacturing engineering involves developing 
the production operations and specifying the equip- 
ment needed to make and assemble the final vehicle. 
Prototypes can help manufacturing engineers improve 
the production process. Assembly of the prototypes of- 
ten reveals design problems that can be corrected to 
make assembly of the final car more efficient. 

Materials purchasing is the job of buying from sup- 
pliers the raw materials, parts, and components needed 
to build cars. Automakers prepare specifications for 
steel, rubber, and other raw materials. For parts and 
components, a manufacturer might provide the supplier 
with blueprints to make them. Or the manufacturer 
might specify the function and maximum dimensions 
and let the supplier do the designing and engineering. 
Suppliers often include the manufacturer's internal sup- 
plier divisions. Internal and outside suppliers bid for the 
work. 

About 50 percent of the value of European cars and 
up to 75 percent of the value of Japanese cars comes 
from outside suppliers. For American cars, the value 
from outside suppliers ranges from 50 percent to 75 
percent, depending on the automaker. 

Manufacturing involves making parts and compo- 
nents for the new car and assembling them. Today, com- 
puters play a big role in a car's manufacture. Companies 
use enterprise requirements planning programs to 
schedule the quantities and timing of parts for delivery 
to their plants. In computer-aided manufacturing (CAM), 
computers operate machine tools that make various 
parts and components. They also instruct robots that 
weld and paint the body and do other tasks in assem- 
bling the car. 

Manufacturing a car requires different processes to 
produce different parts. In meta/ stamping, presses 
shape metal into forms determined by dies. Small press- 
es stamp out such parts as brackets. Huge presses 
stamp out trunk lids, floors, roofs, fenders, doors, and 
hoods. In casting, molten metal is poured into a mold. 
The engine block is the major part cast. Forging shapes 
steel or iron into desired forms by hammering. Crank- 
shafts and certain pieces of the suspension may be 
forged. Machining involves using various tools to cut, 
grind, and shape precision parts, such as those in en- 
gines and transmissions. Several processes are used to 
shape a car's plastic equipment. 

After the parts and components have been made, the 
car can be put together on the assembly line, which may 
turn out up to 75 copies of the car per hour. Final assem- 
bly includes welding and bolting the body parts togeth- 
er, painting, installing the engine, attaching the interior 
parts, and adding options. Assembly lines have become 
more and more computerized, with robots doing many 
tasks and cameras and lasers performing inspections. 
But the assembly plant still requires much human labor 


958 Automobile 


Automobile production in selected countries since 1960 











Millions of United States Germany” Year United States Japan 
passenger cars Japan —— Canada 1960 6,700,000 185,000 
6 1965 9,340,000 696,000 
1970 6,550,000 3,180,000 
2000. 8,363,000 1975 6,720,000 4,570,000 
3 1980 6,380,000 7,040,000 
if 1985 8,180,000 7,850,000 
1990 6,080,000 9,950,000 
1995 6,350,000 7,610,000 
6 \/ 2000: 5,542,000 2000 5,542,000 8,363,000 
Year Germany” Canada 
ran 1960 1,670,000 326,000 
: 1965 2,440,000 707,000 
1970 3,130,000 823,000 
1975 2,690,000 1,030,000 
- : 1980 3,240,000 820,000 
A ees 1985 3,860,000 1,080,000 
2 1990 4,810,000 1,050,000 
0 1995 4,360,000 1,340,000 
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2000 4,803,000 1,551 000 


“Figures prior to 1990, the year of Germany's reunification, are for West Germany only. 
Source’ Wards Motor Vehicle Facts & Figures, Ward's Communications, Inc. 


Leading automobile-manufacturing 
countries 








Source: Wards Motor Vehicle Facts & Figures. Ward's Communications, Inc 


to make sure all parts and components—and the assem- 
bly itself- are of the highest quality. 


The automobile industry 


The auto industry has become increasingly interna- 
tionalized. During the early 1920's, the United States 
made about 90 percent of the world’s cars. By the late 
1990's, it made about 20 percent. Yet U.S. output has 
generally climbed since the 1920's. What has happened 
is that worldwide production has skyrocketed—from 
about 10 5 million motor vehicles in 1950 to more than 
50 million in the early 2000's. 

Compact cars and the even smaller subcompacts, as a 
rule, cost the least to buy and operate. Larger mid-size 
cars offer greater styling and room. Snappy sports cars 
and convertibles appeal to many of the young and 
young at heart. Vans, trucks, and SUV's also serve the 
lifestyle and personality of certain car buyers today. Lux- 
ury automobiles attract wealthy buyers. 

People in different countries often have different pret- 
erences for automobiles. For example, European drivers 


Leading automobile-manufacturing 
states and provinces 





Source. Automotive News, Crain Communications, Inc 


are much more likely to drive smaller passenger cars 
and to prefer manual transmissions than U.S. drivers. 
United States and Canadian drivers are more likely than 
Japanese drivers to choose pickup trucks, vans, and 
SUV's over traditional passenger cars. 

Major producing countries and companies. In the 
value of its products, the automotive industry leads all 
other manufacturing industries in Japan, the United 
States, and a number of other countries. Most devel- 
oped nations produce motor vehicles. Many developing 
nations also manufacture cars and trucks or assemble 
them for automakers of other countries. In addition, 
more than 100 countries make parts and components. 

The United States and Japan are the largest motor ve- 
hicle producers. Major producers also include France, 
Germany, South Korea, and Spain. In general, the largest 
automaking countries also have the largest markets for 
cars. The United States has the biggest car market by far. 
Most countries with a large auto industry and a large 
car market have a heavy import and export trade in cars. 
Japan and the United States are the chief exceptions. 











Automobile 959 


Automobile registrations in the United States and Canada since 1900 











Millions of ; Year United States Canada 
passenger cars ae 1900 8,000 = 
™ 1905 77,000 600 
1910 458,000 6,000 
1915 2,332,000 61,000 
150 ann nc 1920 8,132,000 252,000 
1925 17,481,000 641,000 
is 1930 23,035,000 1,062,000 
1935 22,568,000 992,000 
1940 27,466,000 1,237,000 
100 1945 25,797,000 1,161,000 
1950 40,339,000 1,913,000 
5 1955 52,145,000 2,961,000 
1960 61,671,000 4,104,000 
1965 75,258,000 5,279,000 
50 1970 89,244,000 6,701,000 
1975 106,706,000 8,961,000 
95 1980 121,601,000 10,256,000 
1900: 8,000 1599. 14.1 oho 1985 131,864,000 11,118,000 
1905: GDO 1990 143,550,000 12,622,000 
0 1995 136,066,000 13,183,000 
1900 1915 1930 1945 1960 1975 1990 2005 1999 126,869,000 14,143,000 


Figures are for passenger cars only. Registrations for trucks, vans, and sport-utility vehicles are not included 


Sources: Federal Highway Administration, Statistics Canada. 


Leading countries 
in automobile registrations 





Figures for Russia are for 1997. 
Source: Ward's Motor Vehicle Facts & Figures, Wards Communications, Inc. 


Japan imports a small share of the cars sold at home, 
and the United States exports many vehicles to Canada, 
but only a small portion to other countries. 

The largest U.S. automakers are General Motors Cor- 
poration and Ford Motor Company. They have thou- 
sands of suppliers, including such giant corporations as 
United States Steel Corporation, General Electric Com- 
pany, and TRW. Both companies produce, under differ- 
ent trade names, a variety of cars and light trucks de- 
signed to meet the needs, preferences, and incomes of 
different consumers. The two companies, along with a 
third U.S. manufacturer, Chrysler Corporation, were 
long known as the Big Three. Chrysler merged with Ger- 
many’s Daimler-Benz in 1998 to form the international 
automaker DaimlerChrysler AG. 

Japan’s major producers include Toyota Motor Cor- 
poration, Nissan Motor Company, and Honda Motor 
Company. Historically, Japanese cars made for use in 
Japan have tended to be small, fuel efficient, and of lim- 
ited power. This is because Japan depends completely 
on imported oil and many of its streets are too narrow 


Leading states and provinces 
in automobile registrations 





Sources Federal Highway Administration; Statistics Canada. 


and crowded for big cars. For export, Japan produces a 
range of models to satisfy a variety of buyers. 

Many European companies make far fewer vehicles 
than do Japanese or American firms because they target 
their output to the smaller luxury and sports car markets. 
Such European producers include BMW and Porsche of 
Germany. Other European manufacturers produce mil- 
lions of cars each year. These major producers include 
Volkswagen of Germany; Peugeot and Renault of 
France; and Fiat of Italy. 

Some large manufacturing concerns own or control 
several automobile companies, often in more than one 
country. For example, Volkswagen owns the luxury car 
manufacturers Audi of Germany and Rolls Royce of the 
United Kingdom. Ford owns Jaguar of the United King- 
dom and Volvo of Sweden. It also owns a controlling in- 
terest in Mazda, a Japanese manufacturer. Renault owns 
a significant share of Nissan. General Motors owns Saab 
of Sweden and controls Isuzu and Suzuki of Japan. 

Economic importance of the auto industry extends 
far beyond making motor vehicles. Although this activity 


960 Automobile 


~— 
rl 
- Rail 





provides millions of jobs, supplier industries employ 
even more people. And still more millions work in such 
related businesses as service stations, repair shops, and 
car rental agencies. 

Manufacturing jobs in the auto industry generally pay 
well and offer good benefits. Production workers earn 
the most money and receive the best benefits in devel- 
oped countries. But even in developing nations, workers 
make two or three times more in automotive production 
than in other manufacturing activities. 

The auto industry also aids the economies of many 
countries by its huge consumption of the output of oth- 
er industries. For example, the typical passenger car re- 
quires about 1,790 pounds (810 kilograms) of steel; 380 
pounds (170 kilograms) of iron; 240 pounds (110 kilo- 
grams) of plastics; 210 pounds (100 kilograms) of alu- 
minum; and 140 pounds (60 kilograms) of rubber. 

Because automobile manufacturing generates and 
supports a broad range of businesses, it can spur 
growth in developing countries. Many such nations 
therefore try to establish an automotive industry. They 
also hope to export vehicles to earn money with which 
to buy needed imports. The developing nations of South 
Korea and Yugoslavia attempted to become major car 
exporters in the 1980's. South Korea has had much 
greater success than Yugoslavia. During the mid-1990’'s, 
South Korea exported about a third of its car production. 

Careers. Rewarding careers can be made in each of 
the auto industry's three main activities—manufacturing, 
selling, and servicing. 

Manufacturing hires college graduates trained as 
chemists, engineers, metallurgists, or physicists. Some 
perform research to develop the materials, processes, 
and machinery needed to make cars. Others work with 
artists, designers, and drafters to create new models. 
The industry also hires college graduates trained in eco- 
nomics, journalism, marketing, statistics, business ad- 
ministration, or industrial management. 

Most workers who assemble cars or make parts and 
components are trained on the job. Some jobs require 
skilled workers, including machinists, patternmakers, 


japanese cars for export 
are loaded aboard this ship 
docked at Yokohama, Japan. 
Japan makes more passenger 
cars than any other country in 
the world and is the world’s 
leading exporter of automo- 
biles. 


©Cameramann Intemational, Ltd. 


and tool and die makers. Such workers may spend four 
to six years as apprentices, learning on the job and re- 
ceiving classroom training in mathematics, computer 
technology, blueprint reading, and mechanical drawing. 
Some car manufacturers and autoworkers’ unions run 
joint apprentice programs. High school students want- 
ing jobs in automobile trades should take shop, math, 
and computer courses. 

Selling new or used cars for dealers often requires a 
forceful personality. Experience as a mechanic or in 
business can be especially useful to jobber salespeople. 
They sell automobile parts wholesale to garages and car 
dealers. Companies that make materials or parts for car 
manufacturers also hire salespeople. 

Servicing. Many young people work in garages, gaso- 
line stations, or the service departments of car dealers. 
Such young people may learn car repair from experi- 
enced mechanics. Most workers in dealer service de- 
partments receive training in the shop from the au- 
tomaker's factory service instructors. Some workers 
become specialty mechanics, experts in repairing cer- 
tain parts or systems of a car. A car dealer's service de- 
partment is headed by a service manager, who sched- 
ules all repairs and assigns the jobs to mechanics. A 
parts manager makes sure the service department has 
enough parts on hand. 


Driving safely 


Most people find it easy to drive a car. But operating 
an automobile is a complicated and demanding task— 
and driving safely is not easy. 

Learning to drive. Most automobile accidents in- 
volve drivers who violate traffic laws, lack good driving 
skills, or ignore or are unaware of the rules of safe dri- 
ving. For that reason, in many countries, a new driver 
can be granted a license to operate a car only after pass- 
ing a series of tests, including a road sign test, vision 
test, road rules test, and driving test. In the United 
States, most states require a person to be at least 16 
years old to be given the privilege of driving. State dri- 
ver's license bureaus stress that a driver's license is a 
















ueitenholy before starting the € engine. 
ly—always think ahead. 






re ee and in heavy traffic. 
ergency vehicles ‘that flash a light ot or -_ 
I far to the right and stop. 

lane only when passing. 

hind you to pass when diese indicate 

o so and passing conditions are favorable. 
light vty to turn, pass, or 


er on the right, ‘if you both arrive at an inter- 
a Uh same time. 


privilege, not a right. Careless, unsafe drivers who break 
traffic laws risk losing their licenses. 

A qualified instructor provides the best way to learn 
how to drive. Many teen-agers learn to drive by taking 
driver education classes in high school. Commercial dri- 
ving schools also teach beginning drivers. Before learn- 
ing to drive, a student must obtain a restricted opera- 
tor’s license, also known as a provisional license or 
learner's permit, to practice driving. Only qualified and 
experienced adult drivers should accompany a student 
who is practicing. Classroom instruction and practice 


Standard traffic signs 


The main aids to safe driving are the traffic signs seen on all 
American highways. These signs (1) regulate traffic, (2) warn of 
dangerous road conditions, or (3) give vital information. 


Always requires a com- 
plete stop—not merely a 
slowdown. 


Always means there is a 
railroad crossing just 
ahead. 


Always warns of a certain 
danger, such as a sharp 
curve. 


Diamond 


Always means yield the 
right of way by slowing or 


stopping. 


Always gives important in- 
structions or directions. 


lations. — lan 





Automobile 961 


Don'ts of safe driving 


Never pass a car unless you have plenty of open road ahead. 
Come back into line only after the car you have passed is 
visible in your rear-view mirror. 

Never pass a stopped bus without taking precautions. A pas- 
senger may step into your path from in front of the bus. 

Never park with any part of your car in a driving lane. 

Never coast with gears in neutral. 

Never weave from lane to lane in traffic. 

Never cut across a curve. 

Never drive past a STOP sign without stopping, even though 
there is no traffic, and even though the car ahead of you 
has halted and moved on. 

Never pull into traffic until your car’s engine is running 
smoothly. 

Never park a car facing traffic. It confuses other drivers, es- 
pecially at night, and is illegal in most places. 

Never drive with your bright lights on when other cars are 
approaching, or when following another car. 


driving help students sharpen their driving skills and 
master the techniques of controlling a moving vehicle. 
They also learn about the responsibilities involved in 
driving a car. 

Responsibilities of driving. Operating a car involves 
certain responsibilities to oneself and to others. First of 
all, a driver must be continuously alert while making a 
variety of maneuvers, such as speeding up, slowing 
down, changing lanes, turning, and stopping. At the 
same time, the driver must be aware of other motor ve- 
hicles (including motorcycles), pedestrians, bicyclists, 


Safe following distances 


A driver can determine the safe following distance by using the 
two-second rule. The driver selects a fixed object in the road 
ahead. When the vehicle ahead passes the object, the driver 
counts “one-thousand-one, one-thousand-two.” If the driver's ve- 
hicle reaches the object before the count is completed, he or 
she is following too closely. If road or weather conditions are 
not good, the driver should increase the count to four or five 
seconds. The graph below shows some safe following distances 
based on the two-second rule. 





962 Automobile 


various road signs, and road hazards. Decisions must be 
made quickly and correctly. Drowsiness or illness slows 
a driver's ability to react rapidly to changes in traffic con- 
ditions. Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs 
is especially dangerous. 

A good driver concentrates on only one thing while 
driving—the driving itself. Drivers who become distract- 
ed by cellular phone use or by other activities cause 
many accidents. A good driver also has a proper atti- 
tude, which means a willingness to share the road with 
others. Aggressive behavior—driving too fast, following 
another vehicle too closely, or rapid lane changes—may 
cause a driver to lose control of the car or provoke an- 
gry reactions in other motorists. Finally, drivers have the 
responsibility to see that their cars are properly main- 
tained. 

Defensive driving means anticipating danger to 
avoid accidents. A defensive driver stays alert to all pos- 
sibilities, such as other vehicles slowing down, entering 
the roadway, or stopping suddenly. A defensive driver 
adjusts the car's speed and position to suit visibility, the 
road, and traffic conditions; slows down before entering 
a curve; yields the right of way; and signals well in ad- 
vance before turning or changing lanes. 


History of the automobile 


The first cars. During the late 1700's, the develop- 
ment of steam-powered engines progressed rapidly in 
Europe. Inventors dreamed of a “horseless carriage — 
and steam seemed the obvious power source. 

The steam car. Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot, a French mili- 
tary engineer, built the first self-propelled road vehicles 


Highlights in the history of the automobile 


Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot of 
France built two steam- 
powered road vehicles. 


© 1769-1770 ©)1801-1803 


for transporting passengers. 


©) 1860 


Richard Trevithick of England devel- 
oped a four-wheeled steam carriage 





in 1769 and 1770. One was designed to carry passen- 
gers, while the other was a three-wheeled steam tractor 
for hauling artillery. In 1801 and 1803, Richard Trevithick 
of the United Kingdom demonstrated four-wheeled 
steam-propelled road vehicles to carry passengers. But 
he lacked the money to continue his work. 

Numerous attempts in the United Kingdom to pro- 
mote the use and development of steam cars failed be- 
cause of competition from railroad and stagecoach 
companies. Early steam cars damaged roads and some- 
times blew up. They also made a terrible racket, dirtied 
the air with smoke, and frightened horses. In 1865, the 


“Red Flag Law’ ended further development of automo- 


biles in the United Kingdom for about 30 years. Under 
the law, a steam car could go no faster than 4 miles (6 
kilometers) per hour in the country and 2 miles (3 kilo- 
meters) per hour in town. To warn of its approach, a sig- 
nalman had to walk ahead of the vehicle, swinging a red 
flag by day and a red lantern by night. 

In 1805 in the United States, an inventor named Oliver 
Evans demonstrated a steam-operated dredge mounted 
ona boat. He had built it to deepen and clean the Phila- 
delphia waterfront. Evans put wheels on the boat and 
drove the gigantic machine, which weighed about 20 
tons (18 metric tons), through the streets to the harbor 
and into the water. During the 1860's, another American 
inventor, Sylvester H. Roper, developed a much smaller 
steam vehicle. It looked more like a present-day automo- 
bile. Ropers vehicle received much public attention. 

Many other Americans experimented with steam cars 
during the late 1800's. They included J. N. Carhart, 
Richard Dudgeon, and Ransom E. Olds. The number of 


Jean Joseph Etienne Lenoir of 
France patented an internal- 
combustion engine. 


©) 1865 


England passed the ‘Red Flag Law,” 
which ended development of auto- 
mobiles there for about 30 years. 








WORLD BOOK illustration by 
Oxford illustrators tLimnted 


The Cugnot steam tractor was one of two steam-powered 
road vehicles built by French military engineer Nicolas-Joseph 
Cugnot in 1769 and 1770. These were the first self-propelled 
road vehicles. 


Six-wheeled steam carriages provided regular passenger 
service in England in the mid-1800s. By the late 1800's, oppo- 
sition by railroad and stagecoach companies had effectively 
ended the use of such steam carriages in England. 








U.S. companies that made steam cars grew rapidly. One 
of the most successful firms was founded by identical 
twin brothers, Francis E. and Freelan O. Stanley. They 
built the famous Stanley steamer. 

Steam cars had big disadvantages. At first, it took too 
long for the fire to heat the boiler. Inventors solved that 
problem, but others remained. The steam engines had 
to be small to be practical for cars, and so they had to be 
high-pressure engines to produce the required power. 
However, such engines cost much to build and main- 
tain, and the steam-powered car gradually disappeared. 
In 1924, the Stanley brothers company—one of the last 
steam car manufacturers—went bankrupt. 

The electric car. About 1891, William Morrison, an 
American inventor, built a successful electric car. The 
six-passenger vehicle was powered by batteries under 
the seats. Electric cars quickly became popular because 
they were quiet, easy to operate, and free of smelly 
fumes. In 1900, they accounted for 38 percent of all U.S. 
car sales. But the batteries limited how far or fast electric 
cars could go. Few electrics could travel faster than 20 
miles (32 kilometers) per hour, and the batteries had to 
be recharged at least every 50 miles (80 kilometers). By 
1905, only about 7 percent of all cars sold in the United 
States were electrics. See Electric car. 

The gasoline car. The automobile as we know it today 
resulted from the development of the internal-combus- 
tion engine. Jean Joseph Etienne Lenoir, a Belgian living 
in France, patented the first commercially successful 
internal-combustion engine in 1860. It burned coke oven 
gas and was noisy and inefficient. But Lenoir sold sever- 
al hundred engines, which powered printing presses, 


American inventor Sylvester H. Roper 
built a steam-powered vehicle that re- 
ceived much attention. 


C) 1885 


(©) 1860's 


Gottlieb Daimler and Karl Benz of 
Germany developed forerunners of 
the gasoline engines used today. 


Mercedes Benz 


The Benz carriage was one of the first vehi- 
cles powered by a four-stroke gasoline en- 
gine. Karl Benz and Gottlieb Daimler devel- 


oped the engine separately in 1885. ed States. 





An electric car built by William Morrison 
in the early 1890's became the first success- 
ful vehicle ot its kind produced in the Unit- 


Automobile 963 


lathes, and water pumps. He also installed one ina 
crude motorcar. 

In 1885, Gottlieb Daimler and Karl Benz, two Germans 
working separately, developed the first successful four- 
stroke gasoline engines. Their engines led to the devel- 
opment of those used in most cars today. Many Euro- 
pean manufacturers turned out cars based on Daimler’s 
and Benz's work and patents. In 1891, a French compa- 
ny, Panhard et Levassor, created the basic design for the 
automobile that remained largely unchanged for nearly 
100 years. The firm placed a Daimler engine in the front 
of the car and used a revolving chain to transfer power 
to the rear wheels. In 1898, the French inventor Louis Re- 
nault replaced the chain with a drive shaft. Most cars 
had a front engine and rear-wheel drive until the mid- 
1980's, when front-wheel drive began to predominate. 

A French rubber-making firm, Michelin, introduced 
the first tires filled with compressed air for use on cars 
in 1895. Michelin developed such pneumatic tires under 
license from a British manufacturer of bicycle tires. 
Many people believe that the automobile became a 
practical means of transportation because of, first, the 
invention of the internal-combustion engine and, sec- 
ond, the development of the pneumatic tire. 

The birth of the automobile industry occurred in 
1885, the year Daimler and Benz built their successful 
gasoline engines. Until 1900, Europe led the world in au- 
tomobile development and production. Many present- 
day European car companies began in the late 1800's. 
For example, Peugeot, a French firm, started making au- 
tomobiles in 1890. Another French company, Renault, 
began producing cars in 1898. Fiat of Italy dates from 


William Morrison of Des Moines, 
lowa, built a six-passenger car pow- 
ered by electricity. 


©) c 1891 ©) 1891 


en French company Panhard 
et Levassor designed a front- 
engine, rear-wheel drive auto. 





= 


Free Library of Philadelphia 


State Histoncal Society at lowa 


The Panhard et Levassor was the 
first gasoline-powered car with a 
front-mounted engine and rear- 
wheel drive. 








964 Automobile 


1899. France and Germany became the first large pro- 
duction centers. 

The Duryea brothers, Charles E. and J. Frank, built the 
first successful gasoline car in the United States. The 
Duryea car was completed in 1893 and made its first 
successful run in 1894. In 1895, the brothers founded the 
Duryea Motor Wagon Company, the first U.S. firm to 
make gasoline cars. Many other automaking firms were 
started in the United States during the industry's early 
years. Some quickly failed, but others still produce vehi- 
cles. The center of the auto industry shifted from Europe 
to the United States after 1900. Production of American 
cars increased from fewer than 5,000 in 1900 to more 
than 1 5 million in 1916. 

From the beginning, the auto industry had an enor- 
mous impact on Western economies. As car production 
increased, the demand for steel, rubber, glass, machine 
tools, and other goods essential to the manufacture of 
the automobile grew and grew. At the same time, the in- 
dustry began to develop its own supporting divisions 
for sales, service, and repairs. Employment in the auto- 
motive industry soared. 

The discovery of huge oil fields in eastern Texas in 
1901 helped contribute to the rapid growth of the U.S. 
auto industry. The discovery caused a sharp drop in the 
price of gasoline, and plentiful, cheap fuel made cars 
relatively inexpensive to operate. Another factor aiding 
the U.S. auto industry was the application of mass-pro- 
duction techniques to the manufacture of automobiles. 
Prior to 1900, carmakers had used skilled workers to as- 
semble each automobile. But American manufacturers 
had been using mass-production techniques since the 


Charles E. and J. Frank Duryea dem- 
onstrated the first successful Ameri- 
can gasoline-powered car. car. 


©) 1893-1894 


©) 1895 ©) 1896 


The Michelin company of France in- 
troduced the first tires with com- 


pressed air for use on cars. 





‘eras F - : 
3 of 


WORLD BOOK illustration by 
Oxford IWustrators Limited 


The Duryea, the first successfu! 
U.S. gasoline car, was built by 
brothers Charles and Frank Duryea 
in the 1890's. 


Pioneer automaker Henry Ford built 
his first successful gasoline-powered 





Smithsonian Institution 


The Stanley steamer was one of the 
most famous steam-powered cars. Fran- 
cis and Freelan Stanley, identical twin 
brothers, built the first one in 1897. 


mid-1800's to make such products as firearms and farm 
equipment, and it was inevitable that they would apply 
this process to carmaking. Once established, mass pro- 
duction brought the price of U.S. cars down to a level 
that many people could afford. By the early 1900's, a buy- 
er in the United States could choose among a variety of 
cars costing less than $1,000, while elegant European 
models, most of which were still handcrafted, sold for 
more than $2,000 in U.S. dollars. 

Many historians credit the 1901 Oldsmobile with be- 
ing the first mass-produced car. More than any car be- 
fore, this automobile was built of parts made by outside 
suppliers and shipped to the assembly plant. Mass pro- 
duction took a giant step forward in 1904, when Henry 
M. Leland took charge of the Cadillac Automobile Com- 
pany in the United States and began building cars using 
interchangeable parts. Such parts could be used to as- 
semble or repair any car of the same model. Previously, 
most parts were made to fit only one particular car. 

But more than anyone else, the American industrialist 
Henry Ford perfected the mass production of automo- 
biles. In 1913, Ford installed a moving assembly line in 
his car factory. The frame of the car was pulled through 
the plant by a chain. Workers on each side assembled 
the car by adding parts that had been brought to them 
on conveyor belts. This process resulted in a huge cut in 
production time and costs. 

The Detroit pioneers. As the U.S. industry devel- 
oped, the Northern industrial cities of Cleveland, Chica- 
go, and Detroit produced the most cars. Detroit and its 
surrounding area soon became the Automobile Capital 
of the World for several reasons. Detroit already had 


Ransom E. Olds built 425 
autos to begin the mass pro- 
duction of cars in the U. S. 


©) 1901 


The Spindletop gusher marks 
the discovery of huge oil 
fields in eastern Texas. 





Cuber 
The discovery of huge oil deposits in east- 
ern Texas in 1901 aided the growth of the auto 


industry by making gasoline more plentiful 
and cheaper. 




















many foundries and machine shops and was a center for 
making cast-iron stoves and marine engines. Neat by 
Flint was a major producer of horse-drawn wagons and 
carriages. Detroits location on the Detroit River made 
the city a gateway to ports on the Great Lakes. But De- 
troits chief advantage over other production centers 
was that it had a large number of successful pioneer au- 
tomakers. 

Ransom E., Olds began tinkering with steam and elec- 
tric engines as a teen-ager. While in his 20's, he built his 
first vehicle—a three-wheeled steam-powered car. He 
helped found the Olds Motor Works in Detroit in 1899. 
In 1901, the firm began to mass-produce its famous 
curved-dash Oldsmobile, a low-cost gasoline car. The 
floorboards curved up in front, forming a stylish dash- 
board. 

Henry Ford worked as a machinist and engineer in 
Detroit when a young man. He built his first successful 
gasoline car in 1896 and founded the Ford Motor Com- 
pany, his third company, in 1903. His first company 
failed, and he simply left the second. Ford introduced 
his famous Model T in 1908. It sold for $825. Through 
mass production and low production costs, he was able 
to cut the car's price repeatedly. The key to Ford's suc- 
cess was his moving assembly line, which tripled pro- 
duction to more than 240,000 Model Ts ayear. The car's 
price dropped to its all-time low, $290 in U.S. dollars, in 
1924. The Model T outsold all other cars for almost 20 
years and truly put America on wheels. People called it, 
with affection, the Tin Lizzie. 

William Crapo Durant became a millionaire by mak- 
ing carriages in Flint. In 1904, he took control of the 


Ford introduced the Model T. William 
C. Durant set up General Motors. 


Henry Ford founded the Ford 
Motor Company. 


©) 1903 ©) 1904 ©) 1908 


Henry M. Leland of the Cadillac Auto- 
mobile Company began building cars 


using interchangeable parts. 


General Motors Corporation 


The curved-dash Oldsmobile, the first 
mass-produced car, was driven up the 
steps of the Michigan Capitol in a public: 
ity stunt. 





Assemblytine methods were improved 
by Henry Ford. Ford used the moving as- 
sembly line to produce the Model T, the 
most popular U.S. car of the early 1900's. 


Automobile 965 


Buick Motor Company, founded by David Dunbar Buick. 
Durant made Buick a top automaker by 1908. That year, 
he organized General Motors Company with the goal of 
making cars in a broad range of sizes and prices. Over 
the next two years, the company, called GM for short, 
acquired many other car companies, including Cadillac 
and Oldsmobile, plus many supplier firms. 

Durant lost control of GM in 1910. Charles W. Nash re- 
placed him as president at Buick, and Walter P. Chrysler 
became Buick’s works manager. In 1911, Durant and 
Louis Chevrolet formed the Chevrolet Motor Company, 
whose low-priced car became an immediate success. 
Durant regained control of GM in 1916. Nash, who had 
served as GMs president since 1912, resigned and 
formed the Nash Motor Car Company. Chrysler eventu- 
ally became vice president of GM. Later, he founded the 
Chrysler Corporation. 

The Dodge brothers, John and Horace, originally pro- 
duced bicycles. In 1901, they opened a machine shop in 
Detroit and soon built parts for Olds and Ford. The 
Dodges amassed a fortune from their business and es- 
pecially from their purchases of Ford stock. In 1914, they 
began making their own autos, which were among the 
first American cars with an all-steel body. Buyers liked 
the new Dodge—and its price. It cost only slightly more 
than the Model T. 

Technological advances came quickly after the 
birth of the auto industry and helped make cars safer, 
more comfortable, and easier to operate. One major de- 
velopment was the introduction of the electric self- 
starter. Charles F. Kettering, an American engineer, in- 
vented it in 1911, and General Motors installed the first 


General Motors introduced the 
electric self-starter, invented by 
Charles F. Kettering the year before. 


© 1912 © 1913 


Ford installed a moving assembly line 
in his auto factory, dramatically cut- 
ting production time and costs. 





. Te 
a oe — 


AP Wide World Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association 


Road building boomed with the in- 
creased popularity of the automobile. In 
1916, workers began building a nation- 
wide U.S. highway system. 


966 Automobile 


ones in its 1912 Cadillacs. The self-starter ended the 
need to insert a crank into the front of the engine and 
then turn the crank by hand until the engine started. 
Hand-cranking was difficult, troublesome, and some- 
times dangerous. 

In 1914, most U.S. automakers agreed to share use of 
one another's patents without cost. This system, called 
cross-licensing, ended in 1956. Since then, the automak- 
ers have treated their inventions as private property. 

World War ! and the Roaring Twenties. World 
War | (1914-1918) demonstrated the value of motor vehi- 
cles for military purposes. In that war, the Allies, who in- 
cluded France, the United Kingdom, and the United 
States, defeated the Central Powers, who included Ger- 
many and Austria-Hungary. In September 1914, German 
forces advanced on Paris. The French used Paris taxicabs 
to rush soldiers to the battlefront. In 1916, the Allies 
saved Verdun, France, from German capture with the 
help of fresh troops and supplies carried to the front by 
trucks. Car manufacturers produced large quantities of 
war goods for the Allies. They made military trucks and 
tanks, airplane engines, and other military supplies. 

People continued to purchase cars for personal use. 
Automobile production fell for the first time in 1918, re- 
flecting chiefly a shortage of materials. After the war, the 
industry expanded again. 

An economic slump struck the United States in 1920 
and 1921. The sagging economy hurt the U.S. auto in- 
dustry badly and resulted in major shifts in the leader- 
ship of the big companies. 

Changes at the top. General Motors common stock 
plunged as car sales dried up. Durant had to leave his 


U.S. auto production fell for 
___the first time, as a result of 
World War I (1914-1918). 


©) 1918 C) 1921 





Motor Vehicle Manutacturers 


Motor vehicles played a major role dui 
ing World War | (1914-1918). Trucks 
moved soldiers and supplies trom place 
to place. 


©) 1920's 


‘—\valter P. Chrysler became presi- 
dent of the company that later be- 
came the Chrysler Corporation. 





A 1920's boom in the auto industry put 
more Cars on the road in the United 
States. Traffic clogged 42nd Street in 
New York City in this 1922 photograph. 


post as head of GM for the second time. Alfred P. Sloan 
became GM's president in 1923. He developed several 
ideas that the entire industry came to adopt Sloan 
sought to stimulate sales by changing model styling 
each year. The tactic is often described as planned obso- 
lescence—the manufacture of products designed to be- 
come outdated sooner than might be expected. Howev- 
er, the purpose has never been to build cars that would 
necessarily have short lives but rather to improve and 
restyle each year's models and so encourage customers 
to buy a new car before the old one has to be replaced. 
Most of the world’s large automakers still follow the 
practice. Sloan also set up a system of group manage- 
ment in which each GM car division would be inde- 
pendent and responsible for its own operations. Yet the 
head of GM would still have tight control. Sloan thus es- 
tablished an organizational structure for managing the 
huge companies that the major automakers became. 
Leland left Cadillac in 1917 and founded the Lincoln 
Motor Car Company. But the economic slump damaged 
the company so severely that Leland sold it to Henry 
Ford in 1922. The Ford Motor Company then had a luxu- 
ry car—the Lincoln—to contrast with its Model T. But 
sales of the Model T declined in the mid-1920's. The 
economy boomed after the 1920-1921 slump, and peo- 
ple had extra money to spend on cars. Buyers wanted 
more than just basic transportation. Other companies, 
especially GM, built cars that offered comfort, styling, 
and speed at reasonable prices. Henry Ford stopped 
making the Model T in 1927. He introduced the Model A 
in late 1927. In 1928, it became the top-selling car. 
Chrysler retired from General Motors as a millionaire 


The Big Three—Ford, GM, 
and Chrysler—accounted for 
most U.S. car production. 





©) 1922 


Low-pressure, or balloon, 
tires were introduced, giving 
amore comfortable ride. 








General Motors Corporation 


GM's Chevrolet became the top-selling 
U.S. car in the late 1920's, a distinction it 
held almost every year until the late 
1980's. A 1927 Chevy is shown here. 


Automobile 967 





Classic cars The Classic Car Club of America (CCCA) defines a Classic as a “fine” or “distinctive” American or 
foreign car, built between 1925 and 1948. The CCCA lists about 100 makes as Classics. The typical 
Classic was high-priced when new and was produced in limited quantities. Its luxury features in- 
cluded a specially built body called “custom coachwork.” 





















Richard A. Brown from Car Collector Dennis Adter from Car Coffector Car Collector 
1928 Cadillac 1935 Mercedes-Benz 1937 Cord 
341 Sport Pheaton 500K Special Roadster 812 Sportsman 
4 4g ¥ stir ll wee 
: ; f a i je 3 





Dennis Adler from Car Colfector Nickey Wright trom Car Colfector : Dennis Adler from Car Collector 
1937 Packard 1938 Jaguar 1942 Lincoln 
12 Convertible Victoria $S100 Roadster Continental Coupe 
Alfred P. Sloan became presi- Production slumped to The United Automobile Work- 
dent of GM. He introduced 1,300,000 vehicles, the lowest ers (UAW) union was founded 
new car models every year. number since 1918. in Detroit. 








© 1923 OC) 1930 O) 1932 C1935 ©) 1939 
| 


U.S. motor vehicle production Fully automatic transmission 
fell 36 per cent due to the and air conditioning were in- 
Great Depression. troduced. 





= 
1ooOo ] 
SIT DOWN StRIAt 
MAL Searls 
* aap a 





Motor Vehicle Manulacturecs Association Dorothea Lange AP Wide World 
The 1932 Ford, above, was one of the first Rickety cars carried many farm fami- Strikes by auto workers led to im- 
' cars with a V-8 engine. In spite of its new lies to new homes in California during proved wages and working condi- 
model, Ford, like most other auto firms, suf- the mid-1930's, after drought in the tions. Workers held a strike ata GM 
fered hard times in the 1930s. Great Plains. plant in Flint, Mich., in 1936, above. 


968 Automobile 


in 1919. In 1921, he became president of Maxwell Motor 
Corporation and breathed life into the ailing firm. He in- 
troduced a new car, which he called the Chrysler, in 
1924. It was an immediate success. Chrysler renamed 
the company the Chrysler Corporation. He bought the 
Dodge Company in 1928 and introduced two new 
makes—the De Soto and the Plymouth—in 1928. 

The rise of the Big Three. During the 1920s, the large 
manufacturers cut their profits on each car to step up 
their sales. Soon, only companies that could make and 
sell many cars quickly could stay in business. The num- 
ber of U.S. automakers dropped sharply—from 108 in 
1923 to 44 by 1927. Throughout the decade, the Big 
Three—Ford, General Motors, and Chrysler—produced 
most American cars. During this same period, these 
companies also set up factories in Australia, the United 
Kingdom, and other countries. Small companies, such as 
Rolls-Royce in the United Kingdom and Packard in the 
United States, built luxury cars with smart styles and ele- 
gant features. These cars became known as classic Cars. 

The new economic giant. The auto industry became a 
pillar of the U.S. economy in the 1920's. Automobile pro- 
duction climbed from almost 2 million vehicles in 1919 
to more than 5 million in 1929. The value of its output ex- 
ceeded that of any other industry. Furthermore, it had 
become basic to the well-being of industries that pro- 
duced the basic materials and tools needed to manufac- 
ture automobiles. The establishment of thousands of re- 
pair shops, filling stations, restaurants, and lodging 
places to serve the millions of American motorists fur- 
ther stimulated the economy. 

The increasing automobile output reflected the good 


Automakers turned to manu- 
facturing military equipment 


times of the 1920's. Americans eagerly spent money on 
new cars. In addition, dealers and manufacturers en- 
couraged people to trade in their old car for a new 
model or to trade up to a better car. Those who lacked 
cash could buy on credit 

The hard times of the 1930's. The auto industry suf- 
fered severely during the Great Depression, which be- 
gan in October 1929. In the United States, production of 
all vehicles fell 36 percent in 1930 and 29 percent more 
in 1931. In 1932, output plunged an additional 44 per- 
cent to about 1,300,000 vehicles, the lowest volume 
since the war year of 1918. 

Because of plant closings and lowered production, 
autoworkers were periodically jobless during the De- 
pression. Ford and Chrysler lost money, but GM made a 
profit throughout the 1930's. By the end of the decade, 
the Big Three controlled over 85 percent of the car mar- 
ket. Many firms had gone bankrupt Others had shifted 
to truck production and managed to survive. 

World War Il and the postwar years. Automobile 
manufacture in Europe was halted in 1939 by the out- 
break of World War II (1939-1945). In this war, the Allies, 
who included Canada, the Soviet Union, and the United 
Kingdom, defeated the Axis powers, who included Ger- 
many and Japan. The United States entered the war on 
the side of the Allies in December 1941. In several coun- 
tries, the automakers turned their production capacity to 
making war equipment This equipment included not 
only military trucks, jeeps, and personnel carriers, but 
also tanks, aircraft and aircraft engines, ammunition, ar- 
tillery, and marine engines. 

Great changes occurred in the auto industry between 


Hudson and Nash-Kelvinator 
combined to form American 


during World War II. L Motors Corporation (AMC). 
| 


© Early 1940s O 1948 © 1954 O 1956 


ubeless tires were intro- 
duced. Their casing was made 
airtight by an inner liner. 


The Highway Act called for 
building a system of inter- 
state highways. 








P| 
~ 


Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Associatro: Mom Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association 


vet@ele Manutac turers Associaton 


Army tanks were produced The Studebaker represented the new look’ in 
by the automobile industry automobiles after the end of World War Il. Cars 
during World \War II (1939- became longer, wider, and lower, like the 1947 


1945). model shown here. 


Freeway construction began tull force 
with passage of the Highway Act of 1956. 
The act called for building 41,000 miles 
‘(66,000 kilometers) of interstate highways. 





Automobile 


969 


| Special-performance automobiles 














Mercedes-Benz of America 
. A Mercedes-Benz is a German car known for its quality engi- 
| neering. The model shown here is an S-Class luxury sedan. 


Ferrari SpA 
A Ferrari is an Italian sports car known for its speed, power, 
and dashing style. The model shown here is a Modena 360. 





AM General Corporation 
A Hummer is a large, sturdy vehicle designed to drive on rough 
terrain. It was originally developed tor the United States Army. 


Ford North American Fleet Operations 
A Lincoln limousine is an American luxury car usually driven by 
a chauffeur. It has a roomy interior and a large engine. 





American cars became larger, heavier, and more loaded 
with options, such as automatic transmission. 


C) 1959 C) 1964 
__ cars gained 10 percent of 
the U.S. auto market. U.S. automakers 
began introducing compact Cars. 


Ford introduced the Mustang, the first compact car to 
feature sporty styling. 





@ Late 1950's 








H. Armstrong Roberts 





Large motor hotels sprang up along in: 
terstate highways during the 1950's. 
These conveniently located hotels 
catered to Americans on the go. 


UPL Bettmann 


The West German Volkswagen Beetle 
arrived in great numbers in the United 
States beginning in the 1950's. It was a 
big hit with American consumers. 


Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Assoctation 


The Ford Mustang, introduced in 1964 
quickly became a favorite with car buy 
ers. The Mustang was smaller and sporti- 
er than most other compacts. 


970 Automobile 


the start of World War 1 and the end of World War Il. 
There were far fewer manufacturers, but they could pro- 
duce far more cars. Competition changed from simple 
mass production to broad marketing programs involv- 
ing market research, product development, distribution, 
advertising, and publicity. Most of the industry giants 
had retired or died, and the companies tended to be run 
by corporate organization. 

After the war, the auto industry resumed civilian pro- 
duction. The return of former servicemen and women, 
the enormous growth of the suburbs, and the unsatis- 
fied demand for cars during the war all created a huge 
market for automakers. In 1949, the industry set a new 
production record for the first time since 1929. It set an- 
other record in 1950. During the 1950's, performance 
and styling became keys to selling. American cars and 
European luxury vehicles became longer, wider, and 
lower. Cheaper European cars grew shorter and nar- 
rower. Automatic transmission became available in low- 
priced cars. Engine power operated air conditioning, 
brakes, seats, steering, and the tops of convertibles. 

The Big Three continued to control U.S. auto manufac- 
turing. Several companies tried to enter the industry in 
the postwar years, but all failed by 1955. In 1954, two in- 
dependent automakers, Hudson Motor Car Company 
and Nash-Kelvinator Corporation, formed American Mo- 
tors Corporation (AMC). George W. Romney, head of 
AMC, strongly promoted the Rambler, the first success- 
ful small, or compact, U.S. car. In 1957, Ford brought out 
the Edsel. The company’s market research had indicated 
high demand for a relatively expensive model. But dur- 
ing the time it took to bring the Edsel into production, 


Ralph Nader wrote Unsafe at 
Any Speed, which led to 


Car and truck sales in the United States since 1950 


Millions of vehicles Trucks*——-_ __ PasSenger Caks ———= 
Total — 
20 
2000: 17,811,000 
16 
12 






2900: 8 365,006 
2000: 8,846,000 


0 
1950 1965 1980 1995 2010 


“Includes sport utility vehicles and minivans 
Source Wards Motor Vehicle Facts & Figures, Wards Communications, Inc 


economic conditions and public taste changed. The ve- 
hicle was a financial failure. 

By the late 1950's, imports—especially the West Ger- 
man Volkswagen Beetle—began to take a growing share 
of the U.S. market. Imports reached 10 percent in 1959. 
Sales of imports and of AMC’s Ramblers persuaded the 


A worldwide petroleum 
shortage helped make fuel- 


Pe safety regulations. efficient cars popular. 


©) 1965 ©) 1968 


C) 1970's C) 1974 


L Devices that reduce exhaust L A nationwide speed limit of 


fumes became standard 
equipment on U.S. cars. 


agit ae 27> ww > 
bs al Puan a Prt igd 


2 ay 
y pr 





AP/Wide World 


Front-seat shoulder belts became re- 
quired equipment in automobiles in 
1968. During the 1960's, car buyers began 
calling for such safety measures. 





Imports from Japan gained a significant 
share of the U.S. auto market during the 
1970's. Thousands of Japanese cars await- 
ed delivery in Boston, shown here. 


55 mph (89 kph) was estab- 
lished in the United States. 


be A: 


, = Bese 
-Teet, ame o* . 


UPI. Bettmann 


—r- —s 
a “<<, 


AP Wide World 


Long lines at filling stations were the re- 
sult of a worldwide oil shortage in the 
1970's. In Los Angeles, cars waited for a 
turn at the gas pump, shown here. 





1 
i 


~s 















Big Three to enter the small-car market. In 1959, Ford 
brought out its compact Falcon, Chevrolet its Corvair, 


and Chrysler its Valiant. All the compacts sold fairly well. 


By 1960, 77 percent of all U.S. families owned a car, 
and 15 percent owned two or more. Roads and high- 
ways began to look the same everywhere, bordered by 
motels, fast-food restaurants, filling stations, and shop- 
ping centers. About 10,000 miles (16,000 kilometers) of 
interstate expressways were in use. More than ever, the 
United States was a nation on wheels. In 1964, Ford in- 
troduced the Mustang, a smaller, sportier car than most 
compacts. Car buyers loved the Mustang at first sight. 

The growth of government regulation. In 1965, an 
American lawyer named Ralph Nader wrote Unsafe at 
Any Speed. The book attacked Chevrolet's Corvair in 


Japan first surpassed the 
United States as the world’s 
leading manufacturer of cars. 


Japanese automakers built 
seven assembly plants in the 
United States. 





Chrysler Corporation 


Automobile 971 


Sport utility vehicles, such 
as this Grand Cherokee by 
Jeep, became popular in the 
1990's. These rugged vehi- 
cles are designed for rough 
terrain, but many people use 
them for everyday driving. 


Chrysler Corporation 


particular and the auto industry in general for emphasiz- 
ing profits and style over safety. Corvair sales plunged, 
and Chevrolet stopped producing the car in 1969. 

The U.S. auto industry had operated largely free of 
government regulation. The situation changed in the 
1960's, partly because criticism of the automobile had in- 
creased, especially after Nader's book appeared. 

The United States was the first country to pass laws in- 
tended to lower pollution from cars. In 1965, the U.S. 
Congress passed the Motor Vehicle Air Pollution and 
Control Act, which amended the Clean Air Act of 1963. 
The new law ordered automakers to reduce the pollu- 
tion produced by new cars. The Big Three complied by 
modifying the engine. The Clean Air Act of 1970 called 
for 90 percent reductions in tail pipe pollution. Auto- 


The speed limit on rural U.S. 
interstates was allowed to 
rise to 65 mph (105 kph). 





The 65 mph speed limit on rural U.S. 
interstates was abolished, allowing 
each state to set its own limit 





Nissan Andreay Sacks 


The minivan became popular during the 
1980's. Its success provided a financial 
boost to Chrysler, which introduced the 
vehicle in 1984. 


Japanese auto plants in the United 
States, such as this Nissan plant in Smyr- 
na, Tennessee, first appeared in the 
1980's. 


Aerodynamic designs, like this Miata by 
Mazda, presented one of the “hottest” 
new looks for automobiles in the early 
1990 s. 


972 Automobile 


makers met this standard through engine improve- 
ments, the use of catalytic converters, and the change 
from gasoline containing the chemical tetraethy/ lead to 
unleaded gasoline. Some countries still allow the use of 
gasoline with this additive. The Clean Air Act Amend- 
ment of 1990 required tail pipe pollution to be reduced 
by another 7 to 8 percent by 1997. 

The 1966 National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety 
Act ordered certain changes to promote automobile 
safety. Car buyers’ favorable response to the changes 
led automakers to provide safety measures that went 
beyond the law’s requirements. 

The rise of international automaking. During the 
1960's, the auto industries of France, Italy, Spain, Swe- 
den, and West Germany prospered. The Soviet Union 
and Italy agreed to produce Italian Fiat cars in the 
U.S.S.R. The Australian auto industry thrived, and Ar- 
gentina and Brazil expanded production. Japan, howev- 
er, made the most dramatic progress. Japanese produc- 
tion skyrocketed from about 50,000 cars in 1958 to more 
than 2 million by 1968. 

A worldwide petroleum shortage during the 1970's 
resulted in high gasoline prices and long lines at filling 
stations. Many families with large automobiles switched 
to smaller, lightweight cars that were more fuel-efficient 
In the United States, imported cars became popular be- 
cause of their reputation for fuel efficiency. By 1980, im- 
ports had captured more than 25 percent of the U.S. 
market, and Japanese cars accounted for more than 80 
percent of those sales. 

During the middle and late 1900's, American automak- 
ers preferred to build plants abroad rather than export 
their cars. Exports of U.S. autos thus generally remained 
low. More than half of the cars American automakers ex- 
ported went to Canada. In 1965, the United States and 
Canada agreed to the free movement of vehicles and 
parts between them. Thus, American automakers could 
closely adjust production at their many Canadian plants 
with operations at home. 

American automakers began to sell imported cars 
themselves in the 1970's. Chrysler marketed cars made 
by the Japanese firm of Mitsubishi. Ford and General 
Motors retailed pickup trucks made by Japan’s Toyo- 
Kogyo (now Mazda) and Isuzu, respectively. In 1978, 
Volkswagen began making cars in Pennsylvania. It be- 
came the first foreign automaker to produce vehicles in 
the United States since American Rolls-Royce of the 
United Kingdom closed its Massachusetts plant in 1931. 

Challenges to the Big Three. The oil shortage led 
the U.S. Congress to pass a law in 1975 requiring manu- 
facturers to make cars more fuel efficient. The 1974 cars 
averaged 14 miles per gallon (6 kilometers per liter) of 
gasoline. Under the new law, the 1985 models had to av- 
erage 27 5 miles per gallon (11.7 kilometers per liter). 
The Big Three met the requirements by building lighter 
cars with smaller engines and by making mechanical im- 
provements. Congress demanded even greater fuel effi- 
ciency in the 1990's. 

The switch in consumer preference from large cars to 
small ones helped Japan surpass the United States as 
the world’s largest automaker for the first time in 1980. 
The shiploads of imported cars pouring into the United 
States stunned the Big Three. The price of a new car 
rose sharply during the early 1980's. As a result, people 


kept their old cars longer before buying a new one. 

Chrysler, in deep financial trouble, needed $1 5 bil- 
lion in government-guaranteed private loans to survive. 
Lee lacocca, head of Chrysler, turned the company 
around. Chrysler received the loans in 1980 and repaid 
them within three years. In 1984, Chrysler introduced a 
line of minivans that achieved huge success in the mar- 
ketplace. In 1987, the company bought American Mo- 
tors, which the French automaker Renault had largely 
controlled since 1977. 

In 1981, the U.S. and Japanese governments placed 
voluntary restrictions on the export of Japanese cars to 
the United States. The restrictions encouraged Japanese 
carmakers to produce vehicles in the United States 
themselves. By the late 1990's, several Japanese manu- 
facturers had assembly plants in the United States. 

Light trucks and sturdy SUV's became increasingly 
popular in the United States. In the 1990's, U.S. produc- 
tion of such vehicles surpassed that of passenger cars. 

The automobile today. About 450 million passenger 
cars travel the streets and roads of the world. Most cars 
are in the United States, Japan, Canada, and the coun- 
tries of Western Europe. Many people of these nations 
consider a cara necessity. In most countries of Africa, 
Asia, Eastern Europe, and South America, the car is still 
regarded as a luxury by the great majority of the people. 

The widespread use of the automobile has resulted in 
a number of challenges. Gasoline, the fuel that powers 
the engines of almost all cars, is a petroleum product. 
But most countries do not have a sufficient supply of oil 
to meet their energy needs. Also, cars give off harmful 
fumes that pollute the air. In addition, traffic accidents 
cause thousands of deaths and injuries each year. 

Automakers and governments spend large sums of 
money seeking ways to reduce the hazards of driving. In 
the United States, the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration sets safety standards for new cars. To 
meet U.S. federal standards, car manufacturers must 
equip new cars with such safety features as safety belts, 
air bags, and shatterproof windows. Other required 
equipment includes a collapsible steering column and 
bumpers that can absorb the impact of collisions. Most 
other nations have strong safety regulations but require 
less safety equipment to be built into automobiles. 

The United States imports far more goods than it ex- 
ports. The U.S. auto industry accounts for much of the 
trade deficit because it exports relatively little, and yet 
the United States is the worlds largest importer of cars. 
A large portion of the deficit results from trade with 
Japan, reflecting the many Japanese cars Americans buy 
and the parts imported for Japanese auto plants in the 
United States. 

Cars of tomorrow will probably be increasingly fuel 
efficient and less polluting. Internal combustion engines 
will probably still power most automobiles. But worries 
about pollution will likely increase the use of vehicles 
that use alternative fuels, despite their limited range and 
speed. Delivery services and other commercial fleets in 
large cities will probably use such vehicles. Hybrids, ve- 
hicles that have all the components of electric cars plus 
another power source, may serve as a compromise be- 
tween electrics and traditional automobiles. Fue/ cells, 
devices that convert chemical energy to electrical ener- 
gy, may be used in hybrids. 




















A hybrid, such as this Toyota Prius, combines a battery-driven 
electric motor with another power source—in this case, a gaso- 
line engine—that charges the batteries and powers the motor. 


Computerized controls will do more and more tasks 
in tomorrow's cars because of their low cost and pre- 
cise functioning. With the flick of a switch, computer- 
ized suspension systems will adjust to changes in the 
road surface. Computers will also play an increasing 
role in creating tomorrow's cars, from the designing to 
the engineering to the assembling. The selling and ser- 
vicing of cars will also be more and more computerized. 

Many modern automobiles include an on-board navi- 
gation system. This electronic device uses a network of 
satellites called the Global Positioning System to locate a 
driver's vehicle. It can then display a map showing the 
best route to reach a specific destination selected by the 
driver. David J. Andrea and Michael S. Flynn 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Bendix, Vincent 
Benz, Karl 

Buick, David D. 
Chevrolet, Louis 
Chrysler, Walter P. 
Daimler, Gottlieb 
Dodge brothers 
Durant, William C. 
Duryea brothers 
Evans, Oliver 
Ford, Henry 


DaimlerChrysler AG 
Ford Motor Company 
General Motors Corporation 


Biographies 


Ford, Henry, Il 

Haynes, Elwood 

lacocca, Lee 

Kaiser, Henry J. 

Kettering, Charles F. 
Maybach, Wilhelm 

Nash, Charles W. 

Olds, Ransom Eli 

Stanley brothers 
Studebaker, John Mohler 


Automobile industry 


Toyota Motor Corporation 
United Automobile Workers 
Volkswagen 


Automobile parts and devices 


Air bag 

Battery 

Bearing 

Brake 

Carburetor 
Catalytic converter 
Diesel engine 
Electric generator 
Flywheel 
Free-piston engine 
Fuel injection 
Gasoline engine 
Gear 

Governor 


Ignition 
Induction coil 
Muffler 

Radiator 

Rotary engine 
Shock absorber 
Speedometer 
Starter 
Thermostat (Uses) 
Tire 


Torsion bar suspension 
Transmission 
Turbine 


Toyota Motor Company 


Automobile 973 


Kinds of motor vehicles 


Ambulance Motorcycle 
Bus Recreational vehicle 
Electric car Sports car 
Hot rod Truck 
Jeep 

Other related articles 
Air pollution Italy (picture) 
Antifreeze Mass production 
Assembly line Michigan (pictures) 
Automobile, Model Motel 


Automobile racing 
Brazil (picture: Automobile No-fault insurance 
manufacturing) Plastics (picture) 

Driving while Road 
intoxicated Steam engine 


National Safety Council 


Gasoline Streamlining 
Horsepower Traffic 
Hydraulics Trailer 


Indiana (pictures) 
Insurance (Automobile 
insurance} 


Transportation 


Outline 


. The importance of automobiles 
A. Impact on society C. Problems of safety 
B. Economic impact D. Environmental impact 
ll. How an automobile works 

A. The power system E. The electrical system 
B. The power train F. Comfort and convenience 
C. Control systems systems 
D. The support system 

Il. Building an automobile 
A. Market research 
B. Development of the 

concept 

C Product engineering 

IV. The automobile industry 
A. Major producing countries and companies 
B. Economic importance 
C. Careers 

V. Driving safely 
A. Learning to drive 
B. Responsibilities of driving 
C. Defensive driving 

Vi. History of the automobile 


D. Manufacturing 
engineering 

E. Materials purchasing 

F. Manufacturing 


Questions 


Why did the gasoline car eventually replace steam and electric 
automobiles? 

What is defensive driving? 

Why did the Detroit area become the Automobile Capital of the 
World? 

How has the automobile changed people's way of life? 

What is meant by the term planned obsolescence? Who origi- 
nated the idea? 

What does the catalytic converter do? The differentiaP 

What U.S. automakers made up the Big Three? 

How does drinking alcohol affect a car driver? 

What are some ways computers are used to help design and 
build cars? 

What development in 1885 marked the birth of the automobile 
industry? 


Additional resources 
Level! 
Graham, lan. Cars. Raintree Steck-Vaughn, 1999. Discusses auto- 
mobile design. 
Graham, lan, and Salariya, David. Cars. Watts, 2000. 
Petty, William. Some Cars Can Swim. Copper Beech, 1999. 


Level Il 


Brazendale, Kevin, ed. The Encyclopedia of Classic Cars. Rev. ed. 
Thunder Bay Pr., 1999. 


974 Automobile, Model 


Georgano, Nick, ed. The Beaulieu Encyclopedia of the Automo- 
bile. 2 vols. Fitzroy Dearborn, 2000. 

Kollins, Michael J. Pioneers of the U.S. Automobile Industry. 
4 vols. Soc. of Automotive Engineers, 2002. 

Lewis Lucinda. Roadside America: The Automobile and the 
American Dream. Abrams, 2000. 


Toboldt, William K., and others, eds. Automotive Encyclopedia. 
Rev. ed. Goodhean-Willcox, 2000. 


Automobile, Model, is a small-scale copy of a car. 
Many people enjoy making and collecting model cars as 
a hobby. Some hobbyists collect many different types of 
model cars. Others collect only cars from a certain peri- 
od or specialize in models of racing cars, antique Cars, 
or cars of historic value. 

Some models are unique, handcrafted cars made of 
clay, wood, plastic, or plaster of Paris. But the most pop- 
ular type of model is made of molded plastic and is sold 
as a kit. Because of modern advances in plastics mold- 
ing, manufacturers can produce kits of very detailed 





Roy Ritola, Inc 
A model automobile may be a copy of a historic, modern, or 
imaginary car. This model is of a Mercedes-Benz 540, a version 
of the German car that was popular during the 1930's. 





- i a 
j , << ~_ —k 
Pav ¢ a” 
‘ | a = te —e. + 
Radlauer Productions 
Radio control model cars are operated by radio signals transmitted to long, thin antennas at- 


lached to the car's hood, /eft. At the start of a road race, right, operalors prepare lo guide the 
with radio signals they send from handheld transmitters. : 


models at a low cost. Many types of vehicles, including 
sports cars, trucks, racing cars, and unusual show 
cars,are available in model kits. The kits include step-by- 
step instructions on how to assemble the models and 
require such tools as pliers, a sharp knife, and a small 
drill. Popular kits include replicas of the stock cars used 
in such races as the Daytona 500. People can also collect 
die-cast metal models or plastic promotional models of 
current cars that can be obtained from car dealers. 

Some hobbyists have favorite models they build as 
stock. A stock car looks like the real car as it was pro- 
duced at the factory. Others prefer to customize their 
cars. This means that they give them special touches or 
features, such as elaborate paint jobs, unusual decora- 
tions, or molded plastic wheels. 

Some people enjoy the excitement of radio control 
(RC) car racing. In the early years of radio control rac- 
ing, the model cars used fuel-powered model airplane 
engines. Now most radio control cars are powered by a 
battery-operated electric motor. The motor drives the 
wheels through a set of gears. A carefully tuned trans- 
mitter controls the car's speed and steering. The trans- 
mitter sends radio signals to a receiver built into the car. 

in racing, each participant has an assigned channel or 
frequency that prevents cars from receiving conflicting 
signals from other competitors transmitters. Most R/C 
car races last 8 or 10 minutes. The car that finishes the 
most laps on a track during the time limit wins the race. 

Some model car hobbyists enter the Pinewood Derby. 
Pinewood Derby cars are wooden blocks that can be 
shaped to look like racing or passenger cars. The races 
are held on downhill ramps. Winners in a series of races 
compete with other winners until the car that finishes 
first in the final race is named champion. Participants in 
the derby can also win prizes for the best-designed car, 
for superior workmanship, or for the most original car. 

Critically reviewed by the Model Car Collectors Association 
Automobile insurance. See Insurance (Automobile 
insurance). 





Radlauer Productions 


ir cars 











Automobile racing 975 


Pah.” peo . 
a” me 7 . 
A — e =" ar o- et .y 


- 


~~ 3 . : 
a a 
ns ry Do to ak’? \ ™ at: 


Focus on Sports 


Stock cars whip around a turn during the annual Daytona 500 race in Daytona Beach, Florida. 
Stock car racing is the most popular kind of automobile racing in the United States. 


Automobile racing 


Automobile racing is a thrilling sport that tests the 
speed and performance of automobiles and the skill 
and daring of drivers. Each year, millions of spectators 
around the world attend a wide variety of automobile 
races. One of the most famous is the Indianapolis 500, 
which attracts hundreds of thousands of people yearly. 

Much of automobile racing's popularity lies in the 
great variety of racing cars and racing events. The vehi- 
cles range in size from small, open karts (formerly 
called go-karts) to large sedans. However, all racing cars 
can be divided into two major groups: (1) production 
cars and (2) cars built specifically for racing. Production 
cars are factory-made passenger cars converted into 
racing cars. Most cars built only for racing are not de- 
signed to carry passengers. Automobile races range 
from } mile (0.4-kilometer) drag races that last only sec- 
onds to rallies that may cover great distances and last 
weeks. 

There are two major types of racing tracks, ova/ 
tracks and road-racing courses. Oval tracks vary from 
less than } mile (0.3 kilometer) to more than 2 5 miles 
(4.2 kilometers) long. They have straightaways and 
banked turns. Most oval tracks have an asphalt surface, 
but some have a dirt surface. 

Road-racing courses resemble country roads. They 


Sylvia Wilkinson, the contributor of this article, is the author of 


numerous books on automobile racing, including the series 
World of Racing and a history of stock car racing, Dirt Tracks to 
Glory. 


have straightaways, hills, and a variety of turns. Many 
turns are described by their names, such as hairpin, 
dogleg, and ess. Some courses include sections of pub- 
lic roads or are combined with oval tracks. Races are 
faster on big oval tracks than on road courses because 
cars can maintain higher speeds on banked turns than 
on sharp, irregularly shaped turns. Road courses in the 
United States range from less than 2 miles (3.2 kilome- 
ters) to almost 5 miles (8 kilometers) long. 

Events called street races have become increasingly 
popular in automobile racing. Such a race is run ona 
temporary course on city streets. The most famous 
street race is the one held annually in Monaco. Street 
races have also been held in such cities as Detroit; Long 
Beach, California; and Toronto. 

Alongside both oval tracks and road-racing courses 
are special areas called pits, where drivers make servic- 
ing stops and refueling stops during a race. In the pits, 
a skilled crew changes tires and may make minor ad- 
justments and repairs. The pit stops often take only sec- 
onds to complete. A delay in the pits can lose the race 
for a driver. Pit crews are part of large professional rac- 
ing teams. Such teams also include car designers, 
builders, mechanics, and timekeepers, as well as the 
car owners and the drivers themselves. 


Safety measures 


Automobile racing is a highly dangerous sport, but 
many steps have been taken over the years to make it as 
safe as possible for both spectators and drivers. Strong 
guardrails and heavy fencing protect spectators from 
cars that have gone out of control. A driver's most im- 
portant piece of safety gear is a racing helmet. Such a 
helmet has a hard outer shell made of fiberglass or 


976 Automobile racing 


Kinds of automobile 
racing courses 
and tracks 


@ start WW Finish © pit 


A typical drag strip 
+++. >» 


Pe Timed acceleration EY Deceleration 


1,320 feet (402.3 m) @ 


Road-racing course 


@ 
® 


Mosport Park 
in Bowmanville, 
Ontario, Canada 


carbon fiber and a foam-cushioned, flame-resistant lin- 
ing. Drivers also wear flame-resistant clothing from head 
to toe. Some race car drivers also wear a special protec- 
tive face mask. 

Lap and shoulder belts are standard safety equipment 
on racing cars. A device known as the HANS (head and 
neck support) reduces the chance of serious injury 
caused by the violent movement of a driver's unre- 
strained head and helmet. Every car also has a built-in 
structure to help protect a driver's upper body if the car 
rolls over. A racing car with an open cockpit—that is, 
without a roof—has a ro// bar, a dome-shaped metal bar 
that arches over the driver's head. A car with a roof has a 
roll cage, a structure of steel tubes that prevents the roof 
of an overturned car from collapsing. 

A racing car carries fuel in a leak-resistant fvel cell 
within a metal or plastic fuel tank. A fuel cell consists of 
a strong, rubberlike bladder usually filled with a spongy 
material or foam that absorbs the fuel and helps keep it 
from spraying in case of a crash. The fuel cell foam also 
prevents fuel from sloshing around in the tank during a 
race, which makes a car harder to control. 

Many race sites have medical facilities to provide 
emergency treatment to injured drivers in the event of a 
crash. In some cases, helicopters are available to rush 
injured drivers to nearby hospitals. 


Sponsorship 


The cost of building or buying a racing car and keep- 
ing it in top condition makes automobile racing one of 
the most expensive sports. For this reason, most profes- 
sional racing teams have sponsors. A sponsor may bea 
wealthy person or a manufacturing company, such as an 
automobile maker or a household products company. 

In return for their financial support, manufacturers ad- 
vertise their products on the racing cars and on the uni- 


Most races are held on oval tracks or road-racing courses. Oval tracks have fast-banked turns. 
Road-racing courses have some sharp turns. On a combined road course and oval track, races may 
be run on the combined course or only the oval track. Drag strips are straight 


WORLD BOOK diagram by Linda Kinnaman 


Oval track 
Indianapolis 
—_ Ei = Motor 
a Speedway 
in Speedway, 
Indiana 


23 miles 
i wp (4.02 km) 


—_—_ 


Combined road course and oval track 


Lowe's Motor 


<—-- - Ca Speedway 
in \\ in Harrisburg, 
Woe dy North Carolina 
“SS ee (er Combined 
\\y ll course 
aN 
i (3.621 km) 
— a Oval track 
13 miles 
a (2.41 km) 


forms of the drivers and crews. Television coverage of 
races also gives sponsors exposure. 


Racing organizations 


The Fédération Internationale de Automobile (FIA) 
regulates organized automobile racing in about 90 
countries throughout the world. The United States has 
five national racing organizations represented in the FIA. 
They are the National Association for Stock Car Auto 
Racing (NASCAR), Professional Sports Car Racing, Inc. 
(SPORTS CAR), the United States Auto Club (USAC), the 
Sports Car Club of America (SCCA), and the National Hot 
Rod Association (NHRA). 

Two other major American racing organizations are 
Championship Auto Racing Teams (CART) and the Indy 
Racing League (IRL). These groups plan and supervise 
certain kinds of races. Each group establishes classes 
(divisions) of races for the type of racing it governs and 
specifies the cars ina class. Canada is represented in the 
FIA by the Canadian Automobile Sports Club (CASC). 


Kinds of automobile racing 


There are five major kinds of automobile racing: (1) 
Formula One racing, (2) sports car racing, (3) Indy car 
racing, (4) stock car racing, and (5) drag racing. 

Formula One racing features the most expensive 
racing cars. Each Formula One car is designed and man- 
ufactured individually. The cars are built according to a 
formula (set of specifications) drawn up by the FIA. The 
formula dictates tire configuration and chassis and en- 
gine limits as well as the car's aerodynamics. Formula 
One cars are also calied Grand Prix(pronounced grahn 
PREE) cars. The French term Grand Prix is the name of 
the race series in which the cars compete. 

Formula One cars are designed on some of the same 
principles as airplanes. Like the fuselage (body) of an air- 


IA 





plane, a Formula One car has a monocoque construc-
tion. In this type of construction, the car's central struc- 
ture is a tube-shaped shell made of aluminum, carbon 
fiber, or other durable, lightweight material. This struc- 
ture, sometimes called the tub, provides the connecting 
point for the engine, suspension system, and other parts 
of the car and bears the mechanical stresses. A Formula 
One car has front and rear wings. The flow of air over 
and under the wings produces a downward force that 
presses the car to the ground. This downforce holds the 
car to the road, which enables it to go faster through 
turns. Formula One cars have only one seat, an open 
cockpit, and open wheels—that is, no fenders. The en- 
gine of a Formula One Car is in the rear. 

Grand Prix races are the most famous international se- 
ries of racing events held on road courses. The series 
consists of about 15 races held in several countries, in- 
cluding Canada, France, and Monaco. The races are 
governed by the FIA representative in each country. In 
the United States, the representative is the Automobile 
Competition Committee for the United States (ACCUS). 
ACCUS, in turn, authorizes the SCCA to organize U.S. 
Grand Prix events. In Canada, the races are governed by 
the CASC. 

Grand Prix races are held on exceptionally challeng- 
ing courses. The races range from about 150 to 200 
miles (240 to 320 kilometers) long. Cars reach speeds of 
more than 200 miles (320 kilometers) per hour on 
straightaways and may go as slow as 30 miles (48 kilo- 
meters) per hour around sharp turns. The first driver to 
finish the required number of laps around the course 
wins. The top six drivers receive points. The driver who 
earns the most points in Grand Prix races in a year wins 
the World Drivers’ Championship. 

Sports car racing consists of events for both produc- 
tion sports cars and specially built sports-racing cars. 
Most sports car races are held on road courses or on 
combined road courses and oval tracks. The SCCA gov- 
erns a major series of races for sports cars—the Trans- 
American (Trans-Am) Championship. Sports cars are 
also driven in endurance races sanctioned by the SCCA 
and SPORTS CAR. 

The Trans-Am Championship consists of a series of 
road races in the United States and Canada. The races 
feature top American sports sedans manufactured by 
Ford Motor Company, General Motors Corporation, and 
Chrysler Corporation, such as the Camaro and the Mus- 
tang. 

A Trans-Am car has the same shape as the original 
production model and retains such features as doors, 
fenders, and windshield. However, cars resemble only 
the shape of a namesake and are built on a special rac- 
ing framework. The Trans-Am series uses a power-to- 
weight formula to help make the races more competi- 
tive. According to the formula, cars with less potential 
horsepower may weigh less than cars with more power- 
ful engines. 

The Trans-Am series involves about 14 to 16 races. 
Each race is approximately 100 miles (160 kilometers) 
long. The top finishers in each race earn points. The dri- 
ver who earns the most points becomes the Trans-Am 
champion. 

Endurance races are among the most popular sports 
car events. Such races last from less than 3 to 24 hours. 








Automobile racing 977 


(FTA tT; e 2 ~ ’ . 


Thomas Zimmermann, FPG 


Formula One racing features cars with one seat, a rear engine, 
and front and rear wings. They have no roof or fenders. The 
wings produce a downforce that presses the cars to the ground. 


The winner is the driver who completes the most laps 
within the specified time or becomes the first to cover 
the required distance. During an endurance race, cars 
make regular pit stops to refuel, change tires, and alter- 
nate drivers. Two or three drivers usually take turns dri- 
ving the car during the race. Famous endurance races 
include the 24-hour events held in Daytona Beach, Flori- 
da, and Le Mans, France. 

Some endurance cars have turbocharged engines. 
Turbocharging increases the power of a small engine by 
using the energy from the engine's exhaust gases to 
spin a windmill-like pump. The pump forces a large vol- 
ume of a fuel and air mixture into the engine’s combus- 
tion chamber, where the mixture is burned. The greater 
the volume of the fuel-air mixture in the combustion 
chamber, the more power is released and the more en- 
ergy is converted into the car's speed. 

Indy car racing. Indy cars, named after the Indi- 
anapolis 500, resemble Formula One cars. They have 
one seat, an open cockpit, open wheels, and a mono- 
coque chassis that serves as a frame structure and body. 
To provide downforce, an Indy car has front and rear 
wings plus two structures called sidepods, one on each 
side of the cockpit Each sidepod has a curved ground- 





P Boisvert, FPG 
Endurance races are among the most popular sports car 
events. They may last from 3 to 24 hours. A famous endurance 
race is the 24-hour event held in Daytona Beach, Florida. 


978 Automobile racing 





~ 
ee 


© Mark Weber 


Sports-car racing is popular in the United States and Canada. 
The cars are built especially for automobile racing. They race on 
road courses or on combined road courses and oval tracks. 


effects panel on its underside. The ground-effects panels 
direct the flow of air moving under the car so that a low- 
pressure area, Or partial vacuum, is created beneath the 

car. The resulting suction helps hold the car to the track. 

Indy cars have turbocharged engines that burn a form 
of alcohol called methanol Methanol provides maxi- 
mum horsepower without overheating the engine. In 
addition, methanol does not ignite as easily as gasoline, 
reducing the risk of fire in case of a crash. Indy car races 
are held on oval asphalt tracks, such as the California 
Speedway in Fontana, California, and on road courses, 
such as Road America in Elkhart Lake, Wisconsin. Races 
range from 150 to 500 miles (240 to 805 kilometers) long. 
Indy cars can average more than 200 miles (320 kilome- 
ters) per hour on oval tracks. 

The Indianapolis 500 is the most famous race for Indy 
cars. It takes place on the 2 $-mile (4.02-kilometer) Indi- 
anapolis Motor Speedway in Speedway, Indiana. There 
are 33 starting positions. Drivers with the highest aver- 
age speeds in four qualifying laps earn the chance to 
race. The first driver to complete 200 laps around the 
track—a distance of 500 miles (805 kilometers)—wins the 
race. All the participants share in the largest purse 
(amount of prize money) in automobile racing, which 
has exceeded $7,500,000. First prize has reached more 
than $1 million. 

Indy car racing is controlled by CART and the IRL The 
Indianapolis 500 is governed by USAC, which is aligned 
with the IRL The IRL runs only on oval tracks, while 
CART sanctions races on oval tracks and on road cours- 
es. 

Stock car racing is the most popular kind of automo- 
bile racing in the United States, especially in the South, 
where the races originated. Stock car racing is the only 
major form of track racing that has always been restrict- 
ed to American-made automobiles. The chief stock car 
races are restricted to large, late-model sedans like 
those car dealers have in stock. The cars are specially 
built for racing, but from a distance they retain the look 
of ordinary passenger cars. They have an engine mount- 
ed in the front, fenders, doors, and a windshield. Drivers 
sit in the usual upright position. Stock cars have steel 
bodies and are therefore mucli heavier than other kinds 
of racing cars. Stock cars that are raced in the Winston 
Cup series have a minimum weight of 3,500 pounds 
(1,420 kilograms), compared with about 1,500 pounds 





Focus on Sports 


During a pit stop at the Indianapolis 500, crew members re- 
fuel a car and change its tires. Pit stops must be made in sec- 
onds. A delay in the pits can lose the race for a driver. 


(680 kilograms) for an Indy car. However, a stock car's 
large, powerful engine enables it to reach speeds of 200 
miles (320 kilometers) per hour. 

Most major stock car races are held on oval asphalt 
tracks. The distance around the tracks ranges from 
about 2 mile (0.8 kilometer) to 2 = miles (4.2 kilometers) 
for superspeedways, such as the one in Talladega, Al- 
abama. A superspeedway has wide, high-banked turns 
that enable cars to make the turns at speeds up to 200 
miles (320 kilometers) per hour. 

Nearly all stock car races are held in the United States. 
NASCAR governs U.S. competition, including the Win- 
ston Cup series. Winston Cup races range from about 
215 to 600 miles (345 to 965 kilometers). Highlights of this 
series of about 30 races include the Daytona 500 in Day- 
tona Beach; the Southern 500 in Darlington, South Car- 
olina; the Winston 500 in Talladega; and the Brickyard 
400 at Indianapolis Motor Speedway. 

Drag racing. A drag race is a high-speed event held 
on a Straight paved track called a drag strip. Drag races 
are { mile (0.4 kilometer) long, and some cars cross the 
finish line in less than five seconds. The fastest cars 
reach speeds of more than 300 miles (480 kilometers) 
per hour. Such cars use a parachute at the rear to slow 
down the car. 

Drag-racing cars range from mass-produced passen- 
ger cars to strange-looking models built for racing only. 
The three types of professional drag-racing cars are (1) 
Pro Stock cars; (2) Top Fuel cars; and (3) Funny Cars. Pro 
Stock cars are especially built for racing but are re- 
quired to resemble production cars. A Pro Stock car 
burns gasoline and must use the car manufacturer's en- 
gine. For example, a Ford body must use a Ford engine. 
Top Fuel cars, also called dragsters, and Funny Cars 
burn a mixture of nitromethane and alcohol. Top Fuel 
cars may be built in any way the designer wishes. All of 
the cars have a rear engine, one seat, and a long, slen- 
der frame. They have large rear tires to apply more than 
6,000 horsepower to the road. The front wheels on Top 
Fuel cars are narrow like bicycle wheels to reduce drag. 
Funny Cars must have a fiberglass copy of a passenger 
car body and meet restrictions on the whee/base (dis- 
tance between front and rear axles). 

Hundreds of dragsters may race ina drag meet The 
Cars race two at a time, accelerating from a standing 
start. The losing car is eliminated from the competition, 




















and the winner advances in the competition to race 
against another car. The elimination continues until only 
two cars are left. The winner of the last round is the 
meet champion. 

The NHRA supervises the major drag races in the 
United States and Canada. Each year, it conducts more 
than 50 championship races in which the drivers earn 
points toward the Winston Drag Racing Championship. 
Important races in the series include the Gator Nation- 
als in Gainesville, Florida; the U.S. Nationals in Indi- 
anapolis; and the Winternationals in Pomona, California. 

Other kinds of racing. Sprint cars are open cockpit 
cars that race mainly on dirt oval tracks. The cars have 
powerful front engines and open wheels. They often 
have large wings mounted on the roll cage for better 
downforce. 

Midgets are smaller than sprint cars. They have high- 
ly modified small engines in the front that produce 
more than 300 horsepower. Midget tracks are usually 
' mile (0.3 kilometer) to 5 mile (0.8 kilometer) in length. 
Most races last 30 laps. 

The quarter midgetis a popular small racing car. It 
has an open cockpit and open wheel with the engine in 
the front. Many successful drivers raced quarter 
midgets while still in elementary school. 

A kart is the smallest racing vehicle. Many race dri- 
vers begin their careers in karting. Children as young as 
8 years old, as well as adults, compete in kart races, 
which are generally held on miniature road racing 
tracks. See Kart racing. 

A Formula Atlantic looks like a small Formula One or 
Indy car. The car has front and rear wings and a Toyota 
engine. Formula Atlantics race on oval asphalt tracks 
and on road-racing courses. They can go as fast as 160 
miles (260 kilometers) per hour. Formula Atlantic racing 
is popular in the United States as a stepping stone for 
young drivers who hope to move up to Formula One or 
Indy car racing. 

Two rugged forms of racing are offroad races and 
rallies. Popular vehicles for off-road races include small 
trucks produced by such manufacturers as Nissan, Toy- 
ota, and Mazda. Most off-road races are long-distance 
events run on rough, desert terrain. 

Most rally cars are production models, some of 
which have four-wheel drive. The chief kinds of rallies 





National Hot Rod Assocation 


In a drag race, Iwo cars at a time Compete against each other, 
acceleraling from a standing start. The fastest drag cars can tray 
el more than 300 miles (483 kilometers! per hour. 


Automobile racing 979 





Finish 


Stop and consult an official 


Caution—No Passing 





Give Way 





WORLD BOOK illustrations 


Automobile-racing flags signal the start and finish of a race. 
During a race, other flags tell drivers to talk to an official, to drive 
with caution and not to pass because of an accident on the 
course, to stop, or to give way to a faster car. 


are road rallies and pro-rallies. Road rallies are held on 
public roads and feature some of the longest automo- 
bile races. Pro-rallies are held on rugged back roads. 
The SCCA governs the major U.S. rallies. 

The world’s fastest cars are jet-powered vehicles. 
These cars do not race against other cars but against the 
clock to break the world land speed record. Most speed 
trials consist of two 1-mile (1.6-kilometer) runs on the 
hard, level surface of the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah. 


History 


The sport of automobile racing began in the 1890's. 
The first races were run On open-road courses, which 
consisted of public roads between towns. Many of the 
courses were hilly, sharply winding dirt roads. Drivers 
often lost control of their cars and crashed, sometimes 
injuring spectators standing along the road. 

Growth of organized automobile racing. The 
world’s first automobile-racing organization, the Auto- 
mobile Club de France, was established in 1895. Later 
that year, it supervised the first actual automobile race— 
a 732-mile (1,178-kilometer) round trip between Paris 
and Bordeaux, France. Twenty-two drivers started in the 
race, but only nine finished. The winners averaged 15 
miles (24 kilometers) per hour. That same year in the 
United States, J. Frank Duryea, a pioneer automobile 
maker, beat five other drivers in a race from downtown 
Chicago to the suburb of Evanston and back. 

The most famous open-road races in the United 


980 Automobile racing 


States, the Vanderbilt Cup races, began on Long Island 
in New York in 1904. But the crowds along the road 
were difficult to control, and so the races were held in 
several other places around the country after 1910. In 
1916, the races were discontinued. In time, more and 
more races in Europe and the United States were run on 
tracks designed specifically for automobile racing. 

The first Grand Prix race took place on a large course 
near Le Mans, France, in 1906. It was supervised by the 
Fédération Internationale de [Automobile (FIA), which 
was established in 1904 to govern international automo- 
bile racing. The Indianapolis Motor Speedway opened 
in 1909, and the first Indianapolis 500 was run in 1911. 
The Grand Prix series began in 1920. The first 24-hour 
endurance race for sports cars was held in Le Mans in 
1923. Organized stock car racing began in 1936 in Day- 
tona Beach. The first Grand National (now Winston Cup) 
race for stock cars took place in Charlotte, North Caro- 
lina, in 1949. In 1950, the FIA established the World Driv- 
ers Championship for Grand Prix drivers. 


Grand Prix world champions 


Development of racing cars. The earliest racing 
cars were simply the first automobiles. These heavy, 
open vehicles had poor brakes and were hard to steer. 
The main way to increase a car's power for racing was to 
make its engine bigger. However, technological ad- 
vances during World War | (1914-1918) enabled car de- 
signers to produce more power from a smaller engine. 
Racing cars thus became trimmer and faster in the 
1920's and 1930's. Competition among carmakers also 
hastened the development of racing Cars. 

The major automobile races were canceled during 
World War II (1939-1945). After the war, racing cars be- 
came faster than ever. The development of the rear- 
engined racing car in the mid-1950's revolutionized the 
sport. It enabled drivers to lean back and so conform to 
a car's streamlined body. Placing the engine behind the 
driver also improved the car's weight distribution and 
provided better traction. By the early 1960's, rear- 
engined vehicles had almost completely replaced front- 
engined cars in racing. In 1962, Colin Chapman, an 





Year Driver Country Year Driver Country Year Driver Country 

1950 Giuseppe Farina Italy 1968 Graham Hill United Kingdom 1986 ~— Alain Prost France 

1951 Juan M. Fangio Argentina 1969 ~—s— Jackie Stewart United Kingdom 1987 Nelson Piquet Brazil 

1952. Alberto Ascari Italy 1970 ~— Jochen Rindt Austria 1988 = Ayrton Senna Brazil 

1953 Alberto Ascari Italy 197] Jackie Stewart United Kingdom 1989 Alain Prost France 

1954 Juan M. Fangio Argentina 1972. Emerson Fittipaldi Brazil 1990 = Ayrton Senna Brazil 

1955 Juan M. Fangio Argentina 1973 —_ Jackie Stewart United Kingdom 1991 Ayrton Senna Brazil 

1956 Juan M. Fangio Argentina 1974 — Emerson Fittipaldi Brazil 1992. ~—- Nigel Mansell United Kingdom 

1957. Juan M. Fangio Argentina 1975 Niki Lauda Austria 1993 Alain Prost France 

1958 Mike Hawthorn United Kingdom 1976 James Hunt United Kingdom 1994 Michael Schumacher Germany 

1959 —— Jack Brabham Australia 1977. ~— Niki Lauda Austria 1995 Michael Schumacher Germany 

1960 = Jack Brabham Australia 1978 Mario Andretti United States 1996 = =Damon Hill United Kingdom 

1961 Phil Hill United States 1979 Jody Scheckter South Africa 1997 Jacques Villeneuve Canada 

1962.) Graham Hill United Kingdom 1980 ~=—s Alan Jones Australia 1998 Mika Hakkinen Finland 

1963 Jim Clark United Kingdom 1981 Nelson Piquet Brazil 1999 Mika Hakkinen Finland 

1964 John Surtees United Kingdom 1982 Keke Rosberg Finland 2000 Michael Schumacher Germany 

1965 Jim Clark United Kingdom 1983 Nelson Piquet Brazil 2001 Michael Schumacher Germany 

1966 = Jack Brabham Australia 1984 Niki Lauda Austria 2002. Michael Schumacher Germany 

1967 Denis Hulme New Zealand 1985 — Alain Prost France 

Indianapolis 500 winners 

Year _ Driver Mph  Kph Year Driver Mph Kph Year Driver Mph Kph 

1911 Ray Harroun 74.59 120.04 1941 Mauri Rose 1973 Gordon Johncock 159.04 = 255.95 

1912, = Joe Dawson 78.72 126.69 and Floyd Davis 115.12 185.27 1974 = Johnny Rutherford 158.59 © 9255.22 

1913 Jules Goux 75.93 122.20 1946 George Robson 11482 184.78 1975. Bobby Unser 149.21 240.13 

1914 Rene Thomas 8247 = 132.72 1947 = Mauri Rose 116.34 = 187.23 1976 — Johnny Rutherford 148.73 =. 239.36 

1915 Ralph De Palma 89.84 144.58 1948 Mauri Rose 119.81 192.82 1977 A J. Foyt 161.33 259.64 

1916 Dario Resta 84.00 135.18 1949 William Holland 2133 195.26 1978 Al Unser, Sr. 161.36 259.68 

1919 Howdy Wilcox 88.05 141.70 1950 Johnny Parsons 124.00 199.56 1979 Rick Mears 158.90 255.72 

1920 Gaston Chevrolet 88.62 142.62 1951 Lee Wallard 126.24 = 203.16 1980 = Johnny Rutherford 142.86 229.87 

1921 Tommy Milton 89.62 144.23 1952 Troy Ruttman 128.92 207.48 1981 Bobby Unser 139.08 223.83 

1922 Jimmy Murphy 94.48 152.05 1953 Bill Vukovich 128.74 207.19 1982 Gordon Johncock 162.03 260.76 

1923 Tommy Milton 90.95 146.37 1954 Bill Vukovich 130.84 210.57 1983 Tom Sneva 162.12 260.90 

1924 LL Corum and 1955 Bob Sweikert 128.21 206.33 1984 Rick Mears 163.61 263.30 
Joe Boyer 98.23 158.09 1956 Pat Flaherty 128.49 206.78 1985 Danny Sullivan 152.98 246.20 

1925 Peter De Paolo 101.13 162.75 1957 Sam Hanks 135.60 218.23 1986 Bobby Rahal 170.72 274.75 

1926 Frank Lockhart 95.90 154.34 1958 Jimmy Bryan 133.79 215.31 1987 Al Unser, Sr. 162.18 261.00 

1927 George Souders 97.55 156.39 1959 Rodger Ward 135.86 218.65 1988 Rick Mears 144.81 233.05 

1928 ~— Louis Meyer 99.48 160.10 1960 Jim Rathmann 138.77 223.03 1989 Emerson Fittipaldi 167.58 269.69 

1929 Ray Keech 9759 157.06 1961 AJ. Foyt 13913 2239] 1990 = Arie Luyendyk 185.98 299.31 

1930 Billy Arnold 100.45 161.66 1962 Rodger Ward 140.29 2259/7 1991 Rick Mears 176.46 283.98 

1931 Louis Schneider 96.63 155.51 1963 Parnelli Jones 143.14 230.36 1992 Al Unser, Jr. 134.48 216.42 

1932s Frederick Frame 104.44 167.60 1964 A. J. Foyt 147.35 = 237.14 1993 Emerson Fittipaldi 157.20 | 25293 

1233 Louis Meyer 104 16 167.63 1965 Jim Clark 150.69 242.51 1994 Al Unser, Jr. 160.87 258.84 

1934 Bill Cummings 104 86 168.76 1966 Graham Hill 144.32 232.26 1995 _—_ Jacques Villeneuve 153.62 247.17 

1935 Kelly Petillo 106.24 170.98 1967) A.J. Foyt 151.21 243.35 1996 Buddy Lazier 14796 23807 

1936 Louis Meyer 109.07 7253 1968 Bobby Unser 152.88 246.04 1997 Arie Luyendyk 145.83 234.64 

1937. = Wilbur Shaw 113.58 182 79 1969 Mario Andretti 156.87 252.46 1998 Eddie Cheever 145.16 233.55 

1938 Floyd Roberts 117.20 188,62 1970 Al Unser, Sr. 155575 250.66 jhept ae Kenny Brack 153.18 246.47 

1939 Wilbur Shaw 115.04 = 185.14 1971 — Al Unser, Sr. 157.74 253.86 2000 Juan Montoya 16750 269.51 

1940 = Wilbur Shaw 114.28 183.92 1972 Mark Donohue 162.96 262.26 2001 Helio Castroneves 153.60 247.14 

2002 Helio Castroneves 166.50 267.95 





NASCAR Winston Cup champions 


Year Driver Year Driver 

1949 Red Byron 1976 Cale Yarborough 
1950 Bill Rextord 1977 Cale Yarborough 
1951 Herb Thomas 1978 Cale Yarborough 
1952 Tim Flock 1979 Richard Petty 
1953 Herb Thomas 1980 Dale Earnhardt 
1954 Lee Petty 1981 Darrell Waltrip 
1955 Tim Flock 1982 Darrell Waltrip 
1956 Buck Baker 1983 Bobby Allison 
1957 Buck Baker 1984 Terry Labonte 
1958 Lee Petty 1985 Darrell Waltrip 
1959 Lee Petty 1986 Dale Earnhardt 
1960 Rex White 1987 Dale Earnhardt 
1961 Ned Jarrett 1988 Bill Elliott 

1962 Joe Weatherly 1989 Rusty Wallace 
1963 Joe Weatherly 1990 Dale Earnhardt 
1964 Richard Petty 1991 Dale Earnhardt 
1965 Ned Jarrett 1992 Alan Kulwicki 
1966 David Pearson 1993 Dale Earnhardt 
1967 Richard Petty 1994 Dale Earnhardt 
1968 David Pearson 1995 Jeff Gordon 

1969 David Pearson 1996 Terry Labonte 
1970 Bobby Isaac 1997 Jeff Gordon 

ibs Fe] Richard Petty 1998 Jeff Gordon 

1972 Richard Petty 1999 Dale Jarrett 

1973 Benny Parsons 2000 Bobby Labonte 
1974 Richard Petty 2001 Jeff Gordon 

975 Richard Petty 


English racing car designer, introduced the monocoque 
construction to Formula One cars. Wings appeared on 
racing cars in the mid-1960's. In 1978, Chapman intro- 
duced the Lotus 79 ground-effects car. 

Automobile racing today. Racing car designers are 
constantly seeking ways to make cars run faster. At the 
same time, some racing organizations are changing 
their rules for safety reasons. In the early 1980's, for ex- 
ample, Grand Prix teams approved rule changes that 
banned ground-effects skirts on Formula One cars. 

Outstanding drivers of the 1990's and early 2000's in- 
cluded Jacques Villeneuve of Canada, Michael Schu- 
macher of Germany, Damon Hill of the United Kingdom, 
Emerson Fittipaldi of Brazil, Arie Luyendyk of the Neth- 
erlands, and U.S. drivers Michael Andretti and Al Unser, 
Jr. (the sons of drivers Mario Andretti and Al Unser, Sr.), 
Dale Earnhardt, Jeff Gordon, Dale Jarrett, Tom Kendall, 
Butch Leitzinger, and Alex Zanardi. 

Several women have also achieved success in auto- 
mobile racing. In 1977, Janet Guthrie of the United States 
became the first woman to race in the Indianapolis 500. 
Guthrie placed ninth in the race in 1978. Shirley Mul- 
downey, an American drag racer, won the Top Fuel 
Winston World Championship three times—in 1977, 
1980, and 1982. 

In the mid-1990's, a split developed between owners 
and executives in Indy car racing. The result of the spiit 
was the formation of the IRL as a rival to CART. 

Sylvia Wilkinson 


Related articles in Wor/d Book include: 
Andretti, Mario 
Breedlove, Craig 
Chevrolet, Louis 
Earnhardt, Dale 
Foyt, A. J. 
Gordon, Jeff 
Hill, Graham 


Autry,Gene 98] 


Hot rod 

Indiana (pictures) 
Kart racing 

Le Mans 

Oldfield, Barney 
Petty, Richard 
Rickenbacker, Eddie 
Soap Box Derby 
Sports car 

Unser, Al, Sr. 


Outline 


!. Safety measures 
tt. Sponsorship 
ll. Racing organizations 
IV. Kinds of automobile racing 
A. Formula One racing D. Stock car racing 
B. Sports car racing E. Drag racing 
C. Indy car racing F. Other kinds of racing 
V. History 


Questions 


How is the winner of a drag meet determined? 

How does a fve/ ce// help keep fuel from spraying in a crash? 

What is the power-to-weight formula? 

When and where was the first actual automobile race held? 

How long do endurance races last? 

What purpose does a ro// bar or roll cage serve? 

How do wings enable racing cars to go faster through turns? 

What major form of track racing has always been restricted to 
American-made automobiles? 


Additional resources 


Hemphill, Paul. Wheels: A Season on NASCAR's Winston Cup 
Circuit Simon & Schuster, 1997. 

Katz, Joseph. Race Car Aerodynamics. Robert Bentley, 1995. 

Kirkwood, Jon. Car Racing. Millbrook, 1997. Younger readers. 

Rendall, Ivan. The Power and the Glory. A Century of Motor Rac- 
ing. Parkwest Pubns., 1993. 

Rubel, David. How to Drive an Indy Race Car. John Muir, 1992. 
Younger readers. 

Savage, Jeff. Drag Racing. Crestwood Hse., 1996. Younger 
readers. 


Automobile Workers, United. See United Auto- 
mobile Workers. 

Autopsy, AVV tahp see, is an external and internal ex- 
amination of the dead. It is also called necropsyand post 
mortem examination. The law requires that every cause 
of death be verified by a physician or by a coroner's jury. 
If the physician knows that death is from natural causes, 
he or she signs the death certificate and no autopsy 
need be performed. If uncertain of the conditions lead- 
ing to the cause, however, the physician may ask for an 
autopsy for scientific reasons. A medical examiner or 
coroner may legally insist on an autopsy when death re- 
sults from suicide, homicide, or unknown causes. See 
also Medical examiner. John |. Thornton 

Autry, Gene (1907-1998), became famous for his roles 
as a Singing cowboy in Western films from the 1930's 
through the early 1950's. He later became a successful 
business executive. 

Orvon Gene Autry was born in Tioga, Texas, near Pilot 
Point He began recording cowboy songs in 1929 and 
made his first hit record, “That Silver-Haired Daddy of 
Mine, in 1931. Autry wrote over 250 songs, including 
such hits as “Tears on My Pillow (1941) and “Here Comes 
Santa Claus’ (1947). He also made popular recordings of 
“Back in the Saddle Again’ (1939), “Rudolph the Red- 
Nosed Reindeer’ (1949), “Frosty the Snowmian’ (1950), 
and “Peter Cottontail” (1950). 


982 Autumn 


In 1934, Autry moved to Hollywood, Calif., to appear 
in motion pictures, and he made his first film that same 
year. He acted in more than 100 Western movies and 
also continued to perform as a singer. During the 1950s, 
Autry began a successful business career. In 1960, he 
became an owner of the Los Angeles (now California) 
Angels baseball team, which played its first season in 
1961. 
Autumn is the season between summer and winter. 
The Northern Hemisphere, the northern half of the 
earth, has autumn weather during late September, Octo- 
ber, and November. Autumn weather does not last so 
long in the polar region, where extremely cold winter 
weather begins earlier. In tropical regions, seasonal 
changes are not great. The Southern Hemisphere has 
autumn from March until early June. For the dates of the 
first day of autumn and information about the position 
of the earth and sun during autumn, see Season. 

Many people call this season fa// because it is the pe- 
riod of falling leaves. Autumn is also harvest time for 
many crops. In North America, early autumn days are 
generally warm and nights are cool. As winter ap- 
proaches, the air becomes chillier and frost often occurs 
at night. In much of North America, the end of autumn is 
marked by the freezing of lakes and streams, southern 
migration of birds, and prewinter snowstorms. 

Autumn—especially September—is the season when 
most hurricanes occur. Hurricanes cause great damage 
along the coasts of the Gulf of Mexico and the western 
North Atlantic Ocean. John E. Kutzbach 

See also September; October; November; Decem- 
ber; Equinox; Indian summer. 

Autumnal equinox. See Equinox. 

Auxin, AWK sihn, is the name of a group of hormones 
that help control plant growth. Plant embryos, young 
leaves, and the tips of stems and roots produce auxins 
that influence the growth of different parts of plants. 
Auxins play an important role in plant tropisms (bending 
movements). For example, the stems or leaves of many 
plants bend toward light. Such movement, called posi- 
tive phototropism, occurs because auxins accumulate 
on the dark side of the stem or leaf stalk, causing the 
cells on that side to lengthen. This elongation gradually 
bends the stem or leaf toward the light. 

It is almost impossible to extract large amounts of 
auxins from plants. Artificially produced auxins are 
widely used in weedkillers. They are also used to pro- 
mote root formation on plant cuttings, to stimulate the 
growth of seedless fruits, and to prevent sprouting in 
stored potatoes and onions. Joseph E. Armstrong 

See also Hormone (Plant hormones); Tropism. 

Ava. See Kava. 

Avalanche is a mass of snow that slides down a 
mountain slope. Most avalanches result from weather 
conditions that cause snow on a mountain slope to be- 
come unstable. Such disturbances as heavy winds, earth 
tremors, and explosions can send the snow sliding 
down the mountain. Skiers have started many ava- 
lanches. 

There are three chief kinds of avalanches. A dry snow 
avalanche consists of powdery snow and air that may 
move faster than 100 miles (160 kilometers) per hour. A 
wet snow avalanche is a mass of wet, dense snow that 
typically moves slower than a dry snow avalanche. Ina 


Lee Rector 


slab avalanche, a solid portion of snow breaks loose as a 
slab and splits into pieces as it slides. 

Experts can often recognize the conditions that lead 
to avalanches by studying the terrain, snow, and 
weather in an area. To help control avalanches, they use 
explosives to reduce snow build-up. They also replant 
trees on slopes, and erect barriers. H. J. McPherson 
Avant-garde, 4H vahn GAHRD, is a term commonly 
used to describe people in any field who break with tra- 
dition and conventional standards in their work. The 
term is especially used to describe movements in the 
arts. Avant-garde artists emphasize experimental and 
original methods and oppose accepted ways of doing 
things. They sometimes attack past and present attitudes 
about art in the interest of creating a better future. 

Avant-garde was originally a French military term, 
meaning an advance guard that preceded the main body 
of troops. The term was first used in its current meaning 
by the French socialist leader Henri de Saint-Simon in 
1825. During the 1800's, most avant-garde art was used 
to promote social reform. But in the !ate 1800's, a period 
of relative political stability, a doctrine of “art for art's 
sake” developed. It emphasized the form of art itself, re- 
gardless of its effect on society. 

Events of World War I (1914-1918) led to the reappear- 
ance of reform-based avant-garde art. These works criti- 
cized European culture and contributed to political and 
social reform movements after the war. But some artists 
in the early 1900's wanted to restore to art its primary 
creative function. For example, German artist Kurt Sch- 
witters created collages from fragments of newsprint 
and discarded items, including stamps, wood, buttons, 
and cloth. He also wanted to weaken the authority of 
conventional art forms. Avant-garde ideals became es- 
pecially important in art of the mid-1900's when artists 
tended to combine distinct art forms, such as architec- 
ture, motion pictures, music, painting, sculpture, and 
theater. Stephen C. Foster 

See also Cage, John; Dadaism; Duchamp, Marcel; 
Surrealism. 

Average is a number that is typical of a group of num- 
bers. People usually think of an average as a mean. A 
mean is the sum of a group of numbers divided by the 
number of numbers. For example, the average, or mean, 
of 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 is 6, or 30 divided by 5. Other numbers 
are also typical of a group of numbers. A median is the 
middle number of a series of numbers arranged in nu- 
merical order, if there is an odd number of numbers. If 
the number of numbers is even, the median is the mean 
of the middle two numbers. A made is the number that 
occurs most often in a group. See also Mean; Median; 
Mode; Statistics (Probability). 

Averroés, uh VEHR oh eez (1126-1198), was an Arabian 
philosopher. He was also known as Ibn Roshd (pro- 
nounced ‘hb uhn ROOSHN). Averroés was a devoted 
student of the writings of the Greek philosopher Aris- 
totle. His interpretations of Aristotle were influential for 
many years. But Averroés’ insistence on the eternity of 
matter and his denial of personal immortality were con- 
demned by church authorities in the West. Because they 
wished to reconcile Aristotle's philosophy with Christian 
theology, the authorities argued that on these points 
Averroés was mistaken about Aristotle's position. 
Averroés was born in Cordoba, Spain. S. Marc Cohen 








ih 





ASS 


Aviation 983 





Modern airplane factories are a vital part of the aviation industry, which also includes airline and 
airport operations. This Boeing Company plant near Everett, Washington, produces Boeing 747, 
767, and 777 jumbo jets, some of which are lined up awaiting delivery to major passenger airlines. 


Aviation 


Aviation is a term that includes all the activities in- 
volved in building and flying aircraft, especially air- 
planes. The first successful airplane flights did not take 
place until 1903. Yet today, airplanes affect the lives of 
people almost everywhere. Giant airliners carry passen- 
gers and cargo between the world’s major cities ina 
matter of hours. Planes and helicopters rush medicine 
and other supplies to the farthest islands and deepest 
jungles. Farmers use airplanes to seed fields, count live- 
stock, and spray crops. Aviation has also changed the 
way nations make war. Modern warfare depends on the 
instant striking power of jet fighters and bombers and 
the rapid supply capabilities of jet transports. Helicop- 





Roger E. Bilstein, the contributor of this article, is Professor of 
History at the University of Houston-Clear Lake, and the author ot 
several books on aviation, including Flight in America: From the 
Wrights to the Astronauts. 


ters and other special aircraft are also important in mili- 
tary aviation. 

Hundreds of thousands of airplanes are used 
throughout the world. They range from small planes 
with room for only a pilot to enormous jumbo jets, 
which can carry hundreds of passengers. To produce 
and operate all these airplanes requires the skills of mil- 
lions of workers in many countries—from the engineers 
who design the planes to the mechanics and pilots who 
service and fly them. Many government agencies also 
work to make flying safer and more dependable. All 
these activities together make up the aviation industry. 
The industry's two major activities are (1) the manufac- 
ture of aircraft and aircraft components, such as en- 
gines, and (2) the operation of airlines. The manufacture 
of aircraft, together with the manufacture of spacecraft, 
missiles, and related electronic equipment, is often 
called the aerospace industry. 

The aviation industry began on Dec. 17, 1903, near Kit- 


984 Aviation 


ty Hawk, North Carolina. That day, Orville and Wilbur 
Wright—two brothers who operated a bicycle- 
manufacturing shop in Dayton, Ohio— made the world's 
first successful piloted airplane flights. They had built 
their airplane after studying the writings of other avia- 
tion pioneers and after experimenting with gliders, 
kites, and wind tunnels. 

Within a few years, several small factories in Europe 
and the United States were producing airplanes. Dare- 
devil fliers bought many of these planes and used them 
to put on thrilling air shows. The governments of vari- 
ous countries also began to buy airplanes to build small 
air forces. The daring feats of the early fliers and the de- 
velopment of military airplanes greatly encouraged the 
growth of the aviation industry. 

By the late 1930's, airplanes had become an important 
means of transportation. Then, in the 1950's, engineers 
developed jet airliners—and air travel grew at an even 
faster rate. Jn 1960, the world’s airlines carried about 100 
million passengers. By the early 2000's, they carried 
about 1 5 billion people annually. 

Almost from the beginning of the aviation industry, 
the governments of most nations have been deeply in- 
volved in its activities. Airplanes have such great impor- 
tance as weapons of war that many countries have en- 
couraged and financed improvements in airplane 
design for military reasons. Most nations have also sup- 
ported the development of civi/ aviation (the operation 
of nonmilitary aircraft). 

Although aviation includes all types of heavier-than-air 
craft, this article deals chiefly with airplanes. To learn 
about the two other main types of heavier-than-air craft, 
see Glider and Helicopter. The Airplane article traces 
the history of human efforts to fly and the development 
of the airplane. It also describes how a plane flies, how 
pilots navigate, and how planes are built. For a discus- 
sion of space flight, see Space exploration. 


The aviation industry 


The aviation industry can be divided into five branch- 
es: (1) aircraft manufacturing, (2) general aviation activi- 
ties, (3) airline operations, (4) airport operations, and (5) 
aviation support industries. 

Aircraft manufacturing. Aircraft companies pro- 
duce chiefly airplanes, but many also manufacture glid- 
ers, helicopters, and parts for spacecraft. Some parts 
factories and assembly plants are owned by cong/omer- 
ates, enormous corporations that control a number of 
firms in largely unrelated fields. Most of the aircraft 
used around the world are manufactured in the United 
States. 

The Russian aerospace industry produces aircraft and 
equipment for use throughout the former Eastern bloc— 
that is, the former Soviet Union and its Eastern European 
allies. Russia also exports military aircraft to many other 
countries. British Aerospace is the United Kingdom's 
major manufacturer of aircratt. Europe's other leading 
aircraft manufacturing countries are France, Germany, 
Italy, and Spain. Other countries with important aero- 
space industries include Brazil, Canada, China, India, Is 
rael, Japan, and South Africa. Many other nations have 
facilities for aircraft repair and maintenance. 

Manufacturers produce three main types of airplanes. 
(1) general aviation planes, (2) commereial transport 


planes, and (3) military planes. General aviation activities 
range from business and personal flying to rescue serv- 
ices. Most general aviation planes are small propeller 
driven airplanes with one or two engines. Many busi- 
nesses use jets. Commercial transport planes are large 
airplanes used to carry both passengers and cargo or 
cargo only. Airlines operate these planes. The smallest 
commercial transports carry from 20 to 100 passengers, 
and the largest, called junzbo jets or airbuses, carry sev- 
eral hundred. Most commercial transports are jet planes 
with two, three, or four engines. Military planes include 
bombers, fighters, and military transports owned by the 
governments of various countries and operated by their 
armed forces. See Airplane (Types of airplanes). 

In some countries, the government wholly or partly 
owns some or all aircraft companies. All aircraft compa- 
nies in the United States and some other countries are 
privately owned. But many depend heavily on govern- 
ment orders for military planes, engines, missiles, or 
spacecraft. Many U.S. manufacturers—such as the Boe- 
ing Company, General Electric Company, and the Lock- 
heed Martin, Northrop Grumman, and United Technolo- 
gies corporations—receive large government contracts. 

A modern jet airliner costs millions of dollars to build. 
A small company eannot afford to build such a plane, 
and even large companies often have trouble acquiring 
the necessary funds. Many companies have merged 
(combined) to cut costs. These mergers have produced 
some of the world’s largest aerospace companies, in- 
cluding Boeing, British Aerospace, and the European 
Aeronautic Defence and Space Company. 

A number of European nations have cooperated in 
special aircraft-manufacturing projects. For example, the 
British and French governments formed a partnership 
called a consortium to share the cost of building a su- 
personic transport (SST), the Concorde. An SST was de- 
signed to carry passengers at speeds faster than that of 
sound (see Airplane [Supersonic airplanes)). 

General aviation activities include pleasure flying, 
land surveying, giving flying instructions, inspecting 
telephone lines, scattering seed, and spraying crops. 
Another important general aviation activity is using light 
planes to provide transportation. Most air tax! services, 
also called commuter airlines, use compact, twin-engine 
planes to carry passengers -usually fewer than 20—on 
short flights. They serve small communities and provide 
connecting flights to large airports. Some air taxi servic- 
es have planes large enough to carry more than 20 pas- 
sengers. Some large airlines also provide air taxi service. 

Many businesses have their own aircraft that are used 
to fly officials and salespeople to out-of-town assign- 
ments. General aviation planes also carry cargo and pas- 
sengers in areas of the world that do not have highways 
or railroads. 

In Australia, a specialized aviation service called the 
Royal Flying Doctor Service supplies medical treatment 
to people living in remote areas. People who are ill or 
require medical advice use radio to contact a doctor at 
the nearest base. The doctor may advise the patient by 
radio or may arrange for a light plaiie to pick up the pa- 
tient. Air ambulances in other parts of the world provide 
specially equipped airplanes to fly patients to hospitals. 

Airline operations. Almost every couniry has at least 
one airline. In some countries, the governnient owns 














eae _ 

d. from Marilyn Gartman Agency 
Airline operations involve carrying cargo as well as passen- 
gers. Most commercial transport planes carry both passengers 
and cargo. Other transports haul! cargo only. 


Cameramann International, Lt 


one or more airlines. Air France, for example, is mostly 
state-owned. During the 1990's, many governments en- 
couraged privatization of airlines to curb costs and in- 
crease efficiency. 

There are two main types of airline service—sched- 
uled flights and nonscheduled flights. Scheduled flights 
are made over certain routes according to a timetable. 
Nonscheduled flights are mainly charter flights for cus- 
tomers who want to hire a plane to fly to a particular 
place at a particular time. 

In the United States, airlines must receive permission 
from the federal government to use commercial trans- 
port planes for scheduled flights. The airlines that the 
government approves for such flights are called certifi- 
cated airlines. The term scheduled airlines is often used 
in the United States for the certificated airlines, though 
these lines may also make some nonscheduled flights. 
To receive government certification, an airline's planes 
and pilots must meet government standards. 

A majority of airlines carry both passengers and car- 
go. Airliners usually carry a certain amount of freight on 
passenger flights. In addition, a large number of passen- 














| 
| 





© Hem Steenmans. Wheeler Pictures 


General aviation activities include the operation of air taxi 
services, which take small numbers of passengers on shorn 
flights. This plane flies sightseers over the Grand Canyon. 


Aviation 985 





© Lou Jones 


Airport operations focus on providing runways and navigation 
aids as well as facilities to load, refuel, and repair planes. This 
photo is an aerial view of Boston’s Logan Airport 


ger airlines operate transport planes that carry only car- 
go. A few certificated airlines in the United States spe- 
cialize in carrying cargo and do not make any passenger 
flights. 

Sometimes, airlines have financial problems due to 
low passenger traffic, debts from purchasing new air- 
craft, and increasing costs, such as the rising cost of jet 
fuel. In the 1970's, many airlines cut their airfares and de- 
veloped various bargain ticket plans to attract passen- 
gers. These steps led to huge increases in passenger 
traffic. High operating costs led many small airlines to 
merge with larger airlines. By the late 1990's, many air- 
lines had also formed alliances for ticketing and for 
scheduling certain routes. 

In most European countries, the government has 
combined two or more airlines to form a large national 
airline. Various European airlines have also formed con- 
sortiums to help cut expenses. The members of an air- 
line Consortium cooperate in such matters as purchas- 
ing aircraft and training pilots. 

Airport operations. Airports provide the fuel and 
the runways, navigation aids, and other ground facilities 
needed for air travel. Generally, only a few of a country’s 
airports have the facilities to handle large passenger 
planes. Additional small airfields serve light planes or 
specialized aircraft, such as helicopters or seaplanes. 
Cities or public corporations own most large airports. 
Most small airports are private airfields owned by 
organizations or individuals. See Airport. 

Aviation support industries provide a wide variety 
of supplies and services to airlines, airports, pilots, and 
passengers. Some companies furnish repair services or 
fuel for airplanes. Freight forwarders make arrange- 
ments for shipping air cargo. Various food services pre- 
pare meals to be served on passenger flights. Some in- 
surance brokers specialize in flight insurance, and some 
lawyers specialize in air law. Private weather bureaus 
supply pilots with specialized information not provided 
by government weather services. 


Aviation agencies and organizations 


Aviation agencies. A majority of countries have gov- 
ernment agencies that enforce air satety regulations and 
handle related economic matters. In the United States, 
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) establishes 


986 Aviation 


the rules that all planes must follow when flying in the 
United States. One of the agency's most important jobs 
is to operate a network of a/r route traffic control centers 
throughout the United States and its territories. Each 
control center uses radar and radio communications to 
help planes in its vicinity follow the ainwvays, also called 
air routes, to which they are assigned (see Airplane [Air 
navigation)). The FAA also issues licenses to pilots. In ad- 
dition, every newly manufactured airplane must be is- 


Aircraft nationality marks 


Most civil aircraft carry one or two letters or a number and a 
letter to identify their nationality. This nationality mark is painted 
on both sides of the fuselage or tail. It also is displayed on the 
underside of the wing. Numbers or letters following the nation- 
ality mark ona plane are the registration mark issued to that par- 
ticular plane in its own country. Each country that belongs to the 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAQ) reports its na- 
tionality mark to the organization. This table lists the nationality 
marks of selected ICAO members. 


Atghanistane . feo ee OY Ace Wal eras secre eee 9K 
Algeria. .5-. 0c. : amy. eae ae WLAividieeeere.... dus . dane YL 
ATGentO de. a. LO, PV Bilibeniaes ete eee EL 
AIIEN Ide reeenee. eee EK Lithuania .................. LY 
Austiall ase ere. Vie uxG CIO GUnG aa eee LX 
AUSt@la> . 8... . pee OE, “iMialaysia.. 2222 SM 
Azerpaljan 2. . qe: . fee 4K Mexico .......... XA, XB, XC 
Bangladesh... 0m -.... SZ MAOLOC EO ene eee CN 
BelQiligae..<-.< 2... deeacse cs OOs Myanmane.... 2.2... XY, XZ 
Bolivia... "... oot CR Nepaluct-cr-centeeres. ee IN 
Brazile... PPIPR, Pl, PU WNetherlands....---.+..2 2 PH 
BUIGdBId = nonce eee ee LZ New Zealand ....ZK,ZL, ZM 
Cambodias .4. Seas. =e AU Nicaraguaeere eee a YN 
Cameloom cxarcnesoeneer TT) Nigegiavege ee SN 
Canada: .....2...-gmee-me C Cie INORVay ie eee LN 
lB tenn su ner maewn hee Cpa Stan.. Jee ee AP 
CdR oo retinas cee Beebdandind . Secene ene. HP 
Colombia®™. =... ...-====e- FRO fh alaGliay” an. eee Ya ig 
Congo (Kinshasa) ......... SOME Peni ee OB 
CostarKica ........:.:m.--8 ois Woeilippines oe RP 
COleidIVOiiences ses. U0 Flandre eee SP 
CUDGises nee er ee CUmggmRortugaliqe eee CR, CS 
C7ech Republic a... ane OK ik aiitariiale. . eee eee YR 
Denmark .....<. ee. bee COVE URUSSI ate. Ween cern RA 
ECUAU ON ca. gece cence ae HC Saudi Arabia .............. HZ 
Egypt ..... 3. Bae = SUL) LOINGga pare mcm ena SV 
Estoniageg. ... ....eee - Se ES@= Slovakia OM 
Ethiopia. 2260.05. mex sae = South Airi¢a’. 3. ..- ZS, ZT, ZU 
EULA cee toe ca ORES Saini eee EG 
ERAWGE ay son ge cree © Pesraldnkaey ee 4R 
Germany .....%5. 0. Se me Oe SUCRin ee See ee ST 
GHopd .......:.::.e 8 SG. Sweden)... ..2.2.2...5552> SE 
Greete" . . ome. gum. . SX Switzerland.........: HB plus 
Gimemialay........ an! TG national emblem 
OnUUld Sees. een. . oe GS OVE ree nee YK 
een a HA Tanzania ................. JH 
[celandiee ee eonlacs ae hatland ee HS 
[a (olf: Rates praetor meee - Ewa OUUNISI dee eie ye a ee ee TS 
Indonesia............. ae PK ee TRG ce ene ee ee TC 
Na eeyeevate, aeincerery area ase BE Wganddaaeennnen ae OX 
WAG cease cece ester YN, VKGAING oo yee UR 
lreland: <220.04..02- El,EJ) United Arab Emirates A6 
Wrath ea eyecare ac 4X United Kingdom............ G 
Italy .. United States. N 
Japan JAv Weuguay .. Ml. ....:... CX 
JOPGa igs: 2... JY Uzbekistan ................ UK 
Kazakinstanl .. Mme... . UN Venezuela ................ YV 
Kerivid easteeee ee ane me | ViGthaM > Je ee RV 
eek iste (ee Pe EMEN |. :-eeeg-...-- Oo 
Koreatsoutmic.. .. seaneet We Zimbabwe _™ ..'.s....0.. Z 


sued an FAA certificate of airworthiness before it may 
be flown. This certificate states that the airplane has 
been inspected and is in good flying condition. See Fed- 
eral Aviation Administration. 

Almost every U.S. state has an agency to regulate and 
improve aviation within its borders. These agencies han- 
dle airport construction, registration of airplanes and pi- 
lots, and similar matters. Many local governments also 
have aviation agencies. These agencies deal mainly with 
the operation and maintenance of local airports. 

In Canada, the federal government regulates civil avia- 
tion. The director of civil aviation, under the supervision 
of the Department of Transport, deals mainly with such 
matters as registration of aircraft, licensing of pilots, and 
establishment of air navigation facilities. The Canadian 
Transport Commission handles the economic regulation 
of Canadian airlines. 

Similar regulatory activities are carried out by national 
agencies in other countries. Such agencies include the 
United Kingdom’s Civil Aviation Authority (CAA). These 
agencies are involved in such issues as air-traffic control 
and registration of airplanes and pilots. 

The International Civil] Aviation Organization is an 
agency of the United Nations (UN). Almost every country 
belongs to the ICAO. The organization sets up common 
air safety standards among member countries and tries 
to increase cooperation in other matters concerning in- 
ternational aviation. See International Civil Aviation Or- 
ganization. 

Other aviation organizations include various 
groups formed to further their own special interests. 
The groups include airline operators, airplane manufac- 
turers, and pilots. For example, U.S. and Canadian airline 
operators belong to the Air Transport Association of 
America. Operators of international airlines in countries 
throughout the world belong to the International Air 
Transport Association. See Air Transport Association of 
America; International Air Transport Association. 


History of the aviation industry 


Beginnings. The successful piloted flights of a pow- 
ered airplane by Orville and Wilbur Wright in 1903 
marked the beginning of the practical aviation industry. 
After these flights, the Wright brothers tried to sell the 
design for their plane to the U.S. and various European 
governments. But they had never made an official public 
flight, and government leaders were not convinced that 
their plane could fly. 

Meanwhile, a few European inventors had also built 
airplanes. In the 1890's, the German glider pioneer Otto 
Lilienthal had manufactured a limited production series 
of special gliders for experimental use. In 1905, two 
French fliers, the brothers Charles and Gabriel Voisin, 
started the world’s first airplane-manufacturing compa- 
ny. They began making a few made-to-order planes at a 
small factory outside Paris. Within a few years, other Eu- 
ropean fliers also started manufacturing companies. 
They included Louis Blériot and the brothers Henri and 
Maurice Farman in France; and Frederick Handley Page, 
A. V. Roe, and T. O. M. Sopwith in the United Kingdom. 

In 1907, Glenn H. Curtiss, an American flier and air- 
plane designer, started the first airplane company in the 
United States, in Hammondsport, New York. Curtiss sold 
his first plane to the newly organized Aeronautic Society 


I 


le 


at 





of New York for $5,000. This was the first sale of a com- 
mercial airplane in the United States. 

The Wright brothers had made their first official pub- 
lic flight in 1908 and amazed the world with their air- 
plane’s flying ability. That same year, the U.S. Army Sig- 
nal Corps ordered a specially built Wright plane, for 
which the government paid $30,000. This was the 
world's first military plane. In November 1909, a group 
of wealthy Americans lent the Wright brothers money to 
start a manufacturing firm, the Wright Company. The 
company had its factory in Dayton, Ohio, and its head- 
quarters in New York City. In the autumn of 1909, a 
young automobile mechanic and salesman named 
Glenn L Martin began to manufacture airplanes in an 
abandoned church in Santa Ana, California. Within a few 
years, his company became a leading U.S. producer of 
military planes. 

The world’s first great aviation meeting was held in 
1909 near Reims, France. Manufacturers displayed 38 
airplanes. Several of the planes on show were offered 
for sale to the public—a sign of growing confidence in 
the airplane. 

The first flying regulations. In 1905, a group of 
French flying enthusiasts established the Fédération 
Aéronautique Internationale (FAI) in Paris. One of the 
FAI’s main duties was to regulate the sport of flying. It 
also ruled on world speed, altitude, and other flying 
records. The FAI still has this function. The Aero Club of 
America was also founded in 1905. It regulated flying in 
the United States, sponsored exhibitions and races, and 
issued licenses to U.S. pilots. 

In 1908, Kissimmee, Florida, passed the world’s first 
law regulating airplanes. The law required the registra- 
tion of local aircraft and regulated their speed and alti- 
tude when flying over the town. In 1911, Connecticut 
passed the first state law regulating aviation. The law re- 
quired anyone who owned or operated an airplane 
within the state to register the plane and obtain a pilot's 
license. 

World War 1 (1914-1918). When World War | began 
in Europe, even the largest airplane factories turned out 





National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution 


Aviation 987 


only a few planes a year. But the factories quickly in- 
creased their production to meet the demands of the 
warring nations. Airplane builders used newly designed 
engines to put fighters and bombers into the skies. Such 
well-known manufacturers as Farman, Handley Page, 
and Voisin built many of these planes. Other European 
manufacturers also became famous for their warplanes. 
They included Morane-Saulnier and Nieuport in France; 
Fokker and Junkers in Germany; and Bristol, de Havil- 
land, Hawker, Short, and Vickers in the United Kingdom. 
By the end of the war, designers had created such air- 
craft as the British Vickers Vimy bomber and the Ameri- 
can Curtiss NC-4, both of which flew across the Atlantic 
Ocean in 1919. 

The United States entered the war in 1917 with about 
110 military planes. The government immediately set a 
production goal of 29,000 airplanes a year. But the air- 
plane companies had little or no experience with mass- 
production methods. The nation’s automobile manufac- 
turers, on the other hand, had developed assembly lines 
before the war and used them to turn out thousands of 
cars yearly. Various automakers helped set up assembly 
lines in the airplane factories. 

The United States had no designs of its own for 
bombers or fighters. But American engineers designed 
a powertul airplane engine called the Liberty. Several 
U.S. companies began to mass-produce the United King- 
dom’s de Havilland D.H. 4 bombers and equip them with 
Liberty engines. The principal producer was the Dayton 
Wright Aeroplane Company, which was organized in 
1917. Wilbur Wright had died of typhoid fever in 1912, 
and Orville sold his interest in the Wright Company to a 
group of investors in 1915. Although Orville had no fi- 
nancial interest in the Dayton Wright Company, he al- 
lowed the firm to use the Wright name in its title. The 
companies founded by Curtiss and Martin also became 
major producers of military planes during the war. Al- 
though U.S. factories did not meet their production goal 
of 29,000 planes a year, they had built almost 15,000 mili- 
tary planes by the end of the war. 

In 1916, two airplane companies were established on 





Early airplane factories, 
such as this French plant of 
1908, produced only a few 
planes at a time—and almost 
entirely by hand. Mass pro- 
duction began with the manu- 
facture of warplanes during 
World War I (1914-1918). Be- 
fore the war, airplanes were 
used mainly for sport. 


988 Aviation 








Natronal Arr and Space Museum, Smithsonan Insttutron 


Airplanes raced against automobiles in the early days of avia- 
tion. This 1914 race at Columbus, Ohio, was between the famous 
auto racer Barney Oldfield and the daredevil pilot Lincoln 
Beachey. The finish was so close that no one knows who won. 


the West Coast of the United States. They were the Boe- 
ing Company, which was founded in Seattle by William 
E. Boeing, and the Lockheed Corporation (now Lock- 
heed Martin Corporation), which was founded in Santa 
Barbara, California, by the brothers Allan and Malcolm 
Loughead. The Boeing and Lockheed companies were 
too small to make many planes during the war. But in 
time, they became two of the nation’s leading aircraft 
manufacturers. 

The first airlines. The Wright brothers and other 
early fliers occasionally took passengers for short plane 
rides. In 1910, a Wright airplane flew 70 pounds (32 kilo- 
grams) of silk from Dayton to Columbus, Ohio— perhaps 
the first air freight shipment in history. The world's first 
regular airplane passenger service began in the United 
States in 1914, but it lasted only a few months. A pilot 
named Tony Jannus used a small seaplane to fly passen- 
gers across Tampa Bay, between St Petersburg and 
Tampa, Florida. On May 15, 1918, the U.S. government 
started the world’s first permanent airmail service. Army 
pilots flew the mail between New York City, Philadel- 
phia, and Washington, D.C. 

After World War |, thousands of military planes be- 
came available for civilian use. In 1919, bombers were 
used to start nearly 20 small passenger airlines in 
France, Germany, the United Kingdom and several 
other European countries. One of these airlines, found- 
ed by Henri and Maurice Farman, began the world’s 
first regular international airline service. The company 
used old Farman bombers to make weekly passenger 
flights between Paris and Brussels, Belgium. 

By 1924, passenger airlines were operating in 17 Euro- 
pean countries as well as in Africa, Australia, and South 
America. Several of these airlines are still active. They in- 
clude Royal Dutch Airlines (KLM) of the Netherlands, 
Germany's Lufthansa, and Australia s Queensland and 
Northern Territory Aerial Services (QANTAS). Beginning 
in the mid-1920's, the governments of many countries 


started to combine two or more private airlines to form 
a large national airline. In 1924, the United Kingdom be- 
came the first major power to form a national, govern- 
ment-owned airline, Imperial Airways. 

Aviation progress. Many small passenger airlines 
were formed during the early 1920's. But most lasted 
only a few months because they could not attract 
enough customers. Most people considered flying a 
dangerous sport rather than a safe means of transporta- 
tion. 

In the United States, the federal government's main 
interest in aviation was to improve airmail service. In 
1920, airmail routes extended from New York City to San 
Francisco. Mail planes operated only during the day, 
however. To help the mail pilots fly their open-cockpit 
planes at night, the government installed beacon lights 
at airports along the transcontinental route. Each light 
could be seen as far as 50 miles (80 kilometers) away. By 
1924, night-flying techniques enabled planes to get mail 
from New York City to San Francisco in 24 hours. 

In 1925, the U.S. Congress passed the Kelly Air Mail 
Act, which gave private airlines the job of flying the mail. 
The government then signed contracts with 11 compa- 
nies formed to carry the mail. Henry Ford, the famous 
automobile maker, owned one of these airlines. In 1926, 
Fords airline became the first airline to carry U.S. mail. 
Within a few months, all 11 companies were flying mail 
between major U.S. cities. Some of the airlines also be- 
gan carrying passengers. In 1926, airlines in the United 
States carried only about 6,000 passengers. In 1930, they 
carried more than 400,000. 

Several U.S. aircraft companies were also started dur- 
ing the 1920's. In 1920, an engineer named Donald 
Douglas helped organize an aircraft company in Santa 
Monica, California. It became the Douglas Company the 
following year, later part of McDonnell Douglas Corpo- 
ration, and later still part of the Boeing Company. In 
1923, the Consolidated Aircraft Corporation was found- 
ed in East Greenwich, Rhode Island. It took over the air- 





National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Instrtution 
Post-office planes began flying U.S. mail in 1918. This plane is 
being loaded with mail for a transcontinental flight in 1923. Pri- 
vate airlines began flying the mail in 1926. 





ee eee SSS 


i 


« 


vi 


United Airlines 
Early airliners like this Ford Tri-Motor carried about 10 passen- 
gers, who bundled up in coats to keep warm. This Tri-motor was 
flown by National Air Transport (NAT), one of the first successful 
U.S. airlines. NAT began carrying mail in 1926 and passengers in 
1927. It became part of United Airlines in 1931. 


plane designs of the Dayton Wright Company. The Pratt 
and Whitney Company began making aircraft engines in 
Hartford, Connecticut, in 1925. In 1929, the Curtiss and 
Wright companies merged to form the Curtiss-Wright 
Corporation. Grumman Aircraft (now part of Northrop 
Grumman Corporation) also started business in 1929 on 
Long Island, New York. 

The rapid increase in aviation activity led Congress to 
pass the Air Commerce Act in 1926. This act was the first 


Growth of airline passenger traffic 


Revenue passenger-miles flown by scheduled airlines* 


Millions of passer ger-miles Worldt 
1,750,000 


1,500,000 
1,250,000 
1,000,000 


750,000 








Aviation 989 


federal law to regulate aviation in the United States. It 
provided for a system of airways and navigation aids 
across the country. The act also called for rules govern- 
ing the manufacture of airplanes and the licensing of air- 
planes and pilots. A Bureau of Air Commerce was set up 
to carry out these measures. 

The industry comes of age. Air transport continued 
to grow during the early 1930's. By 1935, the United 
States had four major domestic airlines—American, East- 
ern, Transcontinental and Western Air (later called Trans 
World Airlines), and United. Smaller regional airlines in- 
cluded Braniff, Delta, and Northwest. The country also 
had a major international airline—Pan American World 
Airways (Pan Am)—which flew to Latin America. Many 
European governments continued to form large national 
airlines, such as Air France and Italy's Ala Littoria (now 
Alitalia). 

To meet the growing demand for faster, larger airlin- 
ers, manufacturers began to produce twin-engine 
planes, such as the Boeing 247 and the Douglas DC-3. 
The DC-3 appeared in 1935 and soon became the 
world’s most popular transport plane. A number of 
companies, including Martin (now Lockheed Martin 
Corporation) in the United States and Short in the 
United Kingdom, started to make large, four-engine sea- 
planes called flying boats. \n the 1930's, flying boats 
made the first passenger flights across oceans. New 
firms were also started in the 1930's, such as North 
American Aviation and United Aircraft (now United 
Technologies), which took over production of Pratt and 
Whitney engines. 

By the late 1930's, flying was an important means of 
travel in most of the world. In 1938, the world’s airlines 
carried nearly 3 5 million passengers. 

The rapid growth of civil aviation created a need for 
more effective government regulation. In 1938, the U.S. 
Congress established the Civil Aeronautics Authority to 





United States 


1997: 1,597,000 


This graph shows the growth 
of passenger traffic for United 
States airlines and for the 
world since 1930. Passenger 
traffic, especially the world to- 
tal, has risen sharply since 
1965. 






1997: 605 400 


ve 


500,000 
250,000 
0 
1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1986 1990 2000 
*A passenger-mile js one passenger camed | mile (16 kilometers) 
tWorld total includes statistics for member countnes of the international Gvil Aviation Organization (ICAQl 


Sources: 1(CAQ, U.S Department of Transportation 


990. Aviation 


deal with every aspect of civil aviation. The authority in- 
cluded a five-member board, which, in 1940, became 
the Civil Aeronautics Board. It also included an adminis- 
trative office, which became the Civil Aeronautics Ad- 
ministration (CAA) in 1940. 

World War II (1939-1945). The peace treaty that end- 
ed World War | prohibited the manufacture of military 
aircraft in Germany. Nevertheless, several German air- 
craft firms were founded during the 1920's. They includ- 
ed the famous Heinkel and Messerschmitt companies. 
In the mid-1930's, Heinkel, Messerschmitt, and other 
German firms, such as Dornier and Junkers, secretly 
made hundreds of bombers and fighters for the German 
air force. On Sept. 1, 1939, German dive bombers at- 
tacked Poland, and World War II began. One European 
country after another fell to the Germans. Finally, the 
United Kingdom was left nearly alone to fight off the 
German air force. British aircraft companies, such as 
Avro, de Havilland, Handley Page, Hawker, and Super- 


marine, quickly increased their production of warplanes. 


The United States produced about 2,100 military 
planes in 1939. Both Germany and Japan had larger air 
forces. The huge Mitsubishi corporation produced 
many of Japan‘s warplanes, including the famous Zero 
fighter. After the United States entered the war in De- 
cember 1941, U.S. airplane production increased greatly. 
More than 40 companies took part in a gigantic effort to 
supply the United States and its allies with military 
planes. Many companies enlarged their factories and 
hired additional workers. Assembly lines began working 
round the clock. By 1944, production had reached nearly 
100,000 transport planes, bombers, and fighters a year. 

By the end of the war, U.S. factories had built more 
than 300,000 aircraft. Germany, Japan, the Soviet Union, 
and the United Kingdom had also produced many thou- 
sands of planes. During the war, aircraft production had 
become the world’s leading manufacturing industry. 


Growth of airline cargo traffic 





Huge flying boats began carrying passengers on ocean flights 
during the 1930's. In 1939, Pan American World Airways used 
this Boeing 314 Clipper to start regular transatlantic service. 


A new age of flight. In 1937, British inventor Frank 
Whittle built the first successful jet engine. The first jet 
airplanes were developed for military use. Germany 
flew the first jet aircraft in 1939. By 1942, both the United 
Kingdom and the United States had developed experi- 
mental jet planes for military use. 

After World War II, aircraft manufacturers began the 
development of jet airliners. In 1952, British Overseas 
Airways Corporation (BOAC), now British Airways, start- 
ed jet passenger flights with de Havilland Comets. But 
the flights were stopped after several Comets exploded 
in the air. Investigators discovered serious flaws in the 
plane's structure. De Havilland engineers then designed 
an improved Comet. In 1958, BOAC used the new Com- 
ets to begin jet passenger service across the Atlantic 


Revenue ton-miles flown by scheduled airlines* 











Millions of ton-miles Worldt United States i 
80,000 
This graph shows the growth Lip ‘ 
of cargo traffic for United 70,000 
States airlines since 1930. It 
shows the growth of world 60,000 
cargo traffic since 1945, when 
accurate world totals became 
available. Cargo traffic has in- 30,000 
creased sharply since 1960. 
40,000 
30,000 - 
1997 20.310 
20,000 
10,000 
0 | 
1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 
*A ton mile ts 1 ton (0.9 metric ton) carried 1 mile (1.6 kilometers). 
*World total includes statistics for member countnes of the International Civil Aviation Organization (1CAO) 


Sources ICAO, US Department of Transportation. 


Boeing Co. 


a = Zz | 





Ocean. American companies also built successful jet 
transports in the late 1950's, and these aircraft quickly 
dominated international air transportation. In 1959, 
American Airlines used the first of these—the Boeing 
707—to start transcontinental jet service from New York 
City to Los Angeles. 

The beginning of jet airline service created new chal- 
lenges. Large jetliners carried nearly 200 passengers, 
and the crash of one of these planes could cause heavy 
loss of life. New hazards were also created along the 
world’s air routes as airplanes flew faster and in greater 
numbers than ever before. In 1958, the U.S. government 
combined the CAA and several other agencies to form 
the Federal Aviation Agency. The agency was given the 
job of establishing and enforcing air safety regulations 
and air traffic procedures in the United States. It was re- 
named the Federal Aviation Administration in 1967. 

By 1970, jet transports had replaced propeller-driven 
planes on most major airlines. In 1970, Pan Am became 
the first airline to offer jumbo jet service, using Boeing 
747's. France and the United Kingdom began passenger 
service with their SST, the Concorde, in 1976. 

Industry mergers. Beginning in the 1950's, several 
large aerospace companies were formed by mergers. In 
1954, the General Dynamics Corporation took control of 
Consolidated Vultee (Convair). In 1967, McDonnell Air- 
craft merged with Douglas Aircraft to form the McDon- 
nell Douglas Corporation, and North American Aviation 
and Rockwell-Standard merged, forming the North 
American Rockwell Corporation. In 1973, this firm 
merged with Rockwell Manufacturing Company to be- 
come Rockwell International Corporation. 

Internationalization became an important trend in 
the aviation industry beginning in the 1960's. The term 
refers to cooperative manufacturing programs in which 
firms from different nations share research, develop- 
ment, and production costs. The consortium formed by 
the British and French to build the Concorde SST was an 
early program of this type. Another successful program 
has been Airbus. This consortium, which manufactures 
commercial transport aircraft, has involved most coun- 
tries in Western Europe. 

United States aviation firms moved slowly into inter- 
nationalization in the 1970's. Manufacturers in Canada, 
Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom produced major 
parts of the McDonnell Douglas DC-10 transport, which 
began commercial service in 1971. Some U.S. firms have 
formed partnerships with foreign companies to manu- 
facture European-designed aircraft in the United States. 
For example, during the 1980's, McDonnell Douglas 
produced the British-designed Harrier—a V/STOL (Verti- 
cal/Short Take-Off and Landing plane)—in partnership 
with British Aerospace (see V/STOL). 

Airline safety concerns. Beginning in the 1960's, air- 
liner hijacking, also called air piracy, became a serious 
problem. In 1970, hijackers throughout the world seized 
49 airliners and forced the pilots to fly to destinations off 
their routes, often to other countries. In the 1980's, ter- 
rorist sabotage became a serious risk as several airliners 
were blown up in flight. 

In response to the hijackings, aviation authorities 
tightened airport security regulations. These regulations 
include the inspection of aircraft, passengers, and bag- 
gage for hidden guns, bombs, or other weapons. Most 


Aviation 991 


countries have laws against hijacking and terrorism. But 
laws differ from country to country. The ICAO develops 
procedures to help member countries establish consist- 
ent methods to prevent and investigate hijackings. See 
Airport (Airport security); Hijacking; Terrorism. 

Deregulation of the U.S. airlines. In the late 1970's, 
the Civil Aeronautics Board began to ease its controls 
over airline fares and routes in the United States to en- 
courage greater competition and better service. In 1978, 
Congress passed the Airline Deregulation Act. This law 
provided for the gradual removal of economic controls 
of the airline industry. The Civil Aeronautics Board was 
dissolved in 1984. New airlines soon began to form, and 
existing ones rapidly expanded their services. 

Recent developments. Deregulation in the United 
States allowed domestic airlines to compete in many in- 
ternational markets. U.S. airlines formed alliances with 
overseas carriers to simplify ticketing. Many developed 
hub and spoke systems, in which many flights connect 
at a central airport. In manufacturing, several mergers in 
the 1990's led to the disappearance of historic U.S. air- 
plane builders, such as McDonnell Douglas, which 
merged into Boeing. International partnerships became 
increasingly significant, with Airbus capturing one-third 
of the world market in jet airliner sales in the 1990's. 

On Sept. 11, 2001, terrorists hijacked four commercial 
airplanes, deliberately crashing two into the towers of 
the World Trade Center in New York City and one into 


Important dates in aviation history 


1903 Onville and Wilbur Wright of the United States made the 
world’s first successful airplane flights. 

1905 Charles and Gabriel Voisin of France started the first air- 
plane-manufacturing company. 

1907 Glenn H. Curtiss started the first airplane-manufacturing 
company in the United States. 

1914 The world’s first scheduled airline began service across 
Tampa Bay between St Petersburg and Tampa, Florida. 
But the airline lasted only a few months. 

1918 The U.S. government used Army pilots to start the 
world’s first permanent airmail service. 

1919 The first successful scheduled airlines began to operate 
in Europe. They used converted World War | bombers. 

1925 __ Private airlines began carrying U.S. airmail. 

1926 The first successful scheduled airlines in the United 
States began operations. 

1926 The U.S. Congress passed the Air Commerce Act, the 
first federal law to regulate aviation in the United States. 

1952 British Overseas Airways Corporation (now British Air- 
ways) started jet passenger service with de Havilland 
Comets. 

1958 The U.S. Congress established the Federal Aviation 
Agency (FAA) to deal with air safety and air traffic control. 
The agency became the Federal Aviation Administration 
in 1967. 

1959 American Airlines started jet service across the United 
States with Boeing 707’'s. 

1970 Pan American World Ainvays (Pan Am) began jumbo jet 
service with Boeing 747°s. 

1970 Agroup of Western European countries founded Airbus 
to compete with U.S. production of jet airliners. 

1976 = Air France and British Ainvays began passenger service 
with supersonic transport planes. 

1984 The Civil Aeronautics Board was dissolved as part of the 
U.S. government plan to deregulate the airline industry. 

2001 In response to terrorist attacks in New York City and 


Washington D.C. on September 11, the U.S. Congress 
created the Transportation Security Administration to 
take over air safety functions from the FAA. 


992 Aviation 


the Pentagon Building outside Washington, D.C The 
fourth hijacked plane crashed in Somerset County, 
Pennsylvania. After the hijackings, U.S. airports and air- 
lines sought new ways to protect against terrorist at- 
tacks. Congress passed legislation requiring federal em- 
ployees to handle all passenger and baggage inspection 
in U.S. airports by the end of 2002. A newly created 
agency, the Transportation Security Administration, took 
over air safety functions from the FAA. 


Careers in aviation 


The aviation industry employs many kinds of skilled 
workers. They include aeronautical engineers, computer 
specialists, electricians, flight attendants, flight engi- 
neers, flying instructors, mechanics, pilots, radar spe- 
cialists, and radio operators. In the United States, many 
jobs in the aviation industry require FAA certification. 
For example, air traffic controllers, aviation mechanics, 
flight engineers, and pilots must have FAA certificates. 

Some schools offer courses in preparation for such 
careers as aviation mechanic, computer specialist, and 
radio operator. Aeronautical engineering and some oth- 
er highly skilled professions require a college educa- 
tion. Most pilots obtain their training at flying schools or 
in military service. Some high schools and colleges also 
offer courses in flying. See Airplane (Learning to fly). 

Jobs in general aviation. Many pilots work for air 
taxi services, business firms, and other organizations 
that use light planes. In many countries, flying light 
planes for commercial purposes requires a commercial 
pilot license. \n the United States, the FAA issues these 
licenses to pilots 18 years old or over who have at least 
200 hours of flying experience and who pass the physi- 
cal, written, and flight examinations. 

Jobs with airlines and airports. In most countries, 
airline pilots and copilots must obtain a special license. 
They must pass a thorough physical examination, as well 
as written and flight examinations. In the United States, 
airline pilots and copilots must have an FAA airline 
transport pilot license. To obtain this license, they must 
be at least 23 years old and have a commercial pilot li- 
cense and 1,500 hours of flight time. 

Some airlines use flight engineers. On long flights, 
the engineers watch the many instruments in the cock- 
pit that tell how the engines are operating. Most airlines 
require their flight engineers to have a commercial pilot 
license. Airlines prefer to hire flight attendants who have 
some college, business, or nursing training. Skilled me- 
chanics are needed for airliner maintenance. 

Jobs in the aircraft industry. Aircraft manufacturers 
hire electricians, machine tool operators, mechanics, 
and other skilled workers to make and assemble the 
many parts of airplanes. The industry also employs vari- 
ous types of engineers to design aircraft and experi- 
enced pilots to test-fly planes. 

Jobs with government agencies. Government 
agencies in many countries hire radar and radio opera- 
tors to work at air route traffic control centers and air- 
port control towers. They also hire mechanics and pilots 
to serve as safety agents. Many local aviation agencies 
also require engineers, mechanics, pilots, and other 
skilled people. Some large cities hire pilots to serve as 
flying police officers or to perform rescue services. 

Roger E. Bilstein 


Related articles. See Airplane with its list of Related articles 
and the Transportation section of the various state, province, 
country, and continent articles. See also the following articles: 


Biographies 


Fokker, Anthony H. G. 
Hughes, Howard R. 


Bleériot, Louis 
Boeing, William E. 


Curtiss, Glenn H. Link, Edwin A. 
De Seversky, Alexander Pro- Sikorsky, Igor I. 
cofieff Wright brothers 
Other related articles 
Air force Manufacturing 
Air Force, United States National Aeronautic 
Airmail Association 
Airport National Air and Space 
Careers (Transportation) Museum 
Federal Aviation Administra- Radar 


tion Test pilot 
Great-circle route Transportation 
Jet propulsion Tuskegee Airmen 
Jet stream 


Outline 


I. The aviation industry 
A. Aircraft manufacturing 
B. General aviation activities 
C Airline operations 
D. Airport operations 
E. Aviation support industries 
Il. Aviation agencies and organizations 
A. Aviation agencies 
B. The International Civil Aviation Organization 
C. Other aviation organizations 
Ill. History of the aviation industry 
IV. Careers in aviation 
A. Jobs in general aviation 
B. Jobs with airlines and airports 
C Jobs in the aircraft industry 
D. Jobs with government agencies 


Questions 


What are air taxi services? What is another name for air taxi serv- 
ices? 

When did U.S. manufacturers first mass-produce planes? 

What are the responsibilities of the Federal Aviation Administra- 
tion? 

How do scheduled airline flights differ from nonscheduled 
flights? 

In what year did the aviation industry begin? What event marked 
its beginning? 

What is general aviation? What sorts of activities do general avi- 
ation aircraft carry out? 

Who started the world’s first airplane-manufacturing company? 
Where? 

What is the aerospace industry? 

For what purpose was the first jet aircraft used? 

When were the first passenger flights made across oceans? 


Additional resources 


Level I 

Berliner, Don. Before the Wright Brothers. Lerner, 1990. 

Moser, Barry. Fly! A Brief History of Flight Illustrated. Harper- 
Collins, 1993. 

Otfinoski, Steven. Taking Off Planes Then and Now. Benchmark 
Bks., 1997. 


Level Il 

Baker, David. Flight and Flying: A Chronology. Facts on File, 1993. 

Bilstein, Roger E. The American Aerospace Industry- From Work- 
shop to Global Enterprise. Twayne, 1996. 

Harrison, James P. Mastering the Sky- A History of Aviation from 
Ancient Times to the Present Sarpedon, 1996. 

Lopez, Donald S. Aviation: A Smithsonian Guide. Macmillan, 
1995. 








Aviation medicine. See Aerospace medicine. 
Avicenna, Av jh SEHN uh (980-1037), also known as 
Ibn-Sina, /HB uhn SEE nah, was a Muslim physician, 
philosopher, astronomer, and poet. He wrote Canon of 
Medicine, which was used as a medical text for over 600 
years. It is still occasionally used in Asia. Avicenna’s ma- 
jor philosophical work, 7he Cure, presented his inter- 
pretation of the philosophy of Aristotle. Of all his books, 
it had the greatest effect on Western thought. Avicenna 
was born near Bokhara (now Bukhara in Uzbekistan) in 
what was then a part of Persia ruled by the Samanid dy- 
nasty. He began to practice medicine at 16. When only 
20, he was known as the most learned person of his 


time. See also Geology (The Romans). Matthew Ramsey 


Avignon, ah vee NYAWN (pop. 88,312; met. area pop. 
253,580), is an agricultural center and a historic city in 
southeastern France. It lies along the Rhéne River in one 
of the richest agricultural regions in France. For loca- 


Giorgio Ricatto, Shostal 
The Papal Palace in Avignon was the home of the popes of 
the Roman Catholic Church from 1309 to 1377. The building at 
the far left, topped by a statue of the Virgin Mary, is the cathe- 
dral. The other buildings are part of the palace complex 


tion, see France (political map). 

Avignon is a trading center for wine, fruits, vegeta- 
bles, and other products produced in its area. Other 
economic activities include shipping, food processing, 
and the manufacture of chemicals, leather, machine 
tools, soap, and textiles. A major theater festival is held 
there each summer. The city is the capital of the Vau- 
cluse department (administrative district). 

Roman soldiers established a colony on the site of 
what is now Avignon in the 100’s B.C. From 1309 to 1377, 
Avignon served as the home of the popes and, as such, 
the center of Christianity (see Pope [The troubles of the 
papacy)). The Papal Palace, where the popes lived, is an 
architectural masterpiece and a major tourist attraction. 
Walls that were built around the city to protect the 
popes still stand. 


Mark Kesselman 


Avocado 993 


Avila Camacho, AH vee LAH kah MAH choh, 
Manuel, mah NWEHL (1897-1955), a Mexican soldier, 
diplomat, and political leader, served as president of 
Mexico from 1940 to 1946. As president, he promoted 
closer relations with the United States and encouraged 
U.S. investment in Mexico. During World War II (1939- 
1945}, he allied Mexico with the United States against 
the Axis Powers and initiated the bracero (day laborer) 
program. This program sent Mexican agricultural work- 
ers to the United States. See Mexico (The mid-1900’s). 

Avila Camacho was born on THAWN, in Teziutlan, 
Puebla, Mexico. When he was 17, he joined the uprising 
led by Venustiano Carranza against President Victoriano 
Huerta (see Carranza, Venustiano). He later fought with 
Lazaro Cardenas and Plutarco Elias Calles against the re- 
bellion of Adolfo de la Huerta in 1923. Avila Camacho 
served as secretary of national defense under Cardenas. 

W. Dirk Raat 
Avocado is a fruit that grows in tropical and subtropi- 
cal climates. The fruit may be round, oval, or pear- 
shaped. Its skin color ranges from green to dark purple, 
depending on the variety. Avocados have a yellow- 
green pulp and contain one large seed. 

Avocados are highly nutritious. They are rich in vita- 
mins, minerals, and oil. People eat avocados fresh in 
dips, salads, and desserts. Guacamole, a popular Mexi- 
can dish, is made with mashed avocados, onions, toma- 
toes, cilantro, garlic, and salt. In Brazil, avocados are 
used to make milk shakes and ice cream. 

Avocados are native to Mexico, Guatemala, Jamaica, 
and Cuba, but they are now grown in many parts of the 
world. The United States is the leading avocado-produc- 
ing country, followed by Mexico and Brazil. California 
and Florida produce most of the U.S. avocado crop. 

Avocado trees grow up to 30 to 60 feet (9 to 18 me- 
ters) tall. They have spreading branches with dark green 
leaves and small, greenish-white flowers. In some vari- 
eties, it is estimated that only one fruit is harvested for 
every 5,000 flowers. To help guarantee fruit develop- 
ment and uniformity, the stems of avocado seedlings 





WORLD BOOK illustration by Kate Loyd: Jones. Linden Antsts ttd 


Avocados have a yellow-green pulp that surrounds one large 
seed. Avocado trees bear broad leaves and small flowers. 





994 Avocet 


are grafted to the stems of selected varieties. 

The many varieties of avocados are divided into three 
main groups—(1) Mexican, (2) Guatemalan, and (3) West 
Indian. Mexican avocados have smooth, thin skins. The 
fruits are small and seldom weigh more than 5 pound 
(0.2 kilogram). Guatemalan avocados have thick, rough 
skins, and they may weigh more than 3 pounds (1.4 kilo- 
grams). West Indian avocados are about the same size 
as the Guatemalan fruits, but they have leathery skins. 

Jaime E. Lazarte 

Scientific classification. The avocado is a member of the 
laurel family, Lauraceae. Its scientific name is Persea americana. 


See also Fruit (table: Leading fruits). 





WORLD BOOK illustration by John Rignall, Linden Artists Ltd. 
The American avocet is a wading bird whose long legs and 


long, curved bill help it feed in shallow-water areas. 


Avocet, AV uh seht, is a type of long-legged wading 
bird. The American avocet is most common west of the 
Mississippi River, from Canada to the Mexican border. It 
is about 17 inches (43 centimeters) long and has a white 
body and black wings. The head and neck are streaked 
with brown during the breeding season. The long, flat 
bill curves upward. Another avocet species, the pied av- 
ocet, lives throughout much of Africa, Asia, and Europe. 
Pied avocets resemble American avocets, except they 
have both black and white plumage on the head. 

The avocet feeds by scraping its bill along the bottom 
of shallow pools of water. In this way it collects small 
water animals, which it eats. It also eats other food that 
floats on or in the water. Harmful insects form part of its 
diet. 

Scientific classification. Avocets belong to the stilt and avo- 
cet family, Recurvirostridae. The scientific name for the Ameri- 


can avocet is Kecurvirostra americana. The pied avocet is R. 
avosetta. 


Fritz L. Knopf 


Avogadro, 4H vuli GAH droh, Amedeo, AH mah DEF 
oh (1776-1856), was an Italian physicist. He proposed in 
1811 his famous hypothesis, now known as Avogadro's 
law. The law stated that equal volumes of all gases at the 
same temperature and pressure contain the same num- 
ber of chemical units. Avogadro distinguished between 
gases composed of complex units (molecules) and gases 
made up of simple units (atoms). He was able to calcu- 


late atomic and molecular weights from gas densities 
(see Atom [Atomic weight]). Avogadro's hypothesis was 
not accepted by the leading scientists of his time. His hy- 
pothesis was discounted until 1858, when Italian | 
chemist Stanislao Cannizzaro reintroduced it and devel- 
oped it further. Avogadro was born on Aug. 9, 1776, in 
Turin. See also Chemistry (Development of physical 
chemistry). 
Avoirdupois, 4v uhr duh POYZ, is a system of weights 
used for common commodities such as coal, grain, and 
foodstuffs. The system is used primarily in the United 
States. The word avoirdupois comes from French words 
meaning goods of weight The basis of the system is the 
pound, which equals 0.454 kilogram. An avoirdupois 
pound contains 16 ounces or 7,000 grains. Each ounce 
contains 16 drams, so 1 dram equals 27.344 grains. One 
grain equals 64.799 milligrams. Two other systems of 
weight, the Zroyand apothecaries’ systems, also have 
grains that equal 64.799 milligrams. The Troy and 
apothecaries’ pounds, however, equal 5,760 grains. 

Richard S. Davis 

Related articles in World Book include: 


Melvyn C. Usselman 


Ounce Troy weight 
Pound Weights and measures 
Ton 


Avon, Earl of. See Eden, Sir Anthony. 

Avon, AY vuhn, River, is a river in central England 
made famous by William Shakespeare, who lived in 
Stratford-upon-Avon. The river rises in Northampton- 
shire and flows southwest to join the River Severn. 

M. Trevor Wild 

See also United Kingdom (terrain map). 

AWOL. See Desertion. 

Ax, also spelled axe, is a cutting tool made up of an 
edged head attached to a handle. Some axes have dou- 
ble-edged heads. The head is steel or a steel alloy. The 
handle is hardwood or plastic and fits into a hole in the 
ax head called the eye. Axes have different shapes and 
sizes, depending on their uses. They include the fire- 
fighters ax, used to fight fires; the /ogging ax, used to 
cut trees into logs; and the hatchet, a small ax used to 
drive roofing nails or trim tree branches. The battle-ax 
was a weapon of the Middle Ages. Alva H. Jared 

See also Tomahawk. 

Axiom, AX see uhm, is a mathematical statement that is 
assumed to be true. Axioms are considered to be self- 
evident truths that cannot be proved. An example of an 
axiom is the parallel axiom of geometry. The parallel ax- 
iom states that “through a point not on a given line, one, 
and only one, line may be drawn that is parallel to the 
given line.” 

The ancient Greeks distinguished between axioms 
and postulates. Postulates were considered to be as- 
sumptions that applied only to geometry, but axioms ap- 
plied to any field of mathematics. Today, most mathe- 
maticians no longer make this distinction. 

Mary Kay Corbitt 

See also Geometry (Axiomatic organization). 

Axis refers to alliances formed among Germany, Italy, 
and Japan before and during World War II (1939-1945). 
In 1936, Italy and Germany joined together in an alliance 
called the Rome-Berlin Axis. The term Axis was used to 
suggest that all Europe rotated about a line between 
these two capitals. Japan joined the alliance in 1940, and 


ee 





it became the Rome-Berlin-Tokyo Axis. Bulgaria, Hun- 
gary, Romania, and the German-created states of Croatia 
and Slovakia became Axis satellites. The inability of the 
major Axis powers to forge an effective alliance helped 
the Allies win World War Il. See also World War Il 
(table; maps). Donald M. McKale 

Axle. See Wheel and axle. 

Axum. See Aksum. 

Ayckbourn, AYK bawrn, Alan (1939- ), is a British 
playwright known for dark comedies about middle-class 
life. The audience laughs at his characters but often real- 
izes that they lead sad, empty lives. For example, in 
Woman in Mind (1985), a neglected homemaker invents 
an imaginary family who become more real to her than 
her own family. Ayckbourn is noted for the clever use of 
stage space and dramatic structure. The Norman Con- 
quests (1973) is really three plays, each about events set 
in different parts of a country home at the same time. In 
Taking Steps (1979), one set represents three places. The 
plays House and Garden (both 2000) are performed in 
two separate theaters by the same cast at the same time. 

Ayckbourn first gained international notice with How 
the Other Half Loves (1969). His other plays include Ab- 
surd Person Singular (1972), Absent Friends (1974), Bed- 
room Farce (1975), Sisterly Feelings (1979), A Small Family 
Business (1987), Man of the Moment (1988), The Re- 
vengers Comedies (1989), Communicating Doors (1994), 
Things We Do for Love (1997), and Comic Potential (1999). 

Ayckbourn is the artistic director of the Stephen 
Joseph Theatre-in-the-Round in Scarborough, where 
most of his comedies premiere. He was born on April 
12, 1939, in London. He was knighted in 1997. 

Gerald M. Berkowitz 
Aycock, Charles Brantley (1859-1912), was a leader 
in developing public school education in the South. As 
governor of North Carolina from 1901 to 1905, he 
brought about increased school appropriations, the first 
rural high schools, and many new teacher-training facili- 
ties. Educational reformers used his legislation as a 
model in much of the South. 

Aycock was born on Nov. 1, 1859, in Wayne County, 
North Carolina. He graduated from the University of 
North Carolina with a law degree in 1880. A statue of Ay- 
cock represents North Carolina in the U.S. Capitol. 


Eric F. Goldman 





Anthony and Elizabeth Bomtord ARDEA 


The aye-aye lives in the forests of Madagascar. Its large eyes 
and ears help it move around easily at night 


Azalea 995 


Aye-aye, EYE eye, is a rare animal of Madagascar that 
belongs to the group called /emurs. It has brownish fur 
and a long, bushy tail. The animal measures about 3 feet 
(1 meter) long, including the tail. It has large eyes and 
ears. It is most active at night, when it hunts insects for 
food. The aye-aye uses its long, narrow third finger to 
draw boring insects out of their tunnels in tree trunks. 
During the day, the aye-aye hides in its nest of twigs 
built in a tree in the forest. The aye-aye is an endangered 
species. The growth of villages destroys the forest that 
the animals need to survive. Madagascar's government 
forbids aye-aye hunting. It has set up reserves to protect 
the species. See also Lemur. Clyde Jones 


Scientific classification. The aye-aye is in the family Dauben- 
toniidae and the order Primates. Its scientific name is Daubento- 
nia madagascariensis. 


Aylloén, evel YAWN, Lucas Vasquez de (1480?-1526), 
a Spanish colonizer, founded the first European settle- 
ment in what is now the United States. The settlement, 
on what is now the nation’s southeast coast, survived for 
only about six months. 

Ayllon was born in Toledo, Spain. In 1504, he arrived 
in the Americas and served as a judge for the Spanish 
government on the island of Hispaniola. Ayllo6n became 
wealthy, partly by trading in Indian slaves. He also spon- 
sored voyages to the coast of what may have been pres- 
ent-day South Carolina or Georgia. The first voyage, 
made in 1521, was led by Spanish explorer Francisco 
Gordillo. Ayllon heard reports that the land Gordillo 
saw, Called Chicora by the Indians, was rich in natural 
resources and resembled southern Spain. In 1526, Ayl- 
lon led an expedition of about 600 people to colonize 
Chicora. The colony Ayll6n founded, called San Miquel 
de Gualdape, was probably on Sapelo Sound in what is 
now Georgia. The colonists soon suffered from starva- 
tion and disease. Many, including Ayllon, died there. 


The survivors returned to Hispaniola. Helen Delpar 


Azalea, uh ZAYL yuh, is the name of a group of flower- 
ing shrubs. Azaleas grow mostly in North America and 
eastern Asia. Most North American azaleas are decidu- 
ous—that is, they lose their leaves every autumn Asian 




















————<——S ——— 





WORLD BOOK iftustration by Robert Hynes 
Azalea flowers have five tapering petals that may be pink, red 
white, yellow, or purple. The flowers bloom in May and June. 





996 Azerbaijan 


species usually are evergreen and remain green all year. 
Azaleas can be grown in gardens. These plants also oc- 
cur wild in woodlands, often in swamp areas. 

Azalea blossoms range in color through all shades of 
pink, red, white, yellow, and purple. Their long, conspic- 
uous stamens (stalks that contain pollen) extend beyond 
the petals. A long, slender capsule covered with hairlike 
parts holds the seeds. 

Over 50 species of azaleas grow in North America. 
These shallow-rooted plants live best in well-drained 
acid soil. They especially thrive in partial shade with fil- 
tered sunlight Azalea plants bloom during the months 
of May and June. Fred T. Davies, Jr. 

Scientific classification. Azaleas belong to the heath family, 
Ericaceae. They make up part of the genus Rhododendron. 

See also Bonsai (picture); Heath. 

Azerbaijan, 4H zuhr by JAHN, is a country in the Cau- 
casus Mountain region on the western shore of the Cas- 
pian Sea. It is located mostly in southwestern Asia, but 
part of northern Azerbaijan is located in Europe. An area 
of Azerbaijan called the Naxcivan Autonomous Republic 
lies west of the rest of the country, separated from it by 
Armenian territory. 

The country’s full name in Azerbaijani, the official lan- 
guage, is Azarbayjan Respublikasy (Azerbaijan Republic). 
Baku is its capital and largest city. Azerbaijan became in- 
dependent in 1991, after nearly 70 years as a part of the 
Soviet Union. 

Government Under Azerbaijan's Constitution, which 
became effective in 1995, the president is the country’s 
most powerful government official. The people elect the 
president to a five-year term. A Cabinet of Ministers, 
headed by a prime minister, helps carry out the opera- 
tions of government The president appoints the Cabinet 
members. A 125-member parliament called the Milli 
Majlis (National Assembly) makes the country’s laws. 
Voters elect the assembly members to five-year terms. 

The main units of local government include the Naxci- 
van Autonomous Republic and districts, cities, and vil- 
lages. Each unit elects a governing council to manage 
local affairs. All citizens 18 years old or older may vote. 

Azerbaijan's highest court is the Supreme Court. 
There are also regional courts. 

About 85,000 people serve in Azerbaijan's armed 
forces. Beginning at the age of 18, men must serve 17 
months in the armed forces. 

People. Most of the people are Azerbaijanis. Armeni- 
ans and Russians make up the largest minority groups. 

In Azerbaijan's cities, most people live in multistory 
apartment buildings. In rural areas, most of the people 
live in one- or two-story houses. 

Most Azerbaijanis are Shiite Muslims. Most Armeni- 
ans are Christians, and many belong to the Armenian 
Church, an Eastern Orthodox Church. Many Russians 
are Russian Orthodox Christians. 

Most people in Azerbaijan wear Western-style cloth- 
ing. On holidays, some men wear a traditional costume 
consisting of pants, a long shirt, boots, and a long jacket 
Some rural women wear wide skirts and blouses with 
long, wide sleeves. Muslim women in rural areas often 
wear a black shawl that covers the head and shoulders 
and may be drawn over the face. The wearing of the 
shawl is based on a Muslim custom. 

The Azerbaijani language developed from the lan- 


Facts in brief 


Capital: Baku. 

Official language: Azerbaijani. 

Area: 33,436 mi? (86,600 km+). Greatest distances—north-south, 
240 mi (385 km); east-west, 295 mi (475 km). 

Elevation: Highest—Bazardyuzyu, 14,652 ft (4,466 m) above sea 
level. Lowest—Caspian Sea coast, 92 ft (28 m) below sea level. 

Population: Estimated 2002 population—7 854,000; density, 235 
per mi? (91 per km/*); distribution, 52 percent urban, 48 percent 
rural. 1989 census—7,021,178. 

Chief products: Agricu/ture—cotton, fruit, grain, livestock, tea, 
tobacco, vegetables. Manufacturing—machine building, pe- 
troleum refining, processing of chemicals, textile production. 
Mining—aluminum, copper, iron, natural gas, petroleum, salt 

Flag: The flag's three horizontal stripes are light blue, red, and 
green. In the flag's center is a white crescent and star. 


Money: Basic unit—manat. One hundred gepik equal one manat 


guages of Persians and Turkic people who once inhabit- 
ed the region. Today, Azerbaijani closely resembles the 
modern Turkish language. 

Azerbaijanis enjoy pi/af(a rice dish) and a variety of 
grilled and boiled meats, including beef, goat, and lamb. 
Traditional dishes include bozartma (mutton stew) and 
dovga (soup made of yogurt, meat, and herbs). Tea and 
wine are popular drinks. 

Soccer is a popular sport in Azerbaijan. Many people 
walk or swim for recreation. Men spend much of their 


Azerbaijan 


» | International boundary 
Road 






—— | Railroad 
National capital 
Other city or town 


Elevation above sea level 

















Baku, Azerbaijan’s capital, lies on the Caspian Sea. It serves 
as the country’s chief port. Refineries in Baku process petrole- 
um, Azerbaijan's chief source of income. 


leisure time talking with one another in teahouses. 
Azerbaijanis are known for their handwoven rugs. 


Also, their brightly patterned shawls are highly admired. 


Nearly all adults in Azerbaijan can read and write. The 
government requires children to attend school from the 
ages of 6 to 17. The country has 17 schools of higher ed- 
ucation. 

Land and climate. The Caucasus Mountains rise in 
northern Azerbaijan, and the Little Caucasus Mountains 
stretch across the western part of the country. The area 
north of the Caucasus Mountains is considered part of 
Europe. The area south of the range is considered part 
of Asia. Azerbaijan's highest mountain, Bazardyuzyu, ris- 
es 14,652 feet (4,466 meters) above sea level in the Cau- 
casus Mountains. 

The rugged Armenian Plateau, a land broken by deep 
gorges, covers part of southwestern Azerbaijan. The 
Kur, the country’s main river, flows through the central 
valley between the mountain ranges and across a 
broad, dry plain called the Kur-Aras Lowland. From the 
lowland, the Kur drains into the salty Caspian Sea. The 
Kur's main tributary, the Aras, flows along part of Azer- 
baijan’s southern border. Other important rivers in 
Azerbaijan include the Terter and the Akera. The rivers 
serve as a source of irrigation water and energy. The 
Mingacevir dam on the Kur River provides hydroelec- 
tric power for Baku and the Ganja industrial region. 

Summers in the lowlands are long and hot. Winters 
are cool. The lowlands have an average temperature of 
79 °F (26 °C) in August and 39 °F (4 °C) in January. Parts of 
the Caucasus Mountains have average temperatures of 
56 °F (13 °C) in August and 21 F (6 °C) in January. Annual 
precipitation ranges from about 5 to 15 inches (13 to 38 
centimeters) in most of the country’s lowland areas. The 
highlands and a region in southeastern Azerbaijan on 
the Caspian Sea receive about 40 to 55 inches (100 to 
140 centimeters) of precipitation every year. 


Economy. The government controls most of Azerbai- 


jan's economy. Industry accounts for about half of the 
value of economic production. The country’s industrial 
activities include machine building, mining, petroleum 
refining, the processing of chemicals, and textile pro- 





© Serquei Fedorov, Woodfin Camp, Inc 


Azerbaijan 997 


duction. The chief industrial centers are Baku, Ganja, 
Saki, Xankandi, and Naxcivan. 

Petroleum ranks as the country’s most important min- 
eral product by far. It is Azerbaijan's chief single source 
of income. The largest producing oil fields lie in the 
Baku region, in the Caspian Sea, and on the sea’s west- 
ern shore. Azerbaijan's other mineral products include 
aluminum, copper, iron, natural gas, and salt. 

Agriculture accounts for about a third of the value of 
economic production. About 70 percent of the farmland 
is irrigated. Farmers in the lowlands grow such crops as 
cotton, fruit, grain, tea, tobacco, and vegetables. Some 
farmers raise silkworms for the raw silk industry. Herd- 
ers raise Cattle, goats, and sheep on mountain slopes. 
The Caspian Sea is a source of fish. 

Azerbaijan has a limited road and railway system. A 
port at Baku handles most of the country's trade on the 
Caspian Sea. The main airport is located at Baku. 

Azerbaijan's main radio and television stations broad- 
cast from Baku. The country publishes newspapers and 
magazines in Azerbaijani and Russian. 

History. People have lived in the region that is now 
Azerbaijan since prehistoric times. Medes invaded the 
region in the 700's B.C. Later invaders were Persians of 
the Achaemenid Empire in the 500’s B.C. and Alexander 
the Great in the 300’s B.C. Persians of the Sassanid dy- 
nasty controlled much of the region from the A.D. 200's 
until the 600's, when the Arabs conquered the area. The 
Arabs introduced Islam, the Muslim religion. 

From the 1000's to the 1200's, Turkic tribes migrated 
into the region in large numbers and mixed with the 
Persians who lived there. These people became the an- 
cestors of the Azerbaijanis. In the early 1500's, Azerbai- 
jan fell to the Safavid Empire, which ruled Iran. The Ot- 
toman Empire took control of Azerbaijan from the Sa- 
favids in the late 1500's but lost it to them again in the 
early 1600's. 

In the early 1800's, Russia gained control of what is 
now Azerbaijan. Under Russia, industry, especially pe- 
troleum production, developed in Azerbaijan. By the 
late 1800's, Baku had become the world’s leading pro- 
ducer of refined petroleum. 

In 1917, revolutionaries known as Bolsheviks (later 
called Communists) seized control of the Russian gov- 
ernment. In 1918, Azerbaijani nationalists set up an inde- 
pendent state in western Azerbaijan. But the Russians 
regained the area in 1920. 

Soviet rule. \n early 1922, Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Ar- 
menia combined to form the Transcaucasian Republic 
under Russia's leadership. Later that year, the Transcau- 
casian Republic joined Byelorussia (now Belarus), Rus- 
sia, and Ukraine to form the Soviet Union. In 1936, the 
three parts of the Transcaucasian Republic became sep- 
arate republics of the Soviet Union. Azerbaijan was 
called the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic. 

The Soviet Union established a powerful central gov- 
ernment and took control of Azerbaijan s industry and 
land. The Soviet Union co/lectivized agriculture in Azer- 
baijan—that is, it severely restricted private farming and 
transferred control of farms to the government. The So- 
viet rulers destroyed many Azerbaijani traditions, and 
they tried to reduce the influence of Islam. They closed 
down almost all mosques and religious schools in Azer- 
baijan. But the Soviets also built roads, schools, modern 





998 Azimuth 


housing, hospitals, and communication systems. 

Independence. The Soviet government maintained 
strict control until the late 1980's. In 1989, Azerbaijan de- 
clared that its own laws overruled the laws of the Soviet 
Union. In August 1991, conservative Communist officials 
failed in an attempt to overthrow the Soviet president, 
Mikhail S. Gorbachev. During the upheaval that fol- 
lowed, Azerbaijan and several other republics of the So- 
viet Union declared their independence. Jn December, 
Azerbaijan joined other republics in a loose association 
called the Commonwealth of Independent States. The 
Soviet Union was formally dissolved on December 235. 

In 1992, the Azerbaijani government slowly began to 
pass laws that encouraged a market economy. But most 
of the economy continued under government control. 
Most of the country’s people remained very poor. 

Dispute over Nagorno-Karabakh. An area known as 
Nagorno-Karabakh in southern Azerbaijan has been a 
source of dispute between Azerbaijan and neighboring 
Armenia. Most of its people are Armenians, and Arme- 
nia claims the area. In early 1988, Nagorno-Karabakh pe- 
titioned to become part of Armenia. This action trig- 
gered fighting between Azerbaijanis and Armenians for 
control of Nagorno-Karabakh. About 200,000 Azerbaija- 
nis—almost all those who lived in Armenia—fled to Azer- 
baijan. About 250,000 Armenians fled Azerbaijan for Ar- 
menia. Jn 1994, the two countries declared a cease-fire. 
However, fighting continued from time to time, and the 
conflict over the territory remained unresolved. 

Recent developments. |n the middle and late 1990's, 
Azerbaijan made progress in selling government-owned 
farmland and businesses to private owners. It signed 
agreements with foreign oil companies for supplies of 
oil from the Caspian Sea. The agreements were expect- 
ed to prove profitable for Azerbaijan. Nancy Lubin 

See also Baku; Caspian Sea; Caucasus; Caucasus 
Mountains. 

Azimuth, AZ uh muhth, is a measure along the hori- 
zon of the angle between an object and a reference 
point The reference point is usually due north, and the 
angle is measured in a clockwise direction. An object 
that lies due east would have an azimuth of 90°. A wind 
of direction 270° is blowing from the west. Azimuth may 
also be measured from the south point. Jn this case, an 
object of azimuth 135° would lie to the northwest. The 
reference point can be made even clearer by giving the 
direction as S 135 W. 

Surveyors use azimuth to help determine boundary 
points. Soldiers use it to direct artillery fire. Astronomers 
and navigators use it to locate objects in the sky. Howev- 
er, these people must also know the altitude to locate a 
Star or other object in the sky. Azimuth once referred to 
objects in the sky, and bearing to land objects. But these 
terms now mean the same thing. Elizabeth Roemer 
Azores, AY zohrz or uh ZOHRZ, are a group of nine is- 
lands that belong to Portugal. They are in the North At- 
lantic Ocean, about 800 miles (1,300 kilometers) west of 
Portugal. The Azores lie in the path of air and cable lines 
that link Europe and North America. The islands cover 
868 square miles (2,247 square kilometers) and have a 
320-mile (515-kilometer) coastline. 

Approximately 248,000 people live in the Azores. 
Through the years, many Azoreans have immigrated to 
the United States. More people of Azorean descent live 





The Azores are a group of is- 
lands in the North Atlantic 
Ocean. The islands, which be- 
long to Portugal, lie about 800 
miles (1,300 kilometers) west 
of the Portuguese mainland. 








°Corvo 30° West Long tude 


(aSanta Cruz 


North Atlantic Ocean 
Flores 


Qeraciosa 
_-LAJES AIRPORT 


Sao Jorge @ig'ercer? 
Faralsgaet ngra do Hergismo 


ajes 


Ponta do Pico-” Pico 
P73 tt 

{2.351 m) 

A Z OwURUGbas 





S30 Miguel 


Ponta Dig a 


100 Miles 
10 Kitometers Santa Mariagy 


WORLD BOOK maps 


in the United States than live in the Azores. The most im- 
portant city in the Azores is Ponta Delgada, which is on 
Sao Miguel Jsland. 

The Azores form the peaks of a vast underwater vol- 
canic mountain chain that extends through the mid- 
Atlantic Ocean from Jceland nearly to Antarctica. Earth- 
quakes are fairly common in the Azores. Much of the 
land is hilly and wooded, but it produces corn, grapes, 
and citrus fruits. 

Navigator Gonzalo Cabral claimed the Azores for Por- 
tugal in 1431. No one lived there at the time that Cabral 
arrived. However, the Portuguese soon colonized the is- 
lands. The United Kingdom used the Azores as a naval 
base in the warfare against Nazi submarines in World 
War II (1939-1945). Portugal, though neutral, permitted 
this because of an ancient treaty that allowed the United 
Kingdom to use the islands in time of war. The United 
States has military installations in the Azores. 

During the mid-1970's, many Azoreans objected to 
Portugal's tight rule over the islands. Under the 1976 
Portuguese Constitution and its later revisions, the 
Azores became an autonomous (self-governing) region 
of Portugal. However, some Azoreans continued to call 
for complete independence from Portugal. 

Douglas L Wheeler 

See also Flores Island. 

Azov, AZ awfor uh ZAWF, Sea of, is a large, shallow 
inland sea bounded by Ukraine and Russia. Jt is connect- 
ed with the Black Sea by the Kerch Strait For location, 
see Black Sea (map). 

The Sea of Azov covers about 14,500 square miles 
(37,550 square kilometers) and is only about 48 feet (15 
meters) deep. Its western end is called the Sivash, or Pu- 
trid Lake, because of the many foul-smelling marshes 
and lagoons there. The lagoons yield important chemi- 
cals for industry. The Don River flows into the Gulf of 
Taganrog, which lies at the northeastern end of the sea. 
Ice and storms make shipping on the Sea of Azov dan- 


gerous in winter. Leslie Dienes 




















. =. ware 





Aztec 999 


aw i Sh A . _s a 
ay ¥ = _ lee, 7 aS 

Detail of Great Gity of Tenochtitlan (1929-1945), a fresco mural by Diego Rivera. 
National Palace, Mexico City (Carlos Hernandez, Pirarmnide Photo Service) 


The Aztec Indians built a great civilization in Mexico before being conquered by the Spaniards in 
1521. This painting shows the huge Aztec capital, Tenochtitlan, shortly before the Spanish conquest. 
Nobles, slaves, warriors, farmers, and traders crowd the busy market in the foreground. 


Aztec 


Aztec were an American Indian people who ruled a 
mighty empire in Mexico during the 1400's and early 
1500's. The Aztec had one of the most advanced civiliza- 
tions in the Americas. They built cities as large as any in 
Europe at that time. They also practiced a remarkable re- 
ligion that affected every part of their lives. To worship 
their gods, the Aztec built towering temples, created 
huge sculptures, and held impressive ceremonies fea- 
turing bloody human sacrifices. Their empire was de- 
stroyed by the Spaniards, who conquered it in 1521. But 
the Aztec left a lasting mark on Mexican culture. 

The name Aztec is also commonly applied to the peo- 
ple who founded the city of Tenochtitlan (pronounced 
tay nohch TEE tlahn} This city stood on the site of pres- 
ent-day Mexico City and, according to legend, was es- 
tablished in 1325. Its people referred to themselves by 
such names as Colhua-Mexica, Mexica, and Tenochca. i 
the 1400's, the city and its allies conquered many groups 
in central and southern Mexico, forming the Aztec em- 
pire. Tenochtitlan became the capital. Aztec also refers 
to this larger group of Indians who made up the empire. 
This article uses Aztec in that sense. 


The Aztec empire 


The center of Aztec civilization was the Valley of Mex- 
ico, a huge, oval basin about 7,500 feet (2,300 meters) 


above sea level. Although the valley was in the tropics, 
its high altitude gave it a mild climate. The surrounding 
lowlands had a hotter, wetter climate. 

The Aztec empire included many cities and towns, es- 
pecially in the Valley of Mexico. The largest city was the 
capital, Tenochtitlan, which occupied an island in Lake 
Texcoco. Causeways (raised earthen roads) linked the 
city to the mainland. On an island to the north stood the 
city of Tlatelolco, a huge commercial center. Both Te- 
nochtitlan and Tlatelolco lay within the borders of what 
is now Mexico City. The present-day city covers much of 
the bed of Lake Texcoco, which was drained during the 
1600's. In 1473, the people of Tenochtitlan conquered 
Tlatelolco and united the two cities. When the Spaniards 
arrived in the 1500's, Tenochtitlan may have had a popu- 
lation of 200,000 to 300,000. No Spanish city had so many 
people. 

The emperor of the Aztec was called the Auey tlatoani 
(great speaker). A council of high-ranking nobles chose 
him from the members of a royal family. The emperor 
had great power, but he had to consult the council of 
nobles before making important decisions. Military 
units were stationed in key locations throughout the em- 
pire to keep it secure. Most of these units were com- 
manded by a great noble, who often also served as gov- 


H. B. Nicholson, the contributor of this article, is Ementus 
Professor of Anthropology at the University of Calitornia at Los 
Angeles. 





1000 Aztec 


ernor of the territory. An elaborate system of govern- 
ment offices administered the affairs of the empire. 
Many of the top positions were hereditary, but service 
to the emperor was the chief way for a person to obtain 
high office. 

Aztec society had four main classes: (1) nobles, (2) 
commoners, (3) serfs, and (4) slaves. Among nobles and 
commoners, closely related families belonged to 
groups called ca/po/lis. The members of a calpolli 
owned an area of land in common, and each family was 
allowed to farm a plot large enough for its needs. In ad- 
dition to their calpolli land, most nobles had their own 
private land or received government land for use during 
their term in public office. Commoners made up the ma- 
jority of the population, and many made a living by 
farming their calpolli plots. Serfs worked the land held 
by nobles and remained on the land when a new noble 
acquired it. Slaves were considered property, but their 
children were born free. Many slaves had been cap- 
tured in war, and the Aztec also bought slaves from 
other groups. Other slaves were criminais or people 
who could not pay their debts. 


Way of life 


Religion was extremely important in Aztec life. The 
people devoted much of their time to religious practices 
and even waged war largely to obtain prisoners to sacri- 
fice to their gods. 

The Aztec worshiped hundreds of divinities (gods 
and goddesses), each of whom ruled one or more 
human activities or aspects of nature. The Aztec econ- 
omy was based on farming, and so the people had many 
agricultural divinities. They include Centeéotl, a corn 
god; Tlaloc, a rain and fertility god; and Xipe Totec, who 
was associated with springtime and regrowth. Other 





The Aztec empire had its Vn = am 
capital at Tenochtitlan, which AN -.€©6CO 

. =, Ki - 
stood on the site of present- XX Bieeies 
day Mexico City. The empire \ Mexico: — 2) 
was established during the ~S __ =~ 
1400's, when the Aztec and AZTEC EMPIRE \_"Ganira! 
their allies conquered much America 
of central and southern Mex- North Pacit Se 


Ico. Ocean § 
WORLD BOOK map - { 


) 


; ry Guifof 
erma ary Mexico 
‘ ATCM 


| ae 

~ Cy gexcoce™@* at 

TARASCAN Tiacopan && ~~ take Teacoco 
TEPANSS AG PEAKC=) 28 


Tenochtitlan ° _ Co@tepec 











—— 


B ' 
| S85 Wire Xochimiice —_"e007tIan aes 
[ a AZTEC EMPIRE _—a 
— _ a, 1 El Coatzaceaicos aaa 
oe ZOQUE 
, at a Muaxyacac iW 


Tehuantepec, <> > 


: 2°23 
SS Ss 
= 


North Pacific 
Seconusco®_ | 
25060 Miles 
_ 
250 « lometers 


major gods included Tezcatlipoca, an all-powerful divin- 
ity; Tonatiuh, the sun god; Mictlantecuhtli, ruler of the 
dead; and Xiuhtecuhtli, the fire god. Huitzilopochtli, a 
war god, was the special guardian of the people of Te- 
nochtitlan. The god Quetzalcoatl was associated with 
civilization and learning. However, he sometimes took 
the form of Ehecatl, god of the wind. 

The Aztec held many religious ceremonies, the most 
important of which observed planting, harvesting, and 
other events in the agricultural year. The purpose of 
many of these ceremonies was to ensure good crops by 
winning the favor of the gods. 

Human sacrifice played a vital role in the major cere- 
monies. Priests slashed open the chest of a living victim 
and tore out the heart. The Aztec believed that the gods 
needed human hearts and blood to remain strong. Wor- 
shipers sometimes ate portions of a victim's body. They 
may have thought that the dead person's strength and 
bravery passed to anyone who ate the flesh. Most vic- 
tims were prisoners of war or slaves. But the Aztec also 
sacrificed children to the god Tlaloc. 

Most religious activities took place inside walled cer- 
emonial centers. The chief structures within the centers 
were teocallis. The typical teocalli consisted of a solid 
base rising like giant stairsteps. A temple dedicated to a 
divinity stood at the top. Priests climbed a stairway on 
one side of the base to reach the temple. The ceremo- 
nial centers also included gardens, living quarters for 
the priests, sacred pools for ceremonial cleansing, and 
racks to hold the skulls of sacrificial victims. In addition, 
many centers had a playing court for a game that resem- 
bled basketball. The players tried to hit a rubber ball 
through a ring with their hips and knees. They could not 
use their hands or feet. 

The Aztec had a 260-day religious calendar. Priests 


Drawing from the Codex Florentino ‘nmd-1500s!: ¢ Amencan 
Museum of Natural Histon New York Cin 


Human sacrifice played a major role in Aztec religion. This 
drawing by an Aztec artist show's priests cutting out a victim's 
heart. Clay flutes broken during the ceremony lie nearby. 








———— 


a 








Stone, 8 ft. (2.4 m) high; Instituto Nacional de Antropologia 
e Historia, Mexico City (Ramiz Shehadi, Jr., Piramide Photo Service) 


A statue of the goddess Coatlicue wears a necklace of 
human hands, hearts, and a skull. The goddess has been be- 
headed, and the snakes coming out of her neck represent 
streams of blood. 


used the calendar to determine luck days for such activi- 
ties as sowing crops, building houses, and going to war. 
The Aztec also had a 365-day solar calendar. It consisted 
of 18 months of 20 days each plus 5 extra days. 

Every 52 years, the Aztec held a great celebration 
called the Binding Up of the Years or the New Fire Cere- 
mony. Before the celebration, people let their hearth 
fires go out. At the start of the new 52-year cycle, the 
priests lit a new fire on the chest of a sacrificial victim. 
People pricked themselves to add their blood to the sac- 
rifice. Then they relit their hearth fires from the new fire 
and feasted. 

Family life. The typical Aztec household consisted of 
a husband and wife, their unmarried children, and a 
number of the husband’s relatives. All members of this 
extended family, including the children, helped with the 
work. The husband's chief responsibility was to support 
the family, usually by farming or craftwork. The wife's 
duties included weaving the family’s clothing and cook- 
ing their food. 

Boys were educated by their father until about the 
age of 10. They then attended a school run by their cal- 
polli or—especially if they belonged to the nobility— a 
school connected with a temple. Calpolli schools pro- 
vided general education and military training. Temple 
schools offered a religious education, which prepared 
boys to become priests or other leaders. Some girls also 
attended the temple schools, but the majority learned 
household skills at home. The Aztec married at an early 
age, women at about 16 and men at about 20. 


Aztec 1001 


Food. The principal food of the Aztec was a thin corn- 
meal pancake called a ¢/axcall/i. In Spanish, it is called a 
tortilla. The Aztec used tlaxcallis to scoop up other 
foods, or they wrapped the tlaxcallis around bits of meat 
and vegetables to form facos. Aztec cooking was rich 
and spicy. Many dishes had sauces flavored with chili 
peppers. 

Hunting provided much of the meat in the Aztec diet. 
The chief game animals included deer, rabbits, and such 
birds as ducks and geese. The only animals raised for 
meat were dogs and turkeys. 

The Aztec used the juice of maguey plants to make an 
alcoholic beverage called oct/i. Chocolate drink was also 
a favorite beverage, but only the wealthy could afford to 
have it often. 

Clothing. Aztec women wore a loose, sleeveless 
blouse and a wraparound skirt. Men wore a cloth 
around their hips and a cloak knotted over one shoul- 
der. The poorer people used cloth made from maguey 
fibers, but richer people had cotton clothing. The 
amount of decoration on a garment further indicated 
the wealth and social rank of the wearer. 

Shelter. Most Aztec houses were simple and de- 
signed for usefulness rather than beauty. In the high- 
lands, they were made of adobe. In the lowlands, the 
houses had thatched roofs, and the walls were made of 
branches or reeds plastered with clay. In addition to the 
main dwelling, most families had several other build- 
ings, including a storehouse and a small sweat house, 
where the family took steam baths. Wealthy Aztec fami- 
lies had large adobe or stone houses built around a 
patio. 

Arts and crafts. Aztec sculptures, which decorated 
temples and other buildings, were among the most 
elaborate in the Americas. The most famous surviving 
Aztec sculpture is the large, circular “Calendar Stone,” 
which represents the Aztec universe. The stone meas- 
ures about 12 feet (3.7 meters) in diameter. In its center 
is the face of the sun god Tonatiuh. Other carvings on 





‘la 


12 ft G7 mi tn dtameter. Instituto Nacional de Antropologia 
e Histona, Mexco City Murray Greenberg, DPI 


The Aztec Calendar Stone was used in ceremonies honoring 
the sun god Tonatiuh. His face is in the center of the stone. 
Other carvings represent the Aztec universe. 





1002 Aztec 


the stone represent the days of the Aztec month and re- 
ligious symbols related to worship of the sun god. Many 
archaeologists believe that Aztec priests placed the 
hearts of human sacrifices on the stone. 

The Aztec produced various forms of oral literature, 
including poetry and traditional accounts of their his- 
tory. Music played a major part in religious services. The 
chief instruments were drums, flutes, and rattles. 

Aztec craftworkers used feathers to make beautiful 
cloaks, headdresses, and other garments. Other impor- 
tant crafts included metalworking, pottery, weaving, and 
woodCarving. 

Language. The Aztec spoke a language called 
Nahuatl. \t belongs to a large group of Indian languages 
known as the Aztec-Tanoan or Uto-Aztecan family. This 
language family also includes the languages spoken by 
the Comanche, Pima, Shoshone, and other tribes of 
western North America. 

The Aztec used a form of writing called pictographic 
writing, which consisted mostly of small pictures. Some 
pictures symbolized ideas. Others stood for the sounds 
of syllables. For example, the Aztec town of Coatepec 
was represented by a snake and a hill. The Nahuatl 
words for snake and hill were coat/ and tepetl, which to- 
gether sounded like Coatepec. The pictographic system 
of writing was not developed enough to provide full ex- 
pression of ideas. The Aztec used it mainly for business 
records, censuses, historical and religious writings, and 
tax lists. 

Warfare was considered a religious duty by the 
Aztec. They fought not only to enlarge their empire but 
also to take prisoners to sacrifice to the gods. The high- 
est goal for a young man was to be a successful warrior. 
Men who took many captives in battle were rewarded. 
They received land, high social rank, and important gov- 
ernment offices. 





Codes Borbomeus teary 1500s) Bibhotheque 
iu Palais Bourbon. Pans (Lauros-Giraudon 
Aztec writing consisted of small pictures called pictographs. 


This page from an Aztec book shows Xipe Totec, /ef, the god of 
spring, and the god Quetzalcoatl, who appears as a snake, right 


Aztec methods of combat were designed to capture 
prisoners rather than to kill. The chief weapon was a 
wooden club edged with sharp pieces of obsidian (vol- 
canic glass). This weapon, called a macuahuitl, was ef- 
fective for disabling an opponent without killing him. 
The Aztec also used bows and arrows and spears. A 
spear-throwing device called an a¢/at/ increased the 
range and force of their spears. For protection, warriors 
carried shields and wore padded cotton armor. 


Economy 


Agriculture formed the basis of the Aztec economy. 
Corn was the most important crop. Farmers also grew 
avocados, beans, squashes, sweet potatoes, tomatoes, 
and many other crops. The lowlands provided such 
tropical products as cotton, papayas, rubber, and cacao 
beans, from which chocolate is made. 

The basic agricultural tool was a pointed stick for dig- 
ging. In the lowlands, which were covered with dense 
forest, farmers practiced s/ash-and-burn agriculture. 
They chopped down and burned a section of forest, 
then planted crops in the clearing. The ashes fertilized 
the soil. In the highlands, the Aztec cut terraces into the 
hillsides to increase the amount of level farmland. They 
also dug irrigation systems to water their crops. In addi- 
tion, farmers turned areas of shallow lakes into cropland 
by scooping up mud from the lake bottoms to form is- 
lands. These islands were called chinampas. The farmers 
regularly added fresh mud, which was extremely fertile. 
As a result, the chinampas yielded huge crops. Lake Xo- 
chimilco in Mexico City still has many chinampas. Al- 
though they do not float, they are often called floating 
gardens. 

Trade and transportation. The market place was a 
major center of Aztec life. The market at Tlatelolco was 
the largest in the Americas. It displayed nearly every 


28 im (70 cm) tn diameter, Museum fur 
Volkerkunde, Vienna. Austna 


The cover of an Aztec shield is made of gold and feathers 
and bears the figure of a coyote. The cover dates from the early 
1500s. The shield itself consists of woven reeds. 


kind of merchandise available in the Aztec world. The 
Spanish explorer Hernando Cortés reported that more 
than 60,000 persons visited it daily. There were also 
many smaller markets throughout the empire. Govern- 
ment officials supervised the trading. 

Merchants called pochteca traveled throughout the 
empire on trading expeditions. The merchants em- 
ployed many bearers, who marched in long caravans 
with heavy loads on their backs. People of the lowlands 
traded such products as cacao beans, cotton, jaguar 
pelts, rubber, and the feathers of tropical birds. In re- 
turn, they received goods from the highlands, including 
obsidian, which was used for knives, and a variety of 
manufactured products. 

The Aztec had no system of money as we know it. 
They usually traded goods and services for other goods 
and services. But the Aztec used cacao beans and other 
widely acceptable goods somewhat as we use money. 

The Aztec used the wheel only in toys, and they had 
no beasts of burden. As a result, the people themselves 
carried all their goods on land. Dugout canoes were an 
important means of transportation in the Valley of Mex- 
ico, where lakes, canals, and other waterways covered 
much of the area. 


History 


The Aztec migration. According to Aztec legend, 
the ancestors of the people who founded Tenochtitlan 
came to the Valley of Mexico from a place in the north 
called Aztlan. The name Aztec comes from Aztlan. The 
Aztec wandered for many years before settling in the 
valley in the 1200s. At first, they were subjects of people 
who lived in the area. But later—in 1325, according to 
legend—they founded their own city, Tenochtitlan. 

Growth of the Aztec empire. By the early 1400s, Te- 
nochtitlan had become a powerful city that controlled 


. di a : = ——" 


a 





Aztec 1003 


the region around it, forming a kind of city-state. Te- 
nochtitlan joined with Texcoco and Tlacopan, two other 
city-states in the Valley of Mexico, to form an alliance. 
Tenochtitlan became the most powerful member of the 
alliance and began to build what became the Aztec em- 
pire. Under Montezuma I, who ruled from 1440 to 1469, 
the alliance conquered large areas to the east and south. 
Montezumas name is also spelled Moctezuma or 
Motecuhzoma. His successors expanded the empire 
until it extended between what are now Guatemala and 
the Mexican state of San Luis Potosi. Hundreds of con- 
quered towns paid heavy taxes in goods to the empire. 
When Montezuma IJ became emperor in 1502, the Aztec 
empire was at the height of its power. 

The Spanish conquest. In 1519, the Spanish ex- 
plorer Hernando Cortés landed on the east coast of 
Mexico and marched inland to the Aztec capital. He and 
his troops were joined by many Indians who had been 
conquered by the Aztec and resented their heavy taxes. 
Montezuma II did not oppose the advancing Spaniards, 
possibly because he thought Cortés represented the 
god Quetzalcoatl. An Aztec legend said that Quetzal- 
coatl had sailed across the sea and would return some- 
day. Cortés entered Tenochtitlan and made Montezuma 
a prisoner. 

In 1520, the Aztec rebelled and drove the Spaniards 
from the city. Montezuma died from wounds received in 
the fighting. Cortés reorganized his army and began a 
bloody attack on Tenochtitlan in May 1521. Montezuma’s 
successor, Cuauhtémoc, surrendered in August the 
same year. 

The Aztec heritage. Little Aztec architecture re- 
mains. The Spaniards considered it their duty as Chris- 
tians to wipe out the temples and all other traces of the 
Aztec religion. They destroyed Tenochtitlan and built 
Mexico City on the ruins. However, archaeologists have 


__ sr 


Lf oe s Pasa 5 * Bb ie ie = OF nee ™ 


Drawing by an unknown Aztec artist from ffistor de las Indias de Nueva Espana e Islas de Tierra Firrmne 
imid- 1500s) by Diego Duran Biblioteca Nactonal, Madnd. Spain (Ampliaciones y Reproducciones MAS} 





The Spanish conquest in 1521 destroyed the Aztec empire. This drawing shows Aztec warriors, 
right, fighting to recapture a palace from the Spaniards, /eft. One Aztec wears an eagle costume, 
and one a jaguar suit. Warriors earned the right to wear such costumes by taking many prisoners. 





1004 Aztec 





excavated the site of the Great Temple in downtown 
Mexico City. They have uncovered all four sides of the 
building and recovered about 6,000 objects, including 
jewelry, pottery, statues, wall carvings, and remains of 
animal and human sacrifices. Archaeologists have re- 
stored some other Aztec buildings, including temples at 
Tenayuca and Tepoztlan near Mexico City. In addition, 
the National Museum of Anthropology in Mexico City 
has a large collection of Aztec art 

Thousands of people in Mexico have Aztec ancestors, 
and many of them speak a modern form of Nahuatl. 
Many Mexican place names, including Acapulco and 
Mexico itself, come from Nahuatl, as do the English 
words avocado, chocolate, and tomato. Such Mexican 
painters as José Orozco, Diego Rivera, and David Siquei- 
ros have used Aztec themes in their work. Foods of 
Aztec origin, including chili, chocolate, and tacos, have 
become popular in many countries. 

Descendants of the Aztec also live in the United 
States, especially in California and Texas. During the 
mid-1900's, these Mexican Americans developed a new 
cultural pride in their Aztec ancestry, which they called 
the heritage of Aztlan. H. B. Nicholson 

Related articles in World Book include: 

Chocolate (History) Manuscript (picture: Aztec 
Cortés, Hernando manuscript) 


Cuauhtémoc Mexico (The Toltec and the 
Exploration (picture: Spanish Aztec; The Spanish con- 


soldiers attacked Aztec In- quest) 

dians) Mexico City (City of the Aztec) 
Hispanic Americans (In Mexi- Montezuma II 

co) Mythology (American Indian 
Indian, American (pictures: mythology) 


Aztec Indians; Aztec mer- 
chants; The Aztec capital) 

Latin America (picture: The 
Spanish conquest of the 
Aztec Indians) 


Tarascan Indians 
Tenochtitlan 
Toltec Indians 


Outline 
I. The Aztec empire 
ll. Way of life 
A. Religion D. Clothing 
B. Family life F. Shelter 
C. Food F. Arts and crafts 


An Aztec pyramid stands at 
Santa Cecilia, Mexico, near 
Mexico City. Priests climbed 
the stairway to offer sacrifices 
in front of the temple at the 
top. The Mexican government 
has rebuilt the temple, which 
was damaged by the Span- 


iards. 
Ramiz Shehadi, Jr., Piramide Photo Service 
G. Language H. Warfare 
ili, Economy 
A. Agriculture B. Trade and transportation 
IV. History 


Questions 


Why did Montezuma II fail to oppose Cortés? 

Why did the Aztec want prisoners of war? 

When was the Aztec empire at its height? 

What were chinampas? 

How did the Aztec move their goods on land? 

Why did the Aztec think human sacrifices were necessary? 
What are two popular foods of Aztec origin? 

Where was the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan? 

Why are so few Aztec buildings left? 


Additional resources 


Carrasco, David, and Sessions, Scott. Daily Life of the Ancient 
Aztecs. Greenwood, 1998. 

Smith, Michael E. The Aztecs. Blackwell, 1996. 

Stein, R. Conrad. The Aztec Empire. Benchmark Bks., 1996. 
Younger readers. 

Townsend, Richard F. The Aztecs. 1992. Reprint Thames & Hud- 
son, 1993. 


Aztec Ruins National Monument lies in north- 
western New Mexico. It contains ruins of a Pueblo In- 
dian town of the 1100's, including a 500-room dwelling 
place. The ruins were misnamed Aztec by American set- 
tlers of the 1800's. The monument was established in 
1923. For its area, see National Park System (table: Na- 
tional monuments). Critically reviewed by the National Park Service 
Azurite, AZH uh ryt, is a blue mineral that contains 
copper. Azurite is mined as a copper ore, but most azur- 
ite is used for ornamentation. Small stones are polished 
and mounted in jewelry. Slabs are shaped into decora- 
tive objects such as bowls. Artists once used ground az- 
urite as a pigment for paint Azurite’s chemical formula 
is Cu,(CO,),(OH).. Its crystal structure is monoclinic (see 
Crystal [Classifying crystals}). Azurite is found through- 
out the world, usually in the same location as malachite, 
a similar mineral that is green. But the best crystals 
come from Chessy, near Lyon, France. Fine azurite also 
occurs in Australia, Greece, Mexico, Namibia, Romania, 
Russia, and the United States. Kenneth J. De Nault 

See also Mineral (picture: Azurite). 
