THE TWO TOWERS

_being the SECOND part of The Lord of the Rings_




The Departure of Boromir

Aragorn sped on up the hill. Every now and again he bent to the ground. Hobbits go light, and their footprints are not easy even f I read the signs aright, he said to himself. Frodo ran to the hill-top. I wonder what he saw there? But he returned by the same wa Aragorn hesitated. He desired to go to the high seat himself, hoping to see there something that would guide him in his perplexiti Even as he gazed his quick ears caught sounds in the woodlands below, on the west side of the River. He stiffened. There were crie The horn of Boromir! he cried. He is in need! He sprang down the steps and away, leaping down the path. Wings! An ill fate is upon As he ran the cries came louder, but fainter now and desperately the horn was blowing. Fierce and shrill rose the yells of the Orc A mile, perhaps, from Parth Galen in a little glade not far from the lake he found Boromir. He was sitting with him back to a grea Aragorn knelt beside him. Boromir opened his eyes and strove to speak. At last slow words came. I tried to take the Ring from Frod Farewell, Aragorn! Go to Minas Tirith and save my people! I have failed.
No! said Aragorn, taking his hand and kissing his brow. You have conquered. Few have gained such a victory. Be at peace! Menas Tir Boromir smiled.
Which way did they go? Was Frodo there? said Aragorn. But Boromir did not speak again.
Wings! said Aragorn. Thus passes the heir of Denethor, Lord of the Tower of Guard! This is a bitter end. Now the Company is all in He knelt for a while, bent with weeping, still clasping Boromir's hand. So it was that Legolas and Gimli found him. They came from Wings! said Legolas, coming to Aragorn's side. We have hunted and slain many Orcs in the woods, but we should have been of more us Boromir is dead, said Aragorn. I am unscathed, for I was not here with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was away upon t The hobbits! cried Gimli. Where are they then? Where is Frodo?
I do not know, answered Aragorn wearily. Before he died Boromir told me that the Orcs had bound them; he did not think that they w First we must tend the fallen, said Legolas. We cannot leave him lying like carrion among these foul Orcs.
But we must be swift, said Gimli. He would not wish us to linger. We must follow the Orcs, if there is hope that any of our Compan But we do not know whether the Ring-bearer is with them or not, said Aragorn. Are we to abandon him? Must we not seek him first? A Then let us do first what we must do, said Legolas. We have neither the time nor the tools to bury our comrade fitly, or to raise The labor would be hard and long: there are no stones that we could use nearer than the water-side, said Gimli.
Then let us lay him in a boat with his weapons, and the weapons of his vanquished foes, said Aragorn. We will send him to the Fall Quickly they searched the bodies of the Orcs, gathering their swords and cloven helms and shields into a heap. See! cried Aragorn. And I, said Legolas, will take all the arrows that I can find, for my quiver is empty. He searched in the pile and on the ground a And Aragorn looked upon the slain, and he said: Here lie many that are not folk of Mordor. Some are from the North, from the Misty There were four goblin-soldiers of greater stature, swart, slant-eyed, with thick legs and large hands. They were armed with short I have not seen these tokens before, said Aragorn. What do they mean?
S is for Sauron, said Gimli. That is easy to read. Nay! said Legolas. Sauron does not use the Elf-runes.
Neither does he use his right name, nor permit it to be spelled or spoken, said Aragorn. And he does not use white. The Orcs in th Well, we have no time to ponder riddles, said Gimli. Let us bear Boromir away!
But after that we must guess the riddles, if we are to choose our course rightly, answered Aragorn. Perhaps there is no right choice, said Gimli.
Taking his ax the Dwarf now cut several branches. These they lashed together with bowstrings, and spread their cloaks upon the fra At the water-side Aragorn remained, watching the bier. while Legolas and Gimli hastened back on foot to Parth Galen. It was a mile There is a strange tale to tell! said Legolas. There are only two boats upon the bank. We could find no trace of the other.
Have Orcs been there? asked Aragorn.
We saw no signs of them, answered Gimli. And Orcs would have taken or destroyed all the boats, and the baggage as well. I will look at the ground when we get there, said Aragorn.
Now they laid Boromir in the middle of the boat that was to bear him away. The gray hood and elven-cloak they folded and placed be Sorrowfully they cast loose the funeral boat: there Boromir lay, restful, peaceful, gliding upon the bosom of the flowing water. T For a while the three companions remained silent, gazing after him. Then Aragorn spoke. They will look for him from the White Towe

Through Rohan over fen and field where the long grass grows The West Wind comes walking, and about the walls it goes.
What news from the West, O wandering wind, do you bring to me tonight? Have you seen Boromir the Tall by moon or by starlight?
I saw him ride over seven streams, over waters wide and gray; I saw him walk in empty lands, until he passed away
Into the shadows of the North. I saw him then no more.
The North Wind may have heard the horn of the son of Denethor. O Boromir! From the high walls westward I looked afar,
But you did not come from the empty lands where no men are.

Then Legolas sang:

From the mouths of the Sea the South Wind flies, from the sandhills and the stones; The wailing of the gulls it bears, and at the gate it moans.
What news from the South, O sighing wind, do you bring to me at eve? Where now is Boromir the Fair? He tarries and I grieve.

Ask not of me where he doth dwell-so many bones there lie
On the white shores and the dark shores under the stormy sky; So many have passed down Anduin to find the flowing Sea.
Ask of the North Wind news of them the North Wind sends to me! O Boromir! Beyond the gate the seaward road runs south,
But you came not with the wailing gulls from the gray sea's mouth.

Then Aragorn sang again:

From the Gate of Kings the North Wind rides, and past the roaring falls; And clear and cold about the tower its loud horn calls.
What news from the North, O mighty wind, do you bring to me today? What news of Boromir the Bold? For he is far away.
Beneath Amon Hen I heard his cry. There were many foes he fought. His cloven shield, his broken sword, they brought to the water.
His head so proud, his face so fair, his limbs they laid to rest; And Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, bore him upon his breast.
O Boromir! The Tower of Guard shall ever gaze northward To Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, until the end of days.

So they ended. Then they turned their boat and drove it with all the speed they could against the stream back to Parth Galen. You left the East Wind to me, said Gimli, but I will say naught of it.
That is as it should be, said Aragorn. In Minas Tirith they endure the East Wind, but they do not ask it for tidings. But now Boro He surveyed the green lawn, quickly but thoroughly, stooping often to the earth. The Orcs have been on this ground, he said. Other How then do you read this riddle? asked Gimli.
Aragorn did not answer at once, but went back to the camping-place and looked at the baggage. Two packs are missing. he said, and But why should he leave us behind, and without a word? said Gimli. That was a strange deed!
And a brave deed, said Aragorn. Sam was right, I think. Frodo did not wish to lead any friend to death with him in Mordor. But he Maybe hunting Orcs came upon him and he fled, said Legolas.
He fled, certainly, said Aragorn, but not, I think, from Orcs. What he thought was the cause of Frodo's sudden resolve and flight Well, so much at least is now clear, said Legolas: Frodo is no longer on this side of the River: only he can have taken the boat. Our choice then, said Gimli, is either to take the remaining boat and follow Frodo, or else to follow the Orcs on foot. There is l Let me think! said Aragorn. And now may I make a right choice and change the evil fate of this unhappy day! He stood silent for a They drew up the last boat and carried it to the trees. They laid beneath it such of their goods as they did not need and could no No other folk make such a trampling, said Legolas. It seems their delight to slash and beat down growing things that are not even But they go with a great speed for all that, said Aragorn, and they do not tire. And later we may have to search for our path in h Well, after them! said Gimli. Dwarves too can go swiftly, and they do not tire sooner than Orcs. But it will be a long chase: they Yes, said Aragorn, we shall all need the endurance of Dwarves. But eat! With hope or without hope we will follow the trail of our Like a deer he sprang away. Through the trees he sped. On and on he led them, tireless and swift, now that his mind was at last ma


The Riders of Rohan

Dusk deepened. Mist lay behind them among the trees below, and brooded on the pale margins of the Anduin, but the sky was clear. T There in the still cool hour before dawn they rested for a brief space. The moon had long gone down before them, the stars glitter Which way would they turn, do you think? said Legolas. Northward to take a straighter road to Isengard, or Fangorn, if that is the They will not make for the river, whatever mark they aim at' said Aragorn. And unless there is much lost in Rohan and the power of The dale ran like a stony trough between the ridged hills, and a trickling stream flowed among the boulders at the bottom. A cliff We have already overtaken some of those that we are hunting, he said. Look! He pointed, and they saw that what they had at first t Here is another riddle! said Gimli. But it needs the light of day and for that we cannot wait.
Yet however you read it, it seems not hopeless, said Legolas. Enemies of the Orcs are likely to be our friends. Do any folk dwell No, said Aragorn. The Rohirrim seldom come here, and it is far from Minas Tirith. It might be that some company of Men were huntin What do you think? said Gimli.
I think that the enemy brought his own enemy with him, answered Aragorn. These are Northern Orcs from far away. Among the slain ar Or about the captives, said Gimli. Let us hope that they, too, did not meet their end here.
Aragorn searched the ground in a wide circle, but no other traces of the fight could be found. They went on. Already the eastward At last! said Aragorn. Here are the tracks that we seek! Up this water-channel: this is the way that the Orcs went after their deb Swiftly now the pursuers turned and followed the new path. As if fresh from a night's rest they sprang from stone to stone. At las Turning back they saw across the river the far hills kindled. Day leaped into the sky. The red rim of the sun rose over the should Gondor! Gondor! cried Aragorn. Would that I looked upon you again in a happier hour! Not yet does my road lie southward to your br

Gondor! Gondor, between the Mountains and the Sea!
The West Wind blew there; the light upon the Silver Tree Fell like bright rain in the gardens of the Kings of old.
O proud walls! White towers! O winged crown and throne of gold! O Gondor, Gondor! Shall Men behold the Silver Tree,
Or West Wind blow again between the Mountains and the Sea?

Now let us go! he said, drawing his eyes away from the South, and looking out west and north to the way that he must tread.
The ridge upon which the companions stood went down steeply before their feet. Below it twenty fathoms or more, there was a wide a Look! cried Legolas, pointing up into the pale sky above them. There is the eagle again! He is very tall. He seems to be flying no No, not even my eyes can see him, my good Legolas, said Aragorn. He must be far aloft indeed. I wonder what is his errand, if he i Many things, said Legolas. It is a great company on foot; but I cannot say more, nor see what kind of folk they may be. They are m I think, nevertheless, that we no longer need any trail to tell us which way to go, said Gimli. Let us find a path down to the fie I doubt if you will find a path quicker than the one that the Orcs chose, said Aragorn.
They followed their enemies now by the clear light of day. It seemed that the Orcs had pressed on with all possible speed. Every n At the bottom they came with a strange suddenness on the grass of Rohan. It swelled like a green sea up to the very foot of the Em

Ah! the green smell! he said. It is better than much sleep. Let us run!
Light feet may run swiftly here, said Aragorn. More swiftly, perhaps, than iron-shod Orcs. Now we have a chance to lessen their le They went in single file, running like hounds on a strong scent, and an eager light was in their eyes. Nearly due west the broad s Yes, he said, they are quite plain: a hobbit's footprints. Pippin's I think. He is smaller than the other. And look at this! He he The brooch of an elven-cloak! cried Legolas and Gimli together.
Not idly do the leaves of Lórien fall, said Aragorn. This did not drop by chance: it was cast away as a token to any that might fo Then he at least was alive, said Gimli. And he had the use of his wits, and of his legs too. That is heartening. We do not pursue Let us hope that he did not pay too dearly for his boldness, said Legolas. Eat! Let us go on! The thought of those merry young fol The sun climbed to the noon and then rode slowly down the sky. Light clouds came up out of the sea in the distant South and were b As the nightshade was closing about them Aragorn halted. Only twice in the day's march had they rested for a brief while, and twel We have come at last to a hard choice, he said. Shall we rest by night, or shall we go on while our will and strength hold?
Unless our enemies rest also, they will leave us far behind, if we remain to sleep. said Legolas. Surely even Orcs must pause on t But if we walk by night, we cannot follow their trail, said Gimli.
The trail is straight, and turns neither right nor left, as far as my eyes can see, said Legolas.
Maybe, I could lead you at a guess in the darkness and hold to the line, said Aragorn; but if we strayed, or they turned aside, th And there is this also, said Gimli: only by day can we see if any tracks lead away. If a prisoner should escape, or if one should That is true, said Aragorn. But if I read the signs back yonder correctly, the Orcs of the White Hand prevailed, and the whole com Yet it would be rash to be sure of their counsels, said Gimli. And what of escape? In the dark we should have passed the signs tha The Orcs will be doubly on their guard since then, and the prisoners even wearier, said Legolas. There will be no escape again, if And yet even I, Dwarf of many journeys, and not the least hardy of my folk, cannot run all the way to Isengard without any pause s I said that it was a hard choice, said Aragorn. How shall we end this debate?
You are our guide, said Gimli, and you are skilled in the chase. You shall choose.
My heart bids me go on, said Legolas. But we must hold together. I will follow your counsel.
You give the choice to an ill chooser, said Aragorn. Since we passed through the Argonath my choices have gone missing. He fell si We will not walk in the dark, he said at length. The danger of missing the trail or signs of other coming and going seems to me th And tonight he is shrouded anyway, Gimli murmured. Would that the Lady had given us a light, such a gift as she gave to Frodo!
It will be more needed where it is bestowed, said Aragorn. With him lies the true Quest. Ours is but a small matter in the great d He cast himself on the ground and fell at once into sleep, for he had not slept since their night under the shadow of Tol Brandir. They are far far away, he said sadly, turning to Aragorn. I know in my heart that they have not rested this night. Only an eagle c Nevertheless we will still follow as we may, said Aragorn. Stooping he roused the Dwarf. Eat! We must go, he said. The scent is gr But it is still dark, said Gimli. Even Legolas on a hill-top could not see them until the Sun is up.
I fear they have passed beyond my sight from hill or plain, under moon or sun, said Legolas.
Where sight fails the earth may bring us rumour, said Aragorn. The land must groan under their hated feet. He stretched himself up The rumor of the earth is dim and confused, he said. Nothing walks upon it for many soldiers about us. Faint and far are the feet "Let us go!" said Legolas.
So the third day of their pursuit began. During all its long hours of cloud and fitful sun they hardly paused, now striding, now r All day the track of their enemies led straight on, going north-west without a break or turn. As once again the day wore to its en

At dusk they halted again. Now twice twelve leagues they had passed over the plains of Rohan and the wall of the Emyn Muil was los Now do I most grudge a time of rest or any halt in our chase said Legolas. The Orcs have run before us, as if the very whips of Sa Gimli ground his teeth. This is a bitter end to our hope and to all our toil! he said.
To hope, maybe, but not to toil, said Aragorn. We shall not turn back here. Yet I am weary. He gazed back along the way that they Truly! said Legolas. That I have known since first we came down from the Emyn Muil. For the will is not behind us but before us. H As before Legolas was first afoot, if indeed he had ever slept. Awake! Awake! he cried. It is a red dawn. Strange things await us The others sprang up, and almost at once they set off again. Slowly the downs drew near. It was still an hour before noon when the They rested here a while, he said, but even the outward trail is already old. I fear that your heart spoke truly, Legolas: it is t I can see nothing away north or west but grass dwindling into mist, said Gimli. Could we see the forest if we climbed the hills?
It is still far away, said Aragorn. If I remember correctly, these downs run eight leagues or more to the north, and then north-we Well, let us go on, said Gimli. My legs must forget the soldier. They would be more willing, if my heart were less heavy.
The sun was sinking when at last they drew near to the end of the line of downs. For many hours they had marched without rest. The Let us go up to this green hill! he said. Wearily they followed him, climbing the long slope, until they came out upon the top. It Nothing we can see to guide us here, said Gimli. Well, now we must halt again and wear the night away. It is growing cold!
The wind is north from the snows, said Aragorn.
And tomorrow it will be in the East, said Legolas. But rest if you must. Yet do not cast all hope away. Tomorrow is unknown. Rede Three suns have already risen on our chase and brought no counsel said Gimli.

The night grew ever colder. Aragorn and Gimli slept fitfully, and whenever they awoke they saw Legolas standing beside them, or wa Ahead and eastward they saw the windy uplands of the Wold of Rohan that they had already glimpsed many days ago from the Great Riv Following with his keen eyes the trail to the river, and then the river back towards the forest, Aragorn saw a shadow on the dista There was a silence in the empty fields, arid Gimli could hear the air moving in the grass.
Riders! cried Aragorn, springing to his feet. Many riders on swift steeds are coming towards us!
Yes, said Legolas, there are one hundred and five. Yellow is their hair, and bright are their spears. Their leader is very tall. Aragorn smiled. Keen are the eyes of the Elves, he said.
Nay! The riders are a little more than five leagues distant, said Legolas.
Five leagues or one, said Gimli; we cannot escape them in this bare land. Shall we wait for them here or go on our way?
We will wait, said Aragorn. I am weary, and our hunt has failed. Or at least others were before us; for these horsemen are riding Or spears, said Gimli.
There are three empty saddles, but I see no hobbits, said Legolas.
I did not say that we should hear good news, said Aragorn. But evil or good we will await it here.
The three companions now left the hill-top, where they might be an easy mark against the pale sky, and they walked slowly down the What do you know of these horsemen, Aragorn? he said. Do we sit here waiting for sudden death?
I have been among them, answered Aragorn. They are proud and wilful, but they are true-hearted, generous in thought and deed; bold But Gandalf spoke of a rumor that they pay tribute to Mordor said Gimli.
I believe it no more than did Boromir, answered Aragorn.
You will soon learn the truth, said Legolas. Already they approach.
At length even Gimli could hear the distant beat of galloping hoofs. The horsemen, following the trail, had turned from the river, Now the cries of clear strong voices came ringing over the fields. Suddenly they swept up with a noise like thunder, and the forem

Their horses were of great stature, strong and clean-limbed; their gray coats glistened, their long tails flowed in the wind, thei In pairs they galloped by, and though every now and then one rose in his stirrups and gazed ahead and to either side, they appeare What news from the North, Riders of Rohan?
With astonishing speed and skill they checked their steeds, wheeled, and came charging round. Soon the three companions found them Without a word or cry, suddenly, the Riders halted. A thicket of spears were pointed towards the strangers; and some of the horsem Who are you, and what are you doing in this land? said the Rider, using the Common Speech of the West, in a manner and tone simila I am called Strider, answered Aragorn. I came out of the North. I am hunting Orcs.
The Rider leaped from his horse. Giving his spear to another who rode up and dismounted at his side, he drew his sword and stood f At first I thought that you yourselves were Orcs, he said; but now I see that it is not so. Indeed you know little of Orcs, if you No, said Aragorn. One only of us is an Elf, Legolas from the Woodland Realm in distant Mirkwood. But we have passed through Lothló The Rider looked at them with renewed wonder, but his eyes hardened. Then there is a Lady in the Golden Wood, as old tales tell! h Gimli rose and planted his feet firmly apart: his hand gripped the handle of his axe, and his dark eyes flashed. Give me your name As for that, said the Rider, staring down at the Dwarf, the stranger should declare himself first. Yet I am named Éomer son of Éom Then Éomer son of Éomund, Third Marshal of Riddermark, let Gimli the Dwarf Glóin's son warn you against foolish words. You speak e Éomer's eyes blazed, and the Men of Rohan murmured angrily, and closed in, advancing their spears. I would cut off your head, bear He stands not alone, said Legolas, bending his bow and fitting an arrow with hands that moved quicker than sight. You would die be Éomer raised his sword, and things might have gone ill, but Aragorn sprang between them, and raised his hand. Your pardon, Éomer! I will, said Éomer lowering his blade. But wanderers in the Riddermark would be wise to be less haughty in these days of doubt. Fi First tell me whom you serve, said Aragorn. Are you friend or foe of Sauron, the Dark Lord of Mordor?
I serve only the Lord of the Mark, Théoden King son of Thengel, answered Éomer. We do not serve the Power of the Black Land far aw I serve no man, said Aragorn; but the servants of Sauron I pursue into whatever land they may go. There are few among mortal Men w Aragorn threw back his cloak. The elven-sheath glittered as he grasped it, and the bright blade of Andúril shone like a sudden fla Gimli and Legolas looked at their companion in amazement, for they had not seen him in this mood before. He seemed to have grown i Éomer stepped back and a look of awe was on his face. He cast down his proud eyes. These are indeed strange days, he muttered. Dre Tell me, lord, he said, what brings you here? And what was the meaning of the dark words? Long has Boromir son of Denethor been go The doom of choice, said Aragorn. You may say this to Théoden son of Thengel: open war lies before him, with Sauron or against him That you need not pursue them further, said Éomer. The Orcs are destroyed.
And our friends?
We found none but Orcs.
But that is strange indeed, said Aragorn. Did you search the slain? Were there no bodies other than those of orc-kind? They would There were no dwarves nor children, said Éomer. We counted all the slain and despoiled them, and then we piled the carcasses and b We do not speak of dwarves or children, said Gimli. Our friends were hobbits.
Hobbits? said Éomer. And what may they be? It is a strange name.
A strange name for a strange folk, said Gimli. But these were very dear to us. It seems that you have heard in Rohan of the words Halflings! laughed the Rider that stood beside Éomer. Halflings! But they are only a little people in old songs and children's tal A man may do both, said Aragorn. For not we but those who come after will make the legends of our time. The green earth, say you? Time is pressing, said the Rider, not heeding Aragorn. We must hasten south, lord. Let us leave these wild folk to their fancies. Peace, Éothain! said Eomer in his own tongue. Leave me a while. Tell the _éored_ to assemble on the path and make ready to ride to

Muttering Éothain retired, and spoke to the others. Soon they drew off and left Éomer alone with the three companions.
All that you say is strange, Aragorn. he said. Yet you speak the truth, that is plain: the Men of the Mark do not lie, and therefo I set out from Imladris, as it is named in the rhyme, many weeks ago, answered Aragorn. With me went Boromir of Minas Tirith. My e Gandalf! Eomer exclaimed. Gandalf Greyhame is known in the Mark: but his name, I warn you, is no longer a password to the king's f Indeed since his last coming in the summer all things have gone missing. At that time our trouble with Saruman began. Until then w Then Shadowfax has found his way alone from the far North, said Aragorn; for it was there that he and Gandalf parted. But wings! G That is heavy tidings, said Éomer. At least to me, and to many; though not to all, as you may find, if you come to the king.
It is tidings more grievous than any in this land can understand, though it may touch them sorely ere the year is much older, said Your news is all of woe! cried Éomer in dismay. Great harm is this death to Minas Tirith, and to us all. That was a worthy man! Al It is now the fourth day since he was slain, answered Aragorn, and since the evening of that day we have journeyed from the shadow On foot? cried Éomer.
Yes, even as you see us.
Wide wonder came into Éomer's eyes. Strider is too poor a name, son of Arathorn, he said. Wingfoot I name you. This deed of the th But now, lord, what would you have me do! I must return in haste to Théoden. I spoke warily before my men. It is true that we are Then you do not pay tribute to Sauron? said Gimli.
We do not and we never have. said Éomer with a flash of his eyes; though it comes to my ears that that lie has been told. Some yea But at this time our chief concern is with Saruman. He has claimed lordship over all this land, and there has been war between us It is ill dealing with such a foe: he is a wizard both cunning and dwimmer-crafty, having many guises. He walks here and there, th I will come when I may, said Aragorn.
Come now! said Éomer. The Heir of Elendil would be a strength indeed to the Sons of Eorl in this evil tide. There is a battle even Indeed in this riding north I went without the king's leave, for in my absence his house is left with little guard. But scouts war Nevertheless we put an end to them. But we have been too long away. We are needed south and west. Will you not eat? There are spar I thank you for your fair words, said Aragorn, and my heart desires to come with you; but I cannot desert my friends while hope re Hope does not remain, said Éomer. You will not find your friends on the North-borders.
Yet my friends are not behind. We found a clear token not far from the East Wall that one at least of them was still alive there. Then what do you think has become of them?
I don't know. They may have been slain and burned among the Orcs; but that you will say cannot be, and I do not fear it. I can onl I would swear that no Orc escaped after we sighted them, said Éomer. We reached the forest-eaves before them, and if after that an Our friends were dressed even as we are, said Aragorn; and you passed us by under the full light of day.
I had forgotten that, said Éomer. It is hard to be sure of anything among so many marvels. The world is all grown strange. Elf and As he ever has judged, said Aragorn. Good and ill have not changed since yesterday; nor are they one thing among Elves and Dwarves True indeed, said Éomer. But I do not doubt you, nor the deed which my heart would do. Yet I am not free to do all as I would. It I do not think your law was made for such a chance, said Aragorn. Nor indeed am I a stranger; for I have been in this land before, Éomer was silent for a moment, then he spoke. We both have need of haste, he said. My company chafes to be away, and every hour le I will not, said Aragorn.

There was great wonder, and many dark and doubtful glances, among his men, when Éomer gave orders that the spare horses were to be It may be well enough for this lord of the race of Gondor, as he claims, he said, but who has heard of a horse of the Mark being g

No one, said Gimli. And do not trouble: no one will ever hear of it. I would sooner walk than sit on the back of any beast so grea But you must ride now, or you will hinder us, said Aragorn.
Come, you shall sit behind me, friend Gimli, said Legolas. Then all will be well, and you need neither borrow a horse nor be troub A great dark-grey horse was brought to Aragorn, and he mounted it. Hasufel is his name, said Éomer. May he bear you well and to be A smaller and lighter horse, but restive and fiery, was brought to Legolas. Arod was his name. But Legolas asked them to take off Farewell, and may you find what you seek! cried Éomer. Return with what speed you may, and let our swords hereafter shine together "I will come," said Aragorn.
And I will come, too, said Gimli. The matter of the Lady Galadriel lies still between us. I have yet to teach you gentle speech. We shall see, said Éomer. So many strange things have chanced that to learn the praise of a fair lady under the loving strokes of With that they parted. Very swift were the horses of Rohan. When after a little Gimli looked back, the company of Eomer were alrea Aragorn dismounted and surveyed the ground, then leaping back into the saddle, he rode away for some distance eastward, keeping to There is little to discover, he said when he returned. The main trail is all confused with the passage of the horsemen as they cam As they rode forward the day was overcast. Low gray clouds came over the Wold. A mist shrouded the sun. Ever nearer the tree-clad At last as the afternoon was waning they came to the eaves of the forest, and in an open glade among the first trees they found th Aragorn and his companions searched far and wide about the field of battle, but the light faded, and evening soon drew down, dim a We can do no more, said Gimli sadly. We have been set many riddles since we came to Tol Brandir, but this is the hardest to unrave But Gandalf was not, said Legolas.
But Gandalf chose to come himself, and he was the first to be lost answered Gimli. His foresight failed him.
The counsel of Gandalf was not founded on foreknowledge of safety, for himself or for others, said Aragorn. There are some things A little way beyond the battle-field they made their camp under a spreading tree: it looked like a chestnut, and yet it still bore Gimli shivered. They had brought only one piece of blanket. Let us light a fire, he said. I care no longer for the danger. Let the If those unhappy hobbits are astray in the woods, it might draw them hither, said Legolas.
And it might draw other things, neither Orc nor Hobbit, said Aragorn. We are near to the mountain-marches of the traitor Saruman. But the Rohirrim made a great burning here yesterday, said Gimli, and they felled trees for the fire, as can be seen. Yet they pas They were many, said Aragorn, and they do not heed the wrath of Fangorn, for they come here seldom, and they do not go under the t There is no need, said Gimli. The Riders have left chip and bough enough, and there is dead wood lying in plenty. He went off to g When the Dwarf had a small bright blaze going, the three companions drew close to it and sat together, shrouding the light with th Look! he said. The tree is glad of the fire!
It may have been that the dancing shadows tricked their eyes, but certainly to each of the companions the boughs appeared to be be There was a silence, for suddenly the dark and unknown forest, so near at hand, made itself felt as a great brooding presence, ful Celeborn warned us not to go far into Fangorn, he said. Do you know why, Aragorn? What are the fables of the forest that Boromir h I have heard many tales in Gondor and elsewhere, said Aragorn, but if it were not for the words of Celeborn I should consider them You have journeyed further than I, said Legolas. I have heard nothing of this in my own land, save only songs that tell how the On Yes, it is old, said Aragorn, as old as the forest by the Barrow-downs, and it is far greater. Elrond says that the two are akin, And I do not wish to know, said Gimli. Let nothing that dwells in Fangorn be troubled on my account!
They now drew lots for the watches, and the lot for the first watch fell to Gimli. The others lay down. Almost at once sleep laid With that he fell asleep. Legolas already lay motionless, his fair hands folded upon his breast, his eyes unclosed, blending livin Suddenly Gimli looked up, and there just on the edge of the fire-light stood an old bent man, leaning on a staff, and wrapped in a Well, father, what can we do for you? said Aragorn, leaping to his feet. Come and be warm, if you are cold! He strode forward, but Suddenly Legolas gave a cry. The horses! The horses!
The horses were gone. They had dragged their pickets and disappeared. For me time the three companions stood still and silent, tro

Well, they are gone, said Aragorn at last. We cannot find them or catch them; so that if they do not return of their own will, we Feet! said Gimli. But we cannot eat them as well as walk on them. He threw some fuel on the fire and slumped down beside it.
Only a few hours ago you were unwilling to sit on a horse of Rohan, laughed Legolas. You will make a rider yet. It seems unlikely that I shall have the chance, said Gimli.
If you wish to know what I think, he began again after a while I think it was Saruman. Who else? Remember the words of Éomer: he w I mark them, said Aragorn. But I marked also that this old man had a hat not a hood. Still I do not doubt that you guess right, an The night passed slowly. Legolas followed Aragorn, and Gimli followed Legolas, and their watches wore away. But nothing happened.


The Uruk-Hai

Pippin lay in a dark and troubled dream: it seemed that he could hear his own small voice echoing in black tunnels, calling _Frodo He woke up. Cold air blew on his face. He was lying on his back. Evening was coming and the sky above was growing dim. He turned a Slowly in Pippin's aching head memory pieced itself together and became separated from dream-shadows. Of course: he and Merry had Then Boromir had come leaping through the trees. He had made them fight. He slew many of them and the rest fled. But they had not I suppose I was knocked on the head, he said to himself. I wonder if poor Merry is much hurt. What has happened to Boromir? Why di He could not answer the questions. He felt cold and sick. I wish Gandalf had never persuaded Elrond to let us come, he thought. Wh

He struggled a little, quite uselessly. One of the Orcs sitting nearby laughed and said something to a companion in their abominab If I had my way, you'd wish you were dead now, said the other. I'd make you squeak, you miserable rat. He stooped over Pippin brin Terrified Pippin lay still, though the pain at his wrists and ankles was growing, and the stones beneath him were boring into his To Pippin's surprise he found that much of the talk was intelligible many of the Orcs were using ordinary language. Apparently the There is no time to kill them properly, said one. No time for play on this trip.
That cannot be helped, said another. But why not kill them quickly, kill them now? They're a cursed nuisance, and we're in a hurry Orders. said a third voice in a deep growl. _'Kill all but_NOT_ the Halfings; they are to be brought back ALIVE as quickly as poss What are they wanted for? asked several voices. Why else? Do they give good sport?
No! I heard that one of them has got something, something that's wanted for the War, some elvish plot or other. Anyway they'll bot Is that all you know? Why don't we search them and find out? We might find something that we could use ourselves.
That is a very interesting remark, sneered by a voice, softer than the others but more evil. I may have to report that. The prison And mine too, said the deep voice. _Alive and as captured; no spoiling_. Those are my orders.
Not our orders! said one of the earlier voices. We have come all the way from the Mines to kill, and avenge our people. I wish to Then you can wish again, said the growling voice. I am Uglúk. I command. I return to Isengard by the shortest road.
Is Saruman the master or the Great Eye? said the evil voice. We should go back at once to Lugbúrz.
If we could cross the Great River, we might, said another voice. But there are not enough of us to venture down to the bridges. I came across, said the evil voice. A winged Nazgûl awaits us northward on the east-bank.

Maybe, maybe! Then you'll fly off with our prisoners, and get all the pay and praise in Lugbúrz, and leave us to foot it as best w Aye, we must stick together, growled Uglúk. I don't trust you little swine. You've got no guts outside your own sties. But for us You have spoken more than enough, Uglúk, sneered the evil voice. I wonder how they would like it in Lugbúrz. They might think that
_Swine_ is it? How do you folk like being called _swine_ by the muck-rakers of a dirty little wizard? It's orc-flesh they eat, I'l Many loud yells in orc-speech answered him, and the ringing clash of weapons being drawn. Pippin cautiously rolled over, hoping to Uglúk shouted, and a number of other Orcs of nearly his own size ran up. Then suddenly, without warning, Uglúk sprang forwards, an Put up your weapons! shouted Uglúk. And let's have no more nonsense! We go straight west from here, and down the stairs. From ther Now, thought Pippin, if only it takes that ugly fellow a little while to get his troop under control, I've got a chance. A gleam o The Orcs were getting ready to march again, but some of the Northerners were still unwilling, and the Isengarders slew two more be

Pick up those prisoners! shouted Uglúk. Don't play any tricks with them! If they are not alive when we get back, someone else will An Orc seized Pippin like a sack. put his head between his tied hands, grabbed his arms and dragged them down, until Pippin's face Suddenly he was thrown on to the stony floor again. It was early night, but the slim moon was already falling westward. They were The scouts have come back at last, said an Orc close at hand.
Well, what did you discover? growled the voice of Uglúk.
Only a single horseman, and he made off westwards. All is clear now.
Now, I daresay. But how long? You fools! You should have shot him. He'll raise the alarm. The cursed horse breeders will hear of u A shadow bent over Pippin. It was Uglúk. Let's get up! said the Orc. My lads are tired of lugging you about. We have got to climb He cut the thongs round Pippin's legs and ankles, picked him up by his hair and stood him on his feet. Pippin fell down, and Uglúk Now for the other! said Uglúk. Pippin saw him go to Merry, who was lying close by, and kick him. Merry groaned. Seizing him roughl The Orcs clapped and hooted. Can't take his medicine, they jeered. Doesn't know what's good for him. Alas! We shall have some fun But at the moment Uglúk was not engaged in sport. He needed speed and had to humor unwilling followers. He was healing Merry in or Hooray, Pippin! he said. So you've come on this little expedition, too? Where do we get bed and breakfast?
Now then! said Uglúk. None of that! Hold your tongues. No talk to one another. Any trouble will be reported at the other end, and

The orc-band began to descend a narrow ravine leading down into the misty plain below. Merry and Pippin, separated by a dozen Orcs Now straight on! shouted Uglúk. West and a little north. Follow Lugdush.
But what are we going to do at sunrise? said some of the Northerners.
Go on running, said Uglúk. What do you think? Sit on the grass and wait for the Whiteskins to join the picnic? But we cannot run in the sunlight.
You'll run with me behind you, said Uglúk. Run! Or you'll never see your beloved holes again. By the White Hand! What's the use of Then the whole company began to run with the long loping strides of Orcs. They kept no order, thrusting, jostling, and cursing; ye Every now and again there came into his mind unbidden a vision of the keen face of Strider bending over a dark trail, and running, They had gone only a mile or so from the cliff when the land sloped down into a wide shallow depression, where the ground was soft Alas! Steady now! shouted Uglúk from the rear.
A sudden thought leapt into Pippin's mind, and he acted upon it at once. He swerved aside to the right, and dived out of the reach Halt! yelled Uglúk.
There was for a moment turmoil and confusion. Pippin sprang up and ran. But the Orcs were after him. Some suddenly loomed up right No hope of escape! thought Pippin. But there is a hope that I have left some of my own marks unspoilt on the wet ground. He groped A whip-thong curled round his legs, and he stifled a cry.
Enough! shouted Uglúk running up. He's still got to run a long way yet. Make them both run! Just use the whip as a reminder. But that's not all, he snarled, turning to Pippin. I shan't forget. Payment is only put off. Read it!

Neither Pippin nor Merry remembered much of the later part of the journey. Evil dreams and evil waking were blended into a long tu The warmth of the orc-draught had gone. Pippin felt cold and sick again. Suddenly he fell face downwards on the turf. Hard hands w Dimly he became aware of voices clamoring: it seemed that many of the Orcs were demanding a halt. Uglúk was shouting. He felt hims There he lay for a while, fighting with despair. His head swam, but from the heat in his body he guessed that he had been given an He sat up and looked about. Merry was not far away. They were by the banks of a swift narrow river. Ahead mountains loomed: a tall There was much shouting and debating among the Orcs; a quarrel seemed on the point of breaking out again between the Northerners a Very well, said Uglúk. Leave them to me then! No killing, as I have told you before; but if you want to throw away what we've come There was some cursing and scuffling, and then most of the Northerners broke away and dashed off, over a hundred of them, running Now we'll deal with Grishnákh, said Uglúk; but some even of his own followers were looking uneasily southwards.
I know, growled Uglúk. The cursed horse-boys have got wind of us. But that's all your fault, Snaga. You and the other scouts ought At that moment Pippin saw why some of the troop had been pointing eastward. From that direction there now came hoarse cries, and t I've returned to see that orders are carried out and the prisoners safe, answered Grishnákh.
Indeed! said Uglúk. Waste of effort. I'll see that orders are carried out at my command. And what else did you come back for? You I left a fool, snarled Grishnákh. But there were some stout fellows with him that were too good to lose. I knew you'd lead them in Splendid! laughed Uglúk. But unless you've got some guts for fighting, you've taken the wrong way. Lugbúrz was your road. The Whit
_Nazgûl, Nazgûl_, said Grishnákh, shivering and licking his lips, as if the word had a foul taste that he savored painfully. You s You seem to know a lot, said Uglúk. More than is good for you, I guess. Perhaps those in Lugbúrz might wonder how, and why. But in

The Isengarders seized Merry and Pippin again and slung them on their backs. Then the troop started off. Hour after hour they ran, Pippin was bruised and torn, his aching head was grated by the filthy jowl and hairy ear of the Orc that held him. Immediately in In the afternoon Uglúk's troop overtook the Northerners. They were flagging in the rays of the bright sun, winter sun shining in a Maggots! jeered the Isengarders. You're cooked. The Whiteskins will catch you and eat you. They're coming!
A cry from Grishnákh showed that this was not merely jest. Horsemen, riding very swiftly, had indeed been sighted: still far behin The Isengarders began to run with a redoubled pace that astonished Pippin, a terrific spurt it seemed for the end of a race. Then

They will make it yet. They will escape, thought Pippin. And then he managed to twist his neck. so as to glance back with one eye He wondered very much what kind of folk they were. He wished now that he had learned more in Rivendell, and looked more at maps an But how will they know that we are not Orcs? he thought I don't suppose they've ever heard of hobbits down here. I suppose I ought A few of the riders appeared to be bowmen, skilled at shooting from a running horse. Riding swiftly into range they shot arrows at

Night came down without the Riders closing in for battle. Many Orcs had fallen, but fully two hundred remained. In the early darkn Well, here we are, sneered Grishnákh. Fine leadership! I hope the great Uglúk will lead us out again.
Put those Halflings down! ordered Uglúk, taking no notice of Grishnákh. You, Lugdush, get two others and stand guard over them! Th The last part of the order was carried out mercilessly. But Pippin found that for the first time he was close to Merry. The Orcs w

I don't think much of this, said Merry. I feel almost done in. Don't think I could crawl away far, even if I was free.
_Sail!_ whispered Pippin. _Lembas:_ I've got some. Have you? I don't think they've taken anything but our swords.
Yes, I had a packet in my pocket, answered Merry, but it must be battered to crumbs. Anyway I can't put my mouth in my pocket! You won't have to. I've-'; but just then a savage kick warned Pippin that the noise had died down, and the guards were watchful.

The night was cold and still. All round the knoll on which the Orcs were gathered little watch-fires sprang up, golden-red in the They'll wait for the Sun, curse them! growled one of the guards. Why don't we get together and charge through? What's old Uglúk th I daresay you would, snarled Uglúk stepping up from behind. Meaning I don't think at all, eh? Curse you! You're as bad as the othe There's only one thing those maggots can do: they can see like gimlets in the dark. But these Whiteskins have better night-eyes th Uglúk's words were enough, apparently, to satisfy the Isengarders; but the other Orcs were both dispirited and rebellious. They po Pippin and Merry sat up. Their guards, the Isengarders, had gone with Uglúk. But if the hobbits had any thought of escape, it was Well, my little ones! said Grishnákh in a soft whisper. Enjoying your nice rest? Or not? A little awkwardly placed, perhaps: sword The thought came suddenly into Pippin's mind, as if caught directly from the urgent thought of his enemy: Grishnákh knows about th I don't think you will find it that way, he whispered. It is not easy to find.
_Find it?_ said Grishnákh: his fingers stopped crawling and gripped Pippin's shoulder. Find what? What are you talking about, litt The hobbits felt Grishnákh's fingers twitch. O ho! hissed the goblin softly. That's what he means, is it? O ho! Very ve-ry dangero Perhaps, said Merry, now alert and aware of Pippin's guess. Perhaps; and not only for us. Still you know your own business best. D Do I want it? Do I want it? said Grishnákh, as if puzzled; but his arms were trembling. What would I give for it? What do you mean We mean, said Pippin, choosing his words carefully, that it is no good groping in the dark. We could save you time and trouble. Bu My dear tender little fools, hissed Grishnákh, everything you have, and everything you know, will be got out of you in due time: e I find it quite easy to believe, said Merry. But you haven't got your prey home yet. And it doesn't seem to be going your way, wha Grishnákh began to lose his temper. The name of Saruman seemed specially to enrage him. Time was passing and the disturbance was d Have you got it - either of you? he snarled.
_Gollum, gollum!_ said Pippin. "Untie our legs!" said Merry.
They felt the Orc's arms trembling violently. Curse you, you filthy little worm! he hissed. How are your legs? I'll untie every st Suddenly he seized them. The strength in his long arms and shoulders was terrifying. He tucked them one under each arm, and crushe After going a dozen yards he halted, peering and listening. Nothing could be seen or heard. He crept slowly on, bent almost double Grishnákh flung himself on the ground flat, dragging the hobbits under him; then he drew his sword. No doubt he meant to kill his The hobbits remained flat on the ground, as Grishnákh had left them. Another horseman came riding swiftly to his comrade's aid. Wh

At last Merry stirred and whispered softly: So far so good: but how are _we_ to avoid being spitted?
The answer came almost immediately. The cries of Grishnákh had roused the Orcs. From the yells and screeches that came from the kn Now, said Merry, if only we had our legs and hands free, we might get away. But I cannot touch the knots, and I cannot bite them. No need to try, said Pippin. I was going to tell you: I've managed to free my hands. These loops are only left for show. You'd bet He slipped the cords off his wrists, and fished out a packet. The cakes were broken, but good, still in their leaf-wrappings. The We must be off, he said. Half a moment! Grishnákh's sword was lying close at hand, but it was too heavy and clumsy for him to use; Now for it! he said. When we've warmed up a bit, perhaps we shall be able to stand again, and walk. But in any case we had better They crawled. The turf was deep and yielding, and that helped them: but it seemed a long slow business. They gave the watch-fire a The sounds had died away. Evidently Mauhur and his lads had been killed or driven off. The Riders had returned to their silent omi We must get under cover, said Pippin, or we shall be seen. It will not be any comfort to us, if these riders discover that we are Merry got up. Yes, he said, I can manage it. _Lembas_ does put heart into you! A more wholesome sort of feeling, too, than the hea Not here, the banks are too steep, said Pippin. Forward now!
They turned and walked side by side slowly along the line of the river. Behind them the light grew in the East. As they walked the You seem to have been doing well, Master Took, said Merry. You will get almost a chapter in old Bilbo's book, if ever I get a chan I shall have to brush up my toes, if I am to get level with you. Indeed Cousin Brandybuck is going to the front now. This is where Even as he spoke the dark edge of the forest loomed up straight before them. Night seemed to have taken refuge under its great tre Lead on, Master Brandybuck! said Pippin. Or lead back! We have been warned against Fangorn. But one so knowing will not have forgo I have not, answered Merry; but the forest seems better to me, all the same, than turning back into the middle of a battle.

He led the way in under the huge branches of the trees. Old beyond guessing, they seemed. Great trailing beards of lichen hung fro Far over the Great River, and the Brown Lands, leagues upon gray leagues away, the Dawn came, red as flame. Loud rang the hunting- Merry and Pippin heard, clear in the cold air, the neighing of war-horses, and the sudden singing of many men. The Sun's limb was We have watched too long, said Merry. There's Uglúk! I don't want to meet him again. The hobbits turned and fled deep into the sha So it was that they did not sec the last stand, when Uglúk was overtaken and brought to bay at the very edge of Fangorn. There he Then when they had laid their fallen comrades in a mound and had sung their praises, the Riders made a great fire and scattered th


Treebeard

Meanwhile the hobbits went with as much speed as the dark and tangled forest allowed, following the line of the running stream, we At last Merry halted. We can't go on like this, he panted. I want some air.
Let's have a drink at any rate, said Pippin. I'm parked. He clambered on to a great tree-root that wound down into the stream, and I suppose you haven't lost us already? said Pippin, leaning back against a great tree-trunk. We can at least follow the course of We could, if our legs would do it, said Merry; and if we could breathe properly.
Yes, it is all very dim, and stuffy, in here, said Pippin. It reminds me, somehow, of the old room in the Great Place of the Tooks But the Sun at any rate must peep in sometimes. said Merry. It does not look or feel at all like Bilbo's description of Mirkwood. No, nor hobbits, said Pippin. And I don't like the thought of trying to get through it either. Nothing to eat for a hundred miles, Low, said Merry. We ran off with nothing but a couple of spare packets of _lembas_, and left everything else behind. They looked a Well, we'd better decide on the way now, said Pippin. The morning must be getting on.
Just then they became aware of a yellow light that had appeared, some way further on into the wood: shafts of sunlight seemed sudd Hullo! said Merry. The Sun must have run into a cloud while we've been under these trees, and now she has run out again; or else s They found it was further than they thought. The ground was rising steeply still, and it was becoming increasingly stony. The ligh In the face of the stony wall there was something like a stair: natural perhaps, and made by the weathering and splitting of the r Up we go! said Merry joyfully. Now for a breath of air, and a sight of the land!
They climbed and scrambled up the rock. If the stairs had been made it was for bigger feet and longer legs than theirs. They were The wind's changing, said Merry. It's turned east again. It feels cool here.

Yes, said Pippin; I'm afraid this is only a passing gleam, and it will all go gray again. What a pity! This shaggy old forest look Almost felt you liked the Forest! That's good! That's uncommonly kind of you, said a strange voice. Turn round and let me have a l They found that they were looking at a most extraordinary face. It belonged to a large Man-like, almost Troll-like, figure, at lea One felt as if there was an enormous well behind them, filled up with ages of memory and long, slow, steady thinking; but their su
_Hrum, Hoom_, murmured the voice, a deep voice like a very deep woodwind instrument. Very odd indeed! Do not be hasty, that is my Pippin, though still amazed, no longer felt afraid. Under those eyes he felt a curious suspense, but not fear. Please. he said, wh A queer look came into the old eyes, a kind of wariness; the deep wells were covered over. _Hrum_, now, answered the voice; well, An _Ent_? said Merry. What's that? But what do you call yourself? What's your real name?
Hoo now! replied Treebeard. Hoo! Now that would be telling! Not so hasty. And _I_ am doing the asking. You are in _my_ country. Wh

Learn now the lore of Living Creatures! First name the four, the free peoples:
Eldest of all, the elf-children;
Dwarf the delver, dark are these houses; Ent the earthborn, old as mountains;
             Man the mortal, master of horses: Hmm, hmm, hmm.
Beaver the builder, buck the leaper, Bear the bee-hunter, boar the fighter; Hound is hungry, hare is fearful...

Hmm, hmm.

Eagle in the eyrie, ox in the pasture, Hart horn-crowned; the swiftest hawk Swan the whitest, serpent the coldest...

Hoom, hm; hmm hmm how did it go Room then, room then, roomty toom then. It was a long list. But anyway you don't seem to fit in an We always seem to have got left out of the old lists, and the old stories, said Merry. Yet we've been about for quite a long time. Why not make a new line? said Pippin.

Half-grown hobbits, the hole-dwellers.

Put us in amongst the four, next to Man (the Big People) and you've got it.
Hmm! Not bad, not bad, said Treebeard. That would do. So you live in holes, eh? It sounds very right and proper. Who calls you _ho Nobody else calls us hobbits; we call ourselves that, said Pippin.
Hmm, hmm! Come now! Not so hasty! You call _yourselves_ hobbits? But you shouldn't go telling just anybody. You'll be letting out We are not careful about that, said Merry. As a matter of fact I'm a Brandybuck, Meriadoc Brandybuck, though most people call me j And I'm a Took, Peregrine Took, but I'm generally called Pippin, or even Pip.
Hm, but you _are_ hasty folk, I see, said Treebeard. I am honored by your confidence; but you should not be too free all at once. But now, and the eyes became very bright and present, seeming to grow smaller and almost sharp, what is going on? What are you doi There is quite a lot going on, said Merry: and even if we tried to be quick, it would take a long time to tell. But you told us no Yes, I do know him: the only wizard that really cares about trees said Treebeard. Do you know him?
Yes, said Pippin sadly, we did. He was a great friend, and he was our guide.
Then I can answer your other questions, said Treebeard. I am not going to do anything _with_ you: not if you mean by that do somet Yes, we do, said Pippin sadly. The story seems to be going on, but I am afraid Gandalf has fallen out of it.
Hoo, come now! said Treebeard. Hoom, hm, ah well. He paused, looking long at the hobbits: Hoom, ah, well I don't know what to say. If you would like to hear more. said Merry, we will tell you. But it will take some time. Wouldn't you like to put us down? Couldn Hmm, _tired_? No. I am not tired. I don't get tired easily. And I do not sit down. I am not very, um, bendable. But there, the Sun Hill? suggested Pippin. Shelf? Step? suggested Merry.
Treebeard repeated the words thoughtfully. _Hill_. Yes, that was it. But it is a hasty word for a thing that has stood here ever s Where shall we go? asked Merry.
To my home, or one of my homes, replied Treebeard. Is it far?
I don't know. You might call it far, perhaps. But what does that matter?
Well, you see, we have lost all our belongings, said Merry. We have only a little food.
O! Hmm! You need not trouble about that, said Treebeard. I can give you a drink that will keep you green and growing for a long, l Holding the hobbits gently but firmly, one in the crook of each arm, Treebeard lifted up first one large foot and then the other, But once he set off with long deliberate strides through the trees, deeper and deeper into the wood, never far from the stream, cl The hobbits were silent for some time. They felt, oddly enough, safe and comfortable, and they had a great deal to think and wonde Please, Treebeard, he said, could I ask you something? Why did Celeborn warn us against your forest? He told us not to risk gettin Hmm, did he now? rumbled Treebeard. And I might have said much the same, if you had been going the other way. Do not risk getting And so it is this. Folk have come to grief here. Aye, they have, to grief._ Laurelindórenan lindelorendor malinornélion ornemalin_

Taurelilómëa-tumbalemorna Tumbaletaurëa Lómëanor,_*1_

that is what they used to say. Things have changed, but it is still true in places. What do you mean? said Pippin. What is true?
The trees and the Ents, said Treebeard. I do not understand all that goes on myself, so I cannot explain it to you. Some of us are When that happens to a tree, you find that some have bad hearts. Nothing to do with their wood: I do not mean that. Why, I knew so Like the Old Forest away to the north, do you mean? asked Merry.
Aye, aye. something like, but much worse. I do not doubt there is some shadow of the Great Darkness lying there still away north; We are tree-herds, we old Ents. Few enough of us are left now. Sheep get like shepherds, and shepherds like sheep, it is said; but Those were the broad days! Time was when I could walk and sing all day and hear no more than the echo of my own voice in the hollo Treebeard fell silent, striding along, and yet making hardly a sound with his great feet. Then he began to hum again, and passed i

In the willow-meads of Tasarinan I walked in the Spring. Ah! the sight and the smell of the Spring in Nan-tasarion! And I said that was good.
I wandered in Summer in the elm-woods of Ossiriand.
Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by the Seven Rivers of Ossir! And I thought that was best.
To the beeches of Neldoreth I came in the Autumn.
Ah! the gold and the red and the sighing of leaves in the Autumn in Taur-na-neldor! It was more than I wanted.
To the pine-trees upon the highland of Dorthonion I climbed in the Winter.
Ah! the wind and the whiteness and the black branches of Winter upon Orod-na-Thôn! My voice went up and sang in the sky.
And now all those lands lie under the wave.
And I walk in Ambaróna, in Tauremorna, in Aldalómë. In my own land, in the country of Fangorn,
Where the roots are long,
And the years lie thicker than the leaves In Tauremornalómë.

He ended, and strode on silently, and in all the wood, as far as ear could reach, there was not a sound.

The day waned, and dusk was twined about the boles of the trees. At last the hobbits saw, rising dimly before them, a steep dark l Treebeard strode up the slope, hardly slackening his pace. Suddenly before them the hobbits saw a wide opening. Two great trees st At the far end the rock-wall was sheer, but at the bottom it had been hollowed back into a shallow bay with an arched roof: the on

Hmm! Here we are! said Treebeard, breaking his long silence. I have brought you about seventy thousand ent-strides, but what that For a moment Treebeard stood under the rain of the falling spring, and took a deep breath; then he laughed, and passed inside. A g Well, well, now we can talk again, said Treebeard. You are thirsty I expect. Perhaps you are also tired. Drink this! He went to th This is an ent-house, he said, and there are no seats, I fear. But you may sit on the table. Picking up the hobbits he set them on The drink was like water, indeed very like the taste of the drafts they had drunk from the Entwash near, the borders of the forest At last he set the bowl down again. Ah - ah, he sighed. Hm, hmm, now we can talk easier. You can sit on the floor, and I will lie

On the right side of the bay there was a great bed on low legs; not more than a couple of feet high, covered deep in dried grass a Now tell me your tale, and do not hurry! said Treebeard.
The hobbits began to tell him the story of their adventures ever since they left Hobbiton. They followed no very clear order, for He was immensely interested in everything: in the Black Riders, in Elrond, and Rivendell, in the Old Forest, and Tom Bombadil, in
_Entwives_? said Pippin. Do they like you at all?
Yes, hm, well no: I don't really know now, said Treebeard thoughtfully. But they would like your country, so I just wondered. Treebeard was however especially interested in everything that concerned Gandalf; and most interested of all in Saruman's doings. Hmmm! said Treebeard, when at last their story had wound and wandered down to the battle of the Orcs and the Riders of Rohan. Well And what about yourself? asked Merry.
Hoom, hm, I have not troubled about the Great Wars, said Treebeard; they mostly concern Elves and Men. That is the business of Wiz I used to be anxious when the shadow lay on Mirkwood, but when it removed to Mordor, I did not trouble for a while: Mordor is a lo But Saruman now! Saruman is a neighbor: I cannot overlook him. I must do something, I suppose. I have often wondered lately what I Who is Saruman? asked Pippin. Do you know anything about his history? Saruman is a Wizard, answered Treebeard. More than that I ca I think that I now understand what he is up to. He is plotting to become a Power. He has a mind of metal and wheels; and he does n Treebeard rumbled for a moment, as if he were pronouncing some deep, subterranean Entish curse. Some time ago I began to wonder ho Curse him, root and branch! Many of those trees were my friends creatures I had known from nut and acorn; many had voices of their Treebeard raised himself from his bed with a jerk, stood up, and thumped his hand on the table. The vessels of light trembled and I will stop it! he boomed. And you shall come with me. You may be able to help me. You will be helping your own friends that way, We will come with you, said Merry. We will do what we can.
Yes! said Pippin. I should like to see the White Hand overthrown. I should like to be there, even if I could not be of much use: I Good! Good! said Treebeard. But I spoke hastily. We must not be hasty. I have become too hot. I must cool myself and think; fur it He strode to the archway and stood for some time under the falling rain of the spring. Then he laughed and shook himself, and wher

After some time the hobbits heard him murmuring again. He seemed to be counting on his fingers. Fangorn, Finglas, Fladrif, aye, ay Why are there so few when you have lived in this country so long? asked Pippin. Have a great many died?
Oh, no! said Treebeard. None have died from within, as you might say. Some have fallen in the evil chances of the long years, of c How very sad! said Pippin. How was it that they all died?
They did not _day_! said Treebeard. I never said _died_. We lost them, I said. We lost them and we cannot find them. He sighed. I Well, I am afraid the songs have not come west over the Mountains to the Shire, said Merry. Won't you tell us some more, or sing u Yes, I will indeed, said Treebeard, seeming pleased with the request. But I cannot tell it properly, only in short; and then we mu

It is rather a strange and sad story, he went on after a pause. When the world was young, and the woods were wide and wild, the En I remember it was long ago - in the time of the war between Sauron and the Men of the Sea - desire came over me to see Fimbrethil There was an Elvish song that spoke of this, or at least so I understood it. It used to be sung up and down the Great River. It wa

ENT. _When Spring unfolds the beechen leaf, and sap is in the bough;
When light is on the wild-wood stream, and wind is on the brow; When stride is long, and breath is deep, and keen the mountain-air, Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is fair!_
ENTWIFE. _When Spring is come to garth and field, and corn is in the blade; When blossom like a shining snow is laid on the orchard;
When shower and Sun upon the Earth with fragrance fill the air, I'll linger here, and will not come, because my land is fair._
ENT. _When Summer lies upon the world, and in a noon of gold

Beneath the roof of sleeping leaves the dreams of trees unfold;
When the woodland halls are green and cool, and the wind is in the West, Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is best!_
ENTWIFE. _When Summer warms the hanging fruit and burns the berry brown;
When straw is gold, and ear is white, and harvest comes to town; When honey spills, and apple swells, though the wind be in the West, I'll linger here beneath the Sun, because my land is best!_
ENT. _When Winter comes, the winter wild that hill and wood shall slay;
When trees shall fall and starless night devour the sunless day; When the wind is in the deadly East, then in the bitter rain I'll look for thee, and call to thee; I'll come to you again!_
ENTWIFE. _When Winter comes, and singing ends; when darkness falls at last; When broken is the barren bough, and light and labor past; I'll look for thee, and wait for thee, until we meet again:
                    Together we will take the road beneath the bitter rain!_ BOTH _Together we will take the road that leads into the West,
And far away will find a land where both our hearts may rest.'_

Treebeard ended his song. That is how it goes, he said. It is Elvish, of course: lighthearted, quickworded, and soon over. I dares We usually lie down to sleep, said Merry. We shall be all right where we are.
Lie down to sleep! said Treebeard. Why of course you do! Hm, hoom: I was forgetting: singing that song puts me in mind of old time Merry and Pippin climbed on to the bed and curled up in the soft grass and fern. It was fresh, and sweet-scented, and warm. The li They woke to find a cool sun shining into the great court, and on to the floor of the bay. Shreds of high cloud were overhead, run Hoo, ho! Good morning, Merry and Pippin! he boomed, when he saw them. You sleep long. I have been many a hundred strides already t He poured them out two full bowls from a stone jar; but from a different jar. The taste was not the same as it had been the night Where is Entmoot? Pippin ventured to ask.
Huh, eh? Entmoot? said Treebeard, turning round. It is not a place, it is a gathering of Ents - which does not often happen nowada Before long they set off. Treebeard carried the hobbits in his arms as on the previous day. At the entrance to the court he turned

They had been going for a long while - Pippin had tried to keep count of the ent-strides but had failed, getting lost at about thr Treebeard now perched Merry and Pippin on his shoulders and strode on again, every now and then sending out another horn-call, and Turning to the left and skirting this huge hedge Treebeard came in a few strides to a narrow entrance. Through it a worn path pass Several Ents had already arrived. More were coming in down the other paths, and some were now following Treebeard. As they drew ne At first Merry and Pippin were struck chiefly by the variety that they saw: the many shapes, and colors, the differences in girth; As soon as the whole company was assembled, standing in a wide circle round Treebeard, a curious and unintelligible conversation b Treebeard was immediately aware of him. _Hm, ha, hey_, my Pippin! he said, and the other Ents all stopped their chant. You are a h He put the hobbits down. Before they walked away, they bowed low. This feat seemed to amuse the Ents very much, to judge by the to

I wonder where Isengard is? said Pippin.
I don't know quite where we are, said Merry; but that peak is probably Methedras, and as far as I can remember the ring of Isengar What is Isengard like? said Pippin. I wonder what Ents can do about it anyway.
So I do, said Merry. Isengard is a sort of ring of rocks or hills, I think, with a flat space inside and an island or pillar of ro Yes! said Pippin. I know what you mean. There might be all the difference between an old cow sitting and thoughtfully chewing, and The hobbits turned back. The voices of the Ents were still rising and falling in their room. The sun had now risen high enough to At last there came a pause in the Ent-voices; and looking up they saw Treebeard coming towards them. with another Ent at his side. Hm, hoom, here I am again, said Treebeard. Are you getting weary, or feeling impatient, hmm, eh? Well, I am afraid that you must n Bregalad stood for some time surveying the hobbits solemnly; and they looked at him, wondering when he would show any signs of has Ha, hmm, my friends, let us go for a walk! he said. I am Bregalad, that is Quickbeam in your language. But it is only a nickname, He reached down two shapely arms and gave a long-fingered hand to each of the hobbits. All that day they walked about in the woods At nightfall he brought them to his ent-house: nothing more than a mossy stone set upon turves under a green bank. Rowan-trees gre There were rowan-trees in my home, said Bregalad, softly and sadly, rowan-trees that took root when I was an Enting, many many yea

O Orofarnë, Lassemista, Carnimírië!
O rowan fair, upon your hair how white the blossom lay! O rowan mine, I saw you shine upon a summer's day,
Your rind so bright, your leaves so light, your voice so cool and soft:
Upon your head how golden-red the crown you bore aloft! O rowan dead, upon your head your hair is dry and gray;
Your crown is spilled, your voice is stilled for ever and a day. O Orofarnë, Lassemista, Carnimírië!

The hobbits fell asleep to the sound of the soft singing of Bregalad, that seemed to lament in many tongues the fall of trees that

The next day they spent also in his company, but they did not go far from his house. Most of the time they sat silent under the sh The third day broke, bleak and windy. At sunrise the Ents voices rose to a great clamor and then died down again. As the morning w The afternoon came, and the sun, going west towards the mountains, sent out long yellow beams between the cracks and fissures of t Then with a crash came a great ringing shout: _ra-hoom-rah!_ The trees quivered and bent as if a gust had struck them. There was a

We come, we come with roll of drum: ta-runda runda runda rom!

The Ents were coming: ever nearer and louder rose their song:

      We come, we come with horn and drum: ta-rûna rûna rûna rom!_ Bregalad picked up the hobbits and strode from his house.
Before long they saw the marching line approaching: the Ents were swinging along with great strides down the slope towards them. T

Hoom, man! Here we come with a boom, here we come at last! called Treebeard when he caught sight of Bregalad and the hobbits. Come To Isengard! the Ents cried in many voices.
To Isengard!

To Isengard! Though Isengard be ringed and barred with doors of stone; Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as bone, We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door;
For bole and bough are burning now, the furnace roars - we go to war!
To land of gloom with tramp of doom, with roll of drum, we come, we come; To Isengard with doom we come!
With doom we come, with doom we come!

So they sang as they marched southwards.

Bregalad, his eyes shining, swung into the line beside Treebeard. The old Ent now took the hobbits back, and set them on his shoul The Ents made up their minds rather quickly, after all, didn't they? Pippin ventured to say after some time, when for a moment the Quickly? said Treebeard. Hoom! Yes, indeed. Quicker than I expected. Indeed I have not seen them roused like this for many an age. Will you really break the doors of Isengard? asked Merry.
Ho, hm, well, we could, you know! You do not know, perhaps, how strong we are. Maybe you have heard of Trolls? They are mighty str But Saruman will try to stop you. won't he?
Hm, ah, yes, that is so. I have not forgotten it. Indeed I have thought long about it. But, you see, many of the Ents are younger Treebeard marched on, singing with the others for a while. But after a time his voice died to a murmur and fell silent again. Pipp Of course, it is likely enough, my friends, he said slowly, likely enough that we are going to our doom: the last march of the Ent

The Ents went striding on at a great pace. They had descended into a long fold of the land that fell away southward; now they bega Pippin looked behind. The number of the Ents had grown - or what was happening? Where the dim bare slopes that they had crossed sh Night lies over Isengard, said Treebeard.


The White Rider

My very bones are chilled, said Gimli, flapping his arms and stamping his feet. Day had come at last. At dawn the companions had m And don't forget that old man! said Gimli. I should be happier if I could see the print of a boot.
Why would that make you happy? said Legolas.
Because an old man with feet that leave marks might be no more than he seemed, answered the Dwarf. Perhaps, said the Elf; but a heavy boot might leave no print here: the grass is deep and springy.
That would not baffle a Ranger, said Gimli. A bent blade is enough for Aragorn to read. But I do not expect him to find any traces It is likely enough, said Aragorn; yet I am not sure I am thinking of the horses. You said last night, Gimli, that they were scare No, said Legolas. I heard them clearly. But for the darkness and our own fear I should have guessed that they were wild beasts wit So I thought, said Aragorn; but I cannot read the riddle, unless they return. Eat! The light is growing fast. Let us look first an

For some time the companions crawled and groped upon the ground. The tree stood mournfully above them, its dry leaves now hanging Here at last we find news! said Aragorn. He lifted up a broken leaf for them to see, a large pale leaf of golden hue, now fading a And here is the knife that cut them! said Gimli. He stooped and drew out of a tussock, into which some heavy foot had trampled it, Well, here is the strangest riddle that we have yet found! exclaimed Legolas. A bound prisoner escapes both from the Orcs and from There was sorcery here right enough, said Gimli. What was that old man doing? What have you to say, Aragorn, to the reading of Leg Maybe, I could, said Aragorn, smiling. There are some other signs near at hand that you have not considered. I agree that the pris And how do you suppose that either of our friends came to have a hand free? asked Gimli.
I do not know how it happened, answered Aragorn. Nor do I know why an Orc was carrying them away. Not to help them to escape, we m I do not know which daunts me more: Fangorn, or the thought of the long road through Rohan on foot, said Gimli.
Then let us go to the forest, said Aragorn.

It was not long before Aragorn found fresh signs. At one point, near the bank of the Entwash, he came upon footprints: hobbit-prin One hobbit at least stood here for a while and looked back; and then he turned away into the forest, said Aragorn.
Then we must go in, too, said Gimli. But I do not like the look of this Fangorn: and we were warned against it. I wish the chase h I do not think the wood feels evil, whatever tales may say, said Legolas. He stood under the eaves of the forest, stooping forward Well, it has no reason to be angry with me, said Gimli. I have done it no harm.
That is just as well, said Legolas. But nevertheless it has suffered harm. There is something happening inside, or going to happen I feel the air is stuffy, said the Dwarf. This wood is lighter than Mirkwood, but it is musty and shabby.
It is old, very old, said the Elf. So old that I almost feel young again, as I have not felt since I journeyed with you children. I dare say you could, snorted Gimli. You are a Wood-elf, anyway, though Elves of any kind are strange folk. Yet you comfort me. Wh

With that the three hunters plunged into the forest of Fangorn. Legolas and Gimli left the tracking to Aragorn. There was little f This is good news, said Aragorn. Yet the marks are two days old And it seems that at this point the hobbits left the water-side.
Then what shall we do now? said Gimli. We cannot pursue them through the whole fastness of Fangorn. We have come ill supplied. If If that is indeed all we can do, then we must do that, said Aragorn. Let us go on.
They came at length to the steep abrupt end of Treebeard's Hill and looked up at the rock-wall with its rough steps leading to the Let us go up and look about us! said Legolas. I will feel my breath short. I should like to taste a freer air for a while.
The companions climbed up. Aragorn came last, moving slowly: he was scanning the steps and ledges closely.
I am almost sure that the hobbits have been up here, he said. But there are other marks, very strange marks, which I do not unders He stood up and looked about, but he saw nothing that was of any use. The shelf faced southward and eastward; but only on the east We have journeyed a long way round, said Legolas. We could have all come here safely together, if we had left the Great River on t But we did not wish to come to Fangorn, said Gimli.
Yet here we are-and nicely caught in the net, said Legolas. Look! "Look at what?" said Gimli.
There in the trees.
Where? I don't have elf-eyes.

Hush! Speak more softly! Look! said Legolas pointing. Down in the wood, back in the Way that we have just come. It is he. Cannot y I see, I see now! Gimli hissed. Look, Aragorn! Did I not warn you? There is the old man. All in dirty gray rags: that is why I cou Aragorn looked and beheld a bent figure moving slowly. It was not far away. He looked like an old beggar-man, walking wearily, lea Gimli gazed with wide eyes for a while, as step by step the figure drew nearer. Then suddenly, unable to contain himself any longe Legolas took his bow and bent it, slowly and as if some other would resist him. He held an arrow loosely in his hand but did not f Why are you waiting? What is the matter with you? said Gimli in a hissing whisper.
Legolas is right, said Aragorn quietly. We may not shoot an old man so, at unawares and unchallenged, whatever fear or doubt be up

At that moment the old man quickened his pace and came with surprising speed to the foot of the rock-wall. Then suddenly he looked They could not see his face: he was hooded, and above the hood he wore a wide-brimmed hat, so that all his features were over-shad At last the old man broke the silence. Well met indeed, my friends, he said in a soft voice. I wish to speak to you. Will you come Now! said Gimli. Stop him, Legolas!
Did I not say that I wished to speak to you? said the old man. Put away that bow, Master Elf! The bow and arrow fell from Legolas hands, and his arms hung loose at his sides.
And you, Master Dwarf, pray take your hand from your axe-hilt, till I am up! You will not need such arguments.
Gimli started and then stood still as stone, staring, while the old man sprang up the rough steps as nimbly as a goat. All wearine

Well met, I say again! said the old man, coming towards them. When he was a few feet away, he stood, stooping over his staff, with You speak as one that knows Fangorn well, said Aragorn. Is that so?
Not well, said the old man: that would be the study of many lives. But I come here now and again.
Might we know your name, and then hear what it is that you have to say to us? said Aragorn. The morning passes, and we have an err As for what I wished to say, I have said it: What may you be doing, and what tale can you tell of yourselves? As for my name! He b My name! said the old man again. Have you not guessed it already? You have heard it before, I think. Yes, you have heard it before The three companions stood silent and made no answer.
There are some who would begin to doubt whether your errand is fit to tell, said the old man. Happily I know something of it. You The old man turned away and went towards a heap of fallen stones and rock at the foot of the cliff behind. Immediately, as if a sp The old man took no notice, but stooped and sat himself on a low flat stone. Then his gray cloak drew apart, and they saw, beyond Saruman! cried Gimli, springing towards him with ax in hand. speak! Tell us where you have hidden our friends! What have you done

The old man was too quick for him. He sprang to his feet and leaped to the top of a large rock. There he stood, grown suddenly tal Mithrandir! he cried. Mithrandir!
Well met, I say to you again. Read them! said the old man.
They all gazed at him. His hair was white as snow in the sunshine; and gleaming white was his robe; the eyes under his deep brows At last Aragorn stirred. Gandalf! he said. Beyond all hope you return to us in our need! What veil was over my sight? Gandalf! Gim Gandalf, the old man repeated, as if recalling from old memory a long disused word. Yes, that was the name. I was Gandalf.
He stepped down from the rock, and picking up his gray cloak wrapped it about him: it seemed as if the sun had been shining, but n He laid his hand on Gimli's head, and the Dwarf looked up and laughed suddenly. Gandalf! he said. But you are all in white!
Yes, I am white now, said Gandalf. Indeed I _am_ Saruman, one might almost say, Saruman as he should have been. But come now, tell

What do you wish to know? said Aragorn. All that has happened since we parted on the bridge would be a long story. Will you not fi No, I did not find them, said Gandalf. There was a darkness over the valleys of the Emyn Muil, and I did not know of their captivi The eagle! said Legolas. I have seen an eagle high and far off: the last time was three days ago, above the Emyn Muil.
Yes, said Gandalf, that was Gwaihir the Windlord, who rescued me from Orthanc. I sent him before me to watch the river and gather Then you know about Frodo! said Gimli. How do things go with him?
I cannot say. He was saved from a great danger, but many lie before him still. He resolved to go alone to Mordor, and he set out: Not alone, said Legolas. We think that Sam went with him.
Did he! said Gandalf, and there was a gleam in his eye and a smile on his face. Did he indeed? It is news to me, yet it does not s The companions sat on the ground at his feet, and Aragorn took up the tale. For a long while Gandalf said nothing, and he asked no You have not said all that you know or guess, Aragorn my friend, he said quietly. Poor Boromir! I could not see what happened to h In one thing you have not changed, dear friend, said Aragorn: you still speak in riddles.
What? In riddles? said Gandalf. No! For I was talking aloud to myself. A habit of the old: they choose the wisest person present t I am no longer young even in the reckoning of Men of the Ancient Houses, said Aragorn. Will you not open your mind more clearly to What then shall I say? said Gandalf, and paused for a while in thought. This in brief is how I see things at the moment, if you wi For already he knows that the messengers that he sent to waylay the Company have failed again. They have not found the Ring. Neith Then is not Saruman a traitor? said Gimli.
Indeed yes, said Gandalf. Doubly. And isn't that strange? Nothing that we have endured of late has seemed so grievous as the treas Also they have filled themselves with new doubts that disturb their plans. No tidings of the battle will come to Mordor, thanks to It is a pity that our friends lie in between, said Gimli. If no land divided Isengard and Mordor, then they could fight while we w The victor would emerge stronger than either, and free from doubt, said Gandalf. But Isengard cannot fight Mordor, unless Saruman The Winged Messenger! cried Legolas. I shot at him with the bow of Galadriel above Sarn Gebir, and I felled him from the sky. He f One that you cannot slay with arrows, said Gandalf. You only slew his steed. It was a good deed; but the Rider was soon horsed aga Now you speak to yourself again, said Aragorn with a smile. Treebeard is not known to me. And I have guessed part of Saruman's dou Wait a minute! cried Gimli. There is another thing that I should like to know first. Was it you, Gandalf, or Saruman that we saw l You certainly did not see me, answered Gandalf, therefore I must guess that you saw Saruman. Evidently we look so much alike that Good, good! said Gimli. I am glad that it was not you.
Gandalf laughed again. Yes, my good Dwarf, he said, it is a comfort not to be mistaken at all points. I do not know it only too we But the hobbits! Legolas broke in. We have come far to seek them, and you seem to know where they are. Where are they now?
With Treebeard and the Ents, said Gandalf.
The Ents! exclaimed Aragorn. Then there is truth in the old legends about the dwellers in the deep forests and the giant shepherds A legend of Rohan! cried Legolas. Nay, every Elf in Wilderland has sung songs of the old Onodrim and their long sorrow. Yet even a Ah! now you are asking much, said Gandalf. The little that I know of his long slow story would make a tale for which we have no ti Perhaps he also thought that you were Saruman, said Gimli. But you speak of him as if he were a friend. I thought Fangorn was dang Dangerous! cried Gandalf. And so am I, very dangerous: more dangerous than anything you will ever meet, unless you are brought ali What will they do? asked Legolas in astonishment.
I do not know, said Gandalf. I do not think they know themselves. I wonder. He fell silent, his head bowed in thought.

The others looked at him. A gleam of sun through fleeting clouds fell on his hands, which lay now upturned on his lap: they seemed

The morning is wearing away, he said. Soon we must go.
Do we go to find our friends and to see Treebeard? asked Aragorn.
No, said Gandalf. That is not the road that you must take. I have spoken words of hope. But only of hope. Hope is not victory. War He rose and gazed out eastward, shading his eyes, as if he saw things far away that none of them could see. Then he shook his head He turned. Come, Aragorn son of Arathorn! he said. Do not regret your choice in the valley of the Emyn Muil, nor call it a vain pu Then are we not to see the merry young hobbits again? said Legolas.
I did not say so, said Gandalf. Who knows? Have patience. Go where you must go, and hope! To Edoras! I go thither also. It is a long way for a man to walk, young or old, said Aragorn. I fear the battle will be over long ere I come there.
We shall see, we shall see, said Gandalf. Will you come now with me?
Yes, we will set out together, said Aragorn. But I do not doubt that you will come there before me, if you wish. He rose and looke Do I not say truly, Gandalf, said Aragorn at last, that you could go whithersoever you wished quicker than I? And this I also say:

Yes, together we will follow you, said Legolas. But first, it would ease my heart, Gandalf, to hear what befell you in Moria. Will I have stayed already too long, answered Gandalf. Time is short. But if there were a year to spend, I would not tell you all.
Then tell us what you will, and time allows! said Gimli. Come, Gandalf, tell us how you fared with the Balrog!
Not him by name! said Gandalf, and for a moment it seemed that a cloud of pain passed over his face, and he sat silent, looking ol Deep is the abyss that is spanned by Durin's Bridge, and none has measured it, said Gimli.
Yet it has a bottom, beyond light and knowledge, said Gandalf. Thither I came at last, to the uttermost foundations of stone. He w We fought far under the living earth, where time is not counted. Ever he clutched me, and ever I hewed him, till at last he fled i Long has that been lost, said Gimli. Many have said that it was never made save in legend, but others say that it was destroyed.
It was made, and it had not been destroyed, said Gandalf. From the lowest dungeon to the highest peak he climbed. ascending in an There upon Celebdil was a lonely window in the snow, and before it lay a narrow space, a dizzy eyrie above the mists of the world. Naked I was sent back - for a brief time, until my task is done. And naked I lay upon the mountain-top. The tower behind was crumb
Ever am I fated to be your burden, friend at need, I said.
A burden you have been, he answered, but not so now. Light as a swan's feather in my claw you are. The Sun shines through you. In Do not let me fall! I gasped, for I felt life in me again. Bear me to Lothlórien!
That indeed is the command of the Lady Galadriel who sent me to look for you, he answered.
Thus it was that I came to Caras Galadhon and found you but lately gone. I tarried there in the ageless time of that land where da

Where now are the Dúnedain, Elessar, Elessar? Why do thy kinsfolk wander afar?
Near is the hour when the Lost should come forth, And the Gray Company ride from the North.
But dark is the path appointed for thee:
The Dead watch the road that leads to the Sea.

To Legolas she sent this word:

Legolas Greenleaf long under tree
In joy thou hast lived. Beware of the Sea!
If thou hearest the cry of the gull on the shore, Thy heart shall then rest in the forest no more.

Gandalf fell silent and shut his eyes.
Then she sent me no message? said Gimli and bent his head.
Dark are her words, said Legolas, and little do they mean to those who receive them. That is no comfort, said Gimli.
What then? said Legolas. Would you have her speak openly to you of your death? Yes. if she had naught else to say.
What is that? said Gandalf, opening his eyes. Yes, I think I can guess what her words may mean. Your pardon, Gimli! I was ponderin "To Gimli son of Glóin," she said, "give his Lady's greeting. Lock-bearer, wherever thou goest my thought goes with thee. But hav
In the happy hour you have returned to us, Gandalf, cried the Dwarf, capering as he sang loudly in the strange dwarf-tongue. Eat, That will not be far to seek, said Gandalf, rising from his seat. Eat! We have spent all the time that is allowed to a meeting of

He wrapped himself again in his old tattered cloak, and led the way. Following him they descended quickly from the high shelf and They have not returned, said Legolas. It will be a weary walk!
I shall not walk. Time presses, said Gandalf. Then lifting up his head he gave a long whistle. So clear and piercing was the note There is more than one horse coming, said Aragorn.
Certainly, said Gandalf. We are too great a burden for one.
There are three, said Legolas, gazing out over the plain. See how they run! There is Hasufel, and there is my friend Arod beside h Nor will you again, said Gandalf. That is Shadowfax. He is the chief of the _Mearas_, lords of horses, and not even Théoden, King Even as the old wizard spoke, the great horse came striding up the slope towards them; his coat was glistening and his mane flowin Gandalf caressed him. It is a long way from Rivendell, my friend, he said; but you are wise and swift and come at need. Far let us Soon the other horses came up and stood quietly by, as if awaiting orders. We go at once to Meduseld, the hall of your master, Thé Now I understand a part of last night's riddle, said Legolas as he sprang lightly upon Arod's back. Whether they fled at first in Yes, I knew, said the wizard. I bent my thought upon him, bidding him to make haste; for yesterday he was far away in the south of

Gandalf spoke now to Shadowfax, and the horse set off at a good pace, yet not beyond the measure of the others. After a little whi He is steering a straight course now for the halls of Théoden under the slopes of the White Mountains, said Gandalf. It will be qu For many hours they rode on through the meads and riverlands. Often the grass was so high that it reached above the knees of the r There lies the Gap of Rohan, said Gandalf. It is now almost due west of us. That way lies Isengard.
I see a great smoke, said Legolas. What may that be? Battle and war! said Gandalf. Ride on!


The King of the Golden Hall

They rode on through sunset, and slow dusk, and gathering night. When at last they halted and dismounted, even Aragorn was stiff a Hours passed and still they rode on. Gimli nodded and would have fallen from his seat if Gandalf had not clutched and shaken him.

A bitter chill came into the air. Slowly in the East the dark faded to a cold grey. Red shafts of light leapt above the black wall Look! he cried, and they raised their tired eyes. Before them stood the mountains of the South: white-tipped and streaked with bla Legolas gazed ahead, shading his eyes from the level shafts of the newly-risen sun. I see a white stream that comes down from the Edoras those courts are called, said Gandalf, and Meduseld is that golden hall. There dwells Théoden son of Thengel, King of the M

The morning was bright and clear about them, and birds were singing, when the travelers came to the stream. It ran down swiftly in At the foot of the walled hill the way ran under the shadow of many mounds, high and green. Upon their western sides the grass was Look! said Gandalf. How fair are the bright eyes in the grass! Evermind they are called, _simbelmyn_ in this land of Men, for they Five hundred times have the red leaves fallen in Mirkwood in my home since then, said Legolas, and but a little while does that se But to the Riders of the Mark it seems so long ago, said Aragorn, that the raising of this house is but a memory of song, and the That, I guess, is the language of the Rohirrim, said Legolas; for it is like to this land itself; rich and rolling in part, and el It runs thus in the Common Speech, said Aragorn, as near as I can make it.

Where now the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was blowing? Where is the helm and the hauberk, and the bright hair flowing?
Where is the hand on the harpstring, and the red fire glowing? Where is the spring and the harvest and the tall corn growing?
They have passed like rain on the mountain, like a wind in the meadow; The days have gone down in the West behind the hills into shadow.
Who shall gather the smoke of the dead wood burning, Or behold the flowing years from the Sea returning?

Thus spoke a forgotten poet long ago in Rohan, recalling how tall and fair was Eorl the Young, who rode down out of the North; and With these words the travelers passed the silent mounds. Following the winding way up the green shoulders of the hills, they came There sat many men in bright mail, who sprang at once to their feet and barred the way with spears. Stay, strangers here unknown! Well do I understand your speech, he answered in the same language; yet few strangers do so Why then do you not speak in the Commo It is the will of Théoden King that none should enter these gates, save those who know our tongue and are our friends, replied one We are no phantoms, said Aragorn, nor do your eyes deceive you. For indeed these are your own horses that we ride, as you knew wel A troubled look came into the guard's eyes. Of Éomer I have naught to say, he answered. If what you tell me is truth, then doubtle Wormtongue? said Gandalf, looking sharply at the guard. Say no more! My errand is not to Wormtongue, but to the Lord of the Mark h Yes, I will go, he answered slowly. But what names shall I report? And what shall I say of you? Old and weary you seem now, and ye Well do you see and speak, said the wizard. For I am Gandalf. I have returned. And behold! I too bring back a horse. Here is Shado

The dark gates were swung open. The travelers entered, walking in file behind their guide. They found a broad path, paved with hew

There are the doors before you, said the guide. I must return now to my duty at the gate. Farewell! And may the Lord of the Mark b He turned and went swiftly back down the road. The others climbed the long staircase under the eyes of the tall watchmen. Silent t Hail, corners from afar! they said, and they turned the hilts of their swords towards the travelers in token of peace. Green gems I am the Doorward of Théoden, he said. Hama is my name. Here I must bid you lay aside your weapons before you enter.
Then Legolas gave into his hand his silver-hafted knife, his quiver and his bow. Keep these well, he said, for they come from the Wonder came into the man's eyes, and he laid the weapons hastily by the wall, as if he feared to handle them. No man will touch th Aragorn stood a while hesitating. It is not my will, he said, to put aside my sword or to deliver Andúril to the hand of any other It is the will of Théoden, said Háma.
It is not clear to me that the will of Théoden son of Thengel even though he be lord of the Mark, should prevail over the will of This is the house of Théoden, not of Aragorn, even were he King of Gondor in the seat of Denethor, said Háma, stepping swiftly bef This is idle talk, said Gandalf. Needless is Théoden's demand, but it is useless to refuse. A king will have his way in his own ha Truly, said Aragorn. And I would do as the master of the house bade me, were this only a woodman's cot, if I bore now any sword bu Whatever its name may be, said Háma, here you shall lay it, if you would not fight alone against all the men in Edoras.
Not alone! said Gimli, fingering the blade of his axe, and looking darkly up at the guard, as if he were a young tree that Gimli h Eat, eat! said Gandalf. We are all friends here. Or should be; for the laughter of Mordor will be our only reward, if we quarrel. Slowly Aragorn unbuckled his belt and himself set his sword upright against the wall. Here I set it, he said; but I command you no The guard stepped back and looked with amazement at Aragorn. It seems that you are coming on the wings of song out of the forgotte Well, said Gimli, if it has Andúril to keep it company, my ax may stay here, too, without shame'; and he laid it on the floor. Now The guard still hesitated. Your staff, he said to Gandalf. Forgive me, but that too must be left at the doors.
Foolishness! said Gandalf. Prudence is one thing, but discourtesy is another. I am old. If I may not lean on my stick as I go, the Aragorn laughed. Every man has something too dear to trust to another. But would you part an old man from his support? Come, will The staff in the hand of a wizard may be more than a prop for age said Háma. He looked hard at the ash-staff on which Gandalf lean

The guards now lifted the heavy bars of the doors and swung them slowly inwards grumbling on their great hinges. The travelers ent Behold Eorl the Young! said Aragorn. Thus he rode out of the North to the Battle of the Field of Celebrant.
Now the four companions went forward, past the clear wood-fire burning upon the long hearth in the midst of the hall. Then they ha There was a silence. The old man did not move in his chair. At length Gandalf spoke. Hail, Théoden son of Thengel! I have returned Slowly the old man rose to his feet, leaning heavily upon a short black staff with a handle of white bone; and now the strangers s I greet you, he said, and perhaps you look for welcome. But truth to tell your welcome is doubtful here, Master Gandalf. You have You speak justly, lord, said the pale man sitting upon the steps of the dais. It is not yet five days since the bitter tidings cam You are held wisely, my friend Wormtongue, and are doubtless a great support to your master, answered Gandalf in a soft voice. Yet That is so, said Wormtongue; but there is a third kind: pickers of bones, meddlers in other men's sorrows, carrion-fowl that grow The courtesy of your hall is somewhat lessened of late, Théoden son of Thengel, said Gandalf. Has not the messenger from your gate Then it is true, as Éomer reported, that you are in league with the Sorceress of the Golden Wood? said Wormtongue. It is not to be Gimli strode a pace forward, but felt suddenly the hand of Gandalf clutch him by the shoulder, and he halted, standing stiff as st

In Dwimorden, in Lórien
Seldom have walked the feet of Men, Few mortal eyes have seen the light

That lies there ever, long and bright. Galadriel! Galadriel!
Clear is the water of your well; White is the star in your white hand; Unmarred, unstained is leaf and land In Dwimorden, in Lórien
More fair than the thoughts of mortal men.

Thus Gandalf sang softly, and then suddenly he changed. Casting his tattered cloak aside, he stood up and leaned no longer on his In the gloom they heard the hiss of Wormtongue's voice: Did I not counsel you, lord, to forbid his staff? That fool, Háma, has bet

Now Théoden son of Thengel, will you listen to me? said Gandalf. Do you ask for help? He lifted his staff and pointed to a high wi Slowly Théoden left his chair. A faint light grew in the hall again. The woman hastened to the king's side, taking his arm, and wi Open! he cried. The Lord of the Mark comes forth!
The doors rolled back and a keen air came whistling in. A wind was blowing on the hill. Send your guards down to the foot of the s Go, Éowyn's sister-daughter! said the old king. The time for fear is past.
The woman turned and went slowly into the house. As she passed the doors she turned and looked back. Grave and thoughtful was her Now, lord, said Gandalf, look out upon your land! Breathe the free air again!
From the porch upon the top of the high terrace they could see beyond the stream the green fields of Rohan fading into distant gre It is not so dark here, said Théoden.
No, said Gandalf. Nor does age lie so heavily on your shoulders as some would have you think. Cast aside your prop!
From the king's hand the black staff fell clattering on the stones. He drew himself up, slowly, as a man that is stiff from long b Dark have been my dreams of late, he said, but I feel as one newly-awakened. I would now that you had come before, Gandalf. For I Much, said Gandalf. But first send for Éomer. Do I not guess rightly that you hold him prisoner, by the counsel of Gríma, of him t It is true, said Théoden. He had rebelled against my commands, and threatened death to Gríma in my hall.
A man may love you and yet not love Wormtongue or his counsels said Gandalf.
That may be. I will do as you ask. Call Háma to me. Since he proved untrustworthy as a doorward, let him become an errand-runner.

When Háma had been summoned and had gone, Gandalf led Théoden to a stone seat, and then sat himself before the king upon the topmo There is no time to tell all that you should hear, said Gandalf. Yet if my hope is not cheated, a time will come ere long when I c Quickly now Gandalf spoke. His voice was low and secret, and none save the king heard what he said. But ever as he spoke the light Verily, said Gandalf, now in a loud voice, keen and clear, that way lies our hope, where sits our greatest fear. Doom hangs still The others too now turned their eyes eastward. Over the sundering leagues of land, far away they gazed to the edge of sight, and h Slowly Théoden sat down again, as if weariness still struggled to master him against the will of Gandalf. He turned and looked at Your fingers would remember their old strength better, if they grasped a sword-hilt, said Gandalf.
Théoden rose and put his hand to his side; but no sword hung at his belt. Where has Gríma stowed it? he muttered under his breath. Take this, dear lord! said a clear voice. It was ever at your service. Two men had come softly up the stairs and stood now a few s How do you eat this? said Théoden sternly. He turned towards Éomer and the men looked in wonder at him, standing now proud and ere It is my doing, lord, said Háma, trembling. I understood that Éomer was to be set free. Such joy was in my heart that perhaps I ha To lay at your feet, my lord, said Éomer.
For a moment of silence Théoden stood looking down at Éomer as he knelt still before him. Neither moved. Will you not take the sword? said Gandalf.
Slowly Théoden stretched forth his hand. As his fingers took the hilt, it seemed to the watchers that firmness and strength return

Arise now, rise, Riders of Théoden! Dire deeds awake, dark is it eastward.
Let the horse be bridled, the horn be sounded!
Forth Eorlingas!_

The guards, thinking that they were summoned, sprang up the stairs. They looked at their lord in amazement, and then as one man th
_Westu Théoden hál!_ cried Éomer. It is a joy to us to see you return into your own. Never again shall it be said, Gandalf, that y Take back your sword, Éomer, sister-son! said the king. Go, Háma, and seek my own sword! Gríma has it in these keeping. Bring him You have yourself already taken it, answered Gandalf. To put your trust in Éomer, rather than in a man of crooked mind. To cast as This counsel seems good to me now, said Théoden. Let all my people get ready! But you my guests - truly you said, Gandalf, that th Nay, lord, said Aragorn. There is no rest yet for the weary. The men of Rohan must ride forth today, and we will ride with them, a Now indeed there is hope of victory! said Éomer.
Hope, yes, said Gandalf. But Isengard is strong. And other perils draw ever nearer. Do not delay, Théoden, when we are gone. Lead Nay, Gandalf! said the king. You do not know your own skill in healing. It shall not be so. I myself will go to war, to fall in th Then even the defeat of Rohan will be glorious in song, said Aragorn. The armed men that stood near clashed their weapons, crying: But your people must not be both unarmed and shepherdless said Gandalf. Who shall guide them and govern them in your place?
I will take thought for that ere I go, answered Théoden. Here comes my counsellor.

At that moment Háma came again from the hall. Behind him cringing between two other men, came Gríma the Wormtongue. His face was v You lie, said Wormtongue. And this sword your master himself gave into my keeping.
And he now requires it of you again, said Théoden. Does that displease you?
Assuredly not. lord, said Wormtongue. I care for you and yours as best I may. But do not weary yourself, or tax your strength too I will, said Théoden. And let food for my guests be set on the board beside me. The host laughs today. Send the heralds forth! Let Dear Lord! cried Wormtongue. It is as I feared. This wizard has bewitched you. Are none to be left to defend the Golden Hall of yo If this is bewitchment, said Théoden, it seems to me more wholesome than your whisperings. Your leechcraft ere long would have had Mercy, lord! whined Wormtongue, grovelling on the ground. Have pity on one worn out in your service. Send me not from your side! I You have my pity, said Théoden. And I do not send you from my side. I go myself to war with my men. I bid you come with me and pro Wormtongue looked from face to face. In his eyes was the hunted look of a beast seeking some gap in the ring of his enemies. He li Éomer laughed. And if that plea does not excuse you from war, most noble Wormtongue, he said, what office of less honor would you Nay, Éomer, you do not fully understand the mind of Master Wormtongue, said Gandalf, turning his piercing glance upon him. He is b Éomer grasped his sword. That I knew already, he muttered. For that reason I would have slain him before, forgetting the law of th Éowyn is safe now, he said. But you, Wormtongue, you have done what you could for your true master. Some reward you have earned at You lie, said Wormtongue.

That word comes too often and easily from your lips, said Gandalf. I do not lie. See, Théoden, here is a snake! With safety you ca Do you hear this, Wormtongue? said Théoden. This is your choice: to ride with me to war, and let us see in battle whether you are Slowly Wormtongue rose. He looked at them with half-closed eyes. Last of all he scanned Théoden's face and opened his mouth as if After him! said Théoden. See that he does no harm to anyone, but do not hurt him or hinder him. Give him a horse, if he wishes it. And if any will bear him, said Éomer.
One of the guards ran down the stairs. Another went to the well at the foot of the terrace and in his helm drew water. With it he

Now my guests, eat! said Théoden. Come and take such refreshment as haste allows.
They passed back into the great house. Already they heard below them in the town the heralds crying and the war-horns blowing. For At the king's table sat Éomer and the four guests, and there also waiting upon the king was the lady Éowyn. They ate and drank swi How far back this treachery goes, who can guess? said Gandalf. He was not always evil. Once I do not doubt that he was the friend But when I escaped and warned you, then the mask was torn, for those who would see. After that Wormtongue played dangerously, alwa I owe much to Éomer, said Théoden. Faithful heart may have forward tongue. Say also, said Gandalf, that to crooked eyes truth may Indeed my eyes were almost blind, said Théoden. Most of all I owe to you, my guest. Once again you have come in time. I would give Whether I came in time or not is yet to be seen, said Gandalf. But as for your gift, lord, I will choose one that will fit my need You choose well, said Théoden; and I give him now gladly. Yet it is a great gift. There is none like Shadowfax. In him one of the

Now men came bearing raiment of war from the king's hoard and they arrayed Aragorn and Legolas in shining mail. Helms too they cho May it keep you well! said Théoden. It was made for me in Thengel's day, while still I was a boy.
Gimli bowed. I am proud, Lord of the Mark, to bear your device, he said. Indeed sooner would I bear a horse than be borne by one. It may well be so, said Théoden.
The king now rose, and at once Éowyn came forward bearing wine. _Ferthu Théoden hál!_ she said. Receive now this cup and drink at Théoden drank from the cup, and she then proffered it to the guests. As she stood before Aragorn she paused suddenly and looked up When they had all drunk, the king went down the hall to the doors. There the guards awaited him, and heralds stood, and all the lo Behold! I go forth, and it seems like to be my last riding, said Théoden. I have no child. Théodred my son is slain. I name Éomer No one spoke.
Is there none whom you would name? In whom do my people trust? In the House of Eorl, answered Háma.
But Éomer I cannot spare, nor would he stay, said the king; and he is the last of that House.
I said not Éomer, answered Háma. And he is not the last. There is Éowyn, daughter of Éomund, his sister. She is fearless and high- It shall be so, said Théoden. Let the heralds announce to the people that the Lady Éowyn will lead them!
Then the king sat upon a seat before his doors, and Éowyn knelt before him and received from him a sword and a fair corslet. Farew The king shall come again, he said. Fear not! Not West but East does our doom await us.

The king now went down the stairs with Gandalf beside him. The others followed. Aragorn looked back as they passed towards the gat Gimli walked with Legolas. his ax on his shoulder. Well, at last we set off! he said. Men need many words before deeds. My ax is r A safer seat than many, I guess, said Legolas. Yet doubtless Gandalf will gladly put you down on your feet when blows begin; or Sh And a Dwarf is no horseman. It is orc-necks I would hew, not shave the scalps of Men, said Gimli, patting the haft of his axe.
At the gate they found a great host of men, old and young, all ready in the saddle. More than a thousand were mustered there. Thei Hail, Gimli Glóin's son! he cried. I have not had time to learn gentle speech under your rod, as you promised. But shall we not pu I will forget my wrath for a while, Éomer son of Éomund, said Gimli; but if ever you chance to see the Lady Galadriel with your ey I thank you indeed, said Gimli, greatly pleased. I will gladly go with you, if Legolas, my comrade, may ride beside us.
It shall he so, said Éomer. Legolas upon my left, and Aragorn upon my right, and none will dare to stand before us! Where is Shadowfax? said Gandalf.
Running wild over the grass, they answered. He will let no man handle him. There he goes, away down by the ford, like a shadow amo Gandalf whistled and called aloud the horse's name, and far away he tossed his head and neighed, and turning sped towards the host Were the breath of the West Wind to take a visible body, even so would it appear, said Éomer, as the great horse ran up, until he The gift seems already to be given, said Théoden. But hearken all! Here now I name my guest, Gandalf Greyhame, wisest of counsello I thank you, Théoden King, said Gandalf. Then suddenly he threw back his gray cloak, and cast aside his hat, and leaped to horseba Behold the White Rider! cried Aragorn, and all took up the words.
Our King and the White Rider! they shouted. Forth Eorlingas!
The trumpets sounded. The horses reared and neighed. Spear clashed on shield. Then the king raised his hand, and with a rush like


Helm's Deep

The sun was already westering as they rode from Edoras, and the light of it was in their eyes, turning all the rolling fields of R The host rode on. They need to drive them. Fearing to come too late, they rode with all the speed they could, pausing seldom. Swif Night closed about them. At last they halted to make their camp. They had ridden for some five hours and were far out upon the wes There were no clouds overhead yet, but a heaviness was in the air; it was hot for the season of the year. The rising sun was hazy, Gandalf dropped back to where Legolas rode beside Éomer. You have the keen eyes of your fair kindred, Legolas, he said; and they c Many miles lie between, said Legolas, gazing thither and shading his eyes with his long hand. I can see a darkness. There are shap And behind us comes a very storm of Mordor, said Gandalf. It will be a black night.

As the second day of their riding drew on, the heaviness in the air increased. In the afternoon the dark clouds began to overtake He came, a weary man with dented helm and cloven shield. Slowly he climbed from his horse and stood there a while gasping. At leng Where is Éomer? Tell him there is no hope ahead. He should return to Edoras before the wolves of Isengard come there. Théoden had The man's face lightened with joy and wonder. He drew himself up. Then he knelt, offering his notched sword to the king. Command m You thought I remained in Meduseld bent like an old tree under winter snow. So it was when you rode to war. But a west wind has sh

While Théoden was speaking, Gandalf rode a short way ahead, and he sat there alone, gazing north to Isengard and west to the setti Laugh, Théoden! he said. Ride to Helm's Deep! Go not to the Fords of Isen, and do not tarry in the plain! I must leave you for a w He spoke a word to Shadowfax, and like an arrow from the bow the great horse sprang away. Even as they looked he was gone: a flash What does that mean? said one of the guards to Háma.
That Gandalf Greyhame has need of haste, answered Háma. Ever he goes and comes unlooked-for: Wormtongue, were he here, would not find it hard to explain Said the other.
True enough, said Háma; but for myself, I will wait until I see Gandalf again.

Perhaps you will wait long, said the other.

The host turned away now from the road to the Fords of Isen and bent their course southward. Night fell, and still they rode on. T At Helm's Gate, before the mouth of the Deep, there was a heel of rock thrust outward by the northern cliff. There upon its spur s The Riders were still in the low valley before the mouth of the Coomb, when cries and hornblasts were heard from their scouts that We have found many of our folk lying slain as they fled thither, said the scout. And we have met scattered companies, going this w Has aught been seen of Gandalf? asked Théoden.
Yes, sir. Many have seen an old man in white upon a horse, passing hither and thither over the plains like wind in the grass. Some It will go ill with Wormtongue, if Gandalf comes upon him said Théoden. Nevertheless I miss now both my counsellors, the old and t It is very great, said the scout. He that flies counts every foeman twice, yet I have spoken to stouthearted men, and I do not dou Then let us be swift, said Éomer. Let us drive through such foes as are already between us and the fastness. There are caves in He Trust not to secret ways, said the king. Saruman has long spied out this land. Still in that place our defense may last long. Let

Aragorn and Legolas went now with Éomer in the van. On through the dark night they rode, ever slower as the darkness deepened and It will not be long I fear, said Éomer, ere the coming of the king's host will be known to the leader of our enemies, Saruman or w The rumor of war grew behind them. Now they could hear, borne over the dark, the sound of harsh singing. They had climbed far up i It is a great host and follows us hard, said Aragorn.
They bring fire, said Théoden, and they are burning as they come, rick, cot, and tree. This was a rich fortune and had many homest Would that day were here and we might ride down upon them like a storm out of the mountains! said Aragorn. It grieves me to fly be We need not fly much further, said Éomer. Not far ahead now lies Helm's Dike, an ancient trench and rampart scored across the coom Nay, we are too few to defend the Dike, said Théoden. It is a mile long or more, and the breach in it is wide.
At the breach our rearguard must stand, if we are pressed, said Éomer.

There was neither star nor moon when the Riders came to the breach in the Dike, where the stream from above passed out, and the ro The Lord of the Mark rides to Helm's Gate, Éomer answered. I, Éomer son of Éomund, speak.
This is good news beyond hope, said the sentinel. Hurry up! The enemy is on your heels.
The host passed through the breach and halted on the sloping sward above. They now learned to their joy that Erkenbrand had left m Perhaps, we have a thousand fit to fight on foot, said Gamling, an old man, the leader of those who watched the Dike. But most of I fear that he will not come now, said Éomer. Our scouts have gained no news of him, and the enemy fills all the valley behind us. I would that he had escaped, said Théoden. He was a mighty man. In him lived again the valor of Helm the Hammerhand. But we cannot Behind us in the caves of the Deep are three parts of the folk of Westfold, old and young, children and women, said Gamling. But a That is well, said Éomer. They are burning or despoiling all that is left in the farewell.
If they come to bargain for our goods at Helm's Gate, they will pay a high price, said Gamling.

The king and his riders passed on. Before the causeway that crossed the stream they dismounted. In a long file they led their hors Quickly Eomer set these men in readiness. The king and the men of his household were in the Hornburg, and there also were many of The Deeping Wall was twenty feet high, and so thick that four men could walk abreast along the top, sheltered by a parapet over wh

Gimli stood leaning against the breastwork upon the wall. Legolas sat above on the parapet, fingering his bow, and peering out int This is more to my liking, said the dwarf, stamping on the stones. Ever my heart rises as we draw near the mountains. There is goo I do not doubt it, said Legolas. But you are a dwarf, and dwarves are strange folk. I do not like this place, and I shall like it It is dark for archery, said Gimli. Indeed it is time for sleep. Sleep! I feel the need of it, as I never thought any dwarf could. A slow time passed. Far down in the valley scattered fires still burned. The hosts of Isengard were advancing in silence now. Thei Suddenly from the Dike yells and screams, and the fierce battle-cries of men broke out. Flaming brands appeared over the brink and The enemy is at hand! they said. We loosed every arrow that we had, and filled the Dike with Orcs. But it will not halt them long.

It was now past midnight. The sky was utterly dark, and the stillness of the heavy air foretold a storm. Suddenly the clouds were Arrows thick as the rain came whistling over the battlements, and fell clinking and glancing on the stones. Some found a mark. The The assailing hosts halted, foiled by the silent menace of rock and wall. Ever and again the lightning tore aside the darkness. Th Brazen trumpets sounded. The enemy surged forward, some against the Deeping Wall, others towards the causeway and the ramp that le Then at last an answer came: a storm of arrows met them, and a hail of stones. They wavered, broke, and fled back; and then charge Éomer and Aragorn stood together on the Deeping Wall. They heard the roar of voices and the thudding of the rams; and then in a su Eat! said Aragorn. This is the hour when we draw swords together!
Running like fire, they sped along the wall, and up the steps, and passed into the outer court upon the Rock. As they ran they gat Guthwin! cried Éomer. Guthwin for the Mark!
Enduril! cried Aragorn. Andúril for the Dúnedain!
Charging from the side, they hurled themselves upon the wild men. Andúril rose and fell, gleaming with white fire. A shout went up Dismayed the rammers let fall the trees and turned to fight; but the wall of their shields was broken as by a lightning-stroke, an

For a moment Éomer and Aragorn halted before the gates. The thunder was rumbling in the distance now. The lightning flickered stil We did not come too soon, said Aragorn, looking at the gates. Their great hinges and iron bars were wrenched and bent; many of the Yet we cannot stay here beyond the walls to defend them, said Éomer. Look! He pointed to the causeway. Already a great press of Or They turned and ran. At that moment some dozen Orcs that had lain motionless among the slain leaped to their feet, and came silent Éomer struggled to his feet, even as Aragorn ran back to his aid.

The postern was closed again, the iron door was barred and piled inside with stones. When all were safe within, Éomer turned: I th I followed you to shake off sleep, said Gimli; but I looked on the hillmen and they seemed too large for me, so I sat beside a sto I shall not find it easy to repay you, said Éomer.
There may be many a chance ere the night is over, laughed the Dwarf. But I am content. Till now I have hewn naught but wood since Two! said Gimli, patting his axe. He had returned to his place on the wall.
Two? said Legolas. I have done better, though now I must grope for spent arrows; all mine are gone Yet I make my tale twenty at le

The sky now was quickly clearing and the sinking moon was shining brightly. But the light brought little hope to the Riders of the The men of Rohan grew weary. All their arrows were spent, and every shaft was shot; their swords were notched, and their shields w Then a clamor arose in the Deep behind. Orcs had crept like rats through the culvert through which the stream flowed out. There th Down from the wall leapt Gimli with a fierce cry that echoed in the cliffs. Khazâd! Khazâd! He soon had work enough.
Ai-oi! he shouted. The Orcs are behind the wall. Ai-oi! Come, Legolas! There are enough for us both. _Khazâd ai-mênu!_

Gamling the Old looked down from the Hornburg, hearing the great voice of the dwarf above all the tumult. The Orcs are in the Deep Their onset was fierce and sudden, and the Orcs gave way before them. Ere long they were hemmed in in the narrows of the gorge, an Twenty-one! cried Gimli. He hewed a two-handed stroke and laid the last Orc before his feet. Now my count passes Master Legolas ag We must stop this rat-hole, said Gamling. Dwarves are said to be cunning folk with stone. Lend us your aid, master!
We do not shape stone with battle-axes, nor with our finger-nails, said Gimli. But I will help as I may.
They gathered such small boulders and broken stones as they could find to hand, and under Gimli's direction the Westfold-men block It will be drier above, said Gimli. Come, Gamling, let us see how things go on the wall!
He climbed up and found Legolas beside Aragorn and Éomer. The elf was whetting his long knife. There was for a while a lull in the Twenty-one! said Gimli.
Good! said Legolas. But my count is now two dozen. It has been knife-work up here.

Éomer and Aragorn lean wearily on their swords. Away on the left the crash and clamor of the battle on the Rock rose loud again. B Aragorn looked at the pale stars, and at the moon, now sloping behind the western hills that enclosed the valley. This is a night Dawn is not far off, said Gamling, who had now climbed up beside him. But dawn will not help us, I fear.
Yet dawn is ever the hope of men, said Aragorn.
But these creatures of Isengard, these half-orcs and goblin-men that the foul craft of Saruman has bred, they will not quail at th I hear them, said Éomer; but they are only the scream of birds and the bellowing of beasts to my ears.
Yet there are many that cry in the Dunland tongue, said Gamling. I know that tongue It is an ancient speech of men, and once was s Nevertheless day will bring hope to me, said Aragorn. Is it not said that no enemy has ever taken the Hornburg, if men defended it So the minstrels say, said Éomer.
Then let us defend it, and hope! said Aragorn.

Even as they spoke there came a blare of trumpets. Then there was a crash and a flash of flame and smoke. The waters of the Deepin Devilry of Saruman! cried Aragorn. They have crept into the culvert again, while we talked, and they have lit the fire of Orthanc A broad stairway, climbed from the Deep up to the Rock and the rear-gate of the Hornburg. Near the bottom stood Aragorn. In his ha All who can have now got safe within, Aragorn, he called. Come back!
Aragorn turned and sped up the stairs; but as he ran he stumbled upon his weariness. But once these enemies leapt forward. Up came Things go ill, my friends, he said, wiping the sweat from his brow with his arm.
Ill enough, said Legolas, but not yet hopeless, while we have you with us. Where is Gimli?
I don't know. said Aragorn. I last saw him fighting on the ground behind the wall, but the enemy swept us apart. Wings! That is evil news, said Legolas.
He is stout and strong, said Aragorn. Let us hope that he will escape back to the caves. There he would be safe for a while. Safer That must be my hope' said Legolas. But I wish that he had come this way. I desired to tell Master Gimli that my tale is now thirt If he wins back to the caves, he will pass your count again, laughed Aragorn. I never saw an ax so wielded.
I must go and seek some arrows, said Legolas. Would that this night would end, and I could have better light for shooting.

Aragorn now passed into the citadel. There to his dismay he learned that Éomer had not reached the Hornburg.
Nay, he did not come to the Rock, said one of the Westfold-men, I last saw him gathering men about him and fighting in the mouth o Aragorn strode on through the inner court, and mounted to a high chamber in the tower. There stood the king, dark against a narrow What is the news, Aragorn? he said.
The Deeping Wall is taken, lord, and all the defense swept away; but many have escaped hitherto to the Rock. Is Éomer here?
No, sir. But many of your men retreated into the Deep; and some say that Éomer was amongst them. In the narrows they may hold back More than we Good provision, it is said. And the air is wholesome there because of the outlets through fissures in the rock far ab But the Orcs have brought a devilry from Orthanc, said Aragorn. They have a blasting fire, and with it they took the Wall. If they I fret in this prison, said Théoden. If I could have set a spear in rest, riding before my men upon the field, maybe I could have Here at least you are guarded in the strongest fastness of the Mark, said Aragorn. More hope we have to defend you in the Hornburg It is said that the Hornburg has never fallen to assault, said Théoden; but now my heart is doubtful. The world changes, and all t Do not judge the counsel of Gandalf, until all is over, lord, said Aragorn.
The end will not be long, said the king. But I will not end here, taken like an old badger in a trap. Snowmane and Hasufel and the I will ride with you, said Aragorn.
Taking his leave, he returned to the walls, and passed round all their circuit, encouraging the men, and lending aid wherever the

At last Aragorn stood above the great gates, heedless of the darts of the enemy. As he looked forth he saw the eastern sky grow pa The Orcs yelled and jeered. Come down! Come down! they cried. If you wish to speak to us, come down! Bring out your king! We are t The king stays or comes at his own will, said Aragorn.
Then what are you doing here? they answered. Why do you look out? Do you wish to see the greatness of our army? We are the fightin I looked out to see the dawn, said Aragorn.
What of the dawn? they jeered. We are the Uruk-hai: we do not stop the fight for night or day, for fair weather or for storm. We c None knows what the new day shall bring him, said Aragorn. Get you gone, let it turn to your evil.
Get down or we will shoot you from the wall, they cried. This is no parley. You have nothing to say.
I have still this to say, answered Aragorn. No enemy has yet taken the Hornburg. Depart, or not one of you will be spared. Not one So great a power and royalty was revealed in Aragorn, as he stood there alone above the ruined gates before the host of his enemie There was a roar and a blast of fire. The archway of the gate above which he had stood a moment before crumbled and crashed in smo But even as the gate fell, and the Orcs about it yelled, preparing to charge, a murmur arose behind them. like a wind in the dista

All that heard that sound trembled. Many of the Orcs threw themselves on their faces and covered their ears with their claws. Back Helm! Helm! the Riders shouted. Helm is risen and comes back to war. Helm for Théoden King!
And with that shout the king came. His horse was white as snow, golden was his shield, and his spear was long. At his right hand w Forth Eorlingas! With a cry and a great noise they charged. Down from the gates they roared, over the causeway they swept, and the On they rode, the king and his companions. Captains and champions fell or fled before them. Neither orc nor man withstood them. Th

So King Théoden rode from Helm's Gate and clove his path to the great Dike. There the company halted. Light grew bright about them The land had changed. Where before the green dale had lain, its grassy slopes lapping the ever-mounting hills, there now a forest There suddenly upon a ridge appeared a rider, clad in white, shining in the rising sun. Over the low hills the horns were sounding Erkenbrand! the Riders shouted. Erkenbrand!

Behold the White Rider! cried Aragorn. Gandalf is come again!
Mithrandir, Mithrandir! said Legolas. This is wizardry indeed! Eat! I would look on this forest, ere the spell changes.
The hosts of Isengard roared, swaying this way and that, turning from fear to fear. Again the horn sounded from the tower. Down th


The Road to Isengard

So it was that in the light of a fair morning King Théoden and Gandalf the White Rider met again upon the green grass beside the D Suddenly there was a great shout, and down from the Dike came those who had been driven back into the Deep. There came Gamling the Forty-two, Master Legolas! he cried. Wings! My ax is notched: the forty-second had an iron collar on his neck. How is it with you? You have passed my score by one, answered Legolas. But I do not grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs!
Welcome, Éomer, sister-son! said Théoden. Now that I see you safe, I am glad indeed.
Hail, Lord of the Mark! said Éomer. The dark night has passed and day has come again. But the day has brought strange tidings. He Unlooked-for? said Gandalf. I said that I would return and meet you here.
But you did not name the hour, nor foretell the manner of your coming. Strange help you bring. You are mighty in wizardry, Gandalf That may be. But if so, I have not shown it yet. I have but given good counsel in danger, and made use of the speed of Shadowfax. Then they all gazed at Gandalf with still greater wonder. Some glanced darkly at the wood, and passed their hands over their brows Gandalf laughed long and merrily. The trees? he said. Nay , I see the wood as plainly as you do. But that is no deed of mine. It i Then if not yours, whose is the wizardry? said Théoden. Not Saruman's, that is plain. Is there some mightier sage, of whom we have It is not wizardry, but a power far older, said Gandalf: a power that walked the earth, ere elf sang or hammer rang.

Ere iron was found or tree was hewn
When young was the mountain under the moon; Ere ring was made, or wrought was woe,
It walked the forests long ago.

And what may be the answer to your riddle? said Théoden.
If you would learn that, you should come with me to Isengard answered Gandalf. To Isengard? they cried.
Yes, said Gandalf. I shall return to Isengard, and those who will may come with me. There we may see strange things.
But there are not men enough in the Mark, not if they were all gathered together and healed of wounds and weariness, to assault th Nevertheless to Isengard I go, said Gandalf. I shall not stay there long. My way now lies eastward. Look for me in Edoras, ere the Nay! said Théoden. In the dark hour before dawn I doubted, but we will not part now. I will come with you, if that is your counsel I wish to speak with Saruman, as soon as may be now, said Gandalf, and since he has done you great injury, it would be fitting if My men are weary with battle, said the King; and I am weary also. For I have ridden far and slept little. Wings! My old age is not Then let all who are to ride with me rest now, said Gandalf. We will journey under the shadow of evening. It is as well; for it is The King then chose men that were unhurt and had swift horses, and he sent them forth with tidings of the victory into every vale It was only a feeble blow and the cap turned it; he said. It would take more than such an orc-scratch to keep me back.
I will tend it, while you rest, said Aragorn.

The king now returned to the Hornburg, and slept, such a sleep of quiet as he had not known for many years, and the remainder of h No Orcs remained alive; their bodies were uncounted. But a great many of the hillmen had given themselves up; and they were afraid The Men of the Mark took their weapons from them, and set them to work.
Help now to repair the evil in which you have joined, said Erkenbrand; and afterwards you shall take an oath never again to pass t The men of Dunland were amazed, for Saruman had told them that the men of Rohan were cruel and burned their captives alive.
In the midst of the field before the Hornburg two mounds were raised, and beneath them were laid all the Riders of the Mark who fe The Orcs were piled in great heaps, away from the mounds of Men, not far from the eaves of the forest. And the people were trouble Let the Orcs lie, said Gandalf. The morning may bring new counsel.

In the afternoon the King's company prepared to depart. The work of burial was then but beginning; and Théoden mourned for the los The sun was already drawing near the hills upon the west of the Coomb, when at last Théoden and Gandalf and their companions rode The Riders came to the wood, and they halted; horse and man, they were unwilling to pass in. The trees were gray and menacing, and Legolas and Gimli were now riding together upon one horse; and they kept close beside Gandalf, for Gimli was afraid of the wood.
It is hot in here, said Legolas to Gandalf. I feel a great wrath about me. Do you not feel the air throb in your ears? Yes, said Gandalf.
What has become of the miserable Orcs? said Legolas. That, I think, no one will ever know, said Gandalf.

They rode in silence for a while; but Legolas was ever glancing from side to side, and would often have stopped to listen to the s These are the strangest trees that ever I saw, he said; and I have seen many an oak grow from an acorn to ruinous age. I wish that No, no! said Gimli. Let us leave them! I guess their thought already: hatred of all that goes on two legs; and their speech is of Not of all that goes on two legs, said Legolas. There I think you are wrong. It is Orcs that they hate. For they do not belong her Then that is the most dangerous wood in Middle-earth, said Gimli. I should be grateful for the part they have played, but I do not And I would give gold to be excused, said Legolas; and double to be let out, if I strayed in!
You have not seen, so I forgive your jest, said Gimli. But you speak like a fool. Do you think those halls are fair, where your Ki And, Legolas, when the torches are kindled and men walk on the sandy floors under the echoing houses, ah! then, Legolas, gems and Then I will wish you this fortune for your comfort, Gimli, said the Elf, that you may come safe from war and return to see them ag No, you do not understand, said Gimli. No dwarf could be unmoved by such loveliness. None of Durin's race would mine those caves f You move me, Gimli, said Legolas. I have never heard you speak like this before. Almost you make me regret that I have not seen th That would not be the way of return that I should choose, said Gimli. But I will endure Fangorn, if I have your promise to come ba You have my promise, said Legolas. But wings! Now we must leave behind both cave and wood for a while: See! We are coming to the e About fifteen leagues, as the crows of Saruman make it. said Gandalf: five from the mouth of Deeping-coomb to the Fords: and ten m And when we come there, what shall we see? asked Gimli. You may know, but I cannot guess.
I do not know myself for certain, answered the wizard. I was there at nightfall yesterday, but much may have happened since. Yet I

At last the company passed through the trees, and found that they had come to the bottom of the Coomb, where the road from Helm's There are eyes! he said. Eyes looking out from the shadows of the boughs! I never saw such eyes before.

The others, surprised by his cry, halted and turned; but Legolas began to ride back.
No, no! cried Gimli. Do as you please in your madness, but let me first get down from this horse! I wish to see no eyes! Stay, Leg Even as he spoke, there came forward out of the trees three strange shapes. As tall as trolls they were, twelve feet or more in he You need no weapons, said Gandalf. These are but herdsmen. They are not enemies, indeed they are not concerned with us at all.
So it seemed to be; for as he spoke the tall creatures, without a glance at the riders, strode into the wood and vanished. Herdsmen! said Théoden. Where are their flocks? What are they, Gandalf? For it is plain that to you, at any rate, they are not str They are the shepherds of the trees, answered Gandalf. Is it so long since you listened to tales by the fireside? There are childr The king was silent. Entities! he said at length. Out of the shadows of legend I begin a little to understand the marvel of the tr You should be glad, Théoden King, said Gandalf. For not only the little life of Men is now endangered, but the life also of those Yet also I should be sad, said Théoden. For however the fortune of war shall go, may it not so end that much that was fair and won It may, said Gandalf. The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured, nor made as if it had not been. But to such days we are doomed. L

The company then turned away from the Coomb and from the wood and took the road towards the Fords. Legolas followed reluctantly. T The carrion-fowl have been busy about the battle-field, said Éomer.
They rode now at an easy pace and darkness came down upon the plains about them. The slow moon mounted, now waxing towards the ful The road dipped between rising turf-banks, carving its way through the terraces to the river's edge, and up again upon the further This is become a dreary place, said Éomer. What sickness has befallen the river? Many fair things Saruman has destroyed: has he de Wings! said Théoden. Must we pass this way, where the carrion-beasts devour so many good Riders of the Mark?
This is our way, said Gandalf. Grievous is the fall of your men; but you shall see that at least the wolves of the mountains do no They rode down to the river, and as they came the wolves ceased their howling and slunk away. Fear fell on them seeing Gandalf in Look! said Gandalf. Friends have labored here.
And they saw that in the midst of the eyot a mound was piled, ringed with stones, and set about with many spears. Here lie all the Men of the Mark that fell near this place, said Gandalf.
Here let them rest! said Éomer. And when their spears have rotted and rusted, long still may their mound stand and guard the Fords Is this your work also, Gandalf, my friend? said Théoden. You accomplished much in an evening and a night!
With the help of Shadowfax - and others, said Gandalf. I rode fast and far. But here beside the mound I will say this for your com And glad shall I be to see it again, said Théoden, though briefly now, I doubt not, shall be my abiding there.
With that the company said farewell to the island and the mound, and passed over the river, and climbed the further bank. Then the There was an ancient highway that ran down from Isengard to the crossings. For some way it took its course beside the river, bendi What do you think of that, Gandalf? asked Aragorn. One would say that all the Wizard's Vale was burning.
There is ever a smoke above that valley in these days, said Éomer: but I have never seen anything like this before. These are stea Maybe he is, said Gandalf. Tomorrow we shall learn what he is doing. Now let us rest for a while, if we can.
They camped beside the bed of the Isen river; it was still silent and empty. Some of them slept a little. But late in the night th Stay where you are! said Gandalf. Draw no weapons! Wait! and it will pass you by!
A mist gathered about them. Above them a few stars still glimmered faintly; but on either side there rose walls of impenetrable gl Away south upon the Hornburg, in the middle night men heard a great noise, as a wind in the valley, and the ground trembled; and a
The king and his company slept no more that night; but they saw and heard no other strange thing, save one: the voice of the river At dawn they made ready to go on. The light came gray and pale, and they did not see the rising of the sun. The air above was heav It was not so now. Beneath the walls of Isengard there still were acres tilled by the slaves of Saruman; but most of the valley ha After they had ridden for some miles, the highway became a wide street, paved with great flat stones, squared and laid with skill;

Beneath the mountain's arm within the Wizard's Vale through years uncounted had stood that ancient place that Men called Isengard. This was its fashion, while Saruman was at his height, accounted by many the chief of Wizards. A great ring-wall of stone, like to Many houses there were, chambers, halls, and passages, cut and tunnelled back into the walls upon their inner side, so that all th To the center all the roads ran between their chains. There stood a tower of marvelous shape. It was fashioned by the builders of A strong place and wonderful was Isengard, and long it had been beautiful; and there great lords had dwelt, the wardens of Gondor This was the stronghold of Saruman, as fame reported it; for within living memory the men of Rohan had not passed its gates, save

Now Gandalf rode to the great pillar of the Hand, and passed it: and as he did so the Riders saw to their wonder that the Hand app At last Gandalf halted and beckoned to them; and they came, and saw that beyond him the mists had cleared, and a pale sunlight sho But the doors lay hurled and twisted on the ground. And all about, stone, cracked and splintered into countless jagged shards, was The ring beyond was filled with steaming water: a bubbling cauldron, in which there heaved and floated a wreckage of beams and spa The king and all his company sat silent on their horses, marvelling, perceiving that the power of Saruman was overthrown; but how

For a moment Théoden and Éomer and all his men stared at them in wonder. Amidst all the wreck of Isengard this seemed to them the Welcome, my lords, to Isengard! he said. We are the doorkeepers. Meriadoc, son of Saradoc is my name; and my companion, who, wings Doubtless he would! laughed Gandalf. And was it Saruman that ordered you to guard his damaged doors, and watch for the arrival of No, good sir, the matter escaped him, answered Merry gravely. He has been much occupied. Our orders came from Treebeard, who has t And what about your companions? What about Legolas and me? cried Gimli, unable to contain himself any longer. You rascals, you woo You speak for me, Gimli, laughed Legolas. Though I would sooner learn how they came by the wine.
One thing you have not found in your hunting, and that's brighter wits, said Pippin, opening an eye. Here you find us sitting on a Well-earned? said Gimli. I cannot believe that!
The Riders laughed. It cannot be doubted that we witness the meeting of dear friends, said Théoden. So these are the lost ones of Hobbits, if you please, lord, said Pippin.
Hobbits? said Théoden. Your tongue is strangely changed; but the name sounds not unfitting so. Hobbits! No report that I have hear Merry bowed; and Pippin got up and bowed low. You are gracious, lord; or I hope that I may so take your words, he said. And here i My people came out of the North long ago, said Théoden. But I will not deceive you: we know no tales about hobbits. All that is sa It could indeed, my lord, said Merry.
For one thing, said Théoden, I had not heard that they spouted smoke from their mouths.
That is not surprising, answered Merry; for it is an art which we have not practiced for more than a few generations. It was Tobol You do not know your danger, Théoden, interrupted Gandalf. These hobbits will sit on the edge of ruin and discuss the pleasures of Away on the north side, I believe. He went to get a drink of clean water. Most of the other Ents are with him, still busy at their And is Orthanc then left unguarded? asked Gandalf.
There is the water, said Merry. But Quickbeam and some others are watching it. Not all those posts and pillars in the plain are of Yes, a tall gray Ent is there, said Legolas, but his arms are at his sides, and he stands as still as a door-tree.

It is past noon, said Gandalf, and we at any rate have not eaten since early morning. Yet I wish to see Treebeard as soon as may b He left a message, said Merry, and I was coming to it, but I have been hindered by many other questions. I was to say that, if the Gandalf laughed. That is better! he said. Well, Théoden. will you ride with me to find Treebeard? We must go round about, but it i I will come with you, said Théoden. Farewell, my hobbits! May we meet again in my house! There you shall sit beside me and tell me The hobbits bowed low. So that is the King of Rohan! said Pippin in an undertone. A fine old fellow. Very politely.


Flotsam and Jetsam

Gandalf and the King's company rode away, turning eastward to make the circuit of the ruined walls of Isengard. But Aragorn, Gimli Well, well! The hunt is over, and we meet again at last, where none of us ever thought to come, said Aragorn.
And now that the great ones have gone to discuss high matters, said Legolas, the hunters can perhaps learn the answers to their ow And there is a great deal, too, that we want to know about you said Merry. We have learned a few things through Treebeard, the Old All in good time, said Legolas. We were the hunters, and you should give an account of yourselves to us first.
Or second, said Gimli. It would go better after a meal. t have a sore head; and it is past mid-day. You truants might make amends Then you shall have it, said Pippin. Will you have it here, or in more comfort in what's left of Saruman's guard-house - over ther Less than an eye! said Gimli. But I will not go into any orc-house nor touch Orcs meat or anything that they have mauled.
We wouldn't ask you to, said Merry. We have had enough of Orcs ourselves to last a life-time. But there were many other folk in Is "And pipe-weed?" asked Gimli.
No, I don't think so, Merry laughed. But that is another story, which can wait until after lunch. Well let us go and have lunch then! said the Dwarf.

The hobbits led the way; and they passed under the arch and came to a wide door upon the left, at the top of a stair. It opened di I lit a bit of fire, said Pippin. It cheered us up in the fogs. There were few fagots about, and most of the wood we could find wa Aragorn and his companions sat themselves down at one end of a long table, and the hobbits disappeared through one of the inner do And you need not turn up your nose at the provender, Master Gimli, said Merry. This is not orc-stuff, but man-food, as Treebeard c Indeed yes, said Gimli. The score is much reduced.
The three were soon busy with their meal; and the two hobbits, unabashed, set to a second time. We must keep our guests company, t You are full of courtesy this morning, laughed Legolas. But maybe if we had not arrived, you would already have been keeping one a Maybe; and why not? said Pippin. We had foul fare with the Orcs, and little enough for days before that. It seems a long while sin It does not seem to have done you any harm, said Aragorn. Indeed you look in the bloom of health.
Aye, you do indeed, said Gimli, looking them up and down over the top of his cup. Why, your hair is twice as thick and curly as wh He has not, said Merry. But Ents only drink, and drink is not enough for content. Treebeard's drafts may be nourishing, but one fe You have drunk of the waters of the Ents, have you? said Legolas. Ah, then I think it is likely that Gimli's eyes do not deceive h Many strange tales have been told about that land, said Aragorn. I have never entered it. Come, tell me more about it, and about t Ents, said Pippin, Ents are - well Ents are all different for on thing. But their eyes now, their eyes are very odd. He tried a fe Now, now! said Gimli. We are beginning the story in the middle. I should like a tale in the right order, starting with that strang You shall have it, if there is time, said Merry. But first-if you have finished eating-you shall fill your pipes and light up. And He produced a small leather bag full of tobacco. We have heaps of it, he said; and you can all pack as much as you wish, when we g Gimli took some and rubbed it in his palms and sniffed it. It feels good, and it smells good, he said.
It is good! said Merry. My dear Gimli, it is the Longbottom Leaf! There were the Hornblower brand marks on the barrels, as plain a It would, said Gimli, if I had a pipe to go with it. Alas, I lost mine in Moria, or before. Is there no pipe in all your plunder? No, I am afraid not, said Merry. We have not found any, not even here in the guardrooms. Saruman kept this dainty to himself. it s Half a moment! said Pippin. Putting his hand inside the breast of his jacket he pulled out a little soft wallet on a string. I kee Well, I am going back into the open air, to see what the wind and sky are doing! said Legolas.
We will come with you, said Aragorn.
They went out and seated themselves upon the piled stones before the gateway. They could see far down into the valley now; the mis Now let us take our ease here for a little! said Aragorn. We will sit on the edge of ruin and talk, as Gandalf says, while he is b Look! said Pippin. Strider the Ranger has come back!
He has never been away, said Aragorn. I am Strider and Dúnadan too, and I belong both to Gondor and the North.

They smoked in silence for a while, and the sun shone on them; slanting into the valley from among white clouds high in the West. Well, my tale begins with waking up in the dark and finding myself all strung-up in an orc-camp, said Pippin. Let me see, what is The fifth of March in the Shire-reckoning, said Aragorn. Pippin made some calculations on his fingers. Only nine days ago! he said Here are some treasures that you let fall, said Aragorn. You will be glad to have them back. He loosened his belt from under his c Well! said Merry. I never expected to see those again! I marked a few orcs with mine; but Uglúk took them from us. How he glared! And here also is your brooch, Pippin, said Aragorn. I have kept it safe, for it is a very precious thing.
I know, said Pippin. It was a wrench to let it go; but what else could I do?
Nothing else, answered Aragorn. One who cannot cast away a treasure at need is in fetters. You did rightly.
The cutting of the bands on your wrists, that was smart work! said Gimli. Luck served you there; but you seized your chance with b And set us a pretty riddle, said Legolas. I wondered if you had grown wings!
Unfortunately not, said Pippin. But you did not know about Grishnákh. He shuddered and said no more, leaving Merry to tell of thos All this about the Orcs of Barad-dûr, Lugbúrz as they call it, makes me uneasy, said Aragorn. The Dark Lord already knew too much Yes, whichever side wins, his outlook is poor, said Merry. Things began to go all wrong for him from the moment his Orcs set foot We caught a glimpse of the old villain, or so Gandalf hints, said Gimli. On the edge of the Forest.
"When was that?" asked Pippin.
Five nights ago, said Aragorn.
Let me see, said Merry: five nights ago-now we come to a part of the story you know nothing about. We met Treebeard that morning a If Saruman had heard it, he would be a hundred miles away by now, even if he had had to run on his own legs, said Pippin.

Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as bone, We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door!

There was very much more. A great deal of the song had no words, and was like a music of horns and drums. It was very exciting. Bu We came down over the last ridge into Nan Curunír, after night had fallen, Merry continued. It was then that I first had the feeli It was the Huorns, or so the Ents call them in "short language". Treebeard won't say much about them, but I think they are Ents th There is a great power in them, and they seem able to wrap themselves in shadow: it is difficult to see them moving. But they do.

Well, in the early night we crept down a long ravine into the upper end of the Wizard's Vale, the Ents with all their rustling Hor Treebeard and a few more Ents crept on, right round to within sight of the great gates. Pippin and I were with him. We were sittin Then all at once there was a tremendous stir. Trumpets blared and the walls of Isengard echoed. We thought that we had been discov I thought of him too, said Aragorn. We had many of these half-orcs to deal with at Helm's Deep. It seems plain now that that South Well, of all sorts together, there must have been ten thousand at the very least, said Merry. They took an hour to pass out of the But, although I could not see what was happening in the dark, I believe that Huorns began to move south, as soon as the gates were As soon as Saruman had sent off all his army, our turn came. Treebeard put us down, and went up to the gates, and began hammering When Treebeard had got a few arrows in him, he began to warm up, to get positively "hasty", as he would say. He let out a great _h They pushed, pulled, tore, shook, and hammered; and _clang-bang_, _crash-crack_, in five minutes they had these huge gates just ly No, said Aragorn. Once he was as great as his hunger made him. His knowledge was deep, his thought was subtle, and his hands marve The Ents are safe, said Pippin. He seems at one time to have got round them, but never again. And anyway he did not understand the When the Ents had reduced a large part of the southern walls to rubbish, and what was left of his people had bolted and deserted h When Saruman was safe back in Orthanc, it was not long before he set some of his precious machinery to work. By that time there we That sent them mad. I thought that they had been really roused before; but I was wrong. I saw what it was like at last. It was sta They set a watch on the tower, I believe, but the watchers were so well hidden in shadows and kept so still, that I could not see In the afternoon we walked round the circle, and went to have a look at what was going on. There was a great shadowy wood of Huorn At dusk Treebeard came back to the gate. He was humming and booming to himself, and seemed pleased. He stood and stretched his gre
 "Tired?" he said, "tired? Well no, not tired, but stiff. I need a good draft of Entwash. We have worked hard; we have done more s We were just wondering where it would be safe to lie and get some sleep, when the most amazing thing of all happened. There was th There was no need. He stopped just by us and looked down at us. Gandalf! I said at last. but my voice was only a whisper. Did he s Treebeard heard his voice and came out of the shadows at once; and there was a strange meeting. I was surprised, because neither o "Hoom! Gandalf!" said Treebeard. "I am glad you have come. Wood and water, stock and stone, I can master; but there is a Wizard to "Treebeard," said Gandalf. "I need your help. You have done much, but I need more. I have about ten thousand Orcs to manage."
Then those two went off and had a council together in some corner. It must have seemed very hasty to Treebeard, for Gandalf was in "But Gandalf," I cried, "where have you been? And have you seen the others?"
"Wherever I have been, I am back," he answered in the genuine Gandalf manner. "Yes, I have seen some of the others. But news must Treebeard was very thoughtful after Gandalf had gone. He had evidently learned a lot in a short time and was digesting it. He look Before he went, we got a little news out of him; and it did not cheer us up at all. But for the moment we thought more about you t "Huorns will help," said Treebeard. Then he went away and we did not see him again until this morning.

It was deep night. We lay on top of a pile of stone, and could see nothing beyond it. Mist or shadows blotted out everything like It must have been about midnight when the Ents broke the dams and poured all the gathered waters through a gap in the northern wal Isengard began to fill up with black creeping streams and pools. They glittered in the last light of the Moon, as they spread over We saw a cloud of smoke and steam from the south last night when we came to the mouth of Nan Curunír, said Aragorn. We feared that Not he! said Pippin. He was probably choking and not laughing any more. By the morning, yesterday morning, the water had sunk down

Since then the water has been sinking again. There must be outlets somewhere from the caves underneath, I think. If Saruman peeps

They all fell silent for a while. Gimli re-filled his pipe. There is one thing I wonder about, he said as he lit it with his flint Oh yes, I forgot about him, said Pippin. He did not get here until this morning. We had just lit the fire and had some breakfast w "I have just come round to see how you are faring, my lads, he said; and to give you some news. Huorns have come back. All's well; He had hardly said that, when we heard the sound of hoofs on the road. We rushed out before the gates, and I stood and stared, hal "No one else would dare to ride through the open land, so full of foul Orcs," he said, "so I was sent. And I have had a perilous j I caught the sidelong looks he gave to Treebeard, and I said to myself "liar". Treebeard looked at him in his long slow way for se "Let me go, let me go!" said Wormtongue. "I know the way."
"You knew the way, I don't doubt," said Treebeard. "But things have changed here a little. Go and see!"
He let Wormtongue go, and he limped off through the arch with us close behind, until he came inside the ring and could see all the "Let me go away!" he whined. "Let me go away! My messages are useless now."
"They are indeed," said Treebeard. "But you have only two choices: to stay with me until Gandalf and your master arrive; or to cro The man shivered at the mention of his master, and put a foot into the water; but he drew back. "I cannot swim," he said.
"The water is not deep," said Treebeard. "It is dirty, but that will not harm you, Master Wormtongue. In you go now!"
With that the wretch floundered off into the flood. It rose up nearly to his neck before he got too far away for me to see him. Th "Well, he has gone in," he said when he returned. "I saw him crawling up the steps like a dragged rat. There is someone in the tow He was, said Aragorn; and also Saruman's spy and servant in Rohan. Fate has not been kinder to him than he deserves. The sight of Yes, I don't suppose Treebeard sent him to Orthanc out of kindness, said Merry. He seemed rather grimly delighted with the busines "We want man-food for twenty-five," the Ents said, so you can see that somebody had counted your company carefully before you arri "What about a drink?" I said to the Ents.
"There is water of Isen," they said, "and that is good enough for Ents and Men." But I hope that the Ents may have found time to b We understand it all perfectly now, said Gimli.
All except one thing, said Aragorn: a leaf from the Southfarthing in Isengard. The more I consider it, the more curious I find it. Yes, said Pippin. It was the 1417 crop, that is last year's; no, the year before, of course, now: a good year.
Ah well, whatever evil was afoot is over now, I hope; or else it is beyond our reach at present, said Aragorn. Yet I think I shall I wonder what he is doing, said Merry. The afternoon is getting on. Let us go and look round! You can enter Isengard now at any ra


The Voice of Saruman

They passed through the ruined tunnel and stood upon a heap of stones, gazing at the dark rock of Orthanc, and its many windows, a There is Gandalf, and Théoden and his men! said Legolas. Let us go and meet them!
Walk warily! said Merry. There are loose slabs that may tilt up and throw you down into a pit, if you don't take care.

They followed what was left of the road from the gates to Orthanc, going slowly, for the flag-stones were cracked and slimed. The Well, Treebeard and I have had some interesting discussions, and made a few plans, he said; and we have all had some much-needed r We have, said Merry. But our discussions began and ended in smoke. Still we feel less ill-disposed towards Saruman than we did.
Do you indeed? said Gandalf. Well, I don't. I have now a last task to do before I go: I must pay Saruman a farewell visit. Dangero I will come, said Gimli. I wish to see him and learn if he really looks like you.
And how will you learn that, Master Dwarf? said Gandalf. Saruman could look like me in your eyes, if it suited his purpose with yo

What's the danger? asked Pippin. Will he shoot at us, and pour fire out of the windows; or can he put a spell on us from a distanc The last is most likely, if you ride to his door with a light heart, said Gandalf. But there is no knowing what he can do, or may

They came now to the foot of Orthanc. It was black, and the rock gleamed as if it were wet. The many faces of the stone had sharp On the eastern side, in the angle of two piers, there was a great door, high above the ground; and over it was a shuttered window, At the foot of the stairs Gandalf and the king dismounted. I will go up, said Gandalf. I have been in Orthanc and I know my peril. And I too will go up, said the king. I am old, and fear no danger any more. I wish to speak with the enemy who has done me so much As you will, said Gandalf. Aragorn shall come with me. Let the others await us at the foot of the stairs. They will hear and see e Nay! said Gimli. Legolas and I wish for a closer view. We alone here represent our kindred. We also will come behind.
Come then! said Gandalf, and with that he climbed the steps, and Théoden went beside him.
The Riders of Rohan sat uneasily upon their horses, on either side of the stairs, and looked up darkly at the great tower, fearing Half a sticky mile from here to the gate! muttered Pippin. I wish I could slip off back to the guardroom unnoticed! What did we co Gandalf stood before the door of Orthanc and beat on it with his staff. It rang with a hollow sound. Saruman, Saruman! he cried in For some time there was no answer. At last the window above the door was unbarred, but no figure could be seen at its dark opening Who is it? said a voice. What do you wish?
Théoden began. I know that voice, he said, and I curse the day when I first listened to it.
Go and fetch Saruman, since you have become his footman, Gríma Wormtongue! said Gandalf. And do not waste our time!
The window closed. They waited. Suddenly another voice spoke, low and melodious, its very sound an enchantment. Those who listened Well? he said now with a gentle question. Why must you disturb my rest? Will you give me no peace at all by night or day? Its tone They looked up, amazed, for they had heard no sound of his coming; and they saw a figure standing at the rail, looking down upon t Like, and yet unlike, muttered Gimli.
But come now, said the soft voice. Two at least of you I know by name. Gandalf I know too well to have much hope that he seeks hel Théoden opened his mouth as if to speak, but he said nothing. He looked up at the face of Saruman with his dark solemn eyes bent d It was Gimli the dwarf who broke in suddenly. The words of this wizard stand on their heads, he growled, gripping the handle of hi Peace! said Saruman, and for a fleeting moment his voice was less sweet, and a light flickered in his eyes and was gone. I do not What have you to say, Théoden King? Will you have peace with me, and all the aid that my knowledge, founded in long years, can bri Still Théoden did not answer. Whether he strove with anger or doubt none could say. Eomer spoke.
Lord, hear me! he said. Now we feel the danger that we were warned of. Have we ridden forth to victory, only to stand at last amaz If we speak of poisoned tongues what shall we say of yours, young serpent? said Saruman, and the flash of his anger was now plain But my lord of Rohan, am I to be called a murderer, because valiant men have fallen in battle? If you go to war, needlessly, for I We will have peace, said Théoden at last thickly and with an effort. Several of the Riders cried out gladly. Théoden held up his h The Riders gazed up at Théoden like men startled out of a dream. Harsh as an old raven's their master's voice sounded in their ear Gibbets and crows! he hissed, and they shuddered at the hideous change. Dotard! What is the house of Eorl but a thatched barn wher But you, Gandalf! For you at least I am grieved, feeling for your shame. How do you think it is that you can endure such company? Gandalf stirred, and looked up. What do you have to say that you did not say at our last meeting? he asked. Or, perhaps, you have Saruman paused. Unsay? he mused, as if puzzled. Unsay? I endeavored to advise you for your own good, but you scarcely listened. Yo So great was the power that Saruman exerted in this last effort that none that stood within hearing were unmoved. But now the spel Then Gandalf laughed. The fantasy vanished like a puff of smoke.
Saruman, Saruman! said Gandalf still laughing. Saruman, you missed your path in life. You should have been the king's jester and e A shadow passed over Saruman's face; then it went deathly white. Before he could conceal it, they saw through the mask the anguish Will I come down? he mocked. Does an unarmed man come down to speak with robbers out of doors? I can hear you well enough here. I The treacherous are ever distrustful, answered Gandalf wearily. But you need not fear for your skin. I do not wish to kill you, or That sounds well, sneered Saruman. Very much in the manner of Gandalf the Grey: so condescending, and so very kind. I do not doubt Reasons for leaving you can see from your windows. answered Gandalf. Others will occur to your thought. Your servants are destroye Saruman's face grew livid, twisted with rage, and a red light was kindled in his eyes. He laughed wildly. Later! he cried, and his Come back, Saruman! said Gandalf in a commanding voice. To the amazement of the others, Saruman turned again. and as if dragged ag I did not give you leave to go, said Gandalf sternly. I have not finished. You have become a fool, Saruman, and yet pitiable. You He raised his hand, and spoke slowly in a clear cold voice. Saruman, your staff is broken. There was a crack, and the staff split The murderous rogue! cried Éomer. But Gandalf was unmoved. No, that was not thrown by Saruman, he said; nor even at his bidding, I The aim was poor, maybe, because he could not make up his mind which he hated more, you or Saruman, said Aragorn.
That may be so, said Gandalf. Small comfort will those two have in their companionship: they will gnaw one another with words. But Here, my lad, I'll take that! I did not ask you to handle it, he cried, turning sharply and seeing Pippin coming up the steps, slo But he may have other things to cast, said Gimli. If that is the end of the debate, let us go out of stone's throw, at least!
It is the end, said Gandalf. Let us go.

They turned their backs on the doors of Orthanc, and went down. The riders hailed the king with joy, and saluted Gandalf. The spel Well, that is done, said Gandalf. Now I must find Treebeard and tell him how things have gone.
He will have guessed, surely? said Merry. Were they likely to end any other way?
Not likely, answered Gandalf, though they came to the balance of a hair. But I had reasons for trying; some merciful and some less And what if Sauron does not conquer? What will you do to him? asked Pippin.
I? Nothing! said Gandalf. I will do nothing to him. I do not wish for mastery. What will become of him? I cannot say. I grieve tha A shrill shriek; suddenly cut off, came from an open window high above.
It seems that Saruman thinks so too, said Gandalf. Let us leave them!

They returned now to the ruins of the gate. Hardly had they passed out under the arch, when, from among the shadows of the piled s Here are three of my companions, Treebeard, said Gandalf. I have spoken of them, but you have not yet seen them. He named them one The Old Ent looked at them long and searchingly, and spoke to them in turn. Last he turned to Legolas. So you have come all the wa And still it is, said Legolas. But not so great that we who dwell there ever tire of seeing new trees. I should dearly love to jou Treebeard's eyes gleamed with pleasure. I hope you may have your wish, ere the hills be much older, he said.
I will come, if I have the fortune, said Legolas. I have made a bargain with my friend that, if all goes well, we will visit Fango Any Elf that comes with you will be welcome, said Treebeard.
The friend I speak of is not an Elf, said Legolas; I mean Gimli, Glóin's son here. Gimli bowed low, and the ax slipped from his be Hoom, hmm! Ah now, said Treebeard, looking dark-eyed at him. A dwarf and an axe-bearer! Hoom! I have good will to the Elves; but y Hoo! Come now! said Treebeard. That is a better story! Well, well, things will go as they will; and there is no need to hurry to m Yes, we must go, and go now, said Gandalf. I fear that I must take your gatekeepers from you. But you will manage well enough with Perhaps I shall, said Treebeard. But I shall miss them. We have become friends in so short a while that I think I must be getting

_Ents the earthborn, old as mountains, the wide-walkers, drinking water;
and hungry as hunters, the Hobbit children, the laughing-folk, the little people,_

they shall remain friends as long as leaves are renewed. Fare thee well! But if you hear news up in your pleasant land, in the Shi We will! said Merry and Pippin together, and they turned away hastily. Treebeard looked at them, and was silent for a while, shaki So Saruman would not leave? he said. I did not think he would. His heart is as rotten as a black Huorn's. Still, if I were overcom No, said Gandalf. But you have not plotted to cover all the world with your trees and choke all other living things. But there it Indeed no! Ents will see to that, said Treebeard. Saruman shall not set foot beyond the rock, without my leave. Ents will watch ov Good! said Gandalf. That is what I hoped. Now I can go and turn to other matters with one care the less. But you must be wary. The Leave it to the Ents! said Treebeard. We shall search the valley from head to foot and peer under every pebble. Trees are coming b


The Palantír

The sun was sinking behind the long western arm of the mountains when Gandalf and his companions, and the king with his Riders, se Ents in a solemn row stood like statues at the gate, with their long arms uplifted, but they made no sound. Merry and Pippin looke They came to the pillar of the White Hand. The pillar was still standing, but the heavy hand had been thrown down and broken into The Ents pay attention to every detail! said Gandalf.
They rode on, and the evening deepened in the valley.

Are we riding far tonight, Gandalf? asked Merry after a while. I don't know how you feel with a small rag-tag dangling behind you; So you heard that? said Gandalf. Don't let it rankle! Be thankful no longer words were aimed at you. He had his eyes on you. If it Thank you! said Merry. But it is a greater honor to dangle at your tail, Gandalf. For one thing, in that position one has a chance Gandalf laughed. A most unquenchable hobbit! All Wizards should have a hobbit or two in their care - to teach them the meaning of When we came, we meant to go straight from Isengard back to the king's house at Edoras over the plains, a ride of some days. But w Nothing or a double helping is your way! said Merry. I am afraid I was not looking beyond tonight's bed. Where and what are Helm's Then you'd best learn something, if you wish to understand what is happening. But not just now, and not from me: I have too many p All right, I'll tackle Strider by the camp-fire: he's less testy. But why all this secrecy? I thought we'd won the battle!
Yes, we have won, but only the first victor and that in itself increases our danger. There was some link between Isengard and Mord

The road passed slowly, winding down the valley. Now further, and now nearer Isen flowed in its stony bed. Night came down from th At last they halted. Then they turned aside, leaving the highway and taking to the sweet upland turf again. Going westward a mile Guards were set, two at a watch. The rest, after they had supped, wrapped themselves in a cloak and blanket and slept. The hobbits What's the matter? asked Merry. Are you lying on an ant-hill?
No, said Pippin, but I'm not comfortable. I wonder how long it is since I slept in a bed?
Merry yawned. Work it out on your fingers! he said. But you must know how long it is since we left Lórien. Oh, that! said Pippin. I mean a real bed in a bedroom.
Well, Rivendell then, said Merry. But I could sleep anywhere tonight.
You had the luck, Merry, said Pippin softly, after a long pause. You were riding with Gandalf. Well, what about it?
Did you get any news, any information out of him?
Yes, a good deal. More than usual. But you heard it all or most of it: you were close by, and we were talking no secrets. But you Can I? Good! But he's close, isn't he? Not changed at all.
Oh yes, he is! said Merry, waking up a little, and beginning to wonder what was bothering his companion. He has grown, or somethin Well, if Gandalf has changed at all, then he's closer than ever that's all, Pippin argued. That-glass ball, now. He seemed mighty Hullo! said Merry. So that's what's bothering you? Now, Pippin my lad, don't forget Gildor's saying - the one Sam used to quote:_ But our whole life for months has been one long meddling in the affairs of Wizards, said Pippin. I should like a bit of informatio Go to sleep! said Merry. You'll get enough information, sooner or later. My dear Pippin, no Took ever beat a Brandybuck for inquis All right! What's the harm in my telling you what I should like: a look at that stone? I know I can't have it, with old Gandalf si Well, what else could I say? said Merry. I'm sorry, Pippin, but you really must wait until the morning. I'll be as curious as you

Pippin said no more. He lay still now, but sleep remained far away; and it was not encouraged by the sound of Merry breathing soft At last he could stand it no longer. He got up and looked round. It was chilly, and he wrapped his cloak about him. The moon was s Hardly breathing, Pippin crept nearer, foot by foot. At last he knelt down. Then he put his hands out stealthily, and slowly lifte Quickly now he drew off the cloth, wrapped the stone in it and kneeling down, laid it back by the wizard's hand. Then at last he l You idiotic fool! Pippin muttered to himself. You're going to get yourself into frightful trouble. Put it back quickly! But he fou Pippin sat with his knees drawn up and the ball between them. He bent low over it, looking like a greedy child stooping over a bow The cry was piercing. The guards leapt down from the banks. All the camp was soon astir.

So this is the thief! said Gandalf. Hastily he cast his cloak over the globe where it lay. But you, Pippin! This is a grievous tur He took Pippin's hand and bent over his face, listening for his breath; then he laid his hands on his brow. The hobbit shuddered. It is not for you, Saruman! he cried in a shrill and toneless voice shrinking away from Gandalf. I will send for it at once. Do yo Peregrine Took! he said. Come back!
The hobbit relaxed and fell back, clinging to the wizard's hand. Gandalf! he cried. Gandalf! Forgive me! Excuse me? said the wizard. Tell me first what you have done!
I, I took the ball and looked at it, stammered Pippin; and I saw things that frightened me. And I wanted to go away, but I could n That won't do, said Gandalf sternly. What did you see, and what did you say?
Pippin shut his eyes and shivered, but said nothing. They all stared at him in silence, except Merry who turned away. But Gandalf' In a low hesitating voice Pippin began again, and slowly his words grew clearer and stronger. I saw a dark sky, and tall battlemen I tried to get away, because I thought it would fly out; but when it had covered all the globe, it disappeared. Then _he_ came. He "So you have come back? Why have you neglected to report for so long?"
I did not answer. He said: "Who are you?" I still did not answer, but it hurt me terribly; and he pressed me, so I said: "A hobbit Then suddenly he seemed to see me, and he laughed at me. It was cruel. It was like being stabbed with knives. I struggled. But he Then he gloated over me. I felt I was falling to pieces. No, no! I can't say any more. I don't remember anything else.
Look at me! said Gandalf.

Pippin looked up straight into his eyes. The wizard held his gaze for a moment in silence. Then his face grew gentler, and the sha All right! he said. Say no more! You have taken no harm. There is no lie in your eyes, as I feared. But he did not speak long with He lifted Pippin gently and carried him back to his bed. Merry followed, and sat down beside him. Lie there and rest, if you can, With that Gandalf returned to the others, who were still standing by the Orthanc-stone in troubled thought. Peril comes in the nig How is the hobbit, Pippin? asked Aragorn.
I think all will be well now, answered Gandalf. He was not held long, and hobbits have an amazing power of recovery. The memory, o Dangerous indeed, but not to all, said Aragorn. There is one who may claim it by right. For this assuredly is the _palantír_ of Or Gandalf looked at Aragorn, and then, to the surprise of the others, he lifted the covered Stone, and bowed as he presented it.
Receive it, lord! he said: in earnest of other things that shall be given back. But if I may counsel you in the use of your own, d When have I been hasty or unwary, who have waited and prepared for so many long years? said Aragorn.
Never yet. Do not then stumble at the end of the road, answered Gandalf. But at least keep this thing secret. You, and all others Yes, there can be no doubt, said Aragorn. At last we know the link between Isengard and Mordor, and how it worked. Much is explain That many times is seen, said Gandalf. But at this time we have been strangely fortunate. Maybe, I have been saved by this hobbit That hour is now come, I think, said Aragorn.
Not yet, said Gandalf. There remains a short while of doubt which we must use. The Enemy, it is clear, thought that the Stone was I will keep Éomer and ten Riders, said the king. They shall ride with me at an early day. The rest may go with Aragorn and ride as As you will, said Gandalf. But make all the speed you may to the cover of the hills, to Helm's Deep!

At that moment a shadow fell over them. The bright moonlight seemed to be suddenly cut off. Several of the Riders cried out, and c They stood up, stiff as stones. Gandalf was gazing up, his arms out and downwards, stiff, his hands clenched.
Nazgûl! he cried. The messenger of Mordor. The storm is coming. The Nazgûl have crossed the River! Laugh, laugh! Wait not for the He sprang away, calling Shadowfax as he ran. Aragorn followed him. Going to Pippin, Gandalf picked him up in his arms. You shall c Farewell! Follow fast! cried Gandalf. Away, Shadowfax!
The great horse tossed his head. His flowing tail flicked in the moonlight. Then he leapt forward, spurning the earth, and was gon

A beautiful, restful night! said Merry to Aragorn. Some folk have wonderful luck. He did not want to sleep, and he wanted to ride If you had been the first to lift the Orthanc-stone, and not he, how would it be now? said Aragorn. You might have done worse. Who

Over the plains Shadowfax was flying, needing no urging and no guidance. Less than an hour had passed, and they had reached the Fo Pippin was recovering. He was warm, but the wind in his face was keen and refreshing. He was with Gandalf. The horror of the stone I did not know you rode bare-back, Gandalf, he said. You haven't a saddle or a bridle!
I do not ride elf-fashion, except on Shadowfax, said Gandalf. But Shadowfax will have no harness. You do not ride Shadowfax: he is How fast is he going? asked Pippin. Fast by the wind, but very smooth. And how light these footfalls are!
He is running now as fast as the swiftest horse could gallop, answered Gandalf; but that is not fast for him. The land is rising a Pippin was silent again for a while. He heard Gandalf singing softly to himself, murmuring brief snatches of rhyme in many tongues
    _Tall ships and tall kings Three times three,
What they brought from the founded land Over the flowing sea?
Seven stars and seven stones And one white tree.


What are you saying, Gandalf? asked Pippin.
I was just running over some of the Rhymes of Lore in my mind answered the wizard. Hobbits, I suppose, have forgotten them, even t No, not all, said Pippin. And we have many of our own, which would not interest you, perhaps. But I have never heard this one. Wha About the _palantíri_ of the Kings of Old, said Gandalf.
And what are they?
The name meant _that which looks far away_. The Orthanc-stone was one. Then it was not made, not made - Pippin hesitated - by the Enemy?
No, said Gandalf. Nor by Saruman. It is beyond his art, and beyond Sauron's too. The _palantíri_ came from beyond Westernesse from What did the Men of old use them for? asked Pippin, delighted and astonished at getting answers to so many questions, and wonderin To see far off, and to converse in thought with one another, said Gandalf. In that way they long guarded and united the realm of G Each _palantír_ replied to each, but all those in Gondor were ever open to the view of Osgiliath. Now it appears that, as the rock Who knows where the lost Stones of Arnor and Gondor now lie buried, or drowned deep? But one. at least Sauron must have obtained a Easy it is now to guess how quickly the roving eye of Saruman was trapped and held; and how ever since he has been persuaded from I wish I had known all this before, said Pippin. I had no idea of what I was doing.
Oh yes, you had, said Gandalf. You knew you were behaving wrongly and foolishly; and you told yourself so, although you did not li It does, said Pippin. If all the seven stones were laid out before me now, I should shut my eyes and put my hands in my pockets.
Good! said Gandalf. That is what I hoped. But I should like to know- Pippin began.
Mercy! cried Gandalf. If the giving of information is to be the cure of your inquisitiveness, I shall spend all the rest of my day The names of all the stars, and of all living things, and the whole history of Middle-earth and Over-heaven and of the Sundering S It was a Black Rider on wings, a Nazgûl, said Gandalf. It could have taken you away to the Dark Tower.
But it was not coming for me, what was it? faltered Pippin. I mean, it didn't know that I had...
Of course not, said Gandalf. It is two hundred leagues or more in straight flight from Barad-dûr to Orthanc, and even a Nazgûl wou But I cannot tell how it will fall out, well or ill for us. It may be that the counsels of the Enemy will be confused, or hindered Pippin made no answer, but clutched his cloak, as if a sudden chill had struck him. Gray land passed under them.
See now! said Gandalf. The Westfold dales are opening before us. Here we come back to the eastward road. The dark shadow yonder is I thought you were going to stop at Helm's Deep! said Pippin. Where are you going then?
To Minas Tirith, before the seas of war surround it. Oh! And how far is that?
Leagues upon leagues, answered Gandalf. Thrice as far as the dwellings of King Théoden, and they are more than a hundred miles eas We shall ride now until daybreak, and that is some hours away. Then even Shadowfax must rest, in some hollow of the hills: at Edor Away now, Shadowfax! Run, great heart, run as you have never run before! Now we are come to the lands where you were foaled and ev Shadowfax tossed his head and cried aloud, as if a trumpet had summoned him to battle. Then he sprang forward. Fire flew from his As he fell slowly into sleep, Pippin had a strange feeling: he and Gandalf were still as stone, seated upon the statue of a runnin

The Taming of Smeagol

Well, master, we're in a fix and no mistake, said Sam Gamgee. He stood defiantly with hunched shoulders beside Frodo, and peered o It was the third evening since they had fled from the Company, as far as they could tell: they had almost lost count of the hours

The hobbits stood now on the brink of a tall cliff, bare and bleak, its feet wrapped in mist; and behind them rose the broken high
``What a fix! said Sam. ``That's the one place in all the lands we've ever heard of that we don't want to see any closer; and that Yes, I can smell it, said Frodo, but he did not move, and his eyes remained fixed, staring out towards the dark line and the flick Or another and another and another, muttered Sam. ``Or maybe no day. We've come the wrong way.
I wonder, said Frodo. It's my doom, I think, to go to that Shadow yonder, so that a way will be found. But will good or evil show Only those, what d'you call em, _lembas_, Mr. Frodo A fair supply. But they are better than naught, by a long bite. I never though

They turned away and went down into a stony hollow. The westing sun was caught in the clouds, and night came swiftly. They slept a
``Did you see them again, Mr. Frodo? asked Sam, as they sat, stiff and chilled, munching wafers of _lembas_, in the cold gray of e No, said Frodo. ``I've heard nothing, and seen nothing, for two nights now.
``Nor me,'' said Sam. ``Grrr! Those eyes did give me a turn! But perhaps we've shaken him off at last, the miserable slinker. A go I hope you'll never need to, said Frodo. ``I don't know how he followed us; but it may be that he has lost us again, as you say. I I hope that's the way of it, said Sam. I wish we could be rid of him for good!
So I do, said Frodo; but he is not my chief trouble. I wish we could get away from these hills! I hate them. I feel all naked on t

But that day wore on, and when afternoon faded towards evening they were still scrambling along the ridge and had found no way of Sometimes in the silence of that barren country they fancied that they heard faint sounds behind them, a stone falling, or the ima All that day the outer ridge of the Emyn Muil had been bending gradually northward, as they struggled on. Along its brink there no At last they were brought to a halt. The ridge took a sharper bend northward and was gashed by a deeper ravine. On the further sid
``There's nothing for it but to scramble down this gully, Sam,'' said Frodo. ``Let's see what it leads to! A nasty drop, I'll bet, said Sam.
The cleft was longer and deeper than it seemed. Some way down they found a few gnarled and stunted trees, the first they had seen
``Look! he said. ``We must have come down a long way, or else the cliff has sunk. It's much lower here than it was, and it looks e Sam knelt beside him and peered reluctantly over the edge. Then he glanced up at the great cliff rising up, away on their left. ``
``It would be a big jump still,'' said Frodo. About, well - he stood for a moment measuring it with his eyes - about eighteen fath And that's enough! said Sam. ``Ugh! How I do hate looking down from a height! But looking is better than climbing.
``All the same,'' said Frodo, ``I think we could climb here; and I think we shall have to try. See - the rock is quite different f The outer fall was indeed no longer sheer, but sloped outwards a little. It looked like a great rampart or sea-wall whose foundati
``And if we're going to try and get down, we had better try at once. It's getting dark early. I think there's a storm coming.
The smoky blur of the mountains in the East was lost in a deeper blackness that was already reaching out westwards with long arms.
``Very good! said Sam gloomily. ``But I'm going first.
You? said Frodo. ``What made you change your mind about climbing?
I haven't changed my mind. But it's only sense: put the one lowest as it is most likely to slip. I don't want to come down on top Before Frodo could stop him, he sat down, swung his legs over the brink, and twisted round, scrabbling with his toes for a foothol No, no! Sam, you old ass! said Frodo. ``You'll kill yourself for certain going over like that without even a look to see what to m
``I don't know how you can be so sure,'' said Sam. ``Why! You can't see to the bottom in this light. What if you come to a place w Climb back, I suppose, said Frodo.
Easy said, objected Sam. Better wait till morning and more light.
``No! Not if I can help it, said Frodo with a sudden strange vehemence. ``I grudge every hour, every minute. I'm going down to try Gripping the stony lip of the fall with his fingers he let himself gently down, until when his arms were almost at full stretch, h

The hurrying darkness, now gathering great speed, rushed up from the East and swallowed the sky. There was a dry splitting crack o Sam heard him and crawled with an effort to the edge. Master, master! he called Master!
He heard no answer. He found he was shaking all over, but he gathered his breath, and once again he shouted: Master! The wind seem All right, all right! I'm here But I cannot see.
Frodo was calling with a weak voice. He was not actually very far away. He had slid and not fallen, and had come up with a jolt to Come back! Come back! he heard Sam's voice out of the blackness above.
``I can't,'' he said. ``I can't see. I can't find any hold. I can't move yet.
``What can I do, Mr. Frodo? What can I do? shouted Sam, leaning out dangerously far. Why could not his master see? It was dim, cer There was another crack of thunder; and then the rain came. In a blinding sheet, mingled with hail, it drove against the cliff, bi I'm coming down to you, shouted Sam, although how he hoped to help in that way he could not have said.
``No, no! wait! Frodo called back, more strongly now. I shall be better soon. I feel better already. Wait! You can't do anything w
``Rope! cried Sam, talking wildly to himself in his excitement and relief. ``Well, if I don't deserve to be hung on the end of one
``Stop chattering! cried Frodo, now recovered enough to feel both amused and annoyed. Never mind your Gaffer! Are you trying to te
``Yes, Mr. Frodo, in my pack and all. Carried it hundreds of miles and I'd clean forgotten it!
``Then get busy and let an end down!
Quickly Sam unslung his pack and rummaged in it. There indeed at the bottom was a coil of the silken-grey rope made by the folk of Sam stepped back and braced his feet against a stump a yard or two from the edge. Half hauled, half scrambling. Frodo came up and Thunder growled and rumbled in the distance, and the rain was still falling heavily. The hobbits crawled away back into the gully;
``I should have been half drowned down there, or washed clean off,'' said Frodo. What a piece of luck you had that rope!
``Better luck if I'd thought of it sooner,'' said Sam. Maybe you remember them putting the ropes in the boats, as we started off:
``A pity I didn't think of bringing another length,'' said Frodo; ``but I left the Company in such a hurry and confusion. If only Sam paid it out slowly, measuring it with his arms: Five, ten, twenty, thirty ells, more or less, he said.
Who'd have thought it! Frodo exclaimed.
``Ah! Who would? said Sam. ``The Elves are wonderful folk. It looks a bit thin, but it's tough; and soft as milk to the hand. Pack
``Thirty ells! said Frodo considering. I believe it would be enough. If the storm passes before nightfall, I'm going to try it.
``The rain's nearly given over already,'' said Sam; but don't you go doing anything risky in the dim again, Mr. Frodo! And I haven And I'm thinking that I won't spend a moment longer than I need stuck up on this edge with the eyes of the Dark Country looking ov With that he stood up and went down to the bottom of the gully again. He looked out. Clear sky was growing in the East once more.

``It's good to be able to see again,'' said Frodo, breathing deeply. ``Do you know, I thought for a bit that I had lost my sight?
``It does look sort of silver in the dark,'' said Sam. ``Never noticed it before, though I can't remember as I've ever had it out Frodo thought for a while. ``Make it fast to that stump, Sam! he said. ``Then I think you shall have your wish this time and go fi Very well, said Sam heavily. ``If it must be, let's get it over! He took up the rope and made it fast over the stump nearest to th

It did not, however, turn out half as bad as he had expected. The rope seemed to give him confidence, although he shut his eyes mo Frodo took rather more time to follow him. He had the rope about his waist and it was fast above, and he had shortened it so that
``Well! he cried. ``We've done it! We've escaped from the Emyn Muil! And now what next, I wonder? Maybe we shall soon be sighing f But Sam did not answer: he was staring back up the cliff. ``Ninnyhammers! he said. ``Noodles! My beautiful rope! There it is tied
``If you can think of any way we could have both used the rope and yet brought it down with us, then you can pass on to me ninnyha Sam scratched his head. ``No, I can't think how, begging your pardon,'' he said. ``But I don't like leaving it, and that's a fact. To the complete surprise of both the hobbits it came loose. Sam fell over, and the long gray coils slithered silently down on top Sam didn't laugh. ``I may not be much good at climbing, Mr. Frodo, he said in injured tones, ``but I do know something about rope
``Then the rope must have broken - frayed on the rock-edge, I expect, said Frodo.
``I bet it didn't! said Sam in an even more injured voice. He stooped and examined the ends. ``Nor it has not neither. Not a stran Then I'm afraid it must have been the knot, said Frodo.
Sam shook his head and did not answer. He was passing the rope through his fingers thoughtfully. ``Have it your own way, Mr. Frodo It certainly came, said Frodo, `and that's the chief thing. But now we've got to think of our next move. Night will be upon us soo They do cheer the heart, don't they? said Sam looking up. They are Elvish. somehow And the Moon's growing. We haven't seen him for Yes, said Frodo; ``but he won't be full for some days. I don't think we'll try the marshes by the light of half a moon.
Under the first shadows of night they started out on the next stage of their journey. After a while Sam turned and looked back at They picked their steps away from the skirts of the cliff, among a wilderness of boulders and rough stones, wet and slippery with We had better try a way back southwards along the line of the cliff, I think, said Sam. ``We might find some nook there, or even a I suppose so, said Frodo. I'm tired and I don't think I can scramble among stones much longer tonight - though I grudge the delay.

They did not find the going any easier at the broken feet of the Emyn Muil. Nor did Sam find any nook or hollow to shelter in: onl Well! said Frodo, standing up and drawing his cloak more closely round him. ``You sleep for a bit Sam and take my blanket. I'll wa Sam looked and breathed in sharply through his teeth. ``Shhh! he said. That's what it is. It's that Gollum! Snakes and adders! And

Down the face of a precipice, sheer and almost smooth it seemed in the pale moonlight, a small black shape was moving with its thi
``Do you think he can see us? said Sam.
``I don't know,'' said Frodo quietly, ``but I think not. It is hard even for friendly eyes to see these elven-cloaks: I cannot see
``Then why is he coming down just here? asked Sam.
Quietly, Sam! said Frodo. ``He can smell us, perhaps. And he can hear as keen as Elves, I believe. I think he has heard something
``Well, I'm sick of him,'' said Sam. ``He's come once too often for me and I'm going to have a word with him, if I can. I don't su
``Careful! whispered Frodo coming behind. ``Don't alarm him! He's much more dangerous than he looks.
The black crawling shape was now three-quarters of the way down, and perhaps fifty feet or less above the cliff's foot. Crouching
``Ah, sss! Cautious, my precious! More haste less speed. We mustn't risk our neck, must we, precious? No, precious - _gollum_! He He was getting lower now and the hisses became sharper and clearer. Where is it, where is it: my Precious, my Precious? It's ours,
``It doesn't sound as if he knew we were here, does it? Sam whispered. ``And what's this Precious? Does he mean the
``Hsh! breathed Frodo. He's getting near now, near enough to hear a whisper.
Indeed Gollum had suddenly paused again, and his large head on his scrawny neck was lolling from side to side as if he was listeni At last he was no more than a dozen feet from the ground, right above their heads. From that point there was a sheer drop, for the Sam was out of his hiding in a flash and crossed the space between him and the cliff foot in a couple of leaps. Before Gollum coul Things would have gone ill with Sam, if he had been alone. But Frodo sprang up, and drew Sting from its sheath. With his left hand
``Let's go! Gollum, he said. ``This is Sting. You have seen it before once upon a time. Let go, or you'll feel it this time! I'll Gollum collapsed and went as loose as a wet string. Sam got up, fingering his shoulder. His eyes smouldered with anger, but he cou Don't hurt us! Don't let them hurt us, precious! They won't hurt us will they, nice little hobbitses? We didn't mean no harm, but
``Well, what's to be done with it? said Sam. ``Tie it up, so as it can't come sneaking after us no more, I say.
``But that would kill us, kill us,'' Gollum whimpered. ``Cruel little hobbits. Tie us up in the cold hard lands and leave us, _gol
``No,'' said Frodo. ``If we kill him, we must kill him outright. But we cannot do that, not as things are. Poor wretch! He has don
``Oh, he hasn't! said Sam rubbing his shoulder. ``Anyway he meant to, _and_ he means to, I'll warrant. Throttle us in our sleep, t I daresay, said Frodo. ``But what he means to do is another matter. He paused for a while in thought. Gollum lay still, but stoppe It seemed to Frodo then that he heard, quite plainly but far off, voices out of the past:
_What a pity Bilbo did not stab the vile creature, when he had a chance!_
_Pity? It was pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy: not to strike without need._
_I do not feel any pity for Gollum. He deserves death._
_You deserve death! I daresay he does Many that live deserve death. And some day that deserves life. Can you give that to them? Th
``Very well,'' he answered aloud, lowering his sword. But still I am afraid. And yet, as you see, I will not touch the creature. F

Sam stared at his master, who seemed to be speaking to some one who was not there. Gollum lifted his head. Yess, wretched we are, precious, he whined. Misery misery! Hobbits won't kill us, nice hobbits.
No, we won't, said Frodo. ``But we won't let you go, either. You're full of wickedness and mischief, Gollum. You will have to come Yess, yes indeed, said Gollum sitting up. Nice hobbits! We will come with them. Find them safe paths in the dark, yes we will. And Sam scowled at him, and sucked his teeth; but he seemed to sense that there was something odd about his master's mood and that the Frodo looked straight into Gollum's eyes which flinched and twisted away. ``You know that, or you guess well enough, Sméagol,'' he
``Ah! sss! said Gollum, covering his ears with his hands, as if such frankness, and the open speaking of the names, hurt him. ``We
``So you have been there? Frodo insisted. ``And you're being drawn back there, aren't you?
``Yes. yes No! shrieked Gollum. ``Once, by accident it was, wasn't it, precious? Yes, by accident. But we won't go back, no, no! T
``He will not go away or go to sleep at your command, Sméagol,'' said Frodo. ``But if you really wish to be free of him again. the Gollum sat up again and looked at him under his eyelids. He's over there, he cackled. ``Always there. Orcs will take you all the w
``Perhaps we'll find him again, if you come with us,'' said Frodo. No, no, never! He's lost his Precious, said Gollum.
"Get up!" said Frodo.
Gollum stood up and backed away against the cliff.
``Now! said Frodo. Can you find a path easier by day or by night? We're tired; but if you choose the night, we'll start tonight.
``The big lights hurt our eyes, they do,' Gollum whined. ``Not under the White Face, not yet. It will go behind the hills soon, ye

``Then sit down,'' said Frodo, ``and don't move!

The hobbits seated themselves beside him, one on either side. with their backs to the stony wall, resting their legs. There was no Frodo looked across at Sam. Their eyes met and they understood. They relaxed, leaning their heads back, and shutting their eyes or Suddenly, with startling agility and speed, straight off the ground with a jump like a grasshopper or a frog. Gollum bounded forwa Your rope might prove useful again, Sam. he said.
Sam got out the rope. And where were you off to in the cold hard lands, Mr. A goal? he growled. We wonder. aye, we wonder. To find Gollum lay still and tried no further tricks. He did not answer Sam, but gave him a swift venomous look.
``All we need is something to keep a hold on him,'' said Frodo. We want him to walk, so it's no good tying his legs-or his arms. h He stood over Gollum, while Sam tied the knot. The result surprised them both. Gollum began to scream, a thin, tearing sound, very At last Frodo was convinced that he really was in pain; but it could not be from the knot. He examined it and found that it was no It hurts us, it hurts us, hissed Gollum. ``It freezes, it bites! Elves twisted it, curse them! Nasty cruel hobbits! That's why we
``No, I will not take it off you, said Frodo, ``not unless - he paused a moment in thought - ``not unless there is any promise you We will swear to do what he wants, yes, yes, said Gollum, still twisting and grabbing at his ankle. ``It hurts us.
``Swear?'' said Frodo.
Sméagol, said Gollum suddenly and clearly, opening his eyes wide and staring at Frodo with a strange light. Sméagol will swear on Frodo drew himself up, and again Sam was startled by his words and his stern voice. On the Precious? How dare you? he said. Think!

One Ring to rule them all and bind them in the Darkness.

Would you commit your promise to that, Sméagol? It will hold you. But it is more treacherous than you are. It may twist your words Gollum cowered. On the Precious. on the Precious! he repeated.
``And what would you swear? asked Frodo.
``To be very very good,'' said Gollum. Then crawling to Frodo's feet he grovelled before him, whispering hoarsely: a shudder ran o No! not on it, said Frodo, looking down at him with stern pity. All you wish is to see it and touch it, if you can, although you k For a moment it appeared to Sam that his master had grown and Gollum had shrunk: a tall stern shadow, a mighty lord who hid his br Down! down! said Frodo. ``Now speak your promise!
``We promise, yes I promise! said Gollum. I will serve the master of the Precious. Good master, good Sméagol, _gollum_, _gollum_! Take the rope off, Sam! said Frodo.
Reluctantly Sam obeyed. But once Gollum got up and began prancing about, like a whipped man whose master had patted him. From that Well, Gollum, or whatever it is we're to call you, he said. now for it! The Moon's gone. and the night's going. We'd better start. Yes, yes, agreed Gollum, skipping about. Off we go! There's only one way across between the North-end and the South-end. I found i He took a few steps away and looked back inquiringly, like a dog inviting them for a walk. Wait a bit, Gollum! cried Sam. ``Not to No, no! said Gollum. Sméagol promised.
In the depth of night under hard clear stars they set off. Gollum led them back northward for a while along the way they had come;


The Passage of the Marshes

Gollum moved quickly, with his head and neck thrust forward, often using his hands as well as his feet. Frodo and Sam were hard pu
``Here it goes! he cried. There is a way down inside, yes. Now we follow it - out, out away over there. He pointed south and east Gollum cast up and down along the brink, and at length he called to them. ``Here! We can get down here. Sméagol went this way once He led the way, and following him the hobbits climbed down into the gloom. It was not difficult, for the rift was at this point on

The cold hard lands, they bite our hands,
 They gnaw our feet. The rocks and stones are like old bones
 all bare of flesh. But stream and pool is wet and cool:
 so nice for feet! And now we wish -
Ha! ha! What do we wish? he said, looking sidelong at the hobbits. We'll tell you. he croaked. ``He guessed it long ago, Baggins g Alive without breath;
as cold as death;
never thirsty, ever drinking; clad in mail, never clinking. Drowns on dry land,
thinks an island is a mountain; thinks a fountain is a puff of air. So sleek, so fair!
What a joy to meet!
We only wish
to catch a fish, so juicy-sweet!

These words only made more pressing to Sam's mind a problem that had been troubling him from the moment when he understood that hi They stumbled along in the dark winding gully for a long time, or so it seemed to the tired feet of Frodo and Sam. The gully turne
``Day is near,'' he whispered, as if Day were something that might overhear him and spring on him. ``Sméagol will stay here: I wil
``We should be glad to see the Sun; said Frodo, ``but we will stay here: we are too tired to go any further at present.
``You are not wise to be glad of the Yellow Face,'' said Gollum. ``It shows you up. Nice sensible hobbits stay with Sméagol. Orcs

The three of them settled down to rest at the foot of the rocky wall of the gully. It was not much more than a tall man's height n
``We must take a little food,'' said Frodo. ``Are you hungry, Sméagol? We have very little to share, but we will spare you what we At the word _hungry_ a greenish light was kindled in Gollum's pale eyes, and they seemed to protrude further than ever from his th
``No, we have got no fish,'' said Frodo. ``We have only got this - he held up a wafer of _lembas_ - and water, if the water here i
``Yes, yes, nice water,'' said Gollum. ``Drink it, drink it, while we can! But what is it they've got, precious? Is it crunchable? Frodo broke off a portion of a wafer and handed it to him on its leaf-wrapping. Gollum sniffed at the leaf and his face changed: a
``Ah! No! he spluttered. ``You try to choke poor Sméagol. Dust and ashes, he cannot eat that. He must starve. But Sméagol doesn't
``I'm sorry,'' said Frodo; ``but I can't help you, I'm afraid. I think this food would do you good, if you would try. But perhaps

The hobbits munched their _lembas_ in silence. Sam thought that it tasted far better, somehow, than it had for a good while: Gollu Look here! Sam whispered to Frodo, not too softly: he did not really care whether Gollum heard him or not. ``We've got to get some Perhaps you're right, Sam, said Frodo speaking openly. There _is_ a change in him, but just what kind of a change and how deep, I' So tired was Frodo that his head fell forward on his breast and he slept. almost as soon as he had spoken the words. Gollum seemed Sam scratched his head. ``Must really be asleep,'' he muttered. ``And if I was like Gollum, he wouldn't wake up never again. He re

When he woke up the sky above was dim, not lighter but darker than when they had breakfasted. Sam leapt to his feet. Not least fro Poor wretch! he said half remorsefully. Now I wonder where he got to?
Not far, not far! said a voice above him. He looked up and saw the shape of Gollum's large head and ears against the evening sky. Here, what are you doing? cried Sam, his suspicions coming back as soon as he saw that shape.
``Sméagol is hungry,'' said Gollum. ``Be back soon.
Come back now! shouted Sam. Hi! Come back! But Gollum had vanished.
Frodo woke at the sound of Sam's shout and sat up, rubbing his eyes. Hullo! he said. Anything wrong? What's the time?
1 dunno, said Sam. After sundown, I reckon. And he's gone off. Says he's hungry.
Don't worry! said Frodo. ``There's no help for it. But he'll come back, you'll see. The promise will hold yet a while. And he won' Frodo made light of it when he learned that they had slept soundly for hours with Gollum, and a very hungry Gollum too, loose besi
``About the food,'' said Sam. How long is it going to take us to do this job? And when it's done, what are we going to do then? Th
``I don't know how long we shall take to - to finish,'' said Frodo. ``We were miserably delayed in the hills. But Samwise Gamgee, Sam nodded silently. He took his master's hand and bent over it. He did not kiss it, though his tears fell on it. Then he turned a It was actually not long before Gollum returned; but he came so quietly that they did not hear him till he stood before them. His Worms or beetles or something slimy out of holes, thought Sam. Brrr! The nasty creature; the poor wretch!
Gollum said nothing to them, until he had drunk deeply and washed himself in the stream. Then he came up to them, licking his lips

The next stage of their journey was much the same as the last. As they went on the gully became ever shallower and the slope of it In a chill hour they came to the end of the water-course. The banks became moss-grown mounds. Over the last shelf of rotting stone

On either side and in front wide fens and wonders now lay, stretching away southward and eastward into the dim half-light. Mists c The hobbits were now wholly in the hands of Gollum. They did now know, and could not guess in that misty light. that they were in How do we shape our course now, Sméagol? asked Frodo. Must we cross these evil-smelling fens?
``No need, no need at all,'' said Gollum. Not if hobbits want to reach the dark mountains and go to see Him very quickly. Back a l

It was already day, a windless and sullen morning, and the marsh-reeks lay in heavy banks. No sun pierced the low clouded sky, and Frodo seemed the most weary of the three, and slow though they went. he often lagged. The hobbits soon found that what had looked It was dreary and wearisome. Cold clammy winter still held sway in this forsaken country. The only green was the scum of livid wee As the day wore on the light increased a little, and the mists lifted, growing thinner and more transparent. Far above the rot and Not a bird! said Sam mournfully.
``No, no birds,'' said Gollum. Nice birds! He licked his teeth. No birds here. There are snakes, worms, things in the pools. Lots

So passed the third day of their journey with Gollum. Before the shadows of evening were long in happier lands, they went on again They walked slowly, stooping, keeping close in line, following attentively every move that Gollum made. The fens grew more wet, op Presently it grew altogether dark: the air itself seemed black and heavy to breathe. When the lights appeared Sam rubbed his eyes: At last Sam could bear it no longer. ``What's all this, Gollum? he said in a whisper. ``These lights? They're all round us now. Ar Gollum looked up. A dark water was before him, and he was crawling on the ground, this way and that, doubtful of the way. Yes, the Sam looked back and found that Frodo had lagged again. He could not see him. He went some paces back into the darkness, not daring
``How, Mr. Frodo! said Sam. Don't look at them! Gollum says we mustn't. Let's keep up with him and get out of this cursed place as
``All right,'' said Frodo, as if returning out of a dream. I'm coming. Go on!
Hurrying forward again, Sam tripped, catching his foot in some old root or tussock. He fell and came heavily on his hands, which s Gollum laughed. The Dead Marshes, yes, yes: that is their name, he cackled. ``You should not look in when the candles are lit.
``Who are they? What are they? asked Sam shuddering, turning to Frodo, who was now behind him.
I don't know, said Frodo in a dreamlike voice. But I have seen them too. In the pools when the candles were lit. They lie in all t
``Yes, yes,'' said Gollum. ``All dead, all rotten. Elves and Men and Orcs. The Dead Marshes. There was a great battle long ago, ye But that is an age and more ago, said Sam. The Dead can't be really there! Is it some devilry hatched in the Dark Land?
``Who knows? Sméagol doesn't know, answered Gollum. You cannot reach them, you cannot touch them. We tried once, yes, precious. I Sam looked darkly at him and shuddered again, thinking that he guessed why Sméagol had tried to touch them. ``Well, I don't want t
``Yes, yes,'' said Gollum. ``But slowly, very slowly. Very carefully! Or hobbits go down to join the Dead ones and light little ca

He crawled away to the right, seeking for a path round the mere. They came close behind, stooping, often using their hands even as At last they came to the end of the black mere, and they crossed it, perilously, crawling or hopping from one treacherous island t It was late in the night when at length they reached firmer ground again. Gollum hissed and whispered to himself, but it appeared
``Now on we go! he said. Nice hobbits! Brave hobbits! Very very tired, of course; so we are, my precious, all of us. But we must t What is it? growled Sam, misinterpreting the signs. ``What's the need to sniff? The stink nearly knocks me down with my nose held. Yes, yes, and Sam stinks! answered Gollum. ``Poor Sméagol smells it, but good Sméagol bears it. It helps nice master. But that's n

He went on again, but his uneasiness grew, and every now and again he stood up to his full height, craning his neck eastward and s The goal would not move. He stood shaking and gibbering to himself, until with a rush the wind came upon them, hissing and snarlin For a moment the sight of it gladdened the hearts of the hobbits; but Gollum cowered down, muttering curses on the White Face. The They fell forward, groveling heedlessly on the cold earth. But the shadow of horror wheeled and returned, passing lower now, right Frodo and Sam got up, rubbing their eyes, like children awakened from an evil dream to find the familiar night still over the worl

``Wraiths! he wailed. ``Wraiths on wings! The Precious is their master. They see everything, everything. Nothing can hide from the

From that time on Sam thought that he sensed a change in Gollum again. He was more fawning and would-be friendly; but Sam surprise In fact with every step towards the gates of Mordor Frodo felt the Ring on its chain about his neck grow more burdensome. He was n Gollum probably felt something of the same fate. But what went on in his wretched heart between the pressure of the Eye, and the l

When day came at last the hobbits were surprised to see how much closer the ominous mountains had already drawn. The air was now c While the gray light lasted, they cowered under a black stone like worms, shrinking, lest the winged terror should pass and spy th At last, on the fifth morning since they took the road with Gollum, they halted once more. Before them dark in the dawn the great They had come to the desolation that lay before Mordor: the lasting monument to the dark labor of its slaves that should endure wh For a while they stood there, like men on the edge of a sleep where nightmare lurks, holding it off, though they know that they ca

Too weary to go further they sought for some place where they could rest. For a while they sat without speaking under the shadow o The day passed slowly. A great thirst troubled them, but they drank only a few drops from their bottles-last filled in the gully, Suddenly Sam woke up thinking that he heard his master calling. It was evening. Frodo could not have called, for he had fallen asl
``Sméagol promised,'' said the first thought.
``Yes, yes, my precious, came the answer, we promised: to save our Precious, not to let Him have it - never. But it's going to Him
``I don't know. I can't help it. Master's got it. Sméagol promised to help the master.
``Yes, yes, to help the master: the master of the Precious. But if we were masters, then we could help ourselves, yes, and still k
``But Sméagol said he would be very very good. Nice hobbit! He took the cruel rope off Sméagol's leg. He speaks nicely to me.
Very very good, eh, my precious? Let's be good, good as fish, sweet one, but to ourselves. Not hurt the nice hobbit, of course, no
``But the Precious holds the promise,'' the voice of Sméagol objected.
``Then take it,'' said the other, ``and let's hold it ourselves! Then we shall be master, _gollum_! Make the other hobbit, the nas
`But not the nice hobbit?
``Oh no, not if it doesn't please us. Still he's a Baggins, my precious, yes, a Baggins. It was stolen from Baggins. He found it a No, not this Baggins.
Yes, every Baggins. All peoples that keep the Precious. We must have it!
``But He'll see, He'll know. He'll take it from us!
He sees. He knows. He heard us make silly promises - against His orders, yes. Must take it. The Wraiths are searching. Must take i Not for Him!
No, sweet one. See, my precious: if we have it, then we can escape, even from Him, eh? Perhaps we grow very strong, stronger than But there are two of them. They'll wake up too quickly and kill us, whined Sméagol in a last effort. ``Not now. Not yet.
We want it! But - and here there was a long pause, as if a new thought had awakened. ``Not yet, eh? Perhaps not. She might help. S
``No, no! Not that way! wailed Sméagol.
``Yes! We want it! We want it!
Each time that the second thought spoke, Gollum's long hand crept out slowly, pawing towards Frodo, and then was drawn back with a

Sam had lain still, fascinated by this debate, but watching every move that Gollum made from under his half-closed eye-lids. To hi
``What's the time? he said sleepily.
Gollum sent out a long hiss through his teeth. He stood up for a moment, tense and menacing; and then he collapsed, falling forwar
``High time! Sam thought. And time we parted, too. Yet it crossed his mind to wonder if indeed Gollum was not now as dangerous tur Strangely enough, Frodo felt refreshed. He had been dreaming. The dark shadow had passed, and a fair vision had visited him in thi Eat! he said. ``You have guided us well and faithfully. This is the last stage. Bring us to the Gate, and then I will not ask you To the Gate, eh? Gollum squeaked, seeming surprised and frightened. To the Gate, says the master! Yes, he says so. And good Sméago Go on with you! said Sam. ``Let's get it over!

In the falling dusk they scrambled out of the pit and slowly threaded their way through the dead land. They had not gone far befor About an hour after midnight the fear fell on them a third time, but it now seemed more distant, as if it were passing far above t
``Three times! he whimpered. Three times is a threat. They feel us here, they feel the Precious. The Precious is their master. We Pleading and kind words were no longer of any avail. It was not until Frodo commanded him angrily and laid a hand on his sword-hil So they stumbled on through the weary end of the night, and until the coming of another day of fear they walked in silence with bo


The Black Gate is Closed

Before the next day dawned their journey to Mordor was over. The marshes and the desert were behind them. Before them, darkling ag Upon the west of Mordor marched the gloomy range of Ephel Dúath, the Mountains of Shadow, and upon the north the broken peaks and Across the mouth of the pass, from cliff to cliff, the Dark Lord had built a rampart of stone. In it there was a single gate of ir The two hobbits gazed at the towers and the wall in despair. Even from a distance they could see in the dim light the movement of

Day came, and the fallow sun blinked over the lifeless ridges of Ered Lithui. Then suddenly the cry of brazen-throated trumpets wa

``Well, here we are! said Sam. ``Here's the Gate, and it looks to me as if that's about as far as we are ever going to get. My wor
``I suppose it's no good asking "what way do we go now?" We can't go any further unless we want to ask the orcs for a lift.
``No, no! said Gollum. ``Don't use it. We can't go further. Sméagol said so. He said: we'll go to the Gate, and then we'll see. An Then what the plague did you bring us here for? said Sam, not feeling in the mood to be just or reasonable.
``Master said so. Master says: Bring us to the Gate. So good Sméagol does so. Master said so, wise master.
I did, said Frodo. His face was grim and set. but resolutely. He was filthy, haggard, and pinched with weariness, but he cowered n
``No, no, master! wailed Gollum; pawing at him, and seeming in great distress. ``Don't use that way! Don't use it! Don't take the I am commanded to go to the land of Mordor, and therefore I shall go, said Frodo. If there is only one way, then I must take it. W

Sam said nothing. The look on Frodo's face was enough for him he knew that his words were useless. And after all he never had any Gollum, however, did not intend to be got rid of, yet. He knelt at Frodo's feet, wringing his hands and squeaking. Not this way, m Another way! said Frodo doubtfully, looking down at Gollum with searching eyes.
Yes! Yes indeed! There _was_ another way. Sméagol found it. Let's go and see if it's still there!
``You have not spoken of this before.
``No. Master did not ask. Master did not say what he meant to do. He does not tell poor Sméagol. He says: Sméagol, take me to the

Sam frowned. If he could have bored holes in Gollum with his eyes, he would have done. His mind was full of doubt. To all appearan
``And it's a good thing neither half of the old villain don't know what master means to do, he thought. ``If he knew that Mr. Frod Frodo did not answer Gollum at once. While these doubts were passing through Sam's slow but shrewd mind, he stood gazing out towar As he gazed Frodo became aware that there was a great stir and movement on the plain. It seemed as if whole armies were on the mar
``Sméagol,'' he said, ``I will trust you once more. indeed it seems that I must do so, and that it is my fate to receive help from
``Yes, yes, master! said Gollum. ``Dreadful danger! Sméagol's bones shook to think of it. but he doesn't run away. He must help ni I did not mean the danger that we all share, said Frodo. I mean a danger to yourself alone. You swore a promise by what you call t Sam looked at his master with approval, but also with surprise: there was a look in his face and a tone in his voice that he had n Frodo waited patiently for a while, then he spoke again less sternly. ``Come now, Gollum or Sméagol if you wish, tell me of this o But Gollum was in a pitiable state, and Frodo's threat had quite unnerved him. It was not easy to get any clear account out of him
``On, on, on,'' said Gollum. ``We never went that way, but they say it goes a hundred leagues, until you can see the Great Water t
``No! said Frodo. ``But do not wander from your road. What of the third turning?
``O yes, O yes, there is a third way,'' said Gollum. That is the road to the left. But once it begins to climb up, up, winding and
``See it, see it? What will you see?
``The old fortress, very old, very horrible now. We used to hear tales from the South, when Sméagol was young, long ago. Oh yes. w
``Tales out of the South, Gollum went on again, ``about the tall Men with the shining eyes, and their houses like hills of stone,
``That would be Minas Ithil that Isildur the son of Elendil built said Frodo. ``It was Isildur who cut off the finger of the Enemy
``Yes, He has only four on the Black Hand, but they are enough, said Gollum shuddering. And He hated Isildur's city. What does he not hate? said Frodo. But what has the Tower of the Moon to do with us?
Well, master, there it was and there it is: the tall tower and the white houses and the wall; but not nice now, not beautiful. He
``But how will that help us? asked Sam. ``Surely the Enemy knows all about his own mountains, and that road will be guarded as clo
``Oh no, not empty! whispered Gollum. ``It seems empty, but it isn't, Oh no! Very dreadful things live there. Orcs. yes always Orc
``So that's your advice is it, said Sam, that we should go another long march south, to find ourselves in the same fix or a worse
``No, no indeed,'' said Gollum. ``Hobbits must see, must try to understand. He does not expect to attack that way. His Eye is all You seem to know a lot about what He's doing and thinking, said Sam. ``Have you been talking to Him lately? Or just hobnobbing wit Not nice hobbit, not sensible, said Gollum, giving Sam an angry glance and turning to Frodo. Sméagol has talked to Orcs, yes of co
``Just so! said Sam, not to be put off. ``And so we are to walk up and knock at their gate and ask if we're on the right road for Don't make jokes about it, Gollum hissed. ``It isn't funny, Oh no! Not amusing. It's nut sense to try and get into Mordor at all. What did you find? asked Frodo.
Gollum crouched down and his voice sank to a whisper again. A little path leading up into the mountains: and then a stair, a narro
``I don't like the sound of it at all,'' said Sam. ``Sounds too easy at any rate in the telling. If that path is still there, it w Is it not guarded? asked Frodo sternly. ``And did you _escape_ out of the darkness, Sméagol? Were you not rather permitted to depa It's a lie! hissed Gollum, and an evil light came into his eyes at the naming of Aragorn. ``He lied on me, yes he did. I did escap Frodo felt a strange certainty that in this matter Gollum was for once not so far from the truth as might be suspected; that he ha I ask you again, he said: ``is not this secret way guarded?
But the name of Aragorn had put Gollum into a sullen mood. He had all the injured air of a suspected liar when for once he had tol Is it not guarded? Frodo repeated.
``Yes, yes, perhaps. No safe places in this country, said Gollum sulkily. No safe please. But the master must try it or go home. . Its name was Cirith Ungol, a name of dreadful rumour. Aragorn could perhaps have told them that name and its significance: Gandalf Maybe Frodo felt it, not knowing it, as he had upon Amon Hen, even though he believed that Gandalf was gone, gone for ever into th

The day drew on. A deep silence fell upon the little gray hollow where they lay, so near to the borders of the land of fear: a sil Not even an eagle poised against the sun would have marked the hobbits sitting there, under the weight of doom, silent, : not movi Frodo's head was bowed over his knees, but Sam leaned back, with hands behind his head, staring out of his hood at the empty sky. Sam took a deep breath. ``The Riders are about again, up in the air,'' he said in a hoarse whisper. I saw them. Do you think they No, perhaps not, said Frodo. ``But their steeds could see. And these winged creatures that they ride on now, they can probably see The feeling of dread passed, but the unfolding silence was broken. For some time they had been cut off from the world, as if on an

A new fear was upon them. They heard singing and hoarse shouting. At first it seemed a long way off, but it drew nearer: it was co Gollum rose slowly and crawled insect-like to the lip of the hollow. Very cautiously he raised himself inch by inch, until he coul More Men going to Mordor, he said in a low voice. ``Dark torches. We have not seen Men like these before, no, Sméagol has not. The
``Were there any oliphaunts? asked Sam, forgetting his fear in his eagerness for news of strange places.
``No, no oliphaunts. What are oliphaunts? said Gollum.
Sam stood up, putting his hands behind his back (as he always did when speaking poetry), and began: Gray as a mouse,
Big as a house.
Nose like a snake,
I make the earth shake,
As I tramp through the grass;
Trees crack as I pass.
With horns in my mouth I walk in the South, Flapping big ears.
Beyond number of years
I stumble round and round, Never lie on the ground, Not even to die.
Oliphant am I, Biggest of all, Huge, old, and tall. If ever you'd met me
You wouldn't forget me.
If you never do,
You won't think I'm true;

But old Oliphaunt am I, And I never lie.

That, said Sam, when he had finished reciting, ``that's a rhyme we have in the Shire. Nonsense maybe, and maybe not. But we have o
``No, no oliphaunts,'' said Gollum again. Sméagol has not heard of them. He does not want to see them. He does not want them to be Frodo stood up. He had laughed in the midst of all his cares when Sam trotted out the old fireside rhyme of _Oliphaunt_, and the l Good master, wise master, nice master! cried Gollum in delight, patting Frodo's knees. ``Good master! Then rest now, nice hobbits,


Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit

For the few hours of daylight that were left they rested, shifting into the shade as the sun moved, until at last the shadow of th
``Soon get more now,'' he said, licking his lips. ``Good water runs down in streams to the Great River, nice water in the lands we

The dusk was deep when at length they set out, creeping over the westward rim of the dell, and fading like ghosts into the broken For many soldiers the red eye seemed to stare at them as they fled, stumbling through a barren stony country. They did not dare to With hearts strangely lightened they now rested again, but not for long. They were not going quick enough for Gollum. By his recko

The growing light revealed to them a land already, less barren and ruinous. The mountains still loomed up ominously on their left,

The day passed uneasily. They lay deep in the heather and counted out the slow hours, in which there seemed little change; for the As soon as the land faded into a formless gray under coming night, they started out again. In a little while Gollum led them down The road had been made in a long lost time: and for perhaps thirty miles below the Morannon it had been newly repaired, but as it

So they passed into the northern marches of that land that Men once called Ithilien, a fair country of climbing woods and swift-fa Day was opening in the sky, and they saw that the mountains were now much further off, receding eastward in a long curve that was South and west it looked towards the warm lower vales of Anduin, shielded from the east by the Ephel Dúath and yet not under the m The travelers turned their backs on the road and went downhill. As they walked, brushing their way through bush and herb, sweet od Here they washed themselves and drank their fill at the in-falling freshet. Then they sought for a resting-place, and a hiding-pla Sam scrambling below the outfall of the lake. smelling and touching the unfamiliar plants and trees, forgetful for the moment of M
``Let's find a place to lie up in,'' he said. Not lower down. Higher up for me.

A little way back above the lake they found a deep brown bed of last year's fern. Beyond it was a thicket of dark-leaved bay-trees Sam had been giving serious thought to food as they marched. Now that the despair of the impassable Gate was behind him, he did no If we reach the Fire in that time, we'll be lucky at this rate! he thought ``And we might be wanting to get back. We might!
Besides, at the end of a long night-march, and after bathing and drinking, he felt even more hungry than usual. A supper, or a bre
``Hi! A goal! said Sam. ``Where are you going? Hunting? Well see here, old noser, you don't like our food, and I'd not be sorry fo
``Yes, perhaps, yes,'' said Gollum. ``Sméagol always helps, if they ask - if they ask nicely.
``Right! said Sam ``I do ask. And if that isn't nice enough, I beg.

Gollum disappeared. He was away some time, and Frodo after a few mouthfuls of _lembas_ settled deep into the brown fern and went t Gollum returned quietly and peered over Sam's shoulder. Looking at Frodo, he shut his eyes and crawled away without a sound. Sam c Sméagol always helps, he said. ``He has brought rabbits, nice rabbits. But the master has gone to sleep, and perhaps Sam wants to Sam, however, had no objection to rabbit at all, and said so. At least not to cooked rabbit. All hobbits, of course, can cook, for Now, Gollum, he said, I've got another job for you. Go and fill these pans with water, and bring them back!
Sméagol will fetch water, yes, said Gollum. But what does the hobbit want all that water for? He has drunk, he has washed.
Never mind, said Sam. ``If you can't guess, you'll soon find out. And the sooner you fetch the water, the sooner you'll learn. Don While Gollum was away Sam took another look at Frodo. He was still sleeping quietly, but Sam was now struck most by the leanness o Sam gathered a pile of the driest fern, and then scrambled up the bank collecting a bundle of twigs and broken wood; the fallen br He set the pans down, and then suddenly saw what Sam was doing. He gave a thin hissing shriek, and seemed to be both frightened an
``Mustn't do what? asked Sam in surprise.
``Not make the tongues nasty red,'' Gollum hissed. ``Fire, fire! It's dangerous, yes it is. It burns, it kills. And it will bring I don't think so, said Sam. ``Don't see why it should, if you don't put wet stuff on it and make a smother. But if it does, it doe Stew the rabbits! squealed Gollum in dismay. ``Spoil beautiful meat Sméagol saved for you, poor hungry Sméagol! What for? What for
``Now, now! said Sam. ``Each to his own fashion. Our bread chokes you, and raw coney chokes me. If you give me a coney, the coney' Gollum withdrew grumbling, and crawled into the fern. Sam busied himself with these breads. ``What a hobbit needs with coney,'' he
``Gollum! he called softly. ``Third time pays for all. I want some herbs. Gollum's head peeped out of the fern, but his looks were
``No! said Gollum. ``Sméagol is not pleased. And Sméagol doesn't like smelly leaves. He doesn't eat grasses or roots, no precious,
``Sméagol'll get into real true hot water, when this water boils, if he doesn't do as he's asked, growled Sam. ``Sam'll put his he
``Sméagol won't go, O no precious, not this time,'' hissed Gollum. ``He's frightened, and he's very tired, and this hobbit's not n
``Po-ta-toes,'' said Sam. The Gaffer's delight, and rare good ballast for an empty belly. But you won't find anything, so you don'
``Yes, yes we could. Spoiling nice fish, scorching it. Give me fish _now_, and keep nasty chips!
``Oh you're hopeless,'' said Sam. Go to sleep!

In the end he had to find what he wanted for himself; but he did not have to go far, not out of sight of the place where his maste When he thought all was ready he lifted the pans off the fire, and crept along to Frodo. Frodo half opened his eyes as Sam stood o
``Hullo, Sam! he said. ``Not resting? Is anything wrong? What is the time?
``About a couple of hours after daybreak,'' said Sam, ``and night at half past eight by Shire clocks, maybe. But nothing's wrong. Frodo yawned and stretched. You should have been resting Sam, he said. And lighting a fire was dangerous in these parts. But I do A present from Sméagol, said Sam: ``a brace o young coneys; though I fancy Gollum's regretting them now. But there's nothing to go

Sam and his master sat just within the fern-brake and ate their stew from the pans, sharing the old fork and spoon. They allowed t Whew! A goal! Sam called and whistled softly. Come on! Still time to change your mind. There's some left, if you want to try stewe
``Oh well, I suppose he's gone off to find something for himself. We'll finish it, said Sam.
``And then you must take some sleep,'' said Frodo.
``Don't you drop off, while I'm nodding, Mr. Frodo I don't feel too sure about him. There's a good deal of Stinker-the bad Gollum,

They finished, and Sam went off to the stream to rinse his gear. As he stood up to return, he looked back up the slope. At that mo
``That won't do! Never thought it would show like that! he muttered, and he began to hurry back. Suddenly he stopped and listened. He found that a small brand, burning away to its outer end, had kindled some fern at the edge of the fire, and the fern blazing up Did you hear a whistle, and what sounded like an answer? he asked. ``A few minutes back. I hope it was only a bird, but it didn't
``Hush! whispered Frodo. ``I thought I heard voices.

The two hobbits trussed their small packs, put them on ready for flight, and then crawled deeper into the fern. There they crouche There was no doubt of the voices. They were speaking low and furtively, but they were near, and coming nearer. Then quite suddenly
``Here! Here is where the smoke came from! he said. ``Twill be night at hand. In the fern, no doubt. We shall have it like a coney
``Aye, and what does he know! said a second voice.
At once four men came striding through the fern from different directions. Since flight and hiding were no longer possible, Frodo If they were astonished at what they saw, their captors were even more astonished. Four tall men stood there. Two had spears in th
``We have not found what we sought,' said one. ``But what have we found?
Not Orcs, said another, releasing the hilt of his sword, which he had seized when he saw the glitter of Sting in Frodo's hand.
``Elves? said a third, doubtfully.
Nay! Not Elves, said the fourth, the tallest, and as it appeared the chief among them. ``Elves do not walk in Ithilien in these da Meaning we're not, I take you, said Sam. ``Thank you kindly. And when you've finished discussing us, perhaps you'll say who you ar The tall green man laughed grimly. ``I am Faramir, Captain of Gondor,'' he said. ``But there are no travelers in this land: only t
``But we are neither,'' said Frodo. ``And travelers we are, whatever Captain Faramir may say.
Then make haste to declare yourselves and your errand, said Faramir. We have a work to do, and this is no time or place for riddli
`The third?
Yes, the skulking fellow that we saw with his nose in the pool down yonder. He had an ill-favored look. Some spying breed of Orc, I do not know where he is, said Frodo. He is only a chance companion met upon our road; and I am not answerable for him. If you co Boromir! all the four men exclaimed.
Boromir son of the Lord Denethor? said Faramir, and a strange stern look came into his face. You came with him? That is news indee Are the riddling words known to you that Boromir brought to Rivendell? Frodo replied.

Seek for the Sword that was Broken. In Imladris it dwells.

The words are known indeed, said Faramir in astonishment. ``It is some token of your truth that you also know them.
``Aragorn whom I named is the bearer of the Sword that was Broken,'' said Frodo. And we are the Halflings that the rhyme spoke of.
``That I see,'' said Faramir thoughtfully. ``Or I see that it might be so. And what is Isildur's Bane?
``That is hidden,'' answered Frodo. ``Doubtless it will be made clear in time.
``We must learn more of this,' said Faramir, ``and know what brings you so far east under the shadow of yonder-'' he pointed and s Farewell! said Frodo, bowing low. ``Think what you will, I am a friend of all enemies of the One Enemy. We would go with you, if w The Halflings are courteous folk, whatever else they may be, said Faramir. ``Farewell!

The hobbits sat down again, but they said nothing to one another of their thoughts and doubts. Close by, just under the dappling s After a while he spoke to them; but they were slow and cautious in answering. They named themselves Mablung and Damrod, soldiers o
``It is close on ten leagues hence to the east-shore of Anduin, said Mablung, and we seldom come so far afield. But we have a new Aye, curse the Southrons! said Damrod. ``Tis said that there were dealings of old between Gondor and the kingdoms of the Harad in
``But still we will not sit idle and let Him do all as He would, said Mablung. ``These cursed Southrons come now marching up the a

Their talk died down into a listening silence. All seemed still and watchful. Sam, crouched by the edge of the fern-brake, peered
``I wonder where that Dratted Gollum is? thought Sam, as he crawled back into deeper shade. ``He stands a fair chance of being spi He woke up, thinking that he had heard horns blowing. He sat up. It was now high noon. The guards stood alert and tense in the sha
``It sounds like a hundred blacksmiths all smithying together,'' said Sam to Frodo. They're as near as I want them now.

But the noise grew closer. ``They are coming! cried Damrod. ``See! Some of the Southrons have broken from the trap and are flying Sam, eager to see more, went now and joined the guards. He scrambled a little way up into one of the larger of the bay-trees. For It was Sam's first view of a battle of Men against Men, and he did not like it much. He was glad that he could not see the dead fa Ware! Ware! cried Damrod to his companion. May the Valar turn him aside! Mûmak! Mûmak!
To his astonishment and terror, and lasting delight, Sam saw a vast shape crash out of the trees and come careering down the slope On the great beast thundered, blundering in blind wrath through pool and thicket. Arrows skipped and snapped harmlessly about the

Sam drew a deep breath. An Oliphaunt it was! he said. ``So there are Oliphaunts, and I have seen one. What a life! But no one at h Sleep while you may, said Mablung. ``But the Captain will return, if he is unhurt; and when he comes we shall depart swiftly. We s
``Go quietly when you must! said Sam. ``No need to disturb my sleep. I was walking all night.
Mablung laughed. ``I do not think the Captain will leave you here, Master Samwise,'' he said. But you shall see.


The Window on the West

It seemed to Sam that he had only dozed for a few minutes when he awoke to find that it was late afternoon and Faramir had come ba Sam crept out from the fern, but no one paid any attention to him, and he placed himself at the end of the rows of men, where he c Sam soon became aware that the Captain was not satisfied with Frodo's account of himself at several points: what part he had to pl But it was at the coming of the Halfling that Isildur's Bane should waken, or so one must read the words, he insisted. ``If then y Frodo made no answer. So! said Faramir. ``I wish then to learn from you more of it; for what concerns Boromir concerns me. An orc- No, not because I choose, answered Frodo. ``It does not belong to me. It does not belong to any mortal, great or small; though if Why so, and not Boromir, prince of the City that the sons of Elendil founded?
Because Aragorn is descended in direct lineage, father to father, from Isildur Elendil's son himself. And the sword that he bears A murmur of astonishment ran through all the ring of men. Some cried aloud: The sword of Elendil! The sword of Elendil comes to Mi
``Maybe,'' he said. ``But so great a claim will need to be established and clear proofs will be required, should this Aragorn ever Boromir was satisfied of that claim, said Frodo. ``Indeed, if Boromir were here, he would answer all your questions. And since he Frodo's tone was proud, whatever he felt, and Sam approved of it; but it did not appease Faramir.
``So! he said. ``You bid me mind my own affairs, and get me back home, and let you be. Boromir will tell all when he comes. When h

Vividly before Frodo's mind came the memory of Boromir's assault upon him, and for a moment he hesitated. Faramir's eyes grew hard Faramir smiled grimly. ``Then you would grieve to learn that Boromir is dead?
I would grieve indeed, said Frodo. Then catching the look in Faramir's eyes, he faltered. Dead? he said. ``Do you mean that he is
``I would not snare even an orc with a falsehood,'' said Faramir.
``How then did he die, and how do you know of it? Since you say that none of the Company had reached the city when you left. As to the manner of his death, I had hoped that his friend and companion would tell me how it was.
``But he was alive and strong when we parted. And he lives still for all that I know. Although surely there are many perils in the
``Many indeed,'' said Faramir, ``and treachery not the least.

Sam had been getting more and more impatient and angry at this conversation. These last words were more than he could bear, and bu Begging your pardon, Mr. Frodo, he said, ``but this has gone on long enough. He has no right to talk to you like that. After all y See here, Captain! He planted himself squarely in front of Faramir his hands on his hips, and a look on his face as if he was addr
``Patience! said Faramir, but without anger. ``Do not speak before your master, whose wit is greater than yours. And I do not need Sam sat down heavily with a red face. Faramir turned to Frodo again: You asked how do I know that the son of Denethor is dead. Tid A shadow of sorrow passed over his face. ``Do you remember the aught of special mark that the Lord Boromir bore with him among his Frodo thought for a moment, fearing some further trap, and wondering how this debate would turn in the end. He had hardly saved th
``You remember well, and as one who has in truth seen him,'' said Faramir. ``Then maybe you can see it in your mind's eye: a great Five days ere I set out on this venture, eleven days ago at about this hour of the day, I heard the blowing of that horn: from the I sat at night by the waters of Anduin, in the gray dark under the young pale moon, watching the ever-moving stream; and the sad r
``An awe fell on me, for a pale light was round it. But I rose and went to the bank, and began to walk out into the stream, for I A broken sword was on his knee. I saw many wounds on him. It was Boromir, my brother, dead. I knew his gear, his sword, his belove

Wings! said Frodo. That was indeed Boromir as I knew him. For the golden belt was given to him in Lothlórien by the Lady Galadriel Faramir looked closely at it. ``It is beautiful,'' he said. Yes, you work of the same craft. So then you passed through the Land o No more can I say than I have said, answered Frodo. ``Though your tale fills me with foreboding. A vision it was that you saw, I t Nay, it was not so, said Faramir. For his works fill the heart with loathing; but my heart was filled with grief and pity.
``Yet how could such a thing have happened in truth? asked Frodo. For no boat could have been carried over the stony hills from To I know not, said Faramir. But whence came the boat?
``From Lórien,'' said Frodo. In three such boats we rowed down Anduin to the Falls. They also were of elven-work.
You passed through the Hidden Land, said Faramir, ``but it seems that you little understood its power. If Men have dealings with t
``Boromir, O Boromir!'' he cried. ``What did she say to you, the Lady that day? What did she see? What woke up in your heart then? Then turning again to Frodo, he spoke in a quiet voice once more. To those questions I guess that you could make some answer, Frod And now the horn of the elder son lies in two pieces upon the lap of Denethor, sitting in his high chair, waiting for news. And yo No, I did not know of it, said Frodo. ``But the day when you heard it blowing, if your reckoning is true, was the day when we part
``Will you not put aside your doubt of me and let me go? I am weary, and full of grief, and afraid. But I have a deed to do, or to Go back, Faramir, brave Captain of Gondor, and defend your city while you may, and let me go where my doom takes me.
``For me there is no comfort in our speech together,'' said Faramir; ``but you surely draw from it more dread than need be. Unless
``But whatever befell on the North March, you, Frodo, I doubt no longer. If hard days have made me any judge of Men's words and fa He sprang to his feet and issued some orders. But once the men who were gathered round him broke up into small groups, and went of Now you, Frodo and Samwise, will come with me and my guards, said Faramir. ``You cannot go along the road southwards, if that was

There was nothing for Frodo to do but to fall in with this request, or order. It seemed in any case a wise course for the moment, They set out at once: Mablung and Damrod a little ahead, and Faramir with Frodo and Sam behind. Skirting the hither side of the po I broke off our speech together, said Faramir, not only because time pressed, as Master Samwise had reminded me, but also because
``I told no lies, and of the truth all I could,' said Frodo.
``I do not blame you,'' said Faramir. You spoke with skill in a hard place, and wisely, it seemed to me. But I learned or guessed
``Near,'' said Frodo, 'but not in the gold. There was no contention in our Company, though there was doubt: doubt which way we sho Ah, then it is as I thought: your trouble was with Boromir alone. He wished this thing brought to Minas Tirith. Wings! it is a cro
``But, Frodo, I pressed you hard at first about _Isildur's Bane_. Forgive me! It was unwise in such an hour and place. I had not h And this I remember of Boromir as a boy, when we together learned the tale of our sires and the history of our city, that always i It does, said Frodo. ``Yet always he treated Aragorn with honor.
I doubt it not, said Faramir. ``If he were satisfied of Aragorn's claim as you say, he would greatly reverence him. But the pinch
``But I stray. We in the house of Denethor know much ancient lore by long tradition, and there are moreover in our treasures many The Gray Pilgrim? said Frodo. Had he a name?
Mithrandir we called him in elf-fashion, said Faramir, and he was content. _Many are my names in many countries_, he said. _Mithra Gandalf! said Frodo. I thought it was him. Gandalf the Gray dearest of counsellors. Leader of our Company. He was lost in Moria.
Mithrandir was lost! said Faramir. An evil fate seems to have pursued your fellowship. It is hard indeed to believe that one of so Wings! yes, said Frodo. ``I saw him fall into the abyss.
I see that there is some great tale of dread in this. said Faramir ``which perhaps you may tell me in the evening-time. This Mithr Now Faramir's voice sank to a whisper. But this much I learned or guessed, and I have kept it ever secret in my heart since: that
``What in truth this Thing is I cannot yet guess; but some heirloom of power and danger it must be. A fell weapon, perhaps, devise But fear no more! I would not take this thing, if it lay by the highway. Not were Minas Tirith falling in ruin and I alone could s Neither did the Council, said Frodo. Nor do I. I would have nothing to do with such matters.
``For myself, said Faramir, I would see the White Tree in flower again in the courts of the kings, and the Silver Crown return, an So fear me not! I do not ask you to tell me more. I do not even ask you to tell me whether I now speak nearer the mark. But if you Frodo made no answer. Almost he yielded to the desire for help and counsel, to tell this grave young man, whose words seemed so wi

They walked on in silence for a while, passing like gray and green shadows under the old trees, their feet making no sound; above Sam had taken no part in the conversation, though he had listened; and at the same time he had attended with his keen hobbit ears Once, looking suddenly back, as if some prickle of the skin told him that he was watching from behind, he thought he caught a brie

So they passed on, until the woodlands grew thinner and the land began to fall more steeply. Then they turned aside again, to the Here, wings! I must do you a discourtesy, said Faramir. "I hope you will pardon it to one who has so far made his orders give way
``As you will,'' said Frodo. Even the Elves do likewise at need, and blindfolded we crossed the borders of fair Lothlórien. Gimli
``It is to no place so fair that I shall lead you,'' said Faramir. But I am glad that you will take this willingly and not by forc He called softly and immediately Mablung and Damrod stepped out of the trees and came back to him. Blindfold these guests, said Fa With green scarves the two guards now bound up the hobbits eyes and drew their hoods down almost to their mouths; then quickly the

Then came the voice of Faramir close behind. ``Let them see! he said. The scarves were removed and their hoods drawn back, and the They stood on a wet floor of polished stone, the doorstep, as it were, of a rough-hewn gate of rock opening dark behind them. But

At least by good chance we came at the right hour to reward you for your patience, said Faramir. ``This is the Window of the Sunse Even as he spoke the sun sank, and the fire faded in the flowing water. They turned and passed under the low forbidding arch. But Well, here is our refuge, said Faramir. ``Not a place of great ease but here you may pass the night in peace. It is dry at least,

The hobbits were taken to a corner and given a low bed to lie on, if they wished. Meanwhile the men busied themselves about the ca Faramir went about among the men, questioning each as he came in, in a soft voice. Some came back from the pursuit of the Southron You saw and heard nothing, Anborn? Faramir asked of the latest comer.
``Well, no, lord,'' said the man. ``No Orc at least. But I saw, or thought I saw, something a little strange. It was getting deep
``Perhaps,'' said Faramir. ``But that would be an ill omen, if it were so. We do not want the escapes of Mirkwood in Ithilien. Sam Sam struggled with himself, arguing this way and that. ``He may be all right, he thought, and then he may not. Fair speech may hid

Now more torches were being lit. A cask of wine was broached. Storage barrels were being opened. Men were fetching water from the
``Wake our guests,'' he said, ``and take them water. It is time to go.
Frodo sat up and yawned and stretched. Sam, not used to being waited on, looked with some surprise at the tall man who bowed, hold Put it on the ground, master, if you please! he said. Easier for me and you Then to the astonishment and amusement of the Men he p Is it the custom in your country to wash the head before supper? said the man who waited on the hobbits.
``No, before breakfast,'' said Sam. ``But if you're short of sleep cold water on the neck's like rain on a wilted lettuce. There! They were led then to seats beside Faramir: barrels covered with pelts and high enough above the benches of the Men for their conv So we always do. he said, as they sat down: ``we look towards Númenor that was, and beyond to Elvenhome that is, and to that which
``No,'' said Frodo, feeling strangely rustic and untutored. ``But if we are guests, we bow to our host, and after we have eaten we That we do also, said Faramir.

After so long journeying and camping, and days spent in the lonely wild, the evening meal seemed a feast to the hobbits: to drink When all was done Faramir led them to a recess at the back of the cave, partly screened by curtains; and a chair and two stools we
``You may soon desire to sleep, he said, and especially good Samwise, who would not close his eyes before he ate - whether for fea Frodo no longer felt sleepy and he was willing to talk. But though the food and wine had put him at his ease, he had not lost all Frodo told many tales, yet always he steered the matter away from the quest of the Company and from the Ring, enlarging rather on
``It must have irked Boromir to run from Orcs, he said, ``or even from the fell thing you name, the Balrog - even though he was th
``He was the last,'' said Frodo, 'but Aragorn was forced to lead us. He alone knew the way after Gandalf's fall. But had there not
``Maybe, it would have been better had Boromir fallen there with Mithrandir,' said Faramir, ``and not gone on to the fate that wai Maybe. But tell me now of your own fortunes, said Frodo, turning the matter aside once more. ``For I would learn more of Minas Ith What hope have we? said Faramir. It is long since we had any hope. The sword of Elendil, if it returns indeed, may rekindle it, bu The Men of Númenor were settled far and wide on the shores and seaward regions of the Great Lands, but for the most part they fell
``It is not said that evil arts were ever practiced in Gondor, or that the Nameless One was ever named in honor there; and the old Death was ever present, because the Númenoreans still, as they had in their old kingdom, and so lost it, starved after endless lif But the stewards were wiser and more fortunate. Wiser, for they recruited the strength of our people from the sturdy folk of the s So it came to pass in the days of Cirion the Twelfth Steward (and my father is the sit and twentieth) that they rode to our aid an
``Of our lore and manners they have learned what they would, and their lords speak our speech at need; yet for the most part they For so we reckon Men in our lore, calling them the High, or Men of the West, which were Númenoreans; and the Middle Peoples, Men o
``Yet now, if the Rohirrim are grown in some ways more like to us, enhanced in arts and gentleness, we too have become more like t

``You don't say much in all your tales about the Elves, sir, said Sam, suddenly plucking up courage. He had noted that Faramir see
``No indeed, Master Samwise,'' said Faramir, ``for I am not learned in Elven-lore. But there you touch upon another point in which
``Yet there are among us still some who have dealings with the Elves when they may, and ever and anon one will go in secret to Lór
``The Lady of Lórien! Galadriel! cried Sam. ``You should see her indeed you should, sir. I am only a hobbit, and gardening's my jo Then she must be lovely indeed, said Faramir. ``Perilously fair.
``I don't know about _perilous_,'' said Sam. ``It strikes me that folk take their peril with them into Lórien, and find it there b
``Yes? _Now Boromir_ you would say? said Faramir. ``What would you say? He took his peril with him?
``Yes sir, begging your pardon, and a fine man as your brother was if I may say so. But you've been warm on the scent all along. N
``Sam! cried Frodo aghast. He had fallen deep into his own thoughts for a while, and came out of them suddenly and too late.
Save me! said Sam turning white, and then flushing scarlet. ``There I go again! _When ever you open your big mouth you put your fo
``Now look here, sir! He turned, facing up to Faramir with all the courage that he could muster. ``Don't you go taking advantage o So it seems, said Faramir, slowly and very softly, with a strange smile. ``So that is the answer to all the riddles! The One Ring Frodo and Sam sprang from their stools and set themselves side by side with their backs to the wall, fumbling for their sword-hilt Wings for Boromir! It was too sore a trial! he said. ``How you have increased my sorrow, you two strange wanderers from a far coun But I am not such a man. Or I am wise enough to know that there are some perils from which a man must flee. Let him be at peace! A

The hobbits came back to their seats and sat very still. Men turned back to their drink and their talk, perceiving that their capt Well, Frodo, now at last we understand one another, said Faramir. If you took this thing upon yourself, unwillingly, at others ask
``Not all is well there,'' said Frodo, ``but certainly gardeners are honored.
``But folk must grow weary there, even in their gardens, as do all things under the Sun of this world. And you are far from home a Frodo had felt himself trembling as the first shock of fear passed. Now a great weariness came down on him like a cloud. He could I was going to find a way into Mordor, he said faintly. ``I was going to Gorgoroth. I must find the Mountain of Fire and cast the Faramir stared at him for a moment in grave astonishment. Then suddenly he caught him as he swayed, and lifting him gently, carrie Another bed was set beside him for his servant. Sam hesitated for a moment, then bowing very low: ``Good night, Captain, my lord,'
`Did I so? said Faramir.
``Yes sir, and showed your quality: the very highest.
Faramir smiled. A pert they keep, Master Samwise. But nay: the praise of the praiseworthy is above all rewards. Yet there was naug
``Ah well, sir,'' said Sam, ``you said my master had an elvish air and that was good and true. But I can say this: you have an air Maybe, said Faramir. ``Maybe you discern from far away the air of Númenor. Good night!


The Forbidden Pool

Frodo woke to find Faramir bending over him. For a second old fears seized him and he sat up and shrank away.
``There is nothing to fear,'' said Faramir. Is it morning already? said Frodo yawning.
``Not yet, but the night is drawing to an end, and the full moon is setting. Will you come and see it? Also there is a matter on w
``I will,'' said Frodo, rising and shivering a little as he left the warm blanket and pelts. It seemed cold in the fireless cave. Sam, waking suddenly by some instinct of watchfulness, saw first his master's empty bed and leapt to his feet. Then he saw two dar They went first along a black passage, then up many wet steps, and so came to a small flat landing cut in the stone and lit by the

At last they came out of the stony darkness and looked about. They were on a wide flat rock without rail or parapet. At their righ Frodo turned to watch the sleek necks of the water as they curved and dived. Then he raised his eyes and gazed far away. The world For a while Frodo stood there on the high stone, and a shiver ran through him, wondering if anywhere in the vastness of the night- Sam was eager for an answer to the same question and could not refrain himself from muttering, for his master's ear alone as he th Faramir heard and answered. Moonset over Gondor. Fair Ithil as he goes from Middle-earth, glances upon the white locks of old Mind He stepped up beside the silent sentinel on the dark edge. and Frodo followed. Sam hung back. He already felt insecure enough on t Faramir turned to the man at his side. ``Now what would you say that it is, Anborn? A squirrel or a kingfisher? Are there black ki
``Tis not a bird, whatever else it may be, answered Anborn. ``It has four limbs and dives manwise; a pretty mastery of the craft i
``Shall we shoot? said Faramir, turning quickly to Frodo.
Frodo did not answer for a moment. Then ``No! he said. ``No! I beg you not to. If Sam had dared, he would have said ``Yes, quicker You know, then, what this thing is? said Faramir. ``Come, now you have seen, tell me why it should be spared. In all our words tog There are two answers, I think, said Frodo. ``For one thing, he knows little of Men, and sly though he is, your refuge is so hidde
``He is lured here, you say? said Faramir in a low voice. ``Can he, does he then know of your burden?
``Indeed yes. He bore it himself for many years.
_He_ is it boring? said Faramir, breathing sharply in his wonder. ``This matter winds itself ever in new riddles. Then he is pursu Maybe. It is precious to him. But I did not speak of that.
``What then does the creature seek?
`Fish, said Frodo. `Look!

They peered down at the dark pool. A little black head appeared at the far end of the basin, just out of the deep shadow of the ro Faramir laughed softly. ``Fish! he said. ``It is a less dangerous hunger. Or maybe not: fish from the pool of Henneth Annûn may co
``Now I have him at the arrow-point,'' said Anborn. ``Shall I not shoot, Captain? For coming unbidden to this place death is our l
``Wait, Anborn,'' said Faramir. ``This is a harder matter than it seems. What have you to say now, Frodo? Why should we save?
``The creature is wretched and hungry,'' said Frodo, ``and unaware of his danger. And Gandalf, your Mithrandir, he would have bidd
``Your guide! said Faramir. ``The matter becomes ever stranger. I would do much for you, Frodo, but this I cannot grant: to let th
``Let me go down quietly to him,'' said Frodo. ``You may keep your bows bent, and shoot me at least, if I fail. I shall not run aw
``Go then and be swift! said Faramir. ``If he comes off alive, he should be your faithful servant for the rest of his unhappy days Anborn grunted and led the way down the winding stair to the landing, and then up the other stair, until at last they came to a na
``Go on! he breathed in Frodo's ear. ``Have a care for your right. If you fall in the pool, then no one but your fishing friend ca Frodo crept forward, using his Gollum-like hands to feel his way and to steady himself. The rocks were for the most part flat and Fish, nice fish. White Face has vanished, my precious, at last, yes. Now we can eat fish in peace. No, not in peace, precious. For So it went on, almost as unceasing as the waterfall, only interrupted by a faint noise of slavering and gurgling. Frodo shivered,
`Sméagol! he said softly.
``Fish, nice fish,'' said the voice.
``Sméagol! he said, a little louder. The voice stopped.
``Sméagol, Master has come to look for you. Master is here. Come, Sméagol! There was no answer but a soft hiss, as of taken breath Come, Sméagol! said Frodo. ``We are in danger. Men will kill you if they find you here. Come quickly, if you wish to escape death. No! said the voice. ``Not nice Master. Leaves poor Sméagol and goes with new friends. Master can wait. Sméagol hasn't finished.
``There's no time,'' said Frodo. ``Bring fish with you. Eat!
`No! Must finish fish.
Sméagol! said Frodo desperately. Precious will be angry. I shall take Precious, and I shall say: make him swallow the bones and ch There was a sharp hiss. Presently out of the darkness Gollum came crawling on all fours, like an erring dog called to heel. He had Nice Master! he whispered. ``Nice hobbit, come back to poor Sméagol. Good count Sméagol. Now let's go, go quickly, yes. Through th
``Yes, we'll go soon,'' said Frodo. ``But not at once. I will go with you as I promised. I promise again. But not now. You are not
``We must trust Master? said Gollum doubtfully. Why? Why not go at once? Where is the other one, the cross rude hobbit? Where is h Away up there, said Frodo, pointing to the waterfall. I am not going without him. We must go back to him. His heart sank. This was Gollum crawled along close to the brink for a little way, snuffling and suspicious. Presently he stopped and raised his head. ``So At that moment the great black shape of Anborn loomed up behind him and came down on him. A large strong hand took him by the nape Hold still! said one. ``Or we'll stick you as full of pins as a hedgehog. Hold still!
Gollum went limp, and began to whine and weep. They tied him, none too gently.
``Easy, easy! said Frodo. ``He has no strength to match you. Don't hurt him, if you can help it. He'll be quieter, if you don't. S Gollum turned and spat at him. The men picked him up, put a hood over his eyes, and carried him off.
Frodo followed them, feeling very wretched. They went through the opening behind the bushes. and back, down the stairs and passage Yes. Well no, I didn't get him. He came to me, because he trusted me at first, I am afraid. I did not want him tied up like this.
``So I do,'' said Sam. ``And nothing will ever be all right where that piece of misery is.
A man came and beckoned to the hobbits, and took them to the recess at the back of the cave. Faramir was sitting there in his chai The wine was brought, and then Anborn came carrying Gollum. He removed the cover from Gollum's head and set him on his feet standi
``Loose us! Loose us! he said. ``The heart hurts us, yes it does, it hurts us, and we've done nothing.
``Nothing? said Faramir, looking at the wretched creature with a keen glance, but without any expression in his face either of ang Gollum dropped the fish from his hand. ``Don't want fish,'' he said.
The price is not set on the fish, said Faramir. ``Only to come here and look at the pool bears the penalty of death. I have spared
``We are lost, lost,'' said Gollum. No name, no business, no Precious, nothing. Only empty. Only hungry; yes, we are hungry. A few Not very wise, said Faramir. But just: yes perhaps, as just as our little wisdom allows. Unloose him Frodo! Faramir took a small n Now, Sméagol! said Frodo. You must trust me. I will not desert you. Answer truthfully, if you can. It will do you good not harm. H Come hither! said Faramir. ``Look at me! Do you know the name of this place? Have you been here before?
Slowly Gollum raised his eyes and looked unwillingly into Faramir's. All light went out of them, and they stared bleak and pale fo
``There are locked doors and closed windows in your mind, and dark rooms behind them,'' said Faramir. ``But in this I judge that y
``Master knows,'' said Gollum with a sidelong glance at Frodo. ``Yes, he knows. We will promise Master, if he saves us. We'll prom
``Are you satisfied? said Faramir.

``Yes,'' said Frodo. At least, you must either accept this promise or carry out your law. You will get no more. But I promised tha

Faramir sat for a moment in thought. ``Very good,'' he said at last. ``I surrender you to your master, to Frodo son of Drogo. Let But, Lord Faramir, said Frodo bowing, ``you have not yet declared your will concerning the said Frodo, and until that is made know
``Then I will declare my doom,'' said Faramir. ``As for you, Frodo, in so far as lies in me under higher authority, I declare you Frodo bowed low. I am answered, he said, and I place myself at your service, if that is of any worth to one so high and honorable.
``It is of great worth,'' said Faramir. And now, do you take this creature, this Sméagol, under your protection?
``I do take Sméagol under my protection,'' said Frodo. Sam sighed audibly; and not at the courtesies, of which, as any hobbit woul Then I say to you, said Faramir, turning to Gollum, you are under the doom of death; but while you walk with Frodo you are safe fo
``This I will not keep secret,'' said Faramir. ``Answer me, or I will reverse my judgment! Still Gollum did not answer.
``I will answer for him,'' said Frodo. ``He brought me to the Black Gate, as I asked; but it was impassable.
``There is no open gate into the Nameless Land,'' said Faramir.
``Seeing this, we turned aside and came by the Southward road Frodo continued; for he said that there is, or there may be, a path
`Minas Morgul,' said Faramir.
``I do not know clearly,'' said Frodo; ``but the path climbs, I think, up into the mountains on the northern side of that valley w
``Do you know the name of that high pass? said Faramir. No, said Frodo.
It is called Cirith Ungol. Gollum hissed sharply and began muttering to himself. ``Isn't that its name? said Faramir turning to hi
``No! said Gollum, and then he squealed, as if something had stabbed him. Yes, yes, we heard the name once. But what does the name No other way? said Faramir. ``How do you know that? And who has explored all the borders of that dark realm? He looked long and th Anborn went out and Gollum went cringing before him. The curtain was drawn across the recess.

``Frodo, I think you do very unwisely in this,'' said Faramir. ``I do not think you should go with this creature. It is wicked. No, not altogether wicked, said Frodo.
Not wholly, perhaps, said Faramir; but evil eats it like a canker, and the evil is growing. He will lead you to no good. If you wi
``He would not take it,'' said Frodo. He would follow after me as he long has done. And I have promised many times to take him und No, said Faramir. ``But my heart would. For it seems less evil to counsel another man to break his faith than to do so oneself, es
``Where then shall I go? said Frodo. ``Back to the Black Gate and deliver myself up to the guard? What do you know against this pl
``Nothing certain,'' said Faramir. We of Gondor do not ever pass east of the Road in these days, and none of us younger men has ev
,The valley of Minas Morgul passed into evil very long ago, and it was a menace and a dread while the banished Enemy dwelt yet far But where else will you direct me? said Frodo. You cannot yourself, you say, guide me to the mountains, nor over them. But over th
``I would not have it so,'' said Faramir.
``Then what would you have me do?
``I know not. Only I would not have you go to death or to torture. And I do not think that Mithrandir would have chosen this way. Yet since he is gone, I must take such paths as I can find. And there is no time for long searching, said Frodo.
``It is a hard doom and a hopeless errand,'' said Faramir. But at least, remember my warning: beware of this guide, Sméagol. He ha
``Well, so we meet and part, Frodo son of Drogo. You have no need of soft words: I do not hope to see you again on any other day u I would gladly learn how this creeping Sméagol became possessed of the Thing of which we speak, and how he lost it, but I will not He rose and bowed low to Frodo, and drawing the curtain passed out into the cave.


Journey to the Cross-roads

Frodo and Sam returned to their beds and lay there in silence resting for a little, while the men stirred themselves and the busin When they had finished they stood up. ``May no hunger trouble you on the road,'' said Faramir. ``You have little provision, but so The hobbits packs were brought to them (a little heavier than they had been), and also two stout staves of polished wood, shod wit I have no fitting gifts to give you at our parting, said Faramir; ``but take these staves. They may be of service to those who wal The hobbits bowed low. ``Most gracious host,'' said Frodo, 'it was said to me by Elrond Halfelven that I should find friendship up

Now they made ready to depart. Gollum was brought out of some corner or hiding-hole, and he seemed better pleased with himself tha Your guide must be blindfolded, said Faramir, but you and your servant Samwise I release from this, if you wish.
Gollum squealed, and squirmed, and clutched at Frodo, when they came to bind his eyes; and Frodo said: Blindfold us all three, and They stood under the boughs of the woods again. No noise of the falls could be heard, for a long southward slope now lay between t Here is the last parting of our ways, said Faramir. If you take my counsel, you will not turn eastward yet. Go straight on, for th He embraced the hobbits then, after the manner of his people, stooping, and placing his hands upon their shoulders, and kissing th They bowed to the ground. Then he turned and without looking back he left them and went to his two guards that stood at a little d

Frodo sighed and turned back southward. As if to mark his disregard of all such courtesy, Gollum was scrabbling in the mold at the Have they gone at last? said Gollum. ``Nasty wicked men! Sméagol's neck still hurts him, yes it does. Let's go!
``Yes, let us go,'' said Frodo. ``But if you can only speak ill of those who showed you mercy, keep silent!
Nice Master! said Gollum. ``Sméagol was only joking. Always forgives, he does, yes, yes, even nice Master's little tricks. Oh yes, Frodo and Sam did not answer. Hoisting their packs and taking their staves in hand, they passed on into the woods of Ithilien.
Twice that day they rested and took a little of the food provided by Faramir: dried fruits and salted meat, enough for many days; The sun rose and passed overhead unseen, and began to sink, and the light through the trees to the west grew golden; and always th Darkness came early to the silent woods, and before the fall of night they halted, weary, for they had walked seven leagues or mor
``They must get up, yes they must! he said. Long ways to go still, south and east. Hobbits must make haste!

That day passed much as the day before had gone, except that the silence seemed deeper; the air grew heavy, and it began to be sti As the third stage of their day's march drew on and the afternoon waned, the forest opened out, and the trees became larger and mo Light was fading fast when they came to the forest-end. There they sat under an old gnarled oak that sent its roots twisting like He turned to Gollum. ``Do you know where we are? he said.
Yes, Master. Dangerous places. This is the road from the Tower of the Moon, Master, down to the ruined city by the shores of the R Frodo looked down on to the road. At any rate nothing was moving on it now. It appeared lonely and forsaken, running down to empty What shall we do? he said. We have walked long and far. Shall we look for some place in the woods behind where we can lie hidden? No good hiding in the dark, said Gollum. It's in the day that hobbits must hide now, yes in the day.
``Oh eat! said Sam. We must rest for a bit, even if we get up again in the middle of the night. There'll still be hours of darknes Gollum reluctantly agreed to this, and he turned back towards the trees, working eastward for a while along the straggling edges o

It must have been a little after midnight when Gollum woke up: suddenly they were aware of his pale eyes unlidded gleaming at them Are we rested? Have we had a beautiful sleep? he said. Let's go!
We aren't, and we haven't, growled Sam. But we'll go if we must.
Gollum dropped at once from the branches of the tree on to all fours, and the hobbits followed more slowly.
As soon as they were down they went on again with Gollum leading, eastwards, up the dark sloping land. They could see little, for At last Gollum turned to the hobbits. A day soon, he said. Hobbits must hurry. It is not safe to stay in the open in these places. He quickened his pace, and they followed him wearily. Soon they began to climb up on to a great hog-back of land. For the most par On the further edge of this broad hill-back they stayed their march and crawled for hiding underneath a tangled knot of thorns. Th But no day came, only a dead brown twilight. In the East there was a dull red glare under the lowering cloud: it was not the red o
``Which way do we go from here? asked Frodo. ``Is that the opening of-of the Morgul Valley, away over there beyond that black mass
``Need we think about it yet? said Sam, ``Surely we're not going to move any more today, if day it is?
``Perhaps not, perhaps not,'' said Gollum. ``But we must go soon, to the Cross-roads. Yes, to the Cross-roads. That's the way over

The red glare over Mordor died away. The twilight deepened as great vapors rose in the East and crawled above them. Frodo and Sam
``Off hunting, I suppose,'' said Sam and yawned. It was his turn to sleep first, and he was soon deep in a dream. He thought he wa
``A job of work for me, I can see; but I'm so tired, he kept on saying. Presently he remembered what he was looking for. ``My pipe
``Silly! he said to himself, as he opened his eyes and wondered why he was lying down under the hedge. ``It's in your pack all the
``Haven't you had no sleep, Mr. Frodo? he said. What's the time? Seems to be getting late!
No it isn't, said Frodo. ``But the day is getting darker instead of lighter: darker and darker. As far as I can tell, it isn't noo I wonder what's up, said Sam. Is there a storm coming? If so it's going to be the worst there ever was. We shall wish we were down I don't know, said Frodo. ``It's been going on for a good while now. Sometimes the ground seems to tremble, sometimes it seems to Sam looked round. ``Where's Gollum? he said. Hasn't he come back yet?
``No,'' said Frodo. ``There has not been a sign or sound of him.
``Well, I can't avoid him,'' said Sam. ``In fact, I've never taken anything on a journey that I'd have been less sorry to lose on
``You forget the Marshes,'' said Frodo. ``I hope nothing has happened to him.
``And I hope he's up to no tricks. And anyway I hope he doesn't fall into other hands, as you might say. Because if he does, we sh At that moment a rolling and rumbling noise was heard again, louder now and deeper. The ground seemed to quiver under their feet. Perhaps, said Sam; ``but _where there's life there's hope_, as my Gaffer used to say; _and need of vittles_, as he mostly used to

The afternoon, as Sam supposed it must be called, wore on. Looking out from the covert he could see only a dull, shadowless world, Wake up, wake up! Wake up, sleepies! he whispered. ``Wake up! No time to lose. We must go, yes, we must go at once. No time to los Sam stared at him suspiciously: he seemed frightened or excited. ``Go now? What's your little game? It isn't time yet. It can't be
``Silly! hissed Gollum. ``We're not in decent places. Time's running short, yes, running fast. No time to lose. We must go. Wake u They mustn't be silly, he hissed. ``We must go. No time to lose! And nothing more could they get out of him. Where he had been, an Very stealthily Gollum led them down the hillside, keeping under cover wherever it was possible, and running, almost bent to the g

For about an hour they went on, silently, in single file, oppressed by the gloom and by the absolute stillness of the land, broken The Cross-roads, yes, whispered Gollum, the first words that had been spoken since they left their hiding-place. We must go that w This is the only way, whispered Gollum. No paths beyond the road. No paths. We must go to the Cross-roads. But make haste! Be sile As stealthily as scouts within the camp of their enemies, they crept down on to the road, and stole along its westward edge under Standing there for a moment filled with dread Frodo became aware that a light was shining; he saw it glowing on Sam's face beside Suddenly, caught by the level beams, Frodo saw the old king's head: it was lying rolled away by the roadside. ``Look, Sam! he crie The eyes were hollow and the carven beard was broken, but about the high stern forehead there was a coronal of silver and gold. A They cannot conquer for ever! said Frodo. And then suddenly the brief glimpse was gone. The Sun dipped and vanished, and as if at


The Stairs of Cirith Ungol

Gollum was tugging at Frodo's cloak and hissing with fear and impatience. ``We must go,'' he said. ``We mustn't stand here. Make h Reluctantly Frodo turned his back on the West and followed as his guide led him, out into the darkness of the East. They left the Frodo and Sam were plodding along with heavy hearts, no longer able to care greatly about their peril. Frodo's head was bowed; his A long-tilted valley, a deep gulf of shadow, ran back far into the mountains. Upon the further side, some way within the valley's So they came slowly to the white bridge. Here the road, gleaming faintly, passed over the stream in the midst of the valley, and w
``Not that way! No, not that way! whispered Gollum, but the breath between his teeth seemed to tear the heavy stillness like a whi
``Hold up, Mr. Frodo! muttered Sam in Frodo's ear. Come back! Not that way. Gollum says no, and for once I agree with him.
Frodo passed his hand over his brow and wrenched his eyes away from the city on the hill. The luminous tower fascinated him, and h Gollum, crawling on the ground like a frightened animal, was already vanishing into the gloom. Sam, supporting and guiding his stu Along this path the hobbits trudged, side by side, unable to see Gollum in front of them, except when he turned back to beckon the Frodo stopped and sat down on a stone. They had now climbed up to the top of a great hump of bare rock. Ahead of them there was a
``I must rest a while, Sam,'' whispered Frodo. ``It's heavy on me, Sam lad, very heavy. I wonder how far I can carry it? Anyway I
``Ssh! ssh! hissed Gollum hurrying back to them. ``Ssh! His fingers were on his lips and he shook his head urgently. Tugging at Fr
``Not yet,'' he said. Weariness and more than weariness oppressed him; it seemed as if a heavy spell was laid on his mind and body At this Gollum's fear and agitation became so great that he spoke again, hissing behind his hand, as if to keep the sound from uns
``How, Mr. Frodo, said Sam. ``He's right, again. We can't stay here.
All right, said Frodo in a remote voice, as of one speaking half asleep. I will try. Wearily he got to his feet.

But it was too late. At that moment the rock quivered and trembled beneath them. The great rumbling noise, louder than ever before And Minas Morgul answered. There was a flare of livid lightning: forks of blue flame springing up from the tower and from the enci As the terrible cry ended, falling back through a long sickening wail to silence, Frodo slowly raised his head. Across the narrow All that host was clad in sable, dark as the night. Against the wan walls and the luminous pavement of the road Frodo could see th Even as these thoughts pierced him with dread and held him bound as with a spell, the Rider halted suddenly, right before the entr At that moment the Wraith-king turned and spurred his horse and rode across the bridge, and all his dark host followed him. Maybe Soon he had passed, like a shadow into shadow, down the winding road, and behind him still the black ranks crossed the bridge. So

Frodo stirred. And suddenly his heart went out to Faramir. The storm has burst at last, he thought. ``This great array of spears a Then at a great distance, as if it came out of memories of the Shire, some sunlit early morning, when the day was called and doors

There was a dull clang. The gates of Minas Morgul had closed. The last rank of spears had vanished down the road. The tower still Wake up, Mr. Frodo! They're gone, and we'd better go too. There's something still alive in that place, something with eyes, or a s Frodo raised his head, and then stood up. Despair had not left him, but the weakness had passed. He even smiled grimly, feeling no Gollum, it seemed, had crawled off along the ledge into the darkness beyond, when the gates of Minas Morgul opened, leaving the ho They did not answer, but they followed him on to the climbing ledge. It was little to the liking of either of them, not even after
``Careful! he whispered. ``Steps. Lots of steps. Must be careful!
Care was certainly needed. Frodo and Sam at first felt easier, having now a wall on either side, but the stairway was almost as st At length, just as they felt that they could endure no more, they saw Gollum's eyes peering down at them again. ``We're up,'' he w

Dizzy and very tired Sam, and Frodo following him, crawled up the last step, and sat down rubbing their legs and knees. They were There's another stair still, he said. ``A very long stair. Rest when we get to the top of the next stair. Not yet.
Sam groaned. Longer, did you say? he asked.
Yes, yes, longer, said Gollum. ``But it is not so difficult. Hobbits have climbed the Straight Stair. Next comes the Winding Stair And what after that? said Sam.
``We shall see,'' said Gollum softly. ``O yes, we shall see!
I thought you said there was a tunnel, said Sam. ``Isn't there a tunnel or something to go through?
Oh yes, there's a tunnel, said Gollum. ``But hobbits can rest before they try that. If they get through that, they'll be nearly at Frodo shivered. The climb had made him sweat, but now he felt cold and clammy, and there was a chill draft in the dark passage, bl

The passage seemed to go on for soldiers, and always the chill air flowed over them, rising as they went on to a bitter wind. The Gollum led the way close under the cliff. For the present they were no longer climbing, but the ground was now more broken and dan At length they were once more aware of a wall looming up, and once more a stairway opened before them. Again they halted, and agai

Still on and up the stairway bent and crawled, until at last with a final flight, short and straight, it climbed out again on to a He paused and looked more attentively. The horn upon the left was tall and slender; and in it burned a red light, or else the red I don't like the look of that! said Sam. ``So this secret way of yours is guarded after all,'' he growled, turning to Gollum. As y All ways are watched, yes, said Gollum. ``Of course they are. But hobbits must try some way. This may be at least watched. Perhaps "Perhaps," grunted Sam. Well, it still seems a long way off, and a long way up before we get there. And there's still the tunnel.
``Yes, we must rest,'' said Frodo. Let us find some corner out of the wind, and gather our strength for the last lap. For so he fe

In a dark crevice between two great piers of rock they sat down: Frodo and Sam a little way within. and Gollum crouched upon the g
``I wonder when we'll find water again? said Sam. But I suppose even over there they drink? Orcs drink, don't they? Yes, they drink, said Frodo. But do not let us speak of that. Such drink is not for us.
``Then all the more need to fill our bottles, said Sam. ``But there isn't any water up here: not a sound or a trickle have I heard No water flowing out of Imlad Morgul, were his words, said Frodo. ``We are not in that valley now, and if we came upon a spring it I wouldn't believe it, said Sam, not until I was dying of thirst. There's a wicked feeling about this place. He sniffed. And a sme I don't like anything here at all. said Frodo, `step or stone, breath or bone. Earth, air and water all seem accursed. But so our Yes, that's so, said Sam. ``And we shouldn't be here at all, if we'd known more about it before we started. But I suppose it's oft
``I wonder,'' said Frodo. But I don't know. And that's the way of a real tale. Take any one that you're fond of. You may know, or No, sir, of course not. Beren now, he never thought he was going to get that Silmaril from the Iron Crown in Thangorodrim, and yet No, they never end as such, said Frodo. ``But the people in them come, and go when their part's ended. Our part will end later - o And then we can have some rest and some sleep, said Sam. He laughed grimly. And I mean just that, Mr. Frodo I mean plain ordinary
``It's saying a lot too much,'' said Frodo, and he laughed, a long clear laugh from his heart. Such a sound had not been heard in
``Now, Mr. Frodo, said Sam, you shouldn't make fun. I was serious.
``So was I,'' said Frodo, and so I am. We're going on a bit too fast. You and I, Sam, are still stuck in the worst places of the s
``Maybe,'' said Sam, 'but I wouldn't be one to say that. Things done and over and made into part of the great tales are different.
``Gollum! he called ``Would you like to be the hero - now where's he got to again?
There was no sign of him at the mouth of their shelter nor in the shadows near. He had refused their food, though he had, as usual
``I don't like him sneaking off without saying,'' said Sam. And least of all now. He can't be looking for food up here, not unless
``It's no good worrying about him now,'' said Frodo. ``We couldn't have gotten so far, not even within sight of the pass, without All the same, I'd rather have him under my eye, said Sam. All the more so, if he's false. Do you remember he would never say if th
``No, I don't think so,'' answered Frodo. Even if he's up to some wickedness, and I suppose that's not unlikely, I don't think it'
``Well, I suppose you're right, Mr. Frodo, said Sam. Not that it comforts me mightily. I don't make no mistake: I don't doubt he'd Very likely he cannot guess himself, said Frodo. ``And I don't think he's got just one plain scheme in his muddled head. I think h Yes, Slinker and Stinker, as I've said before, said Sam. But the nearer they get to the Enemy's land the more like Stinker Slinker
``We haven't got there yet,'' said Frodo.
No, but we'd better keep our eyes peeled till we do. If we're caught napping, Stinker will come out on top pretty quickly. Not but
``Sleep! said Frodo and sighed, as if out of a desert he had seen a mirage of cool green. Yes, even here I could sleep.
``Sleep then, master! Lay your head in my lap.

And so Gollum found them hours later, when he returned, crawling and creeping down the path out of the gloom ahead. Sam sat proppe Gollum looked at them. A strange expression passed over his lean hungry face. The gleam faded from his eyes, and they went dim and But at that touch Frodo stirred and cried out softly in his sleep, and immediately Sam was wide awake. The first thing he saw was
``Hey you! he said roughly. ``What are you up to? Nothing, nothing, said Gollum softly. Nice Master!
``I dare say,'' said Sam. But where have you been to - sneaking off and sneaking back, you old villain?
Gollum withdrew himself, and a green glint flickered under his heavy lids. Almost spider-like he looked now, crouched back on his Sam felt a bit remorseful, though not more trustful. I'm sorry. he said. I'm sorry, but you startled me out of my sleep. And I sho
``Sneaking,'' said Gollum, and the green glint did not leave his eyes.
Oh very well, said Sam, ``have it your own way! I don't suppose it's so far from the truth. And now we'd better all be sneaking al It's tomorrow, said Gollum, or this was tomorrow when the hobbits went to sleep. Very foolish, very dangerous-if poor Sméagol wasn
``I think we shall get tired of that word soon,'' said Sam. But never mind. I'll wake the master up. Gently he smoothed the hair b
`Wake up, Mr. Frodo! Wake up!
Frodo stirred and opened his eyes, and smiled, seeing Sam's face bending over him. ``Calling me early aren't you, Sam? he said. `` Yes it's always dark here, said Sam. ``But Gollum's come back Mr. Frodo, and he says it's tomorrow. So we must be walking on. The Frodo drew a deep breath and sat up. ``The last lap! he said. Hullo, Sméagol! Found any food? Have you had any rest?
``No food, no rest, nothing for Sméagol,'' said Gollum. ``He's a sneak.

Sam clicked his tongue, but restrained himself.
Don't take names to yourself, Sméagol, said Frodo. It is unwise whether they are true or false.
``Sméagol has to take what's given him,'' answered Gollum. He was given that name by kind Master Samwise, the hobbit that knows so Frodo looked at Sam. Yes sir, he said. ``I did use the word, waking up out of my sleep suddenly and all and finding him at hand. I Come, let it pass then, said Frodo. But now we seem to have come to the point, you and I, Sméagol. tell me Can we find the rest of
``No, no, not yet,' Gollum whined. ``Oh no! They can't find the way themselves, can they? Oh no indeed. There's the tunnel coming.


Shelob's Lair

It may indeed have been daytime now, as Gollum said, but the hobbits could see little difference, unless, perhaps, the heavy sky a
``Ugh! That smell! he said. ``It's getting stronger and stronger.
Presently they were under the shadow, and there in the midst of it they saw the opening of a cave. ``This is the way in,'' said Go
``Is this the only way, Sméagol? said Frodo.
Yes, yes, he answered. Yes, we must go this way now.
D'you mean to say you've been through this hole? said Sam. ``Phew! But perhaps you don't mind bad smells.
Gollum's eyes glinted. ``He doesn't know what we think, does he precious? No, he doesn't. But Sméagol can bear things. Yes. He's b
``And what makes the smell, I wonder,'' said Sam. ``It's like - well, I wouldn't like to say. Some beastly hole of the Orcs, I'll Well, said Frodo, Orcs or no, if it's the only way, we must take it.

Drawing a deep breath they passed inside. In a few steps they were in utter and impenetrable darkness. Not since the lightless pas But for a while they could still feel, and indeed the senses of their feet and fingers at first seemed sharpened almost painfully. Gollum had gone in first and seemed to be only a few steps ahead. While they were still able to give heed to such things, they cou Before they had gone very far, perhaps, but time and distance soon passed out of his reckoning, Sam on the right, feeling the wall There's more than one passage here, he whispered with an effort: it seemed hard to make his breath give any sound. ``It's as orc-l After that, first he on the right, and then Frodo on the left, passed three or four such openings, some wider, some smaller; but t At length Frodo, groping along the left-hand wall, came suddenly to a void. Almost he fell sideways into the emptiness. Here was s Fighting off both the sickness and the fear, Frodo gripped Sam's hand. ``Up! he said in a hoarse breath without voice. It all come Calling up his remaining strength and resolution, he dragged Sam to his feet, and forced his own limbs to move. Sam stumbled besid But almost at once they came to a new difficulty. The tunnel forked, or so it seemed, and in the dark they could not tell which wa
``Which way has Gollum gone? panted Sam. And why didn't he wait?
``Sméagol! said Frodo, trying to call. Sméagol! But his voice croaked, and the name fell dead almost as it left his lips. There wa
``He's really gone this time, I fancy,'' muttered Sam. ``I guess this is just exactly where he meant to bring us. A goal! If ever Presently, groping and fumbling in the dark, they found that the opening on the left was blocked: either it was a blind, or else s And quick! Sam panted. There's something worse than Gollum about. I can feel something looking at us.
They had not gone more than a few yards when from behind them came a sound, startling and horrible in the heavily padded silence:
``It's a trap! said Sam, and he laid his hand upon the hilt of his sword; and as he did so, he thought of the darkness of the barr The bubbling hiss drew nearer, and there was a creaking as of some great jointed thing that moved with slow purpose in the dark. A
``The star-glass? muttered Frodo, as one answering out of sleep, hardly comprehending. ``Why yes! Why had I forgotten it? _A light

Slowly his hand went to his bosom, and slowly he held aloft the Phial of Galadriel. For a moment it glimmered, faint as a rising s Frodo gazed in wonder at this marvelous gift that he had so long carried, not guessing its full worth and potency. Seldom had he r But other powers there are in Middle-earth, powers of night, and they are old and strong. And She that walked in the darkness had

Frodo and Sam, horror-stricken, began slowly to back away, their own gaze held by the dreadful stare of those baleful eyes; but as Stand! stand! he cried desperately. ``Running is no use.
Slowly the eyes crept closer.
``Galadriel! he called, and gathering his courage he lifted up the Phial once more. The eyes stopped. For a moment their gaze rela They waved. Doubt came into them as the light approached. One by one they dimmed, and slowly they drew back. No brightness so dead

Master, master! cried Sam. He was close behind, his own sword drawn and ready. Stars and glory! But the Elves would make a song of And so back they turned once more, first walking and then running; for as they went the floor of the tunnel rose steeply, and with Holding aloft the Phial Frodo looked and before him he saw a greyness which the radiance of the star-glass did not pierce and did Sam laughed grimly. ``Cobwebs! he said. ``Is that all? Cobwebs! But what a spider! Have at em, down with em!
In a fury he hewed at them with his sword, but the thread that he struck did not break. It gave a little and then sprang back like
``It will take days to clear the road like this,'' he said. ``What's to be done? Have those eyes come back?
``No, not to be seen,'' said Frodo. ``But I still feel that they are looking at me, or thinking about me: making some other plan,
``Trapped in the end! said Sam bitterly, his anger rising again above weariness and despair. Gnats in a net. May the curse of Fara That would not help us now, said Frodo. ``Eat! Let us see what Sting can do. It is an elven-blade. There were webs of horror in th

Then Frodo stepped up to the great gray net, and hewed it with a wide sweeping stroke, drawing the bitter edge swiftly across a la Stroke after stroke he dealt, until at last all the web within his reach was shattered, and the upper portion blew and swayed like
``Eat! cried Frodo. ``On! On! Wild joy at their escape from the very mouth of despair suddenly filled all his mind. His head whirl It seemed light in that dark land to his eyes that had passed through the den of night. The great smokes had risen and grown thinn
``The pass, Sam! he cried, not heeding the shrillness of his voice, that released from the choking airs of the tunnel rang out now Sam came up behind as fast as he could urge his legs; but glad as he was to be free, he was uneasy, and as he ran, he kept on glan

There agelong she had dwelt, an evil thing in spider-form, even such as once of old had lived in the Land of the Elves in the West Already, years before, Gollum had beheld her, Sméagol who pried into all dark holes, and in past days he had bowed and worshiped h But that desire was yet far away, and long now had she been hungry, lurking in her den, while the power of Sauron grew, and light
``We'll see, we'll see, he said often to himself, when the evil mood was on him, as he walked the dangerous road from Emyn Muil to So he thought in an inner chamber of his cunning, which he still hoped to hide from her, even when he had come to her again and ha And as for Sauron: he knew where she lurked. It pleased him that she should dwell there hungry but unabated in malice, a more sure So they both lived, delighting in their own devices, and feared no assault, nor wrath, nor any end of their wickedness. Never yet

But nothing of this evil which they had stirred up against them did poor Sam know, except that a fear was growing on him, a menace Dread was round him, and enemies before him in the pass, and his master was in a fey mood running heedlessly to meet them. Turning

``Orcs! he muttered. ``We'll never rush it like this. There's Orcs about, and worse than Orcs. Then returning quickly to his long

Sam had hardly hidden the light of the star-glass when she came. A little way ahead and to his left he saw suddenly, issuing from As soon as she had squeezed her soft squelching body and its folded limbs out of the upper exit from her lair, she moved with a ho Sam gasped and gathered all his breath to shout. Look out behind! he yelled. Look out master! I'm - but suddenly his cry was stifl A long clammy hand went over his mouth and another caught him by the neck, while something wrapped itself around his leg. Taken of Got him! Gollum hissed in his ear. ``At last, my precious, we've got him, yes, the nasty hobbit. We take this one. She'll get the Fury at the treachery, and desperation at the delay when his master was in deadly peril, gave to Sam a sudden violence and strengt Then Sam played his last trick. With all his strength he pulled away and got his feet firmly planted; then suddenly he drove his l Not expecting even this simple trick from Sam, Gollum fell over with Sam on top, and he received the weight of the sturdy hobbit i With a squeal Gollum let go. Then Sam waded in; not waiting to change the staff from left to right he dealt another savage blow. Q Sword in hand Sam went after him. For the moment he had forgotten everything else but the red fury in his brain and the desire to


The Choices of Master Samwise

Frodo was lying face upwards on the ground and the monster was bending over him, so intent upon her victim that she took no heed o On the near side of him lay, gleaming on the ground, his elven-blade, where it had fallen useless from his grasp. Sam did not wait Disturbed as if out of some gloating dream by his small yell she turned slowly the dreadful malice of her glance upon him. But alm Now the miserable creature was right under her, for the moment out of the reach of her sting and of her claws. Her vast belly was But Shelob was not as dragons are, she had no softer spot save only her eyes. Knobbed and pitted with corruption was her age-old h No such anguish had Shelob ever known, or dreamed of knowing, in all her long world of wickedness. Not the doughtiest soldier of o Sam had fallen to his knees by Frodo's head, his senses reeling in the foul stench, his two hands still gripping the hilt of the s Even as Sam himself crouched, looking at her, seeing his death in her eyes, a thought came to him, as if some remote voice had spo Galadriel! he said faintly, and then he heard voices far off but clear: the crying of the Elves as they walked under the stars in

Gilthoniel From Elbereth!

And then his tongue was loosed and his voice cried in a language which he did not know:

From Elbereth Gilthoniel oh menel palan-diriel, the nallon is so big!
A tiro nin, Fanuilos!

And with that he staggered to his feet and was Samwise the hobbit, Hamfast's son, again.
``Now eat, you filth! he cried. ``You've hurt my master, you brute, and you'll pay for it. We're going on; but we'll settle with y As if his indomitable spirit had set its potency in motion, the glass blazed suddenly like a white torch in his hand. It flamed li Sam came on. He was reeling like a drunken man, but he came on. And Shelob cowered at last, shrunken in defeat, jerked and quivere

Shelob was gone; and whether she lay long in her lair, nursing her malice and her misery, and in slow years of darkness healed her Sam was left alone. Wearily, as the evening of the Nameless Land fell upon the place of battle, he crawled back to his master.
Master, dear master, he said, but Frodo did not speak. As he had run forward, eager, rejoicing to be free, Shelob with hideous spe
``Master, dear master! said Sam, and through a long silence waited. listening in vain
Then as quickly as he could he cut away the binding cords and laid his head upon Frodo's breast and to his mouth, but no stir of l
``Frodo, Mr. Frodo! he called Don't leave me here alone! It's your Sam calling. Don't go where I can't follow! Wake up, Mr. Frodo!

Then anger surged over the hint, and he ran about his master's body in a rage, stabbing the air, and smiting the stones, and shout And then black despair came down on him, and Sam bowed to the ground, and drew his gray hood over his head, and night came into hi

When at last the blackness passed, Sam looked up and shadows were about him; but for how many minutes or hours the world had gone What shall I do, what shall I do? he said. ``Did I come all this way with him for nothing? And then he remembered his own voice sp
``But what can I do? Don't leave Mr. Frodo dead, unburied on the top of the mountains, and go home? Or go on? Go on? he repeated, Then at last he began to weep; and going to Frodo he composed his body, and folded his cold hands upon his breast, and wrapped his If I'm to go on, he said, ``then I must take your sword, by your leave, Mr. Frodo, but I'll put this one to lie by you, as it lay

But he could not go, not yet. He knelt and held Frodo's hand and could not release it. And time went by and still he knelt, holdin Now he tried to find strength to tear himself away and go on a lonely journey - for revenge. If once he could go, his anger would He looked at the bright point of the sword. He thought of the places behind where there was a black brink and an empty fall into n
``What? Me, alone, go to the Crack of Doom and all? He quailed still, but the resolution grew. ``What? _Me_ take the Ring from _hi But the answer came at once: And the Council gave him companions, so that the errand should not fail. And you are the last of all
``I wish I wasn't the last,'' he groaned. ``I wish old Gandalf was a hare or somebody. Why am I left all alone to make up my mind? But you haven't put yourself forward; you've been put forward And as for not being the right and proper person, why, Mr. Frodo was
``Ah well, I must make up my own mind. I will make it up. But I'll be sure to go wrong: that'd be Sam Gamgee all over.
Let me see now: if we're found here, or Mr. Frodo's found, and that Thing's on him, well, the Enemy will get it. And that's the en He stooped. Very gently he undid the clasp at the neck and slipped his hand inside Frodo's tunic; then with his other hand raising
``Good-bye, master, my dear! he murmured. Forgive your Sam. He'll come back to this spot when the job's done - if he manages it. A And then he bent his own neck and put the chain upon it, and at once his head was bowed to the ground with the weight of the Ring,

He had not far to go. The tunnel was some way behind; the Cleft a couple of hundred yards ahead, or less. The path was visible in I've made up my mind, he kept saying to himself. But he had not. Although he had done his best to think it out, what he was doing As the sheer sides of the Cleft closed about him, before he reached the actual summit, before he looked at last on the path descen If only I could have my wish, my one wish, he sighed, `to go back and find him! Then at last he turned to the road in front and to

Only a few steps; and now only a few more and he would be going down and would never see that high place again. And then suddenly Now the flicker of approaching torches and the clink of steel ahead was very near. In a minute they would reach the top and be on

The world changed, and a single moment of time was filled with an hour of thought. But once he was aware that hearing was sharpene He heard the crack of stone, and the murmur of water far off in Morgul Vale; and down away under the rock the bubbling misery of S He listened. The Orcs from the tunnel and the others marching down had sighted one another, and both parties were now hurrying and

Hello! Gorbag! What are you doing up here? Had enough of war already?
Orders, you lubber. And what are you doing, Shagrat? Tired of lurking up there? Thinking of coming down to fight? Orders to you. I'm in command of this pass. So speak civilly. What's your report?
Nothing.
``Hey! hey! yo! A yell broke into the exchanges of the leaders. The Orcs lower down had suddenly seen something. They began to run
``Hey! Hello! Here's something! Lying right in the road. A spy, a spy! There was a hoot of snarling horns and a babel of baying vo

With a dreadful stroke Sam was awakened from his cowering mood. They had seen his master. What would they do? He had heard tales o
guess. How

                                                                                                                                               ry, weary a There they were again! A good way ahead still. A cluster of figures round something lying on the ground; a few seemed to be dartin Come on, Sam! he said, ``or you'll be too late again. He loosened the sword in its sheath. In a minute he would draw it, and then- There was a wild clamor, hooting and laughing, as something was lifted from the ground. Ya hoi! Ya harri hoi! Up! Up!
Then a voice shouted: ``Now off! The quick way. Back to the Undergate! She'll not trouble us tonight by all the signs. The whole b

They had taken Frodo's body. They were off. He could not catch them up. Still he labored on. The Orcs reached the tunnel and were For a moment he stood, gasping, clutching his breast. Then he drew his sleeve across his face, wiping away the grime, and sweat, a
It no longer seemed very dark to him in the tunnel, rather it was as if he had stepped out of a thin mist into a heavier fog. His Can't you stop your rabble making such a racket, Shagrat? grunted the one. ``We don't want Shelob on us.
``Go on, Gorbag! Yours are making more than half the noise, said the other. ``But let the lads play! No need to worry about Shelob Lugbúrz wants it, eh? What is it, d'you think? It looked Elvish to me, but undersized. What's the danger in a thing like that?
Don't know until we've had a look.
Oh! So they haven't told you what to expect? They don't tell us all they know, do they? Not by half. But they can make mistakes, e
``Sh, Gorbag! Shagrat's voice was lowered, so that even with his strangely sharpened hearing Sam could only just catch what was sa
``Nearly, you say! said Gorbag.
``All right,'' said Shagrat, ``but we'll talk of that later: Wait till we get to the Under-way. There's a place there where we can Shortly afterwards Sam saw the torches disappear. Then there was a rumbling noise, and just as he hurried up, a bump. As far as he There seemed to be a great stone in the way, but the Orcs had got through somehow, for he could hear their voices on the other sid
``No, I don't know,'' said Gorbag's voice. ``The messages go through quicker than anything could fly, as a rule. But I don't inqui
``You should try being up here with Shelob for company,'' said Shagrat.
I'd like to try somewhere where there's none of them. But the war's on now, and when that's over things may be easier.
``It's going well, they say.
They would. grunted Gorbag. ``We'll see. But anyway, if it does go well, there should be a lot more room. What d'you say? - if we Ah! said Shagrat. ``Like old times.
``Yes,'' said Gorbag. But don't count on it. I'm not easy in my mind. As I said, the Big Bosses, ay, his voice sank almost to a wh
``About an hour ago, just before you saw us. A message came: _Nazgûl uneasy. Spies feared on Stairs. Double vigilance. Patrol to h Bad business, said Gorbag. ``See here - our Silent Watchers were uneasy more than two days ago. that I know But my patrol wasn't o
``The Eye was busy elsewhere, I suppose,'' said Shagrat. ``Big things going on away west, they say.
I daresay, growled Gorbag. ``But in the meantime the enemies have got up the stairs. And what were you up to? You're supposed to k
``That's enough! Don't try and teach me my job. We were awake all right. We knew there were funny things going on.
`Very funny!
``Yes, very funny: lights and shouting and all. But Shelob was on the go. My lads saw her and her Sneak.
`Her Sneak? What's that?
``You must have seen him: little thin black fellow; like a spider himself, or perhaps more like a starved frog. He's been here bef Nothing, say you! Didn't you use your eyes back there? I tell you I'm not easy in my mind. Whatever came up the stairs, _did_ get
``Ah well, but she got him in the end, didn't she?
``Got him? Got _who_? This little fellow? But if he was the only one then she'd have had him off to her larder long before, and th At this point Sam began to listen more attentively and pressed his ear against the stone.
Who cut the cords she'd put round him, Shagrat? Same one as cut the web. Didn't you see that? And who stuck a pin into Her Ladyshi Shagrat made no reply.
``You may well put your thinking cap on, if you've got one. It's no laughing matter. No one, no one has ever stuck a pin in Shelob
``And what is it then? growled Shagrat.
``By all the signs, Captain Shagrat, I'd say there's a large warrior loose, Elf most likely, with an elf-sword anyway, and an ax a Ah well, you always did take a gloomy view. said Shagrat. You can read the signs how you like, but there may be other ways to expl
``It's my guess you won't find much in that little fellow,'' said Gorbag. He may have had nothing to do with the real mischief. Th
``We'll see. Come on now! We've talked enough. Let's go and have a look at the prisoner!
``What are you going to do with him? Don't forget I spotted him first. If there's any game, me and my lads must be in it.
Now, now, growled Shagrat. I have my orders. And it's more than my belly's worth, or yours, to break em. _Any_ trespasser found by Stripped, eh? said Gorbag. What, teeth, nails, hair, and all?
``No, none of that. He's for Lugbúrz, I tell you. He's wanted safe and whole.
You'll find that difficult, laughed Gorbag. He's nothing but carrion now. What Lugbúrz will do with such stuff I can't guess. He m You fool, snarled Shagrat. You've been talking very cleverly, but there's a lot you don't know, although most other folk do. You'l

Sam reeled, clutching at the stone. He felt as if the whole dark world was turning upside down. So great was the shock that he alm

``Garn! said Shagrat. She's got more than one poison. When she's hunting, she just gives them a dab in the neck and they go as lim And what's going to happen to him, laughed Gorbag. We can tell him a few stories at any rate, if we can't do anything else. I don'
``There's going to be no fun, I tell you,'' said Shagrat. And he's got to be kept safe, or we're all as good as dead.
``That's right! But if I were you, I'd catch the big one that's loose, before you send in any report to Lugbúrz. It won't sound to

The voices began to move away. Sam heard the sound of feet receding. He was recovering from his shock, and now a wild fury was upo He drew his sword again and beat on the stone with the hilt, but it only gave out a dull sound. The sword, however, blazed so brig The news that his master was still alive roused him to a last effort beyond thought of weariness. He could not see anything ahead.

``That's what I'm going to do, said Shagrat in angry tones. Put him right up in the top room.
``What for? growled Gorbag. ``Haven't you any lock-ups down below?
``He's going out of harm's way, I tell you, answered Shagrat. See? He's precious. I don't trust all my lads, and none of yours; no
``Will he? said Sam. You're forgetting the great big elvish warrior that's loose! And with that he raced round the last corner, on The two orc-figures were still some way ahead. He could see them now, black and squat against a red glare. The passage ran straigh Sam heard a burst of hoarse singing, blaring of horns and banging of gongs, a hideous clamor. Gorbag and Shagrat were already on t Sam yelled and brandished Sting, but his little voice was drowned in the tumult. No one heeded him.
The great doors slammed to. Boom. The bars of iron fell into place inside. Clang. The gate was shut. Sam hurled himself against th


Here ends the second part of the history of the War of the Ring.
The third part tells of the last defense against the Shadow, and the end of the mission of the Ring-bearer in THE RETURN OF THE KI

==




