THE TWO TOWERS


_being the SECOND part of The Lord of the Rings




Boromir's departure

Aragorn climbed the hill at full speed. From time to time, he ducked down to the ground. Hobbits are light, and their footprints
"I interpreted the signs correctly," he told himself. Frodo ran to the top of the hill. What did he see up there? But he returned. Arag "To Boromir's horn!" he cried. "He needs help!" He rushed down the steps and dashed along the path. "Alas! Fate..." As he ran, the crie "No!" said Aragorn, taking his hand and kissing him on the forehead. "You have won. Few have won a Boromir." He smiled.
Where did they go? Was Frodo there? asked Aragorn. But Boromir said nothing more.
"Alas!" cried Aragorn. "Thus perished the heir of Denethor, Lord of the Watchtower! What a tragic end!" He remained kneeling for a mome "Alas!" exclaimed Legolas, joining Aragorn. "We have hunted and killed many Orcs in the woods, but we have... Boromir is dead," said Ar "The hobbits!" cried Gimli. "Where are they? Where is Frodo?"
"I don't know," replied Aragorn wearily. "Before he died, Boromir told me the Orcs had tied them up; he didn't know..."
"We must first attend to the wounded man," said Legolas. "We cannot leave him lying like a carcass in the midst of these [Orcs]." "But "So let's do what we need to do first," said Legolas. "We have neither the time nor the means to give our children a proper burial. The "Then let us put him in a boat with his weapons and those of his defeated enemies," said Aragorn. "We will send him to the falls." Quic "And I," said Legolas, "will take any arrows I can find, for my quiver is empty." He searched the pile and the ground. Aragorn surveyed "I've never seen these tokens before," said Aragorn. "What do they mean?"
"S is for Sauron," said Gimli. "It's easy to read." "No!" said Legolas. "Sauron does not use Elven runes."
"He doesn't use his real name, nor does he allow it to be spelled or pronounced," said Aragorn. "And he doesn't use white. The Orcs "Well, we don't have time to waste on riddles," said Gimli. "Let's take Boromir!"
"But after that, we will have to solve the riddles if we want to choose the right path," replied Aragorn. "Perhaps there is no good choice," Gimli said.
Taking his axe, the Dwarf cut several branches. They tied them together with bowstrings and spread their cloaks. Aragorn remained by th "That's a strange story to tell!" said Legolas. "There are only two boats on the shore. We haven't found any trace of them."
"Have Orcs ever been there before?" asked Aragorn.
"We saw no trace of them," replied Gimli. "And the Orcs would have taken or destroyed all the ships, as well as the..." "I'll look at the ground when we get there," said Aragorn.
They placed Boromir in the middle of the boat that was to carry him away. They folded the grey hood and the elven cloak and, with sorro

Through Rohan, beyond the marshes and the fields where the tall grass grows, the west wind comes walking, and it follows the walls. What news from the West do you bring me tonight, O wandering wind?
Have you seen Boromir the Great by moonlight or starlight?
I saw him ride over seven streams, over broad, grey waters; I saw him walk through desolate lands, even unto his death. In the shadows of the North. I never saw him again afterwards.
The north wind may have heard the horn of Denethor's son.
O Boromir! From the top of the ramparts, I looked far west, But you do not come from deserted lands where there are no men. Then Legolas sang:
From the mouths of the sea blows the south wind, from the dunes and the stones; it carries the cries of the seagulls and moans at the d What news from the South, sighing wind, do you bring me at dusk? Where is Boromir the Fair? He is late and I am grieved.

Do not ask me where he dwells, for there are so many bones there. On the white shores and the dark shores, beneath a stormy sky; so man O Boromir! Beyond the gate, the sea route flows south,
But you did not come with the screaming seagulls from the mouth of the grey sea. Then Aragorn sang again:
From the Gate of Kings blows the North Wind, and beyond the roaring falls; And around the tower, the clear, cold sky resounds the might What news do you bring me from the North today, O mighty wind? What news of Boromir the Bold? For he has been far away for a long time. His shield split, his sword broken, they brought them to the water.
His head so proud, his face so beautiful, his limbs which they have put to rest; And Rauros, the golden fall of Rauros, carried him on O Boromir! The Watchtower will always look north.
To Rauros, to the golden falls of Rauros, until the end of time.

Thus ended their journey. Then they turned around and, at full speed, went upstream to Parth Galien. "You left me the East Wind," said Gimli, "but I won't say anything about it."
"That's how it should be," said Aragorn. "In Minas Tirith, we endure the east wind, but we don't ask about it." He inspected the green "How then can we read this riddle?" asked Gimli.
Aragorn did not reply immediately, but returned to the camp and examined the luggage. "Two bags are missing," he said, "and the... But "And an act of bravery," said Aragorn. "Sam was right, I think. Frodo didn't want to drag any friend down with him to his death in the "Perhaps some hunting orcas attacked him and he fled," said Legolas.
"He fled, certainly," said Aragorn, "but not, I believe, from the Orcs." Aragorn did not reveal what he thought had driven Fr "Well, at least one thing is clear now," said Legolas: "Frodo is no longer on this side of the river: only he could..."
"Our choice," said Gimli, "is therefore either to take the remaining boat and follow Frodo, or to follow the Orcs on foot. In the

"Let me think!" said Aragorn. "Can I now make the right choice and change the disastrous fate of this day?" They pulled the last boat a "No other people trample each other like this," said Legolas. "They seem to take pleasure in slashing and felling. But they advance wit "Yes," said Aragorn, "we shall all need the endurance of the Dwarves. But come! With or without hope, we shall follow the trail." Like


The Riders of Rohan

Twilight was deepening. The mist spread behind them, among the trees below, and hovered over the pale banks of the river. There, in the "Which way do you think they would go?" asked Legolas. "North, to take a more direct route to Is
"They will not reach the river, whatever their objective," said Aragorn. "And unless there is a grave problem at the Roh..." The valley "We've already caught up with some of those we're hunting," he said. "Look!" He pointed, and they saw that what... "Here's another ridd "In any case, the situation is not hopeless," said Legolas. "The enemies of the Orcs are likely to be our friends."
"No," said Aragorn. "The Rohirrim rarely come here, and it's far from Minas Tirith. It's possible that a company of Men hunted them dow "I believe the enemy has brought his own enemy with him," replied Aragorn. "They are Orcs from the North, come from afar. Or, as for th Aragorn raked the ground in a wide circle, but found no further trace of the battle. They continued on their way. "At last!" exclaimed

Gondor! Gondor, between the mountains and the sea!
The west wind blew there; the light on the silver tree fell like a brilliant rain in the gardens of kings of old. O proud walls! O whit Or will the west wind blow again between the mountains and the sea?

"Let's go!" he said, turning his gaze from the south and looking west and north, toward the path he was to take. The ridge on which his "Look!" cried Legolas, pointing to the pale sky above them. "There's the eagle again! It's very high. O
"No, not even my eyes can see it, my dear Legolas," said Aragorn. "It must be very high up. I wonder what it's doing, if it's "Many things," said Legolas. "It's a large troop on foot; but I can't say more, nor see what kind of people..."
"However, I think we no longer need a path to show us the way," said Gimli. "Let's find a way as quickly as possible." "I doubt you will find a faster way than the one the Orcs chose," said Aragorn.
They followed their enemies now, in the daylight. It seemed the Orcs had advanced at great speed. Having reached the bottom, they sudde

Ah! That smell of greenery! he said. It's better than a long night's sleep. Let's go!
"Here, we run fast on tiptoe," said Aragorn. "Faster, perhaps, than the Orcs in irons. Here's an opportunity to..." They advanced in si "The brooch from an elven cloak!" cried Legolas and Gimli together.
"The leaves of Lórien do not fall by chance," said Aragorn. "It is not by chance that they have fallen: they have been "At least he was alive," said Gimli. "And he still had his head, and he could walk. That's encouraging. We don't..."
"Let us hope he has not paid too dearly for his audacity," said Legolas. "Come on! Let us continue! The thought of these merry young me "Unless our enemies also rest, they will leave us far behind if we stop to sleep," said Leg. But if we walk at night, we will not be ab "The path is straight and turns neither to the right nor to the left, as far as my eyes can see," said Legolas.
"Perhaps I could guide you at random through the darkness and follow the right path," said Aragorn; "but if we were to lose our way... "That's true," said Aragorn. "But if I interpreted the signs there correctly, the Orcs of the White Hand triumphed, and all
"It would be unwise to trust their advice," said Gimli. "And how could we escape? In the darkness, we should have missed them. The Orcs "I said it was a difficult choice," said Aragorn. "How are we going to conclude this debate?"
"You are our guide," said Gimli, "and you are an exceptional hunter. The choice is yours."
"My heart tells me to continue," said Legolas. "But we must remain united. I will follow your advice."
"You're leaving the choice to a bad decision-maker," said Aragorn. "Since we crossed the Argonath, my choices have proven..."
"We won't go into the dark," he finally said. "The danger of losing the trail or seeing signs of other people's presence is too great f "And tonight, he's wrapped in a shroud anyway," Gimli murmured. "If only the Lady had granted us a light
"It will be all the more necessary where it is granted to us," said Aragorn. "The true Quest lies within it. Ours does not." He slumped "They are very far away," he said sadly, turning to Aragorn. "I know deep down that they have not found rest."
"We will follow them nonetheless, whatever happens," said Aragorn. Bending down, he woke the Dwarf. "Come! We must go," said Gimli. "Bu "I fear they have passed out of my sight, whether from the hill or the plain, under the moon or the sun," said Le
"Where sight fails, the earth can bring us rumors," said Aragorn. "The earth must groan beneath their hated feet."
"The sound of the earth is faint and confused," he said. "Nothing moves for miles around. The footsteps of our enemies are faint. Let's Thus began the third day of their pursuit. During those long hours of clouds and capricious sunshine, they did not stop. All day long,

At dusk, they stopped again. They had by then traveled twice twelve leagues across the plains of Rohan, and
"What I fear most is a moment of rest or an interruption in our pursuit," said Legolas. "The Orcs are after us." Gimli gritted his teet "Hope, perhaps, but not toil," said Aragorn. "We shall not turn back here. Yet I am weary." He threw a
"Truly!" said Legolas. "I have known it since our descent of the Emyn Muil. For the will is not behind us, but before us." As before, L "I see nothing to the north or west, only grass blending into the mist," said Gimli. "Could we see
"It's still a long way off," said Aragorn. "If I remember correctly, those hills stretch for eight leagues or more to the north, and th "Well, let's continue," said Gimli. "My legs must forget the miles. They would be faster if my heart were faster." The sun was setting "Come on, let's climb that green hill!" he said. They followed him wearily, climbing the long slope until...
"We see nothing that can guide us here," said Gimli. "Well, we'll have to stop again and wait for the light to appear." "The wind is coming from the north, from the snows," said Aragorn.
"And before morning, he will be in the East," said Legolas. "But rest if you must. However, do not lose all hope. Tomorrow, three suns

The night grew colder and colder. Aragorn and Gimli slept fitfully, and each time they awoke, they saw. Before them, to the east, rose "Horsemen!" cried Aragorn, leaping to his feet. "Many horsemen on swift steeds are coming towards us!"
"Yes," said Legolas, "there are one hundred and five of them. Their hair is blond and their spears are shining. Their leader is very ta No! The riders are barely more than five leagues from here, said Legolas.
"Five leagues or one," said Gimli; "we cannot escape them on this barren land. Should we wait for them here or continue on"?
"We will wait," said Aragorn. "I am weary, and our hunt has failed. Or at least, others have before us; for these... Or spears," said G "There are three empty stools, but I don't see any hobbits," said Legolas.
"I didn't say we had to hear good news," said Aragorn. "But, good or bad, we shall await it." The three companions then left the hillto "I have been among them," replied Aragorn. "They are proud and stubborn, but sincere, generous in thought and deed; bold. But Gandalf s "I don't believe it any more than Boromir," replied Aragorn.
"You will soon learn the truth," said Legolas. "They are already approaching."
Finally, even Gimli could hear the distant gallop of hooves. The riders, following the trail, had left the river and then, clear, power

Their horses were large, strong and slender; their grey coats shone, their long tails flowed in the wind, they galloped past in pairs, With astonishing speed and skill, they braked their mounts, turned around, and charged. Soon, the three cavalrymen... Without a word or "Who are you, and what are you doing in these lands?" asked the Rider, using the common language of the West, in a tone and
"My name is Aragorn," he replied. "I come from the North. I hunt Orcs."
The rider leaped from his horse. Handing his lance to another rider who approached and dismounted beside him, he drew his sword. "At first, I thought you were Orcs yourselves," he said; "but I see that you are not. In truth, you know little
"No," said Aragorn. "Only one of us is an Elf, Legolas, from the Woodland Realm in distant Mirkwood." But the Rider looked at them with "As for that," said the Rider, sizing up the Dwarf, "the stranger should present himself first. My name is Éomer, son of Éomund, Éomer, "He is not alone," said Legolas, drawing his bow and placing an arrow in it with hands faster than lightning. "You die!" Éomer raised h "I will," said Éomer, lowering his sword. "But travelers from the Riddermark would do well to be less arrogant."
"Tell me first whom you serve," Aragorn asked. "Are you a friend or an enemy of Sauron, the Dark Lord of Mordor?"
"I serve only the Lord of the Mark, Théoden, king son of Thengel," replied Éomer. "We do not serve the Power of the P
"I serve no one," said Aragorn; "but the servants of Sauron, I pursue wherever they go. Few are the dead men." Aragorn threw back his c "The fate of choice," said Aragorn. "You can tell this to Théoden, son of Thengel: open war awaits him, with Sauron."
"There's no point in pursuing them," said Éomer. "The Orcs are annihilated." And our friends? We only found orcs.
"That's very strange," said Aragorn. "Did you search the victims' bodies? Were there only orcs among them? They would be "There were neither dwarves nor children," said Éomer. "We counted all the dead, we stripped them, and then we..." "We're not talking about dwarves or children," said Gimli. "Our friends were hobbits."
"Hobbits?" asked Éomer. "And what could they possibly be? It's a strange name."
"A strange name for a strange people," said Gimli. "But they were very dear to us. It seems you heard of them in Rohan." "Hobbits!" exclaimed the Rider, laughing, who stood near Éomer. "Hobbits! But they are only small creatures of
"A man can do both," said Aragorn. "For it is not we, but those who come after us, who will forge the legends." "Time is of the essence," said the Rider, ignoring Aragorn. "We must hasten south, my lord. Let us leave these "Peace, Éothain!" said Éomer in his tongue. "Give me a moment. Tell the Éored to gather on the road and to...

Éothain, muttering to himself, withdrew and addressed the others. Soon they moved away, leaving Éomer alone with his three companions. "Everything you say is strange, Aragorn," he said. "Yet you speak the truth, it's obvious: the Men of the Mark do not lie."
"I left Imladris, as the nursery rhyme calls it, several weeks ago," replied Aragorn. "Boromir of Minas Tirith..."
"Gandalf!" exclaimed Éomer. "Gandalf Greyhame is known in the Mark; but his name, I tell you, is no longer a guarantee of safety. Since "So Gripoil found his way alone from the Far North," said Aragorn; "for that is where he and Gandalf parted ways.
"That's sad news," said Éomer. "At least for me, and for many others; but not for everyone, as you will see..."
"This is news more terrible than anyone in these places could possibly understand, even though it risks grieving them deeply." "Your news is all of it a bad omen!" cried Éomer, dismayed. "This death is a great misfortune for Minas Tirith and
"It has now been four days since he was killed," replied Aragorn, "and since the evening of that day, we have traveled from the om On f Yes, even right before your eyes.
Surprise crossed Éomer's face. "Strider is too poor a name, son of Arathorn," he said. "I name you Strider. But now, lord, what do you "So you don't pay tribute to Sauron?" asked Gimli.
"No, we never had any," said Éomer peremptorily. "Yet I seem to recall hearing that this lie has... But at present, our main concern is "Come!" said Éomer. "The Heir of Elendil would be a valuable asset to the Sons of Eorl in these troubled times. Indeed, on this journey "Thank you for your kind words," said Aragorn, "and my heart desires to go with you; but I cannot abandon my friends."
"There is no hope left," said Éomer. "You will not find your friends at the northern borders."
Yet, my friends are not late. We found a clear clue, not far from the Eastern Wall, that at least one of them was there. So, in your op I don't know. They may have been killed and burned among the Orcs; but you'll say that's impossible, and I don't have any idea.
"I would swear that no Orc escaped our sight," said Éomer. "We reached the edge of the forest before them, and if pa "Our friends were dressed like us," said Aragorn; "and you passed us by in broad daylight."
"I had forgotten that," said Éomer. "It is difficult to be sure of anything among so many wonders. The world is becoming "As he always has," said Aragorn. "Good and evil haven't changed since yesterday; they are not a thing among the
"That's quite true," said Éomer. "But I don't doubt you, nor what my heart desires. Yet I cannot act as I wish."
"I do not believe your law was designed for such an eventuality," said Aragorn. "Besides, I am no stranger." Éomer was silent for a mom "I will not do it," said Aragorn.

There was great astonishment, and many dark and doubtful glances, among his men, when Éomer gave the order that... This may perhaps suf

"No one," said Gimli. "And don't worry: no one will ever hear about it. I'd rather walk than ride. But you must ride now, or you'll get "Come, sit behind me, friend Gimli," said Legolas. "Then all will be well, and you will need neither to borrow a horse nor..." A large, "I too will come," said Gimli. "Lady Galadriel's business remains between us. I still have to teach you how to speak with..."
"We shall see," said Éomer. "So many strange things have happened that to learn the praises of a fair lady under the..." With these wor "There's not much to discover," he said upon his return. "The main trail is completely obscured by the passage of the..." As they advan "There is nothing more we can do," said Gimli sadly. "We have been asked many riddles since our arrival in Tol Br. But Gandalf was not, But Gandalf chose to come himself, and he was the first to be lost, replied Gimli. His foresight betrayed him.
"Gandalf's advice wasn't based on certainty of danger, either for himself or for others," said Aragorn. "A little further on, beyond th "If those unfortunate hobbits have strayed into the woods, it might attract them here," said Legolas.
And that might attract other creatures, neither orcs nor hobbits, said Aragorn. We are near the mountain steps of the traitor. But the "They are many," said Aragorn, "and they do not fear Fangorn's wrath, for they rarely come here and do not venture forth..."
"It's not necessary," said Gimli. "The Riders have left enough wood chips and branches, and there's no shortage of dead wood." When the "Look!" he said. "The tree is happy with the fire!"
It may be that the dancing shadows deceived their eyes, but it is certain that for each of the companions, the branches seemed... A sil "I have heard many stories in Gondor and elsewhere," said Aragorn, "but were it not for Celeborn's words, I would have taken them for "You have gone further than I," said Legolas. "I have heard nothing like this in my country, except for songs that tell of it."
"Yes, it is ancient," said Aragorn, "as ancient as the Forest of the Barrows, and much larger. Elrond says that both are a "And I don't want to know," said Gimli. "Let nothing that lives in Fangorn be disturbed because of me!"
They then drew lots for the guards, and the one for the first tower fell on Gimli. The others lay down. Almost immediately, at these wo "Well, Father, what can we do for you?" asked Aragorn, leaping to his feet. "Come and warm yourselves if you have." Suddenly, Legolas c The horses were gone. They had dragged their stakes and disappeared. For a moment, the three companions remained motionless.

"Well, they're gone," Aragorn said at last. "We can neither find them nor catch them; if they don't return from
"Feet!" said Gimli. "But you can't eat them, or walk on them." He threw fuel into the fire and collapsed. "Just a few hours ago, you re "It seems unlikely that I'll have the opportunity," said Gimli.
If you want to know what I think, he spoke again after a moment. I believe it was Saruman. Who else? So
"I've spotted them," said Aragorn. "But I also noticed that this old man was wearing a hat, not a hood. I have no doubt..." The night p


The Uruk-hai

Pippin was plunged into a dark and troubled dream: he seemed to hear his own voice echoing in dark tunnels. He awoke. A blast of cold a "I suppose I've been hit on the head," he said to himself. "I wonder if poor Merry is badly hurt. What happened to him?" He couldn't an

He struggled a little, but in vain. One of the Orcs sitting nearby laughed and said something to a companion in their abominable tongue "If I could, you'd wish you were dead," said the other. "I'd make you squeal, you miserable rat!" He leaned over Pippin, and Pippin, te "We don't have time to kill them properly," said one of them. "No time to have fun on this trip."
"There's nothing we can do," said another. "But why not kill them quickly, kill them now? They're a real plague, and..."
"Orders," said a third voice, its tone deep and gruff. "Kill everyone except the Hobbits; they must be brought back." "Why are they bei No! I heard that one of them possesses something, something wanted for the War, an elven plot... Is that all you know? Why not do some "That's a very interesting point," sneered a voice, softer than the others, but more malevolent. "Perhaps I should..."
"And mine too," said the deep voice. "Alive and just as captured; no question of spoiling it. Those are my orders." "Those are not our orders!" cried one of the first voices. "We came from the Mines to kill and avenge our own. I will "Then you may make another wish," said the hoarse voice. "I am Uglúk. I command. I return to Isengard by the most..." "Is Saruman the master or the Great Eye?" asked the evil voice. "We should return to Lugbúrz immediately."
"If we could cross the Great River, perhaps we would," said another voice. "But we are not numerous enough." "I have arrived," said the evil voice. "A winged Nazgûl awaits us to the north, on the eastern shore."

Perhaps, perhaps! Then you'll run away with our prisoners, pocket the pay and honors in Lugbúrz, and leave us... "Yes, we must remain united," Uglúk growled. "I don't trust you, you little pigs. You have no guts outside of..."
"You've talked enough about it, Uglúk," mocked the evil voice. "I wonder what they'll think of it in Lugbúrz. They might believe "Pigs," really? How does it feel to be called "pigs" by the gossips of a disgusting little wizard? They eat... Many shouts in the Orcis "Get rid of your weapons!" shouted Uglúk. "And enough of this nonsense! We're heading straight west, then we'll go down
"If only this guy would take a little longer to get his troop under control, I could get out of this," Pippin thought. A glimmer of hop

"Pick up these prisoners!" shouted Uglúk. "Don't play any tricks on them! If they aren't alive when we return, someone..." An orc seize "The scouts are finally back," said an orc who was nearby.
"Well, what have you discovered?" growled Uglúk's voice.
Just one rider, and he set off westward. Everything is clear now.
Now I dare say it. But for how long? Fools! You should have shot him. He'll raise the alarm. Those damned ones! A shadow leaned over Pi "And the other one!" said Uglúk. Pippin saw him approach Merry, who was lying nearby, and kick him. Merry groaned. The orcs applauded a "Come now!" said Uglúk. "None of that! Silence! Don't speak to each other. Every problem will be reported to the other end of the..."

The band of orcs began to descend a narrow ravine that plunged into the misty plain below. Merry and Pippin, separated. Straight ahead! But what will we do at sunrise? wondered some inhabitants of the North.
"Keep running," said Uglúk. "What do you think? Sitting in the grass and waiting for the Whiteskins to join us? But we can't run in the "You will run with me behind you," said Uglúk. "Run! Otherwise, you will never see your beloved holes again. By the White Hand!" Then t A sudden idea crossed Pippin's mind, and he acted immediately. He veered to the right and dove headfirst. "Halt!" shouted Uglúk.
A moment of tumult and confusion ensued. Pippin leaped to his feet and began to run. But the Orcs were right behind him.
"No hope of escape!" thought Pippin. "But I hope I've left some traces of my passage on the damp ground." A whip lash curled around his "That's enough!" shouted Uglúk, running up. "He still has a long way to go. Make them both run! Use the f... But that's not all," he gr

Neither Pippin nor Merry remembered much of the end of the journey. Bad dreams and nightmarish awakenings mingled. The warmth of the or "Very well," said Uglúk. "Leave them to me then! No murder, as I've already told you; but if you want to spoil this... There were a few "We will now deal with Grishnákh," said Uglúk; but even some of his own supporters looked on with suspicion.
"I know," Uglúk snarled. "Those damned riders got wind of our presence. But it's entirely your fault, Snaga. You..." At that moment, Pi "I came back to make sure that the orders are carried out and that the prisoners are safe and sound," Grishnakh replied.
"Indeed!" said Uglúk. "A futile effort. I will see to it that the orders are carried out under my command. And what are you looking for "I left behind a fool," Grishnakh growled. "But there were some good guys with him that shouldn't be lost. I knew that
"Splendid!" exclaimed Uglúk, laughing. "But unless you have the guts for a fight, you've taken the wrong path." Lugbúrz "Nazgûl, Nazgûl," said Grishnákh, shivering and licking his lips, as if the word had a bitter taste that he was savoring. "You seem to know a great deal," said Uglúk. "More than is good for you, in my opinion. Those in Lugbúrz may be wondering..."

The Isengardians seized Merry and Pippin again and threw them onto their backs. Then the troop set off. An hour later, Pippin was bruis "Maggots!" the Isengardians jeered. "You're cooked! The Whiteskins will catch you and eat you. They're coming!" A cry from Grishnákh sh
They'll make it. They'll escape, thought Pippin. Then he managed to turn his head to glance over his shoulder. He wondered what sort of Night fell without the Riders drawing near to give battle. Many Orcs had fallen, but some remained.
"Well, here we are," scoffed Grishnákh. "What leadership! I hope the great Uglúk will lead us out of trouble again. Put down those hobb

"I don't really believe it," said Merry. "I feel like I'm at the end of my rope. I don't think I can run away very far, m "Lembas!" whispered Pippin. "Lembas: I have some. And you? I don't think they took anything but our swords."
"Yes, I had a packet in my pocket," replied Merry, "but it must be in pieces. Anyway, I can't put my... You won't have to. I've..."; bu

The night was cold and still. All around the mound where the Orcs were gathered, small watch fires were being lit, glowing red. "They'll wait for the sun, damn them!" snarled one of the guards. "Why don't we regroup and charge? What's the point?"
"I bet you would," growled Uglúk, stepping forward behind us. "You mean I don't think at all, eh? Damn it! There's only one thing these "Well, my little ones!" said Grishnákh in a soft whisper. "Are you enjoying your rest? Or not? Perhaps it's a little..." The idea sudde

"I don't think you'll find it that way," he murmured. "It's not easy to find."
"Have you found it?" asked Grishnákh; his fingers stopped crawling and gripped Pippin's shoulder. "Found what? What?" The hobbits felt "Perhaps," said Merry, now alert and aware of Pippin's supposition. "Perhaps; and not just for us. Do I want it? Do I want it?" asked G "We mean," said Pippin, choosing his words carefully, "that there's no point groping in the dark. We could spare you the trouble. My de "I have no trouble believing it," said Merry. "But you haven't brought your prey home yet. And things didn't seem to be going well." Gr "Gollum, Gollum!" said Pippin. "Untie our legs!" said Merry.
They felt the orc's arms tremble violently. "Bad little vermin!" he hissed. "Untie your legs? I'll..." Suddenly, he seized them. The st

Finally, Merry stirred and murmured softly, "So far, so good, but how are we going to avoid getting spat on?" The answer came quickly. "If only we had free legs and hands, we could escape," said Merry. "But I can't touch the knots."
"No point in trying," said Pippin. "I was just about to tell you: I managed to free my hands. These bows are only for show." He removed "We must leave," he said. "Just a moment!" Grishnákh's sword was within reach, but too heavy and cumbersome to use.
"Let's go!" he said. "When we're a little warmed up, perhaps we can get up and walk. But in any case..." They crawled. The grass was th "We need to take cover," said Pippin, "otherwise we'll be spotted. It won't do any good if those riders discover us." Merry stood up. " "Not here, the banks are too steep," said Pippin. "Onward!"
They turned and walked slowly along the river, side by side. Behind them, the light was growing in the east. As they walked
"You seem to have come through it well, Master Took," said Merry. "You'll almost get a chapter in the old man's book. I'll have to hurr "No," replied Merry; "but the forest still seems preferable to returning to the heart of a battle."

He led the way beneath the immense branches of the trees. Their age seemed indeterminate. Long tresses of lichen hung from them. Beyond "We've been watching for too long," said Merry. "There's Uglúk! I never want to see him again." The hobbits turned away. Thus they miss


Treebeard

Meanwhile, the hobbits advanced as fast as the dark and impenetrable forest allowed, following the course of the stream. Finally, Merry "Let's go have a drink, at least," said Pippin. "I'm thirsty." He climbed onto a large root that plunged into the stream and,
"You haven't lost us yet, I suppose?" said Pippin, leaning against a large tree trunk. "We can at least follow "We could, if our legs would allow it," said Merry; "and if we could breathe properly."
"Yes, it's very dark and stuffy in here," said Pippin. "It reminds me, in a way, of the old room in the Great Manor. But the sun must b "No, not the hobbits either," said Pippin. "And the idea of having to go through all that doesn't appeal to me at all. Nothing to eat f "It's sad," said Merry. "We left with only a few spare packets of _lembas_, and we left everything behind."
"Well, we'd better decide on the way now," said Pippin. "The morning must be getting on."
It was then that they noticed a yellow light appearing a little further into the woods: rays of sunlight seemed suddenly to
"Hello!" said Merry. "The sun must have hidden behind a cloud while we were under those trees, and now it's back again." They realized "Onward!" exclaimed Merry joyfully. "Finally, a breath of fresh air and a view of the landscape!"
They climbed the rock with difficulty. If the staircase had been carved, it was undoubtedly intended for larger feet and "The wind is changing," said Merry. "It's veered to the east again. It's cool in here."

"Yes," said Pippin, "I'm afraid it's only a passing glimmer, and everything will turn grey again. What a pity! That old woman... I almo "Hrum, Hoom," murmured the voice, a voice as deep as a very deep wind instrument. "Really strange! Don't be too afraid." Pippin, still "An Ent?" asked Merry. "What is that? But what's your name? What's your real name?"
"Oh!" replied Treebeard. "Oh! That would be revealing something! Not so fast. And it's me asking the question. You are..."

Discover the legends of living creatures now! First, name the four, the free peoples:
The oldest of all, the elf children; Dwarf the burrower, dark are his houses;
Ent, the beings born of the earth, old as the mountains; Mortal man, master of horses:

Hmm, hmm, hmm.

Castor the builder, Buck the jumper,
The bear hunts bees, the boar fights; the dog is hungry, the hare is afraid... hm, hm.
Eagle in its nest, ox in the pasture,
The stag with a crown of horns; the falcon is the fastest; the swan the whitest, the snake the coldest...

Hoom, hm; hoom. hm. How did it go? Room tum, room tum, roomty toom tum. It was a long list. But anyway, t "It seems we're always forgotten in old lists and old stories," said Merry. "Yet we've existed for ages." "Why not make a new line?" said Pippin. Half-grown hobbits, the inhabitants of holes.
Place us among the four, next to Man (the Great Ones) and you're there.
Hmm! Not bad, not bad, said Treebeard. That would do the trick. So you live in holes, eh? Sounds very good. But who v "Nobody else calls us hobbits; we call ourselves that," said Pippin.
Hoom, hmm! Come on! Not so fast! You call yourselves hobbits? But don't tell just anyone. You might reveal your
"People don't pay attention to it," said Merry. "Actually, I'm a Brandybuck, Meriadoc Brandybuck, even though most people call me Pippi "Hmm, but you're a bit of a hurry, I see," said Treebeard. "I'm honored by your trust; but don't get carried away." But now, and the ey "A lot is happening," said Merry. "Even if we tried to be quick, it would take us a long time to... Yes, I know him: the only wizard wh "Yes," said Pippin sadly, "we did it. He was a great friend and he served as our guide."
"Then I can answer your other questions," said Treebeard. "I won't do anything _with_ you: not if by that you mean vo "Yes, that's true," said Pippin sadly. "The story continues, but I fear Gandalf has left it."
"Come now!" said Treebeard. "Ahem, ahem, ah, well..." He paused, observing the hobbits for a long time: "Ahem, ah, eh
"If you want to know more," said Merry, "we'll tell you. But it will take time. Wouldn't you like to ask us? 'Um, tired?' No. I'm not t Treebeard repeated the words thoughtfully. _Hill_. Yes, that was it. But it's a rather hasty term for something that stands upright. "Where are we going?" asked Merry.
"At my place, or in one of my houses," replied Treebeard. "Is it far?"
I don't know. You could say it's far away, maybe. But what does it matter?

"You see, we've lost everything," said Merry. "We only have a few provisions left."
"Oh! Hmm! Don't worry," said Treebeard. "I can give you a drink that will keep you green and growing strong." Holding the hobbits gentl "Oh, really?" grumbled Treebeard. "I probably would have said the same thing if you'd gone the other way. Don't venture there. And this

Taurelilómëa-tumbalemorna Tumbaletaurëa Lómëanor,_*1_

That's what they used to say. Things have changed, but it's still true in some places. What do you mean? asked Pippin. What's true? "Trees and Ents," said Treebeard. "I don't understand everything that's going on myself, so I can't explain it to you. When it happens Yes, yes. Something like that, but much worse. I have no doubt that a shadow of the Great Darkness still hovers there, to the north. We

In spring, I used to walk in the willow groves of Tasarinan. Ah! The sight and scent of spring in Nan-tasarion! And I said that was fine.
I wandered in the elm woods of Ossiriand in the summer.
Ah! The light and music of summer on the banks of the Seven Rivers of Ossir! And I thought it was the best solution. I came to the beech trees of Neldoreth in the autumn.
Ah! the gold, the red, and the rustling of leaves in autumn at Taur-na-neldor! It was more than I desired. In winter, I used to climb up to the pine trees on the heights of Dorthonion.
Ah! the wind, the whiteness and the black branches of Winter on Orod-na-Thôn! My voice rose and sang in the sky. And now, all these lands are under the waves. And I walk to Ambaróna, to Tauremorna, to Aldalómë.
In my own country, in the land of Fangorn, where the roots run deep, And the years weigh more heavily than the leaves in Tauremornalómë.

He finished his journey and walked away in silence, and throughout the woods, as far as the ear could reach, there was not a sound. Day was waning and twilight enveloped the tree trunks. At last, the hobbits saw, rising indistinctly, Treebeard climbing the slope with
"Hm! Here we are!" said Treebeard, breaking his long silence. "I brought you about seventy thousand paces of ent, but I..." For a momen "Well, well, we can talk again," said Treebeard. "You're probably thirsty. Perhaps you're also tired
"It's hell," he said, "and I'm afraid there are no seats. But you can sit at the table." Taking the hobbi, the drink was like water, an

On the right bank of the bay was a large bed on low legs, barely sixty centimeters high, covered with a thick "Now tell me your story, and don't rush!" said Treebeard.
The hobbits began to tell him about their adventures since leaving Hobbiton. They didn't follow any particular order, but he was extrem "Entwives?" asked Pippin. "Are they like you?"
"Yes, um, well no: I don't really know now," said Treebeard thoughtfully. "But they would like your country, so Treebeard was particula "Hmm, hmm!" said Treebeard, when at last their story had meandered to the battle of the Orcs and the Riders of Rohan. "Well, and you?" "Hmm, hmm, I didn't concern myself with the Great Wars," said Treebeard; "they mainly concern Elves and Men. I used to be worried when "Who is Saruman?" asked Pippin. "Do you know his story?" "Saruman is a wizard," replied Treebeard. "I think I understand his intentions "I'll stop him!" he thundered. "And you'll come with me. Perhaps you can help me. In doing so, you'll be helping your own friends." "We will come with you," said Merry. "We will do what we can."
"Yes!" said Pippin. "I'd like to see the White Hand overturned. I'd like to be there, even if I couldn't be of great importance." "Good

After a while, the hobbits heard him murmuring again. He seemed to be counting on his fingers. "Fangorn, Finglas, Fladri
"Why are there so few, given that you've lived in this country for so long?" asked Pippin. "Were there many? Oh no!" said Treebeard. "N "That's really sad!" said Pippin. "How come they're all dead?"
"They're not dead!" exclaimed Treebeard. "I never said they were dead. We lost them, I said."
"Well, I'm afraid the songs haven't made it over the mountains to the Shire," said Merry. "Could you
"Yes, I will," said Treebeard, seeming delighted by the request. "But I can't tell you everything in detail, only briefly."
"It's a rather strange and sad story," he continued after a pause. "When the world was young, and the woods were... I remember, it was ENT. _When spring unfolds the beech leaf and the sap is in the branch;
When the light illuminates the stream in the wild woods, and the wind blows across the brow; When the stride is long, the breath deep, Come back to me! Come back to me, and tell me that my land is beautiful!
ENTWIFE. _When spring has arrived in the gardens and fields, and the corn is in ears; When the flowers, like sparkling snow, cover the When the rain and the sun cover the earth and the air is filled with fragrance, I will stay here, and I will not come, for my land is b ENT. _When summer spreads across the world, and at golden noon

Beneath the roof of sleeping leaves, the dreams of the trees unfold;
When the forest halls are green and fresh, and the wind blows from the west, come back to me! Come back to me and tell me that my land ENTWIFE. _When summer warms the hanging fruits and browns the berries;
When the straw is golden, and the ear of corn white, and the harvest comes to the city;
When the honey overflows and the apples swell, even if the wind blows from the west, I will stay here under the sun, for my land is the ENT. _When winter comes, the wild winter will kill the hill and the wood;
When the trees fall and the starless night devours the sunless day; When the wind blows from the deadly east, then under a freezing rai I will seek you, I will call you; I will come back to you!
ENTWIFE. _When winter comes and the songs cease; when darkness finally falls; When the barren branch is broken, and light and labor are Together, we will take to the road in the freezing rain!
BOTH OF US. Together, we will take the road that leads west.
And in the distance, we will find a land where our two hearts can find rest.

Treebeard finished his song. "That's how it goes," he said. "It's elven, of course: light, quick, and over in a flash." "Usually, we lie down to sleep," said Merry. "We'll be fine where we are."
"Lie down and sleep!" said Treebeard. "But of course!" "Hm, hoom: I forgot: singing that song brought back old memories." Merry and Pip "Hey? An Ent gathering?" said Treebeard, turning around. "It's not a place, it's an Ent gathering-which is..." Soon after, they set off

They had been walking for a long time-Pippin had tried to count the Ents' strides, but in vain, having lost his way around Treebeard, h

"Where is Isengard?" asked Pippin.
"I don't know exactly where we are," said Merry; "but that peak is probably Methedras, and if I remember correctly, the "What does Isengard look like?" asked Pippin. "I wonder what the Ents could be doing there."
"Me too," said Merry. "Isengard is a sort of ring of rocks or hills, I think, with a plain inside and
"Yes!" said Pippin. "I understand what you mean. There can be a great difference between an old cow sitting, but..." The hobbits retrac "Ahem, ahem, here I am again," said Treebeard. "Are you beginning to tire, or to grow impatient? Well, I fear you will not." Bregalad s "There were rowan trees at my house," said Bregalad in a soft, sad voice, "rowan trees that had taken root when I was a

O Orofarnë, Lassemista, Carnimírië!
O beautiful rowan tree, how the white flowers settled upon your hair! O my rowan tree, I saw you shining one summer's day, Your bark so shiny, your leaves so light, your voice so fresh and sweet:
On your head, what a red-gold crown you wore!
O dead rowan tree, on your head your hair is dry and grey;
Your crown has fallen, your voice is silenced forever. O Orofarnë, Lassemista, Carnimírië!

The hobbits fell asleep to the sound of Bregalad's sweet song, which seemed to lament in several languages the falling of the trees he The next day, they also spent the day in his company, but without straying far from his house. They remained most of the day. The third We're coming, we're coming to the sound of the drum: ta-runda runda runda rom!
The Ents were approaching: their song grew louder and louder: "We're coming, we're coming with horn and drum: ta-rûna rûna rûna rom!" Bregalad took the hobbits in his arms and left his house with long strides.

Soon they saw the approaching line of march: the Ents were striding down the slope towards them. Treebeard

Hoom, hom! Here we are at last! cried Treebeard when he saw Bregalad and the hobbits. Come, join the assembly! We part "To Isengard!" cried the Ents in unison. "To Isengard!"

To Isengard! Though Isengard is surrounded and barricaded with stone gates; Though Isengard is strong and hard, cold as stone and bare We go, we go, we go to war, to cut the stone and break down the gate; For the trunk and branches are now burning, the furnace roars - w We arrive at Isengard, bearers of misfortune!
With misfortune we come, with misfortune we come! So they sang as they walked south.
Bregalad, his eyes shining, joined Treebeard in the line. The old Ent took the hobbits back and hoisted them up onto his e. The Ents de "Quickly?" asked Treebeard. "Boom! Yes, indeed. Quicker than I expected. I haven't seen them awake like this since..."
"Are you really going to force your way into Isengard?" asked Merry.
Oh, um, well, we could, you know! You may underestimate our strength. Have you heard of the Trolls? They are... But Saruman will try to Hmm, ah yes, that's quite true. I haven't forgotten it. I've even given it a lot of thought. You see, many Ents are much more... Treebe

The Ents strode onward. They had descended into a long fold of the terrain that sloped southward; Pippin turned around. The number of E


The White Rider

"I'm cold to the bone," said Gimli, waving his arms and stamping his foot. Day had finally broken. At dawn, the... And don't forget tha "Why would that make you happy?" asked Legolas.
"Because an old man whose feet leave marks might be nothing more than he seems," replied the Dwarf. "Perhaps," said the elf; "but a big boot would probably leave no trace here: the grass is deep and soft.
"That wouldn't baffle a Ranger," said Gimli. "A twisted blade is all Aragorn could do to decipher it. But I don't expect..." "That's quite likely," said Aragorn; "yet I'm not certain. I'm thinking of the horses. You said last night, Gimli, that they
"No," said Legolas. "I heard them clearly. Were it not for the darkness and our own fear, I would have thought they were wild beasts." "That's what I thought too," said Aragorn. "But I can only decipher the riddle when they return. Come on! The

For a moment, the companions crawled and groped on the ground. The tree stood forlornly above them, its leaves
"Finally, some news!" exclaimed Aragorn. He lifted a broken leaf to show them, a large pale leaf with shimmering highlights "And here is the knife that cut them!" said Gimli. He bent down and pulled from a clump of grass, trampled by a heavy foot, a "Well, here is the strangest riddle we have found so far!" exclaimed Legolas. "A prisoner, bound,
"There was indeed sorcery here," said Gimli. "What was that old man doing?" "What do you think, Aragorn, of "Perhaps," said Aragorn, smiling. "There are other clues close by that you haven't thought of. I agree, the p "And how do you think our friends ended up with a free hand?" asked Gimli.
"I don't know how it happened," replied Aragorn. "Nor do I know why an Orc was carrying them off. Certainly "I don't know what frightens me more: Fangorn, or the idea of walking the long road across Rohan," said Gimli "Let's go into the forest then," said Aragorn.

Aragorn soon discovered new tracks. Near the bank of the Entwash, he came upon footprints: "At least one hobbit stopped here for a mome "Then we must go too," said Gimli. "But Fangorn doesn't appeal to me at all: we were warned about it. I've
"I don't believe the forest is evil, whatever the legends say," said Legolas. He was standing under the eaves, leaning "Well, he has no reason to be angry with me," said Gimli. "I haven't done him any harm."
"So much the better," said Legolas. "But the fact remains that it has suffered damage. Something is happening inside, or "I feel the air is stifling," said the Dwarf. "This wood is lighter than the Black Forest, but it's moldy and moth-eaten." "It's old, very old," said the Elf. "So old that I almost feel young again, as I haven't felt since my journey with
"I suppose you're capable of it," Gimli sneered. "You're a wood elf, after all, even if elves, whatever their kind, are..."

With these words, the three hunters plunged into Fangorn Forest. Legolas and Gimli left the hunt to Aragorn. There "That's good news," said Aragorn. "However, the marks are two days old. And it seems that at that time, the hobbic
"What should we do now?" asked Gimli. "We can't chase them all the way through Fangorn Fortress. We're... If that's truly all we can do They finally reached the steep summit of Treebeard's Hill and looked up at the rock face and its rudimentary steps. "Come on, let's loo The companions climbed. Aragorn brought up the rear, advancing slowly: he carefully scanned the steps and ledges. "I'm almost certain t "We took a long detour," said Legolas. "We would all have arrived here safely if we had left the Great River. But we did not wish to co And yet, here we are, well and truly trapped, said Legolas. Look!
"Look at what?" said Gimli.
There, in the trees.
Where? I don't have elf eyes.

Hush! Speak more quietly! Look! said Legolas, pointing. Over there, in the woods, on the path we came by
"I see, I see now!" hissed Gimli. "Look, Aragorn! Didn't I warn you? There's the old man." All the while, Aragorn saw a hunched figure Legolas is right, said Aragorn calmly. You can't just kill an old man like that, without warning and without him being...

At that moment, the old man quickened his pace and arrived with surprising speed at the foot of the rock face. Then, suddenly, they cou "Now!" said Gimli. "Stop him, Legolas!"
"Didn't I say I wished to speak with you?" said the old man. "Put away that bow, Elf Master!" The bow and arrows fell from Legolas's hands, and his arms hung limply at his sides.
And you, Dwarf Master, please remove your hand from the handle of your axe until I am standing! You will not need to. Gimli jumped, the

"Welcome!" called the old man as he approached. When he was a few steps away, he stopped, leaning on his staff, his head forward. "You speak like someone who knows Fangorn well," said Aragorn. "Really?"
"Not good," said the old man, "it would take up many a lifetime. But I come here from time to time."
"May we know your name, and then hear what you have to say?" asked Aragorn. "Morning passes, and as for what I wanted to say, I have sa "My name!" repeated the old man. "Haven't you guessed it yet? You've already heard it, I think. Yes, you have." The three companions re "Some might doubt the relevance of your mission," said the old man. "Fortunately, I know a little more. You..." The old man turned away

The old man was too fast for him. He sprang to his feet and leaped to the top of a large rock. There he stood, "Mithrandir!" he cried. Delighted, I repeat. Legolas! said the old man.
Everyone stared at him. His hair was as white as snow in the sun; his robe dazzling white; his eyes, beneath his brow... Aragorn finall "Gandalf," repeated the old man, as if remembering a long-forgotten word. "Yes, that was the name. I was..." He climbed down from the r "Yes, I am white now," said Gandalf. "Truly, I am Saruman, one might almost say, Saruman as he will have

"What do you wish to know?" asked Aragorn. "Everything that has happened since we parted on the bridge would be a long story." "No, I did not find them," said Gandalf. "The valleys of the Emyn Muil were shrouded in darkness, and I knew not their
"The eagle!" exclaimed Legolas. "I saw an eagle high and far away: the last time was three days ago, above the
"Yes," said Gandalf, "it was Gwaihir, the Lord of the Wind, who saved me from Orthanc. I had sent him ahead of me to watch over the riv I couldn't say. He escaped a great danger, but many others still awaited him. He resolved to set off alone for the Mor
"Not alone," said Legolas. "We think Sam was with him."
"Really?" exclaimed Gandalf, a smile on his lips and his eyes sparkling. "Really? This is new to me, but..." His companions sat down at "You haven't said all that you know or suspect, Aragorn, my friend," he said softly. "Poor Boromir! I didn't see what..."
"There is one thing you haven't changed, my dear friend," said Aragorn: "you still speak in riddles."
"What? Riddles?" asked Gandalf. "No! I was just talking to myself. It's a custom of the ancients: they choose
"Even by the standards of the Old Houses, I am no longer young," said Aragorn. "Could you open my eyes further? What shall I say then?" "Absolutely," replied Gandalf. "Twofold. And isn't it strange? Nothing we've endured lately... New doubts assail them and disrupt their "It's a pity our friends are caught in the crossfire," said Gimli. "If no land separated Isengard and Mordor, they would emerge stronge "The Winged Messenger!" cried Legolas. "I struck him with Galadriel's bow above Sarn Gebir and brought him down from the sky."
"He whom you cannot kill with arrows," said Gandalf. "You have only killed his mount. It was an act of bravery; but the Rider was "You're still talking to yourself," said Aragorn with a smile. "I don't know Treebeard. I guessed part of the double meaning." "Wait a minute!" cried Gimli. "There's one more thing I'd like to know first. Was it you, Gandalf, or Saruma?"
"You certainly didn't see me," replied Gandalf. "I suppose you saw Saruman then. Obviously, we no "Good, good!" said Gimli. "I'm glad it wasn't you."
Gandalf laughed again. "Yes, my good Dwarf," he said, "it is a comfort not to be mistaken about everything. I only know that... But the "The Ents!" exclaimed Aragorn. "So, the old legends about the inhabitants of the deep forests and the giant shepherds of the
"A legend of Rohan!" cried Legolas. "No, every Elf of the Wild Lands has sung the praises of the ancient Onodrim and of
"Ah! You ask a great deal," said Gandalf. "The little I know of its long and slow history would be enough to make a story of it." "Perhaps he also thought you were Saruman," said Gimli. "But you speak of him as if he were a friend. I think
"Dangerous!" cried Gandalf. "I too am very dangerous: more dangerous than anything you will ever meet, in What are they going to do?" a "I don't know," said Gandalf. "I don't think they know themselves. I wonder." He fell silent, his head bowed, lost in thought. The othe

"The morning is drawing to a close," he said. "Soon we'll have to leave." "Are we going to find our friends and see Treebeard?" asked Aragorn.
"No," said Gandalf. "That is not the way you should go. I spoke words of hope. But only of hope." He rose and gazed eastward, shielding "I didn't say that," replied Gandalf. "Who knows? Be patient. Go where you must go, and keep hope! To Edoras!"
"It is a long way to go for a man, young or old," said Aragorn. "I fear the battle may be over well "We shall see, we shall see," said Gandalf. "Do you want to come with me now?"
"Yes, we will go together," said Aragorn. "But I have no doubt you will go before me, if you wish." He rose.
"Isn't it true, Gandalf," said Aragorn at last, "that you could go wherever you want faster than I? And I say it too: you are n

"Yes, we will follow you together," said Legolas. "But first, Gandalf, it would be helpful to know what happened to you at
"I have already stayed too long," replied Gandalf. "Time is of the essence. But if I had a year left, I wouldn't tell you everything. S "Don't name him!" cried Gandalf. For a moment, a veil of sorrow seemed to cross his face, and he remained silent, looking
"Deep is the abyss that Durin's bridge spans, and no one has measured it," said Gimli.
"Yet there is a bottom, beyond light and knowledge," said Gandalf. "I have finally reached it, down to the very depths of the earth. We "It's been lost for a long time," said Gimli. "Many say it never existed, except in legend, but others..."
"It was built and had not been destroyed," said Gandalf. "From the deepest dungeon to the highest peak, it rose in... There, on Celebdi

Am I doomed to be your burden, friend in need, did I say?
"You were a burden," he replied, "but not anymore. You are light as a swan's feather in my talons. The sun shines brightly. Don't let m "It was indeed Lady Galadriel's order that sent me to search for you," he replied.
That is how I came to Caras Galadhon and found you, but you have recently left. I stayed there, in the past

Where are the Dúnedain now, Elessar, Elessar? Why do your kinsmen wander far away?
The time is near when the lost should make themselves known, and the Grey Company is coming from the North. But dark is the path that lies before you:
The dead watch over the road that leads to the sea. She sent this message to Legolas:
Legolas Greenleaf long under the tree
You have lived in joy. Beware of the sea! If you hear the cry of the seagull on the shore, Then your heart will never again rest in the forest.

Gandalf fell silent and closed his eyes.
"So she didn't send me any messages?" said Gimli, lowering his head.
"His words are dark," said Legolas, "and they have little importance for those who receive them." "That doesn't console me," Gimli said.
"So?" asked Legolas. "Do you want her to speak openly about your death?" Yes, if she had nothing else to say. "What is it?" asked Gandalf, opening his eyes. "Yes, I think I can guess what he meant. Forgive me, Gimli! I
"To Gimli, son of Glóin," she said, "convey the greetings of his Lady. Lock-bearer, wherever you go, my thoughts are with you." "In this joyous hour, you have returned among us, Gandalf!" cried the Dwarf, skipping and singing at the top of his lungs in the
"It won't be far to look for," said Gandalf, rising to his feet. "Come on! We've spent all the allotted time in a meeting of friends."

He put his old, tattered coat back on and took the lead. Following him, they quickly descended from the high cor "They did not return," said Legolas. "The road ahead will be long and arduous!"
"I will not walk. Time is of the essence," said Gandalf. Then, raising his head, he let out a long whistle. The sound was "There's more than one horse coming," said Aragorn.
"Certainly," said Gandalf. "We are too heavy a burden for one person."
"There are three of them," said Legolas, gazing at the plain. "Look how they run! There's Hasufel, and beside him my friend Aro
"You will never do it again," said Gandalf. "Here is Shadowfax. He is the chief of the Mearas, lords of the horses, and even Théoden." "I now understand part of last night's riddle," said Legolas, bouncing lightly onto Arod's back. "That they have
"Yes, I knew it," said the magician. "I focused my thoughts on him, commanding him to hurry; for yesterday he was far away,

Gandalf then spoke to Shadowfax, and the horse set off at a good pace, though not ahead of the others. Soon after, it... "He is now hea "There is the Chasm of Rohan," said Gandalf. "It is now almost due west of here. Isengard lies that way."
"I see a great plume of smoke," said Legolas. "What could it be?" "Battle and war!" said Gandalf. "Forward!"


The King of the Golden Hall
They continued their journey through the sunset, the slow twilight, and the encroaching night. When they stopped, the hours passed, and A biting cold settled in. Slowly, in the east, the darkness dissipated into an icy gray. Rays of red light burst forth.
"Look!" he cried, and they raised their weary eyes. Before them rose the southern mountains: Legolas gazed straight ahead, shielding hi "These courts are called Edoras," said Gandalf, "and Meduseld is this golden hall. There resides Théoden, son of Thengel, king of the M

The morning was clear and bright, and the birds were singing, when the travelers arrived at the stream. It tumbled swiftly down. At the "Look!" said Gandalf. "How beautiful are those shining eyes in the grass! In the land of Men, they are called simbelmynë, for they f "Since then, five hundred times the red leaves have fallen in Mirkwood, at my home," said Legolas, "and it seems to us nothing." But fo "This is doubtless the language of the Rohirrim," said Legolas; "for it resembles this land itself: rich and hilly by nature."
"That's how it works in the common tongue," said Aragorn, "at least according to what I've been able to transcribe."

Where are the horse and rider now? Where is the horn that was sounding?
Where are the helmet and the hauberk, and the shining hair that floats in the wind? Where is the hand on the harp string, and the glowi Where are spring, harvest time, and the tall corn?
They passed like rain on the mountain, like wind in the prairie; In the west, the days decline, buried in the shadows behind the hills. Who will collect the smoke from the burning dead wood?
Or contemplate the return of the passing years from the Sea?

Thus spoke once a forgotten poet of Rohan, evoking the tall and beautiful bearing of Eorl the Young, who came from the North; and the w "I understand your speech perfectly," he replied in the same language; "yet few foreigners manage to do so."
"King Théoden's will is that no one should cross his gates except those who know our language and are our friends," he replied.
"We are not ghosts," said Aragorn, "and your eyes do not deceive you. For it is indeed your own horses that we ride." A worried look pa "Snaketon?" asked Gandalf, fixing the guard with a piercing gaze. "Say no more! My mission is not to..."
"Yes, I will go," he replied slowly. "But what names should I bring back? And what will I say about you? You look old and the
"Well, see and speak well," said the wizard. "For I am Gandalf. I have returned. And behold! I too am..." The dark doors opened. The tr "Here are the gates before you," said the guide. "I must return to my post at the gate. Farewell! May the Lord of the Mark..." He turne "I am the guardian of the gate of Théoden," he said. "My name is Háma. I ask you to lay down your weapons before entering." Legolas the "That is Théoden's will," said Háma.
It does not seem obvious to me that the will of Théoden, son of Thengel, even if he is lord of the March, should prevail over c
"This is the house of Théoden, not of Aragorn, even though he was King of Gondor on the throne of Denethor," declared Háma, placing him "These are just empty words," said Gandalf. "Théoden's request is superfluous, but there's no point in refusing it. A
"Truly," said Aragorn. "And I would do as the master of the house commands, even if it were only a simple cottage, if I could. Whatever "Not alone!" said Gimli, stroking the blade of his axe and looking up at the guard grimly, as if he were... "Come, come!" said Gandalf.

"Well," said Gimli, "if Andúril is here to keep her company, my axe can stay here too, without shame," and he placed it down. The guard "What madness!" exclaimed Gandalf. "Prudence is one thing, but rudeness is another. I am old. If I don't..." Aragorn laughed. "Everyone "The staff in a magician's hand can be more than just an accessory testifying to his age," said Háma. He examined it carefully.

The guards then lifted the heavy bolts on the doors and slowly opened them inwards, creaking on their hinges. "Here is Eorl the Young!" said Aragorn. He then left the North to go to the battle of the Field of Celebrant.
The four companions then advanced, passing the clear wood fire that burned in the long fireplace in the middle of the hall. A silence f "I greet you," he said, "and perhaps you seek a warm welcome. But to tell the truth, your welcome here is questionable, Master."
"You are right, sir," said the pale man sitting on the steps of the platform. "It hasn't even been five days since we had "You are considered wise, my friend Wormtongue, and you are no doubt a great support to your master," replied Gandalf. "That's how it is," said Snake-Tongue. "But there is a third kind: bone-collectors, the indiscreet ones in
"The hospitality of your home has faded somewhat lately, Théoden, son of Thengel," said Gandalf. The messenger
"So, as Éomer reported, you're in league with the Witch of the Golden Wood?" asked Wormtongue. "There's no need to." Gimli took a step

In Dwimordene, in Lórien
Few are the feet of men who have trod the earth, Few mortal eyes have seen the light

It remains there, forever, long and bright. Galadriel! Galadriel! The water in your well is clear;
White is the star in your white hand; immaculate leaf and earth, without stains In Dwimordene, in Lórien
More accurate than the thoughts of mortal men.

So Gandalf sang softly, then suddenly he changed. Throwing off his tattered cloak, he rose and stopped leaning on it. In the darkness,

"Théoden, son of Thengel, will you listen to me?" said Gandalf. "Do you need any help?" He raised his staff and pointed to a high place The doors opened and a brisk draft whistled inside. The wind was blowing up the hill. "Send your guards to the foot."
"Go, Éowyn, my sister and daughter!" said the old king. "The time of fear is over."
The woman turned and slowly entered the house. Reaching the doors, she turned again and cast one last glance at the... "Now, my lord," said Gandalf, "behold your land! Breathe the fresh air again!"
From the porch, at the top of the high terrace, they could see, beyond the stream, the green fields of Rohan merging into the "It's not that dark in here," said Théoden.
"No," said Gandalf. "Age does not weigh on your shoulders as heavily as some would have you believe. Throw down your crutch." The black "My dreams have been dark lately," he said, "but I feel like a man who has woken up again. I wish..."
"Many things," said Gandalf. "But first, bring Éomer here. Am I not right to think you are holding him prisoner?" "That's true," said Théoden. "He rebelled against my orders and threatened Gríma with death in my hall."
"A man can love you and yet not love Snake-tongue or his advice," said Gandalf.
It's possible. I'll do as you ask. Call Háma. Since he's proven unreliable as a doorman, let him become

When Háma had been summoned and had departed, Gandalf led Théoden to a stone seat, then sat himself before the
"There is no time to tell you everything," said Gandalf. "Yet, if my hope is not disappointed, soon will come the time when I..." Ganda "Truly," said Gandalf in a strong, clear, and sure voice, "therein lies our hope, therein lies our greatest strength." The others also "Your fingers would better remember their former strength if they gripped the hilt of a sword," said Gandalf.
Théoden rose and put his hand to his side; but no sword hung from his belt. "Where has Gríma put it?" murmured "Take this, my lord!" said a clear voice. "He has always been at your service." Two men had gone up the stairs. "How is this possible?" asked Théoden sternly. He turned to Éomer, and the men stared at him in astonishment. "This is my work, my lord," said Háma, trembling. "I understood that Éomer was to be freed. I was so joyful that I "I will lie down at your feet, my lord," said Éomer.
For a moment of silence, Théoden remained there, watching Éomer who remained kneeling before him. Neither of them moved. "You won't take the sword?" asked Gandalf.
Théoden slowly extended his hand. As soon as his fingers grasped the handle, it seemed to the spectators that firmness and strength ret

_Arise, arise, riders of Théoden!
Ominous deeds are awakening, the east is dark. Let the horse be bridled, let the horn sound! Go Eorlingas!

The guards, believing they had been summoned, bounded up the stairs. They gazed at their lord in astonishment, then... "Westu Théoden hál!" cried Éomer. "It is a joy for us to see you return home. Never again will it be said, Gandalf, that you "Take up your sword again, Éomer, my son!" said the king. "Go, Háma, and fetch mine! Gríma keeps it. Bring it to me too." "You've already done it yourself," replied Gandalf. "Trust Éomer rather than a man of twisted mind. Get rid of
"This advice seems wise to me," said Théoden. "Let all my people prepare! As for you, my guests... Gandalf, you have said "No, my lord," said Aragorn. "There is still no rest for the weary. The men of Rohan must depart today, and..."
"That gives us hope for victory!" said Éomer.
"Hope, yes," said Gandalf. "But Isengard is powerful. And other perils are drawing ever closer. Do not wait, Th
"No, Gandalf!" said the king. "You are ignorant of your own healing gifts. It will not be so. I myself will go to war, and I will... Th

At that moment, Háma returned from the hall. Behind him, crouching between two other men, Gríma Serpent-Tongue approached. His face "You lie," said Serpenttongue. "And this sword, your master himself entrusted it to my hands." "And now he asks for it back from you," "Certainly not, my lord," said Snake-tongue. "I take care of you and yours as best I can. But don't f
"I will do it," said Théoden. "Let the food for my guests be placed on the table beside me. The army leaves today."
"My God!" cried Snake-Tongue. "This is just what I feared. That sorcerer has bewitched you. Will anyone remain to defend you?" "If it is sorcery," said Théoden, "it seems to me more beneficial than your murmurs. Your spells would have quickly reduced me to
"Have mercy, Lord!" wailed Serpent-Tongue, crawling on the ground. "Have mercy on him who is weary in your service. Do not send me away "You have my full pity," said Théoden. "And I will not send you away from my camp. I myself am going to war with my men. I beg you." Wo "No, Éomer, you don't truly understand Master Wormtongue's mind," said Gandalf, giving him a sharp look. Éomer gripped his sword. "I al

"That word comes out of your mouth too often and too easily," said Gandalf. "I'm not lying. Look, Théoden, here's a serpent! You

"Do you hear me, Wormtongue?" said Théoden. "Here is your choice: go to war with me and see in battle if you are loyal." Slowly, Wormto "Follow him!" said Théoden. "See that he does no harm to anyone, but do not injure or hinder him. Give him a hand. And if someone will One of the guards ran down the stairs. Another went to the well at the foot of the terrace and drew water into his helmet.

"Come then, my guests!" said Théoden. "Come and have a refreshment as quickly as the weather permits."
They returned to the great house. Already, below in the city, they could hear the heralds shouting and the war horns sounding. At the k "How far back does his treachery go? No one knows," said Gandalf. "He wasn't always bad. I don't doubt he was once a bad man. But when "I owe Éomer a great deal," said Théoden. "A faithful heart can have a sharp tongue." "Let us also say," added Gandalf,
"I was almost blind," said Théoden. "It is to you, my host, that I owe the most. You have arrived at just the right time. Before leavin "We shall see if I have arrived in time," said Gandalf. "But as for your present, my lord, I shall choose one that suits you."
"You have made an excellent choice," said Théoden; "and I offer it to him willingly. It is a precious gift. No one can equal Gripoil."

Men arrived, laden with armor from the king's treasury, and they clothed Aragorn and Legolas in coats of mail. "May it keep you healthy "That's quite possible," said Théoden.
The king then rose, and at once Éowyn stepped forward, carrying wine. "Ferthu Théoden hál!" she said. "Take this cup and drink." Théode "Here I am, gone, and it seems this is my last journey," said Théoden. "I have no children. My son Théodred is dead." No man spoke.
Is there no one you would name? In whom does my people place their trust? In the House of Eorl, replied Háma. But Eomer, I cannot spare him, and he would not want to stay, said the king; and he is the last of this House.
"I didn't say Éomer," replied Háma. "And he's not the last. There's Éowyn, daughter of Éomund, his sister. She's brave." "So be it," said Théoden. "Let the heralds announce to the people that Lady Éowyn will lead them!"
The king then sat upon a throne before his gates, and Éowyn knelt before him. She received from him a sword and a handsome corsair. "Th

The king then descended the stairs, Gandalf at his side. The others followed. Aragorn turned as they passed Gimli, who was walking with "A safer seat than many others, I imagine," said Legolas. "Nevertheless, Gandalf will be happy to put you back on your feet. And a Dwar "I will forget my anger for a moment, Éomer, son of Éomund," said Gimli; "but if ever you have the opportunity to see with your own eye "Thank you so much," said Gimli, delighted. "I will gladly accompany you, if Legolas, my comrade, can join us."
"So it shall be," said Éomer. "Legolas on my left, and Aragorn on my right, and none shall dare to stand before us!" "Where is Shadowfa Running through the grass, they answered. He will let no one touch him. There he goes, far away, near the ford, Gandalf whistled and ca "The gift seems already offered," said Théoden. "But listen to me, all of you! I now name my host, Gandalf Grisham, the most
"Thank you, King Théoden," said Gandalf. Then, suddenly, he threw off his grey cloak, took off his hat, and mounted his horse. "Here is the White Rider!" cried Aragorn, and all repeated these words in chorus.
"Our king and the White Rider!" they cried. "Forward, Eorlingas!"
The trumpets sounded. The horses reared and neighed. Lances clashed against shields. Then the king...


Helm's Deep

The sun was already setting in the west when they left Edoras, and its light dazzled them, bathing the rolling fields of the Rhine. The "There are many miles between us," said Legolas, staring at the horizon and shielding his eyes with his long hand. "And behind us is a

As the second day of their ride dragged on, the atmosphere grew heavy. In the afternoon, the dark clouds gathered. A weary man arrived,

While Théoden was speaking, Gandalf had moved away a little and sat alone, gazing at Isengard to the north and the setting sun. "Onward, Théoden!" he said. "Onward to Helm's Deep! Do not go to the Fords of Isen and do not linger in the valley." He spoke a word to "What does this mean?" one of the guards asked Háma.
"Gandalf Greyhame needs to hurry," replied Háma. "He's always coming and going unexpectedly." "Serpent-Tongue, if he were here, would h "That's quite true," said Háma; "but for my part, I will wait until I see Gandalf again."

"Perhaps you will be waiting a long time," said the other.

The army then left the road to the Fords of Isen and headed south. Night fell, and they continued on their way. At the gates of Helm's "We found many of our men lying dead as they fled towards us," said the scout. "We also found
"Have we seen anything of Gandalf?" asked Théoden.
Yes, my lord. Many have seen an old man dressed in white, on horseback, traversing the plains like the wind in
"Something bad will happen to Snake-tongue if Gandalf finds him," said Théoden. "My two advisors, the old and the new, me "That's enormous," said the scout. "He who steals counts each enemy twice, but I've spoken to brave men, and I
"Then let us be quick," said Éomer. "Let us drive out the enemies who are already between us and the fortress. There are caves
"Do not trust the secret paths," said the king. "Saruman has been spying on these lands for a long time. However, in this place, our

Aragorn and Legolas then set off with Éomer in their lead. They continued their journey through the dark night, slowing down as
"I greatly fear," said Éomer, "that the arrival of the king's army will soon be known to the leader of our enemies, Saruman or whoever. "He's a wonderful host and he's been following us closely," said Aragorn.
"They bring fire," said Théoden, "and they burn as they come, haystacks, cottages, and trees. It was a rich valley, with a name "If only that day had come and we could descend upon them like a storm from the mountains!" exclaimed Arago
"We don't need to fly much further," said Éomer. "Not far from here is Helm's Dyke, an ancient ditch..." "No, we are too few to defend the dike," said Théoden. "It is more than a mile long, and the breach is the "In the breach, our rearguard must hold firm if we are under pressure," Éomer said.

There was neither star nor moon when the Riders reached the breach in the Dike, where the torrent flowed and where the "The Lord of the Mark is going to Helm's Gate," replied Éomer. "I, Éomer, son of Éomund, speak."
"This is excellent news, beyond all hope," said the sentry. "Hurry! The enemy is on your heels." The army crossed the breach and halted "Perhaps we have a thousand men fit for combat on foot," said Gamling, an old man, chief of the Dike guards. "But the
"I fear he will not come now," said Éomer. "Our scouts have had no news of him, and the enemy occupies all
"I wish he had escaped," said Théoden. "He was a valiant man. In him lived again the bravery of Helm. Behind us, in the caverns of the "That's fine," said Éomer. "They burn or plunder everything that remains in the valley."
"If they come to bargain for our goods at Helm's Gate, they will pay a high price," Gamling said.

The king and his horsemen continued on their way. Before the causeway that spanned the stream, they dismounted. Éomer quickly put his m

Gimli was leaning against the parapet of the wall. Legolas, sitting higher up on the parapet, stroked his bow with his fingertips and s "That suits me better," said the dwarf, stamping his foot on the stones. "My heart races as we approach..."
"I don't doubt it," said Legolas. "But you are a dwarf, and dwarves are a strange people. I don't like this place, and I don't
"It's too dark for archery," said Gimli. "Time to sleep. Sleep! I need it like I've never known." Time passed slowly. Deep in the valle

It was past midnight. The sky was plunged into total darkness, and the heavy stillness of the air heralded the storm. Suddenly, arrows, "Come!" said Aragorn. "The time has come to draw our swords together!"
Running at full speed, they ran along the wall, climbed the steps, and entered the outer courtyard of the Rock. "Guthwinë!" cried Éomer Andúril! cried Aragorn. Andúril for the Dúnedain!
Bursting forth from the flank, they hurled themselves upon the wild men. Andúril rose and fell, wreathed in white fire. A cry arose. Di

Éomer and Aragorn paused for a moment before the gates. Thunder rumbled in the distance. Lightning still streaked across the sky. "We haven't arrived too early," said Aragorn, looking at the doors. "Their great hinges and iron bars were
"We cannot, however, remain here beyond the walls to defend them," said Éomer. "Look!" He pointed to the causeway. They turned and fled

The postern gate was closed again, the iron door locked, and stones piled inside. Once everyone was safe at
"I followed you to wake up," said Gimli; "but when I looked at the mountain people, they seemed too big for me, so I..." "I will have no easy time repaying you," said Éomer.
"There may well be opportunities before the end of the night," laughed the Dwarf. "But I'm happy. Ever since I left the "Two!" said Gimli, tapping his axe. He had returned to his place on the wall.
"Two?" said Legolas. "I did better, even though I now have to look for my used arrows; I have no more arrows. I..."

The sky was clearing rapidly, and the waning moon shone brightly. But this light offered little hope to the Cava. The men of Rohan were "Ouch!" he cried. "The Orcs are behind the wall. Ouch! Come on, Legolas! There's enough for both of us. Khazad ai-menu!"

Gamling the Old, from the top of Helm's Deep, heard the dwarf's powerful voice rise above the din. "The Orcs are in the gorge!" Their a "This rat den must be wiped out !" cried Gamling. "They say dwarves are cunning with stone. Master,
"We don't hew stone with battle axes, nor with our fingernails," said Gimli. "But I will help you as best I can." They gathered the sma "It'll be drier up there," said Gimli. "Come on, Gamling, let's see what it's like on the wall!"
He climbed up and found Legolas near Aragorn and Éomer. The elf was sharpening his long knife. The assault had a lull, then... "Twenty- "Good!" said Legolas. "But I now count two dozen. It took a lot of work with the knife here."

Éomer and Aragorn leaned, exhausted, on their swords. In the distance, to the left, the din and tumult of the battle on the Rock. Arago "Yet, dawn is still the hope of men," said Aragorn.
But these creatures of Isengard, these half-orcs and goblin-men spawned by the infamous cunning of Saruman, will not tremble. I hear th "Yet many are those who shout in the Dunland tongue," said Gamling. "I know that tongue. It is an ancient tongue."
"Nevertheless, the day will bring me hope," said Aragorn. "Is it not said that no enemy ever took Helm's Deep, if... Thus speak the min "So let us defend her, and hope!" said Aragorn.

While they were speaking, a trumpet blast sounded. Then, a crash, a flash of flames and smoke. The waters of the Stream of
"By Saruman's malice!" cried Aragorn. "They slipped back into the conduit while we were speaking, and a wide staircase led from the Dep "Let all who can now be safe inside!" cried Aragorn. "Come back!"
Aragorn turned and quickly climbed the stairs; but, exhausted, he stumbled. At once, his enemies leaped upon him. The Orcs "Things are going badly, my friends," he said, wiping the sweat from his forehead with his arm.
"It's quite serious," said Legolas, "but not yet hopeless, as long as you're with us. Where is Gimli?"
"I don't know," said Aragorn. "I last saw him fighting on the ground behind the wall, but the enemy separated us. Alas! That's bad news "He is sturdy and strong," said Aragorn. "Let's hope he manages to get back to the caverns. There he would be safe for a while." "That's what I hope," said Legolas. "But I wish he had come this way. I wanted to tell Master Gimli that my reci
"If he manages to get back to the caverns, he'll surpass your count again," Aragorn laughed. "I've never seen an axe wielded..." "I must go and fetch some arrows," said Legolas. "May this night end and may I have better light."

Aragorn then entered the citadel. There, to his great dismay, he learned that Éomer had not reached Helm's Deep.
"No, he didn't come to the Rock," said a man from the Westfold. "I last saw him gathering men around him." Aragorn strode across the in "What's the news, Aragorn?" he asked.
The wall of Deeping is taken, lord, and all the defenses are destroyed; but many have managed to escape to the Rock. Is Éomer there? No, my lord. But many of your men have taken refuge in the abyss; and some say Éomer was among them. In the abyss, more than we. They s "I am tormented in this prison," said Théoden. "If I could have planted my spear, riding at the head of my men on the
"Here at least, you are protected in the most impregnable fortress in the Mark," said Aragorn. "We have more hope of... It is said that "Do not judge Gandalf's advice until it is all over, my lord," said Aragorn.
"The end will not be long," said the king. "But I will not end up here, trapped like an old badger. Snow Mane, "I will ride with you," said Aragorn.
After taking his leave, he returned to the ramparts and walked around them, encouraging the men and offering his help wherever needed.

Finally, Aragorn stood above the great gates, impervious to the enemy arrows. His gaze drifted away, and he saw the eastern sky. The Or "The king may stay or come as he pleases," said Aragorn.
"What are you doing here?" they replied. "Why are you looking outside? Do you want to see the size of our army? We are "I looked outside to see the dawn," said Aragorn.
"And what about dawn?" they scoffed. "We are the Uruk-hai: we do not cease fighting, neither for night nor for day, nor for the "No one knows what the new day holds," said Aragorn. "Go, before evil turns against you."
"Come down or we'll shoot you from the wall!" they shouted. "This isn't a negotiation. You have no say in the matter."
"I have this more to say," replied Aragorn. "No enemy has yet taken Helm's Deep. Go, or none of you will be safe." Such power and majes

All who heard this sound trembled. Many Orcs threw themselves to the ground, face down, and covered their eyes. "Helm! Helm!" cried the And at that cry, the king arrived. His horse was white as snow, his shield golden, and his spear long. To his right stood Aragorn. Forw

King Théoden left Helm's Gate and marched toward the great dike. There, the company halted. Light enveloped them. The landscape had cha

"Here comes the White Rider!" cried Aragorn. "Gandalf has returned!"
Mithrandir, Mithrandir! said Legolas. It is sorcery, indeed! Come! I would like to contemplate this forest before the... The armies of


The road to Isengard

And so, in the clear morning, King Théoden and Gandalf the White Rider found themselves on the green grass by the stream of the G. Sudd "You beat my score by one point," replied Legolas. "But I don't hold it against you for the game, I'm so glad to see you. Welcome, Éome "Greetings, Lord of the March!" said Éomer. "The dark night has lifted and day has dawned. But this day brings strange news..." "Unexpected?" said Gandalf. "I said I would come back to meet you here."
But you have neither specified the time nor announced the manner of your arrival. Strange help you bring. You are a powerful magician. "This is not sorcery, but a much more ancient power," said Gandalf, "a power that walked the earth before the dawn of humanity."

Before iron was found or the tree was cut down, when I was young, the mountain was under the moon; Before the ring was made, or before the misfortune occurred, he roamed the forests long ago.

"And what is the answer to your riddle?" asked Théoden.
"If you want to learn that, you should come with me to Isengard," replied Gandalf. "To Isengard?" they exclaimed.
"Yes," said Gandalf. "I will return to Isengard, and those who wish may accompany me. There, we may perhaps see some... But there are n "Nevertheless, I am going to Isengard," said Gandalf. "I will not stay there long. My journey now takes me east. Find me
"No!" said Théoden. "In the twilight before dawn, I doubted, but we shall not part now. I will come
"I wish to speak to Saruman as soon as possible," said Gandalf. "Since he has done you a great wrong, it would be just that you be..." "Let all who are to accompany me rest now," said Gandalf. "We will travel at nightfall. That is preferable." The king then chose unharm "I'll take care of it while you rest," said Aragorn.

The king then returned to Hornburg Chasm and fell into such a peaceful sleep that he had not known such a sleep for years. No Orc survi "Now help yourselves to undo the evil you have joined," said Erkenbrand. "Then you will swear never again." The men of Dunland were ast "Let's leave the Orcs alone," said Gandalf. "The next morning may bring new advice."

In the afternoon, the king's retinue prepared to depart. The burial work had only just begun; and Théoden mourned the dead. The sun was "It's hot in here," Legolas said to Gandalf. "I feel a great anger. Can't you feel the air throb in your ears?" "Yes," said Gandalf. "What became of the wretched Orcs?" asked Legolas. "That, I believe, no one will ever know," said Gandalf.

They rode in silence for a while; but Legolas kept glancing all around, and would have remembered
"These are the strangest trees I have ever seen," he said; "and I have seen many oaks grow from acorn to stump. No, no!" said Gimli. "L "Not all those who walk on two legs," said Legolas. "On that point, I think you're mistaken. It's the Orcs who
"So this is the most perilous wood in Middle-earth," said Gimli. "I should be grateful to them for the role they have "And I would give gold to be excused," said Legolas; "and double that to be let out, if I had gone astray!"
"You saw nothing, so I forgive your joke," said Gimli. "But you talk like a madman. Do you think these halls are... And, Legolas, when "No, you don't understand," said Gimli. "No dwarf could remain unmoved by such beauty. No dwarf of D's race.
"You touch me, Gimli," said Legolas. "I've never heard you speak like this. You almost make me regret not having seen these g "It wouldn't be the way back I would choose," said Gimli. "But I will endure Fangorn, if I have your promise to return."
"I promise you," said Legolas. "But alas! We must leave the cave and the wood for a time: look! We are coming about fifteen leagues, ac "I don't know for sure myself," replied the magician. "I was there last night at dusk, but many..."

Finally, the company passed through the trees and found that it had reached the bottom of the valley, where the road coming from Helm's "There are eyes!" he exclaimed. "Eyes watching us from the shadows of the branches! I've never seen eyes like these!"

The others, surprised by his cry, stopped and turned back; but Legolas resumed his journey.
"No, no!" cried Gimli. "Do as you please in your madness, but first let me get down from this horse! I won't..." As he spoke, three str "You need no weapons," said Gandalf. "They are only shepherds. They are not enemies, and they care nothing for you." And so it was; for "Shepherds!" asked Théoden. "Where are their flocks? What are they, Gandalf? For it is clear that for you, at least,
"They are the shepherds of the trees," replied Gandalf. "Has it been so long since you listened to stories by the treetops?" The king r "You should rejoice, King Théoden," said Gandalf. "For not only is the life of Men now threatened, but also that of
"But I should also be sad," said Théoden. "For, whatever the course of the war, might it not be so that..."
"It is possible," said Gandalf. "Sauron's evil cannot be entirely cured, nor erased. But we are doomed to such joys."

The company then left the Coomb and the woods to take the road to the Fords. Legolas reluctantly followed. The sun had set. "The scavengers were very active on the battlefield," said Éomer.
They were now riding at a leisurely pace, and night was falling on the surrounding plains. The moon, slow and waxing, illuminated the r "This place has become very sad," said Éomer. "What evil has befallen the river? Saruman has destroyed so many beautiful things." "Alas!" exclaimed Théoden. "Must we pass this way, where scavengers devour so many good Riders of the March?"
"This is our way," said Gandalf. "The fall of your men is terrible; but you will see that at least the mountain wolves did not harm the "Look!" said Gandalf. "Friends have worked here."
And they saw that in the middle of the islets stood a mound, surrounded by stones and adorned with many spears. "Here lie all the men of the Mark who fell near here," said Gandalf.
"Let them rest here!" said Éomer. "And when their spears are rotten and rusted, may their mound long stand."
"Is this also your work, Gandalf, my friend?" asked Théoden. "You have accomplished much in one evening and one night!"
With the help of Gripoil and others, said Gandalf, I rode swiftly and far. But here, near the burial mound, I will say this for you: An With that, the company bid farewell to the island and the mound, crossed the river, and climbed the other bank. Then, relieved to have "What do you think, Gandalf?" asked Aragorn. "It looks as if the whole Valley of the Wizard is burning."
"There's always a mist over this valley these days," said Éomer, "but I've never seen anything like this. These are "Perhaps so," said Gandalf. "Tomorrow we shall know what he is doing. Let us rest a little, if we can."
They camped by the River Isen; the riverbed was still silent and deserted. Some dozed for a moment. But late into the night... "Stay wh A fog enveloped them. Above them, a few stars still twinkled faintly; but on either side rose... To the south, on the Hornburg, in the

The king and his retinue did not sleep that night; but they saw and heard nothing else strange, except for a... At dawn, they prepared At the foot of the mountain, in the Valley of the Wizard, stood from time immemorial this ancient place that Men called. Such was the f Gandalf then rode towards the great pillar of the Hand and passed it. As he went by, the Riders watched in astonishment. Finally, Ganda
For a moment, Théoden, Éomer, and all his men gazed at them in astonishment. Amidst the ruins of Isengard, this sight... "Welcome, my l "Without a doubt!" exclaimed Gandalf, laughing. "And was it Saruman who ordered you to keep his damaged gates and..."
"No, sir, he hasn't the slightest idea," Merry replied gravely. "He's been very busy. Our orders come from Sylveba. And your companions "You speak for me, Gimli," laughed Legolas. "I would, however, like to know how they obtained this wine."
"One thing you lacked on the hunt was intelligence," said Pippin, opening one eye. "You find us sitting on a cham "Well deserved?" said Gimli. "I can't believe it!"
The Knights laughed. "There is no doubt that we are witnessing the reunion of dear friends," said Théoden. "So these are the "Hobbits, please, lord," said Pippin.
"Hobbits?" asked Théoden. "Your language has changed strangely; but the name doesn't seem so strange. Hobbits!" No Merry bowed; and Pip "My people came from the North a long time ago," said Théoden. "But I will not deceive you: we know no history of
"That's quite possible, my lord," said Merry.
"First of all," said Théoden, "I hadn't heard that they exhaled smoke from their mouths."
"That's not surprising," replied Merry, "for it's an art we haven't practiced for more than a few generations."
"You don't realize the danger, Théoden," interrupted Gandalf. "These hobbits, if you encourage them with excessive patience... Over the "Is Orthanc then left unattended?" asked Gandalf.
"There's the water," said Merry. "But Quickbeam and others are watching it. All those posts and pillars in the plain aren't the "Yes, a large grey Ent is there," said Legolas, "but its arms are at its sides and it remains motionless like a tree."

"It's past noon," said Gandalf, "and we haven't eaten since this morning anyway. Still, I wish to see Treebeard at the..." "He left a m "I will come with you," said Théoden. "Farewell, my hobbits! May we meet again at my house! There you will sit." The hobbits bowed deep


Wrecks and debris

Gandalf and the king's company rode off, heading east to circle the ruined walls of Isengard. "Well, well! The hunt is over, and we fin Now that the adults have gone to discuss important matters, said Legolas, perhaps the hunters will be able to find the rep
"And there are also many things we want to know about you," Merry said. "We've learned a few little things about you."
"Everything comes to those who wait," said Legolas. "We were the hunters, and it's up to you to explain yourselves first. Or else," sai "Then you'll have it," said Pippin. "Would you like to take it here, or more comfortably in what remains of the guardhouse of
"Less than an eye!" said Gimli. "But I will not enter any orc house, nor will I touch their meat or anything else they eat."
"We wouldn't ask you," said Merry. "We've had enough Orcs for a lifetime. But there was plenty of other stuff. And pipe-weed?" asked Gi "No, I don't think so," laughed Merry. "But that's another story, which can wait until after lunch." "Well, let's go have lunch then!"

The hobbits led the way; they passed under the arch and arrived at a wide door on the left, at the top of a staircase.
"I lit a small fire," said Pippin. "It cheered us up in the fog. There were few bundles of sticks, and most of them... Aragorn and his "Don't be picky about the meal, Master Gimli," said Merry. "It's not orca food, but food for the
"Absolutely," replied Gimli. "The score has dropped considerably."
The three soon sat down to eat; and the two hobbits, without hesitation, sat down again. "We must keep our guests company."
"You are exquisitely courteous this morning," exclaimed Legolas, laughing. "But perhaps if we hadn't arrived, you... Perhaps; and why n "It doesn't seem to have done you any harm," said Aragorn. "You look perfectly well."
"Yes, indeed," said Gimli, observing them over his cup. "Your hair is twice as thick and curlier as when..."
"No," said Merry. "But the Ents do nothing but drink, and drinking is not enough to satisfy one's meager appetite. Treebeard's brews... "You drank from the Ents' waters, didn't you?" asked Legolas. "Ah, then I think Gimli is right. Strange songs
"There are many strange stories told about that land," said Aragorn. "I have never been there. Come now, tell me more about it," "Ents," said Pippin, "Ents are... well, Ents are all different in one way. But their eyes, their eyes are really..."
"Come now!" said Gimli. "We're starting the story in the middle. I'd like it told to me in the right order, in c
"You'll have it, if we have time," said Merry. "But first, if you've finished eating, fill your pipes and light-" He took out a small l "That's it!" exclaimed Merry. "My dear Gimli, it's Longbottom Leaf!" The Hornblower markings were clearly visible on the
"That would be the case," said Gimli, "if I had a pipe to go with it. Alas, I lost mine in Moria, or before. Isn't there a "No, I'm afraid so," said Merry. "We haven't found any, not even here in the guardrooms. Saruman kept this dish
"Just a moment!" said Pippin. Slipping his hand into his jacket pocket, he pulled out a small, soft purse hanging from a... "Well, I'm "We will come with you," said Aragorn.
They went outside and sat down on the stones piled up in front of the door. They could now see far into the valley; the mists
"Let's rest for a moment!" said Aragorn. "Let's sit by the edge of the precipice and talk, as Gandalf says, while... Look!" said Pippin "He has never been absent," said Aragorn. "I am Aragorn and Dúnadan myself, and I belong to both Gondor and the North.

They smoked in silence for a moment, and the sun flooded them with its slanting rays, filtering through the rising white clouds.
"Well, my story begins with me waking up in the middle of the night, and finding myself tied up in an orc camp," said Pippin. "Let's se "March 5th, according to the Shire calendar," said Aragorn. Pippin did some calculations on his fingers. "There are only nine days left "Here are some treasures you've dropped," said Aragorn. "You'll be glad to find them again." He loosened his belt.
"Well!" said Merry. "I didn't expect to see them again! I marked some orcs with my own, but Uglúk took them down with us."
"And here is your brooch too, Pippin," said Aragorn. "I have kept it very carefully, for it is a very precious object." "I know," said "Nothing else," replied Aragorn. "He who cannot part with a treasure in times of need is a prisoner of his chains. You
"Cutting the ties at your wrists was a good job!" said Gimli. "You were lucky; but you seized it with both hands-" "And ask us a nice riddle," said Legolas. "I was wondering if you had wings!"
"Unfortunately not," replied Pippin. "But you didn't know Grishnákh." He shuddered and fell silent, leaving Merry to tell. "All this ab "Yes, whichever side wins, his prospects are bleak," Merry said. "Things started going wrong for him right from the start."
"We've seen the old villain, or so Gandalf implies," said Gimli. "At the edge of the forest." "When was that?" asked Pippin. "Five nights ago," said Aragorn.
"Let's see," said Merry. "Five nights ago... We're getting to a part of the story you don't know. We met S. If Saruman had heard about

Although Isengard is strong and hard, cold as stone and bare as bone,
We're going, we're going, we're going to war, to cut the stone and break down the door!

There was much more. A large part of the piece was instrumental, like brass and percussion music. That was it. We descended along the l

At the beginning of the night, we crept along a long ravine to the upper end of the Wizard's Valley. Treebeard and a few other Ents cre "I thought of him too," said Aragorn. "We dealt with many of those half-orcs at Helm's Deep. He seems to be..."
"Well, of all kinds, there must have been at least ten thousand of them," said Merry. "It took them an hour to cross the bridge. But, a "No," said Aragorn. "He once lived up to his reputation. His knowledge was profound, his thinking subtle, and his hands of a
"The Ents are safe and sound," said Pippin. "It seems he managed to get around them once, but never again. In any case, when the Ents h "Tired?" he said. "Tired? No, not tired, but stiff. I need a good swig of Entwash. We've been working hard. We were just wondering whe
"Hoom! Gandalf!" said Treebeard. "I am delighted by your arrival. Wood and water, cattle and stone, I have mastery over them; my "Treebeard," said Gandalf, "I need your help. You have done much, but I need more. I have about ten thousand orcs." Then the two of the "But Gandalf," I cried, "where were you? And have you seen the others?"
"Wherever I've been, I've returned," he replied with Gandalf's characteristic nonchalance. "Yes, I've seen some of you again." But Tree "The Huorns will help us," said Treebeard. Then he left, and we didn't see him again until this morning.

The night was deep. Lying on a pile of stones, we could see nothing beyond. Mist or shadows enveloped us. It must have been around midn "We saw a cloud of smoke and steam coming from the south last night, when we arrived at the mouth of the N
"Not him!" exclaimed Pippin. He must have been choking and wasn't laughing anymore. Yesterday morning, the water had flooded all the ho A silence fell. Gimli filled his pipe. "There's something that intrigues me," he said, lighting it with his flint and amadou.
"Ah yes, I'd forgotten about him," said Pippin. "He only arrived this morning. We had just lit the fire and taken the small...
"I just came to check on you, lads," he said, "and to give you the news. The Huorns are back. Everything's going well." He had barely u "No one else would have dared cross these open lands, infested with foul orcs," he said, "so I was sent. My... I caught the sidelong gl "Let me go, let me go!" cried Snake-Tongue. "I know the way."
"You knew the way, I don't doubt it," said Treebeard. "But things have changed a bit here. Go and see!"
He released Serpent-Tongue and limped away under the arch, us at his heels, until he entered the arena and then "Let me go!" he moaned. "Let me go! My messages are useless now."
"That's right," said Treebeard. "But you have only two choices: stay with me until Gandalf and your..." The man shuddered at the mentio "The water isn't deep," said Treebeard. "It's dirty, but it won't hurt you, Master Snaketongue. Go on, then." With these words, the unf "Well, he went in," he said when he returned. I saw him crawling up the steps like a disgusted rat. There are still q
"He was," said Aragorn; "and also Saruman's spy and servant in Rohan. Fate did not spare him. The vision of the
"Yes, I don't think Treebeard sent him to Orthanc out of kindness," said Merry. "He seemed delighted, in a rather sinister way." "We need enough to feed twenty-five men," said the Ents. So it's clear that someone had carefully counted...
"And what about drinks?" I asked the Ents.
"There is water from the Isen," they said, "and it is quite sufficient for both Ents and Men." But I hope the Ents will have "We understand everything perfectly now," Gimli said.
Anything but one thing, said Aragorn: a leaf from the Southern Quarter of Isengard. The more I think about it, the more it intrigues me "Yes," said Pippin. "That was the harvest of 1417, that is to say, last year's; no, the year before, of course, now."
"Well, whatever evil was being plotted, it is now over, I hope; or else it is beyond our reach for the
"I wonder what he's doing," said Merry. "The afternoon is already well advanced. Let's go see! You can enter Isengard now."


The Voice of Saruman

They crossed the ruined tunnel and stopped on a pile of stones, contemplating the dark rock of Orthanc and its many "There's Gandalf, and Théoden and his men!" said Legolas. "Let's go and meet them!"
"Walk carefully!" said Merry. "There are some unstable flagstones that could tip over and send you tumbling into a hole if you..."

They slowly followed what remained of the road from the gates to Orthanc, for the flagstones were cracked and covered "Well, Treebeard and I had some interesting discussions and worked out a few plans," he said. "We were all able to..." "Yes," said Merry. "But our discussions only just began and ended in smoke. Nevertheless, we are less hostile to "Really?" asked Gandalf. "Well, no. I have one last task to perform before I leave: to pay a final visit to
"I will come," said Gimli. "I want to see him and know if he really looks like you."
"And how will you know, Master Dwarf?" asked Gandalf. "Saruman might mistake me for you, if it served his purposes."

"What's the danger?" asked Pippin. "Is he going to shoot at us and make fire come out of the windows? Or can he... "That's the most likely last option, if you arrive at his door with a clear conscience," said Gandalf. "But no one..."

They then arrived at the foot of Orthanc. The stone was black and shone as if wet. Its many faces had areas. On the east side, at the c "I too will go," said the king. "I am old and fear no more danger. I wish to speak to the enemy who has done me so much harm."
"As you wish," said Gandalf. "Aragorn will come with me. Let the others wait for us at the foot of the stairs. They will see..."
"No!" said Gimli. "Legolas and I wish to see more closely. We are the only ones here representing our people. We want to see more close "Let's go!" said Gandalf, and with these words he went up the steps, followed by Théoden.
The Rohan riders, uneasy on their horses on either side of the staircase, raised their eyes towards the great tower, cr
"Just over a kilometer to the gate!" grumbled Pippin. "If only I could sneak back to the guard post." Gandalf stood before the gate of Théoden began. "I know that voice," he said, "and I curse the day I first heard it."
"Go and fetch Saruman, since you have become his servant, Gríma Wormtongue!" said Gandalf. "And don't make us lose our..." The window c "Well?" she asked then in a soft, questioning tone. "Why disturb my rest? Won't you leave me any peace?" They looked up in astonishment "Like, and yet different," Gimli murmured.
"But come then," said the gentle voice. "I know at least two of you by name. I know Gandalf too well to..." Théoden opened his mouth as "Peace!" said Saruman. For a moment, his voice lost its gentleness, a glimmer flickered in his eyes, then vanished. "I do not address m Lord, hear me! he said. We now feel the peril of which we were warned. Have we ridden towards victory?
"If we speak of poisonous tongues, what shall we say of yours, young serpent?" Saruman exclaimed, and the glint of his anger... But, my "We shall have peace," Théoden finally said in a hoarse, labored voice. Several Riders cried out with joy. The Riders looked up at Théo "Gallows and ravens!" he hissed, and they shuddered at this horrible change. "Sensible! What is the house? But you, Gandalf! It is for "Saruman, Saruman!" exclaimed Gandalf, still laughing. "Saruman, you've chosen the wrong path. You should have been the king's jester!"

"Shall I go downstairs?" he scoffed. "Would an unarmed man go downstairs to talk to brigands outside? I can hear you very well." "Traitors are always suspicious," replied Gandalf wearily. "But have no fear. I wish neither to kill you nor..."
"That suits me perfectly," Saruman scoffed. "Just like Gandalf the Grey: so condescending and so amiable."
"The reasons for your departure are visible from your windows," replied Gandalf. "Others will come to mind. Your servants..." Saruman's "Come back, Saruman!" Gandalf commanded imperiously. To everyone's astonishment, Saruman turned around and, as if dragged
"I didn't give you permission to leave," said Gandalf sternly. "I haven't finished. You've gone mad, Saruman, and yet..." He raised his "That scoundrel!" cried Éomer. But Gandalf remained impassive. "No, it wasn't Saruman who threw him," he said; "nor even on
"Perhaps the shot was bad because he couldn't decide who he hated more, you or Saruman," said Aragorn.
"It's possible," said Gandalf. "Their friendship will bring them little comfort: they will tear each other apart with words. But the ca "This is the end," said Gandalf. "Let's go."

They turned their backs on the gates of Orthanc and dismounted. The riders cheered the king joyfully and saluted Gandalf. The sun "Well, that's done," said Gandalf. "Now I must find Treebeard and tell him what happened." "Surely he'll have guessed?" said Merry. "Co "Unlikely," replied Gandalf, although they had reached a very close agreement. "But I had reasons to try; what if Sauron doesn't conque Me? Nothing! said Gandalf. I won't do anything to him. I don't wish to dominate him. What will become of him? I couldn't say. A shrill "It would seem that Saruman thinks so too," said Gandalf. "Let them be!"

They then returned to the ruins of the gate. No sooner had they crossed the arch than, emerging from the shadows of the piled stones "Here are three of my companions, Treebeard," said Gandalf. "I have told you about them, but you have not yet seen them." The old Ent o "And it's still the case," said Legolas. "But not to the point that we who live here tire of seeing new trees." Treebeard's eyes shone "I will come, if fortune smiles upon me," said Legolas. "I have made a deal with my friend: if all goes well, we will go together." "Any elf who accompanies you will be welcome," said Treebeard.
"The friend I speak of is not an elf," said Legolas; "I speak of Gimli, son of Glóin." Gimli bowed deeply, and the "Hoom, hm! Ah," said "Oh! Come now!" said Treebeard. "That's a better story! Well, well, things will turn out as they please."
"Yes, we must leave, and leave now," said Gandalf. "I'm afraid I'll have to take away your guards. But you will." "Perhaps so," said Treebeard. "But I'll miss them. We became friends so quickly that I wonder if I won't

_Ents, born of the earth, old as the mountains, long-distance walkers, drinking water; and hungry like hunters, the Hobbit children, the laughing folk, the little folk,

They will remain friends as long as the leaves renew themselves. Farewell! But if you have news from your pleasant land, in
"Yes!" said Merry and Pippin in unison, and they turned away hastily. Treebeard looked at them, then fell silent. "So Saruman isn't lea "No," said Gandalf. "But you did not plot to cover the whole world with your trees and stifle every other form of life."
"Certainly not! The Ents will take care of it," said Treebeard. "Saruman will not cross the rock without my permission. The Ents "Good!" said Gandalf. "That's what I hoped for. I can now devote myself to other matters with a clearer mind."
"Let the Ents do it!" said Treebeard. "We'll search the valley from top to bottom and examine every pebble. Trees


The Palantír

The sun was setting behind the long western slope of the mountains when Gandalf and his companions, along with the king and his Ents, s "The Ents pay attention to every little detail!" said Gandalf.
They continued on their way, and evening fell further into the valley.

"Are we going far tonight, Gandalf?" Merry asked after a moment. "I don't know what it's like to have this little bundle of joy." "So, you heard that?" asked Gandalf. "Don't be offended! Be grateful that his words are no longer addressed to you." "Thank you!" said
"Nothing or a double portion, whichever you prefer!" said Merry. "I'm afraid I haven't looked beyond my li. So, if you want to understa

The road wound slowly through the valley. Sometimes farther away, sometimes closer, the Isen flowed in its rocky bed. At night, they fi "What's going on?" asked Merry. "Are you lying on an anthill?"
"No," said Pippin, "but I'm not comfortable. I wonder how long it's been since I slept in a bed?"
Merry yawned. "Do the math on your fingers!" he said. "But you must know how long it's been since we left the... Ah, that!" said Pippin "Well, Rivendell then," said Merry. "But I could sleep anywhere tonight."
"You were lucky, Merry," said Pippin softly after a long silence. "You were with Gandalf." So what? Have you received any news or information from him?
Yes, a lot. More than usual. But you heard everything, or almost everything: you were right there, and we weren't talking about anythin "Oh yes, that's right!" said Merry, waking up a little and beginning to wonder what was bothering his companion. "He has a great "Well, if Gandalf has changed, it's because he's closer than ever, that's all," argued Pippin. "This glass ball, my
"Hello!" said Merry. "So that's what's bothering you? Listen, Pippin, my boy, don't forget Gildor's saying-the one that says, 'But for "Sleep!" said Merry. "You'll get enough information sooner or later. My dear Pippin, no Took was ever more curious. Very well! What har "Well, what more can I say?" said Merry. "I'm sorry, Pippin, but you really must wait until tomorrow morning. I'll be too."

Pippin said nothing more. He remained motionless, but sleep was still far away; and the soft breath of Merry, who had fallen asleep... Fi "You idiot!" grumbled Pippin. "You're going to get yourself into serious trouble. Put it back quickly!" But his knees were shaking, and

"So he's the thief!" exclaimed Gandalf. He hastily threw his cloak over the globe. "But you, Pippin!" He took Pippin's hand and leaned "This is not for you, Saruman!" he cried in a shrill, expressionless voice, recoiling from Gandalf. "I will take the Peregrin!" he said The hobbit relaxed and fell back, gripping the wizard's hand. "Gandalf!" he cried. "Gandalf! Forgive me!"
"Forgive you?" asked the magician. "Tell me first what you did!"
"I picked up the ball and looked at it," Pippin stammered. "And I saw things that frightened me. I wanted to leave, but I "That will not be enough," said Gandalf sternly. "What did you see, and what did you say?"
Pippin closed his eyes and shivered, but said nothing. Everyone stared at him in silence, except Merry, who looked away. But then, in a "So you're back? Why did you neglect to show up for so long?"
I didn't answer. He said, "Who are you?" I still didn't answer, but it hurt me terribly; and then he... Suddenly, he seemed to see me a "Look at me!" said Gandalf.

Pippin looked up at him. The wizard held his gaze for a moment in silence. Then his face softened and a smile appeared.

"Very well!" he said. "Say no more! You have suffered nothing. There is no lie in your eyes, as I feared." He gently lifted Pippin and "How is the hobbit, Pippin?" asked Aragorn.
"I think everything will be all right now," replied Gandalf. "He wasn't detained for long, and hobbits have an ability to
"Certainly, it is dangerous, but not for everyone," said Aragorn. "There is one who can rightfully claim it. For this is assured." Gand "Receive it, Lord!" he said, "as a pledge for other things that will be returned to you. But if I may give you some advice regarding it "When have I been hasty or imprudent, I who have waited and prepared for so many long years?" asked Aragorn.
"Not yet. Don't stumble at the end of the road," replied Gandalf. "But at least keep the secret. You, and all those who "Yes, there is no doubt," said Aragorn. "Finally, we know the link between Isengard and Mordor, and how it works." "That happens often," said Gandalf. "But this time we were strangely lucky. Perhaps that hobbit saved me from
"The hour has come, I believe," said Aragorn.
"Not yet," said Gandalf. "We have a brief moment of doubt which we must exploit. The Enemy, clearly, thought that
"I will keep Éomer and ten riders," said the king. "They will leave with me at dawn. The others may accompany Aragorn." "As you wish," said Gandalf. "But hasten to take refuge behind the hills, at Helm's Deep!"

At that moment, a shadow enveloped them. The moonlight seemed to vanish abruptly. Several Riders cried out and stood up, stiff as stone "Nazgûl!" he cried. "Messenger of Mordor! The storm is coming! The Nazgûl have crossed the river! Forward! Forward!" He rushed forward,
The great horse shook its head. Its flowing tail quivered in the moonlight. Then it leaped forward, bounding far away, and di

"A good, restful night!" Merry said to Aragorn. "Some people have incredible luck." He didn't want to sleep and wanted to... "If you had lifted the stone of Orthanc first, and not he, what would have happened today?" asked Aragorn. "You could have

Above the plains, Shadowfax flew without being asked or guided. Less than an hour had passed when Pippin was recovering. He was hot, bu "I didn't know you rode bareback, Gandalf," he said. "You have neither saddle nor bridle!"
"I do not ride in the Elven way, except on Shadowfax," said Gandalf. "But Shadowfax has no harness. One does not ride Shadowfax." "How fast is he going?" asked Pippin. "Fast as the wind, but with a very fluid gait. And as his steps are..."
"He's now running as fast as the swiftest horse could gallop," replied Gandalf, "but that's not fast for..." Pippin remained silent for Great ships and great kings, three times three.
What brought them from this devastated land? Across the raging sea? Seven stars and seven stones and a white tree.


What do you say, Gandalf? asked Pippin.
"I was reviewing some of the Rhymes of Knowledge," replied the wizard. "The Hobbits, I suppose, have forgotten them."
"No, not all of them," said Pippin. "And we have many others that might not interest you. But I never have any about the palantíri of t And what are they?
The name meant "that which gazes into the distance." The Orthanc stone was one such stone. So it wasn't made, not made-Pippin hesitated "No," said Gandalf. "Not by Saruman. That is beyond his skill, and Sauron's as well. The palantíri came from beyond the West."
"What did men of old use use them for?" asked Pippin, delighted and amazed to get answers to so many questions.
"To see far and converse by thought," said Gandalf. Thus they long guarded and united the kingdom of Gondor. Each palantír answered the "If only I had known all this before!" exclaimed Pippin. "I had no idea what I was doing."
"Oh yes, you did," said Gandalf. "You knew you were acting wrongly and foolishly; and you kept telling yourself so, without listening t "That's true," said Pippin. "If the seven stones were laid out before me now, I would close my eyes and put the m
"Perfect!" said Gandalf. "That's what I hoped for." "But I'd like to know..." began Pippin.
"Mercy!" cried Gandalf. "If giving you information will satisfy your curiosity, I'll let the rest go."
"The names of all the stars, all living things, and the entire history of Middle-earth, the Sky, and the Seas Separated
"It was a winged Black Rider, a Nazgûl," said Gandalf. "He could have taken you to the Dark Tower." "But he wasn't after me, was he?" s "Of course not," said Gandalf. "It's two hundred leagues, or more, as the crow flies between Barad-dûr and Orthanc, and even a... But I "Look!" said Gandalf. "The valleys of Westfold open before us. We resume our journey eastward. The dark shadow over there
"I thought you were going to stop at Helm's Deep!" said Pippin. "Where are you going then?" To Minas Tirith, before the seas of war sur Oh! And how far away is it?
"Leagues and leagues," replied Gandalf. "Three times the distance between King Théoden's dwellings, and they are more than... We will r The domestication of Sméagol
"Master, we are in a critical situation, and you are not mistaken," said Sam Gamgee. He stood there, looking dejected. It was the third

The hobbits now stood on the edge of a high, bare, desolate cliff, its base shrouded in mist; and behind them...
"What a nightmare!" exclaimed Sam. "It's the only place, in all the countries we've ever heard of , that we absolutely don't want to go "Yes, I can feel it," said Frodo, but he didn't move, his eyes fixed on the dark line and the flickering flame. "Mordor! Wall!"
"Or another, and another, and another," Sam murmured. "Or perhaps no day at all. We were wrong."
"I wonder," said Frodo. "It is my destiny, I believe, to go to that Shadow over there, so that a way may be found. But the... Only this

They turned around and descended into a rocky hollow. The setting sun was caught in the clouds, and night fell quickly. "Have you seen them again, Mr. Frodo?" asked Sam, as they sat stiff and shivering, nibbling on ga
"No," said Frodo. "I have heard nothing, nor seen anything, for two nights."
"Me neither," said Sam. "Grrr! Those eyes made my head spin! But maybe we've finally lost him, that miserable sneaky bastard." "I hope you never need it," said Frodo. "I don't know how he followed us; but it may be that he..."
"I hope that's how it will be," said Sam. "I wish we could get rid of him for good!"
"Me too," said Frodo; "but he's not my main concern. I wish we could leave these hills! I hate them."

But the day dragged on, and when the afternoon gave way to evening, they continued climbing the ridge without having found anything. So "There's no other way but to go down this ravine, Sam," said Frodo. "Let's see where it leads!"
"Quite a fall, I imagine," said Sam.
The crevasse was longer and deeper than it had appeared. A little further down, they discovered some gnarled trees and
"Look!" he said. "We must have come down from a great distance, or the cliff has collapsed. It's much lower here than it was." Sam knel "That would be quite a leap," said Frodo. "About... well..." He stood there for a moment, gauging it with his eyes... "about eighteen a "That's enough!" said Sam. "Ugh! I hate looking down from a height! But looking is better than climbing."

"Nevertheless," said Frodo, "I think we could climb up here; and I think we ought to try. See, the rock is all... The outer slope was no "And if we want to go down, we'd better do it right away. It gets dark early. I think a storm is coming."
The misty haze from the mountains to the east was fading into a deeper darkness that was already spreading westward. A rumble "Very well!" said Sam darkly. "But I'll go first."
"You?" asked Frodo. "What made you change your mind about climbing?"
I haven't changed my mind. But it makes sense: you have to put the lowest one in, because it's the most likely to slip. Before Frodo co "No, no! Sam, you old fool!" cried Frodo. "You'll surely kill yourself throwing yourself off like that without even looking where you'r "I don't understand how you can be so sure," said Sam. "But come on! You can't see the bottom with this light. And if you
"I suppose I'll have to go back up," said Frodo.
"Easy to say," objected Sam. "It's better to wait until tomorrow morning, when it's lighter."
"No! Not if I can avoid it," said Frodo with a sudden and strange vehemence. "I regret every hour, every minute. I..." Clinging to the

Darkness, accelerating visibly, swept in from the east and engulfed the sky. A sharp, crashing thunder sounded. Sam heard it and crawle He received no answer. He realized he was trembling all over, but he caught his breath and shouted again: Very well, very well! I'm her Frodo called in a weak voice. He wasn't very far away, though. He had slipped without falling and had suddenly found himself...
"Come back! Come back!" he heard Sam's voice coming from the darkness above him.
"I can't," he said. "I can't see anything. I can't find any foothold. I can't move yet."
"What can I do, Mr. Frodo? What can I do?" cried Sam, leaning dangerously over. Why couldn't his master help? Another crash of thunder "I'm coming down to join you!" shouted Sam, unable to say how he hoped to help her.
"No, no! Wait!" cried Frodo, his voice louder this time. "I'll be better soon. I already feel better. Wait!"
"Rope!" Sam cried, talking to himself at full speed, carried away by his excitement and relief. "Well, if I don't..." "Stop chattering away!" cried Frodo, having recovered sufficiently from his emotions to feel both amusement and annoyance.
"Yes, Mr. Frodo, it was in my bag and everything. I carried it for hundreds of kilometers and I had it completely... So get to work and Sam quickly unbuckled his bag and rummaged through it. At the bottom, he did indeed find a spool of the silky-grey rope made by Sam. He "I should have drowned or been completely swept away by the waves," said Frodo. "How lucky you were with that rope!"
"I should have thought of that sooner," said Sam. "You might remember that they used to put the ropes in the boats, at the
"What a pity I didn't think to take another length of rope," said Frodo; "but I left the Company in a Sam paid slowly, measuring with h "Who would have thought it!" exclaimed Frodo.
"Ah! Who would do that?" said Sam. "Elves are a wonderful people. It looks a bit thin, but it's strong; and soft as butter." "Thirty ells!" said Frodo, thinking. "I believe that will be enough. If the storm passes before nightfall, I will try it." "The rain has almost stopped," said Sam; "but don't take any more risks in the twilight, Mr. Frodo! And I can't get over it."
"And I told myself that I wouldn't stay a moment longer than necessary, stuck on this ledge, with the eyes of the Land of Darkness." Wi

"It's good to be able to see again," said Frodo, taking a deep breath. "You know, for a moment I thought I'd lost my sight? Because of "It looks like it has silvery reflections in the dark," said Sam. "I'd never noticed it before, though I don't remember Frodo thinking "Very well," said Sam gravely. "If necessary, let's go!" He took the rope and secured it firmly to the nearest tree stump.

However, things didn't go as badly as he had feared. The rope seemed to give him confidence, even though it took Frodo a little longer "Well!" he cried. "We did it! We escaped from the Emyn Muil! Now what happens?" But Sam didn't answer; he stared at the cliff. "Good Go "If you can think of a way to use the rope both at once and bring it back with us, then you can give it to me, you fool," Sam scratched "So the rope must have broken - frayed on the edge of the rock, I suppose," said Frodo.
"I'm sure of it!" said Sam, his voice even more hurt. He bent down and examined the ends. "Nope. Not a single strand!" "Then I fear that this is the crux of the matter," said Frodo.
Sam shook his head without replying. He was running the rope through his fingers, lost in thought. "Do as you wish, Mr. Frodo," he said "She arrived safely," said Frodo, "and that's the main thing. But now we must think about what to do next. Night will soon fall." "They're comforting, aren't they?" said Sam, looking up. "They're elven, in a way. And the moon
"Yes," said Frodo; "but he will not be satisfied for several days. I do not think we will attempt the marshes by the light of..." At th "We'd better try heading back south along the cliff, I think," said Sam. "We might find a c
"I suppose so," said Frodo. "I'm tired and I don't think I can climb much longer among the stones tonight."

The climb didn't seem any easier at the foot of the steep cliffs of Emyn Muil. Sam found no nook or cranny where...
"Well!" said Frodo, getting up and pulling his cloak tighter around himself. "Get some sleep, Sam, and take my blanket." Sam looked ove

At the edge of a precipice, steep and almost smooth under the pale moonlight, a small black shape moved, its limbs... "Do you think he can see us?" asked Sam.
"I don't know," said Frodo in a low voice, "but I don't believe it. Even to kind eyes, it is difficult to distinguish "Then why is he getting off right here?" asked Sam.
"Easy now, Sam!" said Frodo. "He can smell us, perhaps. And he has hearing as keen as the Elves', I think. I believe that
"Well, I've had enough of him," said Sam. "He's come around far too often, and I'm going to have a word with him, if I can. Anyway "Watch out!" whispered Frodo, coming up behind him. "Don't frighten him! He's much more dangerous than he looks."
The black, creeping shape had now covered three-quarters of the descent, about fifteen meters above the base
"Ouch, sss! Careful, my precious! Less haste, less speed. We mustn't risk our lives, mustn't we, my precious?" He lowered his voice, an "It's like he didn't know we were here, right?" Sam murmured. "And what's his 'Precious'? He means..."
"Hsh!" Frodo hissed. He's approaching now, close enough to hear a whisper.
Gollum had indeed stopped again, and his large head, on his thin neck, swayed from side to side as if listening. Finally, he was only a "Let go of me! Gollum," he said. "This is Sting. You've seen him before, a long time ago. Let go of me, or you'll feel it! I'll..." Gol "Well, what are we going to do with him?" asked Sam. "Tie him up so he can't attack us from behind anymore, I'll tell you..."
"But that would kill us, kill us," groaned Gollum. "Cruel little hobbits. Bind us in these cold, hard lands and leave us "No," said Frodo. "If we kill him, we must kill him on the spot. But we cannot do that, in the current state of affairs."
"Oh really?" said Sam, rubbing his shoulder. "Well, he did it on purpose, and he intends to do it again, I'm sure of it. We'll see." "I dare say it," said Frodo. "But what he intends to do is another matter." He paused, thoughtful. Gollum remained. Then Frodo seemed t What a shame Bilbo didn't knock that vile creature unconscious when he had the chance!
Pity? It was pity that held him back. Pity and mercy: not to strike unnecessarily. I feel no pity for Gollum. He deserves to die. He deserves to die! I dare say it. Many live and deserve to die. And some die when they deserved it.
"Very well," he replied aloud, lowering his sword. "But I am still afraid. And yet, as you see, I do not touch Sam stared at his master, who seemed to be talking to someone invisible. Gollum raised his head.

"Yes, wretched as we are, my precious," he moaned. "What misery! The hobbits won't kill us, kind hobbits." "No, we won't," said Frodo. "But we won't let you go either. You are full of wickedness and malice."
"Yes, yes, indeed," said Gollum, straightening up. "Nice hobbits! We'll go with them. We'll find them some paths." Sam glared at him an "Ouch! Shh!" said Gollum, covering his ears, as if such frankness, and the act of openly uttering the names
"So you went there?" Frodo insisted. "And you're irresistibly drawn there, aren't you?"
"Yes. Yes. No!" roared Gollum. "Once, by accident, it was... wasn't it... precious? Yes, by accident. But we're not going back there." "He will not leave or fall asleep on your command, Sméagol," said Frodo. "But if you truly wish to be free of him, Gollum sat up and lo "Perhaps we will find it, if you come with us," said Frodo. "No, no, never! He has lost his Precious," said Gollum.
"Get up!" said Frodo.
Gollum stood up and stepped back against the cliff.
"Well then!" said Frodo. "Can you find an easier way by day or by night? We are tired; but if you choose
"These lights hurt our eyes, it's true!" complained Gollum. "Not under the White Face, not yet. It will disappear..." "Then sit down," said Frodo, "and don't move!"
The hobbits sat on either side of him, their backs against the stone wall, their legs drawn up. There was no need to hear each other. F Sam took out the rope. "Where were you going in these cold and hostile lands, Mr. Gollum?" he growled. "We wondered the same thing." Go "We just need something to hold him down," said Frodo. "We want him to walk, so there's no point in tying him up." He stood over Gollum "It hurts, it hurts!" hissed Gollum. "It's freezing, it bites! The Elves twisted it, cursed be them!"
"No, I won't take it from you," said Frodo, "unless-" he paused thoughtfully-"unless there's a promise"
"We'll swear to do whatever he wants, yes, yes," said Gollum, continuing to writhe and clutch at his ankle. "That'll make us..." "Swear?" said Frodo.
"Sméagol!" Gollum shouted suddenly and clearly, opening his eyes wide and fixing Frodo with a strange look. "Sméagol!" Frodo sat up, an One Ring to rule them all and in the darkness bind them.
Sméagol, would you keep your promise? She will hold you back. But she is more treacherous than you. She could twist your words. Gollum "And what would you swear?" asked Frodo.
"Be very, very wise," said Gollum. Then, crawling at Frodo's feet, he prostrated himself before him, murmuring in a hoarse voice, "No! "I promise, yes I promise!" said Gollum. "I will serve the master of the Precious. Good master, good Sméagol, Gollum, Gollum!" "So take Sam reluctantly obeyed. Immediately, Gollum stood up and began to prance about, like a beaten dog that its master has just petted. "Rig "Yes, yes!" Gollum agreed, skipping along. "Onward! There's only one way between North and South. I've found it!" He took a few steps b In the dead of night, beneath a sky of bright, clear stars, they set off. Gollum led them back north for a while.


The crossing of the marshes

Gollum moved quickly, his head and neck thrust forward, often using his hands as much as his feet. Frodo and S
"There!" he cried. "There's a passage inside, yes. Let's follow it-out there, way over there." He pointed south and east. Gollum looked

The cold, hard lands, they bite our hands,
They're gnawing at our feet. The rocks and stones are like old bones. Everything is meat-free. But the stream and the pool are damp and cool. So nice for the feet! And now, we wish -
Ha! Ha! What do we wish for? he said, glancing sideways at the hobbits. We'll tell you, he croaked. He had it Alive without breath; cold as death;
Never thirsty, always drinking;
Clad in chainmail, without ever rattling. Drowns on dry land. think of an island as a mountain;
Think of a fountain as a breath of air. So elegant, so perfect!
What a pleasure to meet you! We just want to catch a fish, So juicy and sweet!

These words only heightened Sam's anxiety, already acute since he had realized that his master was going to take Gollum. They stumbled "Day is approaching," he murmured, as if day were a force capable of hearing and surprising him. "Sméagol will stay here."
"We would be happy to see the sun," said Frodo, "but we will stay here: we are too tired to go any further."
"You are not wise to rejoice in the Yellow Face," said Gollum. "He will unmask you. Wise and reasonable hobbits remain with Sméag."

The three of them settled down to rest at the foot of the ravine's rock face. It was barely more than a man's height.
"We need to get some food," said Frodo. "Are you hungry, Sméagol? We don't have much to share, but we..." At the word "hungry," a green "No, we have no fish," said Frodo. "We only have this"-he held up a lembas cake-"and water, if water is available."
"Yes, yes, delicious water," said Gollum. "Drink it, drink it, while you still can! But what do they have here, my precious?" Frodo tor "Ouch! No!" he cried. "You're trying to strangle poor Sméagol. Dust and ashes, he can't eat that. He
"I'm sorry," said Frodo; "but I'm afraid I can't help you. I think this food would do you good, if you

The hobbits chewed their lembas in silence. Sam thought it was much better, in a way, than it had been in a long time: "Listen!" Sam whispered to Frodo, not too quietly: he didn't care whether Gollum heard him or not. "We need to get some sleep; m
"Perhaps you're right, Sam," said Frodo frankly. "He's changed, that's for sure, but I don't yet know exactly how." Frodo was so exhaus

When he woke up, the sky was dark, not brighter, but darker than at breakfast time. Sam jumped out of bed. Fo "Poor fellow!" he said with a touch of remorse. "Where has he gone now?"
"Not far, not far!" said a voice above him. He looked up and saw the silhouette of the large head and ears "What are you doing here?" Sam exclaimed, his suspicions returning as soon as he saw that figure.
"Sméagol is hungry," said Gollum. "Come back quickly."
"Come back now!" Sam shouted. "Hello! Come back!" But Gollum had disappeared.

Frodo woke to Sam's shout and sat up, rubbing his eyes. "Hello!" he said. "Are you all right? What time is it?" "I don't know," said Sam. "After sunset, I suppose. And he left. He says he's hungry."
"Don't worry!" said Frodo. "There's nothing to be done. But he'll come back, you'll see. The promise will hold for a while longer." And "About the food," Sam said. "How long is this going to take? And once it's finished, what are we going to do with this bread of
"I don't know how long it will take us to... to finish," said Frodo. "We've been terribly delayed in the..." Sam nodded silently. He to The next stage of their journey was much like the previous one. As they advanced, the ravine flattened out and the slope... In the free
On either side and in front, vast marshes and peat bogs stretched as far as the eye could see, extending south and east into the countr "What should we do now, Sméagol?" asked Frodo. "Should we cross these foul-smelling marshes?"
"Useless, absolutely useless," said Gollum. "Not if the hobbits want to reach the Dark Mountains and go see him at the most..."

Day was already breaking, on a gloomy, windless morning, and the marshes were surrounded by heavy banks. No sun shone. Frodo seemed the "Not a bird!" said Sam sadly.
"No, no birds," said Gollum. "Pretty birds!" He licked his teeth. "No birds here. There are snakes, worms,

Thus passed the third day of their journey with Gollum. Before the shadows of evening were even fully present in the marshes, they adva "Come, Mr. Frodo!" said Sam. "Don't look at them! Gollum forbids it. Let's follow him and get out of this cursed place."
"Very well," said Frodo, as if waking from a dream. "I'm coming. Go!"
Resuming his journey at full speed, Sam stumbled, his foot catching on an old root or a clump of grass. He fell. Gollum laughed. "The M "Who are they? What are they?" asked Sam, shivering, turning to look at Frodo, who was now behind him.
"I don't know," said Frodo dreamily. "But I saw them too. In the ponds, when the candles were lit."
"Yes, yes," said Gollum. "All dead, all rotten. Elves, Men, and Orcs. The Dead Marshes. There was a great battle, but that was ages ago "Who knows? Sméagol doesn't know," replied Gollum. "You can't reach them, you can't touch them. We tried once... yes." Sam looked at hi "Yes, yes," said Gollum. "But slowly, very slowly. Very carefully! Otherwise, the hobbits will descend to join the dead and all

He crept to the right, searching for a path around the pond. They followed him closely, ducking, often using their hands. They finally "Let's go!" he said. "Good hobbits! Brave hobbits! Very, very tired, of course; we all are, my dears. But we
"What is it?" groaned Sam, misinterpreting the signs. "Why sniff? The smell is so unbearable that
"Yes, yes, and Sam stinks!" replied Gollum. "Poor Sméagol can smell it, but good Sméagol puts up with it. It helps the kind master." He resumed his march, but his discomfort worsened, and from time to time he would straighten to his full height, craning his neck towar "Specters!" he moaned. "Winged specters! The Precious is their master. They see everything, absolutely everything. Nothing can..."
From that moment on, Sam thought he perceived a new change in Gollum. He was more obsequious and sought to appear friendly. In fact, wi

When day finally broke, the hobbits were surprised to see how close the menacing mountains had come. As long as that gray glow persiste

Too exhausted to continue, they looked for a place to rest. They sat for a while, silent, in the shade of a tree. The day passed slowly "Sméagol promised it," said the first thought.
"Yes, yes, my precious," was the reply, "we promised: to save our Precious, never to let him go. But he's going towards L" "I don't know. There's nothing I can do about it. The master has taken care of it. Sméagol promised to help the master."
"Yes, yes, to help the master: the master of the Precious. But if we were masters, then we could help ourselves. But Sméagol said he wo "But the Precious One holds the promise," objected Sméagol's voice.
"Then take him," said the other, "and let's hold him ourselves! Then we'll be masters, Gollum! Make the other hobbit crawl, the mecha! "Oh no, not if it doesn't please us. It's a Baggins, my precious, yes, a Baggins. A Baggins stole it. He found it. No, not that Baggins Yes, all the Bagginses. All the peoples who possess the Precious. We must have it! But He will see, He will know. He will take it from He sees. He knows. He heard us making foolish promises-against His orders, yes. We must take him. The Specters are not for Him!
No, my love. Look, my precious one: if we have it, then we can escape, even from Him, eh? Perhaps we'll become... But there are two of "No, no! Not that way!" moaned Sméagol.
"Yes! We want it! We want it!"
Each time the second thought spoke, Gollum's long hand slowly advanced, seeking to claw at Frodo, p

Sam remained motionless, fascinated by the debate, observing Gollum's every move out of the corner of his eye. For his simple mind, the "What time is it?" he asked in a sleepy voice.
Gollum let out a long hiss through his teeth. He straightened for a moment, tense and menacing, then collapsed, falling.
"It's high time!" thought Sam. "It's also time for us to part ways." Yet, he wondered if Gollum wasn't, at present... Strangely, Frodo "Come!" he said. "You have guided us well and faithfully. This is the final step. Lead us to the Gate, and I will ask you not to..." "To the Gate, eh?" squeaked Gollum, looking surprised and frightened. "To the Gate," said the master! Yes, he said it. And good old Smé "Go on, keep going!" said Sam. "Let's finish this!"

At dusk, they hurried out of the pit and slowly made their way across the desolate land. About an hour after midnight, fear gripped the "Three times!" he groaned. "Three times is a threat. They can smell us here, they can smell the Precious. The Precious is their master.


The Black Gate is closed

Before dawn the next day, their journey to Mordor was over. The marshes and the desert were behind them. Before them lay the dark range Day broke, and the pale sun blinked on the desolate peaks of Ered Lithui. Suddenly, the sound of trumpets in the throat of
"Well, here we are!" said Sam. "There's the Gate, and I don't think we'll ever go any further. My God, if the Boss..." "I suppose it's pointless to ask 'Where do we go now?' We can't go any further, unless..."
"No, no!" said Gollum. "It's useless. We can't go any further. Sméagol said so. He said: we'll go to the Gate, and we "Then why on earth did you bring us here?" asked Sam, having no desire to be fair or reasonable.
"The master said so. The master said: Lead us to the Gate. So good Sméagol obeyed. The master said so, wise master."

"Yes," said Frodo. His face was dark and determined, but resolute. He was dirty, haggard, and weary, but he did not "No, no, master!" groaned Gollum, clawing at him in despair. "It's no use! It's no use! Don't bring him the
"I have been ordered to go to Mordor, and so I shall go," said Frodo. "If there is only one way, I must take it. Which will

Sam said nothing. Frodo's gaze was enough for him; he knew his words were useless. And after all, he had never seen Gollum, however, wh "Another solution!" said Frodo dubiously, looking at Gollum questioningly.
Yes! Absolutely! There was indeed another way. Sméagol found it. Let's see if it still exists! You've never mentioned it before. No. The Master asked nothing. He said nothing of his intentions. He didn't tell poor Sméagol. He simply said: "Sméa

Sam frowned. If he could have pierced Gollum with his gaze, he would have. Doubt assailed him. On the surface, Gollum
"And it's fortunate that neither of those two old scoundrels knows what the master has in mind," he thought. "If Frodo didn't immediate "Sméagol," he said, "I trust you once again. It seems indeed that I have no choice, and that my destiny is to..."
"Yes, yes, master!" said Gollum. "A terrible danger! Sméagol's bones trembled at the thought. But he did not flee. He
"I wasn't talking about the danger we all share," said Frodo. "I was talking about a danger that threatens you alone. You've made a mis "Let's go, let's go, let's go," said Gollum. "We've never been that way, but they say the road leads for a hundred leagues, all the way "No!" said Frodo. "But do not stray from your path. What about the third fork?"
"Oh yes, oh yes, there is a third way," said Gollum. "It's the road on the left." And immediately it began to climb, and climb, "You see, you see? What will you see?"
"The old fortress, very old, very horrible now. We used to hear stories from the South, when Sméagol was young, he "Tales from the South," Gollum continued, "about tall men with shining eyes, their houses like hills of
"This is Minas Ithil, which Isildur, son of Elendil, had built," said Frodo. "It was Isildur who cut off the Enemy's finger." "Yes, he only has four on the Black Hand, but that's enough," said Gollum, shuddering. "And he hated the city of Isildur." "What doesn't he hate?" asked Frodo. "But what does the Tower of the Moon have to do with us?"
Well, master, there it is, it was there, and it still is: the high tower, the white houses, and the wall; but it is not
"But how will that help us?" asked Sam. "The enemy surely knows all about these mountains, and this road will be guarded by..." "Oh no, it's not empty!" murmured Gollum. "It looks empty, but it isn't, oh no! Terrible things live there. O
"So that's your advice," said Sam, "that we should take another long walk south, to find ourselves in the
"No, no, indeed," said Gollum. "The Hobbits must see, must try to understand. He does not expect an attack of this kind."
"You seem to know a lot about what He does and thinks," Sam said. "Have you spoken to Him recently? Or do you just hang out with Him?" "Not a nice hobbit, not a sensible one," said Gollum, glaring at Sam and turning to Frodo. "Sméagol has spoken to the
"Exactly!" said Sam, undeterred. "So, we need to go knock on their door and ask them if we are..."
"Don't joke about that," hissed Gollum. "It's not funny, oh no! Not funny at all. It's madness to try to go to... What have you found?" Gollum crouched down and his voice fell back to a whisper. "A little path that climbs up the mountain: then a staircase, a staircase... "I don't like it at all," said Sam. "It seems too easy, at least from what he says. If that passage still exists
"Isn't it guarded?" asked Frodo sternly. "And have you escaped from the darkness, Sméagol? Didn't you please..."
"That's a lie!" hissed Gollum, and an evil glint shone in his eyes at the mention of Aragorn's name. "He lied to me." Frodo felt a stra But the name of Aragorn had plunged Gollum into a sullen mood. He looked wounded, like the suspected liar who, for once, "Isn't that ri "Yes, yes, perhaps. There is no safe place in this land," said Gollum sulkily. "No safe place. But the master must... His name was Ciri

The day stretched on. A profound silence fell over the small gray hollow where they lay, so close to the borders of the land of fear. N "No, perhaps not," said Frodo. "But their mounts could see. And those winged creatures they ride on..." The feeling of dread faded, but

A new fear gripped them. They heard singing and raucous cries. At first, it seemed distant, but the noise grew louder. Gollum slowly ro "Other Men are heading towards Mordor," he said in a low voice. "Dark faces. We have never seen Men like
"Were there any oliphants?" asked Sam, forgetting his fear in his eagerness to hear news of strange places. "No, not oliphants. What are oliphants?" asked Gollum.
Sam stood up, his hands behind his back (as he always did when reciting poetry), and began: Gray as a mouse, As big as a house.
Snake nose
I make the earth tremble, while I trample the grass; The trees creak as I pass. With horns in my mouth
I walk in the South, big ears flapping. Beyond the count of years, I go around in circles. Never lie down on the ground, not even to die.
I am Oliphant.
The greatest of all, immense, old and tall.
If you ever met me, you would never forget me. If you never do it,
You won't believe I'm being sincere;

But I am an old Oliphant, and I never lie.

"There," said Sam after he had finished reciting, "it's a nursery rhyme we have in the Shire. Absurd perhaps, perhaps not. But
"No, no oliphants," repeated Gollum. "Sméagol has never heard of them. He doesn't want to see them. He doesn't want them to exist." Fro "Good master, wise master, kind master!" cried Gollum, delighted, patting Frodo's knees. "Good master! Rest well."


With herbs and rabbit stew

During the few remaining hours of daylight, they rested, slipping into the shade as the sun moved, until the shadow of the "Come and get some more soon," he said, licking his lips. "Good water flows in streams to the Great River."

Dusk was deep when they finally set off, gliding along the western edge of the valley and disappearing like ghosts. For miles, the red The rising light revealed to them a land that was already less arid and dilapidated. The mountains still rose menacingly above
The day passed slowly. Lying in the heart of the moor, they counted the hours that stretched on, endless and without change. As soon as

So they entered the northern reaches of that land which Men once called Ithilien, a beautiful land of forest. Day was breaking, and the "Let's find a place to lie down," he said. "No lower. Higher for me."

A little further on, above the lake, they discovered a carpet of deep brown ferns, dating from the previous year. Beyond it, Sam had gi "Hello Gollum!" said Sam. "Where are you going? Hunting? Well, listen to me, you old snout, you don't like our food, and I
"Yes, perhaps, yes," said Gollum. "Sméagol always helps, if they ask him-if they ask him nicely." "Exactly!" said Sam. "I'm asking. And if that's not enough, I beg you."

Gollum had disappeared. He had been gone for some time, and Frodo, after swallowing a few mouthfuls of lembas, sank down. Gollum return "Sméagol is always helpful," he said. "He brought rabbits, lovely rabbits. But the master fell asleep, and Sam, however, had no objecti "Gollum," he said, "I have another task for you. Go fill these pots with water and bring them back!"
"Yes, Sméagol will fetch some water," said Gollum. "But why does the hobbit need all that water? He's drunk, he's..."
"Never mind," said Sam. "If you don't guess, you'll soon find out. And the sooner you fetch the water, the sooner you'll have..." While "What am I not supposed to do?" asked Sam, surprised.
"Don't make those nasty red tongues!" hissed Gollum. "Fire! Fire! It's dangerous, yes, it's dangerous. It burns,
"I don't think so," said Sam. "I don't see why it would work if we don't cover them with liquid to suffocate them."
"Simmer the rabbits!" yelled Gollum, dismayed. "To waste all that fine meat Sméagol saved for you, you poor, hungry Sméagol!"
"Now, now!" said Sam. "Everyone has their own way. Our bread chokes you, and raw rabbit chokes me. If you give me one, it's..." Gollum "Gollum!" he called softly. "Never two without three. I need some herbs." Gollum's head appeared above the fire
"No!" said Gollum. "Smeagol is not happy. And Smeagol doesn't like leaves that smell bad. He doesn't eat grass or ra
"Sméagol is going to be in serious trouble when the water boils if he doesn't obey!" snarled Sam. "Sam's going to stick his head in it, "Sméagol won't come, oh no, my precious, not this time!" hissed Gollum. "He's afraid, he's very tired, and that hobbit doesn't "Potatoes," said Sam. "The Big Boss's favorite treat, and excellent food for an empty stomach. But you won't find any."
"Yes, yes, we could. Waste good fish, burn it. Give me fish _now_, and keep the disgusting fries." "Oh, you're desperate," said Sam. "Go to sleep!"

Finally, he had to find what he desired himself; but he did not have to go far, remaining within sight of the end. When he thought ever "Hey Sam!" he said. "Aren't you resting? Is something wrong? What time is it?"
"About two hours after sunrise," said Sam, "around eight-thirty according to Shire clocks, perhaps." But Frodo yawned and stretched. "Y "A gift from Sméagol," said Sam: "two young rabbits; I imagine Gollum already misses them. But there's nothing else for the

Sam and his master were sitting at the edge of the ferns, eating their stew straight from the pots, sharing the food. "Phew! Gollum!" S "Well, I suppose he's gone to get something for himself. We'll finish this," said Sam.
"And then you must sleep a little," said Frodo.
"Don't fall asleep while I doze, Mr. Frodo. I'm not very reassured about him. There's still a lot of..."

They had finished, and Sam headed towards the stream to rinse his equipment. As he got up to return, he threw a
"This isn't right! I never would have thought it would show like this!" he grumbled, and started to turn back. Suddenly, he noticed tha "You heard a whistling sound, and what sounded like a reply?" he asked. "A few minutes ago. I hope it wasn't..."
"Hush!" whispered Frodo. "I thought I heard voices."

The two hobbits tied their small bags together, put them on ready to fly, then slipped deeper into the thickets. There was no doubt abo "There! That's where the smoke was coming from!" he said. "It'll be very close. In the fern, no doubt. We'll catch him like a rabbit ca "Yes, and what she knows!" said a second voice.
Suddenly, four men emerged from the ferns, coming from different directions. As flight and concealment were no longer possible, if thei "We didn't find what we were looking for," said one of them. "But what did we find?"
"Not orcs," said another, dropping the hilt of his sword, which he had gripped upon seeing the glint of Dard in his hand. "Elves?" asked a third, dubiously.
"No! Not Elves," said the fourth, the tallest, who seemed to be the leader among them. "Elves no longer walk in Ithi"
"Which means we aren't, I suppose," said Sam. "Thank you very much. And when you've finished talking about us..." The big green man lau "But we are neither," said Frodo. "And we are travelers, whatever Captain Faramir may say."
"Hurry up and introduce yourself and tell us about your mission," said Faramir. "We have work to do, and it's not the "The third one?"
Yes, that sneaky guy we saw with his nose in the pond over there. He looked malevolent. An orc spy, no doubt, or one of...
"I don't know where he is," said Frodo. "He's just a companion we met by chance on our journey, and I'm not responsible for Boromir!" e "Boromir, son of Lord Denethor?" asked Faramir, and a strangely stern look crossed his face. "You have come. Do you know the enigmatic

Look for the broken sword.
He resides in Imladris.

"These words are indeed known," Faramir said in astonishment. "The fact that you know them too is a sign of
"Aragorn, whom I have named, is the bearer of the Broken Sword," said Frodo. "And we are the Hobbits spoken of in the nursery rhyme." "I see that," Faramir said thoughtfully. "Or I see that it might be the case. And what is the Bane of Isildur?"
"That is hidden," replied Frodo. "It will no doubt be revealed in due time."
"We need to learn more," said Faramir, "and find out what brings you so far east, into the shadow of over there..." He pointed "Farewell!" said Frodo, bowing deeply. "Whatever you may think, I am a friend to all the enemies of the One Enemy."
"Hobbits are courteous people, whatever anyone else may think," said Faramir. "Goodbye!"

The hobbits sat down again, but they said nothing of their thoughts or doubts. Nearby, in the dappled shade of the laurels, after a mom "We still have nearly ten leagues to go to the eastern bank of the Anduin," said Mablung, "and we rarely venture that far."
"Damn the Southerners!" cried Damrod. "It is said that long ago, relations existed between Gondor and the royals
"But we will not sit idly by and let Him do as He pleases," said Mablung. "Those damned Southerners are coming up the hills!"

Their conversation faded into an attentive silence. Everything seemed still and watchful. Sam, crouching at the edge of the fern thicke "Where has that damned Gollum gone?" thought Sam, slipping back into the shadows. "He's likely to end up like an Orc." He awoke, thinki "They look like a hundred blacksmiths working together," Sam said to Frodo. "They're exactly where I wanted them."

But the noise was getting closer. "They're coming!" cried Damrod. "Look! Southerners have escaped the trap and are fleeing the road." S To his utter astonishment, terror and a lasting joy seized Sam, who saw an immense form emerge from the trees and rush down. The immens

Sam took a deep breath. "It was an Oliphant!" he exclaimed. "So, there are Oliphants, and I saw one!"
"Rest while you can," said Mablung. "But the captain will return, if he is unharmed; and as soon as he returns, we will set off." "Leave quietly if you must!" said Sam. "No need to wake me. I've been walking all night." Mablung laughed. "I don't think the Captain w


The window to the west

It seemed to Sam that he had only dozed for a few minutes when he awoke and found it was late afternoon. Sam crept stealthily out of th "No, not by choice," replied Frodo. "It does not belong to me. It does not belong to any mortal, great or small; but if... Why then, an For Aragorn is descended in a direct line, from father to father, from the son of Isildur Elendil himself. And the sword he carries was "Perhaps," he said. "But such a significant claim would have to be made and irrefutable proof provided if this Arago Boromir were ever "So!" he said. "You're telling me to mind my own business, go home, and leave you alone. Boromir will say..."

The image of Boromir's attack flashed back to him with striking clarity, and Frodo hesitated for a moment. Far Faramir's gaze smiled da "I would be truly grieved," said Frodo. Then, catching sight of Faramir's gaze, he hesitated. "Dead?" he said. "Do you mean
"I wouldn't even trick an orc with a lie," said Faramir.
"How did he die, and how do you know? Since you say that no member of the Company had reached the city. As for the circumstances of his But he was alive and well when we parted ways. And he's still alive, to my knowledge. Of course, the world
"Many indeed," said Faramir, "and treason is not the least of them."

Sam was growing increasingly impatient and irritable during the conversation. Those last words were the final straw.
"Please excuse me, Mr. Frodo," he said, "but this has gone on long enough. He has no right to speak to you like this. After all..." "Listen, Captain!" He planted himself squarely in front of Faramir, hands on his hips, with an air of addressing a young hobbit. "Patience!" said Faramir, without anger. "Do not speak before your master, whose mind surpasses your own. And I need no one." Sam sat d "You remember well, and like someone who truly saw him," said Faramir. "Then perhaps you can see him in your mind's eye: Five days befo

"Alas!" exclaimed Frodo. "It was indeed Boromir, as I knew him. For the golden belt had been given to him in Lothlór." Faramir examined "I have nothing more to add," replied Frodo. "Your tale, however, gives me a bad feeling. It was not, I believe-" "No, it was not so," "But how could such a thing have happened?" asked Frodo. "For no ship could have crossed the rocky hills."
"I don't know," Faramir replied. "But where did the boat come from?"
"From Lothlórien," said Frodo. "In three boats of this kind, we sailed down the Anduin to the falls. They were equally..." "You have crossed the Hidden Land," said Faramir, "but it seems you have scarcely grasped its power. If Men attack
"Boromir, oh Boromir!" he cried. "What did she say to you, the Lady who does not die? What did she see? What awoke from within?" Then, "No, I didn't know that," said Frodo. "But the day you heard the wind blow, if your reasoning is correct, f
"Will you not let me go, despite your doubts? I am weary, overcome with grief, and afraid. But I have a mission to undertake. Return, F "For me, our conversation brings no comfort," said Faramir; "but you doubtless derive more fear from it than he does."
"But whatever happened on the Northmarch, Frodo, I no longer doubt it. If trials have taught me to judge words..." He jumped to his fee "Frodo and Sam, come with me and my guards," said Faramir. "You cannot take the road south, if that was your

Frodo had no choice but to submit to this request, or rather, this order. It seemed, in any case, the most likely decision. They set of "I did not lie, and I told all the truth I could," said Frodo.
"I do not blame you," said Faramir. "You spoke skillfully in a difficult situation, and wisely, it seems to me."
"Almost," said Frodo, "but not in gold. There was no argument in our Company, though a doubt remained: doubt when... Ah, so that's what " But, Frodo, I first pressed you with questions about Isildur's Bane. Forgive me! It was unwise at such a time. And this is what I rem "That's true," said Frodo. "Yet he always treated Aragorn with honor."
"I have no doubt," said Faramir. "If he were convinced of Aragorn's legitimacy, as you say, he would revere him greatly. But I digress. "The Grey Pilgrim?" asked Frodo. "Did he have a name?"
"We called him Mithrandir in the Elven manner," said Faramir, "and that suited him." "I bear many names within my name."
"Gandalf!" said Frodo. "I thought it was him. Gandalf the Grey, our dear advisor. The leader of our company. He has gone to Mithrandir! "I see some terrible tale there," said Faramir, "that you might perhaps be able to tell me this evening. This Mithrandir was, I knew... "I cannot yet guess the true nature of this Thing; but it is doubtless an inheritance of power and per... But fear no more! I would not "For my part," said Faramir, "I would like to see the White Tree in bloom in the royal courts again, the Silver Crown and Minas Tiri. S
They walked for a while in silence, passing like gray and green shadows beneath the old trees, their steps making no noise. Sam had not They continued along their path until the woods thinned and the slope steepened. They then turned right.
"Alas! I must be impolite to you," said Faramir. "I hope you will forgive me, I who have hitherto shown such courtesy." "As you wish," said Frodo. "Even the Elves do the same when necessary, and blindfolded, we crossed the borders."
"It is not to such a beautiful place that I will take you," said Faramir. "But I am glad that you accept this journey of your own accor Then Faramir's voice rang out nearby. "Let them see!" he said. Their headscarves were removed and their headscarves pulled down. They s
"At least, by a happy coincidence, we arrive just in time to reward you for your patience," said Faramir. "Here is the..." As he spoke, "Well, here is our refuge," said Faramir. "It's not a very comfortable place, but you can spend the night here."

The hobbits were led to a corner and offered a low bed to lie down on, if they wished. Meanwhile, the Faramir mingled with the men, que "You saw and heard nothing, Anborn?" Faramir asked the last arrival.
"Well, no, sir," said the man. "No orcs, anyway. But I saw, or rather thought I saw, something rather strange. The
"Perhaps," said Faramir. "But it would bode ill if that were the case. We don't want to see the F Sam fugitives torn by internal confli

New torches were lit. A barrel of wine was uncorked. Storage barrels were opened. Men went to fetch "Wake up our guests," he said, "and bring them water. It's time to eat."
Frodo sat up, yawned, and stretched. Sam, unaccustomed to being waited on, looked with some surprise at the tall man who stepped forwar "Put it on the ground, master, please!" he said. "It will be easier for both of us." Then, to everyone's astonishment and a

"Is it the custom in your country to wash one's hair before supper?" asked the hobbit servant.
"No, not before breakfast," said Sam. "But if you're sleep-deprived, cold water on the back of your neck is like rain on a lawn." They "We always do," he said, sitting down. "We look back to Númenor of old, and beyond to the Home of the Elves of old."
"No," replied Frodo, feeling strangely rustic and uneducated. "But if we are guests, we will bow down." "We do too," Faramir said.

After such long journeys and encampments, and days spent in the solitude of the wilderness, the evening meal appeared. Once everything "You may soon feel sleepy," he said, "and especially good Samwise, who refused to close his eyes before eating." Frodo no longer felt d "It must have annoyed Boromir to have to flee from the Orcs," he said, "or even that terrible thing you call the Balrog-even if he
"He was the last," said Frodo, "but Aragorn was forced to guide us. He alone knew the way after the fall of Ghent."
"Perhaps it would have been better if Boromir had fallen there with Mithrandir," said Faramir, "and not suffered the fate that awaited "What hope do we have left?" asked Faramir. "It has been a long time since we had any hope. The sword of Elendil, if it were... The men "Now, if the Rohirrim resemble us more in certain respects, being more skillful and gentler, we also resemble them, e

"You don't talk much about elves in all your stories, sir," said Sam, suddenly regaining his courage. He had noticed
"No, truly, Master Samwise," replied Faramir, "for I am not versed in Elven lore. But you raise a point there. Yet some among us still "The Lady of Lórien! Galadriel!" cried Sam. "You should see her, sir. I am but a hobbit, and my job, sir, is..."
"Then she must be truly ravishing," said Faramir. "Dangerously beautiful."
"I don't know if it's perilous," said Sam. "It seems to me that people carry their peril with them to Lórien, and that they..." "Yes? _Now Boromir_, would you say? asked Faramir. What would you say? He took his peril with him?"
"Yes sir, please excuse me, and what a remarkable man your brother was, if I may say so. But you knew
"Sam!" cried Frodo, horrified. He had been deep in thought for a while, and had suddenly snapped out of it, too late. "Help!" cried Sam, turning white as a sheet, then scarlet. "Here I am again! Every time you open your
"Listen to me carefully, sir!" He turned around, facing Faramir with all the courage he could muster. "Don't you think
"It would seem so," said Faramir slowly and very softly, with a strange smile. "So that's the answer to all of them." Frodo and Sam jum "Alas for Boromir! What a terrible ordeal!" he said. "How you have increased my sorrow, you two strange travelers from... But I am not

The hobbits returned to their places and remained silent. The men resumed their drinks and conversations, understood
"Well, Frodo, we finally understand each other," said Faramir. "If you accepted this mission reluctantly, at someone else's request "All is not well there," said Frodo, "but the gardeners are certainly honored."
But fatigue eventually sets in, even in his garden, as with everything under the sun of this world. And you are far away. Frodo had fel "I was hoping to find a way into Mordor," he said in a weak voice. "I was going to Gorgoroth. I must find the mountain." Faramir stared "Really?" asked Faramir.
"Yes sir, and you have demonstrated your quality: the highest."
Faramir smiled. An impertinent servant, Master Samwise. But no: the praise of the worthy surpasses all rewards. "Well, sir," said Sam, "you said my master had an elven look about him, and that's quite true. But I can tell you "Perhaps," said Faramir. "Perhaps you can hear the air of Númenor from afar. Good night!"


The swimming pool is off-limits

Frodo awoke to find Faramir leaning over him. For a moment, old fears seized him; he sat up and curled up. "There is nothing to fear," said Faramir.
"Is it morning already?" asked Frodo, yawning.
Not yet, but the night is drawing to a close and the full moon is setting. Will you come and see it? I would also need your opinion. "Yes," said Frodo, rising and shivering slightly as he left the warmth of the blanket and furs. It was cold. Sam, startled awake by a s

Finally, they emerged from the rocky darkness and looked around. They stood on a wide, flat rock, without a rampart. Frodo turned to ob "It's not a bird, or anything else for that matter," replied Anborn. "It has four legs and dives like a man; it demonstrates
"Shall we fire?" asked Faramir, turning quickly to Frodo.
Frodo did not answer at once. Then, "No!" he cried. "No! Please don't." If Sam had dared
"So, do you know what this thing is?" asked Faramir. "Come now that you've seen it, tell me why."
"There are two answers, I think," said Frodo. "First, he knows little of Men, and despite his cunning, your refuge is so well "He was lured here, you say?" Faramir asked in a low voice. "Is that possible? Does he then know your burden?"
"Indeed. He endured it himself for many years."
"He's the one who had to put up with it?" Faramir asked, breathless and astonished. "This whole thing keeps getting more complicated. S "What is the creature looking for?"
"Fish," said Frodo. "Look!"

They peered into the dark pool. A small black head appeared at the bottom of the basin, emerging from the deep shadows of the rocks. A "I have it now at the tip of my arrow," said Anborn. "Shall I shoot, Captain? For whoever ventures here without having been..." "Wait, Anborn," said Faramir. "It's more complicated than it seems. What do you have to say now, Frodo? Why should we
"The creature is wretched and starving," said Frodo, "and it is unaware of the danger that threatens it. Gandalf, your Mithrandir, woul "Your guide!" said Faramir. "This is getting stranger and stranger. I would do much for you, Frodo, but this is impossible for me. "Let me go down to him quietly," said Frodo. "You can keep your bows drawn and shoot at me at least, if I
"Go then, and quickly!" said Faramir. "If he gets out of this alive, he will be your faithful servant until the end of his wretched day "Come on!" he whispered in Frodo's ear. "Watch your right. If you fall into the pool, only your fishing friend will be able to..." Frod "Sméagol!" he said softly.
"Fish, beautiful fish," said the voice.
"Sméagol!" he said, a little louder. The voice stopped.
"Sméagol, the Master has come for you. The Master is here. Come, Sméagol!" The only response was a soft whistle.
"Come, Sméagol!" said Frodo. "We are in danger. Men will kill you if they find you here. Come quickly, if you want to escape." "No!" said the voice. "That's not nice, Master." She abandoned poor Sméagol and left with new friends. "Master p
"There is no time," said Frodo. "Bring some fish. Come on!" No! I must finish the fish.
"Sméagol!" cried Frodo in despair. "Precious will be angry. I'll grab him and tell him, 'Make him swallow the bones!'" A sharp hiss sou "Gentle Master!" he murmured. "Gentle hobbit, return to poor Sméagol. Good Sméagol is coming. Let's go, let's go quickly, yes!"
"Yes, we will leave soon," said Frodo. "But not right away. I will go with you as promised. I promise you again. But not

"We must trust the Master?" asked Gollum doubtfully. "Why? Why not go right now? Where is the a
"Up there," said Frodo, pointing to the waterfall. "I won't go without him. We must go back and see him." His heart sank. This made Gol "Don't move!" said one of them. "Or we'll prick you like a hedgehog! Don't move!" Gollum slumped, began to moan and cry. They tied him "Gently, gently!" said Frodo. "He has no strength to rival you. Don't hurt him if you can avoid it. He'll be calmer." Gollum turned and Frodo followed them, his heart heavy. They went through the opening behind the bushes, then retraced their steps, went downstairs. Yes. "Me too," said Sam. "And nothing will ever be right where this place of misery is."
A man approached and beckoned to the hobbits, then led them into the alcove at the back of the cave. Faramir was seated in his chair. T "Let us go! Let us go!" he said. "The cord hurts us, yes, it hurts us, and it's not our fault."
"Nothing?" said Faramir, fixing the unfortunate creature with a piercing gaze, his face expressing neither anger nor pity. Gollum dropp "The price of fish is not fixed," said Faramir. "The mere act of coming here and contemplating the pond is punishable by death."
"We are lost, lost," said Gollum. "No more name, no more reason for being, no more Precious, nothing. Only emptiness. Only "Not very wise," said Faramir. "But just: yes, perhaps, as just as our meager wisdom allows. Set him free, Frodo!" "Sméagol!" said Frodo. "You must trust me. I will not abandon you. Answer honestly, if you can. It will be yours."
"Come this way!" said Faramir. "Look at me! Do you know the name of this place? Have you been here before?"
Slowly, Gollum raised his eyes and reluctantly met Faramir's gaze. Every glimmer of light went out in his eyes, and they stared "In your mind, there are locked doors and closed windows, and dark rooms behind them," said Faramir. But
"Master knows," said Gollum, glancing sideways at Frodo. "Yes, he knows. We'll promise Master, if he saves us." "Are you satisfied?" asked Faramir.

"Yes," said Frodo. "At the very least, you must accept this promise or enforce your law. You will gain nothing more."

Faramir remained thoughtful for a moment. "Very well," he said finally. "I hand you over to your master, to Frodo, son of Drogo. Let hi "But, Lord Faramir," said Frodo, bowing, "you have not yet made known your will concerning the said Frodo,
"Then I will pronounce my judgment," said Faramir. "As for you, Frodo, insofar as it falls within my superior authority, I..." Frodo bo "She is of great value," said Faramir. "And now, will you take this creature, this Sméagol, under your protection?"
"I take Sméagol under my protection," said Frodo. Sam sighed loudly, not out of politeness, which he fully approved of. "So I tell you," said Faramir, turning to Gollum, "you are under a death sentence; but as long as you..."
"This I will not keep secret," said Faramir. "Answer me, or I will reconsider!" Gollum still did not answer. "I will answer for him," said Frodo. "He led me to the Black Gate, as I asked him to; but it was impassable." "There is no open door to the Nameless Country," Faramir said.
"Seeing this, we turned off and went along the southern road," Frodo continued; "for he said that there is, or that there "Minas Morgul," said Faramir.
"I don't know exactly," said Frodo; "but the road leads, I believe, to the mountains north of this valley where..." "Do you know the name of this pass?" asked Faramir. No, said Frodo.
"It's called Cirith Ungol." Gollum hissed sharply and began to mutter. "Isn't that its name?" asked Faramir,
"No!" said Gollum, then he let out a shrill cry, as if he had been stabbed. "Yes, yes, we've heard that name before."
"No other solution?" asked Faramir. "How do you know? And who has explored every corner of this dark realm?" Anborn stepped out and Gol

"Frodo, I think you are acting very unwisely in this," said Faramir. "I don't think you should follow that creature." "No, not entirely "Not entirely, perhaps," said Faramir; "but malice gnaws at it like a canker, and the evil grows. It will lead you nowhere."
"He wouldn't accept it," said Frodo. "He would follow me as he always has. And I have promised him many times that I would..." "No," said Faramir. "But my heart would have it. For it seems less wrong to advise someone to break their promise than to...
"Where then should I go?" asked Frodo. "Return to the Black Gate and surrender to the guard? What do you know of this place that makes "Nothing is certain," said Faramir. "We Gondorians never go east of the Road these days, and none of us among them ever did. The valley "But where else will you take me?" asked Frodo. "You cannot, you say, guide me yourself to the mountains, nor..."
"I wouldn't want that," said Faramir. "So, what do you want me to do?"
"I don't know. I just wouldn't want you to go to your death or torment. And I don't think Mithrandir would have... But since he's gone, "It's a tragic fate and an impossible mission," said Faramir. "But at least remember my warning: beware of
"So we meet and we part, Frodo, son of Drogon. No use flattering me: I do not wish to re-examine you. I would like to know how this cre


Journey to the Crossroads

Frodo and Sam returned to their beds and rested there for a moment in silence, while the men got up and business was attended to. When "I have no gifts worthy of offering you on the occasion of our parting," said Faramir; "but take these staves. They may be useful." The

They then prepared to leave. Gollum was brought out of a corner or hiding place, and he seemed more pleased with himself than
"Your guide must be blindfolded," said Faramir, "but you and your servant Samwise, I will excuse you, if you wish." Gollum shrieked, st "This is the final point of no return," said Faramir. "If you follow my advice, do not head east yet." He then embraced the hobbits, in

Frodo sighed and retraced his steps south. As if to underline his contempt for all politeness, Gollum scratched at the earth with his f "Have they finally left?" asked Gollum. "Wicked men! Sméagol's neck still hurts, yes. Let's go!"
"Yes, let's go," said Frodo. "But if all you can do is speak ill of those who have shown you mercy, then be silent!"
"Gentle Master!" said Gollum. Sméagol was joking. "He always forgives, yes, yes, even the gentle Master's little pranks." Frodo and Sam "They must get up, yes, they must!" he said. "There is still a long way to go, south and east. The Hobbits do

This day unfolded much like the previous one, except that the silence seemed deeper; the air grew heavier. As the third stage of their Yes, Master. Dangerous places. This is the road that leads down from the Tower of the Moon, Master, to the ruined city by the edge of.. "There's no use hiding in the darkness," said Gollum. "It's in the daylight that hobbits must now hide, yes, in the daylight!"
"Come on!" said Sam. "We need to rest a little, even if we have to get up in the middle of the night. There will still be some left." G

It must have been a little after midnight when Gollum woke up: suddenly, they noticed his pale, wide-open eyes, which... "Are we rested? Did we sleep well?" he asked. "Let's go!"
"No, we didn't go," grumbled Sam. "But we'll go if we have to."
Gollum immediately jumped from the branches of the tree and dropped to the ground on all fours, followed more slowly by the hobbits. As soon as they had dismounted, they resumed their journey, Gollum in the lead, eastward across the dark, sloping terrain. Visibility w

"Which way do we go from here?" asked Frodo. "Is that the entrance to the Morgul Vale, over there, beyond that black mass?" "Should we even be thinking about it yet?" said Sam. "We're certainly not going to move today, if it's today?"
"Perhaps not, perhaps not," said Gollum. "But we must go there soon, to the Crossroads. Yes, to the Crossroads. It's that way, yes."

The red glow above Mordor faded. Twilight thickened as thick vapors rose from the East and crept
"Off hunting, I suppose," said Sam, yawning. It was his turn to sleep first, and he soon fell into a deep sleep.
"That's work for me, I can see that; but I'm so tired," he kept repeating. Suddenly, he remembered what he was looking for. "What an idea!" he said to himself, opening his eyes and wondering why he was lying under the hedge. She's always in there. "You haven't slept, Mr. Frodo?" he asked. "What time is it? It's getting late!"
"No, it isn't," said Frodo. "But the day is getting darker instead of brighter: it's getting darker and darker. At this "What's going on?" asked Sam. "Is a storm coming? If so, it'll be the worst one ever. We'll wish we were at the bottom."
"I don't know," said Frodo. "It's been going on for quite some time now. Sometimes it feels like the ground is shaking, sometimes it's "No," said Frodo. "There was no sign or sound from him."
"Well, I can't stand it," said Sam. "In fact, I've never taken anything on a trip that I would have regretted leaving behind less." "You're forgetting the Marshes," said Frodo. "I hope nothing has happened to him."
"And I hope he's not up to anything shady. And above all, I hope he doesn't fall into the wrong hands, as they say." At that moment, a "Maybe," said Sam. "But while there's life, there's hope, as my grandfather used to say; and the need to eat, too."

The afternoon, as Sam supposed it was called, dragged on. From the height of his shelter, he saw only a dull, shadowless world.
"Wake up, wake up! Wake up, you sleepers!" he whispered. "Wake up! Not a second to lose." Sam looked at him suspiciously: he seemed eit "Fool!" hissed Gollum. "We're not in suitable places. Time is of the essence, yes, it's running fast. Not a single se
"They can't be stupid," he hissed. "We have to go. Not a second to lose!" They got nothing more. Gollum stealthily led them down the hi

For about an hour, they advanced in silence, single file, overwhelmed by the darkness and the absolute silence of the landscape. "The Crossroads, yes," murmured Gollum, the first words spoken since they left their hiding place. "We must go that way."
"This is the only way," Gollum murmured. "No other path. No other way. We must get to the Crossroads. But hurry." As stealthily as scou "They cannot conquer forever!" said Frodo. And suddenly, the brief glimpse vanished. The sun bowed and disappeared.


The stairs of Cirith Ungol

Gollum tugged at Frodo's cloak, hissing with fear and impatience. "We must leave," he said. "We mustn't stay." Reluctantly, Frodo turne "Not that way! No, not that way!" murmured Gollum, but the breath between his teeth seemed to tear through the heavy silence like a whi "Wait, Mr. Frodo!" Sam whispered in Frodo's ear. "Come back! Not that way." Gollum said no, and for once, I agree. Frodo ran a hand ove "I need to rest for a while, Sam," Frodo murmured. "It's heavy for me, Sam, very heavy. I wonder how long I can go on."
"Shh! Shh!" hissed Gollum, rushing back to them. "Shh!" His fingers went to his lips and he shook
"Not yet," he said, "not yet." A deeper weariness weighed upon him; it seemed as if a heavy spell hung over his mind. At these words, G "Come, Mr. Frodo," said Sam. "He's right again. We can't stay here."
"Very well," said Frodo in a distant voice, like someone half asleep. "I will try." He rose wearily

But it was too late. At that moment, the rock trembled beneath their feet. A deep rumble, louder than ever, echoed through Minas Morgul Frodo stirred. Suddenly, he thought of Faramir. "The storm has finally broken," he thought. "That immense army of spears..." Then, in t
A dull thud resounded. The gates of Minas Morgul had slammed shut. The last line of spearmen had vanished at the end of the... Wake up, "Watch out!" he whispered. "Stairs. Lots of stairs. You have to be careful!"
Caution was advised. Frodo and Sam initially felt more at ease, protected by a wall on either side, but the staircase... Finally, just

Dazed and exhausted, Sam, followed by Frodo, crawled up the last step and sat down, rubbing his legs and knees.
"There's another staircase," he said. "A much longer one. Rest when we get to the top of the next one." Sam groaned. "Longer, you say?" "Yes, yes, longer," said Gollum. "But not so difficult. The Hobbits climbed the Straight Stairway. Then comes the Tou Stairway. And aft "We shall see," said Gollum in a soft voice. "Oh yes, we shall see!"
"I thought you said there was a tunnel," said Sam. "Isn't there a tunnel or something to go through?"
"Oh yes, there is a tunnel," said Gollum. "But the hobbits can rest before venturing into it. If they manage to cross it..." Frodo shiv

The passage seemed to stretch for miles, and the icy air enveloped them constantly, changing as they went. Gollum led the way, at the f

They continued climbing the winding, twisting staircase until, at last, with a final short, straight flight, it opened up. He paused an "Yes, all the paths are guarded," said Gollum. "Of course. But the hobbits must try something. This one is..."
"Maybe," Sam grumbled. "Well, that still seems a long way off, and there's still a long way to go before we get there." "Yes, we must rest," said Frodo. "Let's find a sheltered spot and regain our strength for the final stretch."

In a dark crevice between two great pillars of rock, they sat down: Frodo and Sam a little further away, and Gollum crouching "I wonder when we'll find water again?" said Sam. "But I imagine they drink even there? Orcs drink, don't they?"
"Yes, they drink," said Frodo. "But let's not talk about it. That kind of drink isn't for us."
"We need to fill our bottles even more," said Sam. "But there's no water here: I haven't heard a sound, not a sound." "There is no water flowing from Imlad Morgul," he said, Frodo reported. "We are no longer in that valley, and if we find "I wouldn't trust it," said Sam, "not until I've died of thirst. There's something unhealthy about that place." He denied
"Nothing pleases me here," said Frodo, "neither foot nor stone, neither breath nor bone. The earth, the air, and the water all seem cur "Yes, that's right," said Sam. "And we wouldn't even be here if we'd known more before leaving. But I imagine that
"I wonder," said Frodo. "But I don't know. And that's how true tales work. Take one you've heard. No, sir, of course not. Beren, for on "No, they are never tales," said Frodo. "But the characters appear and disappear when their role is finished."
"And then we can rest and get some sleep," said Sam. He let out a bitter laugh. "And that's exactly what I want."
"You say far too much," said Frodo, and he burst into a long, hearty laugh, straight from the depths of his heart. Such a sound had nev "Now, Mr. Frodo," said Sam, "you shouldn't laugh. I was serious."
"Me too," said Frodo, "and I still am. We're going a bit too fast. You and I, Sam, are still stuck in the pir
"Maybe," said Sam, "but I wouldn't be sure. The things that have been done, finished, and incorporated into the great legends are..."

"Gollum!" he called. "Do you want to be the hero? But where has he gone already?"
There was no trace of him at the entrance to their shelter or in the surrounding shadows. He had refused their food, but had, "I don't like it when he slips away without warning," said Sam. "And even less so now. He can't look for food here, unless..." "There's no point worrying about him now," said Frodo. "We couldn't have gone that far, not even caught a glimpse of the
"Nevertheless, I'd rather have him right under my nose," said Sam. "Especially if he's a liar. You remember he never said if that colla "No, I don't believe it," replied Frodo. "Even if he is planning some evil deed, and I suppose that's not unlikely,"
"Well, I suppose you're right, Mr. Frodo," said Sam. "That doesn't really console me. I'm not mistaken: I..." "It's highly likely he can't even guess it himself," said Frodo. "And I don't think he has a single simple plan of
"Yes, Slinker and Stinker, as I already said," said Sam. "But the closer they get to enemy territory, the more Slinker "We haven't gotten there yet," said Frodo.
No, but it would be best to remain vigilant until then. If we get caught off guard, Stinker will quickly gain the upper hand. That woul "Sleep!" said Frodo with a sigh, as if he had glimpsed a mirage of fresh green in the middle of the desert. "Yes, even here, I..."
"Go to sleep, master! Lay your head on my knees."

Gollum found them hours later, on his return, crawling along the path, emerging from the darkness. Sam was sitting, leaning against Gol "Hey, you!" he said abruptly. "What are you up to?" "Nothing, nothing," said Gollum softly. "Good Master!"
"I dare say it," said Sam. "But where have you been? Slipping away and sneaking back, you old rascal?"
Gollum retreated, and a green glow flickered beneath his heavy eyelids. Almost arachnid, he now looked like an arachnid. Sam felt a sli "I'll sneak in," said Gollum, and the green glow never left his eyes.
"Very well," said Sam, "do as you wish! I suppose that's not so far from the truth. And now, we would do better
"It's tomorrow," said Gollum, "or rather, it was tomorrow when the hobbits went to bed." "Very unwise, very dangerous." "I think we'll soon get tired of that word," said Sam. "But never mind. I'll wake the master." Gently, he
"Wake up, Mr. Frodo! Wake up!"
Frodo stirred, opened his eyes, and smiled when he saw Sam's face leaning over him. "You're calling me early, Sam?" he said. "It's stil "Yes, it's still dark here," said Sam. "But Gollum's back, Mr. Frodo, and he says it's tomorrow. So we have..." Frodo took a deep breat "No food, no rest, nothing for Sméagol," said Gollum. "He's a scoundrel."

Sam clicked his tongue, but held back.
"Don't take names for yourself, Sméagol," said Frodo. "It's not prudent, whether they're true or false."
"Sméagol must be content with what he's given," replied Gollum. "It's kind Master Samwise, the hobbit who knows so much, that Frodo loo "Come now, let's leave that alone," said Frodo. "But we've come to the point, you and I, Sméagol. Tell me. Can we tr
"No, no, not again!" groaned Gollum. "Oh no! They can't find their way themselves, can they? Oh no, really!"


Arachne's Lair

It might have been daytime, as Gollum had said, but the hobbits could hardly tell the difference, unless the heavy sky had "Ugh! That smell!" he said. "It's getting stronger and stronger."
Soon they found themselves in the shade, and there, in the middle of it, they saw the entrance to a cave. "It's this way," said Gol "Is this the only solution, Sméagol?" asked Frodo.
"Yes, yes," he replied. "Yes, we must go through there now."
"You mean you went through that hole?" Sam asked. "Phew! But maybe bad smells don't bother you."
Gollum's eyes gleamed. "He doesn't know what's bothering us, does he, my precious? No, he doesn't. But Sm
"And where's that smell coming from, I wonder," said Sam. "It's like... well, I'd rather not say. An orc rat hole, I think." "Well," said Frodo, "orcs or not, if it's the only way, we must take it."

Taking a deep breath, they stepped inside. In a few steps, they were plunged into total darkness. But for a moment, they could still fe "There's more than one passage here," he murmured with effort; he seemed to be struggling to make any sound. "It's a place..." After th "Where did Gollum go?" Sam gasped. "And why didn't he wait?"
"Sméagol!" said Frodo, trying to call out. "Sméagol!" But his voice broke and the name fell away almost as soon as it was spoken. "He's really gone this time, I think," Sam murmured. "I suppose this is exactly where he wanted to take us." Soon, groping in the darkn "And quickly!" Sam gasped. "There's something worse than Gollum. I sense something watching us."
They hadn't gone more than a few meters when a noise erupted behind them, a sound that was both surprising and horrible.
"It's a trap!" said Sam, placing his hand on the hilt of his sword. As he did so, he thought of the darkness of the burial mound from w "The mirror of stars?" murmured Frodo, as if half-asleep, not quite understanding. "Why, yes!"
Slowly, his hand moved to his chest, and slowly he raised the Phial of Galadriel. For a moment, it glittered, faint as Frodo gazed in w Frodo and Sam, petrified with horror, began to back away slowly, their eyes fixed on the terrifying gaze of those evil eyes.
"Get up! Get up!" he cried desperately. "Running won't help." Slowly, his eyes moved closer.
"Galadriel!" he called, and summoning his courage, he raised the Phial again. Their eyes stopped. For a moment, their gaze... They wave

"Master, master!" cried Sam. He was right behind them, his sword drawn and ready to strike. "By the stars and the glory!" So they turne "It will take days to clear the road in this state," he said. "What can be done? Will their eyesight ever return?"
"No, I don't want to be seen," said Frodo. "But I always have the feeling that they're watching me, or thinking about me: they're elabo "Trapped in the end!" Sam cried bitterly, his anger once again overcoming his weariness and despair. "Like flies
"That would be of no use to us now," said Frodo. "Come! Let's see what Sting can do. He is an Elven blade."

Then Frodo stepped forward to the great grey net and, with a broad sweeping motion, cut through it, swiftly sliding the slashed edge. B "Let's go!" cried Frodo. "Let's go! Let's go!" An immense joy, at the thought of escaping despair, suddenly overwhelmed him. In this da "The pass, Sam!" he shouted, heedless of the shrillness in his voice, which, freed from the suffocating air of the tunnel, echoed. Sam

There, since time immemorial, she had remained, an evil creature in the form of a spider, like those that once populated the land. Year "We'll see, we'll see," he often repeated to himself, when melancholy overwhelmed him as he traveled the perilous road. This is what he

But poor Sam knew nothing of the evil they had plotted against them, except that fear was growing within him, a terror surrounded him,

"Orcas!" he murmured. "We're never going to rush things like that. There are orcas in the area, and worse."

No sooner had Sam switched off the light of his spyglass than she appeared. A little further on, to his left, he suddenly saw her emerg "I've got him!" hissed Gollum in his ear. "At last, my precious, we've got him, yes, that vile hobbit. This one, we'll take!" Fury at t


The choices of Master Samwise

Frodo lay face down on the ground, and the monster leaned over him, so absorbed in its victim that it paid no attention. Beside him lay Gilthoniel to Elbereth!
Then his tongue loosened and his voice cried out in a language he did not know:

To Elbereth Gilthoniel o menel palan-diriel, le nallon sí di'nguruthos!
A tiro nin, Fanuilos!

With that, he got up, staggering, and became Samwise the hobbit, son of Hamfast, once more.
"Come on, you wretch!" he cried. "You've wronged my master, you brute, and you'll pay for it. We'll continue; but first we'll settle th

Shelob had disappeared; and if she remained long in her lair, nurturing her malice and misery, and if, over long periods, Sam found him "Master, dear master," he said, but Frodo did not answer. As he ran ahead, impatient, joyful to be free, Shelo
"Master, dear master!" said Sam, and after a long silence, he waited in vain.
Then, as quickly as he could, he cut the bonds that held him and laid his head on Frodo's chest, near his mouth, "Frodo, Mr. Frodo!" he called. "Don't leave me alone! It's your Sam calling you. Don't go where I can't."

Then anger overcame all restraint, and he circled his master's body, mad with rage, striking the air, striking the... Then a black desp

When at last the darkness lifted, Sam looked up and saw shadows around him; but he couldn't say how many minutes. What to do, what to d "But what can I do? Should I not leave Mr. Frodo dead, unburied on the mountaintops, and return home? Or continue?" Finally, he began t "If I must continue," he said, "I must take your sword, with your permission, Mr. Frodo, but I will leave this one near

But he couldn't leave, not yet. He remained kneeling, clasped Frodo's hand, and couldn't let go. Time passed, and he searched for the s "What? Me, alone, going all the way to the Crack of Destiny?" He was still trembling, but his determination was growing. "What? Me?" Bu
ou were nom

French	English?

re found he Then he lo


He didn't have far to go. The tunnel was behind him for some time; the Fault, just a few hundred meters away.
"I've made my decision," he repeated to himself. But it wasn't true. Despite all his efforts to think it over, what he was doing was... Just a few steps; a few more and he would fall, never to see that high place again. Suddenly, he heard shouts and the glint of approach The world changed, and a moment turned into an hour of reflection. He noticed at once that his hearing had sharpened as he heard the cr
Hey! Gorbag! What are you doing here? Are you already fed up with the war?
Orders, you moron! And you, Shagrat, what are you doing? Tired of hiding up there? Thinking of coming down? Orders to you. I'm in charg Nothing.
"Hai! Hai! Yoi!" A cry interrupted the exchange between the leaders. The Orcs below had suddenly spotted something
"Hai! Hola! Look who's here! Right in the middle of the road. A spy, a spy!" A cacophony of raucous car horns was heard.

A terrible shock jolted Sam from his stupor. They had seen his master. What would they do? He had heard stories about the Orcs
"How many are there?" he thought. "At least thirty or forty at the top of the tower, and many more down below, I imagine. How many coul

But the Orcs had vanished from his blurred vision. He hadn't had time to think about him, but he realized now that there they were agai "Come on, Sam!" he said, "or you'll be too late again." He loosened his sword from its scabbard. In a minute, he would draw it. A wild

They had taken Frodo's body. They were gone. He couldn't catch them. Yet he kept trying. He stood still for a moment, panting, his hand It no longer seemed very dark in the tunnel; it was more as if it had gone from a light mist to a thick fog.
"Can't you shut up your thugs, Shagrat?" one of them snarled. "We don't want Shelob on us."
"Go on, Gorbag! Yours are making more than half the noise," said the other. "But let the lads play! No need to worry, Lugbúrz wants it, Oh! So they didn't tell you anything about what to expect? They're not revealing everything they know, are they? Far from it!
"Shh, Gorbag!" Shagrat's voice dropped, so that even with his unusually sharp hearing, Sam could barely make out what was being said. "Almost, you say!" said Gorbag.
"Very well," said Shagrat, "but we'll talk about it later: wait until we get to the basement. There's a place down there where we can.. "No, I don't know," said Gorbag's voice. "Messages travel faster than lightning, usually. But I'm not looking for it."
"You should try spending some time here with Shelob," Shagrat said.
I'd like to try a place where there aren't any. But the war has started, and when it's over, things will be... "It's going well," they say.
"They would do it," grumbled Gorbag. "We'll see. But hey, if it goes well, there'll be a lot more room. What do you say to that, Ah!" s "Yes," said Gorbag. "But don't count on it too much. I'm not at ease. As I said, the Great Leaders-yes," his voice dropped. "About an h "Bad news," said Gorbag. "You see, our Silent Watchers were worried more than two days ago, I know that."
"The Eye was busy elsewhere, I suppose," said Shagrat. "There are big things going on in the west, it seems."
"I suppose," Gorbag grumbled. "But in the meantime, enemies stormed the stairs. And what were you doing? You're... That's enough! Don't

Very funny!
"Yes, very funny: the lights, the shouting, and everything. But Shelob was on the move. My guys saw her and her Sneak." "His Sneak? What is that?"
You've surely seen him: a small, thin, black man, like a spider, or rather like a hungry frog. He's already... Nothing, you say! You ha "Well, she finally got it, didn't she?"
Did you get him? Did you get who? That little guy? But if he was the only one, she would have put him in her pantry a long time ago. At Who cut the ties she had built around him, Shagrat? The same one who cut the web. Didn't you see that? And who planted Shagrat didn't a You'd better think about it, if you have one. It's no small matter. No one, absolutely no one, has ever dared
"So what is it then?" Shagrat grumbled.
"Based on all the signs, Captain Shagrat, I would say that a great warrior is at large, most likely an elf, armed with a "Well, you've always had a pessimistic view of things," Shagrat said. "You can interpret the signs however you want."
"In my opinion, you won't find much with that little fellow," said Gorbag. "He may have nothing to do with the real crime." "We'll see. Come on! We've talked enough. Let's go see the prisoner!"
"What are you going to do with him? Don't forget that I was the one who spotted him first. If there's a match, my guys and I, o "Now, now," Shagrat grumbled. "I've received my orders. And there's more to lose than my stomach, or yours, by disobeying them." "Naked, huh?" said Gorbag. "What, teeth, nails, hair and everything?"
"No, nothing like that. He's for Lugbúrz, I tell you. We wanted him safe and sound."
"You'll have a hard time," Gorbag laughed. "He's nothing but carrion now. I wonder what Lugbúrz will do with all this.
"Fool!" Shagrat growled. "You speak with great intelligence, but you are ignorant of many things, unlike the pl Sam staggered, gripping "Garn!" said Shagrat. "She has more than one poison. When she hunts, she puts a drop on their necks and they become mo
"And what's going to happen to him?" exclaimed Gorbag, laughing. "We can always tell him a few stories, if we don't..."
"I'm telling you, this isn't going to be funny," said Shagrat. "And we absolutely have to protect him, otherwise we're all doomed! Abso The voices faded away. Sam heard footsteps receding. He was recovering from his shock, and a savage fury seized him. He drew his sword
"That's what I'm going to do," Shagrat said furiously. "I'm going to put it right at the top, in the upper room." "Why bother?" grumbled Gorbag. "Don't you have cells downstairs?"
"He's safe, I tell you," Shagrat replied. "You see? He's precious. I trust neither my men nor the..."
"Really?" said Sam. "You're forgetting the great elven warrior who's on the loose!" With that, he darted around the last bend. The two The large doors slammed shut. Boom. The iron bars clicked into place inside. Clang. The door closed. Sam threw himself forward.


Thus ends the second part of the story of the War of the Ring.
The third part recounts the final defense against the Shadow and the end of the Ring-bearer's mission in THE RETURN OF THE KING

========================================================





